

Electronic Notes in Theoretical Computer Science 221 (2008) 231–242
www.elsevier.com/locate/entcs

An Effective Tietze-Urysohn Theorem for QCB-Spaces
(Extended Abstract)
Matthias Schro¨der1
Universit¨at der Bundeswehr, Munich, Germany

Abstract
The Tietze-Urysohn Theorem states that every continuous real-valued function defined on a closed subspace of a normal space can be extended to a continuous function on the whole space. We prove an effective version of this theorem in the Type Two Model of Effectivity (TTE). Moreover, for qcb-spaces we introduce a slightly weaker notion of normality than the classical one and show that this property still admits an Extension Theorem for continuous functions.
Keywords: Computable Analysis, Qcb-spaces, Topological spaces

Introduction
Theorems about extendability of continuous functions belong to the most important theorems in the field of topological spaces. Extendability of a continuous function f onto a larger space Y means the existence of a continuous function F on Y which co- incides with f on the domain of f . A famous example of an extension theorem is the Tietze-Urysohn Theorem for normal topological spaces (cf. [2]). Of similar interest are theorems about extendability of computable functions. A computable version of the Tietze-Urysohn Theorem for computable metric spaces has been proved by Weihrauch in [9].
In this paper we prove a continuous and a computable Extension Theorem for a subclass of qcb-spaces that contains all computable metric spaces. Qcb-spaces [7] are known to form exactly the class of topological spaces which can be handled by the representation based approach to Computable Analysis, the Type Two Model of Effectivity (TTE). The category QCB of qcb-spaces has excellent closure properties, for example it is cartesian closed [1].

1 Email: matthias.schroeder@unibw.de

1571-0661 © 2008 Published by Elsevier B.V. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
doi:10.1016/j.entcs.2008.12.020

Unfortunately, many interesting Hausdorff qcb-spaces fail to be normal. For example, it was recently proved that the space N(NN) of Kleene-Kreisel continuous functionals of order 2 is not regular [6]. Moreover the space of real-valued continuous functions on a computable metric space need not necessarily be normal in QCB (cf. [6]). Hence the classical Tietze-Urysohn Theorem, which requires normality, can not be applied to these kinds of spaces.
In this paper we introduce a weaker notion of normality called quasi-normality. This notion may be considered as a substitute for normality in the class of qcb- spaces (cf. Section 3). We show that quasi-normal qcb-spaces admits extendability of continuous functions defined on functionally closed subspaces (cf. Section 4). The category of quasi-normal qcb-spaces forms a cartesian closed subcategory of QCB and contains all separable metrisable spaces.
In Section 5 we establish a computable version of the Tietze-Urysohn Theorem. It is formulated for qcb-spaces that satisfy the property of effective quasi-normality.
Since this is an extended abstract, most proofs are omitted.

Preliminaries
After fixing some notations, we repeat some notions and basic facts of topological spaces, of the used computational model, of qcb-spaces and of pseudobases.

Notations
We write N for the set of natural numbers (including 0) and also for the discrete topological space with carrier set N. The set of infinite sequences over N is denoted by NN, the set of finite words over N by N∗, and, for a word w ∈ N∗, the set of sequences with prefix w by wNN. We write p<k for the prefix of p ∈ NN of length k and ± for the prefix relation on N∗ ∪ NN.
Depending on the context, ⟨.⟩ stands for a computable bijection either from (NN)k to NN or from (NN)N to NN or from Nk to N, as defined in [5]. Moreover, we denote by w : N → N∗ an effective bijection between N and N∗. For a subset M ⊆ R, QM stands for the binary signed-digit representation corestricted to M .

Computability theory
As the underlying computational model we use the representation-based approach to Computable Analysis, the Type-2 Theory of Effectivity (TTE). We assume that the reader is familiar with basic concepts of TTE, see [8,10].
We repeat here the less known notion of a computable multi-function. A multi- function H from X to Y is a relation between X and Y . The domain of H is the
set dom(H) := {x ∈ X | ∃y. (x, y) ∈ H}. Given two representations δ :⊆ NN → X of X and γ :⊆ NN → Y of Y , a multi-function H : X ⇒ Y is called computable, if there is partial computable function g :⊆ NN → NN which maps any name p of an element x ∈ dom(H) to a name of one possible result for x, i.e. for all p ∈ dom(δ)

with δ(p) ∈ dom(H) we have γ(g(p)) ∈ {y ∈ Y | (x, y) ∈ H}. Computability of ordinary functions is defined correspondingly.

Topological spaces and sequential spaces
To denote topological spaces, we use sans-serif letters like X, Y etc. We write O(X) for the topology of a space X, A(X) for the family of closed sets of X and G(X) for the family of Gδ-sets of X, which are countable intersections of open sets. We will often denote the carrier set of a space X by the symbol X.
A subset A of a topological space X is called sequentially closed, if A contains any limit of any convergent sequence of elements in A. Complements of sequen- tially closed sets are called sequentially open. For a given topology τ , we denote the
topology of sequentially open sets by seq(τ ). Spaces such that every sequentially
open set is open are called sequential. The sequentialisation (or sequential coreflec- tion) seq(X) of X is the topological space that carries the topology seq(O(X)) of sequentially open sets of X. The operator seq is idempotent.
A subset A of a topological space X is called functionally closed, if there is a continuous function f from X to the unit interval I = [0, 1] (endowed with the usual Euclidean topology) such that f−1{0} = A. Complements of functionally closed sets are called functionally open. A common term for “functionally closed set” is zero-set, and for “functionally open set” is cozero-set. Two disjoint functionally
closed sets A, B can be strongly separated in the sense that there is a continuous function h : X → [0, 1] satisfying h−1{0} = A and h−1{1} = B.
We denote the family of functionally open sets of X by FO(X) and the family of functionally closed sets by FA(X). T0-spaces such that all open sets are functionally open are called perfectly normal. If X is a hereditarily Lindelo¨f space (i.e. any open cover of any subset has a countable subcover) then FO(X) forms a topology. It has the property that every real-valued function f on X is continuous w.r.t. the original topology O(X) if, and only if, f is continuous w.r.t. FO(X). Regularity, normality 2 and perfect normality are equivalent for hereditarily Lindelo¨f spaces (and thus for qcb-spaces, see below).
For more details about the theory of topological spaces we refer to [2,11].

Qcb-spaces and admissible representations
A qcb-space [7] is a topological q uotient of a countably-based topological space. Qcb0-spaces, i.e. qcb-spaces that satisfy the T0-property, are exactly the class of sequential spaces which have an admissible representation and which therefore can be handled by the Type Two Model of Effectivity. Admissibility is a property guar- anteeing topological well-behavedness of representations (cf. [4]). The final topology of an admissible representation of a sequential space is equal to the topology of that space.

2 A normal space is a T0-space such that for a pair of disjoint closed sets (A, B) there exists a pair of disjoint open sets (U, V ) such that A ⊆ U and B ⊆ V . Note that some authors omit the T0-condition.

Qcb-spaces are hereditarily Lindelo¨f and sequential. The category QCB of qcb- spaces as objects and of continuous functions as morphisms is cartesian closed. Moreover QCB has all countable limits and all countable colimits. For two admis- sible representations δX and δY of qcb0-spaces X and Y we denote by [δX → δY] the usual function space representation of YX as defined in [5] or [8].
More information can be found in [1,4,5,7].

Pseudobases and pseudo-open decompositions
Given a topological space X, we say that a family A of subsets of X is a pseudo-open decomposition of a subset M , if M = A holds and for every sequence (xn)n that converges to some element x∞ ∈ M there is some set B ∈ A and some n0 ∈ N such that {xn, x∞ | n ≥ n0} ⊆ B ⊆ M holds. Clearly, a set has a pseudo-open decomposition if, and only if, it is sequentially open.
A pseudobase for X is a family B of subsets such that every open set has a pseudo- open decomposition into sets in B. Any base of topological space is a pseudobase, but not vice versa. Pseudobases are of interest, when they are countable. Every admissible representation δ of a topological space X induces a countable pseudobase
for X, namely the family Bδ := ∅, δ(wNω) w ∈ N∗}. Using the bijection w : N →
N∗ from Section 2.1, we equip Bδ with a numbering Bδ defined by Bδ(0) := ∅ and Bδ(i + 1) := δ(w(i)NN). Conversely, if A is a pseudobase of a sequential T0-space, then the space has an admissible representation such that the induced pseudobase
is equal to the closure of A under finite intersection. Hence a sequential T0-space is a qcb-space if, and only if, it has a countable pseudobase.
Quasi-normal Qcb-Spaces
In this section we introduce and investigate the notion of a quasi-normal qcb-space. The classical Tietze-Urysohn Theorem is formulated for normal spaces. How-
ever, many interesting Hausdorff qcb-spaces fail to be normal. For example, a recent result states that the function space N(NN) formed in the category QCB is not normal [6]. Hence the final topology of the natural representation on N(NN) is not normal, because it is equal to the topology of the qcb-space N(NN). Moreover, the space R(RR) of continuous real-valued function from RR to R is not normal either, despite the
fact that the compact-open topology on R(RR) is normal and the sequentialisation
of the latter yields the topology of R(RR).
Therefore we need an appropriate substitute for the property of normality. The idea behind the following definition is the fact that finite products and function spaces in the category QCB are constructed as the sequentialisation of their coun-
terparts in classical topology, which enjoy the property of preserving regularity and even normality in the case of countably-pseudobased spaces.
Definition 3.1 A qcb-space X is called quasi-normal, if X is the sequentialisation of a normal space.
In other words, a qcb-space is quasi-normal if, and only if, its convergence rela-

tion is induced by a normal topology. Simple examples of quasi-normal spaces are countably based normal spaces, because countably based spaces are equal to their sequentialisation. In [3, Example 1.2] Michael gave an example of a regular space such that its sequentialisation is not regular. This sequentialisation turns out to be a qcb-space, thus it is an example of a quasi-normal, but not normal qcb-space.
We will give now two characterisations of quasi-normality.
Proposition 3.2 A qcb-space X is quasi-normal if, and only if, its convergence relation is induced by the topology of functionally open sets.
Note that FO(X) is indeed a topology, if X is a qcb-space, because qcb-spaces are hereditarily Lindelo¨f spaces.
Proof. Omitted.	 
We characterise quasi-normal qcb-spaces in terms of properties of pseudobases. Recall that qcb-spaces are known to be those sequential spaces that have a countable pseudobase (cf. [5,7]).
Proposition 3.3 A qcb-space is quasi-normal if, and only if, it is a T0-space and has a countable pseudobase consisting of functionally closed sets.
We omit the proof which is based on the following surprising lemma. By a functional Gδ-set we mean a set that is a countable intersection of functionally open sets.
Lemma 3.4 Let X be a qcb-space equipped with a countable pseudobase consisting of functionally closed sets. Then every open functional Gδ-set is functionally open.
Proof. Let G0, G1,... be a sequence of functionally open sets such that V  :=

∞
j=0
Gj is open. Let (βi)i be a pseudo-open decomposition of V (see Section 2.5)
  n

into pseudobase sets. Since the functionally closed set	i=0 βi is contained in Gn,
there exists a continuous function hn : X → [0, 1] with h−1{0} = X\Gn and h−1{1} =
  n	n	n
i=0 βi by [2, Theorem 1.5.14]. We define a function f : X → [0, 1] by f (x) := infn∈N hn(x) and show that f is sequentially continuous with f−1{0} = X \ V .
Let (xn)n be a sequence converging in X to some x∞.
Let x∞ ∈ V . Then there is some i0, n0 ∈ N such that {xn| n ≥ n0} ⊆ βi0 . Thus for all j ≥ i0 and n ≥ n0 (including n = ∞) we have hj(xn) = 1 and f (xn) = min{h0(xn),..., hi0 (xn)}. This implies that (f (xn))n converges to f (x∞). Moreover, since hj(x∞) /= 0 for all j ≤ i0, f (x∞) /= 0.

Let x∞ ∈/
V .  Then there is some j ∈ N with x∞ ∈/
Gj, hence f (x∞) =

hj(x∞) = 0. As (hj(xn))n converges to 0, (f (xn))n converges to 0 as well.
Hence f is sequentially continuous and therefore (topologically) continuous, because
X is sequential. So f is a witness for V being functionally open.	 
One can show that forming (i) countable products, (ii) subspaces, (iii) count- able coproducts, (iv) function spaces in the category of qcb-spaces preserves quasi- normality. Hence:

Theorem 3.5 The category of quasi-normal qcb-spaces is cartesian closed. More- over it has all countable limits and all countable coproducts.

An Extension Theorem for Quasi-Normal Qcb-Spaces
In this section we prove an Extension Theorem for quasi-normal qcb-spaces. It states that every continuous function from a functionally closed subset into the unit interval can be extended to a continuous function on the whole space.

A transitivity property for zero-sets
It is well-known that the subspace operator on topological spaces has the following transitivity property: Any functionally open subset of a functionally open subspace is functionally open in the original space, whereas the analogous statement for functionally closed sets is false in general (cf. [2, 2.1.B]).
Validity of the transitivity property for zero-sets (= functionally closed sets) is related to extendability of continuous functions. Let X be a functionally closed subspace of a topological space Y. If any continuous [0, 1]-valued function on X is extendable onto Y, then any functionally closed subset M of X is functionally closed in Y: Take continuous functions f : X → [0, 1] and g : Y → [0, 1] with f−1{0} = M and g−1{0} = X and extend f to a continuous function F : Y → [0, 1]. Then λy∈Y. max{F (y), g(y)} is a continuous function witnessing that M is functionally closed in Y.
It follows from [2, 2.1.J] that the reverse implication is true as well. So we will prove at first that quasi-normal qcb-spaces have the property that any zero-set of any functionally closed subspace is also a zero-set of the original space.

Proof of the transitivity property for zero-sets
Let Y be a quasi-normal qcb-space and X be a functionally closed subspace of Y. By Proposition 3.3, Y has a countable pseudobase B consisting of functionally closed sets. We define τ to be the topology on Y given by
τ :=  U ∈ O(Y) U ∩ X ∈ FO(X) and U \ X ∈ FO(Y)}	(1)
and show that τ is equal to the topology FO(Y) of functionally open sets of Y. Note that τ is indeed closed under arbitrary union, because O(Y), FO(X) and FO(Y) are all hereditarily Lindelo¨f topologies by having a countable pseudobase.
Clearly we have FO(Y) ⊆ τ ⊆ O(Y). The proof of the reverse inclusion FO(Y) ⊇ τ is based on three lemmas about Gδ-sets, namely Lemma 3.4 and the following two lemmas. They are direct consequences of the existence of a countable functionally closed pseudobase for Y.
Lemma 4.1 Let V be open and let {βi | i ∈ N} be a pseudo-open decomposition of
V into pseudobase elements in B. Moreover, let (Uj)j be a sequence of open sets
such that i ≤ j implies βi ⊆ Uj. Then the Gδ-set V ∩  ∞ Uj is open.

Proof. Omitted.	 
The complement of any closed subset of Y has a decompostion into sets of the countable and functionally closed pseudobase B. Hence:
Lemma 4.2 Every closed subset of Y is a functional Gδ-set of Y.
The key step of the proof of the transitivity property for zero-sets (Proposi- tion 4.6) is to show that the topology τ satisfies the following ‘normality’ property.
Lemma 4.3 For every functionally closed set A ∈ FA(Y) and every set U ∈ τ con- taining A there is a set U' ∈ τ and a functionally closed set A' ∈ FA(Y) satisfying A ⊆ U' ⊆ A' ⊆ U.
Proof. We omit the non-trivial proof.	 
We employ Lemma 4.3 to show the following separation lemma. It resembles Urysohn’s Separation Lemma which states that two disjoint closed sets in a normal space can be separated by a continuous real-valued function (cf. [2, Theorem 1.5.11]).
Lemma 4.4 For every functionally closed set A ∈ FA(Y) and every set U ∈ τ with A ⊆ U there is a continuous function h : Y → [0, 1] with A ⊆ h−1{0} and Y \ U ⊆ h−1{1}.
Proof idea: The proof is a variation of the standard proof of Urysohn’s Separa- tion Lemma using the weaker normality property stated in Lemma 4.3 in place of standard normality. Details are omitted.	 
From Lemma 4.4 we can deduce:
Lemma 4.5 The topology τ is equal to the family of functionally open sets of Y.
Proof. Omitted.	 
Finally we obtain our transitivity result for functionally closed sets.
Proposition 4.6 Let X be a functionally closed subspace of a quasi-normal qcb- space Y. Then every set that is functionally closed in X is functionally closed in Y.
Proof. Let A ∈ FA(X). Then the set U := Y \ A = (X \ A) ∪ (Y \ X) is an element of τ and thus functionally open in Y by Lemma 4.5. Hence A ∈ FA(Y).	 

The Extension Theorem for Continuous Functions
In this section we formulate and prove the Extension Theorem for quasi-normal qcb-spaces. The proof follows the lines of the proof of the original Tietze-Urysohn Theorem (cf. [2, Theorem 2.1.8]), using Proposition 4.6 in place of Urysohn’s Sep- aration Lemma.
Theorem 4.7 Let X be a functionally closed subspace of a quasi-normal qcb- space Y. Then every continuous function f : X → [0, 1] can be extended to a contin- uous function F : Y → [0, 1] satisfying F (x) = f (x) for all x ∈ X.

Proof. Omitted.	 
In general closed subspaces of a quasi-normal qcb-space which are not function- ally closed do not admit extendability of continuous real-valued functions.

An Effective Version of the Extension Theorem
In this section we establish an effective version of the Tietze-Urysohn Extension Theorem. This theorem is formulated for qcb-spaces that satisfy a computable notion of quasi-normality, which we call effective quasi-normality.

Representations for families of subsets
Given an admissible representation δ of a qcb-space Y, we introduce representations (derived from δ) for the following families of subsets of Y: the open sets, the closed sets, the functionally opens sets, the functionally closed sets, and the functional Gδ-sets (= countable intersections of functionally open sets).
To define the representations of O(Y) and A(Y), we use the fact that every open set has a pseudo-open decomposition into elements of the pseudobase Bδ induced by δ. Using the effective bijective numbering w : N → N∗ of N∗ from Section 2.1, we define the representations δO of O(Y) and δA of A(Y) by
δO(q) = V  :⇐⇒ δ−1(V ) =  p ∈ dom(δ) ∃i. q(i) > 0 ∧ w(q(i) − 1) ± p}
and δA(q) := Y \ δO(q). One can show that δO is computably equivalent to the Sierpin´ski representation of O(Y), which encodes an open set V via its characteristic function cf V from Y into the Sierpin´ski space. The Sierpin´ski space has {⊥, T} as
its underlying set and {⊥} is its only closed singleton.
By using the standard function representation [δ → Q[0,1]] of the space the con- tinuous functions from Y to [0, 1], we define representations δFO of FO(Y) and δFA of FA(Y) by
δFA(q) := y ∈ Y [δ → Q[0,1]](q)(y) = 0} and δFO(q) := Y \ δFA(q) .
Finally, we define the representation δFG of the family of functional Gδ-sets by
δFG (⟨q0, q1,... ⟩) :=  ∞  δFO(qj) ,
where ⟨ . ⟩ denotes a standard computable bijection from (NN)N to NN.
With standard methods of TTE, one can prove the following lemma. It presents effective versions of known theorems in the theory of topological spaces.
Lemma 5.1
Finite union and ﬁnite intersection (on the respective family of subsets) are computable w.r.t. each of the representations δO, δA, δFO, δFA, δFG .
The multi-function that maps two disjoint functionally closed sets A, B to all continuous functions h : Y → [0, 1] satisfying h−1{0} = A and h−1{1} = B is computable w.r.t. δFA and [δ → Q[0,1]].

The function that maps a continuous function h : X → R and two real numbers r, s ∈ R to the functionally closed set h−1[r, s] is computable w.r.t. [δ → QR], QR and δFA.
The representation δFO is computably reducible to δO, and δFA is computably reducible to δA.
Let ·op be any operator in {·O, ·A, ·FO, ·FA}. For any δop-computable subset M, the function A '→ A ∩ M is computable w.r.t. δop and (δ|M )op.
Let ·op be any operator in {·O, ·A, ·FO}. For any δop-computable subset M,
(δ|M )op is computably reducible to δop.
Here δ|M denotes the corestriction of δ to the subset M .

Effectively quasi-normal spaces
We introduce an effectivised version of the notion of a quasi-normal space.
Definition 5.2 Let Y be a qcb-space.
An admissible representation δ of Y is called effectively functionally closed, if the pseudobase Bδ = {Bδ(n) | n ∈ N} induced by δ consists of functionally closed sets and the sequence (Bδ(n))n is computable w.r.t. the representa- tion δFA.
The space Y is called effectively quasi-normal, if Y has an admissible and effectively functionally closed representation.
By having a functionally closed pseudobase, an effectively quasi-normal space is in- deed quasi-normal (cf. Proposition 3.3). The standard construction in [4] of an ad- missible representation built from a functionally closed pseudobase yields a represen- tation that induces a functionally closed pseudobase. An example of an effectively functionally closed representation is the signed-digit representation QR, because the function (a, b) '→ [a, b] is computable w.r.t. QR and QFA. Computable equivalence of representations do not preserve this effectivity property, simply because there are effective representations of the Euclidean space that induce pseudobases containing non-closed sets.

The effective Tietze-Urysohn Extension Theorem
Now we are ready to formulate the effective Tietze-Urysohn Extension Theorem for quasi-normal qcb-spaces. We state a uniform and a non-uniform version.
Theorem 5.3 Let Y be a quasi-normal qcb-space equipped with an admissible effec- tively functionally closed representation δ. Moreover let X be a δFA-computable sub- set of Y. Then the multi-function that maps any continuous function f : X → [0, 1] to all its continuous extensions F : Y → [0, 1] is computable w.r.t. [δ|X → Q[0,1]] and [δ → Q[0,1]].
The non-uniform version reads as follows:
Theorem 5.4 Let Y be a quasi-normal qcb-space equipped with an admissible effec-

tively functionally closed representation δ. Moreover let X be a δFA-computable sub- set of Y. Then every (δ|X, Q[0,1])–computable function f : X → [0, 1] has a (δ, Q[0,1])– computable extension F : Y → [0, 1].
Sketch of Proof of the effective Extension Theorem
The effective Tietze-Urysohn Theorem can be deduced from the following proposi- tion along with Lemma 5.1 by carefully effectivising the proof of Theorem 4.7.
Proposition 5.5 Let Y be a quasi-normal qcb-space equipped with an admissible effectively functionally closed representation δ. For every δFA-computable subset X ⊆ Y, the representation (δ|X )FA is computably reducible to δFA.
This effectivisation of Proposition 4.6 can be proved by showing effective ver- sions of the lemmas in Section 4 on which Proposition 4.6 is based. Their proofs can be obtained by effectivising the proofs of their topological counterparts using Lemma 5.1.
In the sequel, we assume that δ is an admissible effectively functionally closed representation of Y and that X is a δFA-computable subset of Y. By Lemma 5.1, δ|X is an effectively functionally closed representation of X endowed with the sequential subspace topology inherited from Y. As a pseudobase for Y we use the functionally closed pseudobase induced by δ.
At first we introduce a representation Ω of the topology τ from Equation (1).
We define it by
Ω⟨q, r, s⟩ = U :⇐⇒  δO(q) = U, (δ|X )FO(r) = U ∩ X, δFO(s) = U \ X .
Here ⟨·, ·, ·⟩ denotes a computable bijection between NN × NN × NN and NN.
The effective version of Lemma 3.4 states that any δO-name of a functionally open set V can be converted into a δFO-name, when additionally the information about V as a functional Gδ-set is given by means of a δFG -name.  To formulate
Lemma 5.6 precisely, we represent the family of all open functional Gδ-sets by the conjunction 3 of the representations δO and δFG .
Lemma 5.6 The representation δO ∧ δFG is computably equivalent to δFO, and
(δ|X )O ∧ (δ|X )FG is computably equivalent to (δ|X )FO.
Proof. Omitted.	 
The following technical lemma effectivises Lemma 4.1.
Lemma 5.7 There is a computable function g : NN × (NN)N → NN such that

δO g(q, s0, s1,... ) = δO(q) ∩  ∞
δO(sj)

holds for all q, s0, s1,... ∈ dom(δO) satisfying i ≤ j =⇒ Bδ(q(i)) ⊆ δO(sj).
Proof. Omitted.	 
An effective version of Lemma 4.2 reads as follows:

3 The conjunction δO ∧ δFG is defined by (δO ∧ δFG )(⟨q, s⟩)= V :⇐⇒ δO(q)= δFG (s)= V , cf. [5,8].

Lemma 5.8 The representation δA is computably reducible to δFG .
Proof. Any δA-name q of a closed set A provides a sequence (βi)i of pseudobase elements in Bδ such that their union is the complement of A. By the effectivity condition on δ and by Lemma 5.1, we can convert q into a δFG -name of the set

∞
i=0
(Y \ βi).	 

Lemmas 4.3 and 4.4 can be effectivised by stating computability of appropriate multi-functions.
Lemma 5.9 The multi-function which maps a functionally closed set A ∈ FA(Y) and a set U ∈ τ with A ⊆ U to all pairs (U', A') ∈ τ × FA(Y) satisfying A ⊆ U' ⊆ A' ⊆ U is computable w.r.t. the representations δFA and Ω.
Lemma 5.10 The multi-function which maps a functionally closed set A ∈ FA(Y) and a set U ∈ τ with A ⊆ U to all continuous functions h : Y → [0, 1] satisfying A ⊆ h−1{0} and Y \ U ⊆ h−1{1} is computable w.r.t. the representations δFA, τ and [δ → Q[0,1]].
By Lemma 4.5, the topology is τ is equal to FO(Y). We express this property in terms of computable equivalence of representations.
Lemma 5.11 The representations Ω and δFO are computably equivalent.
Lemmas 5.9, 5.10 and 5.11 can be proven by effectivisations of the proofs of their topological counterparts using Lemmas 5.1, 5.6, 5.7 and 5.8. We omit the details.
Discussion
We have shown that quasi-normality yields a reasonable substitute for the prop- erty of normality in the category of qcb-spaces. It admits a continuous and, in its effective version, a computable Extension Theorem for functions defined on func- tionally closed subspaces. The category of quasi-normal qcb-spaces contains all countably based normal spaces and enjoys excellent closure properties, for example it is cartesian closed. By contrast, the category of normal qcb-spaces is not carte- sian closed: one can use the Extension Theorem 4.7 and a non-regularity result from
[6] to prove that for any separable metric space M that is not locally compact the
function space RM formed in QCB is not normal. An open question is whether or not the category of qcb-spaces endowed with an admissible effectively functionally closed representation is cartesian closed.

References
Battenfeld, I., Schr¨oder, M., and Simpson, A.: A Convenient Category of Domains, Electronic Notes in Theoretical Computer Science 172 (2007), pp. 69–99.
Engelking, R.: General Topology, Heldermann, Berlin (1989).
Michael, E.: On k-spaces, kR-spaces and k(X); Pacific Journal of Mathematics 47(2) (1973), 487–498.
Schr¨oder, M.: Extended Admissibility, Theoretical Computer Science 284 (2002), pp. 519–538.

Schr¨oder, M.: Admissible Representations for Continuous Computations, Ph.D. Thesis, Informatik– Berichte 299, FernUniversit¨at Hagen (2003).
Schr¨oder, M.: The sequential topology on NNN is not regular, submitted (2008).
Simpson, A.: Towards a Convenient Category of Topological Spaces, in: Proceedings of Thirteenth ALGI Workshop (2003).
Weihrauch, K.: Computable Analysis, Springer, Berlin (2000).
Weihrauch, K.: On Computable Metric Spaces Tietze-Urysohn Extension is Computable, Lecture Notes in Computer Science 2064 (2001), pp. 357-368.
Weihrauch, K.: The Computable Multi-Functions on Multi-Represented Sets are Closed under Programming, Journal of Universal Computer Science 14(6) (2008), pp. 801–844.
Willard, S.: General Topology, Addison–Wesley Publishing Company, Reading Massachusetts (1970).
