

 HOSTE D BY 

Full Length Article
Black berry juice attenuates neurological disorders and oxidative stress associated with concurrent exposure of aluminum and fluoride in male rats
Hanaa A. Hassan *, Hanaa M. Serage, Wafaa Gad
Zoology Department, Faculty of Science, Mansoura University, Egypt


A R T I C L E	I N F O	A B S T R A C T 



Article history:
Received 11 May 2015
Received in revised form 13 August 2015
Accepted 13 August 2015
Available online 28 August 2015


Keywords: Aluminum chloride Sodium fluoride Black berry Oxidative stress Antioxidants
Male rats
The objective of this study was to assess the protective effect of black berry juice (BBJ) on the neurological disorders and oxidative stress induced by co-exposure to ALCL3 and NaF in male albino rats. Administration of either AlCl3 (200 mg/kg bw) or NaF (10 mg/kg bw) or both of them caused a significant increase in serum and brain TL, TC, TG as well as serum LDLC and VLDLC levels while serum HDLC level was decreased significantly. Additionally, brain neurotransmitter (DA and 5-HT) levels, AChE, Na-K ATPase activity and ATP values were decreased significantly but NE level was increased in rats administered Al or F alone or in combination. Moreover, a significant increase in brain MDA, NO, H2O2 and free radical enzyme (xanthine oxidase (XO)) and a significant decrease in the level of TAC, SOD and GSH were recorded in AlCl3 or NaF intoxicated rats. In addition, the levels of serum Na, Ca, Cu and zinc (Zn) were significantly diminished, while the level of K was significantly in- creased. However ALCL3 appears to enhance the neurotoxic hazards caused by NaF. On the other hand, the administration of BBJ (1.6 g/kg bw) showed a marked neuroprotective effect against the biochemical abnormalities that occurred and oxidative stress of the brain induced by co-exposure to AlCl3 and NaF. So, it can be concluded that the consumption of BBJ might be useful for alleviating the neurological disorders and oxidative stress associated with con- current exposure of ALCL3 and NaF indicating its free radical scavenging and potent antioxidant activity.
© 2015 Mansoura University. Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V. This is an open
access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-
nc-nd/4.0/).







* Corresponding author. Tel.: +201001059907.
E-mail address: drhanaahassan@yahoo.com (H.A. Hassan).
Abbreviations: AlCl3, Aluminum chloride; NaF, sodium fluoride; BBJ, black berry; TL, total lipid; TC, total cholesterol; TG, triglycerides; LDLC, low density lipoprotein; VLDLC, very low density lipoprotein; HDLC, high density lipoprotein cholesterol; DA, dopamine; 5-HT, se- rotonin; AChE, acetyl choline esterase; Na-K ATPase, sodium potassium adenosine tri phosphatase; NE, nor-epinephrine; MDA, malondialdehyde; NO, nitric oxide; H2O2, hydrogen peroxide; XO, xanthine oxidase; TAC, total antioxidant capacity; SOD, super oxide dismutase; GSH, reduced glutathione
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ejbas.2015.08.002
2314-808X/© 2015 Mansoura University. Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).


	

Introduction

Aluminum and fluoride are the most widely distributed toxic metals in the environment. The exposure of the human to these metals causes various adverse physiological effects par- ticularly neuropathological changes. Aluminum occurs naturally and makes up around 8% of the surface of the earth. It con- stantly exists in combination with other elements like fluorine, oxygen and silicon. Everybody is exposed to aluminum from the air, water and food at low levels. It is frequently utilized as a part of building materials, cooking utensils, appliances and containers. It is additionally utilized as a component in fireworks and paints, to produce glass, rubber, and ceramics, and in consumer products such as buffered aspirin, astrin- gents, antacids, food additives, and antiperspirants [1]. Production of free radicals seems to be the catalytic activity of aluminum. Additionally, aggregation of beta-amyloid protein in the brain of Alzheimer’s patients induces more free radi- cals production [2]. Aluminum (Al) can induce oxidative damage through its ability to attach to negatively charged phospho- lipids of the brain, which include polyunsaturated fatty acids.
So the reactive oxygen species (ROS) including H2O2, O2•−, OH•, and OH− can easily attack these fatty acids [3]. Furthermore, the most electronegative element in nature is fluoride anion,
its accumulation leads to fluorosis, a common disorder in de- veloping countries, where human’s main source of drinking water is usually polluted with fluoride [4]. Fluoride easily dis- tributes throughout the body through the blood stream, penetrates the cellular membranes and its subsequent intoxi- cation leads to cellular injury [5]. Also, production of free radical is considered to be one of the most crucial mechanisms of fluoride toxicity [4]. Brain tissues are highly susceptible to oxi- dative damage, probably because of high oxygen consumption rate (20%), the presence of abundant polyunsaturated fatty acids in cell membranes, high iron (Fe) content, and low anti- oxidative enzyme activities [6]. Actually, ingestion of diets containing large amounts of natural antioxidants including vegetables and fruits were considered to diminish specific age related neurological disorders such as dementia and macular degeneration [7].
Black berry (Rubus spp.) is one of the most important natural diets with anti-oxidant properties, contains large amounts of anthocyanins, and these flavonoid pigments give black berries their special red to blue color. Numerous studies have demonstrated the health benefits and antioxidant activities of the anthocyanins which naturally occur in various vegetables and fruits [8,9]. Anthocyanins, water soluble pigments found in plants, are polyphenols that have health promoting benefits including antioxidant and anti-inflammatory effects [10]. The antioxidative properties of anthocyanins arise from their high reactivity and ability to scavenge free radicals. Some reports have confirmed that anthocyan- ins are good antioxidants and can effectively eliminate free radicals [10]. So the present study was designed to eluci- date the neurological disorders and oxidative stress related to exposure to fluoride alone or in conjugation with alumi- num and the possible protective effect of black berry as a natural antioxidant against their adverse effects in male albino rats.
Materials and methods

Chemicals

Aluminum chloride (98%; anhydrous) and sodium fluoride (99%) were obtained from Sigma Chemical Company (St. Louis, USA). Fresh black berry fruits (Rubus spp.) were purchased from the local market (Mansoura, Egypt). The fruits were washed, ho- mogenized and their juice was freshly prepared daily. The doses administered were prepared from the LD50 values of each com- pound; LD50 for NaF is 52 mg/kg for rat, while LD50 for AlCl3 is 200–1000 mg/kg in rats. The tested doses of aluminum chlo- ride (AlCl3; 200 mg/kg bw) and sodium fluoride (NaF; 10 mg/kg bw) was chosen according to previous studies conducted by our group [11] also, black berry dose (1.6 g/kg bw equal to 9 ml/ kg bw) was selected based on earlier studies [8,12]. All kits used through the experiment were obtained from Biodiagnostic Company, Egypt. All used reagents and chemicals were of ana- lytical grade.

Experimental animals

Forty-eight adult male Wistar albino rats (Rattus rattus) with weight of 120–140 g, were obtained from the holding company for biological product and vaccines (VACSERA), Cairo, Egypt. The local committee approved the design of the experiments and the protocol follows the guidelines of the National Institutes of Health (NIH). Animals received human care, were kept under good ventilation, had adequate stable diet and water were allowed ad libitum. They were maintained on normal light/ dark cycle throughout the experimental period. The animals were acclimatized to the laboratory conditions for two weeks before being experimented.

Experimental design

After 2 weeks of acclimation, rats were classified into eight groups comprising six rats in each. Group 1: served as un- treated control (C). Group 2: rats were given orally black berry juice (BBJ) at dose of 1.6 g/kg bw. Group 3 (AlCl3): rats were given orally AlCl3 dissolved in distilled water at dose of 200 mg/kg bw. Group 4 (NaF): rats were given orally NaF dissolved in dis-
tilled water at dose of 10 mg/kg bw. Group 5 (AlCl3+NaF): rats
were given orally AlCl3 followed by NaF at the same men- tioned doses. Group 6 (BBJ+AlCl3): rats were given orally BBJ followed by AlCl3 at the same mentioned dose. Group 7 (BBJ+NaF): rats were given orally BBJ followed by NaF at the same
mentioned dose. Group 8 (BBJ+AlCl3+NaF): rats were given orally
BBJ followed by AlCl3 then NaF at the same mentioned doses. Rats were given their respective doses daily for 5 weeks.

Blood collection and tissue homogenate

At the end of the experimental period (5 weeks), blood samples were collected from the retro-orbital venous plexus of over- night fasted rats [13] in clean tubes and then centrifuged at 860 × g for 20 minutes. The separated sera were stored at −20 °C for subsequent analysis. Then rats of each group were sacri- ficed by decapitation and brain specimens were carefully



removed, washed using chilled saline solution, weighed and then homogenized in phosphate buffer (50 mM, pH 7.0) to form about 10% (w/v) homogenate for biochemical assay.

Biochemical analysis

Total lipid (TL) level was estimated by using a biodiagnostic kit according to the method of Zollner and Kirsch [14]. Total cholesterol (TC) level was estimated according to the method of the colorimetric method of Young [15]. Triglyceride (TG) level was assayed according to Fossati and Prencipe [16]. HDLC level was assayed according to the procedure of [15]. LDLC and VLDLC levels in serum were calculated as described by Friedewald et al.’s [17] formula:

LDLC  Total cholesterol – triglycerides5 – HDLC  mgdl VLDLC  triglycerides5  mgdl
Monoamine neurotransmitter (DA, 5-HT and NE) level was estimated using HPLC technique and the brain content of these neurotransmitters was made using the equation of Pagel et al. [18]. Brain acetyl choline esterase (AChE) activity was deter- mined according to the method of Ellman et al. [19], Na-K ATPase activity was assayed according to Taussky and Shorr
[20] and ATP content was estimated using HPLC according to Liu et al. [21]. The level of malondialdehyde (the end product of lipid peroxidation) was measured by the thiobarbituric acid assay according to the method of Ohkawa et al. [22]; H2O2 level was assayed as described by Aebi [23]; NO production was mea- sured according to the method of Montgomery and Dymock [24]. Brain xanthine oxidase was performed according to the method described by Litwack et al. [25]. TAC was measured ac- cording to Koracevic et al. [26]; SOD activity was assayed according to Nishikimi et al. [27]; and GSH content was assayed according to Beutler et al. [28]. Moreover, serum sodium (Na) and potassium (K) concentrations were evaluated according to the method of Henry [29]. Calcium (Ca) concentration was es- timated according to Gindler and King [30]. Zinc (Zn) concentration was estimated according to Hayakawa and Jap
[31] and copper (Cu) concentration was estimated according to Ventura and King [32].

Statistical analysis

The obtained results were evaluated by one way ANOVA (analy- sis of variance) test and post comparison was carried out with Tukey’s Pairwise comparison as described by Snedecor and Cochran [33]. The results were expressed as means ± stan- dard error (SE) of six animals (N = 6). The values of p ≤ 0.05 were considered statistically significant based on Least Significant Difference (LSD) probability. All the statistical analysis was carried out with the use of SPSS 20.00 software.

Results

As shown in Tables 1–3 the oral administration of black berry juice (1.6 g/kg) alone for 5 weeks did not induce pronounced
changes in the most estimated parameters. However, brain TL, serum LDLC level, Na-K ATPase activity and the measured an- tioxidant parameters were significantly increased while, MDA, H2O2 and K concentrations were significantly decreased in com- parison with the control group.
A marked increase in serum TL, TC, TG, LDLC, VLDLC levels and a marked decrease in serum HDLC level were observed in aluminum chloride and sodium fluoride alone and in combi- nation rat groups compared with that of the control rat group. However, an improvement in the above parameters was ob- served in the AlCl3 or NaF intoxicated rats after the administration of BBJ. Also, a significant elevation in the brain TL, TC, TG levels was observed in AlCl3 or NaF in a single or in combination intoxicated rat groups if compared to control rats. However the administration of BBJ to intoxicated rats caused a marked improvement in these parameters (Table 1). As shown in Table 2 the administration of aluminum chlo- ride and sodium fluoride alone or in combination produced significant decrease in the brain DA, 5-HT, AChE, Na-K ATPase and ATP as compared with control rat group while, NE showed significant increase. The administration of BBJ with AlCl3 or NaF or both of them resulted in a significant improvement in the above examined parameters as compared to the correspond-
ing values of intoxicated rat groups without BBJ treatment.
Furthermore, a marked increase in lipid peroxidation and free radicals production as measured by MDA and H2O2 for- mation respectively was observed in AlCl3 or NaF intoxicated rat groups. Also an increase in NO level and XO activity was coupled with a significant decrease in TAC, SOD and GSH in the AlCl3 or NaF or both of the treated rat groups (Table 3). In contrast a significant improvement in the above examined pa- rameters was observed in intoxicated rat groups when co- administrated with BBJ. Moreover, the data in Table 4 showed a significant decrease in serum Na, Ca, Zn and Cu levels, while an increase in K level was recorded in the AlCl3 or NaF or both of the intoxicated rats. This effect is significantly ameliorated in rats pre-administered with BBJ. In the present study, it was recorded that AlCl3 exposed rats showed marked alteration in most of the estimated parameters than NaF but more pro- nounced toxicity was observed during co-exposure to both toxicants (AlCl3 or NaF).



Discussion

Recent reports have shown that synergistic action of alumi- num and fluoride as a result of the aluminum–fluoride complex accumulates in the brain and would also be expected to cause prolonged neurotoxicity, leading to neurodegeneration and syn- aptic loss [34]. Fluoride is known to potentiate the toxicity of aluminum by promoting its absorption in the gastrointesti- nal tract and across the blood–brain barrier [35]. Another mechanism by which fluoride might increase brain free radical generation and lipid peroxidation would be through activa- tion of protein kinase C by a fluoroaluminum complex which can increase the risk of excitotoxicity [34]. Neurotoxicity of alu- minum is due to the synergistic effect of both aluminum and iron. It potentiates the activity of iron ions to cause neuronal





oxidative damage where aluminum binding to the neuronal membrane accelerates attacks by iron-induced free radicals, while membrane oxidation successively increases aluminum coordination and subsequently, intensive oxidation [36].
The present disturbance in lipid constituents of serum and brain in aluminum or fluoride exposed animals has earlier been reported [37,38]. This finding may be due to the exposure of aluminum which is able to cause alterations in lipid profile of
the brain myelin which is because of pro-oxidant activity of this metal as shown by increased lipid peroxidation which in- terferes with the lipids of cellular membranes and subsequently influences their functional ability and integrity, so aluminum toxicity was found to induce a significant effect on the various membrane bound enzymes [39]. Also, hyperlipidemia may either be due to increased synthesis of fatty acids in the liver or to disturbances in lipid metabolism as a result of aluminum or









fluoride accumulation in the liver [40]. The hypo activity of li- poprotein lipase enzymes may be because of hepatic dysfunction appearing to be one of the most important factors responsible for the increment in serum triglycerides and cholesterol, these enzymes may be inhibited by aluminum or fluoride, for example unspecific esterase, triglyceride lipase and pyrophosphates [41]. The irregularities in lipoprotein profile may be a result of the decrease in the removal of low density lipoprotein (LDL) and VLDL from the circulation accompanied by or uncontrolled pro- duction of VLDL by the liver [42]. Moreover, the significant alterations of the brain catecholamine neurotransmitters (DA, 5-HT and NE) in the intoxicated rats may be attributed to the
increased rate of free radicals production such as O2−, H2O2.These radicals cause oxidation of DA, 5-HT and NE which in turn might
result in neurodegenerative diseases including Alzheimer’s and
Parkinson’s diseases [43]. Also, it may be due to increased neu- ronal activity resulting release of catechol-O-methyl, or may be attributed to the low activity of the enzymes involved in neurotransmitters synthesis such as dopamine β-hydroxylase and tyrosine hydroxylase [44]. The decrease of serotonin might have occurred due to conversion of serotonin to melatonin (which is also considered as a powerful antioxidant) to combat the oxidative stress caused by both exposures. Serotonin and melatonin exist in proportion to each other; as melatonin in- creases, serotonin decreases in the brain. Also, it has been suggested that inhibitory effect on 5-HT system was due to the withdrawal of cholinergic input and resulting in decreased levels of 5-HT in different regions after exposure [45]. The decreased levels of dopamine observed following exposure could be the result of altered activity of biosynthetic enzymes, or altered







availability of their precursor amino acid tyrosine [46]. Con- cerning the elevation in cerebral norepinephrine showed in the present study, it may be a consequence to the oxidative stress, caused by the metal, causing the activation of its synthetic pathway, particularly the step which involves the conversion of dopamine to norepinephrine via hydroxylation [47].
The observed inhibition in brain AChE activity may have re- sulted from the slow accumulation of aluminum in the brain and formation of aluminum complex with high affinity for binding with the active site of this enzyme, leading to induc- tion of oxidative stress, consequently it diminishes the activity of AChE in all parts of the brain. So, acetylcholine (ACh) is not hydrolyzed and accumulates in cholinergic sites leading to dis- turbance in the nervous system [48], inhibition in AChE resulted in the accumulation of ACh, stimulation of lymphocytes and increased lymphocyte motility and cytotoxicity. Since AChE is a membrane bound enzyme, ACh may be removed from the binding with AChE and may result in decreased activity of AChE, so the effect on the synaptic transmission could be ex- plained by the inhibition in the activity of AChE in the brain [49].
The inhibition of Na-K ATPase activity and decreased ATP
were previously reported [50]. Na+-K+ ATPase activity is vital in maintenance of Na+ and K+ electrochemical gradients through the membrane. Thus, changes in the activity of this enzyme could be related to disturbances in neuronal action potential firing [51]. Phospholipid is very important for the activity of this membrane bound enzyme so it is highly susceptible to oxi- dative injury, thus the inhibition mechanism includes damage to protein of enzyme by reactive oxygen species and other prod- ucts of lipid peroxidation directly or alteration of enzyme’s phospholipid microenvironment [52]. The suppression of Na-K ATPase could induce partial membrane depolarization per- mitting excessive Ca2+ to enter into neurons causing toxic complications similar to excitotoxicity and involved in the physiological and pathological abnormalities [53]. While the loss of ATP results in rapid membrane depolarization in the mam- malian brain, the enzyme is present in high concentration in the brain and muscles [54]. The inhibition of glycolysis where it is a main source of ATP in mammalian cells, could affect the critical cellular functions such as protein phosphorylation and ion transport through membrane [55].
Further, the present study revealed that the increased levels of MDA, H2O2, NO and XO in the brains of AlCl3 or NaF intoxi- cated rats indicate high level of oxidative stress and free radical generation. Additionally the decreased antioxidant levels of TAC, SOD and GSH reduced the ability of scavenging high levels of ROS produced in the brain. It is well known that the over- production of ROS causes oxidation of macromolecules. This leads to free radical attacks of phospholipids in membrane causing membrane damage through different mechanisms such as lipid peroxidation, mitochondrial membrane depolariza- tion and apoptosis [56]. Moreover, membrane lipid peroxidation could disturb the anatomical integrity of the membrane and
diminishes its fluidity leading to inhibition of several mem- brane bound enzymes including Na+-K+ ATPase and that is in agreement with findings of Abd El-Rahmana et al. [57]. The
increased nitric oxide (NO) exerts its effects through the pro- duced toxic metabolites such as peroxynitrite (OONO−) which impairs the oxidative phosphorylation complex activities of
mitochondria exerting metabolic disturbances and ATP pro- duction depletion causing destructive conditions for brain tissues leading to increase the blood–brain barrier permeabil- ity [58,59].
The significant changes in total SOD (MnSOD and CuZnSOD) can be explained by the deficiency of serum level of Zn and Cu (being essential for regulating cellular redox state) which may be related to the reduction of SOD activity in brains of AlCl3 or NaF exposed rats or rats exposed to both, exerting mi- tochondrial impairments and dysfunction [60]. Also the observed disturbances in serum electrolytes due to binding of Al ion with
different brain cells namely astrocytes, neural cells and syn- aptosomes, cause inhibition of membrane bound Na+, K+, Ca2+ ATPase activity. These enzymatic disturbance would alter the
electrolytes level and result in cellular alterations [61]. More- over, in the gastrointestinal tract, fluoride being a highly electronegative halogen forms complexes with cations like Ca and thereby reduces their absorption leading to decreased serum Ca level [62]. Also, Cu and Zn are essential enzyme co- factors required for numerous cellular processes, but their abnormal accumulation in the brain will lead to neurotoxic- ity [63]. Any deficiency of zinc could induce an increase in tissue oxidative damage and excessive Zn translocation might be a molecular trigger of the cellular apoptosis [64].
Black berry fruits are well known to have high antioxidant capacity because it was considered a rich source of polyphe- nols known with a great potential for improving short term memory performance in animal studies [65]. Blackberry was considered to be an important source of metabolites with neuro- protective properties. Digested metabolites from these black berries can protect neuronal cells against oxidative damage, one of the most critical mechanisms of neurodegeneration, through activating cellular stress response pathways like GSH modulation, reduction of ROS production and caspase activa- tion [66]. This finding was evidenced by the observed improvement of most examined biomarkers including oxida- tive stress, endogenous antioxidants system, neurotransmitters and electrolyte levels. The current anti-peroxidation and an- tioxidant activity of BBJ may be assigned to its different functional constituents of antioxidants such as flavonoids (an- thocyanin), vitamins (A, B complex, E and C), some minerals (Na, K, Ca, Zn, Se and P), phenolic polymers (ellagic acids) and phenolic acids (ferulic, p-coumaric, caffeic and gallic) [67]. An- thocyanins, the active component in BBJ, and their derivatives use different mechanisms to protect against a variety of oxi- dants. It can combat the dangerous hydroxyl radical-generating system, a main source of oxidants in the body, so it can protect lipids of cellular membranes from oxidation as well as mem- brane bound enzymes, and protects amino acids such as tyrosine from peroxynitrite, a highly reactive oxidant. Also, it has been expected that anthocyanins and non-anthocyanin phenolics in black berries act additively or synergistically to produce the detected beneficial changes via their ability to act as anti-oxidants and/or pro-oxidants in various biological environments [68]. In addition, the protective effect of BBJ may be due to the synergistic antioxidant effect of both vitamins E and C for ameliorating oxidative stress and cell degenera- tion; when vitamin E attacks free radicals, it converts into a vitamin E radical, which then acts as chelating agent and returns to its antioxidant state using vitamin C [8].



In conclusion, black berry juice administration during ex- posure to fluoride and aluminum could be recommended for reverting back brain oxidative stress and neurological disor- ders as well as modulation of antioxidant defense mechanism. The observed beneficial effect of BBJ is probably through the synergistic anti-oxidant capacity of its various nutritional con- stituents. However, the fractionation and bioavailability of the main constituents of black berry which are responsible for the antioxidant activity will be an important area in the future.

R E F E R E N C E S 



ATSDR (Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry). Toxicological profile for aluminum (Update). U.S., Department of Health and Human Services. Public Health Service; 1999. p. 352.
Yuan CY, Lee YJ, Wang Hsu GS. Aluminum overload increases oxidative stress in four functional brain areas of neonatal rats. J Biomed Sci 2012;19–51.
Verstraeten SV, Nogueira LV, Schreier S, Oteiza PI. Effect of trivalent metal ions on phase separation and membrane lipid packing: role in lipid peroxidation. Arch Biochem Biophys 1997;338(1):121–7.
Madhusudhan N, Basha PM, Begum S, Ahmed F. Fluoride- induced neuronal toxicity and its amelioration by antioxidants in developing rats. Fluoride 2009;42(3):179–87.
Bouaziz H, Ben Amara I, Essefi M, Croute F, Zeghal N. Fluoride-induced brain damages in suckling mice. Pestic Biochem Physiol 2010;96:24–9.
Youdim MB. Iron in the brain: implications for Parkinson’s and Alzheimer’s diseases. Mt Sinai J Med 1988;55(1):97–101.
Bastianetto S, Quirion R. Natural extracts as possible protective agents of brain aging. Neurobiol Aging 2002;23:891–7.
Hassan HA, Abdel Aziz AF. Evaluation of free radical scavenging and anti-oxidant properties of blackberry against fluoride toxicity in rats. Food Chem Toxicol 2010;48:1999– 2004.
Felgines C, Fraise D, Besson C, Vasson MB, Texier O. Bioavailability of lemon vera poly phenols in rats. Br J Nutr 2014;111(10):1773–81.
Fan ZL, Wang ZY, Zuo LL, Tian SQ. Protective effect of anthocyanins from lingonberry on radiation-induced damages. Int J Environ Res Public Health 2012;9:4732–43.
Akinrinade ID, Ogundele OM, Memudu AE, Dare BJ. Dehydrogenase activity in the brain of fluoride and aluminium induced Wistar rats. Biol Syst 2013;2:110.
Ismail HA, Hamza Z, El-Shenawy S. Potential protective effects of blackberry and quercetin on sodium fluoride- induced impaired hepato-renal biomarkers, sex hormones and hematotoxicity in male rats. J Appl Life Sci Int 2014;1(1): 1–16.
Schermer S. The blood morphology of laboratory animals. 3rd ed. Philadelphia: F. A. Davi Co.; 1967. p. 42.
Zollner N, Kirsch K. Serum total lipids determination colorimetrically. Exp Med 1962;135:545.
Young DS. Effects of drugs on clinical laboratory test. 4th ed. Washington, DC: AACC Press; 1995. p. 4–57.
Fossati P, Prencipe L. Serum triglycerides determined colourimetrically with an enzyme that procedures hydrogen peroxide. Clin Chem 1982;28:2077–80.
Friedewald WT. Estimation of concentration of low-density lipoprotein cholesterol in plasma without use of the preparative ultracentrifuge. Clin Chem 1972;18:499–502.
Pagel P, Blome J, Wolf HU. High-performance liquid chromatographic separation and measurement of various biogenic compounds possibly involved in the pathomechanism of Parkinson’s disease. J Chromatogr B Biomed Sci Appl 2000;746:297–304.
Ellman GL, Courtney K, Andres V Jr, Feather-Stone RM. A new and rapid colorimetric determination of AChE activity. Biochem Pharmacol 1961;7:88–95.
Taussky HH, Shorr E. A microcolorimetric method for the determination of inorganic phosphorus. J Biol Chem 1953;202:675–85.
Liu H, Jiang Y, Luo Y, Jiang W. Determination of ATP, ADP and AMP in litchi fruit. Food Technol Biotechnol 2006;44(4):531–4.
Ohkawa H, Wakatsuki A, Kaneada C. Assay for lipid peroxides in animal tissue by thiobarbituric acid reaction. Anal Biochem 1982;95(2):351–8.
Aebi HE. Methods of enzymatic analysis, vol. 105. Berlin: Verlag Chem; 1984. p. 121–6.
Montgomery HAC, Dymock JF. The determination of nitrite in water. Analyst 1961;86:414–16.
Litwack G, Bothwell JW, Williams JN Jr, Elvehjem CA. A colorimetric assay for xanthine oxidase in rat liver homogenates. J Biol Chem 1953;200:303–10.
Koracevic D, Koracevic G, Djordjevic V, Andrejevic S, Cosic V. Method for the measurement of antioxidant activity in human fluids. J Clin Pathol 2001;54:356–61.
Nishikimi M, Rao A, Yog K. Colorimetric determination of superoxide dismutase activity. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 1972;46:849–51.
Beutler E, Duron O, Kelly BM. An improved method for the detection of blood glutathione. J Lab Clin Med 1963;61:882–8.
Henry RF. Clinical chemistry principles and technics. 2nd ed. Harper and Row; 1974. p. 525.
Gindler EM, King JD. Rapid colorimetric determination of calcium in biologic fluids with methylthymol blue. Am J Clin Pathol 1972;58:376.
Hayakawa R, Jap J. Estimation of zinc. Toxicol Environ Health 1961;8:14–18.
Ventura S, King EJ. Determination of copper and zinc in blood serum. J Biochem 1951;48(5):Ixi–Ixii.
Snedecor G, Cochran WG. Statistical methods. 7th ed. Ames, IA: The State University Press American Iowa; 1982.
p. 221–2.
Blaylock RL. Aluminum induced immunoexcitotoxicity in neuro-developmental and neurodegenerative disorders. Curr Inorg Chem 2012;2(1):1877–9441.
Dia GY, Cai OH, Zhou LY, Wei ZD, Zhang H. Experimental study of combined effect of fluoride and aluminium [abstract]. Proceedings of the XXth Conference of the International Society for Fluoride Research 1994;Sep 5–9; Beijing, China.
Berthon G. Aluminum speciation in relation to aluminum bioavailability: metabolism and toxicity. Coord Chem Rev 2002;228:319–41.
Hassan HA, Yousef MI. Mitigating effects of antioxidant properties of black berry juice on sodium fluoride induced- hepatotoxicity and oxidative stress in rats. Food Chem Toxicol 2009;47(9):2332–7.
Singla N, Dhawan DK. Zinc protection against aluminium induced altered lipid profile and membrane integrity. Food Chem Toxicol 2013;55:18–28.
Pandya JD, Dave KR, Katyare SS. Effect of long-term aluminum feeding on lipid/phospholipid profiles of rat brain myelin. Lipids Health Dis 2004;3:13.
Yousef MI. Aluminum-induced changes in hemato- biochemical parameters, lipid per oxidation and enzyme



activities of male rabbits: protective role of ascorbic acid. Toxicology 2004;199:47–57.
Shrivastava S. S-allyl-cysteines reduce amelioration of aluminum induced toxicity in rats. Am J Biochem Biotechnol 2011;7(2):74–83.
Tsutsumi K, Inoue Y, Shime A, Murase T. Correction of hypertriglyceridemia with low and high-density lipoprotein cholesterol by the novel compound No 1886, a lipoprotein lipase promoting agent in STZ induced diabetic rats. Diabetes 1995;44:414–17.
Burke WJ, Li SW, Chung HD, Ruggiero DA, Kristal BS, Johnson EM, et al. Neurotoxicity of MAO metabolites of catecholamine neurotransmitters: role in neurodegenerative diseases. Neurotoxicology 2004;25(2):101–15.
Flora SJS, Mittal M, Mishra D. Co-exposure to arsenic and fluoride on oxidative stress, glutathione linked enzymes, biogenic amines and DNA damage in mouse brain. J Neurol Sci 2009;285:198–205.
Kumar S. Aluminium-induced changes in the rat brain serotonin system. Food Chem Toxicol 2002;40:1875–80.
Gupta V, Gill KD. Influence of ethanol on lead distribution and biochemical changes in rats exposed to lead. Alcohol 2000;20:9–17.
George J, Siegel MD. Basic neurochemistry: molecular, cellular and medical aspects. 6th ed. USA: Williams L and Wilkins; 1999.
Kumar A, Dogra S, Prakash A. Protective effect of curcumin (Curcuma longa), against aluminium toxicity: possible behavioral and biochemical alterations in rats. Behav Brain Res 2009;205:384–90.
Mohamd EM, Ahmed HH, Estefan SF, Farrag AE, Salah RS. Windows into estradiol effects in Alzheimer’s disease therapy. Euro Rev Med Pharmacol Sci 2011;15:1131–40.
Mannaa FA, Abdalla MS, Abdel-Wahhab KG, El-Kassaby MI. Effect of some nutraceutical agents on aluminum-induced functional neurotoxicity in senile rats: I. Effect of rosemary aqueous extract and docosahexaenoic acid. J Appl Sci Res 2013;9(3):2322–34.
Zhang B, Nie A, Bai W, Meng Z. Effects of aluminum chloride on sodium current, transient outward potassium current and delayed rectifier potassium current in acutely isolated rat hippocampal CA1 neurons. Food Chem Toxicol 2004;42:1453–62.
Chakraborty A, Sena P, Sura A, Chatterjeeb U, Chakrabarti S. Age-related oxidative inactivation of Na, K-ATPase in rat brain crude synaptosomes. Exp Gerontol 2003;38:705–10.
Huang C, Hsuc C, Liu S, Lin-Shiau S. Neurotoxicological mechanism of methylmercury induced by low-dose and long-term exposure in mice: oxidative stress and
down-regulated Na+/K+-ATPase involved. Toxicol Lett 2008;176:188–97.
Silva LFA, Hoffmann MS, Rambo LM, Ribeiro LR, Lima R, Furian AF, et al. The involvement of Na+, K+-ATPase activity and free radical generation in the susceptibility to pentylenetetrazol-induced seizures after experimental traumatic brain injury. J Neurol Sci 2011;308:35–40.
Agalakova NI, Gusev GP. Fluoride-induced death of rat Erythrocytes in vitro. Toxicology 2011;25:1609–18.
Barbier O, Arreola-Mendoza L, Del Razo LM. Molecular mechanisms of fluoride toxicity. Chem Biol Interact 2010; 188:319–33.
Abd El-Rahmana M, El-Khadragya MF, Abd-El Hayb H, Gab- Allah DM. Effect of some cement components on ion contents in different brain areas of adult male albino mice. J Hazard Mater 2011;186:1527–40.
Heales SJ, Bolanos JP, Stewart VC, Brookes PS, Land JM, Clark JB. Nitric oxide, mitochondrial and neurological disease. Biochem Biophys Acta 1999;1410:215–28.
Mayhan WG. Role of nitric oxide in histamine-induced increases in permeability of the blood–brain barrier. Brain Res 1996;743:70–6.
Radjicic R, Cvijic G, Djokic I, Davidovic V. Effect of propranolol and cold exposure on the activities of antioxidant enzymes in the brain of rats adapted to different ambient temperatures. J Therm Biol 1999;24:433–7.
Wang B, Xing W, Zhao Y, Deng X. Effects of chronic aluminum exposure on memory through multiple signal transduction pathways. Environ Toxicol Pharmacol 2010;29:308–13.
Chhabra S, Siddique N, Randhawa SNS. Comparative studies on plasma mineral status of cattle in fluoride toxic brackish water zone of Punjab India. Asian Pac J Trop Dis 2012;S257–9.
Nelson N. Metal ion transporters and homeostasis. EMBO J 1998;18(16):4361–71.
Frederickson CJ, Koh JY, Bush AI. The neurobiology of zinc in health and disease. Nat Rev Neurosci 2005;6:449–62.
Shukitt-Hale B, Cheng V, Joseph JA. Effects of blackberries on motor and cognitive function in aged rats. Nutr Neurosci 2009;12(3):135–40.
Tavares L, Figueira I, McDougall GJ, Helena LAV, Stewart D, Alves PM, et al. Neuroprotective effects of digested polyphenols from wild blackberry species. Eur J Nutr 2013;52:225–36.
Facchini PJ, Bird DA, St-Pierre B. Can Arabidopsis make complex alkaloids? Trends Plant Sci 2004;9:116–22.
Tsuda T. Mechanism for the peroxynitrite scavenging activity by anthocyanins. FEBS Lett 2000;
484:207–10.
