

Electronic Notes in Theoretical Computer Science 270 (1) (2011) 3–15
www.elsevier.com/locate/entcs
Information Processing
in Convex Operational Theories
Howard Barnum1
CCS-3: Information Sciences; Quantum Institute; and Center for Nonlinear Studies Los Alamos National Laboratory
Los Alamos, NM, USA
Alexander Wilce1
Department of Mathematical Sciences Susquehanna University Selinsgrove, PA, USA

Abstract
In order to understand the source and extent of the greater-than-classical information processing power of quantum systems, one wants to characterize both classical and quantum mechanics as points in a broader space of possible theories. One approach to doing this, pioneered by Abramsky and Coecke, is to abstract the essential categorical features of classical and quantum mechanics that support various information- theoretic constraints and possibilities, e.g., the impossibility of cloning in the latter, and the possibility of teleportation in both. Another approach, pursued by the authors and various collaborators, is to begin with a very conservative, and in a sense very concrete, generalization of classical probability theory – which is still sufficient to encompass quantum theory – and to ask which “quantum” informational phenomena can be reproduced in this much looser setting. In this paper, we review the progress to date in this second programme, and offer some suggestions as to how to link it with the categorical semantics for quantum processes offered by Abramsky and Coecke.
Keywords: Ordered linear spaces, convex sets, operational theories, categories, enriched categories, quantum theory, quantum mechanics, information processing, bit commitment, teleportation


Introduction
The advent of quantum information theory has been accompanied by a resurgence of interest in the convex (or ordered linear spaces) framework for operational the- ories, as researchers seek to understand the nature of information processing in

1 Thanks to Samson Abramsky, John Armstrong, Rick Blute and Bob Coecke for useful discussions about categories, linear logic, and information processing
2 Email: barnum@lanl.gov
3 Email: wilce@susqu.edu

1571-0661 © 2011 Elsevier B.V. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
doi:10.1016/j.entcs.2011.01.002

increasingly abstract terms, both in order to illuminate the sources of the differ- ence between the information processing power of quantum versus classical theory, and because quantum information has occasioned renewed interest in foundational aspects of quantum theory, often with the new twist that axioms or principles con- cerning information processing are considered. A representative (but by no means exhaustive) sample of work in this vein might include the work of Hardy [14,15], D’Ariano [12], and Barrett [9].
At the same time, a fascinating and illuminating categorical approach to the formulation of quantum physics has crystallized around the notions of compact closed and dagger compact closed categories that exhibit key features of quantum theory, but allow many other models as well. The main work along these lines has been done by Abramsky and Coecke [2], by Selinger [19,20], and by Baez [3].
In [2], Abramsky and Coecke established that many of the most striking phe- nomena associated with quantum information processing – notably, various forms of teleportation – arise much more generally in any compact closed category, in- cluding, for instance, the category of sets and relations. An important observation here is that the unit and co-unit deﬁning a dual object in such a category can be in- terpreted as a teleportation protocol. On the other hand, working in the much more concrete but structurally much looser convex framework (in which essentially arbi- trary compact convex sets serve as abstract state spaces), our coauthors (Jonathan Barrett and Matthew Leifer) and we have shown ([3]-[5]) that many of the same phenomena – in particular, many aspects of entanglement, as well as no-cloning and no-broadcasting theorems – are quite generic features of probabilistic models. In this framework, the existence of a teleportation protocol is a nontrivial constraint, moving one somewhat closer to quantum theory; but even so, one can construct many models of teleportation – and even of deterministic teleportation – that are neither classical nor quantum. An important observation here is that a teleportation protocol is just a special case of conditioning.
This paper reviews work by ourselves and various collaborators, especially Jon Barrett, Matt Leifer, Oscar Dahlsten, Leifer, and Ben Toner, on information pro- cessing in the ordered linear spaces framework, and then proceeds to discuss how this work may be related to broad project of describing information-processing using categories of processes. The work reviewed shows that certain information- processing properties which had sometimes been taken to be “peculiarly quantum,” are actually common to all nonclassical theories in the framework. These include the existence of information about states which cannot be obtained without dis- turbing them, and generalizations of the quantum no-cloning and no-broadcasting theorems.
The impossibility of bit commitment has been suggested (for example by Bras- sard [11] and by Fuchs [13]) as a potential fundamental information-processing principle, shared by classical and quantum mechanics, that might, in combination with other principles, characterize quantum mechanics. The other principles pro- posed by Brassard and by Fuchs are the possibility of secure secret key distribution, which is intimately connected with no-cloning, no-broadcasting, and information-

disturbance tradeoffs and which, as we shall see, rules out classical theory, and the impossibility of instantaneous signaling between systems (which is built into the notion of composite system used in our version of the ordered linear spaces frame- work). We will also present some results on bit commitment in our framework, to the effect that all nonclassical theories that lack entanglement permit exponen- tially secure bit commitment, and some results on how the presence in a theory of certain kinds of entangled states can defeat the bit commitment protocol we used for the unentangled case. Closely related states can permit teleportation, another information-processing task whose possibility helps distinguish between classes of nonclassical theories in our framework. We summarize some of our recent work with Barrett and Leifer on multipartite composite systems and teleportation in the ordered linear spaces framework. In particular, we report necessary and sufficient conditions for a composite of three systems to support a conclusive teleportation protocol, and interesting sufficient conditions for deterministic teleportation.
We then make some first steps towards a category-theoretic formulation of our results. The abstract state spaces that we consider naturally form a category; how- ever, this is far from being compact closed. For one thing, the dual of an abstract state space is usually not, in any natural way, another state space, but a different sort of beast altogether. Nor are our categories generally monoidal: more typically, they support a profusion of possible mechanisms for coupling systems, bounded by a maximal (and maximally entangled) tensor product ⊗max, and a minimal (unentan- gled) product ⊗min. On the other hand, there are various constructions by which one can embed our category of state spaces in a larger category of processes having a better behaved – in particular, monoidal and self-dual – structure. Moving in the opposite direction, one can focus on restricted categories that are, in a sense (made precise below) “closed under teleportation”: as it happens, the entangled state and effect corresponding to a correction-free teleportation protocol are precisely the unit and co-unit of a duality.
Rather than building categories of processes from (categories of) abstract state spaces, one might start from the opposite direction, by treating categories of pro- cesses axiomatically. A natural starting point for such an effort would be to consider categories enriched over ordered linear spaces, or over abstract state spaces. This paper ends with a sketch of this idea. We envision such categorical formulations as a first step toward comparing the necessary and/or sufficient conditions for various information processing protocols or informational properties of theories, obtained in the convex framework, with properties such as compact closure, dagger com- pact closure, non-cartesianity and so forth that have been used in the literature on categorical descriptions of information processing. This section of the paper has benefited from discussions with Abramsky, Armstrong, Coecke, and others and may be viewed as describing work early-in-progress in collaboration with at least some of them.

Abstract State Spaces
By an abstract state space, we mean a pair (A, uA) where A is a finite-dimensional ordered real vector space, with positive cone A+, and where uA : A → R is a distinguished linear functional, called the order unit, that is strictly positive on A+ \ {0}. A state is normalized iff uA(α) = 1. We write ΩA for the convex set
of normalized states in A+. By way of illustration, if A is the space RX of real- valued functions on a set X, ordered pointwise on X, with uA(f ) = Σx∈X f (x),
then ΩA = Δ(X), the simplex of probability weights on X. If A is the space L(H)
of hermitian operators on a (finite-dimensional) complex Hilbert space H, with the usual operator ordering, and if uA(a) = Tr(a), then ΩA is the set of density operators on H. On any abstract state space A, there is a canonical norm (the base norm) such that for α ∈ A+, α  = uA(α). For RX , this is just the norm on X; for L(H), it is the trace norm.
Events (e.g., measurement outcomes) associated with an abstract state space A are represented by effects, i.e., positive linear functionals a ∈ A∗, with 0 ≤ a ≤ uA in the dual ordering. Note that 0 and uA are, by definition, the least and greatest effects. If α is a normalized state in A – that is, if uA(α) = 1 – then we interpret a(α) as the probability that the event represented by the effect a will occur if measured. Accordingly, a discrete observable on A is a list (a1, ..., an) of effects with a1 + a2 + ··· + an = uA. We represent a physical process with initial state space A and final state space B by a positive mapping τ : A → B such that, for all α ∈ A+, uB(τ (α)) ≤ uA(α) – equivalently, τ is norm-contractive. We can regard τ (α)  = uB(τ (α)) as the probability that the process represented by τ takes place in initial state α; this event is represented by the effect uB ◦ τ on A.
It is important to note that, in the framework just outlined, the state space A and its dual space A∗ have (in general) quite different structures: A is a cone-base space, i.e., an ordered space with a preferred base, ΩA, for A+, while A∗ is an order-unit space, i.e., an ordered space with a preferred element in its positive cone. Indeed, the spaces A and A∗ are generally not even isomorphic as ordered spaces. Where there exists a linear order-isomorphism (that is, a positive linear mapping with positive inverse) between A and A∗, we shall say that A is weakly self-dual. Where this isomorphism induces an inner product on A such that A+ = {b ∈ A|⟨b, a⟩≥ 0 ∀a ∈ A+}, we say that A is self-dual. Finite dimensional quantum and classical state spaces are self-dual in this sense. A celebrated theorem of Vinberg and Koecher [8,9] tells us that if A is an irreducible, finite-dimensional self-dual state space, and if the group of affine automorphisms of A+ acts transitively on the interior of A+, then the space ΩA of normalized states is affinely isomorphic to the set of density operators on an n-dimensional Hilbert space, or to a ball, or to the set of 3 × 3 trace-one positive matrices over the octonions.
Composite Systems
For our purposes, it will be convenient to identify the tensor product, A⊗B, of two state spaces with the space B(A∗, B∗) of bilinear forms on A∗ ×B∗, interpreting the

pure tensor α⊗β of states α ∈ A, β ∈ B as the form given by (α⊗β)(f, g)= f (α)g(β) where f ∈ A∗,g ∈ B∗. We call a form ω ∈ A ⊗ B positive iff ω(a, b) ≥ 0 for all (a, b) ∈ A∗ ×B∗ . If ω is positive and ω(uA, uB)= 1, then ω(a, b) can be interpreted
+	+
as a joint probability for effects a ∈ A∗ and b ∈ B∗. Conversely, one can show (see [4]
and [10]) that any assignment of joint probabilities consistent with a no-signalling requirement must be bilinear. Thus, the most general model of a composite of A and B consistent with such a requirement, is the space A ⊗ B, ordered by the cone of all positive forms, and with order unit given by uA ⊗ uB : ω '→ ω(uA, uB). This gives us an abstract state space, which we term the maximal tensor product of A and B, and denote A ⊗max B. At the other extreme, we might wish to allow only product states α ⊗ β, and mixtures of these, to count as bipartite (normalized) states. This gives us the minimal tensor product, A ⊗min B. These coincide if A and B are classical – that is, if ΩA and ΩB are simplices [11]; in general, however, the maximal tensor product allows many more states than the minimal. A state in ΩA⊗maxB not belonging to ΩA⊗minB is entangled.
More generally, we define a composite of A and B to be any state space AB
consisting of bilinear forms on A∗ × B∗, ordered by a cone AB+ of positive forms containing every product state α ⊗ β, where α ∈ ΩA and β ∈ ΩB – equivalently, AB is a composite iff A⊗min B ≤ AB ≤ A⊗max B (where, for abstract state spaces A and B, A ≤ B means that A is a subspace of B, that A+ ⊆ B+, and that uA is the restriction of uB to A.) More generally still, a composite of n state spaces A1, ..., An is a state space A of n-linear forms on A∗ ×· · ·×A∗ , ordered by any cone
1	n
of positive forms containing all product states.
Information-disturbance tradeoffs
With Barrett and Leifer, we have shown (as described in [9]) that in nonclassical theories, the only information that can be obtained about the state without dis- turbing it is inherently classical information—information about which of a set of irreducible direct summands of the state cone the state lies in. Call a positive map T : A → A nondisturbing on state ω if T (ω) = cωω for some positive constant cω that in principle could depend on the state. Say such a map is nondisturbing if it is nondisturbing on all pure states. 4 Nevertheless, a norm-nonincreasing map nondisturbing in this sense is precisely the type of map that can appear associated with some measurement outcome in an operation that, averaged over measurement outcomes, leaves the state unchanged.
A cone C in a vector space V is a direct sum of cones D and E if D and E span disjoint (except for 0) subspaces of V , and every element of C is a positive combination of vectors in D and E. A cone is irreducible if if it is not a nontrivial direct sum of cones. Every finite-dimensional cone is uniquely expressible as a direct sum C = ⊕iCi of irreducible cones Ci. Information about which of the summands

4 Of course if we condition on information obtained, this definition permits mixed states to be disturbed by a nondisturbing map—that can be viewed as something like an inevitable “epistemic” disturbance associated with obtaining information.

a state is in should be thought of as “inherently classical” information about the state.
Theorem 4.1 The nondisturbing maps on a cone that is a sum C = ⊕iCi of irreducible Ci, are precisely the maps M = i ciidi, where idi is the identity operator on the summand Vi and the zero operator elsewhere, and ci are arbitrary nonnegative constants.
So for a nondisturbing map, cω can depend only on the irreducible component a state is in. That is, the fact that a nondisturbing map has occurred can give us no information about the state within an irreducible component: in other words, as claimed, only inherently classical information is contained in the fact that a nondisturbing map has occurred.
The existence of information that cannot be obtained without disturbance is often taken to be the principle underlying the possibility of quantum key distribu- tion, so the fact that it is generic in nonclassical theories in the framework leads us (with Barrett and Leifer) to conjecture that secure key distribution, given an authenticated public channel, is possible in all nonclassical models.
No-cloning and no-broadcasting theorems
The security of quantum key distribution is also often ascribed to the quantum no-cloning or no-broadcasting theorem—certainly no-cloning is at least necessary for security. A map T : A → A ⊗ A clones a state ω if T (ω) = ω ⊗ ω. A set S of normalized states can be (deterministically) cloned if there is a single dynamically allowed map T that clones every ω ∈ S.
No-cloning can be closely related to the information-disturbance principle, by an argument introduced in the quantum context but that generalizes to our setting, since if two non-identical states in the same irreducible component of a cone could be cloned, we could—by, for instance, doing an informationally complete measurement on the clone—obtain information about which state we have without disturbing it, contradicting our information-disturbance theorem.
In quantum mechanics, only orthogonal sets of states—sets S such that for all pairs ρ, σ ∈ S, ρσ = 0—can be cloned [6]. As a special case of this, in a classical probability theory with a finite sample space, properly mixed states (distributions) cannot be cloned. Because of this, and because it is natural to consider commuting rather than mutually orthogonal sets of density matrices to be “classical subsets” of the quantum states of a system, [6] introduced the notion of broadcasting in order to better pick out classical subsets of the state spaces of quantum systems. A map T : A → A ⊗ A broadcasts a state ω if both marginals of T (ω) are equal to ω; thus this notion allows correlation, or even entanglement, in the broadcast state. This is to be contrasted with the mixed-state extension of the notion of cloning for which we used the term “cloning” above, which produces a product state. Of course, the notion of broadcasting also extends, in a different way, the notion of cloning pure states, since it reduces to cloning on pure states. A set S of states is broadcastable if there is a norm-preserving dynamical map T that broadcasts all the states in S

(i.e. the same map broadcasts all the states).
The no-broadcasting theorem [6] asserts that it is precisely the mutually commut- ing sets of quantum states that can be broadcast using completely positive maps. Recently, with Barrett and Leifer we have shown [4].
Theorem 4.2 In an arbitrary convex operational theory in our framework, a set S ⊆ Ω of states is broadcastable if, and only if, it is contained in a simplex Δ ⊆ Ω whose vertices are distinguishable by a single measurement. For each positive map B : V → V ⊗ V , the set of states it broadcasts is precisely such a simplex.
This combines Theorems 2 and 3 of [4]. It can be interpreted as saying that broadcastable sets of states are classical sets of states—but the sort of classicality involved is different from the inherent classicality of the information that can be obtained without disturbance.
The proof of the theorem uses a generalized no-cloning theorem, also proved in [4], to the effect that a set of states is clonable if, and only if, the states in it are all distinguishable from each other simultaneously via a one-shot measurement. Given this, proving Theorem 4.2 reduced to proving that a broadcastable set of states is contained in (and the states broadcast by B are precisely) the convex hull (necessarily a simplex) of a clonable set of states. The proof of the no-cloning re- sult is essentially to show that if one can clone a set of states, one can distinguish them by repeatedly cloning to create many independent copies, performing an in- formationally complete measurement on each copy, and using the statistics of the measurement results to identify the state. Conversely if one can distinguish the states, one can clone them using a map that, conditional on distinguishing state ω, prepares ω ⊗ ω. More precisely: for any ω there is a norm-nonincreasing positive map Prep  that prepares ω, i.e. outputs ω no matter what normalized state goes
in. The cloning map is Σi Prepωi⊗ωi ◦ Ti, where {Ti} are a set of maps such that
the effects u ◦ Ti are a measurement distinguishing the ρi ∈ S; such a measurement must exist by our assumption the ρi were one-shot distinguishable, and we assumed as part of our general framework that every effect has at least one associated map Ti. One immediately sees that this map that clones the ωi will also broadcast any state in the convex hull of the ωi, giving us the easy direction of the generalized no-broadcasting theorem.
Nonuniqueness of extremal decomposition, and bit commitment in unentangled theories
Quantum theory has mixed states whose representation as a convex combination of pure states is not unique. So do all nonclassical theories: uniqueness of the de- composition of mixed states into pure states is an easy characterization–sometimes used as a definition—of simplices (see, for example, the proof in [8]). While we are not aware of any quantum information processing task whose possibility is directly traced to the non-unique decomposability of mixed states into pure, this was cer- tainly proposed as a possible basis for quantum bit commitment schemes, though (as

shown in [10] for their proposed scheme, and in [18,17] for more elaborate schemes) these schemes do not work because of entanglement.
In [7] it is shown that the existence of bit commitment protocols is universal in nonclassical theories, provided that the tensor products used do not permit en- tanglement. Consider a theory generated by a finite set Σ of “elementary” systems modeled by finite-dimensional abstract state spaces, containing at least one non- classical system, and closed under the minimal, or separable, tensor product, which we write with the ordinary tensor product symbol ⊗.
The protocol. Let a system have a non-simplicial, convex, compact state space Ω of dimension d, embedded as the base of a cone of unnormalized states in a vector space V of dimension d + 1. The protocol uses a state μ that has two distinct decompositions into finite disjoint sets {μ0}, {μ1} of exposed states, that is,
i	j
N0	N1
(1)	ω = Σ p0μ0 = Σ p1μ1,

i  i
i=1
j  j
j=1

A state μb is exposed if there is a measurement outcome ab that has probability 1
i	i
when, and only when, the state is μb; the protocol exists for all nonclassical systems
because, as we show, any non-simplicial convex set of affine dimension d always has a state ω with two decompositions (as above), into disjoint set of states whose total number N0 + N1 is d + 1 (the disjointness and the bound on cardinality are used in the proof of exponential security).
In the honest protocol, Alice first decides on a bit b ∈ {0, 1} to commit to. She then draws n samples from pb, obtaining a string x = (x1, x2,..., xn). To commit,

she sends the state μb = μb  ⊗ μb  ⊗ ... ⊗ μb
to Bob. To reveal the bit, she sends

x	x1	x2	xn
b and x to Bob. Bob measures each subsystem of the state he has. On the k-th
subsystem, he performs a measurement, (which will depend on b) containing the

distinguishing effect for μb
and rejects if the result is not the distinguishing effect.

If he obtains the appropriate distinguishing effect for every system, he accepts. The protocol is perfectly sound (if Alice is honest, Bob never accuses her of cheating and always obtains the correct bit), perfectly hiding (if Alice is honest, Bob cannot gain any information about the bit until Alice reveals it), and has an exponentially low probability of Alice’s successfully cheating.
Conditioning and teleportation protocols
If AB is a composite of state spaces A and B, we can define, for any normalized state ω ∈ AB+ and any effect a ∈ A, both a marginal state ωA(−)= ω(−, uB) anda conditional state ωB|a(b)= ω(a, b)/ωA(a) (with the usual proviso that if ωA(a)= 0, the conditional state is also 0). We shall also refer to the partially evaluated state ωB(a) := ω(a, −) as an un-normalized conditional state.
More generally, if A is a composite of state spaces A1, ..., An, with order-units u1, ..., un, then for all subsets J ⊆ {1, ..., n}, and all a := (ai) ∈ Πi/∈J A∗, we can define an un-normalized conditional state – that is, a partially evaluated state – ωa, a |J|-linear form on Πj∈J A∗. We define the J-th subsystem to the the ordered
J	j

space spanned by the cone generated by these conditional states, with order unit uJ := ⊗j∈J uj. We call A a regular composite iff it is closed under taking products of such multi-partite conditional states. All state spaces constructed from a single, associative, bilinear product are regular, but one can also build regular composites using “mixed” constructions. For instance, it is not difficult to show that A ⊗min (B ⊗max C) is a regular composite of A, B and C. An example of a non-regular composite is (A ⊗min B) ⊗max (C ⊗min D) where A, B, C and D are four copies of a weakly self-dual, but non-classical, state space.
A state ω ∈ AB gives rise to a positive operator ω : A∗ → B, given by ω(a)(b)= ω(a, b). We can regard ω(a) as an “un-normalized” conditional state. As a partial converse, any positive operator ψ : A∗ → B with ψ(uA) ∈ ΩB – that is, with ψ∗(uB) := uB ◦ ψ = uA – corresponds to a state in the maximal tensor product A ⊗max B. Dually, any effect f ∈ (AB)∗ yields an operator f : A → B∗, given by f (α)(β) = f (α ⊗ β); and any positive operator φ : A → B∗ with φ(α) ≤ uB for all α ∈ ΩA – that is, with φ  ≤ 1 – corresponds to an effect in (A ⊗min B)∗. We have the following result (easily verified by checking that it holds for elementary tensors):
Lemma 6.1 Let ABC be a regular composite. If f is an effect in (AB)∗ and ω is a state in BC, then, for any α ∈ A,

(2)
(α ⊗ ω)B =
 ω^ ◦ f^(α) 
ω^(f^(α)).

If ABC is in a state α ⊗ ω, with α unknown, then conditional on securing measurement outcome f on A ⊗ B, the state of C is, up to normalization, a known function of α. We call this remote evaluation. This is very like a teleportation protocol. Indeed, suppose that C is a copy of A, and that η : A → C is a specified isomorphism allowing us to match up states in the former with those in the latter:
Definition 6.2 With notation as above, (f, ω) is a (one-outcome, post-selected) teleportation protocol iff there exists a positive, norm-contractive correction map τ : C → C such that, for all α ∈ A, τ (α ⊗ ω)C = η(α). 5
By Lemma 6.1, the un-normalized conditional state of α ⊗ ω is exactly ω(f (α)). If we let μ := ω ◦f , the normalized conditional state can be written as μ(α)/u(μ(α)). Thus, (f, ω) is a teleportation protocol iff there exists a norm-contractive mapping τ with (τ ◦ μ)(α)= μ(α)  η for all α ∈ ΩA.
Theorem 6.3 With notation as above, (f, ω) is a teleportation protocol iff μ := ω◦f is proportional to an isomorphism (A, uA)  (C, uC); in this case, the correction τ : (C, uC)  (C, uC) is also an isomorphism.
Henceforth, we simply identify C with A, suppressing η. Note that if (f, ω) is a teleportation protocol on a regular composite ABA of A, B and (a copy of) A, then, as f lives in (AB)∗ ≤ (A ⊗min B)∗ and ω lives in BA ≤ B ⊗max C, one can also regard (f, ω) as a teleportation protocol on A ⊗min (B ⊗max A).

5 One could also allow protocols in which the correction has a nonzero probability to fail. For details, see [5].

Theorem 6.4 A⊗min (B⊗max A) supports a conclusive teleportation protocol iff A1 is order-isomorphic to the range of a compression (a positive idempotent mapping) P : A∗ → A1.
Corollary 6.5 If A can be teleported through a copy of itself, then A is weakly self-dual.
In order to deterministically teleport an unknown state α ∈ A through B, we need not just one entangled effect f , but an entire observable’s worth. Here, we specialize to the case in which ABC = A ⊗min (B ⊗max C):
Definition 6.6 A deterministic teleportation protocol for A through B consists of an observable E = (f1, ..., fn) on A ⊗ B and a state ω in B ⊗ A, such that for all
i = 1, ..., n, the operator f^i ◦ ω^ is physically invertible.
The following result provides a sufficient condition (satisfied, e.g., by any state space A with ΩA a regular polyhedron) for such a protocol to exist.
Theorem 6.7 Let A = B. Suppose that G is a ﬁnite group acting transitively on the pure states of A, and let ω be a state such that ω is a G-equivariant isomorphism.
For all g ∈ G, let fg ∈ (A ⊗max A)∗ correspond to the operator
f^ =  1  ω^−1 ◦ g.
Then E = {fg|g ∈ G} is an observable, and (E, ω) is a deterministic teleportation protocol.
Categories of Abstract State Spaces
If an abstract state space and its dual “effect space” provide an abstract proba- bilistic model, one should like to say that a probabilistic theory is a class of such models, closed under appropriate operations. To make this systematic, one should consider categories of state spaces. Let Asp denote the category whose objects are finite-dimensional abstract state spaces (A, uA), and whose morphisms are norm- contractive positive linear mappings. This category has a preferred object I = R, ordered as usual, with uI =1 and ΩI = {1}. For any A in Asp, there is a preferred morphism, namely uA, from A to I. (Indeed, the mappings τ '→ uA ◦ τ define a natural transformation Asp(−, A) → Asp(−,I).) We can model effect spaces, i.e., dual state spaces, by Hom sets Asp(A, I). However, as remarked above, there is no natural internal duality for Asp; nor is Asp naturally a monoidal category, owing to the the existence of two canonical tensor products ⊗max and ⊗min. These inter- act in a way that will be familiar to linear-logicians, namely, for any state spaces A, B and C, there is a canonical embedding
A ⊗min (B ⊗max C) ≤ (A ⊗min B) ⊗max C.
Thus, we can regard (Asp, ⊗min, ⊗max) as a linearly distributive category [6] (albeit without negation). As to duality, there are various constructions whereby a useful self-duality can be supplied. Applied to Asp, these result in what may

be regarded as categories of process spaces. To take the simplest case, consider the category C2 = C × C, i.e., the category whose objects are ordered pairs (A, B) of state spaces in Asp, and in which
C2((A, B), (C, D)) = C(C, A) × C(B, D),
with composition defined in the obvious way. 6 The idea is that the pair (A, B) represents a space of possible processes from A to B, and that a pair f : C → A, g : B → D takes a process τ : A → B to the process g ◦ τ ◦ f . Indeed, the functor (A, B) '→ C(A, B) endows C2 with exactly this interpretation. Thus, (A, I) encodes A∗, while (I, A) encodes A. Thus, C2 allows us to consider state spaces and effect spaces on an equal footing. Moreover, C2 has a natural self-duality, given by (A, B)∗ = (B, A) and, for (f, g) ∈ C2((A, B), (C, D)),
(f, g)∗ = (g, f ) ∈ C2((C, D)∗, (A, B)∗)= C2((D, C), (B, A)).
Where C is closed under both maximal and minimal tensor products (in particular, for C = Asp), the category C2 has a natural symmetric monoidal structure given by 7
(A, B) ⊗ (C, D)= (A ⊗min B, C ⊗max D).
Note that we then have the expected identity
((A, B)∗ ⊗ (C, D)∗)∗ = (A ⊗max B, C ⊗min D).
Rather than enlarging the category Asp, one can also look within it for sub- categories with a desirable structure. Let C be a subcategory of Asp. If A and B are state spaces in C, let us agree that, as in Definition 6.2, a teleportation proto- col for A through B consists of (i) a regular composite ABA ∈ C; and (ii) a pair f ∈ C(AB, I), ω ∈ BA = C(I, BA) such that, for some correction τ ∈ C(A, A),
τ ((f ⊗ −)(−⊗ ω)) = idA.
We shall say that this protocol is correction free if τ can be taken to be the identity morphism idA. This may look familiar. Recall that a dual for an object A in a symmetric monoidal category (C, ⊗) is an object B, together with morphisms ηA : I → B ⊗ A (the unit) and αA : A ⊗ B → I (the co-unit) such that (here identifying I ⊗ B and B ⊗ I with B, and suppressing the canonical association morphism (A ⊗ B) ⊗ C  A ⊗ (B ⊗ C))
(idB ⊗ αA) ◦ (ηA ⊗ idB)= idB.
If C is a monoidal category of state spaces (that is, a sub-category of Asp equipped with a symmetric, associative product A, B '→ AB), then η ∈ C(I, A⊗B) is simply a positive, sub-normalized state in A ⊗ B, while αA ∈ C(A ⊗ B, I) is simply an effect on A ⊗ B, and we see that this amounts to the definition of a correction-free teleportation protocol in C.
The foregoing discussion suggest one way to make contact between the struc- turally loose, but (so to say) ontologically rigid world of abstract state spaces, and

6 This is essentially the category Cd described in [16]
7 Another possibility for a category of processes would be to apply the Int [16] (or “GoI” [1]) construction to Asp. We shall not pursue this here.

the more highly structured but ontologically fluid categorical semantics of Abram- sky and Coecke: begin with a particular category of abstract state spaces, and, from this, construct, either by enlarging it or by paring it down, a theory having, at a minimum, a sensible duality and monoidal structure.
It is also worth considering a different, more “top-down” approach: to proceed axiomatically, by laying down at the outset a minimum of constraints on what could count as a category of processes, and exploring the consequences of further require- ments, e.g, that such a theory support teleportation, or that it not allow cloning, or bit-commitment. Of course, this is very close to the approach of Abramsky and Coecke and their collaborators; but we want to suggest that it may be fruitful to add an extra structural ingredient at the outset – namely, convexity. This is naturally captured by the notion of a category of processes enriched over ordered linear spaces. In the operational framework, the set of states, the set of measurement outcomes, the set of dynamics on a system or of dynamics turning one type of system into another, are all compact convex sets determined by imposing natural normalization conditions on convex cones of “un-normalized” states, outcomes, or dynamics, and the convexity is motivated by saying that we should be able to prepare two states, or perform two measurements, or implement two dynamics, conditional on the out- come of some random event with some definite ascribed probabilities p and 1 − p, such as the flip of a coin with known bias.
In other words, states, outcomes, and dynamics should belong to convex cones. In a process-centred approach, we will represent states of a system A by morphisms from a distinguished object, the “unit” (not to be confused with the “order unit” associated with a system), measurement outcomes by morphisms from A to the unit object, and dynamics on system A by morphisms from A to itself; dynamics changing a system of type A to one of type B may be represented by morphisms from A to B. The convexity requirement operationally motivated above will be implemented in this framework by requiring all hom-sets in a category describing an operational theory to be pointed, generating, closed convex cones; more formally, by requiring a category describing an operational theory to be enriched over a certain category of ordered linear spaces. This suggests the following
Definition 7.1 A convex operational category of processes is a category C enriched over the category of finite-dimensional ordered real vector spaces, with a unit object I, such that each object A is equipped with a distinguished morphism uA ∈ C(A, I).
In future work, this definition will be elucidated in more detail. We intend it, and related categorical formulations of convex operational theories that we and collaborators are embarked on, to enable the comparison of the categorical formu- lation of information-processing centred around dagger compact closed categories, with the convex operational formalism. In the convex formalism, we have been concerned with obtaining necessary and/or sufficient conditions for the possibility of particular kinds of information processing, such as the ones we have reviewed in this paper. In some cases, it appears these conditions may be weaker than those employed in existing categorical constructions. We hope that the project of cat-

egorifying the convex approach (and convexifying the categorical approach!) may shed more light on categorically formulated necessary and sufficient conditions for various information-processing protocols (about which much, especially sufficient conditions, is known already), in part by enabling us to abstract from some of the more concrete content of the convex formalism while retaining some of its structural looseness.

References
S. Abramsky. Retracing some paths in process algebra. In Proceedings of CONCUR ’96: Concurrency Theory, 7th International Conference, U. Montanari and V. Sassone, eds., Springer-Verlag, pages 1–17, 1996.
S. Abramsky and B. Coecke. A categorical semantics of quantum protocols. Proceedings of the 19th Annual IEEE Symposium on Logic in Computer Science (LICS ’04), pages 415–425, 2004.
J. Baez. Quantum quandaries: a category-theoretic perspective. quant-ph/0404040, 2004.
H. Barnum, J. Barrett, M. Leifer, and A. Wilce. Cloning and broadcasting in generic probabilistic models. arXiv.org e-print quant-ph/0611295, 2006.
H. Barnum, J. Barrett, M. Leifer and A. Wilce, Teleportation in general probabilistic theories. In Proceedings of the Clifford Lectures, Tulane University, March 12-15, 2008. To appear in Proceedings of Symposia in Applied Mathematics (AMS); also arXiv:0805.3553, 2008.
H. Barnum, C. M. Caves, C. A. Fuchs, and B. Schumacher. Noncommuting mixed states cannot be broadcast. Phys. Rev. Lett., 76:2818–2821, 1996.
H. Barnum, O. Dahlsten, M. Leifer, and B. Toner. Nonclassicality without entanglement enables bit commitment. accepted to IEEE Information Theory Workshop, Porto, May 2008, 2007.
J. Barrett.  Information processing in generalized probabilistic theories.  arXiv.org e-print
quant-ph/0508211. To appear in Physical Review A, 2005.
J. Barrett, N. Linden, S. Massar, S. Pironio, S. Popescu, and D. Roberts. Nonlocal correlations as an information-theoretic resource. Phys. Rev. A, 71:022101, 2005.
C. H. Bennett and G. Brassard. Quantum cryptography: Public-key distribution and coin-tossing. In Proceedings of IEEE International Conference on Computers, Systems, and Signal Processing, Bangalore, India, pages 175–179. IEEE Press, 1985.
G. Brassard. Is information the key? Nature Physics, 1:2–4, 2005.
G. M. d’Ariano. How to derive the Hilbert-space formulation of quantum mechanics from purely operational axioms. arXiv.org e-print quant-ph/0603011, 2006.
C. A. Fuchs. Quantum mechanics as quantum information, mostly. J. Mod. Opt., 50:987, 2003.
L. Hardy. Quantum theory from five reasonable axioms. arXiv.org e-print quant-ph/0101012, 2001.
L. Hardy. Why quantum theory? arXiv.org e-print quant-ph/0111068. Contribution to NATO Advanced Research Workshop ”Modality, Probability, and Bell’s Theorem”, Krakow, Poland 19–23.8.01, 2001.
J. Hyland and A. Schalk. Glueing and orthogonality for models of linear logic. Theoretical Computer Science, 294:405–407, 2003.
H.-K. Lo and H. F. Chau. Is quantum bit-commitment really possible? Phys. Rev. Lett., 78:3410–3413, 1997.
D. Mayers. Unconditionally secure quantum bit commitment is impossible. Physical Review Letters, 78:3413, 1997.
P. Selinger. Towards a semantics for higher-order quantum computation. In Proceedings of the 2nd International Workshop on Quantum Programming Languages, Turku Finland, pages 127–143. Turku Center for Computer Science, 2004. Publication No. 33.
P. Selinger. Dagger compact closed categories. Electronic Notes in Theoretical Computer Science, 170:139–163, 2007. Proceedings of the 3rd International Workshop on Quantum Programming Languages (QPL 2005), Chicago.
