Available online at www.sciencedirect.com


Electronic Notes in Theoretical Computer Science 346 (2019) 111–123
www.elsevier.com/locate/entcs

Metric Dimension: from Graphs to Oriented Graphs
Julien Bensmaila,1,4 Fionn Mc Inerneya,2,4 Nicolas Nisse a,3,4
a Universit´e Cˆote d’Azur, CNRS, Inria, I3S, France

Abstract
The metric dimension MD(G) of an undirected graph G is the cardinality of a smallest set of vertices that allows, through their distances to all vertices, to distinguish any two vertices of G. Many aspects of this notion have been investigated since its introduction in the 70’s, including its generalization to digraphs. In this work, we study, for particular graph families, the maximum metric dimension over all strongly- connected orientations, by exhibiting lower and upper bounds on this value. We first exhibit general bounds for graphs with bounded maximum degree. In particular, we prove that, in the case of subcubic n-node graphs, all strongly-connected orientations asymptotically have metric dimension at most n , and that there
are such orientations having metric dimension 2n . We then consider strongly-connected orientations of grids. For a torus with n rows and m columns, we show that the maximum value of the metric dimension of a strongly-connected Eulerian orientation is asymptotically nm (the equality holding when n, m are
even, which is best possible). For a grid with n rows and m columns, we prove that all strongly-connected orientations asymptotically have metric dimension at most 2nm , and that there are such orientations having
3
metric dimension nm .
Keywords: Resolving sets, Metric dimension, Strongly-connected orientations.

Introduction
Resolving sets and metric dimension in undirected graphs
The distance distG(u, v) (or simply dist(u, v) when no ambiguity is possible) between two vertices u, v of an undirected graph G is the length of a shortest path from u to v. A resolving set R of G is a subset of vertices that permits to distinguish all vertices of G according to their distances to the vertices of R. In other words, R is resolving if and only if, for every two distinct vertices u, v of G, there exists

1 Email: julien.bensmail@inria.fr
2 Email: fionn.mc-inerney@inria.fr
3 Email: nicolas.nisse@inria.fr
4 This work has been partially supported by ANR project MultiMod and ANR program “Investments for the Future” under reference ANR-11-LABX-0031-01. Due to lack of space, several proofs are only sketched. Full proofs can be found at https://hal.inria.fr/hal-01938290

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.entcs.2019.08.011
1571-0661/© 2019 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier B.V.
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

w ∈ R such that distG(w, u) /= distG(w, v). The metric dimension MD(G) of G is the minimum cardinality of a resolving set of G. Since V (G) \ {v} is a resolving set of G for every v ∈ V (G), this parameter MD(G) is defined for every undirected graph G.
The notions of resolving sets and metric dimension have been widely studied since their introduction in the 70’s by Harary and Melter [8], and Slater [14], notably because they can be used to model many real-life problems. Many related aspects have been investigated to date, including algorithmic and complexity aspects, and bounds on the metric dimension of particular graph families. Our main focus in this paper being the metric dimension of oriented graphs, we refer the interested reader to surveys (e.g. [1,2]) for more details about investigations in the undirected context.

Resolving sets and metric dimension in digraphs
A natural way of generalizing graph theoretical problems is to consider their di- rected counterparts. In the context of the metric dimension of graphs, this was first considered by Chartrand, Rains, and Zhang in [3], before receiving further consider- ation in several works (see [5,6,9,11,12]). It is worthwhile recalling that, in digraphs, distances have behaviours that differ from those in undirected graphs. Notably, an important point that should be addressed is that, in the context of general digraphs D, we might have dist(u, v) /= dist(v, u) for any two vertices u, v, where dist(u, v) here refers to the length of a shortest directed path from u to v. A digraph D is strongly-connected (or strong for short) if, for every u, v ∈ V (D), there is a directed path from u to v, and conversely one from v to u. Hence, if D is not strong, then there are vertices u, v ∈ V (D) such that no directed paths from u to v exist. In such a case, we set dist(u, v)= +∞.
These peculiar aspects of distances in digraphs must be taken into account when defining directed notions of resolving sets and metric dimension. Throughout this work, the notions of resolving sets and metric dimension in digraphs are with respect to the following definitions. Let R be a subset of vertices of a digraph D. Two vertices u, v of D are said to be distinguished, denoted by u  R v, if there exists w ∈ R such that dist(w, u) /= dist(w, v). Otherwise, u and v are undistinguished by R, which is denoted by u ∼R v. In particular, if dist(w, u) is finite and dist(w, v) is not for some w ∈ R, then u R v. A set R ⊆ V (D) is called resolving if all pairs of vertices of D are distinguished by R. The metric dimension MD(D) of D is then the smallest size of a resolving set. Note that MD(D) is defined for every digraph D; in particular, we have MD(D) < |V (D)| since R = V (D) \ {v} is a resolving set for any v ∈ V (D) (as having any vertex in a resolving set makes it distinguished from all other vertices).
Our definitions of directed resolving sets and metric dimension actually differ from those originally introduced by Chartrand, Rains, and Zhang. On the one hand, in their definition of resolving sets, they consider the distances from each of the vertices not in R to the vertices in R in order to distinguish the vertices of D.

In our definition, the distances from each of the vertices in R to the vertices not in R are considered. Note that both definitions are equivalent on that point, as, given a digraph D, if we reverse the direction of all arcs, resulting in a digraph D, then any shortest path from u to v in D becomes a shortest path from v to u in D.
On the other hand, their definition of resolving sets requires that the distances from each pair of distinct vertices to the vertices in R which distinguish them be defined, while our definition (with distances from vertices in R to the other vertices) allows for undefined distances (+∞) to be used as well. Contrary to our definition, this implies that their definition of metric dimension is not defined for all digraphs. As far as we know, the characterization of digraphs that admit a metric dimension (following their definition) is still an open problem [3].
Although our definitions and those of Chartrand, Rains, and Zhang are different, it is worthwhile mentioning that most of our investigations in this paper also apply to their context, as we mainly focus on strong digraphs, in which case our definitions and theirs are equivalent (up to reversing all arcs).
To date, the investigations on the metric dimension of digraphs have thus been with respect to the definitions originally introduced by Chartrand, Rains, and Zhang. As a first step, they notably gave in [3], a characterization of digraphs with metric dimension 1. Complexity aspects were considered in [12], where it was proved that determining the metric dimension of a strong digraph is NP-complete.
Bounds on the metric dimension of various digraph families were later exhibited
(Cayley digraphs [5], line digraphs [6], tournaments [9], digraphs with cyclic cover- ing [11], De Bruijn and Kautz digraphs [12], etc.).

From undirected graphs to oriented graphs
To avoid any confusion, let us recall that an orientation D of an undirected graph G is obtained when every edge uv of G is oriented either from u to v (resulting in the arc (u, v)) or conversely (resulting in the arc (v, u)). An oriented graph D is a directed graph that is an orientation of a simple graph. Note that when G is simple, D cannot have two vertices u, v such that (u, v) and (v, u) are arcs. Such symmetric arcs are allowed in digraphs, which is the main difference between oriented graphs and digraphs. Throughout this paper, when simply referring to a graph, we mean an undirected graph.
In [4], Chartrand, Rains, and Zhang considered the following way of linking resolving sets of undirected graphs and digraphs. They considered, for a given graph G, the worst orientations of G for the metric dimension, i.e., orientations of G with maximum metric dimension. Looking at our definition of resolving sets and metric dimension, this is a legitimate question as it has to be pointed out that, for a graph, the metric dimension might or might not be preserved when orienting its edges. An interesting example (reported e.g., in [3,9]) is the case of a graph G with a Hamiltonian path: while MD(G) can be arbitrarily large in general (consider e.g., any complete graph), there is an orientation D of G verifying MD(D) = 1 (just orient all edges of a Hamiltonian path from the first vertex towards

the last vertex, and all remaining edges in the opposite direction). Conversely, there exist orientations D of G for which MD(D) can be much larger than MD(G). As an example, let us consider any path P with 2n + 1 vertices v0, ..., v2n. Clearly, MD(P ) = 1; however, the orientation D of P obtained by making every vertex v2k+1 (k = 0, ..., n − 1) become a source (i.e., orienting its incident edges away) verifies MD(D) = n. As shown in this paper, this phenomenon occurs for strong orientations as well.
In [4], the authors proved that, for every positive integer k, there exist infinitely many graphs for which the metric dimension of any of its strongly-connected ori- entations is exactly k. They have also proved that there is no constant k such that the metric dimension of any tournament is at most k.

Our results
Motivated by these observations, we investigate, throughout this work, the param- eter WOMD defined as follows. For any connected graph G, let WOMD(G) denote the maximum value of MD(D) over all strong orientations D of G. Let us extend this definition to graph families as follows. For any family G of 2-edge-connected graphs 5 , let WOMD(G) = max WOMD(G) . Section 2 first introduces tools and re-

G∈G
|V (G)|

sults that will be used in the next sections. In Section 3, bounds on WOMD(GΔ) are
proved, where GΔ refers to the family of 2-edge-connected graphs with maximum de- gree Δ. In particular, we prove that we asymptotically have 2 ≤ WOMD(G3) ≤ 1 .
5	2
In Section 4, we then consider the families of grids and tori. For the family T of
tori, we prove that we asymptotically have WEOMD(T )= 1 , where the parameter WEOMD(T ) is defined similarly to WOMD(T ) except that only strong Eulerian orientations of tori (i.e., all vertices have in-degree and out-degree 2) are considered. For the family G of grids, we then prove that asymptotically 1 ≤ WOMD(G) ≤ 2 .
2	3
Remaining open questions and problems are gathered in Section 5.

Terminology and notation
Let D be a digraph. For a vertex v of D, we denote by d−(v) (resp. d+(v)) the
D	D
in-degree (resp. out-degree) of v which is the number of in-coming (resp. out-going)
arcs incident to v. For every arc (v, u) (resp. (u, v)) in-coming to (resp. out-going from) u, we call u an out-neighbour (resp. in-neighbour ) of v. The set of all in- neighbours (resp. out-neighbours) of v is denoted by N −(v) (resp. N +(v)). The
D	D
subscripts in the previous notations might be dropped when no ambiguity is possible.
We denote by Δ+(D) (resp., Δ−(D)) the maximum out-degree (resp., maximum in-degree) of a vertex in D. Note that, in an oriented graph D, the in-degree (resp. out-degree) of a vertex corresponds to the cardinality of its in-neighbourhood (resp. out-neighbourhood).

5 The edge-connectivity requirement, here and further, is to guarantee the good definition of WOMD(G) for every G ∈ GΔ, as it is a well-known fact that a graph has strong orientations if and only if it is 2-edge-connected (see [13]).

Tools and preliminary results
We start off by pointing out the following property of resolving sets in digraphs having vertices with the same in-neighbourhood. This result will be one of our main tools for building digraphs with large metric dimension.
Lemma 2.1 Let D be a digraph and S ⊆ V (D) be a subset of |S|≥ 2 vertices such that, for every u, v ∈ S, we have N −(u) = N −(v). Then, any resolving set of D contains at least |S|— 1 vertices of S.
Proof. If two vertices u, v ∈ S do not belong to a resolving set R, then dist(w, u)= dist(w, v) for every w ∈ R, contradicting that R is a resolving set.	2
We now introduce a technique that will be used in the next sections for exhibiting upper bounds on the metric dimension of strong digraphs with maximum out-degree at least 2. The technique is based on a connection between the resolving sets of a such digraph and the vertex covers of a particular graph associated to it. A vertex cover of a graph G is a subset S ⊆ V (G) of vertices such that, for every edge uv of G, at least one of u and v belongs to S. To any digraph D we associate an auxiliary (undirected) graph Daux constructed as follows: the vertices of Daux are those of D; for every two distinct vertices u, v of D such that N −(u) ∩ N −(v) /= ∅, let us add
D	D
the edge uv to Daux. In other words, Daux is the simple undirected graph depicting
the pairs of distinct vertices of D sharing an in-neighbour. By construction, note that, in Daux, every two distinct vertices are joined by at most one edge.
It turns out that, for strong digraphs D with maximum out-degree at least 2, a vertex cover of Daux is resolving in D.
Lemma 2.2 Let D be a strong digraph with Δ+(D) ≥ 2. Any vertex cover of Daux
is a resolving set of D.
Proof. Towards a contradiction, assume the claim is false, i.e., there exists a set S ⊆ V (D) which is a vertex cover of Daux but not a resolving set of D. Since Δ+(D) ≥ 2, there are edges in Daux and thus S //= ∅. Let v1, v2 be two vertices that cannot be distinguished through their distances from S; in other words, for every w ∈ S (note that w /= v1, v2), we have distD(w, v1)= distD(w, v2), and that distance is finite since D is strong. Now consider such a vertex w ∈ S at minimum distance from v1 and v2. In D, any shortest path P1 from w to v1 has the same length as any shortest path P2 from w to v2.
Because v1 /= v2 and P1, P2 are shortest paths, note that all vertices of P1 and P2 cannot be the same; let thus x1 denote the first vertex of P1 that does not belong to P2, and, similarly, let thus x2 denote the first vertex of P2 that does not belong to P1. In other words, the first vertices of P1 and P2 coincide up to some vertex x, but the next vertices x1 (in P1) and x2 (in P2) are different. So, Daux contains the edge x1x2, and at least one of x1, x2 belongs to S. Furthermore, x1 and x2 are closer to v1, v2 than w is; this is a contradiction to the original choice of w.   2
Lemma 2.2 shows that a resolving set of any strong digraph (with maximum out-degree at least 2) can be obtained by considering every vertex and choosing at


















(a)
Fig. 1. (a) The oriented graph D3,3,2. The set of red vertices is an example of an optimal resolving set. (b) A strong orientation D of the 6 ∗ 6 torus T6,6 verifying MD(D)= |V (T6,6)|/2. Every two vertices marked with a same letter have the same in-neighbourhood; thus, every resolving set must contain at least one of them.
least all of its out-neighbours but one. The proof suggests that this is because this is a way to distinguish all shortest paths from a vertex to other ones.
Corollary 2.3 For every strong digraph D with Δ+(D) ≥ 2, the metric dimension
MD(D) of D is at most the size of a minimum vertex cover of Daux.
Unfortunately, determining the minimum size of a vertex cover of a given graph is an NP-complete problem in general [7]. However, in the context of Corollary 2.3, we are mostly interested in having reasonable upper bounds on the size of a minimum
vertex cover of Daux. Such upper bounds can be exhibited when D has particular additional properties, as will be shown in the next sections.

Strong oriented graphs with bounded maximum de- gree
By the maximum degree Δ(D) ofa given oriented graph D, we mean the maximum degree of its underlying undirected graph (i.e., the maximum value of d−(v)+ d+(v) over the vertices v of D). In this section, we investigate the maximum value that MD(D) can take among all strong orientations D of a graph with given maximum degree. Since a strong oriented graph D with Δ(D) = 2 is a directed cycle, in which case MD(D) is trivially 1, we focus on cases where Δ(D) ≥ 3.
All our lower bounds in this section are obtained through the following construc- tions. For any k ∈ N and Δ ≥ 2, we denote by TΔ,k the rooted Δ-ary complete tree with depth k. More precisely, TΔ,k is a rooted tree such that every non-leaf vertex has Δ children and all leaves are at distance k from the root. Note that

|V (TΔ,k
)| = Δk+1−1 and T
Δ,k
has Δk leaves and maximum degree Δ + 1. For any

k ∈ N and Δ,i ≥ 2, let DΔ,k,i be the oriented graph defined as follows (see Fig-

ure 1a for an illustration).  Start with T being a copy of TΔ,k—1 with all edges

oriented from the root to the leaves. Let vk—1, ··· , vk—1
be the leaves of T and let

1	Δk−1
r be its root. For every 1 ≤ j ≤ Δk—1, add i out-neighbours uj , ··· , uj to vk—1.
1	i	j
Then, for 1 ≤ j ≤ Δk—1 and 1 ≤ l < i, add the arc (uj, uj). Then, add a copy T j of
l	i
TΔ,k—2 where all edges are oriented from the leaves to the root. Let vj , ··· , vj k−2
1	Δ
be the leaves of T j and let rj be its root. For every 1 ≤ j ≤ Δk—2 and for every
1 ≤ l ≤ Δ, add the arc (uΔ(j—1)+l, vj ). Finally, add the arc (rj, r); note that this
i	j
ensures that DΔ,k,i is strong.
Theorem 3.1 For every k ∈ N and Δ,i ≥ 2, DΔ,k,i is a strong oriented graph with maximum degree Δ+ 1,


Δk — 1
k—1
Δk—1 — 1


and
|V (DΔ,k,i)| =
+ iΔ
Δ — 1
+
Δ — 1

MD(DΔ,k,i) ≥ Δk—1 — 1+ Δk—1 max {1,i — 2} .
Proof. We only need to prove the last statement. For every 1 ≤ l ≤ Δk—1, let
vl, ··· , vl Æ denote the vertices of DΔ,k,i at distance l from r = v0. Note that,
1	Δ	1

for every 0 ≤ l ≤ k — 2 and 1 ≤ j ≤ Δl, the vertices vl+1
l+1
Δ(j—1)+Δ

have the same in-neighbourhood {vl}. By Lemma 2.1, every resolving set of DΔ,k,i
thus has to include at least Δ — 1 of these vertices. For every 1 ≤ j ≤ Δk—1, the

vertices vk
k i(j—1)+i—1
have the same in-neighbourhood {vk—1}. Again

by Lemma 2.1, every resolving set of DΔ,k,i must thus include at least i— 2 of these
vertices. Moreover, it can be checked that, when i = 2, every resolving set of DΔ,k,i

must include at least one of vk
k
2(j—1)+2
. Figure 1a shows an example of a

resolving set of D3,3,2.
Hence, any resolving set R of DΔ,k,i verifies the following inequation and the result follows:

k—2
|R|≥ 
l=0

Δl(Δ — 1)

+ Δk—1 max{1,i — 2}.

2

In the rest of this section, we exhibit upper bounds on MD(D) for oriented graphs D with bounded maximum degree, some of which are close to lower bounds that can be established using Theorem 3.1.
We begin with an upper bound for strong subcubic (i.e., with maximum degree 3) oriented graphs D.
Lemma 3.2 For every strong subcubic n-node oriented graph D, we have MD(D) ≤
n
2
Sketch of proof. In D, there are only 3 types of vertices v, namely: either d—(v)= 
d+(v) = 1; or d—(v) = 1 and d+(v) = 2; or d—(v) = 2 and d+(v) = 1. Only the

vertices v verifying d+(v)=2 create edges in Daux and there are at most 1 n of these
vertices v since Σ	d—(v)= Σ	d+(v). Thus, D	2	1
edges and thus, admits a vertex cover S with size at most 1 n. The result follows Corollary 2.3.	2
In the next result, we exhibit a general upper bound on MD(D) for every strong digraph D with given maximum in-degree and maximum out-degree (at least 2). Recall that a proper vertex-colouring of an undirected graph is a partition of the vertices into stable sets.
Theorem 3.3 For every strong n-node digraph D with max. in-degree Δ— and max. out-degree Δ+ ≥ 2,
Δ—(Δ+ — 1) MD(D) ≤ Δ—(Δ+ — 1) + 1 n.
Proof. The maximum degree of a vertex v of Daux is Δ—(Δ+ — 1): this is because v has at most Δ— in-neighbours in D, each of which, if it has an out-neighbour different from v, might yield a new edge incident to v in Daux. So each of these at most Δ— in-neighbours of v in D might create, in Daux, up to Δ+ — 1 edges incident to v. Hence, the maximum degree of Daux is Δ—(Δ+ — 1). From greedy colouring arguments, it thus follows that Daux admits a proper vertex-colouring using at most Δ—(Δ+ — 1) + 1 colours.
The claim now follows from Lemma 2.2 by just noting that, for any graph with a given proper vertex-colouring, a vertex cover can be obtained by taking all colour classes but one. In particular, since a proper k-vertex-colouring of an n- node graph always has a colour class with size at least 1 n, we deduce the claim by considering, as a vertex cover of Daux, all colour classes but a biggest one of any proper (Δ—(Δ+ — 1) + 1)-vertex-colouring.	2
Theorems 3.1 and 3.3 and Lemma 3.2 yield the following:
Corollary 3.4 Let GΔ be the family of 2-edge-connected graphs with maximum de- gree Δ. Then, for any ϵ > 0,

2 —ϵ ≤ WOMD(G ) ≤ 1 ,	1 —ϵ ≤ WOMD(G ) ≤ 6 ,	and	lim WOMD(G
)= 1.

5	3	2	2	7	Δ→∞	Δ
Strong orientations of grids and tori
By a grid Gn,m, we refer to the Cartesian product Pn Pm of two paths Pn, Pm. A torus Tn,m is the Cartesian product Cn Cm of two cycles Cn, Cm. In the undirected context, it is easy to see that MD(Gn,m) = 2 while MD(Tn,m) = 3 (see e.g., [10]); however, things get a bit more tricky in the directed context.
Grids and tori have maximum degree 4; thus, bounds on the maximum metric dimension of a strong oriented grid or torus can be derived from our results in Section 3. In this section, we improve these bounds through dedicated proofs and

arguments. We first consider strong Eulerian oriented tori (all vertices have in- degree and out-degree 2), for which we exhibit the maximum value of the metric dimension. We then consider strong oriented grids, for which we provide improved bounds.


Strong Eulerian orientations of tori
Let 0 < n ≤ m be two integers, and let Tn,m be the torus on nm vertices. That is, V (Tn,m) = {(i, j) | 0 ≤ i < n, 0 ≤ j < m}, and (i, j), (k, l) ∈ E(Tn,m) if and only if |i — k| ∈ {1,n — 1} and j = l, or |j — l| ∈ {1,m — 1} and i = k. By convention, the vertex (0, 0) is regarded as the topmost, leftmost vertex of the torus. That is, {(0, j) ∈ V (Tn,m) | 0 ≤ j < m} is the topmost (or first) row, and
{(i, 0) ∈ V (Tn,m) | 0 ≤ i < n} is the leftmost (or first) column.
As a main result in this section, we determine the maximum metric dimen- sion of a strong Eulerian oriented torus. More precisely, we study the follow- ing slight modifications of the parameter WOMD. For a connected graph G, we denote by WEOMD(G) the maximum value of MD(D) over all strong Eu- lerian orientations D of G. For a family G of 2-edge-connected graphs, we set WEOMD(G)= max WEOMD(G) .

G∈G
|V (G)|


Theorem 4.1 For the family T of tori, we have WEOMD(T )= 1 .

Sketch of proof. Let us consider the case of a torus Tn,m when n and m are even. We first show that there exists a strong Eulerian orientation D of Tn,m with MD(D) ≥ nm . Indeed, let us orient Tn,m such that odd (resp., even) columns are oriented bottom to top (resp., top to bottom) and odd (resp., even) rows are oriented right to left (resp., left to right). See Figure 1b for an illustration. The lower bound follows from Lemma 2.1 since vertices can be partitioned into pairs of vertices having a common in-neighbourhood.
For the upper bound, the proof is constructive and provides a resolving set of size at most nm . The algorithm starts with the set R = {(i, j) ∈ V (D) | i + j even} (note that it is a minimum vertex cover and a stable set of size nm ) and iteratively performs local modifications (swaps one vertex in R with one of its neighbours not in R) without changing the size of R until R becomes a resolving set R∗. Precisely, if R is not a resolving set (otherwise, we are done) then at least two vertices are not distinguishable by their distances to the vertices in R. Let u and v be two such vertices. We prove that such two vertices belong to a so-called bad square as depicted in Figure 2a (there are two cases). We then prove that all bad-squares are pairwise vertex-disjoint. Finally, we prove (by a case analysis) that the vertex set R∗ obtained from R by exchanging vertices u and nv (as defined in Figure 2a) for every bad square is a resolving set.	2















row i
aA

column j	zA


bA







(a)	(b)
Fig. 2. (a) The two cases of “bad squares” in the torus. Black vertices are the ones in the initial set R.
(b) Configuration with two undistinguished vertices u and v in the grid. Black vertices are those in R and white ones are in V (Gn,m) \ R. The vertex w is the LCV of u and v.
Strong oriented grids
In this section, we consider the maximum metric dimension of a strong oriented grid. For every such grid, we deal with its vertices using the same terminology introduced in Section 4.1 for tori (i.e., the vertices of the topmost row have first coordinate 0, and the vertices of the leftmost column have second coordinate 0). Our main result to be proved in this section is the following.
Theorem 4.2 Let G be the family of grids. For any ϵ > 0, we have
1 — ϵ ≤ WOMD(G) ≤ 2 + ϵ.
2	3
Sketch of proof. Let us consider the case of a grid Gn,m when n and m are even. We first show that there exists a strong orientation D of Gn,m with MD(D) ≥ nm—(n+m) . Indeed, let us orient Gn,m similarly to Tn,m in Theorem 4.1 (and Figure 1b). The lower bound follows from Lemma 2.1 since vertices can be partitioned into bad pairs of vertices having a common in-neighbourhood (except for the vertices on the borders (first/last row/column) in which case only half of the vertices are included in the bad pairs).
For the upper bound, let us assume that m ≡ 0 mod 3. The proof is construc- tive and provides a resolving set of size at most 2nm + ϵ. The algorithm starts with the set R = {V (Gn,m) \ (i, 3j — 1)|0 ≤ i ≤ n — 1, 1 ≤ j ≤ m/3} (i.e., R contains the first 2 out of every 3 columns from left to right in the grid) and iteratively performs local modifications (swaps one vertex in R with one of its neighbours not in R) without changing the size of R until R becomes a resolving set R∗. Precisely, if R is not a resolving set (otherwise, we are done) then at least two vertices are not distinguishable by their distances to the vertices in R. Let u and v be two such vertices. We prove that, for any such two vertices u and v, they belong to the same column C (not including any vertex in R) and there exists a unique vertex w ∈ C (called the Last Common Vertex (LCV ) of u and v) at the same distance

from u and v (see Figure 2b, where superscripts w have been omitted.). In that case, let zw be the vertex on the left of w, xw be the vertex above w, aw be the vertex on the left of xw and above zw, and bw be the vertex below zw. We show that, for every LCV w, the vertices {w, zw, aw, bw} and the vertices around them are pairwise vertex-disjoint. Finally, we prove (by a tedious case analysis) that the vertex set R∗ is a resolving set where R∗ is obtained from R by exchanging, for every LCV w, vertices zw and xw (if (aw, zw) or (bw, zw) is an arc) or exchanging vertices aw and xw otherwise.	2

Conclusion
In this work, we have investigated, for a few families of graphs, the worst strong orientations in terms of metric dimension. In particular settings, such as when considering strong Eulerian orientations of tori, we managed to identify the worst possible orientations (Theorem 4.1). For other families (graphs with bounded maxi- mum degree and grids), we have exhibited both lower and upper bounds on WOMD that are more or less distant apart. As further work on this topic, it would be in- teresting to lower the gap between our lower and upper bounds, or consider strong orientations of other graph families.
In particular, two appealing directions could be to improve Corollary 3.4 (for max. degree 3) and Theorem 4.2. For graphs with maximum degree 3, we do wonder whether there are strong orientations for which the metric dimension is more than

2 of the vertices. It is also legitimate to ask whether our upper bound ( 1
of the

vertices), which was obtained from the simple technique described in Corollary 2.3, can be lowered further.
In Theorem 4.2, we proved that any strong orientation of a grid asymptotically

has metric dimension at most 2
of the vertices. Towards improving this upper

bound, one could consider applying Corollary 2.3, for instance as follows. For a given oriented grid D, let A∗ be the graph obtained as follows (where we deal with the vertices of D using the same terminology as in Section 4):
V (A∗)= V (D).
We add, in A∗, an edge between two vertices (i, j) and (ij, jj) if they are joined by a path of length exactly 2 in the grid underlying D. That is, the edge is added whenever (ij, jj) is of the form (i — 1,j — 1), (i — 2, j), (i — 1,j + 1), (i, j + 2),
(i + 1,j + 1), (i + 2, j), (i + 1,j — 1), or (i, j — 2).
Note that A∗ has two connected components C1, C2 being basically obtained by glueing K4’s along edges. See Figure 3 for an illustration.
It can be noticed that for any oriented grid D, its auxiliary graph Daux is a subgraph of A∗. From Corollary 2.3, any upper bound on the size of a minimum vertex cover of A∗ is thus also an upper bound on MD(D) (assuming D is strong, in which case it necessarily verifies Δ+(D) ≥ 2). Unfortunately, we have observed that any minimum vertex cover of A∗ covers 3 of the vertices, which is not better
than our upper bound in Theorem 4.2.


		
(a) G9,9	(b) A∗	(c) C1

(d) C2
Fig. 3. The grid G9,9 and the associated graph A∗.
There is still hope, however, to improve our upper bound using the vertex cover method. Indeed, under the assumption that D is a strong oriented graph, actually Daux can be far from having all the edges that A∗ has. For instance, it can easily be proved that, in Daux, it is not possible that a vertex (i, j) is adjacent to all four vertices (i— 2, j), (i, j + 2), (i + 2, j), (i, j — 2) (if they exist). Using a computer, we were actually able to check on small grids that, for all strong orientations D, the minimum vertex cover of Daux has size at most 1 of the vertices. This leads us to raising the following two questions related to our upper bound in Theorem 4.2:
Problem 5.1 For any strong orientation D of a grid Gn,m, do the minimum vertex covers of Daux have size at most nm ?
Problem 5.2 For any strong orientation D of a grid Gn,m, do we have MD(D) ≤
nm
2
Note that if the upper bound in Problem 5.2 held, then it would be close to the lower bound in Th. 4.2.

References
R.F. Bailey, P.J. Cameron. Base size, metric dimension and other invariants of groups and graphs.
Bulletin of the London Mathematical Society, 43:209-242, 2011.
G. Chartrand, L. Eroh, M. Johnson, O. Oellermann. Resolvability in graphs and the metric dimension of a graph. Discrete Applied Mathematics, 105(1-3):99-113, 2000.

G. Chartrand, M. Rains, P. Zhang. The directed distance dimension of oriented graphs. Math. Bohemica, 125:155-168, 2000.
G. Chartrand, M. Rains, P. Zhang. On the dimension of oriented graphs. Utilitas Mathematica, 60:139- 151, 2001.


M. Fehr, S. Gosselin, O.R. Oellermann. The metric dimension of Cayley digraphs. Discrete Mathematics, 306:31-41, 2006.
M. Feng, M. Xu, K. Wang. On the metric dimension of line graphs. Discrete Applied Mathematics, 161:802-805, 2013.
M.R. Garey, D.S. Johnson. Computers and Intractability; A Guide to the Theory of NP-Completeness, 1990.
F. Harary, R.A. Melter. On the metric dimension of a graph. Ars Combinatoria, 2:191195, 1976.
A. Lozano. Symmetry Breaking in Tournaments. The Electronic Journal of Combinatorics, 20(1):Paper #P69, 2013.
P. Manuel, B. Rajan, I. Rajasingh, M.C. Monica. Landmarks in torus networks. Journal of Discrete Mathematical Sciences and Cryptography, 9(2):263-271, 2013.
S. Pancahayani, R. Simanjuntak. Directed Metric Dimension of Oriented Graphs with Cyclic Covering.
Journal of Combinatorial Mathematics and Combinatorial Computing, 94:15-25, 2015.
B. Rajan, I. Rajasingh, J.A. Cynthia, P. Manuel. Metric dimension of directed graphs. International Journal of Computer Mathematics, 91(7):1397-1406, 2014.
H.E. Robbins. A theorem on graphs, with an application to a problem in traffic control. Am. Math. Mthly., 46:281283, 1939.
P.J. Slater. Leaves of trees. pages 549559. Congressus Numerantium, No. XIV, 1975.
