Journal Pre-proof

Peracetic acid (PAA)-based pretreatment effectively improves medium-chain fatty acids (MCFAs) production from sewage sludge

Yufen Wang, Haixiao Guo, Xuecheng Li, Xueming Chen, Lai Peng, Tingting Zhu, Peizhe Sun, Yiwen Liu


PII:	S2666-4984(23)00120-5
DOI:	https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ese.2023.100355 Reference:	ESE 100355

To appear in:	Environmental Science and Ecotechnology

Received Date: 23 May 2023
Revised Date:	17 November 2023
Accepted Date: 23 November 2023


Please cite this article as: Y. Wang, H. Guo, X. Li, X. Chen, L. Peng, T. Zhu, P. Sun, Y. Liu, Peracetic acid (PAA)-based pretreatment effectively improves medium-chain fatty acids (MCFAs) production from sewage sludge, Environmental Science and Ecotechnology (2024), doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/ j.ese.2023.100355.


This is a PDF file of an article that has undergone enhancements after acceptance, such as the addition of a cover page and metadata, and formatting for readability, but it is not yet the definitive version of record. This version will undergo additional copyediting, typesetting and review before it is published
in its final form, but we are providing this version to give early visibility of the article. Please note that, during the production process, errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.

© 2023 Published by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of Chinese Society for Environmental Sciences, Harbin Institute of Technology, Chinese Research Academy of Environmental Sciences.


PAA




Intact WAS flocs
EPS disruption and transformation
Formation of amino acids, glucose, etc.







Singlet oxygen
Inorganic radicals
Ethanol/CO2





Organic radicals


MCFA
FAB pathway RBO pathway


Acetate, butyrate, etc.

Peracetic acid (PAA)-based pretreatment effectively improves medium-chain fatty acids (MCFAs) production from sewage sludge
Yufen Wang a, Haixiao Guo a, Xuecheng Li a, Xueming Chen b, Lai Peng c, d, Tingting Zhu a, Peizhe Sun a, Yiwen Liu a,*

a School of Environmental Science and Engineering, Tianjin University, Tianjin 300072,

China

b Fujian Provincial Engineering Research Center of Rural Waste Recycling Technology, College of Environment and Safety Engineering, Fuzhou University, Fujian 350116,
China

c Hubei Key Laboratory of Mineral Resources Processing and Environment, Wuhan University of Technology, Luoshi Road 122, Wuhan, Hubei 430070, China
d School of Resources and Environmental Engineering, Wuhan University of Technology, Luoshi Road 122, Wuhan, Hubei 430070, China



*Corresponding author

E-mail: yiwen.liu@tju.edu.cn (Y. Liu)

Abstract: Peracetic acid (PAA), known for its environmentally friendly properties as a

oxidant and bactericide, is gaining prominence in decontamination and disinfection

applications. The primary product of PAA oxidation is acetate that can serve as an

electron acceptor (EA) for the biosynthesis of medium-chain fatty acids (MCFAs) via

chain elongation (CE) reactions. Hence, PAA-based pretreatment is supposed to be

beneficial for MCFAs production from anaerobic sludge fermentation, as it could

enhance organic matter availability, suppress competing microorganisms and furnish

EA by providing acetate. However, such a hypothesis has rarely been proved. Here we

reveal that PAA-based pretreatment leads to significant exfoliation of extracellular

polymeric substances (EPS) from sludge flocs and disruption of proteinic secondary

structures, through inducing highly active free radicals and singlet oxygen. The

production of MCFAs increases substantially to 11,265.6 mg COD L−1, while the

undesired byproducts, specifically long-chain alcohols (LCAs), decrease to 723.5 mg

COD L−1. Microbial activity tests further demonstrate that PAA pretreatment stimulates

the CE process, attributed to the up-regulation of functional genes involved in fatty acid

biosynthesis pathway. These comprehensive findings provide insights into the

effectiveness and mechanisms behind enhanced MCFAs production through PAA-

based technology, advancing our understanding of sustainable resource recovery from

sewage sludge.

20

Keywords: Sewage sludge; Medium-chain fatty acids (MCFAs); Extracellular

polymeric substances (EPS); Peracetic acid (PAA); Metabolic activity.

1. Introduction

The recycling of sewage sludge, including primary sludge and waste activated

sludge (WAS), which are inherent byproducts of biological wastewater treatment, is an

important part of achieving carbon neutrality at wastewater treatment plants (WWTPs)

[1-3]. As a low-cost and simple technology, anaerobic fermentation can effectively

reduce the contamination properties of sludge and convert organic fractions into value-

added products [4, 5]. Compared to short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs, i.e., traditional

fermentation products), medium-chain fatty acids (MCFAs) carry higher energy

densities. They are more hydrophobic and can be easily separated from fermentation

liquor [6-8]. MCFAs, denoting straight-chain monocarboxylates containing 6–12

carbon atoms, primarily encompass caproate, heptylate, and caprylate when produced

through biotechnological means [9]. MCFAs can be employed in diverse industries,

such as food additives and antimicrobial agents [6]. They are also precursors to

manufacture industrial products, e.g., surfactants, lubricants, plasticizers, etc., or to

synthesize jet fuel and diesel [10]. Consequently, MCFAs have a higher economic and

practical value.

Sewage sludge is a suitable and cheap substrate for MCFAs production. On one

hand, most organics in sludge can be biodegraded into acetate-dominated SCFAs. Chain

elongation (CE) microorganisms prefer to initiate CE with acetate as the initial electron

acceptor (EA) [11]. Meanwhile, sewage sludge is rich in microorganisms and

extracellular hydrolytic enzymes, e.g., acid-producing bacteria, CE microorganisms,

and protease, benefiting hydrolysis/acidification of substrates and SCFAs upgrading

[12]. When electron donor (ED, commonly ethanol) is sufficient, CE microorganisms

will likely be enriched to upgrade SCFAs to MCFAs. For example, it was reported that

6615 mg COD per L MCFAs were produced from anaerobic WAS fermentation due to

the stimulation of 170 mM ethanol [13]. When WAS alkaline fermentation liquid was

applied as EA for CE, with different concentrations of ethanol provided as ED, MCFAs

production was elevated from 5570 to 7670 mg COD L−1 [6]. However, EA provided

by sewage sludge is often limited since the organic components in hard cell walls and

extracellular polymeric substance (EPS) are resistant to biological hydrolysis [12, 14],

resulting in hindered MCFAs production [15, 16]. Meanwhile, potential competing

microbes in sewage sludge allow the conversion of ED and EA to byproducts, e.g.,

long-chain alcohols (LCAs) and methane, leading to dispersive carbon fluxes and

incomplete CE [10]. To accelerate sludge hydrolysis and eliminate competitive

inhibiting processes, sludge pretreatment is essential before anaerobic fermentation.

Yin et al. proved that Fenton-persulfate oxidation could promote sludge acidification

and suppress microorganisms capable of producing LCAs, increasing MCFAs

production from 2367.7 to 3445.9 mg COD L−1 [16]. Wang et al. indicated that after

free ammonia (FA) pretreatment for 24 h, MCFAs production from WAS was promoted

from 1400 to 8300 mg COD L−1 [15]. Nevertheless, adding persulfate may induce a

sulfate-reducing process, and fermentation broth reflux would increase sludge volume.

Therefore, finding an economical and eco-friendly pretreatment technology is urgently

needed to scale up the application of MCFAs recovery from WAS.

Peracetic acid (PAA, E0 = 1.81 eV) is a wide-spectrum antimicrobial agent for

many industries, e.g., medical and food, without byproducts generation. Also, the PAA-

based advanced oxidation process (AOP) has exhibited excellent functions in

chemical/microbiological	micropollutant	removal	from	water/wastewater	[17].

Recently, the inhibition of PAA in the biological wastewater treatment process and its

effect on WAS dissolution have attracted much attention. It was reported that PAA could

inhibit the enzyme activity associated with nitrification and decrease nitrate production

rates [18]. Appels et al. reported that PAA oxidation caused effective solubilization of

sludge organics and increased methane production from anaerobic WAS digestion by

21% [19]. It was also unveiled that PAA could efficiently dissolve sludge cells and EPS

into soluble components [20]. Additionally, Li et al. demonstrated that PAA suppressed

non-functional microorganisms, i.e., hydrogen-consuming microorganisms, during

WAS dark fermentation for hydrogen production, resulting in H2 cumulation increasing

to 14.2 mL per g VSS with considerable SCFAs as liquid-phase products [21]. Although

PAA-based oxidation has been demonstrated feasible for sludge solubilization and

primary fermentation, its enhancement effect on MCFAs production from WAS and the

related mechanisms have not been elucidated. Therefore, we propose employing PAA

oxidation as a pretreatment strategy for sludge disintegration and MCFAs production.

Our hypotheses are based on the following premises: (1) PAA can be activated in situ

within sludge that is rich in iron [22] and accelerate organic components solubilization

and conversion, providing more soluble materials as precursors for EA (i.e., SCFAs)

formation. (2) The only byproduct of PAA oxidation is acetic acid, which can be

consumed by CE microorganisms as EA to produce MCFAs. (3) PAA has bactericidal

or bio-inhibitory effects that may inhibit the production of LCAs and increase electron

transfer efficiency from ED to MCFAs.

This work aims to explore the feasibility and corresponding mechanism of PAA

pretreatment in enhancing MCFAs production from WAS. Firstly, WAS disintegration

performance based on PAA oxidation is elaborated from three aspects: soluble substrate

production, changes in sludge properties, and extracellular organics transformation.

Subsequently, the details of different doses (i.e., 0–25 mg per g TSS) of PAA

pretreatment on MCFAs biosynthesis from sludge are assessed based on ED

consumption, MCFAs accumulation, byproduct (i.e., LCAs) production, and product

distributions. Meanwhile, community succession of MCFAs-forming bioreactors

mediated by PAA pretreatment is elucidated by 16S rRNA sequencing. Furthermore,

mechanisms of enhanced MCFAs production were clarified from three perspectives:

reaction mechanisms of PAA oxidation for WAS disintegration, metabolic activities of

key bioprocesses, and variations in microbial functions and functional gene expression.

The findings observed in this work would fill the knowledge gap of PAA-based AOP

for enhanced MCFAs production from WAS and expand the understanding of the role

of PAA in sludge resource recovery.

2. Material and methods

2.1 Main parameters of WAS and PAA

WAS applied for the experiments was from a local WWTP in Tianjin, China. After

impurities were removed and concentrated, WAS was stored at 4 °C. The key

characteristics of the WAS were as follows: total suspended solids (TSS) of 26.34 ±

0.46 g L−1, volatile suspended solids (VSS) of 15.86 ± 0.28 g L−1, a total COD (TCOD)

of 24540 ± 917 mg L−1, total carbohydrates of 2862 ± 123 mg COD L−1, and total

proteins of 14756 ± 225 mg COD L−1. The inoculum was cultured by WAS with ethanol

as ED. The key properties of this inoculum were characterized by total solids (TS) of

17.69 ± 0.13 g L−1, volatile solids (VS) of 9.79 ± 0.12 g L−1, a TCOD of 16800 ± 591

mg L−1, total carbohydrates of 1853 ± 81 mg COD L−1, and total proteins of 9401 ± 157

mg COD L−1. The commercial PAA solution was purchased from Tianjin Damao

Chemical Reagent Factory, and the PAA content in the solution was 12%.

2.2 WAS disintegration by PAA pretreatment

Effective sludge flocs disintegration is the essential precondition for the

acidogenic fermentation of WAS. In this batch experiment, we employed five serum

bottles as reactors, each containing 150 mL of WAS. Subsequently, a certain volume of

PAA solution was dosed to these reactors to reach a concentration of 0, 10, 15, 20, or

25 mg PAA per g TSS, respectively. This pretreatment process was conducted over a

24-hour period to ensure complete peroxidation [19, 23]. These tests were conducted in

triplicates. After pretreatment, we analyzed the contents of soluble organic components

(such as proteins and carbohydrates). Furthermore, changes in extracellular substances

and excitation-emission matrix (EEM) fluorescence intensities were determined to

expound the impacts of PAA oxidation on WAS properties. Fourier transform infrared

(FTIR) and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) were used to assess the structure

variations of extracellular organic components induced by PAA oxidation.

2.3 Bioreactor operation for MCFAs production

To evaluate the performance of MCFAs production from PAA pretreated WAS, we

employed five serum bottles (V = 300 mL) as anaerobic bioreactors. Briefly, 135 mL

pretreated WAS was employed as substrate, and 15 mL inoculum was applied as

inoculum. The procedures and PAA dosage for sludge pretreatment were the same as in

Section 2.2. The inoculated sludge (i.e., inoculum) was acclimatized by fermentation

of WAS with 50 mM 2-bromoethanesulfonate as methane inhibitor and 160 mM ethanol

as ED [13]. The initial pH values for all reactors were 6.5 and adjusted to 6.0 on day 6

when the pH dropped to about 5.5. To trigger effective MCFAs production, 160 mM

ethanol and 25 mM 2-bromoethanesulfonate were employed as ED and methanogen

inhibitors, respectively. Before anaerobic fermentation, all reactors were flushed with

N2, capped by butyl rubber stoppers, and wrapped with sealing films. All trials were

performed in triplicates. These reactors were operated for 14 days under 35 °C, during

which MCFAs, SCFAs, LCAs, and ethanol were determined every two days.

2.4 Influence of PAA pretreatment on individual steps associated with MCFAs

production

Three key bio-steps, i.e., hydrolysis, acidification, and CE, are associated with

MCFAs production when sewage sludge serves as substrate. PAA pretreatment could

result in soluble substrates increment and cause microbe damage to some degree. Thus,

how does PAA pretreatment affect microbial activities that determine MCFAs

production? To clarify the potential impacts, several standard substances were used to

simulate these processes and differentiate the response of each step to PAA pretreatment.

Three batch tests were conducted, i.e., hydrolysis, acidification, and CE tests, and the

sludge withdrawn from the above anaerobic reactors (described in section 2.3) was used

as inoculum. Before experiments, the residual substances in the inocula were removed

by washing with tap water. Each trial was performed in triplicates, as depicted in

Supplementary Information (SI).

2.5 Microbial evolution and prediction of functional genes

Microbial evolution was characterized by 16S rRNA sequencing, with 338F and

806R as primers [6]. Functional gene prediction was performed according to research

conducted by Huang et al. [24]. Sludge samples were taken from four bioreactors,

including the control, 15, 20, and 25 mg PAA per g TSS, for microbial analysis and

prediction of functional genes at the end of anaerobic fermentation (i.e., on day 14).

2.6 Analytic methods and statistical assessment

TS, VS, TSS, and VSS of sludge were detected by standard procedures [25]. COD,

proteins, and carbohydrates were determined using HACH reagents, Lowry-Folin, and

anthrone-sulfuric methods [22]. A meter (PHS-3E, Leici) was used to measure the

oxidation reduction potential (ORP) of sludge. The zeta potential of sludge samples was

detected by a zeta potential analyzer (Litesizer 500). A gas chromatography (GC2014,

SHIMADZU), equipped with a flame ionization detector (FID), was employed to detect

SCFAs, MCFAs, ethanol, and LCAs (i.e., butanol and hexanol) contents [26]. Protease

and α-glucosidase activities were analyzed according to research conducted by Xie et

al. [12]. The changes in the biodegradability of sewage sludge were assessed by

quantities of  biodegradable  substances  due  to  PAA pretreatment  using  EEM

fluorescence technology. FTIR spectroscopy and XPS were determined according to

Wang et al. [27]. Free radicals and singlet oxygen were analyzed by an electron spin

resonance (ESR) spectrometer (JEOL JES-FA200) using DMPO (5,5-dimethyl-1-

pyrroline-N-oxide) and TEMP (2,2,6,6-tetramethyl-4-piperidine) as trapping agents.

Sludge morphology was detected by scanning electron microscopy (SEM), with

element content determined by energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS). Experimental

data were analyzed using the SPSS software, with p < 0.05 statistically significant.

3. Results and discussion

3.1 WAS disintegration and organics transformation trigged by PAA oxidation

3.1.1 Soluble substrates production

The forms of proteins and carbohydrates, as the primary organic fractions

presented in WAS, are significantly influenced by PAA pretreatment (Fig. 1). Their

contents in the supernatant gradually increase with time and PAA dose within 24 h of

reaction (Fig. 1a–b). The release rates of proteins and carbohydrates are significantly

greater in the first 6 h, indicating that PAA can rapidly oxidize sludge flocs and

effectively convert particulate organic matter to soluble substrates. After pretreatment,

soluble proteins and carbohydrates concentrations reach 850.2 and 208.1 mg COD L−1

for the 25 mg PAA per g TSS group (Fig. 1c), which are respectively elevated by 212.9%

(p < 0.001) and 133.0% (p < 0.001). Similarly, Yang et al. reported that after

pretreatment with 90 mg per g TSS peroxymonosulfate for 24 h, dissolved proteins and

carbohydrates increased to about 630 and 160 mg COD L−1, respectively, and SCFAs

were eventually accumulated to 4894 mg COD L−1 [28]. This suggests that PAA and

PMS have similar oxidative and destructive abilities on sludge flocs, thus providing

more precursors for SCFAs formation that can act as EA for MCFAs production.

EEM spectra of pretreated WAS can further disclose the enhanced effect of PAA

oxidation on WAS dissolution. As displayed in Fig. 1d, two fluorescence peaks, peak 1

and peak 2, appear on the spectrogram, and their color reflects the changes in organic

matter content [29]. The fluorescence intensity is enhanced by PAA pretreatment at all

doses compared to the control, implying more soluble material release. Peak 1

represents soluble microbial byproducts like organics, and they are widely considered

biodegradable substrates, whose significant increase indicates the improvement of

biochemical degradability [30]. Interestingly, the peak fluorescence intensity decreases

when the PAA dose exceeds 10 mg per g TSS (Fig. 1d), inconsistent with elevated

proteins and carbohydrates releases. It may be attributed to the higher level of strong

oxidative species (such as ·OH) triggered by increased PAA dose, which could react

with the dissolved organics in sludge and destroy their fluorescent groups.

Fig. 1.

3.1.2 Changes in sludge properties

Previous studies have shown that PAA could cause cell inactivation and inhibit

functional enzyme activities [17, 31]. However, details of PAA pretreatment on EPS

structure have been neglected [32]. As displayed in Fig. 2a–b, EPS is predominantly in

the tightly bound (TB) state for the control, explaining the low rate of sludge

solubilization. Proteins and polysaccharides contents in TB-EPS decrease gradually

with the increase of PAA dose. For loosely bound (LB)-EPS, the control group has

fewer proteins than raw WAS, while PAA groups all have higher proteinic organics than

raw WAS. It implies that PAA oxidation leads to decreased EPS and migration of TB-

EPS to LB-EPS [1, 33]. Whereas the variation of polysaccharides is not in accord with

proteins, which may be due to its low content in LB-EPS (i.e., 5.4–9.8 mg COD L−1).

The EEM spectra further support the variation of protein contents in EPS (Fig. S1 and

Fig. 2c). Apparently, the fluorescence peak intensity of TB fraction decreases

significantly with PAA dose, while that of LB fraction in the control is lower than those

of PAA groups.

Furthermore, Figure 2d reflects the infrared spectra information of different EPS

fractions extracted from the control and PAA-pretreated WAS. The infrared peak about

1580–1670 cm−1 or near 1410 cm−1 represents the stretching vibrations of C−N and

C=O, or C=O symmetric stretching of −COOH groups in proteins, respectively [34].

The bond at 1070 cm−1 stands for the vibration of C−OH and C−O−C groups in organics

(i.e., carbohydrates or polysaccharides) [34]. Generally, PAA pretreatment increases the

infrared peak intensities of these organic component groups in LB fraction (e.g., C−OH

and C−O−C) while significantly reducing their intensities in TB fraction (e.g., C−N,

C=O, C−OH, and C−O−C), consistent with Fig. 2a and 2b. It implies the disruption,

migration, and dissolution of sludge EPS. As a response, some organic groups at bonds

1580–1670 cm−1 are increased in the soluble fraction after PAA pretreatment. In

addition, the alteration of sludge structure by PAA can be visualized by SEM images

(Fig. 2e–f). After pretreatment, sludge flocs become loose, and EPS is reduced,

exposing more microorganisms. Accordingly, PAA destroys the protective barrier of

microbial cells against extreme environments (i.e., oxidative stress) and facilitates the

rupture of sludge cells. Chen and Pavlostathis [31] indicated that PAA affected the

biological nitrogen removal system by causing cell lysis and enzyme inhibition. Ao et

al. [17] reported that PAA disrupted the membrane and cell wall lipids and attacked the

DNA and RNA in microorganisms. These results above illustrate that PAA disrupts the

dense sludge floc structures by causing the disruption and migration of EPS fractions,

thus boosting the dissolution of EPS and intracellular organics. EPS destruction is

conducive to the contact of hydrolases and functional microorganisms with released

organic  components.  Subsequently,  the  soluble  organics  produced  by  sludge

disintegration would be rapidly and efficiently converted to SCFAs, supplying more

directly accessible EA for CE bacteria.

Fig. 2.

3.1.3 Degradation and transformation of extracellular macromolecular organics

As the primary organic substrate in WAS, proteins occupy 60.1% of TCOD, whose

extracellular transformation can be reflected by conformational structure alterations.

Hence, for characterizing the change of proteinic conformation, FTIR spectra with

wavelengths ranging from 1600–1700 cm−1 were subjected to deconvolution and curve-

fitting analysis (Fig. 3a) [34]. The relative proportions of proteinic secondary structures

in the soluble, LB, and TB fractions are significantly altered after PAA pretreatment.

Particularly, the proteinic conformation in the soluble fraction is significantly disrupted

by PAA oxidation, as only aggregated strands are found, i.e., the band at 1610–1625 or

1680–1695 cm−1. It has been indicated that proteinic stability is mostly determined by

α-helix, β-sheet, and random coil, and a low ratio of α-helix/(β-sheet + random coil)

could make the proteinic structure looser [35]. In Fig. 3c, the proportion of α-helix/(β-

sheet + random coil) is largely reduced by PAA, with LB fraction from 33.1% to 24.6%

and TB fraction from 72.3% to 46.9%. These observations demonstrate that PAA

pretreatment changes the secondary structures of extracellular proteins, promoting their

decomposition and transformation [36].

XPS C 1s spectra can be divided into four peaks, as shown in Fig. 3b. The peak at

284.8 eV (C1) is associated with C−(C,H), primarily ascribed to polysaccharides, lipids,

and side chains of amino acids [36]. The ratio of C1 increases from 40.3% to 72.6%

after PAA pretreatment, which proves the efficient WAS disintegration and particulate

organics solubilization (Fig. 1). The peak at 286.1 eV (C2) belongs to C−(O,N) bonds

from amines, amides, alcohols and ethers groups, while that at 288.0 eV (C3) is

associated with O−C−O and C=O primarily existed in acetal, hemiacetal, amide,

carboxylic or carbonyl groups [37]. The apparent decrease of C2 (from 43.9% to 13.4%)

and C3 (from 15.8% to 0) might be attributed to the effective decomposition of

macromolecular substances or intermediates by PAA pretreatment. Accordingly, the

peak at 288.5 eV (C4) increases from 0 to 14.0%, attributing to O=C−OR and O=C−OH

in ester or carboxyl groups. It implies that PAA results in considerable substrate

transformation and SCFAs accumulation during the pretreatment step [37]. N1 at 399.6

eV is closely related to the N−C−R bond in amino acids of proteins or peptidoglycans

[38]. N2 at 400.4 eV reflects the presence of the H−N−C=O bond, i.e., the pivotal

structure in proteins and peptide chains [38]. The increase of N1 (from 35.7% to 57.1%)

and N2 (from 22.0% to 37.8%) further supports the elevation of protein levels in the

aqueous phase and the destruction of proteins and peptidoglycans induced by PAA

pretreatment, concurrently (Fig. 3b). The peak at 402.0 eV represents the existence of

inorganic N, and its increase from 0 to 5.1% intuitively indicates the promoted proteins

and peptidoglycans degradation and the production of ammonia nitrogen [39].

Additionally, peaks at 164.0 eV (S1) and 169.0 eV (S2) in S 2p spectra, respectively,

belong to the S−S bond and inorganic S (Fig. 3b) [36]. The decrease of the S−S bond

and increase of inorganic S hints that PAA promotes the rupture of proteinic spatial

structure  and  strengthens  the  degradation  and  transformation  of  extracellular

macromolecular organics (e.g., proteins) in WAS [40].

Fig. 3.

3.2	MCFAs	production	from	PAA-pretreated	sludge	through	anaerobic

fermentation

Figure 4 displays ethanol consumption results and product generation from sewage

sludge. Ethanol (i.e., ED) is completely utilized by CE microorganisms (Fig. 4a), and

accumulative MCFAs stop rising at the end (Fig. 4b), suggesting the completion of the

CE process. Caproate is the only MCFAs for all experiments, similar to previous studies

using sewage sludge to produce MCFAs [11, 13]. The highest MCFAs production is

7173.1 mg COD L−1 for the control, similar to a previous study in which MCFAs

production was 6115 mg COD L−1 with sewage sludge as substrates and 170 mM

ethanol as ED [13]. For experimental groups, MCFAs peak values are dependent on

PAA dosage. PAA pretreatment with a dosage from 10–15 mg per g TSS only shortens

the optimal fermentation time rather than further improves the maximal MCFAs

production (p > 0.05). In contrast, the maximal MCFAs concentration is boosted from

8859.8 to 11265.6 mg COD L−1 when the PAA dose increases from 20 to 25 mg per g

TSS, respectively increasing by 23.5% (p = 0.002) and 57.1% (p = 0) than the control.

The maximal MCFAs production attained in this work is higher than that of pretreated

sludge with free ammonia (8300 mg of COD L−1) [15]. Besides, the optimal time

required for MCFAs accumulation in the PAA-pretreated groups is shortened from 12

to 10 days. These facts prove that PAA pretreatment promotes MCFAs production and

accelerates MCFAs generation rate.

LCAs, as the main byproducts of CE, usually occur with MCFAs formation. The

maximum concentration of LCAs (including butanol and hexanol) is 4629.0 mg COD

L−1 for the control, similar to that of 10 or 15 mg PAA per g TSS reactors (Fig. 4c).

Whereas, PAA pretreatment at 20 or 25 mg per g TSS significantly decreases LCAs

production (p = 0). Similarly, Yin and Wang reported that LCAs production from

sewage sludge was repressed by AOP pretreatment [16]. Wang et al. found that FNA

pretreatment	largely	promoted	MCFAs	production	while	decreasing	LCAs

accumulation in the sludge fermentation system supplemented with ethanol [41]. In

contrast, Fe3O4 addition was revealed to concurrently promote MCFAs and LCAs

generation [8]. Thereby, it could be speculated that PAA pretreatment suppresses the

microbes that produce LCAs due to its microbiocidal effect, reducing the conversion of

organic carbons to byproducts. Due to PAA pretreatment, MCFAs proportion increases

from 44.4% to 56.9%, while LCAs proportion reduces from 28.6% to 4.0% (Fig. 4d).

This indicates that PAA pretreatment promotes the carbon specificity towards MCFAs,

and thus greatly avoids electron equivalents loss of ED.

Fig. 4.

3.3 Microbial community evolutions

Figure 5 elucidates the community succession of MCFAs-forming bioreactors

mediated by PAA pretreatment. Rarefaction curves indicate the reliability of sequencing

results (Fig. S2). Alpha diversity analysis suggests that PAA pretreatment has a

negligible effect on community richness but increases community diversity (Table S1).

As displayed in Fig. 5a, Firmicutes is the predominant phylum in experimental groups,

whose abundance is positively associated with PAA dose, increasing from 20.3% (i.e.,

the control) to 45.0%. Firmicutes can hydrolyze and convert complex macromolecular

organics into small molecules, thus promoting substrate transformation and providing

EA for CE [12]. Firmicutes were also enriched in anaerobic systems for MCFAs

generation [11].

Microbial composition at a genus level was further analyzed (Fig. 5b). PAA

pretreatment significantly enriches functional microorganisms, i.e., those associated

with hydrolysis, acidification, and CE, with their abundances rising from 18.3% to

39.7%. Paraclostridium, positively associated with substrate hydrolysis and MCFAs

production [16, 42], dominates in experimental groups, i.e., 12.2% for 20 mg PAA per

g TSS and 12.9% for 25 mg PAA per g TSS, versus 0.5% in the control. Clostridium is

a common SCFAs producer and a typical CE microorganism [43], whose abundance

significantly increases  with  PAA dose,  i.e.,  from  10.0%  to  17.9%.  Besides,

NK4A214_group is related to butyric acid production [44], and Romboutsia is positive

to SCFAs generation [11]. Their abundances are also enhanced in experimental groups.

On the contrary, some non-functional bacteria (e.g., denitrifying bacteria) are

significantly reduced. The enrichment of functional microorganisms is mainly

attributed to PAA oxidation, which leads to the removal/inhibition of non-functional

microbes and stimulates the metabolism of functional microorganisms by providing

more soluble organics. Specifically, sludge floc is fragmented, inhibiting initial

microbial activity due to PAA pretreatment. Meanwhile, substantial amounts of

dissolved organics are directly available to anaerobes, triggering the revival and

enrichment of hydrolytic and SCFAs-producing bacteria that are usually more tolerant

to extreme environments [45, 46]. Driven by ethanol, EA from sludge and PAA

decomposition are elongated to MCFAs by CE microorganisms. Consequently,

functional microorganisms are enriched by PAA pretreatment, and more substrates are

converted to MCFAs.

Fig. 5.

3.4 Mechanisms of enhanced MCFAs production from WAS by PAA pretreatment

3.4.1 Reaction mechanisms of PAA oxidation for WAS disintegration

Previous studies reported that PAA led to pollutants degradation mainly by

inducing the generation of inorganic radicals (i.e., •OH, •O2−), organic radicals (R−O•

(i.e., CH3COO•, CH3•, CH3C(O)O•), and CH3C(O)OO•) and singlet oxygen (1O2),

which are strongly oxidative to WAS flocs [47, 48]. In Fig. 6a–c, the signal peaks of

three adducts, i.e., DMPO−OH, PMPO−O2−, and TEMP−1O2, are found, with

intensities detected at 10 min stronger than those at 5 min of reaction. This implies that

•OH, •O2−, and 1O2 play important roles in the PAA-based sludge pretreatment system

[1, 33]. It was indicated the DMPOX signal could be accompanied by DMPO−OH,

which might be formed via DMPO oxidation by R−O• and thus closely correlated with

the presence of R−O• [49]. Since CH3OO• and CH3• are significantly weaker than

CH3C(O)O• and CH3C(O)OO• in terms of oxidation capacity, the former is usually

considered to be negligible for PAA-induced AOP [50]. It was recorded that DMPO

could be oxidized by R−O• to generate a DMPOX signal [51]. As shown in Fig. 6a,

weak DMPOX signals coexist with DMPO−OH adduct, consistent with previous

studies, which proves the presence of CH3C(O)O• and CH3C(O)OO• during the

pretreatment stage [49]. Figure 6d reflects the dynamic variations of the redox state in

the sludge pretreatment system. The ORP is largely enhanced by PAA-based AOP in

the first 20 min, e.g., 493 mV at 25 mg per g TSS, illustrating the strong oxidative

capacity of PAA. Then, it gradually decreases and finally approaches 0 or below after

24 h of pretreatment, implying the completion of oxidation reactions. Hence, the

introduced PAA may not harm the subsequent fermentation stage.

How does PAA lead to active species production without external iron addition?

Iron is the commonly existing transition metal in sewage sludge, ranging from 2.9 to

39.7 mg Fe per g TS [22]. It was demonstrated that Fe2+ could activate PAA to promote

the degradation of naproxen, bisphenol-A, and methylene blue [52]. EDS results

illustrate iron as the dominant transition metal in the control and PAA-pretreated sludge

(Table S2). Iron content on the surface of PAA-induced WAS is lower than that of the

control (Fig. 6d), attributing to the fact that PAA-induced AOP causes Fe2+ release from

EPS and its redistribution in sludge flocs through disrupting sludge structure. [53]. Thus,

Fe2+ is likely to be the vital substance for PAA activation by WAS. The zeta potential

results further indicate that PAA pretreatment increases the positive charge of the

centrate liquid (Fig. S3). It can be further inferred that after PAA enters sludge, it is

activated by Fe2+ in sludge, inducing a sequence of chemical reactions and strong

oxidizing materials. Thereby, relative reaction mechanisms for Fe2+/PAA AOP could be

proposed in equations (1)–(7) [48, 49, 52].

CH3C(O)OOH + Fe2+ → Fe(III) + •OH + CH3C(O)O−	(1)

CH3C(O)OOH + Fe2+ → Fe(III) + OH− + CH3C(O)O•	(2)

CH3C(O)OOH + CH3C(O)O• → CH3C(O)OH + CH3C(O)OO•	(3)

CH3C(O)OOH + CH3C(O)OO− → CH C(O)O− + CH C(O)OH + 1O2	(4)

CH3C(O)OOH + •OH → CH3C(O)OO• + H2O	(5)

CH3C(O)OOH + •OH → CH C(O)OH + HO2•	(6)

HO2• → •O2− + H+	(7)

Accordingly, these reactive species cause oxidative stress to microorganisms in

sludge and lead to the leakage of intracellular organic components [4]. Meanwhile, they

disintegrate sludge structure and cause the decomposition and transformation of EPS,

which provides abundant soluble substrates directly accessible to anaerobic bacteria

and creates looser EPS for further microbial metabolism, facilitating rapid EA (i.e.,

SCFAs) generation for CE process in the subsequent fermentation stage [15].

Fig. 6.

3.4.2 Variation in metabolic activities of key bioprocesses

The organic matter released from sludge disintegration undergo hydrolysis,

acidification, and CE processes to achieve carbon chain upgrading [8]. Is the microbial

metabolic activity of these key processes affected by PAA pretreatment? Thus, the

results of synthetic wastewater experiments reveal the potential impact at a macroscopic

level (Fig. 7).

After four days’ fermentation, the degradation extent of BSA is respectively 32.1%

(p = 0.002) and 35.7% (p = 0.001) in the experimental groups of 20 and 25 mg PAA per

g TSS, largely greater than the control (i.e., 26.9%) (Fig. 7a). Dextran is almost

completely degraded for all groups on day 4, while PAA groups exhibit a lower

degradation extent during the initial two-day fermentation (Fig. S4a). These results can

be supported by protease and α-glucosidase activities in anaerobic reactors (Fig. S4b).

It is implied that PAA might stimulate the metabolic activity of protein-like substrates

and inhibit the degradation of polysaccharide-like substrates but generally behave as a

facilitator of hydrolytic processes. Although PAA inhibits substrate acidification on day

1, glucose and amino acids of all groups could be completely metabolized after the

three-day fermentation (Fig. 7b), indicating the slight effect of PAA pretreatment on the

microbial activity of acidification [21].

In contrast, PAA pretreatment promotes ethanol and acetate consumption while

increasing butyrate and caproate production (Fig. 7c–d). On day 8, butyrate and

caproate are respectively 4984.2 and 3432.1 mg COD L−1 for the control, which are

significantly lower than the 25 mg per g TSS group, i.e., 6176.2 (p = 0.006) and 4886.8

(p = 0.001) mg COD L−1. Meanwhile, the yield of LCAs in the experimental group is

deducted, suggesting a reduced conversion to byproducts and an improved carbon

specificity towards MCFAs [54].

Fig. 7.

3.4.3 Variation in microbial functions and functional gene expression

The microbial potential functions were predicted by PICRUSt software (Fig. 7e),

further elaborating on the changes in microbial metabolism at the genetic level.

Generally, 11 of the selected 2-level KEGG pathways are stimulated by PAA

pretreatment.	The	potential	functions	related	to	substrate	degradation,	i.e.,

carbohydrates and amino acids, are upregulated in PAA-pretreated systems. The higher

abundances of carbohydrate and amino acid metabolisms indicate efficient conversion

of organics to EA [43]. Additionally, functions of cell motility, membrane transport, and

replication and repair affiliated to cellular processes, environmental information, and

genetic information are enhanced in PAA reactors.

Upgrading of EA (i.e., SCFAs) is achieved by CE microorganisms via two cyclic

processes, i.e., fatty acid biosynthesis (FAB) and reverse β-oxidation (RBO) (Fig. 8a)

[10]. RBO is started by acetyl-CoA directly, while FAB is initiated by malonyl-CoA,

derived from acetyl-CoA carboxylation with ATP expense [16]. The generation of

acetyl-CoA and the entire CE pathways involve the participation of functional enzymes

[7]. Generally, the genes encoding functional enzymes in the FAB pathway are

strengthened in experimental groups and higher than in the RBO pathway (Table S3).

Figure 8b presents the main predictions of functional gene abundances encoding

specific enzymes. Acetyl-CoA might be generated from ethanol and H2/CO2, and the

former is the main pathway due to its higher abundance in functional enzymes. EC

1.1.1.1 (adh) is significantly enriched, indicating increased ethanol consumption in

experimental groups, consistent with the synthetic wastewater experiment (Fig. 7d).

Besides, the abundances of EC 1.2.7.4 (cdhA) and EC 2.1.1.245 (cdhD) are increased,

and they are associated with acetyl-CoA production from H2/CO2. It implies more

endogenous electron donors likely to be produced due to PAA pretreatment. Specifically,

there is an increase in EC 6.4.1.2 (ACACA), EC 2.3.1.39 (fabD), EC 2.3.1.80 (fabH),

and EC 1.3.1.9 (fabV), which are respectively functional enzymes involved in the

generation of malonyl-ACP, and initiation/termination of CE in FAB pathway. It is

hinted	that	PAA	facilitates	SCFAs	upgrading	through	stimulating	ethanol

transformation and FAB pathway. These facts expound the positive influence of PAA

pretreatment on microbiological metabolism in sludge fermentation systems, further

revealing the mechanism of enhanced MCFAs production at a microscopic level.

Fig. 8.

3.5. Implications

Since MCFAs have longer carbon chains, they possess higher energy density and

are more hydrophobic compared to SCFAs [6], thus suitable for large-scale industrial

production [26]. Accordingly, CE has recently become a growingly attractive anaerobic

technology to convert primary fermentation products of WAS, i.e., SCFAs, into MCFAs

with ethanol as ED [8]. However, the organic matter of WAS is well protected by EPS

and hard cell walls [15]. Thus, pretreatment techniques are usually required. As a green

oxidizer and disinfectant, PAA is widely available and easily accessible. PAA-based

AOP has been proven powerful for WAS cracking, accumulation of SCFAs, methane,

and hydrogen from sludge, sludge dewatering, and pollutants degradation [17, 19-21,

23]. Nevertheless, these studies only focused on the traditional fermentation model or

chemical oxidation-based PAA and neglected the underlying mechanisms. This study

aims to fill the knowledge gap and broaden the understanding and applicability of PAA-

based AOP in CE.

Results show that PAA significantly promotes sludge disruption and increases

dissolved material quantities. Further characterization of WAS structure and property

illustrates that PAA oxidation causes substantial EPS exfoliation from microbiological

indications, disrupts the secondary structure of EPS and solution layer proteins, and

enhances the degradation and conversion of macromolecular organic matter (e.g.,

proteins and polysaccharides). It is confirmed that PAA pretreatment creates a looser

EPS and provides abundant accessible substrates for subsequent sludge fermentation.

Consequently, MCFAs production is promoted to 11265.6 mg COD L−1, while the

byproducts, i.e., LCAs, are decreased to 723.5 mg COD L−1. Mechanistic studies show

that the production of free radicals (i.e., •OH, •O2−, CH3C(O)O•, and CH3C(O)OO•)

and singlet oxygen (1O2) are the oxidation mechanisms for WAS disruption. However,

the oxidative stress induced by PAA largely disappears after 24 h, rather than causing a

negative influence on the subsequent bioprocesses. Further, hydrolytic enzyme tests and

synthetic wastewater experiments demonstrate at a macroscopic level that PAA

stimulates protease activity and enhances the metabolic activity of protein-like substrate

degradation and CE process while it causes a slight effect on that of acidification.

Additionally, KEGG pathways and functional gene analysis microscopically illustrate

that PAA pretreatment up-regulates the functional genes related to substrate degradation

and cellular activity, and increases the functional enzyme abundances in ethanol

conversion and FAB pathway. These findings provide a systematic and comprehensive

understanding of the effectiveness and mechanism for enhanced MCFAs generation by

PAA-based AOP.

In this work, PAA is activated by Fe2+ contained in WAS without extra activator

addition, and relative reactions occur under mild pH ranges, avoiding the increase of

iron-bearing sludge at WWTPs (Fig. S5). The main product of PAA oxidation is acetic

acid, which could serve as EA for MCFAs formation. This indicates that PAA has the

dual role of cracking sludge and replenishing EA, posing no environmental risk. In

contrast, other oxidant-induced AOP, such as calcium peroxide and persulfate [16, 55],

might cause great risks to the equipment and final sludge disposal due to the detrimental

byproduct formation. It could be speculated that PAA would probably contribute to

killing potential pathogenic bacteria and degrading micropollutants in WAS due to its

powerful oxidizing property, further reducing the environmental risk of sludge. Besides,

LCAs concentration is reduced to 723.5 mg COD L−1, clearly inferior to the current

reported values [15, 27]. It might be attributed to the potential inhibitions of PAA to

LCAs microorganisms [16]. Inversely, functional microorganisms are enriched, the

metabolic activity of key processes is heightened, and functional enzyme abundances

in CE are enhanced. This suggests that the antimicrobial properties of PAA could

selectively inhibit LCAs microorganisms, decreasing electron flow to byproducts but

improving the conversion of EA and ED to MCFAs. In comparison, MCFAs production

triggered by the PAA technique (i.e., 70.4 mg COD per mM ED) is significantly higher

than that of other strategies, e.g., Fe2O3 (i.e., 53.9 mg COD per mM ED) [26], Fe3O4

(i.e., 46.8 mg COD per mM ED) [11], combined alkaline fermentation with CE (i.e.,

20.2 mg COD per mM ED) [6], free ammonia (i.e., 59.3 mg COD per mM ED) [15],

and ferrate pretreatment (i.e., 47.7 mg COD per mM ED) [27]. Despite the multiple

advantages of PAA-based technology, this study is currently a proof of concept.

Therefore, endeavors should be dedicated to driving the engineering application of this

technology, such as combining it with other technologies, e.g., ultrasound radiation,

thermal pretreatment, or pH adjustment, to enhance sludge solubilization and reduce

PAA dosage [30, 48]. The effectiveness of PAA-based AOP for inactivating pathogens

and degrading contaminants in fermented sludge also warrants future investigations.

4. Conclusion

This work discloses the positive functions of PAA-based AOP on MCFAs

production from sewage sludge. Results exhibit that PAA pretreatment largely disrupts

sludge structure and promotes EPS decomposition. Consequently, this leads to a

substantial increase in MCFAs production, accompanied by a notable reduction in the

formation of undesired byproducts, such as LCAs. Microbial analysis proves functional

microbe enrichment. Mechanistic investigations illustrate that sludge disruption is

closely related to the generation of free radicals (i.e., •OH, •O2−, CH3C(O)OO•, and

CH3C(O)O•) and singlet oxygen (1O2) through PAA activation by Fe2+ in WAS.

Furthermore, microbial activity tests demonstrate the positive impacts of PAA

pretreatment on protein-like substrate degradation and the CE process. Additionally, CE

improvement  might  be  ascribed  to  functional  gene  up-regulation  in  ethanol

transformation and FAB pathway.

554

CRediT authorship contribution statement

Yufen Wang: Investigation, Methodology, Data Curation, Writing - Original Draft,

Software, Writing - Review & Editing. Haixiao Guo: Formal Analysis, Investigation,

Visualization. Xuecheng Li: Investigation, Methodology, Formal Analysis. Xueming

Chen: Conceptualization, Validation. Lai Peng: Writing - Review & Editing,

Validation. Tingting Zhu: Methodology, Supervision, Validation. Peizhe Sun:

Conceptualization,	Supervision,	Methodology.	Yiwen	Liu:	Conceptualization,

Resources, Writing - Review & Editing, Supervision, Project Administration, Funding

Acquisition.

564

565	Declaration of competing interest

566	The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal

567	relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

568

569	Acknowledgement

570	This study was partially funded by the National Natural Science Foundation of

571	China through project 52000135. The first author is funded by the Shanghai Tongji Gao

572	Tingyao Environmental Science & Technology Development Foundation.


573

574	Supporting Information

575	Additional details about materials and methods used in this study, including one

576	section of experimental procedures, five figures (Figs. S1–S5), and three tables (Tables

577	S1–S3).

References
H. Guo, L. Tian, Y. Wang, K. Zheng, J. Hou, Y. Zhao, T. Zhu and Y. Liu. Enhanced anaerobic digestion of waste activated sludge with periodate-based pretreatment. Environmental Science and Ecotechnology 13 (2023) 100208.
Z. Wang, M. Zheng, H. Duan, Z. Yuan and S. Hu. A 20-Year Journey of Partial Nitritation and Anammox (PN/A): from Sidestream toward Mainstream. Environmental Science & Technology 56(12) (2022) 7522-7531.
M. Zheng, H. Li, H. Duan, T. Liu, Z. Wang, J. Zhao, Z. Hu, S. Watts, J. Meng, P. Liu, M. Rattier, E. Larsen, J. Guo, J. Dwyer, B. V. D. Akker, J. Lloyd, S. Hu and
Z. Yuan. One-year stable pilot-scale operation demonstrates high flexibility of mainstream anammox application. Water Research X 19 (2023) 100166.
Y. Wang, K. Zheng, H. Guo, L. Tian, Y. He, X. Wang, T. Zhu, P. Sun and Y. Liu. Potassium permanganate-based advanced oxidation processes for wastewater decontamination and sludge treatment: A review. Chemical Engineering Journal 452 (2023) 139529.
A. P. Paulinetti, I. M. G. Augusto, L. P. P. Batista, A. G. B. Tavares, R. Albanez, S.
M. Ratusznei, G. Lovato and J. A. D. Rodrigues. Anaerobic digestion as a core process for sustainable energy production in the soybean biorefinery: A techno‐ economic assessment. Sustainable Horizons 3 (2022) 100024.
S.-L. Wu, W. Wei, J. Sun, Q. Xu, X. Dai and B.-J. Ni. Medium-Chain fatty acids and long-chain alcohols production from waste activated sludge via two-stage anaerobic fermentation. Water Research 186 (2020) 116381.
J. He, Z. Shi, T. Luo, S. Zhang, Y. Liu and G. Luo. Phenol promoted caproate production via two-stage batch anaerobic fermentation of organic substance with ethanol as electron donor for chain elongation. Water Research 204 (2021) 117601.
T. Luo, Q. Xu, W. Wei, J. Sun, X. Dai and B.-J. Ni. Performance and Mechanism of Fe3O4 Improving Biotransformation of Waste Activated Sludge into Liquid High-Value Products. Environmental Science & Technology 56(6) (2022) 3658-
3668.
L. Wu, W. Wei, Z. Chen and B.-J. Ni. Medium-chain carboxylate productions through open-culture fermentation of organic wastes. Journal of Cleaner Production 373 (2022) 133911.
J. Wang and Y. Yin. Biological production of medium-chain carboxylates through chain elongation: An overview. Biotechnology Advances 55 (2022) 107882.
Y. Wang, J. Hou, H. Guo, T. Zhu, Y. Zhang and Y. Liu. New insight into mechanisms of ferroferric oxide enhancing medium-chain fatty acids production from waste activated sludge through anaerobic fermentation. Bioresource Technology 360 (2022) 127629.
J. Xie, X. Xin, X. Ai, J. Hong, Z. Wen, W. Li and S. Lv. Synergic role of ferrate and nitrite for triggering waste activated sludge solubilisation and acidogenic fermentation: Effectiveness evaluation and mechanism elucidation. Water Research 226 (2022) 119287.

S.-L. Wu, G. Luo, J. Sun, W. Wei, L. Song and B.-J. Ni. Medium chain fatty acids production from anaerobic fermentation of waste activated sludge. Journal of Cleaner Production 279 (2021) 123482.
L. Tian, H. Guo, Y. Wang, X. Wang, T. Zhu and Y. Liu. Urine source separation- based pretreatment: A sustainable strategy for improving methane production from anaerobic digestion of waste activated sludge. Sustainable Horizons 4 (2022) 100043.
Y. Wang, W. Wei, W. Wu, J. Sun, Q. Xu, D. Wang, L. Song and B.-J. Ni. Improving Medium-Chain Fatty Acid Production from Anaerobic Fermentation of Waste Activated Sludge Using Free Ammonia. ACS ES&T Engineering 1(3) (2021) 478-489.
Y. Yin and J. Wang. Production of medium-chain carboxylic acids using sewage sludge pretreated by combined Fenton and persulfate oxidation. Journal of Cleaner Production 369 (2022) 133329.
X.-w. Ao, J. Eloranta, C.-H. Huang, D. Santoro, W.-j. Sun, Z.-d. Lu and C. Li. Peracetic acid-based advanced oxidation processes for decontamination and disinfection of water: A review. Water Research 188 (2021) 116479.
J. Chen, T. Song, S. Long, K. J. Zhu and S. G. Pavlostathis. Effect of peracetic acid solution on a nitrifying culture: Kinetics, inhibition, cellular and transcriptional responses. Water Research 219 (2022) 118543.
L. Appels, A. V. Assche, K. Willems, J. Degrève, J. V. Impe and R. Dewil. Peracetic acid oxidation as an alternative pre-treatment for the anaerobic digestion of waste activated sludge. Bioresource Technology 102(5) (2011) 4124-4130.
W. Zhang, B. Cao, D. Wang, T. Ma, H. Xia and D. Yu. Influence of wastewater sludge treatment using combined peroxyacetic acid oxidation and inorganic coagulants re-flocculation on characteristics of extracellular polymeric substances (EPS). Water Research 88 (2016) 728-739.
C. Li, X. Liu, M. Du, J. Yang, Q. Lu, Q. Fu, D. He, J. Zhao and D. Wang. Peracetic acid promotes biohydrogen production from anaerobic dark fermentation of waste activated sludge. Science of The Total Environment 844 (2022) 156991.
Y. Wang, X. Wang, K. Zheng, H. Guo, L. Tian, T. Zhu and Y. Liu. Ultrasound- sodium percarbonate effectively promotes short-chain carboxylic acids production from sewage sludge through anaerobic fermentation. Bioresource Technology 364 (2022) 128024.
Z. Liu, A. Zhou, Y. Duan, S. Wang, Y. Gao, X. Chen, Z. Cui, Z. Guo and X. Yue. Unraveling the behavior of nitrite on promoting short-chain fatty acids accumulation from waste activated sludge by peracetic acid pretreatment: Extracellular polymeric substance decomposition and underlying mechanism. Science of The Total Environment 841 (2022) 156793.
Y. Huang, H. Zhang, X. Liu, B. Ma and T. Huang. Iron-Activated Carbon Systems to Enhance Aboriginal Aerobic Denitrifying Bacterial Consortium for Improved Treatment of Micro-Polluted Reservoir Water: Performances, Mechanisms, and Implications. Environmental Science & Technology 56(6) (2022) 3407-3418.
APHA. Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater. American

Public Health Association: Washington, DC,	(2005).
Y. Wang, Y. He, K. Zheng, W. Wei, H. H. Ngo, W. Guo, B.-J. Ni, T. Zhu, H. Horn and Y. Liu. Ferric oxide stimulates medium-chain carboxylic acids synthesis from waste activated sludge via ethanol-driven chain elongation: Mechanisms and implications. Journal of Cleaner Production 389 (2023) 136044.
Y. Wang, X. Wang, D. Wang, T. Zhu, Y. Zhang, H. Horn and Y. Liu. Ferrate pretreatment-anaerobic fermentation enhances medium-chain fatty acids production from waste activated sludge: Performance and mechanisms. Water Research 229 (2023) 119457.
J. Yang, X. Liu, D. Wang, Q. Xu, Q. Yang, G. Zeng, X. Li, Y. Liu, J. Gong, J. Ye and H. Li. Mechanisms of peroxymonosulfate pretreatment enhancing production of short-chain fatty acids from waste activated sludge. Water Research 148 (2019) 239-249.
Y. Wang, K. Zheng, H. Guo, Y. Tong, T. Zhu and Y. Liu. Unveiling the mechanisms of how vivianite affects anaerobic digestion of waste activated sludge. Bioresource Technology 343 (2022) 126045.
Y. Wang, K. Zheng, J. Ding, H. Guo, X. Chen, T. Zhu, P. Sun and Y. Liu. Ultrasonic radiation enhances percarbonate oxidation for improving anaerobic digestion of waste activated sludge. Chemical Engineering Journal 457 (2023) 141178.
J. Chen and S. G. Pavlostathis. Evaluation of the effect of peracetic acid solution on the performance of a continuous-flow biological nitrogen removal (BNR) system. Chemical Engineering Journal 431 (2022) 133340.
J. Wang, K. Shang, X. Guo, X. Xia and L. Da. A novel and effective pretreatment to stimulate short-chain fatty acid production from waste activated sludge anaerobic fermentation by ferrous iron catalyzed peracetic acid. Journal of Chemical Technology & Biotechnology 95(3) (2020) 567-576.
Y. Wang, P. Sun, H. Guo, D. Wang, T. Zhu and Y. Liu. Enhancing Methane Production from Anaerobic Digestion of Waste Activated Sludge through a Novel Sodium Percarbonate (SPC) Pretreatment: Reaction Kinetics and Mechanisms. ACS ES&T Engineering 2(7) (2022) 1326-1340.
C. Yin, F. Meng and G.-H. Chen. Spectroscopic characterization of extracellular polymeric substances from a mixed culture dominated by ammonia-oxidizing bacteria. Water Research 68 (2015) 740-749.
Y. Li, D. Wang, G. Yang, X. Yuan, Q. Xu, Q. Yang, Y. Liu, Q. Wang, B.-J. Ni, W. Tang and L. Jiang. Enhanced dewaterability of anaerobically digested sludge by in-situ free nitrous acid treatment. Water Research 169 (2020) 115264.
Y. Li, D. Wang, G. Yang, X. Yuan, L. Yuan, Z. Li, Q. Xu, X. Liu, Q. Yang, W. Tang,
L. Jiang, H. Li, Q. Wang and B. Ni. In-depth research on percarbonate expediting zero-valent iron corrosion for conditioning anaerobically digested sludge. Journal of Hazardous Materials 419 (2021) 126389.
Z. Liu, A. Zhou, H. Liu, S. Wang, W. Liu, A. Wang and X. Yue. Extracellular polymeric substance decomposition linked to hydrogen recovery from waste activated sludge: Role of peracetic acid and free nitrous acid co-pretreatment in a prefermentation-bioelectrolysis cascading system. Water Research 176 (2020)

115724.
Q. Yu, X. Jin and Y. Zhang. Sequential pretreatment for cell disintegration of municipal sludge in a neutral Bio-electro-Fenton system. Water Research 135 (2018) 44-56.
Y. Li, F. Yang, S. Miao, D. Wang, Z. Li, X. Yuan, L. Yuan and Q. Liu. Achieved deep-dewatering of dredged sediments by Fe(II) activating persulfate pretreatment: Filtrating performance and mechanistic insights. Chemical Engineering Journal 405 (2021) 126847.
B. Wu, B.-J. Ni, K. Horvat, L. Song, X. Chai, X. Dai and D. Mahajan. Occurrence State and Molecular Structure Analysis of Extracellular Proteins with Implications on the Dewaterability of Waste-Activated Sludge. Environmental Science & Technology 51(16) (2017) 9235-9243.
C. Wang, Y. Wang, Z. Chen, W. Wei, X. Chen, G. Mannina and B.-J. Ni. A novel strategy for efficiently transforming waste activated sludge into medium-chain fatty acid using free nitrous acid. Science of The Total Environment 862 (2023) 160826.
C. A. B. Silva Rabelo, F. P. Camargo, I. K. Sakamoto and M. B. A. Varesche. Metataxonomic characterization of an autochthonous and allochthonous microbial consortium involved in a two-stage anaerobic batch reactor applied to hydrogen and methane production from sugarcane bagasse. Enzyme and Microbial Technology 162 (2023) 110119.
S.-L. Wu, W. Wei, Q. Xu, X. Huang, J. Sun, X. Dai and B.-J. Ni. Revealing the Mechanism of Biochar Enhancing the Production of Medium Chain Fatty Acids from Waste Activated Sludge Alkaline Fermentation Liquor. ACS ES&T Water 1(4) (2021) 1014-1024.
J. R. Weinert-Nelson, A. S. Biddle and C. A. Williams. Fecal microbiome of horses transitioning between warm-season and cool-season grass pasture within integrated rotational grazing systems. Animal Microbiome 4(1) (2022) 41.
L. Guo, M. Lu, Q. Li, J. Zhang and Z. She. A comparison of different pretreatments on hydrogen fermentation from waste sludge by fluorescence excitation- emission matrix with regional integration analysis. International Journal of Hydrogen Energy 40(1) (2015) 197-208.
Y. Wang, P. Sun, H. Guo, K. Zheng, T. Zhu and Y. Liu. Performance and mechanism of sodium percarbonate (SPC) enhancing short-chain fatty acids production from anaerobic waste activated sludge fermentation. Journal of Environmental Management 313 (2022) 115025.
P. Zhang, X. Zhang, X. Zhao, G. Jing and Z. Zhou. Activation of peracetic acid with zero-valent iron for tetracycline abatement: The role of Fe(II) complexation with tetracycline. Journal of Hazardous Materials 424 (2022) 127653.
J. Wang, Y. Wan, J. Ding, Z. Wang, J. Ma, P. Xie and M. R. Wiesner. Thermal Activation of Peracetic Acid in Aquatic Solution: The Mechanism and Application to Degrade Sulfamethoxazole. Environmental Science & Technology 54(22) (2020) 14635-14645.

J. Lin, J. Zou, H. Cai, Y. Huang, J. Li, J. Xiao, B. Yuan and J. Ma. Hydroxylamine enhanced Fe(II)-activated peracetic acid process for diclofenac degradation: Efficiency, mechanism and effects of various parameters. Water Research 207 (2021).
C. Dai, S. Li, Y. Duan, K. H. Leong, S. Liu, Y. Zhang, L. Zhou and Y. Tu. Mechanisms and product toxicity of activated carbon/peracetic acid for degradation of sulfamethoxazole: implications for groundwater remediation. Water Research 216 (2022) 118347.
J. Wang, B. Xiong, L. Miao, S. Wang, P. Xie, Z. Wang and J. Ma. Applying a novel advanced oxidation process of activated peracetic acid by CoFe2O4 to efficiently degrade sulfamethoxazole. Applied Catalysis B-Environmental 280 (2021).
J. Kim, T. Zhang, W. Liu, P. Du, J. T. Dobson and C.-H. Huang. Advanced Oxidation Process with Peracetic Acid and Fe(II) for Contaminant Degradation. Environmental Science & Technology 53(22) (2019) 13312-13322.
H. Guo, L. Tian, S. Liu, Y. Wang, J. Hou, T. Zhu and Y. Liu. The potent effects of polyoxometalates (POMs) on controlling sulfide and methane production from sewers. Chemical Engineering Journal 453 (2023).
C. A. Contreras-Dávila, V. J. Carrión, V. R. Vonk, C. N. J. Buisman and D. P. B. T.
B. Strik. Consecutive lactate formation and chain elongation to reduce exogenous chemicals input in repeated-batch food waste fermentation. Water Research 169 (2020) 115215.
Q. Xu, Q.-S. Huang, W. Wei, J. Sun, X. Dai and B.-J. Ni. Improving the treatment of waste activated sludge using calcium peroxide. Water Research 187 (2020) 116440.

Figure captions
Fig. 1. a–b, Changes of soluble proteins (a) and carbohydrates (b) within 24 h of PAA oxidation. c, Soluble proteins and carbohydrates contents after pretreatment with significance test results. d–h, EEM spectra after pretreatment: Control (d), 10 (e), 15 (f), 20 (g), and 25 mg PAA per g TSS (h). i, Peak fluorescence intensity of EEM spectra. “*” represents p < 0.05, “**” represents p < 0.01, “***” represents p < 0.001. Error bars represent standard deviations of triplicate experiments.

Fig. 2. a–b, Contents of proteins (a) and polysaccharides (b). c, Peak fluorescence intensity of extracted EPS. d, FTIR spectra of soluble and bound EPS fractions. e–f, changes of sludge structure reflected by SEM, i.e., the control (e) and PAA group (f).

Fig. 3. a, The second-derivative fitting curves of FTIR spectra from 1700 to 1600 cm−1, with samples being the soluble, LB, and TB fractions of control and PAA-pretreated WAS. b, XPS C 1s, N 1s, and S 2p analysis of aqueous phase obtained from the control and PAA-pretreated WAS. c, The area (%) of secondary structures determined by second-derivative fitting.

Fig. 4. Concentrations evolution of ethanol (a), MCFAs (b), LCAs (c), and product distribution (d) in the control and PAA-pretreated reactors during anaerobic sewage sludge fermentation with ethanol as ED. “*” represents p < 0.05, “**” represents p < 0.01, “***” represents p < 0.001. Error bars represent standard deviations of triplicate experiments.

Fig. 5. Microbial community evolutions of the experimental (i.e., 15, 20, and 25 mg PAA per g TSS) and control reactors. a, Microbial abundance analysis at a phylum level. b, Heatmap of functional microorganisms and typical non-functional bacteria based on a genus level.

Fig. 6. a–c, ESR spectra detected from the PAA group (i.e., 25 mg per g TSS), including DMPO-OH (a), DMPO-O2− (b), and TEMP-1O2 (c). Note: * and • stand for DMPOX and DMPO-OH adducts. d, ORP variations for the control and PAA groups during pretreatment, with the inner bar chart representing Fe element content detected by EDS.

Fig. 7. a, Degradation of BSA during a four-day fermentation. b, Accumulative SCFAs production during a three-day fermentation. c–d, MCFAs production with ethanol and acetate as substrates during an eight-day fermentation for the control (c) and experimental (d) groups. e, Predictions of microbial functions in the control and PAA systems. Error bars represent standard deviations of triplicate experiments.

Fig. 8. a, Proposed metabolic pathways for WAS degradation and CE with ethanol as ED, with functional enzyme numbers listed and upgrading functional enzymes marked in red. b, Predicted functional enzyme abundances of CE microorganisms from the control, 15, 20, and 25 mg PAA per g TSS groups.

a	250

800
200

600
150

400	100
200	50

0	6	12	18	24
0	6	12	18	24
0  10 15 20 25
0
0  10 15 20 25

Time (d)
Time (d)
PAA dosages (mg per g TSS)

d 400
e 400
f  400

350
350
350

300
300
300

250
250
250

250	300	350	400	450	500
250	300	350	400	450	500
250	300	350	400	450	500

Ex (nm)	Ex (nm)	Ex (nm)

g 400
h 400
i	6000




350



300



250



350



300



250

5000

4000

3000

2000

1000




250	300	350	400	450	500

250	300	350	400	450	500
0
Peak 1	Peak 2

Ex (nm)	Ex (nm)


6000

4800

3600

2400

1200	0

90


75	100


60
80

45
60
30

40
15


0	20



c	6000	d


5000


4000


3000


2000


1000


4000	3500	3000	2500	2000	1500	1000	500
Wavenumber (cm−1)
e	f

a



1700 1680 1660 1640 1620 1600	1700 1680 1660 1640 1620 1600

1700 1680 1660 1640 1620 1600	1700 1680 1660 1640 1620 1600
292  290  288  286  284  282














406  404  402  400  398  396  394
292  290  288  286  284  282

406  404  402  400  398  396  394


 	 

1700 1680 1660 1640 1620 1600
1700 1680 1660 1640 1620 1600
174 172 170 168 166 164 162
174 172 170 168 166 164 162

Wavenumber (cm−1)	Wavenumber (cm−1)
c
Binding energy (eV)
Binding energy (eV)





a	18000


15000


12000


9000


6000


3000


0


c
5000


4000


3000


2000


1000


0


Time (d)
d















0	2	4	6	8	10	12	14	16
Time (d)





120


100


80


60


40


20


0


Time (d)




a
















b 12.90
Control	15 mg	20 mg	25 mg




10.32



7.74



5.16



2.58



0.00

a	b	d

400

200

0

−200



324	326	328	330	332  334 324  326	328	330	332  334 324  326	328	330	332  334
Magnetic field (mT)	Magnetic field (mT)	Magnetic field (mT)
−400

0	6	12	18	24
Time (h)




a 40	b
35
3500

3000
e
Cell motility

Cellular processes

30	2500
25
2000
20
Signal transduction Environmental
information
processing
Membrane transport

15
10
5
0
1	2	3	4
c	7	18
1500

1000

500

0

d	7






0	1	2	3
18
Replication and repair	Genetic
processing
Transcription

Folding, sorting, and degradation

Translation

6	16	6
14
5	5
12
4	10	4
3	8	3
2	6	2
4
16	Metabolism of
14	other amino acids
12	Lipid metabolism
10
8	Nucleotide metabolism
6
Amino acid metabolism
4

Metabolism

1	2
0	0
0	2	4	6	8
Time (d)
1	2
0	0
0	2	4	6	8
Time (d)


0  1  2  3  4  5  6
Abundance (×106)
Carbohydrate metabolism




a
WAS



Dissolution



CO2



CO2
1.1.1.1



CO
1.2.1.3

Chain elongation


Polysaccharides

Interme

Proteins
Ethanol	Acetaldehyde	Acetyl-CoA	Acetyl-Pi	Acetate

diates
Hydrolysis


Acetate
(n)Fatty acid
(n+2)Acyl- CoA
(n+2)Fatty acid
(n)Acyl-CoA
6.4.1.2
6.3.4.14
Malonyl-CoA

2.3.1.39
Malonyl-ACP



Amino acids


Acidification


Glucose
Next cycle

RBO
pathway
(n+2)β-
Hydroxyacyl-ACP
1.1.1.100



(n+2)β-
2.3.1.179

2.3.1.180
(n)Acyl-ACP


Butyrate

(n+2)
Enoyl-CoA

4.2.1.17

(n+2)β-
1.1.1.35

(n+2)β-
Ketoacyl
-CoA
FAB
pathway

1.3.1.9
Ketoacyl-ACP

(n+2)
Fatty acid

H /CO
Acetate
Other
Hydroxyacyl-CoA
(n+2)
(n+2)

2	2
SCFAs
Caproate
Enoyl-ACP
Acyl-ACP
(n)Fatty acid


adh abundance

Abundance

ACACA abundance

fabD abundance

fabH abundance

fabV abundance

0

Control
20000
40000
0  3000 6000 9000	0
30000
60000	0
12000
24000 0
13000
26000	0
13000
26000


15 mg per g TSS
20 mg per g TSS
25 mg per g TSS




Highlights

Peracetic acid (PAA) can boost sludge disruption and provide electron acceptors.

Medium-chain fatty acids (MCFAs) are promoted to 11,265.6 mg COD L−1 by PAA.

Free radicals and singlet oxygen are the reactive species for PAA oxidation.

PAA promotes protein-like substrate hydrolysis and chain elongation.

PAA induces profitable microbial communities and metabolic pathways.




Declaration of interests
☒ The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

The authors declare the following financial interests/personal relationships which may be considered as potential competing interests:
