


Electronic Notes in Theoretical Computer Science

www.elsevier.com/locate/entcs


Preface
Volume 57
Bernhard Gramlich and Salvador Lucas

Abstract
1st International Workshop on Reduction Strategies in Rewriting and Programming (WRS 2001)This volume contains the post-workshop proceedings of the 1st International Workshop on Reduction Strategies in Rewriting and Programming (WRS 2001). The workshop was held in conjunction with RTA 2001 in Utrecht, The Netherlands, on May 26, 2001.
The motivation to organize this forum stems from the fact that reduction strategies in rewriting and programming have attracted an increasing attention within the last years. New types of re- duction strategies have been invented and investigated, and new results on rewriting/computation under particular strategies have been obtained. Research in this field ranges from primarily theoret- ical questions about reduction strategies to very practical application and implementation issues. The need for a deeper understanding of reduction strategies in rewriting and programming, both in theory and practice, is obvious, since they bridge the gap between unrestricted general rewrit- ing (computation) and (more deterministic) rewriting with particular strategies (programming). Moreover, reduction strategies provide a natural way to go from operational principles (e.g., graph and term rewriting, narrowing, lambda-calculus)and semantics (e.g., normalization, computation of values, infinitary normalization, head-normalization) to implementations of programming lan- guages.
Topics of interest for the workshop included, but were not restricted to,

theoretical foundations for the definition and semantic description of reduction strategies strategies in different frameworks (term rewriting, graph rewriting, infinitary rewriting, lambda
calculi, higher order rewriting, conditional rewriting, rewriting with built-ins, narrowing,
constraint solving, etc.) and their application in (equational, functional, functional-logic) programming (languages)
properties of reduction strategies/computations under strategies (e.g., completeness, com- putability, decidability, complexity, optimality, (hyper-)normalization, cofinality, fairness, perpetuality, context-freeness, neededness, laziness, eagerness, strictness)
interrelations, combinations and applications of reduction under different strategies (e.g., equiv- alence conditions for fundamental properties like termination and confluence, applications in modularity analysis, connections between strategies of different frameworks, etc.)
program analysis and other semantics-based optimization techniques dealing with reduction strategies
rewrite systems/tools/implementations with flexible/programmable strategies as essential con- cept/ingredient
specification of reduction strategies in (real)languages
data structures and implementation techniques for reduction strategies.
1571-0661 ⃝c Elsevier B.V. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
10.1016/S1571-0661(05)80558-4

2	Volume • Number
Based on the careful refereeing process for WRS 2001, the following regular papers were ac- cepted:
Declarative Debugging of Functional Logic Programs by Mar´ıa Alpuente, Francisco J. Correa and Moreno Falaschi
Just-in-time: On Strategy Annotations by Jaco van de Pol
Generic Sort-Preserving Traversal Strategies by Ralf L¨ammel
Compact Normalisation Trace via Lazy Rewriting by Quang-Huy Nguyen
Fusing Logic and Control with Local Transformations: An Example Optimization
by Patricia Johann and Eelco Visser
The Simple Type Theory of Normalization by Evaluation by Ren´e Vestergaard
Furthermore this volume also contains the two invited papers
Evaluation Strategies for Functional Logic Programming by Sergio Antoy
A Survey of Strategies in Program Transformation Systems by Eelco Visser
as well as the worked out panel contributions
Reduction Strategies for Declarative Programming by Michael Hanus Hot Topics in Reduction Strategies - a panelist’s view by Tetsuo Ida Is Strategic Programming a Viable Paradigm? by Paul Klint
about the theme Hot Topics in Reduction Strategies. The program committee of WRS 2001 consisted of Mar´ıa Alpuente
TU Valencia (Spain) Rachid Echahed
IMAG Grenoble (France) Bernhard Gramlich (co-chair) TU Wien (Austria)
Salvador Lucas (co-chair) TU Valencia (Spain) Vincent van Oostrom
U Utrecht (The Netherlands) Rinus Plasmeijer
KU Nijmegen (The Netherlands) Manfred Schmidt-Schauss
U Frankfurt a.M. (Germany) Yoshihito Toyama
U Tohoku (Japan)
Regarding the refereeing process we are very grateful to the program committee and to the additional external referees. Furthermore we would like to thank Michael Mislove, Managing Editor of the ENTCS series, for his technical assistance with using the ENTCS format.
November 25, 2001
Bernhard Gramlich and Salvador Lucas

