


FULL-LENGTH ARTICLE
Study of Information and Communication Technology (ICT) maturity and value: The relationship

Godspower O. Ekuobase a,*, Victor A. Olutayo b

a Department of Computer Science, University of Benin, Benin City, Nigeria
b Department of Computer Science, Joseph Ayo Babalola University, Osun State, Nigeria

Received 9 July 2015; revised 26 October 2015; accepted 27 December 2015
Available online 1 February 2016

Abstract A key challenge within the service industry is how the benefits from ICT adoption and diffusion (ICT value) relate to the degree of adoption and diffusion of ICT (ICT maturity). This challenge has resulted in the uncertainty of value generation from investments on ICT leading to ICT mis-planning and disaster. This paper unraveled this uncertainty by measuring the ICT matu- rity and value of service firms listed in the Nigerian Stock Exchange (NSE) and established the rela- tionship between them. The Value Added Intellectual Coefficient (VAIC) model was adopted to measure the value of ICT in the service firms while the ICT Maturity model of Small-and- Medium Enterprises (SMEs) was used to measure their ICT maturity. The relationship between these two service variables was established by correlation analysis. The result showed that the Nige- ria service industry is comfortably web based in ICT maturity with an index of about 0.76. The ICT value index was estimated to be about 4.60, an indication that ICT’s potentials are not effectively utilized in Nigeria for service delivery. The final analysis showed that, there is a negative-weak cor- relation between ICT maturity and ICT Value in the Nigeria service industry. This shows that the benefit from ICT adoption and diffusion is not traceable to the degree of ICT adoption and diffu- sion in the service industry.
© 2016 Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of Faculty of Computers and Information,
Cairo University. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.
org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).





* Corresponding author. Tel.: +234 (0)8064951845.
E-mail addresses: godspower.ekuobase@uniben.edu (G.O. Ekuobase), akinbolaolutayo@gmail.com (V.A. Olutayo).
Peer review under responsibility of Faculty of Computers and Information, Cairo University.


http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.eij.2015.12.001
Introduction

In the 21st century, Information and Communication Technology (ICT) became a strategic asset for service organi- zations to deliver innovative services and achieve sustainable competitive advantage. The importance of ICT based innova- tion in productivity improvements and competitiveness is huge [1]. With the constant decline in labor productivity since the mid-90s  (partly  attributed  to  the  lack  of  ICT  related

1110-8665 © 2016 Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of Faculty of Computers and Information, Cairo University. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).




investment), it is also evident that the higher productivity and growth rates observed in the United States of America and Europe result from the greater adoption and diffusion of ICT into all segments of their economy [2]. As with the devel- oped nations of the world, the service industry is the largest contributor to the wealth of the Nigerian economy; presently the largest in Africa and 26th largest in the world. It accounts for about 51% of Nigeria’s gross domestic product – GDP [3]. The service industry is extremely information-intensive and knowledge-based and therefore requires a full embrace of ICT, if they are to remain competitive [4]. Despite the embrace of ICT by the industry, particularly over last decades, invest- ments are still inward looking with predominantly pockets of improvements that have failed to bring about sustainable com- petitive advantage. For example, Salah [5] showed that 75% of ICT investments in the service industry did not meet their busi- ness objectives and presented evidence that projects were aban- doned, significantly redirected or kept alive despite business integration failure. According to Sessions [6], the annual cost of ICT failure Worldwide is around USD 6.18 trillion when taken into account not only the direct costs of the investment itself but also the indirect costs associated with lost opportuni- ties. These significant failures and missed opportunities have direct cost on businesses and have led to the dissolution in the strategic benefits of ICT; resulting in decreasing levels of future investments in ICT [7–9]. This is further fueled by the fact that business executives do not fully recognize the func- tionality and full value of ICT to the business while on the other hand; ICT personnel do not possess an understanding of the business and its strategic objectives [10]. In many cases, ICT is still considered by the management of service organiza- tions as purely a cost cutting tool or a utility that is owned and
managed by their ICT departments.
The adoption and diffusion of ICT within the service indus- try strongly varies among sectors. Over the last decade, the regional and national policies particularly focused on stimulat- ing ICT adoption by the small and medium sized enterprises, the SMEs [11–13]. This sector structurally lags behind the ICT diffusion rates of large firms especially those in the telecommunications and banking industries which are of the highest ranks in e-readiness and ICT growth rates [14–16]. Although from a scale perspective this might not seem a prob- lem per se, the more fundamental problem observed is the low awareness, or even mistrust, of SME firms about the potential benefits of ICT [17].
This problem, of over-critical and sceptical attitude toward the potential benefits of ICT, is not only a problem of SME firms; it actually draws back to the uncertainty when investing in ICT from both the cost and the benefits perspective. Although the ‘productivity paradox’ and ‘IT doesn’t matter’ discussions have passed, still the number of studies that reported failure of the ICT adoption and implementations remains large [18]. Quite ironically, the national governments that firmly stimulate the uptake of ICT represent organizations that particularly seem to fail in getting value from ICT. The Dutch government for example, struggled with several public examples of ICT disasters and missed-planning [19].
A key challenge therefore within the service industry is to improve the understanding of how managers actually perceive the benefits from ICT adoption and diffusion (ICT value), and how this relates to the actual level of ICT adoption and
diffusion (ICT maturity) reminiscent of the productive invest- ments on ICT. This paper addressed this challenge.
The value of ICT to service industry in both context and perspective could be used as a basis for exploring its service systems [20] as well as to uncover the contribution of ICT to the tripod goal of service organizations: profitability, staff pro- ductivity and customer satisfaction [21]. Besides, ‘‘Measuring this value will help improve management control over ICT dri- ven organization” [21]. Ekuobase [21] highlighted in sufficient details the ICT value measurement models.
ICT maturity models are increasingly being applied within the field of service science, both as an informed approach for continuous improvement and as a means of self or third- party assessment of service organization [22]. Since the intro- duction of the first ICT maturity model: Nolan’s model in the 1970s [23,24], different ICT maturity models have been developed. ICT maturity models when applied to service department(s) can show how structured, ordered and focused they are toward the provision of service(s) to their customer (s); using ICT facilities [25]. Furthermore, it can guide in the continuous improvement of ICT facilities and services of a ser- vice department(s) [26,27].
As closely linked as the role of these service science tools (i.e. ICT maturity and value models) are, we are not aware of any research work that has investigated the relationship between their outputs (i.e. ICT maturity and value). We are aware of researches that measured the ICT maturity of service firms [28–34]. We are also aware of efforts at estimating the contributing value of ICT in some service firms [35–45].

Related work

The research noted the work of Batenburg and Constantiou
[46] that explored the relationship between the e-business maturity and the perceived benefits from ICT at the firm level. The motivation for their work was the increasing knowledge about organizational adoption of ICT and economic analysis of ICT in the organizational context. The objectives of the work were to investigate the relationship in terms of its strength and stability and to explore the conditions which may influence this relationship. In their work, a survey approach was used and according to their findings, the corre- lation between the e-business maturity and the perceived ben- efits from ICT adoption is indeed positive, significant and stable over countries, firm size and age. Further findings according to them, confirmed the hypothesis that intra- organization adaptations due to ICT moderate the positive correlation between a firm’s e-business maturity and perceived benefits from ICT.
We are also not unmindful of the work done by Okogun et al. [47], entitled ‘‘on economic value of ICT investment in Nigeria: is it commensurate?” They were motivated by the amount of money/capital that countries spend on ICT and yet they continue to ask questions like: What are we getting from this money invested? Are there any progress? Is there any difference between when we invested and when we did not invest in ICT? In the case of Nigeria, are the huge invest- ments made by both private and public sectors on ICT com- mensurate in terms of their return on investments? The specific objective of their work was to evaluate the contribu- tion of ICT investment to economic growth in Nigeria. In their



study, secondary data source was employed for the research methodology. The empirical results according to their findings, suggest that ICT investment has a significant impact on Nige- ria’s economic growth during the periods reviewed, suggesting good payoffs from the investment.
The two research works tried to find a relationship between ICT investment and the benefit from such investment. The gaps in these works are that, they misconstrued ICT invest- ment for ICT maturity, economic benefit of ICT for value of ICT and also did not make use of appropriate Service Science metrics (i.e. models) in line with the service science experts’ glo- bal best practices. Their emphasis was only on the tangibles whereas in modern service industry and Service Science, emphasis is on both tangibles and intangibles [39]. Considering the fact that these researchers are management scientists, one could wonder a little about their myopic understanding of ICT value and maturity. This work examined from a modern and holistic perspective, ICT value and maturity and attempts to establish their relationship in line with service science experts’ global best practices. This work is also completely dif- ferent from the work of Chan et al. [48] which concerned itself with the relationship between knowledge management and intellectual capital efficiency.
The uncertainty of value generation from productive invest- ments on ICT and the associated relationship with the matu- rity of its adoption and diffusion within the service industry is therefore a topic that has not been given adequate attention. This research gives this attention, exploring the benefits (value) of ICT adoption and diffusion and how it relates to the matu- rity of ICT adoption and diffusion in the service industry.

Materials and method

This study adopted the quasi-experimental research methodol- ogy. After a successful consultation with the 72 service firms listed in the Nigeria Stock Exchange (NSE) to seek for permis- sion to use their firms as a research case study, a total of 28 ser- vice firms gave consent but only 23 of them actually participated (returned at least a validly completed question- naire) in the data gathering process which took place from the period of April 14th to May 15th, 2015. The 23 firms were as follows: Expert Edge Software, Main Street Bank, Bank of Industry, Skye Bank PLC, Zenith Bank PLC, Keystone Bank Limited, Access Bank PLC, Guaranteed Trust Bank PLC, First Bank Nigeria PLC, Union Bank PLC, Fast Credit Lim- ited, Information Technology Transfer, Petrodata Manage- ment Services, Digital Communication Company, CHAMS PLC, Computer Warehouse Limited, ETISALAT Nigeria, Visaphone Communications Limited, Airtel Nigeria, MTN Nigeria, SMILE Communications, STACO Insurance PLC and Zenith Insurance. The research took two independent paths which later coalesced into the third and final part of the research.

ICT maturity measurement

The first path of the study measured the ICT maturity of the service firms by adopting the ICT maturity model of SMEs. The ICT maturity model of SMEs was adopted not only
because it has been improved to handle any category of enter- prises but also because it is simple, quantifiable and strongly aligned with modern business enterprises [28,48]. This path began with a questionnaire survey meant to capture the neces- sary data needed to measure the ICT maturity of the service firms. The questionnaire modeled after the ICT Maturity Model of SMEs [28] is a three-part document. The first part introduced the questionnaire and contains demographic data (name and type) of firms and respondent’s managerial positions.
The second part consists of 50 indicator questions grouped under the four major factors of observable capabilities of SMEs: Infrastructure (eleven indicator questions), Application (thirteen indicator questions), Human Resource (twelve indica- tor questions) and Policy (fourteen indicator questions). The third part of the questionnaire captures the respondents’ con- tacts (mobile phone numbers and e-mail addresses). The ques- tionnaire, an adaptation with similar connotations and indicator value as the one used by Pham [28] and Pham et al. [49], was validated and approved for this study by the research leader. A sample questionnaire is contained in Appen- dix A.
The questionnaires were randomly distributed, in company of the protocol officers of the various firms, to the respondents (organization’s staff) in person; across the levels of manage- ment. As a result of the very busy schedule of the respondents, the questionnaires could not be filled and collected immedi- ately after distribution; it sometimes took several days of attempts to get the distributed questionnaires back. A total of 252 questionnaires were distributed, nine questionnaires per firm. The firms’ protocol officers were specifically instructed that the nine questionnaires will be distributed three per level of management namely operational, middle and top management level; to influence the survey tour guide they offered. This is to avoid a possible pitfall of a related research by Chan et al. [48] for companies in mainland China where one questionnaire per firm was administered which may be preju- diced by the respondent’s position. Distributing three ques- tionnaires per managerial level did not only degrade the effect of position prejudice but also weakened chances of bias- ness within a managerial level.
The average time a respondent spent on the questionnaire was about 15–20 min. Due to administrative protocols and the high traffic in Lagos, Nigeria, a maximum of five firms could be visited in a day. The second researcher carried out the questionnaire survey under the strict monitoring of the research leader via mobile phone calls and location tracking. A total of 156 questionnaires were validly completed and returned. The questionnaires were then sorted and coded using the indicator stage value as proposed by Pham [28].
The ICT maturity index (ICTMI) was calculated using the formula in Eq. (1) as proposed by Pham [28]. To the best of our knowledge, the Pham [28] implementation model is the only quantitative means of implementing the ICT maturity model of SMEs. A similar work by Pham et al. [49] also made use of the Pham [28] model.
ICTMI = aI + bA + cH + hP	(1)
where 0 6 I, A, H, P, ICTMI 6 1 and a + b + c + h = 1; and




I = P

4
l=1
nl
  t=1 lt
nl
4	,	A =

4
l=1
ml
  t=1 lt
ml
4	,
The model gives central role to human capital; therefore, employee expenses are not treated as cost. This calculation of the model shows how much VA is created by each unit of

4
l=1
H =
pl
  t=1 lt
pl
4	,	P =

4
l=1
ql
  t=1 lt
ql
4	(2)
currency spent on employees. Pulic [50] argued that salary of an employee is usually determined on the basis of their perfor- mance by market forces. So, it is logical to measure human
capital on the same criteria.

where Ilt, Alt, Hlt and Plt are indicators of stage l; nl, ml, pl and
ql are number of respective indicators of stage l; 1 6 l 6 4. In particular, ‘I’ stands for infrastructure sub-ICTMI; ‘A’ for Application sub-ICTMI; ‘H’ for Human Resource sub- ICTMI and ‘P’ for Policy sub-ICTMI.
Since no information of weighting I, A, H, P is given, we let
a = b = c = h = 0.25	(3)
i.e. the four observable capabilities of SMEs (sub-ICTMIs) were equally weighted.
Thereafter, the results of ICTMIs were mapped to the ICT maturity levels using the stratification proposed by Pham [28] as follows: Inactive (0.0–0.2), Basic (0.2–0.4), Substantial (0.4–
0.6), Web based (0.6–0.8) and Knowledge oriented (0.8–1.0).

ICT value measurement

The second path of the research realized the ICT value of the service firms. Here, we adopted the Value Added Intellectual Coefficient (VAIC) model [21,48,50–52]. The VAIC model also known as the Value Creation Efficiency Analysis model is one of the ICT value measurement models. Others include the Tobin’s Q, Intangible Asset Monitor, Calculated Intangible Value, IC-Index, Technology Broker and Skandia Navigator models but the VAIC model stands out in terms of popularity, generality, standardization, objectivity, verifiability and cog- nizance [21].
The VAIC model considers company’s ability to add value through:
VA = OUT — IN	(4)
where VA is the Value Addition from the current year’s resources, OUT = Total Sales (revenue from sales of goods and services), and IN = Cost of bought in materials, compo- nents and services/inputs.
The input (IN) includes all expenses incurred in earning the above revenue except employee cost. Alternatively, the Value Added can be calculated as
VA = OP + EC + D + A	(5)
where	OP = Operating	Profit,	EC = Employee	Cost, D = Depreciation and A = Amortization.The VA Eq. (5) is simple to use, is precise, accommodate intangibles and is gener- ally accepted as a more realistic approximation of Eq. (4) [52].
The first measure of the model is ‘‘value added efficiency through capital employed” and is calculated as follows:
VACA = VA/CA	(6)
where VACA is the efficiency of physical capital employed by the firm. It is obtained by dividing value added (VA) by the capital employed (CA); CA = net book value of total assets.
Alternatively, CA can also be calculated as
CA = Common Stock + Preferred Stock + Retained Earnings
+ Company Reserves + Long Term Debts.
Second measure of the model which shows the ability of human resources in creating value is given by VAHU and is calculated as follows:
VAHU = VA/HC	(7)
VAHU represents the Human Capital Efficiency of a firm, where value addition is divided by cost of Human Capital (HC). The cost of human capital is treated as investment rather than expense and calculated as
HC = Total salaries and wages (Direct labour
+ Indirect labour + Administrative
+ Marketing and Selling salaries).
The third measure of the model is Structural Capital (SC) efficiency which shows the contribution of SC in value creation.
STVA = ST/VA	(8)
where STVA is the structural capital efficiency of the firm and is calculated through dividing cost of structural capital by value added (VA). The ST is calculated by subtracting HC from the VA:
ST = VA — HC	(9)
Finally, the cumulative IC efficiency of all three compo- nents of VAIC is calculated by adding capital employed, human capital and structural capital efficiencies:
VAIC = VACA + VAHU + STVA	(10)
VAIC calculated by Eq. (10) indicates the overall corporate value creation efficiency of a firm. VAIC does not provide money value of Intellectual Coefficient (IC). It simply adds the three efficiency factors of IC and calculates efficiency index that shows how IC of a company contributes toward value addition. As an index, the higher the VAIC value the better the perceived efficiency and value creation ability of the firm. In using the VAIC model, we made use of Audited Finan- cial Report (AFR). We could not have access to the AFRs of some of the firms that participated. Although we requested for their AFRs during the field work exercise, most firms declined access while others referred us to their web sites. A total of 14 out of the 23 firms that participated in this survey had their AFRs online and as such were used to calculate their VAIC indexes. This accounts for about 60.87% of responses for the secondary source data. Ideally, the latest AFR of these firms to the year of this investigation, considering the period data was captured for their ICT maturity measurement i.e. the AFRs for 2014, should have been used but only four (17.39%) of the 23 firms that participated in this survey had their 2014 AFRs online. Thus, the research opted for the 2013 AFRs. From these AFRs, the required VAIC data were extracted and the ICT value indexes for the respective firms
were calculated on the Microsoft Excel Spreadsheet.



Analysis of results

In this final part of the study, the calculated ICT maturity index of firms with calculated VAIC value was extracted and comparatively analyzed with their respective VAIC values scaled up by a factor of 10 using the Pearson correlation. Sta- tistical Package for Social Sciences (SPSS) 17 was used for the correlation analysis.
The average of the firms’ ICT maturity indexes was taken as the ICT maturity index of Nigeria service industry. Simi- larly, the average of their ICT value indexes was taken as the ICT value index of the Nigeria service industry.

Results and discussion

Table 1 captures the firms’ type and managerial level of the respondents in the respective firms’ type that took part in the questionnaire survey for measuring the ICT maturity of the Nigeria service industry.
Table 1 shows the spread of the respondents across man- agerial levels and firms’ type as well as the number of firms
per firm type that took part in the survey. Most of the firms and respondents were from the Banking sector (45.51%) and the respondents had a good spread across the three managerial levels with the operational level accounting for 43.59% of the respondents.
Table 2 captures the sub-ICTMI, ICTMI and quantized ICTMI of the 23 service firms in the order of occurrence of ser- vice types as shown in Table 1 using Eqs. (1)–(3); to map the calculated ICTMIs indexes to the ICT maturity levels of SMEs, they were quantized by a factor of 2.5. The service firms are denoted as Fi, i = 1(i) 23.
In Table 2, service firms with similar activities were gathered together. For example, it is easy to see from Table 2 that firms F3 and F4 carry out insurance activities and that only firm F22 is involved in consultancy services. Table 2 shows that the aver- age ICT maturity of service firms in Nigeria is 0.763256 which by Pham [28] stratification is web based. Thus, we can state that the ICT maturity of the Nigerian service industry is about 0.76
i.e. web based. Table 2 also shows that the infrastructure (hard- ware), application (software) and policy capabilities of the Nigeria service industry are more advanced than the human capability required to effectively use/implement them.




t

















 Maturity
12


10

8

Figure 1	Column chart of ICT Maturity and ICT Value of some Nigeria Service Firms.



Thereafter, the VAIC parameters were extracted from the available AFRs of firms that participated and employing the VAIC equations, the VAIC value for the service firms was cal-
culated. The VAIC parameters, as extracted from the available AFRs of firms that participated in the survey, are shown in Table 3.

ICT Maturity Line Fit Plot
12
10
8
6
4
2
05	5.5	6	6.5	7	7.5	8	8.5	9	9.5
ICT Maturity
Figure 2	Scatter diagram of ICT Maturity and ICT Value of some Nigeria Service Firms.



9.5
9
8.5
8
7.5
7
6.5
6
5.5
VAIC Line Fit Plot



	

















To be concrete, Pearson Correlation Coefficient analysis

50	2	4	6	8	10	12
VAIC
Figure 3	Scatter diagram of ICT Value and ICT Maturity of some Nigeria Service Firms.

It should be noted that some firms grouped both Amortiza- tion (A) and Depreciation (D) under depreciation and thus had their amortization cell empty. Employing the VAIC equations, the results in Table 4 were realized.
Table 4 shows that the value creation efficiency or capabil- ity of the Nigeria service industry ranges from as low as 1.6 to 11.0; with the telecommunication sector at the peak. The higher a firm’s ICT value index the more effective the firm uti- lizes ICT for service delivery. The average VAIC value for the service firms is 4.60. It is therefore safe to conclude that the value index of ICT in the Nigeria service industry is about
4.60. The implication of this is that the contribution of ICT to the service delivery efficiency and value creation abilities of the Nigeria service industry is poor.
Table 5 captures the ICT maturity and ICT value for some Nigeria service firms and is graphically represented as column chart for clearer appreciation in Fig. 1. From Fig. 1, we could not observe any noteworthy pattern or relationship between the two service variables. This lack of association between the ICT maturity and value of the service firms in Nigeria led to a plot of Scatter diagram for the two variable data in Table 5; as shown in Figs. 2 and 3. Fig. 2 suggests a negative correlation between ICT Maturity (as independent variable) and ICT Value (as dependent variable) while Fig. 3 also sug- gests a similarly negative correlation between ICT Maturity (as dependent variable) and ICT Value (as independent vari- able). The points in the Scatter diagrams suggest a weak linear association between ICT maturity and value; with no non- linear suggestion.
was run on both variable pairs using SPSS and this is shown in Table 6.
The correlation analysis showed a negative and weak corre- lation between ICT maturity and ICT value which implies a negative-weak relationship exists between the ICT maturity and ICT value in the Nigeria service industry. This result is not far from that of Chan et al. [48] which reported a very weak correlation between Knowledge maturity and Intellec- tual Capital Efficiency of firms in mainland China. Intellectual Capital Efficiency (ICE) is strongly correlated with ICT value as shown in Table 7.
It is safe to conclude therefore that there is a negative-weak correlation between ICT maturity and ICT Value in the Nige- ria service industry i.e. one should neither expect a higher value from ICT in a service firm as the ICT maturity of the firm improves nor expect lower value with lower ICT maturity. It is evident therefore that the benefit from ICT adoption and dif- fusion is not traceable to the degree of ICT adoption and dif- fusion in the service industry.

Conclusion

Ordinarily, it is believed that the value of ICT in a service firm will be dependent on the degree of ICT adoption and diffusion in the firm but unraveling this relationship has remained a key challenge within the service industry leading to ICT mis- planning and disaster. The Value and Maturity of ICT in the Nigeria service industry has been calculated and how they relate analyzed using Pearson correlation. The study established that the Nigerian service industry has an ICT maturity index of about 0.76 which shows that the industry is web based and made evident that the human resource capability of the industry is the least developed. The study also established that the ICT value index is about 4.60 an indication that ICT’s potentials are not effectively utilized in Nigeria for service delivery.



The final analysis shows that there is a negative-weak cor- relation between ICT maturity and ICT Value in the Nigerian service industry. It is now evident that the benefit from ICT adoption and diffusion is not dependent on the degree of ICT adoption and diffusion in the service industry.

Contribution and significance

The major contribution of this research to knowledge is that the uncertainty surrounding how ICT value relates to ICT maturity has been unraveled i.e. the contributing value of ICT in a service firm is not traceable to the maturity of ICT in the service firm. Policy makers, managers and Information Technology (IT) experts now have a clear understanding of how the benefits from ICT adoption and diffusion (ICT value) relate to the actual level of ICT adoption and diffusion (ICT maturity).
This can help guide investments on IT and make it more value oriented and better aligned with business objectives. In particular, managers of service firms are now certain of value generation from investments on ICT and thus better posi-
tioned toward a sustainable improvement of ICT based service delivery in their various organizations.

Future direction

The lack of significant association between ICT maturity and value may suggest that there may be other intervening vari- ables yet to be identified in the relationship between them. Future effort will be directed at identifying these variables. Assigning equal weights to the four major observable capabil- ities of the industry (I, A, H and P) is a drawback of this study, as this may not be the case in reality. Future efforts will also be directed at realizing realistic weights for the four capabilities. This research can also be expanded to cover all the industries in a nation, in order to holistically estimate the nation’s degree of ICT adoption as well as the contributing value of ICT to the nation’s economy.

Appendix A




























	








References

European Commission. Communication from the Commission. e- Europe 2012 Action Plan; 2006.
OECD. Innovative clusters: drivers of national innovation systems. Paris: Organizational of Economic Co-operation and Development; 2003.
National Bureau of Statistics. Annual report by federal ministry of finance on Africa economic rebasing; 2014.
Berr D. Strategy for Sustainable Construction; 2008. <http:// www.crrconference.org/downloads/cagnin.pdf> [15 November,
2014].
Salah J. Construction innovation and process improvement. In: A model for successful implementation: international conference on construction information technology, Europe; 2003.
Sessions M. Intellectual capital reporting study of IT-sector corporations in India. Aust J Business Manage Res (AJBMR) 2009;4(4):230–43.
Goulding J, Alshawi M. A process-driven IT training model for construction: core development issues. Constr Innov; Inform Process Manage 2004;4:243–54.
Peppard J, Ward J. Strategic planning for information system. Chichester, England: Wiley; 2004.
Zuhairi HA, Alshawi MA. Framework for strategic information systems planning (SISP) in health sector facilities management: transfer of best practice. In: 4th International postgraduate research conference. UK: University of Salford; 2004.
Basu A, Jarnagin C. How to tap it’s hidden potential. The Wall Street J; March 2008 <http://online.wsj.com/article/ SB120467900166211989.html> [accessed December 2014].
Castaings W, Tarantola S. The 2007 European e-business readi- ness index. Office for Official Publications of the European Communities; 2008.
Castaings W, Tarantola S, Latvala A. The 2006 e-business readiness index. Office for Official Publications of the European Communities; 2007.
European Commission. Communication from the commission. e- Europe 2005 Action Plan; 2005.
Economist Intelligence Unit. The 2006 e-readiness rankings. A white paper from the Economist Intelligence unit The Economist; 2006.
Economist Intelligence Unit, E. E-readiness rankings. A white paper from the Economist Intelligence unit. The Economist, and The IBM Institute for Business Value; 2008.
EITO. European Information Technology Observatory. Group- ing, EITO; 2007.
Lucchetti R, Sterlacchini A. The adoption of ICT among SMEs: evidence from an Italian survey. Small Business Econ 2004; 23(2):151–68.
Ward J, Peppard J. Strategic planning for information systems. Chichester, England: Wiley; 2003.
Court of Audit. Lessons Learned from Government ICT Projects.
Part B, Court of Audit, The Hague, The Netherlands; 2008
Vargo SL, Maglio PP, Akaka MA. On value and value co- creation: a service system and service logic perspective. Eur Manage J 2008;26:145–55.
Ekuobase GO. A comparative study of ICT value measurement models. Int J Electron Commun Comput Eng 2013;4(2):497–501.
Boughzala I, Bououd I. A community maturity model: an application for assessing knowledge sharing in the field. In: PACIS, vol. 30. TEM Research Center, Institute TELECOM; 2011. p. 398–417.
Gibson CF, Nolan RL. Managing the four stages of EDP Growth. Harvard Business Rev 1974;57(2):115–26.
Bass JM. An early-stage ICT maturity model derived from ethiopian education institutions. Int J Educat Develop Inform Commun Technol (IJEDICT) 2011;7(1):5–25.
Cagnin CH, Loveridge D, Butler J. Business sustainability maturity model <http://www.crrconference.org/downloads/cag- nin.pdf>; 2012.
Paulk M, Curtis B, Crissis M, Weber C. Capability maturity model for software Version 1.1; 1993 <http://www.sei.cmu.edu/ pub/documents/93.reports/pdf/tR24.93.pdf> [accessed 23-12-
2014].
Ibrahim L, Bradford B, Cole D, LaBruyere L, Leinneweber H, Piszczek D, Reed N, Ymond N, Smith D, Virga M, Wells C. The




federal aviation administration integrated capacity maturity model. Federal Aviation Administration; 2001.
Pham QT. Measuring the ICT maturity of SMEs. J Knowledge Practice 2010;11:34–40.
Kulkarni U, Freeze R. Development and validation of a knowl- edge management capability assessment model: a staged frame- work for leveraging knowledge. KMWorld; 2000 [CA, USA, 2004].
Damsgaard J, Scheepers R. A stage model of intranet technology implementation and management; 2000. <http://www.econ.au. dk/AFV/staff/jdwww.htm> [retrieved 18 December, 2014].
Burn J. Effective alignment of information system and business strategic; 2003. <http://ifiptc8.org/asp/aspecis/19930008.pdf>
[retrieved 4 April, 2014].
Oracle. Cloud computing maturity model: guiding success with cloud capabilities. An oracle white paper publication; 2011.
Tobias T. Tobi maturity model; 2011. <http://tobimm.com/ bimatmodel.html> [accessed 5th May, 2014].
Ibrahim L, Bach J. Smart buying with the federal aviation administration’s integrated capability maturity model, CROSS- TALK. J Defense Software Eng 1998;7(9):13–8.
Skyrme DJ. Measuring intellectual capital – a plethora of methods;  2005.  <http://www.skyrme.com/insights/24kmeas.
htm#meas> [retrieved May 19, 2014].
Ahangar GR. The relationship between intellectual capital and financial performance: an empirical investigation in an Iranian company. Afr J Business Manage 2011;5(1):88–95.
Brooking A. On the importance of managing intangible assets as part of corporate strategy. Electron J Knowledge Manage 1996; 8(2):217–24.
Veltri S. The impact of Intellectual Capital measurement on the financial markets: a meta- analysis approach. Based on a paper submitted to the 5th Workshop on Visualizing, Measuring, and Managing Intangibles & Intellectual Capital, Dresden, and Germany, vol. 3; 2009. p. 54–76.
Sveiby KE. Methods for measuring intangible assets; 2010
<http://www.Sveiby.com> [accessed 14th November, 2014].
Tobin J. Liquidity preference as behavior towards risk. Rev Econ Stud 1958;25(2):65–86.
Stewart TA. The wealth of knowledge: intellectual capital and the twenty-first Century organization. Currency Doubleday 2002.
Clarke M, Seng D, Whiting RH. Intellectual capital and firm performance in Australia. J Econ Literature Classification Code: M41 2010.
Petty RM, Cuganesam S, Finch N, Ford G. Intellectual capital and valuation: challenges in the voluntary disclosure of value drivers. J Finance Account 2004, <http://www.aabri.com/manus- cipts/09177.pdf>.
Bontis N. Assessing knowledge assets: a review of the models used to measure intellectual capital. Int J Manage Rev 2000.
Rehman W, Anandarajan A, Wen JH. Intellectual capital performance and its impact on corporate performance: an empirical evidence. Aust J Business Manage Res 2011;1(5):8–16.
Batenburg R, Constantiou I D. A European study of e-business maturity and ICT benefits: is there a conditional relationship? In: ECIS Proceedings; 2009. Paper 18.
Okogun OA, Awoyele OM, Siyanbola WO. Economic value of ICT investment in Nigeria: is it commensurate? Int J Econ Manage Sci 2012;1(10):22–30.
Chan KH, Chu SKW, Wu WWY. Exploring the correlation between Knowledge Management Maturity and Intellectual Capital efficiency in Mainland Chinese listed Companies. J Inform Knowledge Manage 2012;11(3). http://dx.doi.org/ 10.1142/S0219649212500177.
Pham XK, Le NS, Nguyen TPG. Measuring the ICT maturity of enterprises under uncertainty using group fuzzy ANP. Int J Mach Learning Comput 2013;3(6):524–8.
Pulic A. Measuring the performance of intellectual potential in knowledge economy. In: Paper presented at the 2nd McMaster world congress on measuring and managing intellectual capital by the Austrian Team for intellectual potential; 1998.
Makki MA, Lodhi SA. Impact of intellectual capital on return on investment in Pakistani corporate sector. Aust J Basic Appl Sci 2009;3(3):2995–3007.
Sabolovic M. Business performance analysis via VAIC. Eur Res Stud 2009;XII(3):77–82.
