A comprehensive review on automation in agriculture using
artiﬁcial intelligence
Kirtan Jha a, Aalap Doshi b, Poojan Patel c, Manan Shah d,⁎
a Gandhinagar Institute of Technology, Gandhinagar, Gujarat, India
b Lalbhai Dalpatbhai College of Engineering, Ahmedabad, Gujarat, India
c Vishwakarma Government Engineering College, Chandkheda, Ahmedabad, Gujarat, India
d School of Technology, Pandit Deendayal Petroleum University, Gandhinagar, Gujarat, India
a b s t r a c t
a r t i c l e
i n f o
Article history:
Received 6 November 2018
Received in revised form 25 May 2019
Accepted 25 May 2019
Available online 17 June 2019
Agriculture automation is the main concern and emerging subject for every country. The world population is in-
creasing at a very fast rate and with increase in population the need for food increases briskly. Traditional
methods used by farmers aren't sufﬁcient enough to serve the increasing demand and so they have to hamper
the soil by using harmful pesticides in an intensiﬁed manner. This affects the agricultural practice a lot and in
the end the land remains barren with no fertility. This paper talks about different automation practices like
IOT, Wireless Communications, Machine learning and Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Deep learning. There are some
areas which are causing the problems to agriculture ﬁeld like crop diseases, lack of storage management, pesti-
cide control, weed management, lack of irrigation and water management and all this problems can be solved
by above mentioned different techniques. Today, there is an urgent need to decipher the issues like use of harm-
ful pesticides, controlled irrigation, control on pollution and effects of environment in agricultural practice. Auto-
mation of farming practices has proved to increase the gain from the soil and also has strengthened the soil
fertility. This paper surveys the work of many researchers to get a brief overview about the current implementa-
tion of automation in agriculture. The paper also discusses a proposed system which can be implemented in bo-
tanical farm for ﬂower and leaf identiﬁcation and watering using IOT.
© 2019 The Authors. Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of KeAi Communications Co., Ltd. This is an
open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
Keywords:
Automation artiﬁcial intelligence
Irrigation
Machine learning
Contents
1.
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
2.
Literature survey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
3.
Artiﬁcial neural networks in agriculture. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
4.
Automation and wireless system networks in agriculture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
5.
Implementation of fuzzy logic systems in agriculture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
6.
Proposed idea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
7.
Future scope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
8.
Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
Authors contribution. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
Declaration of Competing Interests
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
Availability of data andmaterial . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
Funding. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
Consent for publication. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
Ethics approval and consent to participate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
References
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 2 (2019) 1–12
⁎ Corresponding author.
E-mail address: Manan.shah@spt.pdpu.ac.in (M. Shah).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aiia.2019.05.004
2589-7217/© 2019 The Authors. Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of KeAi Communications Co., Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture
journal homepage: http://www.keaipublishing.com/en/journals/artificial-
intelligence-in-agriculture/
1. Introduction
With the advent of technology in this digital world, we humans have
pushed our limit of the thinking process and are trying to coalesce nor-
mal brain with an artiﬁcial one. This continuing exploration gave birth
to a whole new ﬁeld Artiﬁcial intelligence. It is the process by which a
human can make an intelligent machine. AI comes under the domain
area of computer science which can be able to discern its milieu and
should thrive to maximize the rate of success. AI should be able to do
work based on past learning. Deep learning, CNN, ANN, Machine learn-
ing are certain domains which enhances the machine work and helps to
develop a more advance technology.
The term IOT is elucidated as “thing to thing” communication. The
three main targets are communication, automation and cost saving in
the system. Dr. D.K. Sreekantha, Kavya.A.M provides the in-depth appli-
cation of IOT in the ﬁeld of agriculture and how it can be helpful to the
humans.
AI has penetrated in medical science, education, ﬁnance, agriculture,
industry, security, and many other sectors. Implementation of AI in-
volves learning process of machines. This brings us to a sub-domain in
this AI ﬁeld “Machine learning”. The sole purpose of machine learning
is to feed the machine with data from past experiences and statistical
data so that it can perform its assigned task to solve a particular prob-
lem. There are many applications which exist today which includes an-
alyzing of data from past data and experience, speech and face
recognition, weather prediction, medical diagnostics. It is because of
machine learning that the domain of big data and data science has
evolved to such a great extent. Machine learning is a mathematical ap-
proach to build intelligent machines.
As AI stimulated, many new logics and method were invented and
discovered which makes the process of problem- solving more simple.
Such methods are listed below.
1. Fuzzy logic
2. Artiﬁcial neural networks (ANN)
3. Neuro-fuzzy logic
4. Expert systems
Among all of these, the most widely used and constantly applied
method for research purposes is ANN. Our human brain is the most com-
plex part of the body. Based on the inter linked neural networks, electric
signals traverses through the neurons with the help of axons. Synapses
which are at the end of each node passes the signal ahead. ANN method
was invented by keeping in mind the same concept of the working of the
human brain. There are various algorithms of this approach such as for
training this particular model algorithms like Silva and Almeida's algo-
rithm, Delta-bar-delta, Rprop, The Dynamic Adaption algorithm,
Quickprop are used based on its application. 9 neurons are used in the
process. ANN is a task- based method which tells the system to operate
based on some inbuilt task rather than a conventional computational
programmed task. The architecture of ANN consists of three layers:
1. Input layer
2. Hidden (middle) layer
3. Output layer (Fig. 1)
Feedforward back propagation mechanism and its parameters are
shown above: Input Layer–7, output layer-1, hidden layer-50, number
of iterations – 1200. Activation layer- Sigmoidal function in hidden
and output layer, linear function in input layer.
Moreover, Artiﬁcial intelligence and machine learning are mostly
hypothesis and theories. These are programming and algorithms. For
the implementation of these algorithms and logic based concepts,
there should be a hardware- software interface. The system through
which this can be achieved is “Embedded systems”. Embedded systems
are hardware built systems consisting of memory chips with custom
software programmed in it (Fig. 2).
This paper encompasses the links which make embedded systems
and AI coherent with the agriculture sector. Implementation of AI and
expert systems in agriculture is a narrowly deﬁned subject. This topic
was discussed by McKinion and Lemmon (1985). Agriculture is the es-
sential part of any country. At present South Korea, China, North
America are investing trillions of money for development in the agricul-
ture sector and implementing more advance technologies. The popula-
tion is increasing at a very high rate which is directly related to the
Fig. 1. Artiﬁcial neural network layers.
2
K. Jha et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 2 (2019) 1–12
increase in the demand for food. India is a rich source for food crops and
especially for species. The agriculture sector is one of the most sensitive
sectors of the Indian economy, supporting all other sectors and spread-
ing its importance in far- reaching areas. With the advent of technology
in other industries, it is a very crucial point to implement automation in
agriculture.
The pressure on the agriculture sector will increase with the con-
tinuing expansion of the human population and so agri-technology
and precision farming have gained much importance in today's world.
This are also termed as digital agriculture which means the use of hi-
tech computer systems to calculate different parameters such as weed
detection, crop prediction, yield detection, crop quality and many
more machine learning techniques (Liakos et al., 2018). This paper dis-
cusses about the different applications of ANN, ML, and IOT in agricul-
ture and many models which helps in precision farming.
2. Literature survey
Over the past 50 years, there has been a sustainable development in
artiﬁcial intelligence due to its robustness in the application and is per-
vasive in every ﬁeld. One such ﬁeld is agriculture.
Agriculture faces many challenges on a daily basis and is not smooth
running business. Some of the pith problems faced by farmers from seed
sowing to harvesting of crops are as follows:
1. Crop diseases infestations
2. Lack of storage management.
3. Pesticide control
4. Weed management
5. Lack of irrigation and drainage facilities.
Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Machine learning has penetrated each and
every category mentioned above. Bannerjee et al. (2018) segregated ad-
vancements in AI category wise and gave a brief overview on various AI
techniques. Computers and technology started penetrating in this sec-
tor from 1983 onwards. Since then, there have been many suggestions
and proposed systems for betterment in agriculture from the database
to decision making process. Filtering out every process, only AI based
systems have proved to be the most feasible and reliable one. The AI-
based method does not generalize the problem and gives a particular
solution to a particular deﬁned complex problem. The literature survey
covers major breakthroughs in the domain of agriculture from early
1980s to 2018. The paper discusses more than ﬁfty advancement in
technologies in the sub domain of agriculture. First it discusses penetra-
tion of Artiﬁcial neural networks and expert systems to solve above
mentioned problems, then machine learning and fuzzy logic system.
Lastly it covers automation and IOT in the agriculture.
3. Artiﬁcial neural networks in agriculture
Artiﬁcial neural networks have been incorporated in the agriculture
sector many times due to its advantages over traditional systems. The
main beneﬁt of neural networks is they can predict and forecast on
the base of parallel reasoning. Instead of thoroughly programming, neu-
ral networks can be trained. Gliever and Slaughter (2001) used ANN to
differentiate weeds from the crops. Maier and Dandy (2000) used neu-
ral networks for forecasting water resources variables.
Song and He (2005) brought together expert systems and Artiﬁcial
neural networks in predicting nutrition level in the crop. Traditional
ES (Expert systems) have considerable backdrops when it is being im-
plemented. Use of ANN makes it up to all glitches of ES. The whole sys-
tem is built on a single chip computer. Neural networks always prove to
be the best when it comes to predicting methods. Neural networks can
predict the complex mappings if a reliable set of variables are fed. To
dodge the problems of frost formation in the ﬁelds of the island of Sicily,
Robinson and Mort (1997) developed a prediction model using neural
networks. The model is ﬁrst to feed with the raw data like humidity,
temperature, precipitation, cloud cover, wind direction (all these data
were taken from 1980 to 1983). Then, the data gathered got converted
into binary data. These data, now are divided into two strings (input and
output for the neural network model). The back-propagation network
was used as a neural network predictor. A total of 10 trial sets were de-
veloped and trained by the model initially. The frost was predicted more
efﬁciently when a range of values of parameters (mentioned above)
was taken rather than single values.
Within the span of three years, two expert systems had been devel-
oped to increase the production of cotton crop. First, COMAX. In 1986,
Lemmon made a successful attempt in developing an expert system
called Comax (COtton Management eXpert). Lemmon, being the pio-
neer in AI in agriculture sector, develped a program called Gossym
which is microcomputer friendly and bolster the use of Comax
(Lemmon, 1986). For the ﬁrst ever, the expert system (Comax) was suc-
cessfully integrated with a computer model (Gossym) and simulated for
the growth of cotton crops. This expert system was developed in order
Fig. 2. Embedded systems.
3
K. Jha et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 2 (2019) 1–12
to operate continuosly throughout the year in cotton crop ﬁelds. Comax
takes three parameters of the ﬁeld into consideration; scheduling of ir-
rigation, maintaining nitrogen content in the ﬁeld, and growth in the
cotton crop.
Second, COTFLEX. Another expert system for the cotton crop was
developed by Stone and Toman (1989). The system was named as
COTFLEX. The system was made worked on Pyramid 90× computer
which used UNIX as its operating system. The system incorporated
the ﬁeld and farm databases to provide important information re-
garding the cotton crop to the farmer so that it becomes easy for
the grower to take critical and tactical decisions. The system devel-
oped in Texas, and it created simulation models and databases in
the rule-based expert system to help Texan farmers take prudent
economic
and
lucrative
decisions.
After
successful
testings,
COTFLEX was imported to IBM microcomputer and was made open
for the use.
Batchelor et al. (1989) discusses about the soyabean crop growth
model which is deﬁned as SMARTSOY in the paper and the model is
called SOYGRO. The model is explained by knowledge based approach
where it is divided into two approaches ﬁrst being the positivistic ap-
proach stating the attempts to duplicate the processes of domain ex-
perts in order to come to a conclusion while the second approach
being the normative approach which attempts to duplicate the conclu-
sions excluding the processes of the domain experts. The damages
caused by insects are determined by systematic method for determining
the damage rates and the cost control. Here, the positivistic and norma-
tive approach collapses because the later method helps it the selection
of insecticide and application rate. However, the systematic method
does not help to ﬁnd the insect damage rate on yield. This is a major
drawback for generating recommendation because we need to mix
both the approach as the yield reduction is calculated by previous expe-
riences of the similar insect attack, pesticides used and the outcomes of
the crops in the end. The goal to generate recommendation speciﬁcally
for soyabean crop is based on calculation of the damage rate and the
cost to treat the plant and gain the yield. This calculation is derived by
both the approaches.
An expert system PRITHVI based on fuzzy logic was developed in Ra-
jasthan, India by Prakash et al. (2013). The system was designed explic-
itly for Soybeans crop. This system gathered its knowledge base from
agricultural ofﬁcers, published literature, and experts of soybean
crops. Fuzzy logic was considered in studying the whole system and ad-
vising the farmer as an expert. PRITHVI was divided into ﬁve modules.
The main aim of developing this expert system was to help the farmers
in the region increase their soybean production. The system used
MATLAB as a user interface module.
Researchers developed an expert system which helped the farmers
with when to spray insectisides on the apple fruit to avoid the damage
due to insects and atmosphere. The system was named as POMME.
Along with the time, it also advised the farmers what to spray. Instead
of theoretical values from the infection table, here apple scab disease
cycle model was used in POMME. The results of the system were satis-
factory and system was approved by the experts who had used it on
trial basis. (Roach et al., 1987).
A method is suggesting the use of ANN algorithms for crop predic-
tion in smartphones had been successfully tested in 2016 by researchers
Ravichandran and Koteshwari. A prediction model was developed. As
mentioned above, the prediction model of this system had three layers
(Ravichandran and Koteshwari, 2016). The efﬁciency of the model was
dependent on the number of the hidden layers. First and foremost, the
ANN model was built and trained using various algorithms such as
Silva and Almeida's algorithms, Delta-bar-delta, Rprop, and various
other to ﬁnd the most favourable conﬁguration. Trial and error method
was implemented to choose the number of hidden layers. There should
be a précised way to scrutinize the selection of some hidden layers be-
cause the prediction system's accuracy is dependent on the number of
hidden layers. It was observed in the research that more the number
of hidden layers in the ANN model; the more accurate were the
prediction.
Since the purpose of the system was to make it handy for the
farmers, it is developed on APK platform. The source code was written
in Eclipse with Java codes in the backhand, and the algorithm was devel-
oped using Matlab and ANN toolbox. The whole ﬁle was then extracted
on the Android platform so that it can be utilized by smartphones. Be-
sides suggesting the crop to the farmer, the system also has the addi-
tional advantage of advising the farmer for the fertilizer to be used if
the farmer wishes to use the crop of his choice. (Ravichandran and
Koteshwari, 2016) (Fig. 3).
Evapotranspiration process is imperative for maintaining the stabil-
ity in the hydrologic cycle, sustainable irrigation method, and water
management. Parameters- Elevation, Mean daily Temperature, Max.
daily temperature, Min. daily temperature, Wind Speed, Relatuve Hu-
midity, Sunshine Hours, Daylight hours, Latitude, Condition coefﬁcient.
There are more than 20 established method to determine ET which is
dependent on several parameters.
A profound study was carried out in the valley of Dehradun; India
was assessing the importance of the addition of ANN in several tech-
niques of estimation of ET. Researchers gathered monthly climate data
from the Forest research institute (FRI) Dehradun for ET estimation.
The methods on which the algorithms were applied were: 1. Penman-
Monteith method 2. Levenberg-Marquardt back propagation. It was ob-
served that increasing the number of hidden layers in the system re-
sulted in instability in the ET estimation. So, training function with
optimum trial and error method is to be chosen for the overall opti-
mized estimation of ET. It was observed that out of six training algo-
rithms of ANN model, function training with 75% data feed in it was
precise and had the best number of neurons. Furthermore, there was a
gauging between PM method and ANN model with the single layer
feed forward back propagation algorithm. ANN model was designed
and developed using Matlab. Six algorithms were conjured and
assessed. As evapotranspiration is of vital importance in irrigation and
water management, this research manifested the predictive prowess
of ANN structure if implemented correctly. (Nema et al., 2017).
Furthermore, also a method was created to discriminate weed from
crops with the help of image analysis and neural networks. It had the ac-
curacy of more than 75% without any beforehand plant information fed
into the system. (Aitkenhead et al., 2003). Shahzadi et al. (2016) devel-
oped expert systems based smart agriculture system. The concept of IoT
in this system was to send the data to the server so that actuators of the
ﬁeld should be able to take appropriate decisions. For that, the server
should be intelligent enough to take decisions independently. This sys-
tem consists of temperature, humidity, leaf wetness, and soil sensors. It
only gives the information about the ﬁeld and doesn't act on the irriga-
tion process.
Arif et al. (2012) developed two ANN models to estimate soil mois-
ture in Paddy ﬁelds using decidedly less meteorological data. Both
these models were then corroborated and validated by studying ob-
served and estimated soil moisture values. The ﬁrst ANN model was
generated to get the estimate ET. The help of minimum, average, and
the maximum air temperature was taken. To develop the second
model, solar radiation, precipitation, and air temperature data was gath-
ered. Both these models resulted in the accurate and reliable estimation
of soil moisture in the paddy ﬁelds by using the least meteorological
data, less labor and time consumption.
Hinnell et al. (2010) discuss the neuro drip irrigation systems where
ANNs were developed to predict the spatial water distribution in the
subsurface. For drip irrigation method to properly function, water distri-
bution in the lower level of the soil is of the grave importance. Here,
ANNs makes the prediction which comes handy for the user which in
turn results in the fast decision-making process. ANN models give the
result of wetting patterns (ﬁrst and second) after the soil is inﬁltrated
with the water from the emitter which is on the surface of the land.
Thus, the ANN model provides continuous patterns to the user. Also,
4
K. Jha et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 2 (2019) 1–12
researchers developed a model to study the yield of the maize crop. A
multi-layered feedforward ANN (MLFANN) is used. To fuel such net-
work, learning algorithms like GDA (gradient descent algorithms) and
CGDA (Conjugate gradient descent algorithm) are employed. Both the
algorithms have been written and simulated in the MATLAB using
nueral network toolbox (Singh and Prajneshu, 2008).
Precision agriculture and WSN applications combine an exciting
new area of research that will greatly improve quality in agricultural
production, precision irrigation and will have dramatic reduction in
cost needed. Furthermore, the ease of deployment and system mainte-
nance, monitoring opens the way for the acceptation of WSN systems
in precision agriculture. Using the proposed methodology, in ﬁnding
the optimal sensor topology, we contrive to lower implementation
cost and thus make WSN a more appealing solution for all kinds of ﬁelds
and cultivations. (Keshtgari and Deljoo, 2012).
4. Automation and wireless system networks in agriculture
It is imperative for any sector to evolve with time. The agriculture
sector had to adapt the breakthroughs and inventions which came
along in automation ﬁeld. Yong et al. (2018) came forward with emerg-
ing research area of embedded intelligence (EI). Embedded intelligence
in agriculture sector includes smart farming, smart crop management,
smart irrigation and smart greenhouses. It is necessary for a nation to in-
clude these growing technologies in agriculture sector for growth of a
nation as many sectors are inter-dependent on agriculture. Also, re-
searchers of this paper demonstrated Technology roadmap (TRM)
which in turn clariﬁes the qualms regarding the areas of agriculture
mentioned above (smart farming, smart irrigation etc).
Taking into consideration the socio and economic vitality of agricul-
ture in India, researchers Patil and Thorat (2016) developed a system
which predicted grape disease beforehand. Any anomaly in the grape
plant was noticed only after it was infected and this had a considerable
deteriorating effect on the whole vineyard. The system employed vari-
ous sensors such as temperature sensor, leaf wetness sensors, and hu-
midity sensors in the vineyard. These sensors send the data sensed to
the database in the ZigBee server which is linked to the sensors. Deploy-
ment of Wireless System Network (WSN) in any ﬁeld needs to satisfy
certain criteria and Zigbee alliance has developed open global standards
called ZIGBEE. Zigbee compliances of four layers namely physical layer,
medium access control layer, network layer, application layer as stated.
The three devices: Zigbee Co-coordinator (ZC), Zigbee Router(ZR),
Zigbee End Device(ZED) has different function in the WSN. Kalaivani
et al. (2011) discusses end to end approach of Zigbee in agriculture.
The server will store the data. The server is commissioned with a hidden
Markov model algorithm in it. This algorithm is present to train the nor-
mal data sensed by the sensors and report any aberration in tempera-
ture, humidity or leaf wetness which can result in grape disease to
farmer via SMS. Machine learning is blended in the system beforehand
for astute deduction of disease in grapes. The additional advantage of
Fig. 3. Flowchart of ANN-based crop predictor using smartphones.
5
K. Jha et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 2 (2019) 1–12
this system is it also suggests the farmer pesticides and paciﬁes manual
effort in the detection of disease. (Patil and Thorat, 2016). While a sim-
ilar method of machine learning was employed in monitoring the
growth of Paddy crops. This system was developed for increasing the
yield and productivity of paddy crops. It also proved to be cost effective
and durable. (Kait et al., 2007) (Fig. 4).
The sensors used in Fig. 5 are for monitoring agricultural ﬁeld are
shown in Fig. 6. Sensors such as MQ4 and MQ7 are used for Natural
Gas sensing and Carbon Monoxide sensing respectively. DHT11 is used
for Temperature and Humidity monitoring of the environment, soil
moisture sensor is used for measuring soil moisture level and have con-
tinuous monitoring. Esp8266 is a wiﬁ module which helps in communi-
cation between the hardware system and the device which users use.
In one of the research conducted in Ankara, Turkey, implementing
IIS (intelligent irrigation system), numerous positive perks were ob-
served such as less moisture and temperature stress on soil, efﬁcient
water consumption, and neglecting human intervention in case of
ﬂood irrigation. The developed system works on three units. Base unit
(BU), Valve unit (VU), and Sensor unit (SU). The whole system is
powered by solar panels. After the successful installation of every unit,
BU will send the address to which the data is to be sent to SU. Sensors
from the SU will sense the moisture content and send the detected
data to a speciﬁc address in the BU. If required, BU will send a signal
to VU so that it can calibrate the position of the valve in order to provide
the soil with water. However, site- speciﬁc use of automatic irrigation
system took birth in the early 21st century; this method proved to be
a signiﬁcant success as it reduced the cost, feasibility, and complexity
of the developed system. Furthermore, the unit can be set up which
transports the fertilizers and pesticides in the ﬁeld using the same
method. For that, new kind of sensors would have to calibrate for trans-
mitting accurate information. (Dursun and Ozden, 2011).
Research has been conducted to test the ET based, ICT based, and IIS
based technology. In Riyadh, a research was conducted in Wheat and
Tomato ﬁeld in which both sprinkler and drip irrigation method were
employed and tested with ICT as well as IIS. A graph of water depth ver-
sus growth period of the crop (weekly) was plotted for all three
methods. A concise observation concluded that IIS was far more feasible
in a matter of water usage than ICT and ET based system. It skyrocketed
the frugality of water usage from 18% to a whopping 27%. (Al-Ghobari
and Mohammad, 2011).
Also, Kodali and Sahu (2016) presented the use of Losant platform
for monitoring the agriculture farmland and intimate the farmer via
SMS or e-mail if any anomaly is observed by the system. Losant is a sim-
ple Iot based most powerful cloud platform. It offers real-time observa-
tion of data stored in it irrespective of the position of the ﬁeld. Gutiérrez
et al. (2014) came up with an automated irrigation system which uses
the GPRS module as a communication device. The system is pro-
grammed into a microprocessor-based gateway which controls the
Fig. 4. Flowchart explaining evapotranspiration process.
6
K. Jha et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 2 (2019) 1–12
water quantity. It was proved that water savings were 90% more than
the conventional irrigation system. Kim et al. (2008) used a distributed
wireless network for sensing and control of irrigation process from a re-
mote location.
To improve efﬁciency, productivity, global market and to reduce
human intervention, time and cost there is a need to divert towards
new technology named Internet of Things. IoT is the network of devices
to transfer the information without human involvement. Hence, to gain
high productivity, IoT works in synergy with agriculture to obtain smart
farming. Malavade and Akulwar (2016) focused on role of IoT in agricul-
ture that leads to smart framing (Malavade and Akulwar, 2016).
Use of wireless communication has changed the standards of com-
munication in today's world and this can also raise the standards of ag-
riculture automation. Logatchevl et al. (1998) has bifurcated the IOT
gateway into different nodes such as actuator, sensor, interface and
wireless link which give assistance to communication between them.
Frequency estimation and the bandwidth requirement for this
communication has also been elaborated which can be very beneﬁcial
for automation.
Implementation of WSN (Wireless sensor network) in the agricul-
ture sector and its different approaches is deﬁned by this paper. Many
different IEEE standards describe sensor networks, standards like IEEE
802.15.1 PAN/Bluetooth, IEEE 802.15.4 ZigBee and many more are nec-
essary to know while planning its application. Researchers also
discussed about IPV6 the Internet Protocol for wireless communication
and also many hardware system for establishing a WSN. By using WSN,
Precision farming is possible and the strategy is used for crop manage-
ment. Different data is recorded by the sensors and stored in the system.
The system is made to learn by the previous data from the sensors and
future actions are taken accordingly (Shiravale and Bhagat, 2014).
Ganjegunte et al. (2012) studied three soil moisture sensors in
Peacan crop ﬁeld and came to a conclusion that the sensors used
(ECH2O-5TE, Watermark 200SS and Tensiometer model R) need site
speciﬁc calibration in order to bring accurate results.
Fig. 5. Grape disease detection system using ML algorithms.
MQ4
MQ7
DHT11
Soil Moisture Sensor
Esp8266
Fig. 6. Different type of sensors used for detection.
7
K. Jha et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 2 (2019) 1–12
The highlighting features of the paper presented by Gondchawar
and Kawitkar (2016) includes smart GPS based remote controlled
robot to perform tasks like; weeding, spraying, moisture sensing, bird
and animal scaring, keeping vigilance, etc. Secondly, it includes smart ir-
rigation with smart control based on real time ﬁeld data. Thirdly, smart
warehouse management which includes; temperature maintenance,
humidity maintenance and theft detection in the warehouse. Control-
ling of all these operations will be through any remote smart device or
computer connected to Internet and the operations will be performed
by interfacing sensors, Wi-Fi or ZigBee modules, camera and actuators
with micro-controller and raspberry pi.
Thermal Imaging is a noncontact and nonintrusive technique which
analysis the surface temperature of the agricultural ﬁeld and provides
valuable feedback to the farmer. Roopaei et al. (2017) discussed the
use of cloud based thermal imaging system which helps the irrigation
by incorporating the performance of the equipment's and determine
the area of ﬁeld which requires the water most. The absence of unifor-
mity will hamper the crop growth and thermal imaging can help
to consolidate this loss. Also, Thermal Imaging is put to use in agricul-
ture sector truly because of its wide application. The paper by
Manickavasagan et al. (2005) discusses various application of thermal
imaging like Pre-harvest operations, Field nursery, Irrigation schedul-
ing, Yield Forecasting, Green house gases, Termite Attack, Farm
machinery.
Katariya et al. (2015) discussed the use of robot in the agriculture
ﬁeld. The robot is designed to follow the track of white line where actu-
ally there is a need to work and other surface is considered as black or
brown. Working of robot is for spraying of pesticide, dropping of seed's,
water supply and ploughing. In 2016 a group of researchers came up
with e-Agriculture Application based on the framework consisting of
KM-Knowledge base and Monitoring modules.The systems developed
in IOT and Cloud Computing emphasizes on reliable architectures to
provide timely information from the ﬁeld over 3G or Wi-Fi. TI CC 3200
(RFID) launchpad was used to build the prototype with other necessary
devices. Knowledge base has advantage over conventional IOT based
systems; Knowledge Base is constructed to store vast complex struc-
tured and unstructured information to assist farmers or even an individ-
ual with no prior knowledge of farming. But ﬁnding right information in
an appropriate manner is difﬁcult where providing relevant knowledge
should be distributed not only in an organised and complete manner,
but also in absolute way. The knowledge based infrastructure allows
adapting the changes in agriculture for a better extension and adding
advisory services. (Mohanraj et al., 2016).
As degree of automation is required in each and every ﬁeld so the
human intervention becomes less and it is very important to design a
layout in the early stages of the mechanics and electronics. Weed man-
agement is the issue which farmers face a lot and computer vision can
help to solve the issue. There is particular difference between a weed
and the desired crop. CNN can help to distinguish among them and no-
tify us to cut only the unnecessary plant. CNN has many algorithms
which can even be used to identify plants and get the data accordingly
for plantation. (Möller, 2010).
R-CNN extensively used in object detection and in automation it is
used for fruit detection and counting of fruits. Bargoti and Underwood
(2017) discusses the use of R-CNN in fruit detection of orchards, while
training the input to the network is 3 channel colour image (BGR) of ar-
bitrary size. They have used VGG16 NET with 13 convolutional network
and also ZF network which has 5 convolutional layers. Data augmenta-
tion is used because it helps in artiﬁcially enlarging the dataset and
changing the variability of the training data. The results discussed by
them are promising as for both mangoes and apples Faster R-CNN
outperformed the ZF network approach. (R-CNN stands for regional
convolutional neural network).
Cloud based decisions and support in the agriculture is booming
now a days. The Decision support and Automation system (DSAS)
helps the farmers of the growers to control all the applications through
its web portal. DSAS as different stages where the it can interconnect
many devices on the single time and give the real time data to the
farmer. The farmer plays the vital role as he can monitor the real time
data and also control all the machine through software's. Systems like
spray controller will spray the pesticide on the ﬁeld in a deﬁned
amount. Similarly, irrigation controller helps to manage irrigation and
fertilizer controller manages fertilizer. DSAS works through the data
given by different sensors like soil moisture sensor, nitrogen sensor,
etc. (Tan, 2016).
Kumar (2014) used fertility and pH meter to take out the percentage
of ingredients of the soil and developed wireless sensor based drip irri-
gation system. Ingale and Kasat (2012) used IC 89c52 microcontroller to
build a smart irrigation system. The prototype supplies water only when
humidity and moisture drops below a standard decided value hence it
conserves water to a certain extent. A semi-automatic irrigation system
was developed and tested on the ﬁeld of Okra crops (Abelmoschus
esculentus). The system used four moisture sensors and PIC16F877A
processor was used. The valves in the system turns ON only when
there is a voltage drop across any two sensors in the ﬁled drops below
a ﬁxed value and remains ON until the value comes to the decided
threshold value. (Soorya et al., 2013).
5. Implementation of fuzzy logic systems in agriculture
Sicat et al. (2005) developed an FK-based fuzzy model to decide the
land suitability. Various fuzzy sets were generated using farmer's as well
as scientiﬁc knowledge congruently. The sets used S-membership func-
tions and were used to determine soil texture, slope, and colour. The re-
search work was done in several villages of Nizamabad district of
Andhra Pradesh state of India. In FK-based fuzzy factor maps, it is not
necessary to take the lower and upper limits 0 and 1 respectively. This
is because in knowledge-driven fuzzy modeling there is no constraint
on choosing the membership functions as long as the functions are in
context of the factor which has to be modeled (in this case FK-based
model).
Another implementation of fuzzy modeling was done for land level-
ling by Si et al. (2007). They employed fuzzy control theory in the con-
troller of the system. By implementing fuzzy control theory, a precision
based result was obtained. High accuracy fuzzy control theory translates
the variables (the deviation in the height of the ﬁeld and expected the
height of the ﬁeld) into the deﬁned variables sets (E and EC) which con-
tains fuzzy terminologies such as ‘High’, ‘Very high’ and so on. There are
nine sets deﬁned for variable set E and two for variable set EC. This the-
ory helps the controller deduce the position of the bucket which is
inturned will be the height of the ﬁeld. The bucket receives the signal
from the receiver. Sannakki et al. (2011) developed an innovative sys-
tem for grading the leaf diseases. The system was segregated into ﬁve
parts namely Image acquisition where the researchers have captured
images of Pomegranate leaves, image pre-processing where the cap-
tured image is then resized, ﬁltered, and processed according to the re-
quired parameter. Then comes colour image segmentation where k-
means clustering is used to isolate the healthy part of leave with the dis-
ease infected part. Afterward from the resized image, total leaf area is
calculated, and with the help of the third part, infected disease area of
the leaf is calculated. Finally, in the last part, with the help of a fuzzy in-
ference system, accurate grading of the disease can be taken out.
FIS (Fuzzy inference system) was developed by Tremblay et al.
(2010) to determine optimum rates of N fertilizer on the basis of ﬁeld
and crop features. Also, Valdés-Vela et al. (2015) implemented FIS to es-
timate stem water potential. Kavdir and Guyer (2003) applied FL model
in determining the quality of Apple fruit. Gottschalk et al. (2003) devel-
oped fuzzy logic based air controllers to maintain the temperature of
storage facilities for Potato. Escobar and Galindo (2004) came up with
a simulation software (SCD) which came in handy for many fuzzy
based controllers. The software used rule-based knowledge base with
IF. THEN condition type. Its graphical characteristics make the software
8
K. Jha et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 2 (2019) 1–12
adaptable to any fuzzy algorithm simulations. Another Fuzzy inference
system using IF…THEN condition type was developed by Tilva et al.
(2013). The model forecasted plant disease on the base of weather
data. The system was developed to avoid diseases in plant beforehand
as disease occurs in speciﬁc range of temperature and humidity in the
weather.
India and China alone constitute 2.7 billion people living under the
stress of water shortage. Out of overall water consumption, 70% is con-
sumed in the agricultural process. Remaining is used in infrastructural
pipelines and other miscellaneous works. Water leakage is inevitable
and uncontrollable in cities. Water demand will shoot up by 50% shortly
and this fact cannot be vetoed away. The farming fraternity is the only
option in which water usage can be optimized by employing smart irri-
gation systems. By inculcating smart irrigation system, wastage of water
can culminate to a great extent can abridge water consumption by 20%.
(Gupta et al., 2016).
There is a major problem of water wastage and a dearth of water in
conventional irrigation methods employed. To give an example, Egypt
faces a problem of water distribution from the Nile river with neighbor-
ing countries. Ample research had been carried out to solve the prob-
lems faced in the irrigation, process. Many companies have developed
a sensor-based smart irrigation system. These systems have been devel-
oped for optimal water usage, monitoring of water pollution, and to take
care of some other grave problems. Soil moisture and temperature sen-
sors interact directly with embedded components in the ﬁeld and take
care of required water distribution among crops without farmer's inter-
action. Water which is to be fed to the farms, either by the means of
smart irrigation or any other conventional method, should be of a
good quality. Researchers have started implementing IOT systems and
Artiﬁcial intelligence techniques in aquaculture sector along with agri-
culture. The system designed by Encinas et al. (2017) monitors the qual-
ity of water by deploying state-of-the-art automation techniques.
Wall and King (2004) came up with a smart system which con-
trolled valves of sprinklers with the help of temperature and moisture
sensors deployed in the ﬁeld. However, this system did not consider
the water pollution problem. Miranda et al. (2003) came up with a dis-
tributed irrigation system which works on soil water measurement.
M2M (machine-to-machine) technology which allows machines to in-
teract with each other autonomously and store the data directly in a
cloud-based server online. This M2M technology is in an incipient
stage and is developing steadfastly. Shekhar et al. (2017) developed a
technology which allows machines to communicate themselves. Yang
et al. (2007) also developed a complete sensor-based intensive irriga-
tion method which is self-organizing. This system constructed a bottom
and upper layer. Pawar et al. (2018) tried to demonstrate a prototype of
the small-scale smart irrigation system. Savitha and UmaMaheshwari
(2018) considered only automation and IoT I in their quest for an intel-
ligent irrigation system.
So far, there hasn't been such advent which allows complete free-
dom of human intervention. This paper tries to bring forward a method
Sr
no
Crop/fruit
name
Technology
System
name
Results/description
Limitations/future scopes
Country
Reference
1
Tea
Object-oriented
expert system
TEAPEST
Total of 65 real ﬁeld cases were taken from
the system which evaluated the relevant
parameters and the results were almost
satisfactory. The system was stationed in the
tea ﬁelds for two years
The accuracy of the system was only 90%. The
remaining inaccuracy was the result of
inappropriate diagnosis.
India
(Ghosh and
Samanta, 2003)
2
Tea
Radial basis
function
networks.
Modiﬁed
TEAPEST.
The hidden layers of this neural networks are
31. This hidden layers gave the detection
accuracy of 99.99%. There was testing error of
only 1%.
The developed system detects only three
major pests of tea crops. Also it is limited to
only tea and not all the cash crops.
India
(Banerjee et al.,
2017)
3
General
crops
Rule based
expert system
PEST
(Pest
Expert
System)
The system gave satisfactory results for wich
it was developed. (Identiﬁcation and control
of insects).
As the system was developed in late 1980's
the resources and development in this sector
wasn't much and due to it the prototype
couldn't cover many development
parameters like Crop nutrition, salinity,
variety selection etc.
Australia
(Pasqual and
Mansﬁeld, 2003)
4
Mango
and
Cassava
Artiﬁcial neural
networks
N/A
The developed model used three neurons in
the hidden layer of the network to identify
dryness in the given fruits. This study showed
neural networks can be used for procuring
dryness patterns in food.
The system do not consider beforehand
predictions and assumptions. Also,
temperature predictions cannot be done
correctly.
France and
Mexico
(Hernandez-Perez
et al., 2004)
5
Hop plant
Rule based
expert system
Corac
This was developed for detecting diseases
like downy mildew, hop aphid and weevil.
System provided growth of disease,
estimation of harm caused and correct
treatment for the disease in the hop plant
There are models in the system like LANCE
and MESA which creates problems while
estimating disease harm and also meteoro-
logical data varies according to the local
climate.
Czech
republic
(Mozny et al.,
1993)
6
Jute
Artiﬁcial neural
networks
N/A
With 9 to 5 neurons in the hidden layer, the
model accurately predicted the growth of
jute crops. It used back propagation for
training the model.
Predicted results matched correctly with the
observed results (bark, roots, leaf) and if
trained properly the model can predict
results for different crops.
Bangladesh
(Rahman and Bala,
2010)
7
Different
fruits
Fuzzy logic
N/A
The platform used for grading and
classiﬁcation of different fruits is MATLAB.
Support vector Machine technique was used
for classiﬁcation of the fruits and fuzzy logic
was used for grading.
There were misclassiﬁcation problems in the
developed system. But it can be mitigated
adding features of colour and texture of
fruits.
Malaysia
(Mustafa et al.,
2009)
8
Wheat
Image
processing
N/A
Two machine algorithms SVM and neural
networks were used for classiﬁcation process.
The accuracy of SVM was 86.8% and neural
network was 94.5% accurate. The algorithm
used was more accurate then manually
developed algorithm.
More precised algoritmns can be designed
which will have less computational cost.
Additionally various varieties of wheat can be
classiﬁed using different feature sets.
India
(Punn and Bhalla,
2013)
9
Rice
Pattern
classiﬁcation, A
back propaga-
tion neural
N/A
Morphological and colour features were
taken into account for developing algorithm.
Nine morphological and six colour features
were acquired from Images. The accuracy of
Only rice crop was considered in the study.
Further infections on various crops can be
identiﬁed and placated using this system.
India
(Shantaiya and
Ansari, 2010)
(continued on next page)
9
K. Jha et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 2 (2019) 1–12
through which with the help of AI and embedded technology which
eliminates the glitches emphasized in the past.
6. Proposed idea
Need of automation in the agriculture sector is must and there are
many ways it can be implemented in practice. Irrigation is the foremost
thing where automation is necessitate for optimal water usage. Soil
moisture sensor helps to monitor the moisture level of the soil and
starts watering the farm as the value get below the threshold level set
by the farmer. The embedded system and Internet of Things help to de-
velop a compact system which monitors the water level of the farm
without human interaction.
There are many different techniques that we can implement as auto-
mation through different forms like using Machine learning, Artiﬁcial
Intelligence, Deep learning, Neural network, Fuzzy logic. The idea is to
use any of these extended methods to reduce human intervention and
human efforts. All this methods have their own advantages and disad-
vantages, but the way they are used differentiate them from each
other. The meagre research in the ﬁeld of deep learning technique
which analyses the dataset of images from the past data fed and clas-
siﬁes the plants or ﬂowers. Kamilaris and Prenafeta-Boldú (2018) dis-
cusses the Deep learning concepts in the agriculture and the efforts
that apply to execute deep learning techniques, in various agricultural
sectors. Deep learning application is required in this ﬁeld as it provides
major impact on the modern techniques, it extends the Machine learn-
ing by adding more depth into the model. The main feature of the deep
learning is the raw data process to increase accuracy and classiﬁcation.
Plant recognition, fruit counting, predicting future crop yield are the
main target where deep learning can be implemented. Large dataset
of images are required to train the model, while some techniques use
text data to train the model. Data source, Data pre-processing, Data Var-
iation and Data augmentation techniques are necessary for the Deep
learning to train the model. Future of deep learning in agriculture has
many environments and it
can proliferate
agriculture sector.
Ferentinos (2018) have worked with convolution neural network
models and used deep learning in the system by training the model
with different images of healthy and diseased plants. Plant disease rec-
ognition has a high degree of complexity and so many agronomists fail
to diagnose speciﬁc disease. The model represented perfectly identiﬁes
and gives accuracy upto 99.53%.
The idea is to train the model such a way that it identiﬁes plants or
ﬂowers when in future any image is fed to the model. To train the
model, VGG16 is used as it is the simplest model among all other
convolutional networks. This network is characterized by its simplicity,
using only 3 × 3 convolutional layers stacked on top of each other in in-
creasing depth. Reducing volume size is handled by max pooling. Two
fully-connected layers, each with 4096 nodes are then followed by a
softmax classiﬁer. In VGG16, ‘16’ stands for the number of weight layers
in the network. Keras library in python includes VGG, ResNet, Inception,
and Xception network architectures. A large image data of different
plants and different ﬂowers is used to train the model and check the
accuracy. The model then accurately predicts the plant or ﬂower when
any random image is fed in the system.
This system is necessary in the agricultural sector as every plant has
some particular need of environment. A ﬁxed amount of water at regu-
lar time and favourable environmental gases around helps the plant to
grow perfectly healthy. By classiﬁcation through deep learning it be-
comes easy for the farmers or botanist to grow plant, as by identiﬁcation
of plant and its favourable conditions, farmers and botanist can provide
such environment and proper irrigation.
7. Future scope
The farmers who are young will make more investments in automa-
tion with much interest than the elder farmers. The technology which is
new has to be introduced slowly with time. Slowly the agriculture sec-
tor is moving towards precision farming in which management will we
done on the basis of individual plant. Deep learning and other extend
methods are used to detect the plant or ﬂower type, this will help
farmers to provide favourable environment to the plant for sustainable
growth. Eventually the production of more customised fruits and plants
will grow, which leads to an increase in the diversity of products and
production method. Artiﬁcial intelligence techniques are growing at a
rapid scale and it can be used to detect disease of plants or any un-
wanted weed in the farm by using CNN, RNN or any other computa-
tional network. Green house farming can provide a particular
environment to the plants but it is not possible without human inter-
vention. Here, wireless technology and IOT comes in the run and using
the latest communication protocols and sensors we can implement
weather monitoring and control without human presence in the farm.
Harvesting of fruits and crops can also be incorporated by robots
which are specialized in working round the clock for quick harvesting.
Application of robotics are vast in farming such as the robots can be
used in seeding and planting, fertilizing and irrigation, crop weeding
and spraying, harvesting and shepherding. To complete the same
work in many cases, it would take approximately 25 to 30 workers.
Thermal Imaging can also be implemented by using drones and thermal
camera in it. The drones monitor the farm and gives continuous real
time data of the ﬁeld so that the farmers could know in which area of
the ﬁeld the water quantity is less and can only start irrigation in that
particular area. This will prevent water ﬂooding or scarcity of water in
the ﬁeld and the crops get advent amount of water all the time. Many
different integrated approaches can be used to provide a viable environ-
ment and increased growth.
8. Conclusion
Agriculture monitoring is the much necessitate reducing human in-
terventions in practice. Day by day demand for food is reaching its high
peak and the without execution of the modern methods in agriculture it
is very hard to achieve the increasing demand. Agriculture monitoring is
the prime concern as it helps to reduce labour and increase the produc-
tion. Artiﬁcial Intelligence has been implemented in crop selection and
to help the farmer in the selection of the fertilizers. With the help of
(continued)
Sr
no
Crop/fruit
name
Technology
System
name
Results/description
Limitations/future scopes
Country
Reference
networks
classiﬁcation dataset ranged from 74 to 90%.
10
Lentils
Machine Vision
N/A
A Flatbed scanner was used as a hardware
component with a pentium CPU. Various
methods including K-NN, neural networks
etc. were used for colour grading of lentil
crops. Additionally an online neural classiﬁer
was used which gave almost 90% accuracy in
grading of crops.
Cost effective and smaller scanner can be
used instead of a large scanner which can
give only required information required for
lentil classiﬁcation. Owing to the size of
scanner, it gave variety of information which
is less useful for the purpose of classiﬁcation
and grading.
Canada
(Shahin and
Symons, 2001)
10
K. Jha et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 2 (2019) 1–12
the database which the user has gathered and speciﬁed to the system,
the machine communicates among themselves to decide which crop
is suitable for harvesting and also the fertilizers which promote the
maximum growth. Deep learning has wide reach and its application in
industry has received tremendous advancement. Using deep learning
is an added advantage over machine learning and it adds depth to ma-
chine learning. Many signiﬁcant methods can ensure the farmers with
better crops and proper ﬁeld management. This in the end helps in
overall growth of the country as food is the foremost need of any
human being. IOT marked its signiﬁcance to help in the real-time mon-
itoring of the data. IOT is mainly used in an intelligent watering system.
Because, effective use of the available fresh water is essential and with
the advancement in the technology and application of automation
water crisis can be solved. Traditional methods in agriculture have
minor effects in this modern world. Water scarcity and ﬂooding both
are the major problems farmers are facing using the traditional ap-
proach. Many loop holes in this system and the alarming need to protect
the agricultural land leads to the development of agriculture automa-
tion. This paper represents an idea to make a system with the use of sen-
sors, IOT and machine learning to automate the traditional practices in
agriculture.
Authors contribution
All the authors make a substantial contribution to this manuscript.
KJ, AD and PP participated in drafting the manuscript. KJ and AD wrote
the main manuscript; all the authors discussed the results and implica-
tion on the manuscript at all stages.
Declaration of Competing Interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Acknowledgements
The authors are grateful to Gandhinagar Institute of Technology,
Lalbhai Dalpatbhai College of Engineering, Vishwakarma Government
Engineering College and Pandit Deendayal Petroleum Universityfor
the permission to publish this research.
Availability of data and material
All relevant data and material are presented in the main paper.
Funding
Not Applicable.
Consent for publication
Not applicable.
Ethics approval and consent to participate
Not applicable.
References
Aitkenhead, M.J., Dalgetty, I.A., Mullins, C.E., McDonald, A.J.S., Strachan, N.J.C., 2003. Weed
and crop discrimination using image analysis and artiﬁcial intelligence methods.
Comput. Electron. Agric. 39 (3), 157–171.
Al-Ghobari, H.M., Mohammad, F.S., 2011. Intelligent irrigation performance: evaluation
and quantifying its ability for conserving water in arid region. Appl Water Sci 1,
73–83.
Arif, C., Mizoguchi, M., Setiawan, B.I., Doi, R., 2012. Estimation of soil moisture in paddy
ﬁeld using Artiﬁcial Neural Networks. International Journal of Advanced Research
in Artiﬁcial Intelligence. 1 (1), 17–21.
Banerjee, G., Sarkar, U., Ghosh, I., 2017. A radial basis function network based classiﬁer for
detection of selected tea pests. International Journal of Advanced Research in Com-
puter Science and Software Engineering. 7 (5), 665–669.
Bannerjee, G., Sarkar, U., Das, S., Ghosh, I., 2018. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture: A Lit-
erature Survey. International Journal of Scientiﬁc Research in Computer Science Ap-
plications and Management Studies. 7 (3), 1–6.
Bargoti, S., Underwood, J., 2017. Deep Fruit Detection in Orchards. 2017 IEEE International
Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) 3626–3633.
Batchelor, W.D., McClendon, R.W., Adams, D.B., Jones, J.W., 1989. Evaluation of
SMARTSOY: an expert simulation system for insect pest management. Agric. Syst.
31 (1), 67–81.
Dursun, M., Ozden, S., 2011. A wireless application of drip irrigation automation sup-
ported by soil moisture sensors. Sci. Res. Essays 6 (7), 1573–1582.
Encinas, C., Ruiz, E., Cortez, J., Espinoza, A., 2017. Design and implementation of a distrib-
uted IoT system for the monitoring of water quality in aquaculture. Wireless Tele-
communications Symposium (WTS). 2017, 1–7.
Escobar, C., Galindo, J., 2004. Fuzzy Control in Agriculture: Simulation Software. Industrial
Simulation Conference. pp. 45–49.
Ferentinos, K.P., 2018. Deep learning models for plant disease detection and diagnosis.
Comput. Electron. Agric. 145, 311–318.
Ganjegunte, G.K., Sheng, Z., Clark, J.A., 2012. Evaluating the accuracy of soil water sensors
for irrigation scheduling to conserve freshwater. Appl Water Sci 2, 119–125.
Ghosh, I., Samanta, R.K., 2003. Teapest: an expert system for insect pest management In
Tea. Appl. Eng. Agric. 19 (5), 619–625.
Gliever, C., Slaughter, D.C., 2001. Crop verses weed recognition with artiﬁcial neural net-
works. ASAE paper. 01-3104 (2001), 1–12.
Gondchawar, N., Kawitkar, R.S., 2016. IoT based smart agriculture. International Journal of
Advanced Research in Computer and Communication Engineering. 5 (6), 838–842.
Gottschalk, K., Nagy, L., Farkas, I., 2003. Improved climate control for potato stores by
fuzzy controllers. Comput. Electron. Agric. 40, 127–140.
Gupta, A., Mishra, S., Bokde, N., Kulat, K., 2016. Need of smart water systems in India. Int.
J. Appl. Eng. Res. 11 (4), 2216–2223.
Gutiérrez, J., Medina, J.F.V., Garibay, A.N., Gándara, M.A.P., 2014. Automated irrigation sys-
tem using a wireless sensor network and GPRS module. IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas. 63
(1), 1–11.
Hernandez-Perez, J.A., Garcıa-Alvarado, M.A., Trystram, G., Heyd, B., 2004. Neural net-
works for the heat and mass transfer prediction during drying of cassava and
mango. Innov. Food Sci. Emerg. Technol. 5, 57–64.
Hinnell, A.C., Lazarovitch, N., Furman, A., Poulton, M., Warrick, A.W., 2010. Neuro-drip: es-
timation of subsurface wetting patterns for drip irrigation using neural networks.
Irrig. Sci. 28, 535–544.
Ingale, H.T., Kasat, N.N., 2012. Automated irrigation system. Int. J. Eng. Res. Dev. 4 (11),
51–54.
Kait, L.K., Kai, C.Z., Khoshdelniat, R., Lim, S.M., Tat, E.H., 2007. Paddy growth monitoring
with wireless sensor networks. International Conference on Intelligent and Advanced
Systems, IEEE 966–970.
Kalaivani, T., Allirani, A., Priya, P., 2011. A survey on Zigbee based wireless sensor net-
works in agriculture. IEEE 85–89.
Kamilaris, A., Prenafeta-Boldú, F.X., 2018. Deep learning in agriculture: a survey. Comput.
Electron. Agric. 147, 70–90.
Katariya, S.S., Gundal, S.S., Kanawade, M.T., Mazhar, K., 2015. Automation in agriculture.
International Journal of Recent Scientiﬁc Research. 6 (6), 4453–4456.
Kavdir, S., Guyer, D.E., 2003. Apple grading using fuzzy logic. Turk J Agric. 27, 375–382.
Keshtgari, M., Deljoo, A., 2012. A wireless sensor network solution for precision agricul-
ture based on ZigBee technology. Wirel. Sens. Netw. 4 (1), 1–7.
Kim, Y.J., Evans, R.G., Iversen, W.M., 2008. Remote sensing and control of an irrigation sys-
tem using a distributed wireless sensor network. IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas. 57 (7),
1379–1387.
Kodali, R.K., Sahu, A., 2016. An IoT based soil moisture monitoring on Losant platform. 2nd
International Conference on Contemporary Computing and Informatics, IEEE,
pp. 764–768.
Kumar, G., 2014. Research paper on water irrigation by using wireless sensor network. In-
ternational Journal of Scientiﬁc Engineering and Technology 123–125 IEERT confer-
ence Paper.
Lemmon, H., 1986. Comax: an expert system for cotton crop management. Science. 233
(4759), 29–33.
Liakos, K.G., Busato, P., Moshou, D., Pearson, S., Bochtis, D., 2018. Machine Learning in Ag-
riculture: A Review. Sensors. 18 (2674), 1–29.
Logatchevl, A.A., Afanas'evl, V.P., Shkol'nik, S.M., Pursch, H., Jiittner, B., 1998. The behav-
iour of vacuum arc discharges at hydrogen impregnated electrodes. IEEE 18th Int.
Symp. on Discharses and Electrical Insulation in Vacuum-Eindhoven, pp. 288–291.
Maier, H.R., Dandy, G.C., 2000. Neural networks for the prediction and forecasting of
water resources variables: a review of modeling issues and applications. Environ-
mental Modeling & Software 101–124.
Malavade, V.N., Akulwar, P.K., 2016. Role of IoT in Agriculture. National Conference On
“Changing Technology and Rural Development”. pp. 56–57.
Manickavasagan, A., Jayas, D.S., White, N.D.G., Paliwal, J., 2005. Applications of Thermal
Imaging in Agriculture – A Review. CSAE/SCGR 2005 Meeting Winnipeg, Manitoba.
1–11.
McKinion, J.M., Lemmon, H.E., 1985. Expert systems for agriculture. Comput. Electron.
Agric. 1 (1), 31–40.
Miranda, F.R., Yoder, R., Wilkerson, J.B., 2003. “A Site-speciﬁc Irrigation Control System”,
Presented at the ASAE Annu. Int. Meeting, Las Vegas, NV, Jul. 27–30.
Mohanraj, I., Ashokumar, K., Naren, J., 2016. Field monitoring and automation using IOT in
agriculture domain. 6th International Conference on Advances in Computing & Com-
munications, ICACC 2016, 6–8 September 2016, Cochin, India, 93, pp. 931–939.
11
K. Jha et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 2 (2019) 1–12
Möller, J., 2010. Computer vision – a versatile technology in automation of agriculture
machinery. 21st Annual Meeting Bologna. EIMA International 1–16.
Mozny, M., Krejci, J., Kott, I., 1993. CORAC, hops protection management systems. Comput.
Electron. Agric. 9, 103–110.
Mustafa, N.B.M., Ahmed, S.K., Ali, Z., Yit, W.B., Abidin, A.A.Z., Md Sharrif, Z.A., 2009. Agri-
cultural produce sorting and grading using support vector machines and fuzzy
logic. IEEE International Conference on Signal and Image Processing Applications.
391–396.
Nema, M.K., Khare, D., Chandniha, S.K., 2017. Application of artiﬁcial intelligence to esti-
mate the reference evapotranspiration in sub-humid Doon valley. Appl Water Sci 7,
3903–3910.
Pasqual, G.M., Mansﬁeld, J., 2003. Development of a prototype expert system for identiﬁ-
cation and control of insect pests. Comput. Electron. Agric. 2 (4), 263–276.
Patil, S.S., Thorat, S.A., 2016. Early detection of grapes diseases using machine learning and
IoT. Second International Conference on Cognitive Computing and Information Pro-
cessing (CCIP), IEEE 1–5.
Pawar, S.B., Rajput, P., Shaikh, A., 2018. Smart irrigation system using IOT and raspberry
pi. International Research Journal of Engineering and Technology. 5 (8), 1163–1166.
Prakash, C., Rathor, A.S., Thakur, G.S.M., 2013. Fuzzy Based Agriculture Expert System for
Soyabean. pp. 1–13.
Punn, M., Bhalla, N., 2013. Classiﬁcation of wheat grains using machine algorithms. Inter-
national Journal of Science and Research. 2 (8), 363–366.
Rahman, M.M., Bala, B.K., 2010. Modelling of jute production using artiﬁcial neural net-
works. Biosyst. Eng. 105, 350–356.
Ravichandran, G., Koteshwari, R.S., 2016. Agricultural crop predictor and advisor using
ANN for smartphones. IEEE 1–6.
Roach, J., Virkar, R., Drake, C., Weaver, M., 1987. An expert system for helping apple
growers. Comput. Electron. Agric. 2 (2), 97–108.
Robinson, C., Mort, N., 1997. A neural network system for the protection of citrus crops
from frost damage. Comput. Electron. Agric. 16 (3), 177–187.
Roopaei, M., Rad, P., Choo, K.K.R., 2017. Cloud of things in smart agriculture: intelligent ir-
rigation monitoring by thermal imaging. IEEE Computer society. 10–15.
Sannakki, S.S., Rajpurohit, V.S., Nargund, V.B., Kumar, A., Yallur, P.S., 2011. Leaf disease
grading by machine vision and fuzzy logic. Int. J. Comp. Tech. Appl. 2 (5), 1709–1716.
Savitha, M., UmaMaheshwari, O.P., 2018. Smart crop ﬁeld irrigation in IOT architecture
using sensors. Int. J. Adv. Res. Comput. Sci. 9 (1), 302–306.
Shahin, M.A., Symons, S.J., 2001. A machine vision system for grading lentils. Can. Biosyst.
Eng. 43, 7–14.
Shahzadi, R., Tausif, M., Ferzund, J., Suryani, M.A., 2016. Internet of things based expert
system for smart agriculture. Int. J. Adv. Comput. Sci. Appl. 7 (9), 341–350.
Shantaiya, S., Ansari, U., 2010. Identiﬁcation of food grains and its quality using pattern
classiﬁcation. International Journal of Computer & Communication Technology. 2
(2), 70–74.
Shekhar, Y., Dagur, E., Mishra, S., Tom, R.J., Veeramanikandan, M., Sankaranarayanan, S.,
2017. Intelligent IoT based automated irrigation system. Int. J. Appl. Eng. Res. 12
(18), 7306–7320.
Shiravale, S., Bhagat, S.M., 2014. Wireless sensor networks in agriculture sector imple-
mentation and security measures. International Journal of Computer Applications.
92 (13), 25–29.
Si, Y., Liu, G., Lin, J., Lv, Q., Juan, F., 2007. Design of control system of laser leveling machine
based on fussy control theory. International Conference on Computer and Computing
Technologies in Agriculture, pp. 1121–1127.
Sicat, R.S., Carranza, E.J.M., Nidumolu, U.B., 2005. Fuzzy modeling of farmers' knowledge
for land suitability classiﬁcation. Agric. Syst. 83, 49–75.
Singh, R.K., Prajneshu, 2008. Artiﬁcial neural network methodology for modelling and
forecasting maize crop yield. Agric. Econ. Res. Rev. 21, 5–10.
Song, H., He, Y., 2005. Crop nutrition diagnosis expert system based on artiﬁcial neural
networks. Third International Conference on Information Technology and Applica-
tions (ICITA'05), Sydney, NSW, 2005, 1, pp. 357–362.
Soorya, E., Tejashree, M., Suganya, P., 2013. Smart drip irrigation system using sensor net-
works. International Journal of Scientiﬁc & Engineering Research 4 (5), 2039–2042.
Stone, N.D., Toman, T.W., 1989. A dynamically linked expert-database system for decision
support in Texas cotton production. Comput. Electron. Agric. 4 (2), 139–148.
Tan, L., 2016. Cloud-based decision support and automation for precision agriculture in
orchards. IFAC-Papers OnLine. 49 (16), 330–335.
Tilva, V., Patel, J., Bhatt, C., 2013. Weather based plant diseases forecasting using fuzzy
logic. Nirma University International Conference on Engineering (NUiCONE). 1–5.
Tremblay, N., Bouroubi, M.Y., Panneton, B., Guillaume, S., Vigneault, P., Be'lec, C., 2010. De-
velopment and validation of fuzzy logic inference to determine optimum rates of N
for corn on the basis of ﬁeld and crop features. Precision Agric. 11, 621–635.
Valdés-Vela, M., Abrisqueta, I., Conejero, W., Vera, J., Ruiz-Sánchez, M.C., 2015. Soft com-
puting applied to stem water potential estimation: a fuzzy rule based approach.
Comput. Electron. Agric. 115, 150–160.
Wall, R.W., King, B.A., 2004. Incorporating Plug and Play Technology Into Measurement
and Control Systems for Irrigation. Management, 2004, Ottawa, Canada August 1–4.
Yang, H. Liusheng, W. Junmin, X. Hongli, Wireless Sensor Networks for Intensive Irrigated
Agriculture,‖ Consumer Communications and Networking Conference, 2007. CCNC
2007. 4th IEEE, pp.197–201, Las Vegas, Nevada, Jan. 2007.
Yong, W., Shuaishuai, L., Li, L., Minzan, L., Arvanitis, K.G., Georgieva, C., Sigrimis, N., 2018.
Smart sensors from ground to cloud and web intelligence. IFAC-Papers OnLine 51
(17), 31–38.
12
K. Jha et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 2 (2019) 1–12
