 AASRI Procedia  5 ( 2013 )  183 – 188 
2212-6716 © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
Selection and/or peer review under responsibility of American Applied Science Research Institute
doi: 10.1016/j.aasri.2013.10.076 
ScienceDirect
 
A
bD
Abst
Trust
to co
value
trans
 
© 20
Sele
 
Keyw
1. 
S
distr
ensu
distr
mod
have
prop
mod
appr
to co
wher
2013 AA
A New P
aDepartme
Department of Co
tract 
t among entitie
ompute trust val
es. Mutual auth
smitted securely
013 Published
ection and/or p
words: Distributed
Introduction
Security metho
ributed system
ure secure com
ributed trust m
del for distribu
e been discus
posed in [7].  
del is propose
roach is propo
ompute trust u
re trust is def
ASRI Conf
Proposal
ent of Computer S
omputer Science &
es of a distribut
lues using fuzz
hentication is e
y using cryptogr
d by Elsevier B
peer review un
d environment, G
n 
odologies in 
m are identifi
mmunication.
model has been
uted system ha
sed in [6]. Fo
A behaviour
ed in [10] tha
osed in [11]. F
using fuzzy. A
fined in terms
ference on P
l for Dist
Vijay P
Science & Engine
& Engineering, B
ted system supp
zy based approa
ensured among
raphy. The trus
B.V.  
nder responsib
Grid, Fuzzy Logic,
grid systems
ed as: trust, a
. It can be us
n developed fo
as been devel
or wireless co
ral pattern bas
at ensures dat
Fuzzy logic ca
Alfarez Abdu
s of direct trus
Parallel and 
tributed 
rakasha, M
eering, BBD Univ
Babu Banarasi Da
 
ports secure env
ach. The main f
g the communi
st values have a
bility of Amer
 Trust. 
 [1, 2, 3] is 
authentication
sed for imple
for ad hoc mob
oped in [5]. T
ommunication
sed security s
ta security in
an be used for
ul-Rehman and
st and recomm
Distributed
System 
Manuj Darb
versity, Lucknow
as University, Luc
vironment. In t
focus of the app
cating entities
also been used t
rican Applied 
an important
n, encryption 
ementing secu
bile networks 
Trust and repu
ns, a rendezvo
system is pro
n distributed s
r calculating tr
d Stephen Ha
mended trust. 
d Computing
Security
arib 
w, India, E-mail: v
cknow, India, E-m
his paper, the a
proach is on the
using trust val
o generate acce
Science Rese
t aspect. Secu
and access c
urity methods
in [4]. A trus
utation based a
ous node bas
posed in [8, 
system. Trust
rust. Many m
ailers have pro
In our framew
g and Syste
y Frame
vijaylko@gmail.c
mail: manujuma@
authors propose
e dynamic beha
lues. These tru
ess control polic
earch Institute 
urity features
control. ‘Trust
s in grid env
t and access c
access control
ed trust based
9]. A new ac
tWebRank ba
models have be
oposed a trust
work we have
ems 
work 
com 
@gmail.com 
e an approach 
aviour of trust 
ust values are 
cies. 
s required in 
t’ is used to 
vironment. A 
control based 
l mechanism 
d security is 
ccess control 
ased security 
een proposed 
t model [12] 
e direct trust 
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
© 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
Selection and/or peer review under responsibility of American Applied Science Research Institute
Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
184  
 Vijay Prakash and Manuj Darbari /  AASRI Procedia  5 ( 2013 )  183 – 188 
 
values based on direct communication and updated trust value based on direct and feedback trust values. Fixed 
weighted [13] and variable weighted [14] fuzzy based models have been proposed for evaluation of trust. As 
evaluation parameters have dynamic significance, hence variable weighted method is used here. 
This paper is divided into 5 sections; section 2 defines the terminology we have used for defining our grid 
system also with the data structures used for maintaining the trust values. Section 3defines the fuzzy approach 
used to calculate the trust value. Then section 4 defines the various security measures used in this framework. 
Section 5 is conclusion and future scope. 
2. Proposed Framework 
Grid is composed of a number of independent domains. Here, we refer to these domains as Organizations. 
Each organization is an autonomous domain with its own administrative and security policies. These are 
denoted as vector O={O1, O2, O3….. On}, where, Oi is the ith organization of the grid environment. These 
organizations comprises of entities. An entity is represented as 
if where i represents the organization to 
which entity e belongs, j represents the grade of an entity within the organization x is used as a name for entity 
to differentiate from different entities. Grade of an entity refers to the level of trust that an organization has 
over its own entity. Two entities of the same organization can have the same grade.  
Each organization has a manager. Mi denotes the manager of organization Oi. Grades are allotted by the 
organization manager, which is responsible for maintaining the trust values of an organization and its entities. 
Initially Mi assigns same grades to all the entities e  Oi. Gradually, with feedbacks from communicating 
entities, grade is updated. 
For any entity e, we have following types of trust values: 
a) Initial Trust Value: The Trust value assigned for it by any entity with which no communication has 
occurred in the past. They are based on authentication queries. And its value can be either 0 or t0. The scope of 
these values is before completion of any transaction. (b) Direct Trust Value: The Trust generated after an 
entity has carried out a job. It is based on, initial trust, job success rate, error rate, turnaround time. Its value 
ranges from   [t0, 1] and the scope of these values is before completion of job. (c) Reputation: It depends on 
trust values by other entities. Its value depends on feedbacks after job completion, trust on an organization and 
grade within organization.  
For any organization, we have various trust values,  
(a)Initial trust value: It is based on the authentication queries from the highest grade entity. In case, all 
entities are of the same grade, randomly any entity can be selected. (b) Direct Trust Value: With the 
competition of job, direct trust values of entities of organization are updated. 
Direct Trust for Oi = Aggregate function (direct trust values of all communicating entities of Oi). 
The description of the data structures are as follows:   
Direct Trust Matrix: An entity 
 has a trust matrix 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
where columns represents the communicating entities and rows represents the contexts of communications. 
Above matrix represents that 
has .5 trust over 
for context C1 and .2 for context C2. So, we can say that 
Q
op
e
y
ekl
C1 
C2 
C3 
.5 
.2 
.1 
.7 
.9 
.1 
.3 
.6 
0 
z
emn
185
 Vijay Prakash and Manuj Darbari /  AASRI Procedia  5 ( 2013 )  183 – 188 
 
entity 
 is better for context C1 in view point of 
 
Feedback matrix:  this matrix is sent to the manager of the entity’s organization. For example, lets assume 
that 
   Oj communicates with e  Oi then, based on its communications its will generate feedbacks and 
send it to Mj .  Mj will aggregate all the received feedback matrices and send to Mi. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
So in the above matrix we can see, that column represents all the entities of organization Oi. With respect to 
different contexts, trust values are assigned to the entities with which communication took place. Since there 
was no communication of 
  with 
 in terms of C3 hence it takes value as NA.  
Update Trust Matrix: This matrix is generating by updating the trust matrix with the feedbacks received 
from different entities. So a join operator is used here to get a combined result from both the matrices.  
Updated Trust Matrix = Trust Matrix (+) feedback matrix, here (+) represents join operator.  
3. Applying Fuzzy Inference Engine in Trust Computation 
It is a variable weight based fuzzy evaluation. 
3.1 Computation of direct trust matrix: Direct Trust depends on following parameters, initial trust, job 
success rate, Error rate, turnaround time. 
Now we need to assign weights to these parameters. Importance of a parameter depends on the instant of 
time, the trust value is computed. For example, if two entities are going to compute for the first time, then 
whole weightage will be given to initial trust value. Whereas, after few successful job completions, initial 
trust will have least weightage. Therefore, these weights will be variable. Wi is weight for Evaluation 
parameter Ei,  where E= (E1 E2 E3 E4 )  is the evaluation parameter vector. Value of evaluation is denoted as u1, 
u2, …. un  where ui
{0, μm} so, when Ei is best ui  = μm  
When Ei is worst 
i  = 0 
i will be a non increasing differential function in (0,μm)  
i (u) < 0  Where u  (0,μm) 
so, 
Wi = (u1, u2 …… un)  =    
  
3.2 Computation of Feedback matrix  
Say few entities of Oj communicate with entities of Oi. After completion of job, Oj entities will give 
feedback of Oi entities to Mj. On the basis of which feedback matrix will be generated.  
Depending upon the grades of ej entities (which would be variable); then feedback values will be 
computed. 
E = {f1, f2, f3 ……..} 
 
 
 
fi – feedback from the entity. 
 = {
1, 
2, 
3 ……}  
 
 
 
i – grade value of ith entity 
 
 
Q
ip
e
y
elh
C1 
C2 
C3 
.5 
.2 
.1 
.7 
.9 
.1 
.3 
.6 
NA
z
ein
186  
 Vijay Prakash and Manuj Darbari /  AASRI Procedia  5 ( 2013 )  183 – 188 
 
So, here weight values  grade values 
So 
Wi = (u1, u2 …… un) =    
 condition, entities provide feedback for same context. So, for 
different contest, different matrices can be developed. 
3.3 Computation of update matrix  
Here joint operation will be used as:  
As, feedback will be received from different managers 
So E = [Mf1, Mf2, ……… Mf12] where Mfi is feedback from Mi 
  = (
1, 
2 ……… 
 n) 
  = trust value of any organization. 
So, here    weights      Organization trust value. 
So,  Wi = (u1, u2 …… un)  =    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 1 Space Time Diagram Values for Trust and Grade Values 
4. Defence in depth security  
Whenever a new entity/organization wishes to be the part of grid, authentication is required. Security threat 
could be both ways, it may be possible that a hacker is trying to be a part of grid or, it may be possible that a 
legitimate user is getting connected to a spoofed grid component. 
So Mutual Authentication is required. In our framework authentication takes place at two levels. Time line 
diagram below shows how authentication is carried out. 
 
Computes 
Feedback  
Mareix for Oj 
Updates trust 
for 
Oj 
 
feedback mareix 
Feedback of 
ej 
feedback of 
ei 
Updates grade 
Computers 
Feedback  
Mareix 
Updates 
trust for 
Oi 
Communications 
Once job is over 
Updates  
Grade 
 
Job 
Oj 
Oi 
Mj 
Mi 
ei 
ej 
187
 Vijay Prakash and Manuj Darbari /  AASRI Procedia  5 ( 2013 )  183 – 188 
 
 
Fig. 2 Time Line Diagram for Mutual Authentication 
Level 1, whenever a new entity wishes to join a grid, it will send request to particular grid entity to which it 
wants to communicate. This grid entity will check for authentication, by generating certain queries. Only 
legitimate user will have the correct answers to those queries. In case correct responses are received, grid 
entity will sent initial trust value (to).Else if wrong response will be there then grid entity will assign trust = 0, 
and an alarm will be generated for all grid entities informing about this unidentified entity. 
 Level 2:- When grid entity sends the initial trust, the trust value is sent using public key cryptography. 
Therefore, an entity can have access to the trust value, only if it has the key to it. Suppose a hacker in any way 
gets the responses of initial queries, he will be able to cross the first level authentication, but cannot cross level 
2 unless presence of key. 
Keys should be changed periodically because in grid computing, entities may join and leave the grid 
dynamically, even during the execution. So, Stateless Key Management can be used to securely maintain the 
keys. 
The new entity joining the grid must also be sure of the authentication of grid. Therefore, mutual 
authentication is necessary. New entity will also generate queries to which grid responses are checked and 
accordingly trust is established. Here also two levels of security are maintained.  
4.1 Access Control  
Initially, a new entity will have limited access to resources corresponding to the initial trust t0.  As the trust 
values of a new member increases, he is allowed to get more access to resources. 
Thus, access control policies vary according to the trust values. The manager’s of each entity are 
responsible for maintaining the access control. Managers maintain the trust value of each entity of other 
organizations, on the basis of feedback from its own entities. 
Say, 
want to communicate to 
then Mk is responsible for access control. Mk checks the trust value 
from feedback matrices and accordingly allows 
  
 
188  
 Vijay Prakash and Manuj Darbari /  AASRI Procedia  5 ( 2013 )  183 – 188 
 
5. Conclusion and Future Scope  
 
In this paper, trust values have been used to carry out authentication and access control, ensuring a secure 
grid environment. Fuzzy logic concept is utilized for evaluating the trust. In future, authors would be working 
for decreasing the computations required for generating and updating trust values. Also reputation parameter 
can be added to ensure secure communication.  
References  
[1] Shehab M, Ghafoor A, Bertino E., Secure collaboration in a mediator free distributed environment”, IEEE 
Transactions on Parallel and  Distributed Systems, 2010:19(10), pp.1338-1351. 
[2] Pallickara S., Ekanayake J., Fox G, A scalable approach for the secure and authorized tracking of the 
availability of entities in distributed systems, IEEE International Parallel and Distributed Processing 
Symposium, pp. 1-10, 2007. 
[3] Anderson R., Security engineering: a guide to building dependable distributed systems, Wiley, 2010. 
[4] Omar M, Challal Y, Bouabdallah A, Reliable and fully distribted trust model for mobile ad hoc networks”, 
Computers and Security, 2009: 28(3-4), pp. 199-214. 
[5] Feng F, Chuang L, Peng D, Li J, A trust and context based access control model for distributed system, 
10th IEEE International Conference on High Performance Computing and Communications, pp 629-634, 2008. 
[6] Marmol FG, Derez GM, Security threats Scenarios in trust and reputation models for distributed systems, 
Computers and Security, 2009: 28, pp 545-556. 
[7] Cheng N, Govindan K. and Mahopatra P., Rendezvous based trust propagation to enhance distributed 
network security, International Journal of Security and Networks, 2011: 6(2-3), pp 112-122. 
[8] Ukil, Arijit, Secure Trust Management in Distributed Computing Systems, Sixth IEEE International 
Symposium on Electronic Design, Test and Application(DELTA), pp. 116-121, 2011. 
[9] Uzunov AV, Fernandez EB and Falkner K, Securing distributed systems using patterns: a survey, 
Computers and Security, 2012: 31(5), pp. 681-703. 
[10] Aneta PM, Implementation of Access Control Model for Distributed Information Systems Using  Usage 
Control, Security and Intelligent Information System, vol. 7053, 2012, pp. 54-67. 
[11] Carchiolo V, Longheu A, Malgeri M and Mangioni G, Trust assessment: a personalized, distributed, and 
secure approach, Concurrency and Computation: Practice and Experience, 2012: 24(6), pp. 605-617. 
[12] Abdul-Rahman A, Hailes S, Supporting Trust in Virtual Communities, 33rd Hawaii International 
Conference on System Sciences, vol. 6, Dec. 2007, pp. 6007. 
[13] Tang W, Chen Z, Research of subjective trust management model based on the fuzzy set theory, Journal 
of Software, 2003:14(8), pp. 1401-1408. 
[14] Liao H, Wang Q and Li G, A Fuzzy Logic Based Trust Model in Grid, International Conference on 
Networks Security, Wireless Communications and Trusted Computing NSWCTC, pp. 608-614, 2009. 
 
