Array 14 (2022) 100164
Available online 9 April 2022
2590-0056/© 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Array
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/array
A systematic review of meta-heuristic algorithms in IoT based application
Vivek Sharma, Ashish Kumar Tripathi ∗
Malaviya National Institute of Technology, Jaipur, Rajasthan, India
A R T I C L E
I N F O
Keywords:
Meta-heuristic algorithms
Internet-of-things
Swarm intelligence
UAV
A B S T R A C T
Internet-of-Things (IoT) has gained quick popularity with the evolution of technologies such as big data
analytics, block-chain, artificial intelligence, machine learning, and deep learning. IoT based systems provides
smart and automatic framework for the efficient decision making and automation of various task to make
human life easy. Meta-heuristic algorithms are self-organized and decentralized algorithms used for solving
complex problems using team intelligence. Recently, meta-heuristic algorithms has been widely used for solving
a number of IoT based challenges. This paper presents a systematic review of meta-heuristic algorithms used for
unfolding the IoT based applications. The broad classification of existing meta-heuristic based algorithms has
been documented. Further, the prominent applications of IoT based system using the meta-heuristic algorithms
are presented. Moreover, the current research questions are included to illustrate the new opportunities for
the researchers. Finally, the current trends in IoT and possible future directions are documented. This paper
will provide new directions to the researchers working in the field of meta-heuristic algorithms and IoT based
system.
1. Introduction
Meta-heuristics are one of the prominent approach for solving a
number of complex real-world problems. These algorithms are truly
inspired by the fascinating behaviors observed in nature. Over the past
few years, the growing complexity in the optimization based prob-
lems has motivated researchers to explore efficient problem-solving
algorithms which focuses on decentralized, and self-organized sys-
tems [1,2]. Meta-heuristics are inspired by the behavior of physical
phenomenon, biological evolution, and living beings, such as fish,
birds, ants, termites, and birds. These are characterized by interactions
between local individuals and provide intelligent behaviors at various
group levels [3]. Different meta-heuristics have been introduced and
applied successfully to solve a wide range of applications. Moreover,
the new algorithms which have been offered are still under study, and
need to prove their efficiency. A number of reviews have been proposed
for the various applications of meta-heuristic algorithms. Unlike, the
existing work present in the literature, this paper gathers the scope of
application and provides the suitable findings for the IoT based applica-
tions. The present work helps the researchers to localize their research
in the conclusive direction. Moreover, the key findings in the literature
might be used by the researchers to work on a variety of meta-heuristics
for solving IoT based applications. In recent year, internet-of-things has
been widely studied and applied in distinct fields like the medical,
traffic monitoring systems, smart cities, and wearable devices [4].
∗ Corresponding author.
E-mail address: ashish.cse@mnit.ac.in (A.K. Tripathi).
Internet-of-Things (IoT) is an umbrella of other technologies comprised
of sensors, actuation, and data processing for the application and ser-
vice development. The prime aim of IoT is to provide small objects with
intelligence to decide, perceive, and cooperate with other machines,
objects, and even humans. It is an area of research where physical
entities like machines and humans are connected through a network.
The information is shared quickly, enabling a novel category of service
and applications. As the IoT network expands, this increases velocity,
variety, and a large volume of data. There are several challenging issues
in IoT systems as their dynamic properties, mobility of devices, and
communications in wireless mode. However, the flexibility and robust-
ness properties in meta-heuristics make a successful design paradigm
to deal with IoT based complex problems. Therefore, meta-heuristics
algorithms act as a source of inspiration for complex systems of IoT,
which are applied in real-time actions and can be modeled with IoT
based approach to achieve some goals. Fig. 1 depicts the integration
of meta-heuristics and IoT for solving the real time problems. In this
way, a global optimum is reached from the simple rules for individual
behavior and communication among the individuals. In such type of
varying environmental conditions, a self-organizing ability needs to
be adapted to scale efficiently. Recent literature reports a number of
nature inspired algorithms established in the major application areas.
This paper embodies a systematic literature review which reveals the
major meta-heuristics algorithms in internet-of-things based systems
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.array.2022.100164
Received 15 August 2021; Received in revised form 28 February 2022; Accepted 1 April 2022
Array 14 (2022) 100164
2
V. Sharma and A.K. Tripathi
Fig. 1. Integration of SI algorithms in IoT systems.
employed till date [5]. The objective of the current study is in three
folds. First, a comprehensive overview of algorithms and their usage
in various applications have been provided. In the next phase, differ-
ent applications of meta-heuristics in IoT based systems is illustrated.
Finally, important features of meta-heuristics in IoT, recent trends,
challenges, research questions, and improvements to be addressed in
future work are mentioned.
2. Related work
This section reveals the broad classification of meta-heuristic algo-
rithms present in the literature. The algorithms are classified in five
categories based on their nature. Also, the IoT based applications of
different meta-heuristic based algorithms is presented.
2.1. Meta-heuristic algorithms
Concurrently with the new era of information technology, a large
number of optimization problems are emerging in different fields such
as bio-informatics, computer vision, big data analytic, and Internet-of-
Things etc [6]. Unfortunately, majority of the real world optimization
problems are NP hard in nature which cannot be decoded in a polyno-
mial time domain. Therefore, only small scale instance can be handled
using exact mathematical methods. Rather than giving up, the investi-
gators thought to use possible approximation methods which can find
some feasible solution in the given time. These algorithms can be cat-
egorized to meta-heuristics and heuristics based on the randomization
approach. The substantial difference between both algorithms is that
heuristics algorithms are more problem-dependent in comparison to
meta-heuristics. These algorithms are restricted to some specific prob-
lems. In contrary, meta-heuristic algorithms can be applied to atmost all
optimization problems, as they uses the optimizer knows as black box.
The Recent literature reports a number of existing nature inspired meta-
heuristics algorithms namely, evolutionary Algorithms, bio-inspired
algorithms, swarm intelligence, and physical based algorithms. This
study performs a systematic literature review on technological advance-
ments in field of swarm intelligence in IoT. The literature was collected
from eight popular databases namely, google scholar, ACM digital
library, elsevier, frontier media, IEEE explorer, science direct, hindawi
publishing corporation, and taylor francis. The most relevant reviews,
cited papers, and current hot spots are investigated. The information
presented in Fig. 2 shows the summarized survey report of several
paper.
2.2. Classification and applications of meta-heuristic algorithms
In the last four decades, more than hundreds of meta-heuristics algo-
rithms have been developed for solving several real world optimization
problems over a variety of domains. In this section, a classification and
summarizing of existing meta-heuristic algorithms has been illustrated.
Moreover, the classification of the meta-heuristics based on different
applications has been also documented in Table 1. Fig. 3 presents
the classification of the existing meta-heuristics based on their natural
behavior.
2.2.1. Evolutionary based meta-heuristics algorithms
Evolution-based methods are inspired by the principles of Charles
Darwin, theory of natural selection, which is based on survival of the
fittest in a given environment [7]. Initially, these algorithms starts with
a set of population and consequently search process takes place over
successive generations till the most feasible solution is obtained [8].
For evolutionary computations, a number of algorithms has been in-
troduced such as bio-geography based optimizer [9], genetic program-
ming [10], evolution strategy [11], granular agent evolutionary algo-
rithm [12] and virulence optimization algorithm [13]. Besides, to solve
the conventional optimization issues, evolutionary based methods can
be employed in providing the solutions to robotic motion planning,
knapsack problem, travelling salesman problem, fuzzy logic based so-
lutions, and in training the artificial neural networks. These algorithms
are widely applied to resolve the different real world challenges of
engineering, agriculture field, fundamental research, and in industries.
2.2.2. Physics based meta-heuristics algorithms
The physics based methods are inspired by physical rules present in
the universe such as cooling and heating of materials, newtons law of
gravity [14,15]. Simulated annealing based algorithms shows different
behaviour at different temperature. During the physical process, first
it warms the material and then gradually decrease the temperature for
decreasing the defects, which reduces the energy of system. Simulated
annealing gives better performance in finding the optimal solution.
Further, their is no starting point strategy in such algorithms. Some
of the popular algorithms in simulated annealing are ray optimization,
black hole algorithm [16], gravitational local search algorithm [17],
find fix finish exploit analyze [18], electron search algorithm [19],
harmony search [20] and shuffled frog leaping algorithm [21]. These
algorithms has shown the promising results in dealing with the real
world problems. Further, experimentation has been performed to check
Array 14 (2022) 100164
3
V. Sharma and A.K. Tripathi
Fig. 2. Distribution of papers in different database.
Fig. 3. Taxonomy of Meta-heuristics Algorithms.
the possibility of integration of fundamental physics based behaviour in
recent applications such as in structural aligning, retrieving information
from web, time frequency analysis, routing problems of vehicles, and
in testing of softwares. However, these applications sometimes cannot
fully utilize the advantages proffer by distributed physics architectures.
2.2.3. Swarm intelligence based meta-heuristics algorithms
According to Collins dictionary, swarm intelligence is an artificial
intelligence approach of problem solving using the organized collective
behavior of social animals or insects [22]. Moreover, the origin of
swarm intelligence are embedded in the biological studies. Swarm
intelligence is concerned with the intelligent multi-agent system which
are inspired by the collective intelligence. Furthermore, this collective
intelligence comes from the interaction of homogeneous agents. For
this, no such global pattern is required to govern the interactions
among the insects which are executed on information provided locally.
Various algorithms have been developed on different intelligent be-
haviour. The biological swarm intelligence is found among the flocks
of birds, colonies of ants, schools of fish, mosquito host seeking, social
spider and honey bee mating. Some of the popular swarm intelligence
algorithms are ant colony optimization [23], particle Swarm Opti-
mization [24], artificial bee colony [25], fish swarm algorithm [26]
ageist spider monkey optimization [27], lions algorithm, [28], whale
optimization algorithm [29], spider monkey optimization [30], drag-
onfly optimization [31], bee swarm optimization [32], learning swarm
optimization framework [33], photo voltaic swarm optimization [34],
coronavirus optimization [35], mayfly optimization algorithm [36],
horse herd optimization algorithm [37] and artificial humming bird
algorithm [38]. These different applications has envisioned to resolve
the several real world challenges.
2.2.4. Bio inspired based meta-heuristics algorithms
In the current scenario, bio-inspired algorithms is getting more
prominence. The biologically inspired algorithms comprises the major-
ity of meta-heuristics algorithms which are derived from behaviour of
living organism biological evolution [8]. In particular, these algorithms
are concerned with intelligence derived from nature algorithms that
are distributed, decentralized and self organized malleable in nature.
As the world is moving towards the digital era, the size of data is
increasing exponentially. To extract the meaningful information from
decentralized data is one of the challenge. Furthermore, to find the
optimal solution is very tedious task. To overcome this some intelligent
approaches are required. Some of the intelligent bio inspired algorithms
are artificial immune system [39], where we stand & what is the
next [40], salp swarm optimization [41], a long road ahead [42], pity
beetle bio-inspired [43], bacterial foraging optimization [44], dendritic
cell algorithm [45], and krill herd algorithm [46]. Different researchers
has showcased the use of bio inspired algorithms in different applica-
tions such as in text summarization, wireless sensor networks, NP hard
Array 14 (2022) 100164
4
V. Sharma and A.K. Tripathi
Table 1
Classification of algorithms based on applications.
Category
Algorithm
Inspired
Application areas
Year
Physics based [14]
Simulated Annealing (SA)
Inspired by behavior of systems with
many degree of freedom in thermal
equilibrium
In multivariate or combinatorial optimization
1983
Physics based [59]
Memetic Algorithm (MA)
Inspired by population based hybrid
genetic algorithms
Optimization problem for chemical process
1989
Evolutionary based [7]
Genetic algorithms (GA)
Inspired by the process of natural
selection that belongs to the larger class
of evolutionary algorithm
For solving high quality solution to
optimization and search problems
1992
Physics based [20]
Harmony Search (HS)
Mimicking the improvisation of music
players
Travelling salesman problem, A specific
academic optimization problem, A least cost
pipe network design problem
2001
Bio inspired [44]
Bacterial foraging
optimization (BFO)
Foraging behavior of Escherichia coli
bacteria
Machine learning, Pattern recognition,
Mathematical analysis, Neural network
problems
2002
Bird [24]
Particle swarm
optimization (PSO)
Movement of fish schools, and bird
flocks
Data clustering, Data mining, Time series
prediction, flow shop scheduling problem
2004
Insect-based [23]
Ant Colony Optimization
(ACO)
Pheromone behavior of ants
Heart disease prediction, set problem,
Clustering and classification problems, Image
processing, travelling salesman problem
2005
Physics based [21]
Shuffled frog -leaping algo
(SFL)
Population based cooperative search
metaphor, inspired by natural memetics
For Solving combinatorial optimization problem
2006
Evolutionary based [10]
‘‘Evolutionary Strategy
(ES)’’
‘‘Inspired from self adaptive mutation
rates’’
Used to solve the problems related to vector of
real numbers
2006
Bio inspired [45]
Dendritic Cell algorithm
Inspired from the function of dendritic
cell of human immune system
Robotic classifier, dendritic cell population
tuning
2007
Evolutionary based [60]
Differential Evolution (DE)
Inspired from Vector Difference property
Used to solve numerical optimization problem
2008
problems, diode solar cell models, and in optimization of networks. The
aforementioned algorithms experimentally and theoretically, redefine
the different parameters which are used for updating and evaluating
the different applications.
2.2.5. Miscellaneous nature inspired meta-heuristics algorithms
In the last three decades, a number of nature inspired meta-
heuristics have been applied to different real world applications. These
algorithms are materialized as the prominent tools which provides an
alternative solution to many traditional real time based applications.
In the recent years, researchers have developed a number of meta-
heuristics algorithms with intensification and diversification in search
space. Several other nature inspired algorithms are river formation
dynamics [47], chemical reaction inspired [48], brain storm opti-
mization [49], adolescent identity optimization [50], cuckoo search
algorithm [51], cat swarm optimization [52], squirrel optimization
search algorithm [53], a novel hybrid optimizer for feature selec-
tion [54], invasive weed optimization [55], queuing search optimiza-
tion techniques [56], firefly algorithm [57] bat algorithms [58], and
gravitational search algorithm [17]. Further, from the above analysis
and discussions of several algorithms proposed by the authors, it is
quite crystal clear that competency’s of these algorithms seems to
influence different real world applications. The fundamental steps in
developing these algorithms are observations, designing, mathematical
module conversion, pseudo code development, and finally testing is
performed. The applications areas of these algorithms has been ap-
plied in solving the pattern recognition, network routing applications,
clustering of images, and decision making.
Table 2 presents the classification of different algorithms applied
over last four decade including the application areas and from where
these algorithms has been evolved. In addition, these studies did not
prioritize the investigation of a specific optimization techniques. In-
stead, a broad spectrum of them is exploited.
3. Meta-heuristic based IoT application: an overview
In this section, an extensive review of the meta-heuristic algo-
rithm in IoT based systems has been presented. The applications are
categorized in four major areas.
3.1. Meta-heuristic based IoT for enhancing health care services
In recent years, swarm intelligence (SI) in IoT emerged as the
burning research area which provides solution to complex real world
application like health care service [64]. SI in IoT plays an important
role in monitoring the healthcare sector in smart cities due to its
ability to retrieve the data of different patients, data collection using
sensors, disease diagnosis and other health services in less amount of
time and cost. However, to process the request of each stakeholder
is the biggest challenge in smart cities [65]. Furthermore, to enhance
the performance and to reduce the execution time of requested tasks
different task scheduling algorithms are used. The above techniques
will help the different stakeholders to minimize the time turnaround
time and maximize the resources. In addition, to improve the task
scheduling problem and providing magnified support the stakeholder,
intelligent optimization techniques has been introduced like particle
swarm optimization and parallel particle swarm optimization. Although
the different algorithms and frameworks has been proposed to improve
the performance of existing healthcare system. However, there are
certain limitations namely the first one is the problem of the data set.
For the better performance of models, large scale data is required.
Secondly, selection of optimal approach in different situation in this
sector effects the performance of the model. Besides this, there are
some issues which are unresolved and possible trends for the future
work such as information fusion, data analytics system, knowledge
interpretation, privacy and security.
3.2. Meta-heuristic based IoT in financial risk management
In recent years, with growing use of internet of things, different
Swarm intelligence based IoT applications have been developed in a
Array 14 (2022) 100164
5
V. Sharma and A.K. Tripathi
Table 2
Classification of algorithms based on applications.
Insect -based [25]
Artificial Bee Colony (ABC)
Foraging behavior of honey bee
Medical pattern classification, Image
watermarking optimization, vehicle routing,
route optimization
2009
Amphibious-based [25]
Fish swarm algorithm
(FSA)
Natural collective movement of fish, and
their social behavior
Robot control optimization, Routing problem,
Artificial neural network training
2009
Wild-based [61]
Grey wolf optimizer
(GWO)
Predatory behaviors of social hierarchy,
of wolf colony
Satellite image segmentation, Clustering,
Solving multiobjective problem, optimizing
artificial neural networks
2011
Evolutionary based [62]
Differential Evolution (DE)
Inspired from onlooker bee phase
Used to solve Model Order Reduction problem
for Single Input, Single Output Systems.
2012
Bio inspired [39]
Artificial Immune system
(AIS)
Inspired from human immune system
Used for damaged detection in structural health
monitoring
2012
‘‘Evolutionary based [9]’’
‘‘Genetic Programming
(GE)’’
From the natural genetic to the
population of programs
Heuristic search techniques, hill Climbing,
multi expression Progh
2017
Insect-based [63]
Beer froth artificial bee
colony (ABC)
Foraging behavior of honey bee
Job shop scheduling, flow shop scheduling,
batch scheduling’’,
2018
Bio inspired [30]
Spider monkey
optimization
From the behaviour of monkey
This algorithm is developed to enhance the
exploitation and exploration of smo algorithm
2019
Bio inspired [35]
Coronavirus optimization
From the behavior of novel covid-19
This algorithm is mainly defined to identify,
how it may affects the health of people
2020
Bio inspired [37]
Horse herd optimization
algorithm
From the behaviour of horses’ herding
for high-dimensional
Intimates the behaviour of horses at different
ages
2021
Bio inspired [38]
Artificial humming bird
algorithm
From the behavior of specific flight
skills of humming birds
Defines the intelligent foraging techniques
2022
broad field of financial risk management. As the financial data is grow-
ing at the massive rate, the data is collected in unstructured form [66].
As data is collected from multiple sources like mobile networks and
internet, proper prevention and management of multiple risk is an
important concern for commercial banks. Therefore, there is need to
develop some risk prediction models which are intelligent enough to
predict the behaviour with better accuracy. In case of financial risk
management the credit risk assessment is one of the major core consent
to the investors [67]. Furthermore with the development of internet-of-
things and artificial neural network theory, majority of the researchers
have developed some nonlinear models for evaluating the credit risk
of different bank loans [68]. Therefore, using these models testing of
multiple financial data is collected from different companies for the
prediction of bankruptcy. Different algorithms has been applied in the
field of financial risk management such as particle swarm optimization
based back propagation neural network used in banks for internet of
things deployment. This literature sheds light on the recent emerging
challenges associated with financial risk management such as feature
selection, financial distress prediction, option pricing, and bankruptcy
prediction which are gaining the attention of practitioners and scientist
from several communities. Most of these challenges are complex in
nature. However, recent optimization based algorithms tried to resolve
these challenges up to certain extent.
3.3. Meta-heuristic based IoT in smart agriculture
Collaborative swarm intelligence based IoT constitutes promising
solution for smart agriculture system. Unfortunately, smart agriculture
has several constraints and complicated topology. The prime constraint
is to find the optimized path route to work collaboratively [69]. As
population size is increasing at a massive rate, the current agricul-
tural techniques would not be enough to fulfill the food needs. In
order to boost up the existing farming techniques, different measures
needs to be taken for improving the productivity. The organic farming
has shown promising results in the further improvement of agricul-
tural productivity. To overcome the recent challenges of agricultural
activities, researchers robotics and intelligent system has been intro-
duced. Technological support in precision agriculture has come up
with the revolution for the development of crop health on farms [70].
Furthermore, it require collection of data, interpreting and finally
acting on data which has the capability to be automatized with swarm
intelligence in IoT based systems. Different algorithms have been pro-
posed for the proper path planning in agricultural fields namely Ant
colony optimization, Bellman-held-karp, [71] K-means clustering, and
Christofides based on nearest neighbour. Moreover, a number of agri-
cultural robots has been introduced in this field. These includes the
autonomous path planning and agricultural robots in rural areas to
preform the different tasks such as plucking fruits, weeding, pesticides
spraying, and cultivation. However, in the large farmland conditions,
several other alternative solutions are required which can save time as
well as money.
3.4. Meta-heuristic based IoT in infrastructural development
The impact of new technologies, especially in urban areas has
shown tremendous affect in developing countries. Furthermore, rapid
advancement of these technologies has overthrow the time and space
that the people are now familiar today [72]. In recent years swarm in-
telligence based IoT systems have been introduced in the infrastructural
development like smart cities. However, ensuring reliability, security,
efficiency, and scalability in smart cities is a challenging task. In these
conditions swarm intelligence is a promising techniques which focuses
on self organised and collective behaviour of decentralized systems.
Smart infrastructures can be modelled by using latest software, digi-
tal communication networks, sensors and embedded intelligence. The
modern infrastructures are developed, taking care of natural hazards,
tornadoes, earthquakes, and floods which causes the severe damages
and may lead to destruction of electricity, bridges, and communication
systems. To overcome these challenges different algorithms have been
proposed for the proper infrastructural development like a parallel
military-dog-based algorithm [73] and enhanced grey wolf optimizer
algorithm [74]. Further, these algorithms are used to early access
the damage and provide the rapid solutions to avoid the substantial
damages.
4. Research questions, challenges, and future directions
The motivation behind this review is to document the current
research hotspots, trends, challenges, and future research directions.
To answer this, investigation from the literature has been recorded and
research question has been derived. Some of these questions are:
Array 14 (2022) 100164
6
V. Sharma and A.K. Tripathi
1. Research questions investigated
• RQ-1:
What
are
the
fundamental
concepts
of
meta-heuristics ?
Reasoning: With the current growth of technologies, meta-
heuristics techniques has been witnessed as the crucial
asset. Optimization is everywhere, from economic to en-
gineering design, for planning holiday to internet routing.
As time, money, and resources are limited, the absolute
utility of these resources are important. As real world
optimization problems are non linear, to select an optimal
model in not an easier task. Therefore, meta-heuristic helps
in solving these computationally complex problems.
• RQ-2: What is the contribution of current research in meta-
heuristics in IoT ?
Reasoning: Swarm intelligence has been involved with IoT
based system. As IoT based systems are complicated, it
contains smart objects, SI based decentralized algorithms
are preferred to resolve these issues. Therefore, several
intelligent SI algorithms can be used to solve these critical
issues of IOT based systems because of its device mobility,
information provision, dynamic properties, and wireless
communication. SI based algorithms such as artificial bee
colony, ant colony optimization, and social spider opti-
mization has been applied to solve several real world
problems in normalizing IoT process.
• RQ-3: What technologies are used to develop a design
pattern for meta-heuristics algorithms ?
Reasoning: Analyze the frameworks and technologies
adopted from different domains for designing meta heuris-
tics algorithms. Design pattern conquer the crucial factors
of adopting the key practices in an abstract form. Different
computer scientists and researchers has used pattern based
perspectives which includes methodological, structural,
behavioral, and component-based patterns for designing
the optimization algorithms.
• RQ-4: What are different analytical techniques used for val-
idating
the
performance
of
meta-heuristics
algorithms ?
Reasoning: Compare the applicability of validation tech-
niques used, according to type of data collected. Different
evaluation metrics has been used for validating the per-
formance of meta-heuristics algorithms such as precision,
recall, F 1 score, specificity, and unimodel and multimodel
benchmark functions.
• RQ-5: Where the research articles have been published ?
Reasoning: Discover and understand the potential of dif-
ferent algorithms of meta-heuristics in solving the various
problems. For this different publication in journals, con-
ference, books, proceedings are taken into account. To
reveal the research venue where the research articles has
published the research results are shown in figure two.
2. Research challenges and future directions
Over the years, leveraging meta-heuristic algorithms to sustain real-
time applications in IoT environments is inevitable. Although the afore-
mentioned meta heuristic techniques are efficient, still numerous chal-
lenges and future directions must be addressed before scaling to the
next level. Following research challenges and future directions are
mined from the literature.
• Software & hardware IoT challenges in meta heuristic techniques:
From the last two decades, internet of things has gained a signifi-
cant attention with the use of smart devices in the different fields.
Recently, meta-heuristic optimization techniques is required to
make several system such as agriculture, health, infrastructure,
financial risk management and its allied sectors smart. How-
ever, real time implementation of meta-heuristic with IoT based
framework has two significant challenges. Firstly, the lack of
professional sensors is the major hurdle to develop smart specially
in agriculture sector. Secondly, the lack of networking commu-
nication, specially in rural areas affecting the entire system with
the unreliable data transfer. Therefore, it is necessary to develop a
feasible system for examining the performance of computationally
complex problems in different situations.
• Functional & interoperability challenges: In the recent times,
there is no single organisational structure developed which can
handle the dynamic and high dimensional data. Furthermore,
during the data transfer several security challenges such as data
tampering, wiretapping, and replay attacks may be attempted
causing security threat. For getting the best results several factors
such as authenticity, data integrity, and confidentiality must be
ensured during data acquisition and data transfer. However, some
optimization techniques has been developed which can handle
some problem up to certain extent. Capital investment in different
applications mentioned in the literature may hinder the growth of
this industry.
• Handling the large dimensional data: As the large amount of
data is generated from several IoT devices. Further, the ‘‘curse
of dimensionality’’ occurs when the dimensions of size of data
increases. Therefore, there is need of smart infrastructure to pro-
cess, analyze, and store data for the automation of various tasks.
However, during the non-stationary environment i.e when the
data is not static, some additional measures are required. These
essential measures will help the meta-heuristic techniques to
solve some satisfactorily dynamic problems. Moreover, platform
as service models are gaining swift popularity due to low cost
infrastructure such as sales force IOT platforms, thingWorx, and
amazon web services.
5. Conclusion
With the advancement of new technology, Internet-of-things has
evolved rapidly in various technologies such as in big data analytics,
block-chain, artificial intelligence, and machine learning. Furthermore,
these technologies can be applied in several diversified fields such as
agriculture, healthcare, financial risk management and infrastructural
development. This paper aims to introduce a high level of intelligence
in IoT-based systems by investigating the potential of realizing meta-
heuristic algorithms in IoT-based systems. The study shows that how
meta-heuristics algorithms behave closely with new emerging ideas
and applications. Moreover, it is very much clear that meta-heuristic
algorithms are one of the efficient paradigms which are useful for
presenting reliable and robust solutions to the systems based on IoT.
This paper is presented in three folds. First, review and scope of
different IoT base applications of meta-heuristic algorithms have been
discussed. In the second fold, some existing IoT systems with meta-
heuristic based algorithms have been documented. Furthermore, from
the investigated studies some description of research questions has
been included. Finally, this paper reviews and summarize the major
requirements of IoT-based systems. In future, some other swarm based
applications such as block-chain and big data may be covered.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Vivek Sharma: Written manuscript hand performed drafting.
Ashish Kumar Tripathi: Collected data, Writing – original draft.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing finan-
cial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to
influence the work reported in this paper.
Array 14 (2022) 100164
7
V. Sharma and A.K. Tripathi
References
[1] Parpinelli RS, Lopes HS. New inspirations in swarm intelligence: a survey. Int J
Bio-Inspired Comput 2011;3(1):1–16.
[2] Pandey AC, Tripathi AK, Pal R, Mittal H, Saraswat M. Spiral salp swarm
optimization algorithm. In: 2019 4th International Conference on Information
Systems and Computer Networks (ISCON). IEEE; 2019, p. 722–7.
[3] Garnier
S,
Gautrais
J,
Theraulaz
G.
The
biological
principles
of
swarm
intelligence. Swarm Intell 2007;1(1):3–31.
[4] Fortino G, Trunfio P. Internet of Things Based on Smart Objects: Technology,
Middleware and Applications. Springer; 2014.
[5] Zedadra O, Savaglio C, Jouandeau N, Guerrieri A, Seridi H, Fortino G. Towards
a reference architecture for swarm intelligence-based internet of things. In: Inter-
national Conference on Internet and Distributed Computing Systems. Springer;
2017, p. 75–86.
[6] Johri A, Tripathi A, et al. Parkinson disease detection using deep neural net-
works. In: 2019 Twelfth International Conference on Contemporary Computing
(IC3). IEEE; 2019, p. 1–4.
[7] Holland JH. Genetic algorithms. Sci Am 1992;267(1):66–73.
[8] Kar AK. Bio inspired computing–a review of algorithms and scope of applications.
Expert Syst Appl 2016;59:20–32.
[9] Ma H, Simon D, Siarry P, Yang Z, Fei M. Biogeography-based optimization: a
10-year review. IEEE Trans Emerg Top Comput Intell 2017;1(5):391–407.
[10] Goldberg DE. Genetic Algorithms. Pearson Education India; 2006.
[11] Beyer H-G, Schwefel H-P. Evolution strategies–a comprehensive introduction. Nat
Comput 2002;1(1):3–52.
[12] Pan X, Jiao L. A granular agent evolutionary algorithm for classification. Appl
Soft Comput 2011;11(3):3093–105.
[13] Jaderyan M, Khotanlou H. Virulence optimization algorithm. Appl Soft Comput
2016;43:596–618.
[14] Kirkpatrick S, Gelatt CD, Vecchi MP. Optimization by simulated annealing.
Science 1983;220(4598):671–80.
[15] Mittal
H,
Tripathi
A,
Pandey
AC,
Pal
R.
Gravitational
search
algo-
rithm: a comprehensive analysis of recent variants. Multimedia Tools Appl
2021;80(5):7581–608.
[16] Hatamlou A. Black hole: A new heuristic optimization approach for data
clustering. Inform Sci 2013;222:175–84.
[17] Rashedi
E,
Nezamabadi-Pour
H,
Saryazdi
S.
GSA:
a
gravitational
search
algorithm. Inform Sci 2009;179(13):2232–48.
[18] Kashan AH, Tavakkoli-Moghaddam R, Gen M. Find-fix-finish-exploit-analyze
(F3EA) meta-heuristic algorithm: An effective algorithm with new evolutionary
operators for global optimization. Comput Ind Eng 2019;128:192–218.
[19] Tabari A, Ahmad A. A new optimization method: Electro-search algorithm.
Comput Chem Eng 2017;103:1–11.
[20] Geem ZW, Kim JH, Loganathan GV. A new heuristic optimization algorithm:
harmony search. Simulation 2001;76(2):60–8.
[21] Eusuff M, Lansey K, Pasha F. Shuffled frog-leaping algorithm: a memetic
meta-heuristic for discrete optimization. Eng Optim 2006;38(2):129–54.
[22] Blum C, Merkle D. Swarm Intelligence: Introduction and Applications. Springer
Science & Business Media; 2008.
[23] Dorigo M, Blum C. Ant colony optimization theory: A survey. Theoret Comput
Sci 2005;344(2–3):243–78.
[24] Hu X, Shi Y, Eberhart R. Recent advances in particle swarm. In: Proceedings of
the 2004 Congress on Evolutionary Computation (IEEE Cat. No. 04TH8753), vol.
1. IEEE; 2004, p. 90–7.
[25] Karaboga D, Akay B. A comparative study of artificial bee colony algorithm.
Appl Math Comput 2009;214(1):108–32.
[26] Li X-l. An optimizing method based on autonomous animats: fish-swarm
algorithm. Syst Eng Theory Pract 2002;22(11):32–8.
[27] Sharma A, Sharma A, Panigrahi BK, Kiran D, Kumar R. Ageist spider monkey
optimization algorithm. Swarm Evol Comput 2016;28:58–77.
[28] Rajakumar B. The Lion’s Algorithm: a new nature-inspired search algorithm. Proc
Technol 2012;6:126–35.
[29] Tripathi AK, Mittal H, Saxena P, Gupta S. A new recommendation system
using map-reduce-based tournament empowered Whale optimization algorithm.
Complex Intell Syst 2021;7(1):297–309.
[30] Sharma N, Kaur A, Sharma H, Sharma A, Bansal JC. Chaotic spider monkey
optimization algorithm with enhanced learning. In: Soft Computing for Problem
Solving. Springer; 2019, p. 149–61.
[31] Bhardwaj S, Kim D-S. Dragonfly-based swarm system model for node iden-
tification in ultra-reliable low-latency communication. Neural Comput Appl
2021;33(6):1837–80.
[32] Bitam S, Zeadally S, Mellouk A. Fog computing job scheduling optimization based
on bees swarm. Enterprise Inform Syst 2018;12(4):373–97.
[33] Chu X, Wu T, Weir JD, Shi Y, Niu B, Li L. Learning–interaction–diversification
framework for swarm intelligence optimizers: a unified perspective. Neural
Comput Appl 2020;32(6):1789–809.
[34] Ahmed WAEM, Mageed HMA, Mohamed SA, Saleh AA. Fractional order dar-
winian particle swarm optimization for parameters identification of solar PV
cells and modules. Alexand Eng J 2022;61(2):1249–63.
[35] Martínez-Álvarez F, Asencio-Cortés G, Torres JF, Gutiérrez-Avilés D, Melgar-
García
L,
Pérez-Chacón
R,
Rubio-Escudero
C,
Riquelme
JC,
Troncoso
A.
Coronavirus optimization algorithm: a bioinspired metaheuristic based on the
COVID-19 propagation model. Big Data 2020;8(4):308–22.
[36] Liu Y, Chai Y, Liu B, Wang Y. Bearing fault diagnosis based on energy spectrum
statistics and modified mayfly optimization algorithm. Sensors 2021;21(6):2245.
[37] MiarNaeimi F, Azizyan G, Rashki M. Horse herd optimization algorithm:
A
nature-inspired
algorithm
for
high-dimensional
optimization
problems.
Knowl-Based Syst 2021;213:106711.
[38] Zhao W, Wang L, Mirjalili S. Artificial hummingbird algorithm: A new bio-
inspired optimizer with its engineering applications. Comput Methods Appl Mech
Engrg 2022;388:114194.
[39] Dasgupta D. Artificial Immune Systems and their Applications. Springer Science
& Business Media; 2012.
[40] Del Ser J, Osaba E, Molina D, Yang X-S, Salcedo-Sanz S, Camacho D, Das S,
Suganthan PN, Coello CAC, Herrera F. Bio-inspired computation: Where we stand
and what’s next. Swarm Evol Comput 2019;48:220–50.
[41] Castelli M, Manzoni L, Mariot L, Nobile MS, Tangherloni A. Salp swarm
optimization: A critical review. Expert Syst Appl 2022;189:116029.
[42] Del Ser J, Osaba E, Sanchez-Medina JJ, Fister I. Bioinspired computational
intelligence and transportation systems: a long road ahead. IEEE Trans Intell
Transp Syst 2019;21(2):466–95.
[43] Kallioras NA, Lagaros ND, Avtzis DN. Pity beetle algorithm–A new metaheuristic
inspired by the behavior of bark beetles. Adv Eng Softw 2018;121:147–66.
[44] Passino KM. Biomimicry of bacterial foraging for distributed optimization and
control. IEEE Control Syst Mag 2002;22(3):52–67.
[45] Greensmith J, Aickelin U. The dendritic cell algorithm (Ph. D. thesis), University
of Nottingham; 2007.
[46] Gandomi AH, Alavi AH. Krill herd: a new bio-inspired optimization algorithm.
Commun Nonlinear Sci Numer Simul 2012;17(12):4831–45.
[47] Rabanal P, Rodríguez I, Rubio F. Using river formation dynamics to de-
sign
heuristic
algorithms.
In:
International
Conference
on
Unconventional
Computation. Springer; 2007, p. 163–77.
[48] Lam AY, Li VO. Chemical reaction optimization for cognitive radio spectrum
allocation. In: 2010 IEEE Global Telecommunications Conference GLOBECOM
2010. IEEE; 2010, p. 1–5.
[49] Cheng S, Zhang M, Ma L, Lu H, Wang R, Shi Y. Brain storm optimiza-
tion algorithm for solving knowledge spillover problems. Neural Comput Appl
2021;1–14.
[50] Bogar E, Beyhan S. Adolescent identity search algorithm (AISA): A novel
metaheuristic approach for solving optimization problems. Appl Soft Comput
2020;95:106503.
[51] Yang X-S, Deb S. Cuckoo search via Lévy flights. In: 2009 World congress on
nature & biologically inspired computing (NaBIC). Ieee; 2009, p. 210–4.
[52] Nanda SJ, Panda G. Swarm and evolutionary computation. 2013.
[53] Jain M, Singh V, Rani A. A novel nature-inspired algorithm for optimization:
Squirrel search algorithm. Swarm Evol Comput 2019;44:148–75.
[54] Mafarja M, Qasem A, Heidari AA, Aljarah I, Faris H, Mirjalili S. Efficient
hybrid nature-inspired binary optimizers for feature selection. Cogn Comput
2020;12(1):150–75.
[55] Mehrabian AR, Lucas C. A novel numerical optimization algorithm inspired from
weed colonization. Ecol Inform 2006;1(4):355–66.
[56] Zhang J, Xiao M, Gao L, Pan Q. Queuing search algorithm: A novel metaheuristic
algorithm for solving engineering optimization problems. Appl Math Model
2018;63:464–90.
[57] Yang X-S. Firefly algorithms for multimodal optimization. In: International
Symposium on Stochastic Algorithms. Springer; 2009, p. 169–78.
[58] Yang X-S. A new metaheuristic bat-inspired algorithm. In: Nature Inspired
Cooperative Strategies for Optimization (NICSO 2010). Springer; 2010, p. 65–74.
[59] Moscato P, et al. On evolution, search, optimization, genetic algorithms and
martial arts: Towards memetic algorithms. In: Caltech Concurrent Computation
Program, C3P Report, vol. 826. Citeseer; 1989, p. 1989.
[60] Rahnamayan
S,
Tizhoosh
HR,
Salama
MM.
Opposition-based
differential
evolution. IEEE Trans Evol Comput 2008;12(1):64–79.
[61] Liu C, Yan X, Liu C, Wu H. The wolf colony algorithm and its application.
Chinese J Electron 2011;20(2):212–6.
[62] Sharma H, Bansal JC, Arya K. Fitness based differential evolution. Memetic
Comput 2012;4(4):303–16.
[63] Sharma N, Sharma H, Sharma A. Beer froth artificial bee colony algorithm for
job-shop scheduling problem. Appl Soft Comput 2018;68:507–24.
[64] Tsai C-W, Chiang M-C, Ksentini A, Chen M. Metaheuristic algorithms for
healthcare: open issues and challenges. Comput Electr Eng 2016;53:421–34.
[65] Eichelberg M, Aden T, Riesmeier J, Dogac A, Laleci GB. A survey and anal-
ysis of electronic healthcare record standards. Acm Comput Surveys (Csur)
2005;37(4):277–315.
[66] Zhou H, Sun G, Fu S, Liu J, Zhou X, Zhou J. A big data mining approach
of PSO-based BP neural network for financial risk management with IoT. IEEE
Access 2019;7:154035–43.
[67] Wang R, Yu C, Wang J. Construction of supply chain financial risk management
mode based on internet of things. IEEE Access 2019;7:110323–32.
Array 14 (2022) 100164
8
V. Sharma and A.K. Tripathi
[68] Shepherd C, Petitcolas FA, Akram RN, Markantonakis K. An exploratory analysis
of the security risks of the internet of things in finance. In: International
Conference on Trust and Privacy in Digital Business. Springer; 2017, p. 164–79.
[69] Botteghi N, Kamilaris A, Sinai L, Sirmaçek B. Multi-agent path planning of robotic
swarms in agricultural fields. In: ISPRS Annals of the Photogrammetry, Remote
Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, vol. 1. Copernicus GmbH; 2020, p.
361–8.
[70] Albani D, IJsselmuiden J, Haken R, Trianni V. Monitoring and mapping with
robot swarms for agricultural applications. In: 2017 14th IEEE International
Conference on Advanced Video and Signal Based Surveillance (AVSS). IEEE;
2017, p. 1–6.
[71] Sinai L. Efficient path planning for multiple agents in agriculture fields (Master’s
thesis), University of Twente; 2020.
[72] Zedadra O, Guerrieri A, Jouandeau N, Spezzano G, Seridi H, Fortino G. Swarm
intelligence and iot-based smart cities: A review. Internet Things Smart Urban
Ecosyst 2019;177–200.
[73] Tripathi AK, Sharma K, Bala M, Kumar A, Menon VG, Bashir AK. A parallel
military-dog-based algorithm for clustering big data in cognitive industrial
internet of things. IEEE Trans Ind Inf 2020;17(3):2134–42.
[74] Tripathi AK, Sharma K, Bala M. A novel clustering method using enhanced grey
wolf optimizer and mapreduce. Big Data Res 2018;14:93–100.
