ABSTRACTS
Experiments on Adaptation of foreign accented speakers in native Arabic ASR
systems
Sid-Ahmed Selouania, Yousef Ajami Alotaibib
aLARIHS Lab. Universite´ de Moncton, Campus de Shippagan, Canada
b Computer Engineering Department, King Saud University, Saudi Arabia
E-mail addresses: selouani@umcs.ca, yalotaibi@ccis.ksu.edu.sa
Keywords: Arabic language, Adaptation, Foreign accents, MLLR, MAP, HMM,
WestPoint, LDC, Native
Abstract: This paper addresses the adaptation of Arabic speech recognition sys-
tems to foreign accented speakers. This adaptation is accomplished by using the
adaptation techniques; namely, the Maximum Likelihood Linear Regression
(MLLR), the Maximum a posteriori (MAP), and the combination of MLLR
and MAP. The LDC-WestPoint Modern Standard Arabic corpus and HTK
toolkit were used throughout all experiments. The systems were evaluated using
both word and phoneme levels. Results show that particular Arabic Phonemes
such as pharyngeal and emphatic consonants, that are hard to pronounce for
non-native speakers, beneﬁt from the adaptation process using MLLR and
MAP combination. An overall improvement of 7.37% has been obtained.
Peer
review
under
responsibility
of
King
Saud
University.
doi:10.1016/S2210-8327(11)00015-9
Production and hosting by Elsevier
Applied Computing and Informatics (2011) ix–xii
King Saud University
Applied Computing and Informatics
www.ksu.edu.sa
www.sciencedirect.com
Assessing the Quality of Web Sites
Layla Hasana, Emad Abuelrubb
aDeptartment of Management Information Systems, Zarqa Private University,
Jordan E-mail: l.hassan@zpu.edu.jo
bDepartment of Computer Science, Zarqa Private University, Jordan
E-mail: abuelrub@zpu.edu.jo
Keywords: e-Commerce, Electronic services, Website criteria, Website evaluation,
Website quality
Abstract: This paper reviewed the most recent evaluation criteria methods which
were used in diﬀerent e-business services. Furthermore, it proposes general cri-
teria for evaluating the quality of any website regardless of the type of service
that it oﬀers. The dimensions of the criteria are content quality, design quality,
organization quality, and user-friendly quality. These dimensions together with
their comprehensive indicators and check list can be used by web designers and
developers to create quality websites to improve the electronic service and then
the image of any organization on the Internet.
E-learning in the Saudi Tertiary Education: Potential and Challenges
Khlood Al-Siraihi Al-Harbi
University of Leicester
E-mail: ka41@le.ac.uk
Keywords: e-Learning, Higher education, Adoption Factors
Abstract: The advent of the Internet in the twenty-ﬁrst century has led to remark-
able changes in several aspects of our lives. This advanced technology has become
an essential tool of communication and information, thus oﬀering unique advan-
tages to both educators and students. Despite a recent educational revolution in
Saudi Arabian educational systems, the issue of access to higher education still
remains one of the more enduring challenges. The need for more delivery modes
that take education to learners wherever they are, and not within the boundaries
of the campus, is thus a necessity. E-learning could dramatically increase access to
tertiary education and training, especially for those learners who were once de-
nied learning opportunities for any reason such as health, distance or the like.
Yet, successful implementation of e-learning requires an understanding of the is-
sues that promote the eﬀective use of the technologies. This article discusses the
factors that inﬂuence e-learning in Saudi higher education through analyzing the
perceptions and attitudes of Saudi university students (n. 531). It reports the re-
sults of a survey conducted to investigate the acceptance of e-learning in a Saudi
x
Abstracts
higher education institution as perceived by university students. The ﬁndings de-
monstrated that attitudes toward e-learning, subjective norms, perceived beha-
vioral control as well as e-learning systems attributes were critical determinants
of students’ behavioral intention to use e-learning. By explaining students’ beha-
vioral intentions, the ﬁndings of this study will help to provide insight into the
best way to promote e-learning acceptance among students.
Modeling the Electronic Transactions Acceptance using an Extended Technology
Acceptance Model
Said S. Al-Gahtani
Associate Professor of Computer Information Systems (CIS)
Administrative Sciences Department King Khalid University, P O Box 1183,
Abha, Saudi Arabia
E-Mail: ssalgahtani@kku.edu.sa
Keywords: e-Commerce, e-Government, On-line transactions, Internet, Trust,
Credibility, Risk, Technology acceptance model, TAM, Saudi Arabia
Abstract: The outlook for e-commerce and e-government depends not only on
individuasl acceptance of Internet technologies as viable transaction means,
but also on the recognition of the Web as a reliable milieu. In light of this, a
comprehensive model describing the factors that drive individuals to accept
on-line transactions over the Web was developed and tested. This study attempts
to integrate the well-established technology acceptance model (TAM) with three
constructs; namely trust, credibility and risk, which are of paramount impor-
tance in predicting individual acceptance of on-line transactions.
This study seeks empirical support for an extended TAM with three constructs
related to e-transactions in Saudi Arabia. The structural equation modeling
technique was used to evaluate the causal model and to examine the reliability
and validity of the measurement model. Our ﬁndings show that each of trust,
credibility and risk plays an important role toward the acceptance of on-line
transactions in the Saudi settings. To view a broader picture of electronic trans-
action acceptance in Saudi Arabia, general Internet use with four demographic
variables were also incorporated into the model. We hope this study would con-
tribute to a better understanding of individual on-line behavior in the emerging
e-commerce and e-government environments. Such understanding would enable
Saudi IT policy and decision makers solve problems in moving to the digital
economy and information society.
Implications for management and practice of these ﬁndings are discussed to im-
prove the acceptance of e-commerce and e-government as new technologies in
Saudi Arabia.
Abstracts
xi
Book Review: User Interface Design Books
Basit Qureshi
College of Computer and Information System Prince Sultan University, Saudi
Arabia
User interface design or user interface engineering is the design of computers,
mobile communication devices, software applications, websites with the focus
on the user’s experience and interaction. The goal of user interface design is
to improve users experience with simplicity and eﬃciency while keeping the de-
sign ergonomically sound. In literature this phenomenon is known as ‘‘User
Centered Design’’. The term user friendly is often used as a synonym for usabil-
ity which denotes the ease with which people can employ a particular tool or
other human-made object in order to achieve a particular goal.
The key beneﬁts of usability are increased user eﬃciency and productivity, re-
duced development costs and most importantly increased customer satisfaction.
The improved interface would also tend to lower the time needed to perform ne-
cessary tasks. Usability is now recognized as an important software quality at-
tribute,
earning
its
place
among
more
traditional
attributes
such
as
performance and robustness. Indeed, various academic programs in Informa-
tion technology and software development around the globe focus on usability
design and engineering. Here we review recently published popular books in the
area of User Interface Design.
xii
Abstracts
