Array 19 (2023) 100315
Available online 2 August 2023
2590-0056/© 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-
nc-nd/4.0/).
Affective state prediction of E-learner using SS-ROA based deep LSTM 
Snehal Rathi a,*, Kamal Kant Hiran b, Sachin Sakhare a 
a Department of Computer Engineering, Vishwakarma Institute of Information Technology, Pune, India 
b School of Computer Science and IT, Symbiosis University of Applied Sciences, Indore, India   
A R T I C L E  I N F O   
Keywords: 
E-learning 
Higher education 
Affective states 
Deep LSTM 
Squirrel search algorithm 
Rider optimization algorithm 
and Interaction log 
A B S T R A C T   
An affective state of a learner in E-learning has gained enormous interest. The prediction of the emotional state of 
a learner can enhance the outcome of learning by including designated mediation. Many techniques are 
developed for anticipating emotional states using video, audio, and bio-sensors. Still, examining video, and audio 
will not confirm secretiveness and is exposed to security issues. Here the creator devises a fusion technique, to be 
specific Squirrel Search and Rider optimization-grounded Deep LSTM for affect prediction. 
The Deep LSTM is trained to exercise the new fusion SS-ROA. Then, the SS-ROA-grounded Deep LSTM clas-
sifies the states like frustration, confusion, engagement, wrathfulness, and so on. It is based on the interaction log 
data of the E-learner. In conclusion, the course and student ID, predicted state, test marks, and course completion 
status are taken as result information to find out the correlations. The new algorithm gives the best performance 
in comparison to other present methods with the highest prediction accurateness of 0.962 and the most note-
worthy connection of 0.379 respectively. After discovering affective states, students may get the advantage of 
getting real comments from a teacher for improving one’s performance during learning. However, such systems 
should also give feedback about the learner’s affective state or passion because it greatly affects the student’s 
encouragement toward better learning.   
1. Introduction 
The emergence of E-courses helps to increase learning opportunities 
for individuals by allowing them to access premium courses at any time 
and from any location. As a result, the sharing of educational resources 
can greatly improve the spirit of learning [1]. Throughout many years, a 
vast range of online learning platforms have emerged. As a result, the 
quality of online education is regarded as a key component of an 
educational system [2]. 
In contrast to traditional learning methods like in-person instruction, 
research indicates that e-learners are less committed and transmit less 
knowledge. These poor results have ascribed to an asynchronous nature 
of interaction and hence lack of learning [3]. In a traditional classroom, 
it is possible to dynamically monitor student moods, lack of inspiration 
or focus, and interest in a particular subject. Yet, in digital learning 
platforms, this kind of sentiment analysis becomes a significant problem 
[4]. 
Even though e-learning platforms offer convenient learning ways 
and plentiful qualitative courses around the globe, they still face the 
problem of low completion rates [5]. Previous studies have expressed 
that rates of completion using these platforms are as low as 7–11%. Less 
motivation among students and a lower perception of the value of 
courses are some causes of this [6]. So, it is crucial to understand and 
provide comments on the engagement of the learner in real-time [7]. 
By analyzing interaction logs or educational data, one can forecast a 
learner’s performance [8]. Due to the diverse motivations of learners for 
attending the course, the free online course has low commitment and 
knowledge transfer [9]. In corporate training, businesses in the USA 
invest roughly in billions. Employers, however, are not pleased with the 
knowledge transfer [10]. 
Research in specific fields such as data mining in education, cogni-
tive science, multimodal learning, and psychology has made compelling 
progress in learning analysis. It is guaranteed to monitor learner 
engagement and improve learning effectiveness in online learning [7]. 
Data mining provided relationships between various variables 
developed based on activity records of students and student perfor-
mance. Attributes that show a reasonably high correlation with the 
performance of students are used as improved predictors. These vari-
ables are said to be relevant because they can be used to predict at-risk 
students [11]. Affordable online education has attracted the attention of 
* Corresponding author. 
E-mail addresses: snehal.rathi@viit.ac.in (S. Rathi), kamalkant.hiran@suas.ac.in (K. Kant Hiran), sachin.sakhare@viit.ac.in (S. Sakhare).  
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 
Array 
journal homepage: www.sciencedirect.com/journal/array 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.array.2023.100315 
Received 18 April 2023; Received in revised form 25 July 2023; Accepted 30 July 2023   
Array 19 (2023) 100315
2
the government, which provides educational guidelines [12]. 
Given the classical teaching method and the high student-teacher 
ratio, the teacher has additional problems in the auditorium. Tradi-
tionally, trainers delivered content and learners learned it. This 
approach usually does not allow the teacher to respond to the individual 
requirements of the learners [13]. Also, due to the large number of 
learners in the auditorium, the instructor cannot focus on individual 
learners [14]. For evaluation, they conduct examination at the end of 
each course. Despite the large number of learners in the classroom, 
skilled teachers typically observe, address, and identify learners’ 
emotional states [15]. 
Research in areas such as multimodal learning, psychology, and 
other fields has made significant progress and has attracted a great deal 
of attention to improving learning efficiency in e-learning platforms 
[16]. Most of the applications focus on achieving learning engagement 
or identification. Efforts focus on the learner’s emotional state, including 
anxiety, learner attention, boredom, frustration [17], or evaluation by 
quizzes and coursework [7]. 
Additionally, Predictive Learning Analytics (PLA) [3] helps in-
structors improve course quality. At-risk student predictions [3], exam 
grades, and quiz scores [3] show that is likely to have an absolute impact 
on the learning experience. The best-known predictive model for pre-
dicting the performance of students is the Artificial Neural Network 
(ANN) [18]. 
Affect in learning play a very prominent role in education. Accu-
rately predicting emotional states can improve learning outcomes using 
interference, which fine-tunes changes in a learner’s emotional state 
[19]. Various methods are available to classify emotions using acoustic, 
video, and biosensors. However, systems relying on these modalities 
cannot ensure confidentiality and are subject to privacy concerns. 
It is very essential to apprehend the course complexity of engineering 
courses and their impacts on the state of E-Learners. Therefore, we want 
to devise an algorithm for E-Learner’s affective state prediction by 
considering engineering courses of different complexity. At first, three 
courses, Data Structure and Files (C1), Data Base Management and 
System (C2), and Human Computer Interface (C3) are viewed for the 
experimental study. The above noted three courses have High, Medium, 
and Low complexity. Different learners are made to learn these courses 
online. Based on the studying behavior of learners in LMS, a log file is 
recorded. 
Each learning behavior log file carries the important points of course 
ID, topic ID, Lecture ID, lecture type, time spent, opening time, closing 
time, and the examination rating of the learners. Then, the feature in-
dicators are extracted. Based on the features and using Deep LSTM, the 
affective states of the learners are predicted. The proposed SS-ROA is 
used to train Deep LSTM. The SS-ROA is devised through a combination 
of Squirrel Search and Rider Optimization Algorithm. Thus, SS-ROA- 
based Deep LSTM predicts the different affective states. 
The key contributions of this paper are:  
• Proposed SS-ROA: This algorithm is devised through a combination 
of Squirrel Search (SS) and Rider Optimization Algorithm (ROA) and 
it optimizes the training of neural network and hence enhances the 
performance.  
• Proposed SS-ROA-based Deep LSTM for prediction of affective states: 
The affective states of E-learner are predicted using Deep LSTM 
which is trained using proposed SS-ROA 
Other sections of the paper include: Section 2 displays an explanation 
of affective state prediction methods used in earlier works. The proposed 
method for affective state prediction using SS-ROA-based Deep LSTM is 
shown in the 3rd Section. The analysis of techniques is depicted in 
Section 4 and Section 5 provides the conclusion. 
2. Motivation 
With conventional presentation strategies and a high learner- 
instructor ratio, an instructor faces extraordinary obstructions in the 
study hall. Generally, instructors convey the teaching material and un-
derstudies learn it. With this approach, instructors are typically not 
ready to react to the individual necessities of learners. Besides, because 
of the huge quantities of learners in a study hall, educators can’t 
concentrate on every individual learner. For learners’ assessment, they 
often take a test toward the finish of the course. In any case, even though 
there is a high number of learners in a study hall, experienced educators 
normally notice, recognizes, and address the emotional states of the 
learners. 
The talented educator makes an appropriate move to impact learning 
positively. Yet, the question is what these accomplished educators 
“see”? How do they turn up at a course of action? Does that action drive 
the student in a useful way? Students’ knowledge gain is not only 
depending on factors like the educator’s presentation, student’s capa-
bility, and prerequisite knowledge but it also depends on the compati-
bility of learning styles and the affective state of the student. 
Many times, educators don’t have information about, the level of 
emotional upset that can interfere with a learner’s learning. Learners in 
angry, restless, or discouraged states experience difficulties in learning; 
individuals trapped in such states don’t take information effectively 
[20]. 
The connection between learning and emotions is not simple and 
straight. Affirmative and depressing affective states generate diverse 
sorts of thinking and this may hold significant implications from a 
learning viewpoint. A reliable way out which will synchronize both 
cognitive and emotional factors is firmly required [21]. 
Talented teachers change their teaching style and their presentation 
style as indicated by understudies’ feedback signals. E-learning plat-
forms don’t consider these input signals and act similarly for all un-
derstudies. Many existing e-Learning frameworks consider only 
knowledge acquisition and don’t take care of student emotions. While 
developing such a framework, affective states, are taken into consider-
ation while organizing the contents and offering them. To make learning 
effective and to convey customized content, versatile frameworks 
depend on learners’ objectives, knowledge, and preferences. Thus, a 
learning model which incorporates knowledge and inspiration would 
lead to more effective and personalized [22]. 
Converting an e-learning framework of a non-affect sensitive state 
into a framework that incorporates the learner’s emotional states re-
quires going through the affective loop. This includes recognition of a 
learner’s affect, proper action selection, and the fusion of an accurate 
inspirational state by the system [23]. Learners, who become trapped in 
emotional states, for example, anger or sadness don’t process and take in 
data proficiently. From this, it can be inferred that a learner’s emotions 
have an important role in getting better the effectiveness of online 
learning [24]. 
The goal of the educational institutions is to provide quality educa-
tion [25]. The improved education system discovers knowledge using 
educational data and studies the parameter which impacts students’ 
performance. The acquired information from this data is utilized to 
predict academic performance. However, the prediction of learning 
performance in students is a complex task because of the fundamental 
infrastructures [26,27] and customized requirements of different in-
dividuals. The aforementioned limitation and the challenges of the prior 
methods are taken as an inspiration for developing a new student af-
fective state prediction model. 
2.1. Literature survey 
Emotions and online learning are related to one another. The 
learning execution mirrors, the emotional circumstance of online 
learners in education. There has been a lot of enthusiasm among laptop 
S. Rathi et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
Array 19 (2023) 100315
3
researchers and designers looking for methods for the enhancement of 
human-computer interfaces by way of synchronizing emotion and 
knowledge [28]. Affective Computing makes the chance of developing 
computational frameworks for acknowledgment of human affective 
states. It minimizes the gap between intensely emotional individual and 
the emotionally challenged computer [28]. Subsequently, Affective 
Computing research is an interdisciplinary area. It investigates human 
affective involvement with technology by combining engineering and 
computer knowledge with different domains like brain science, intel-
lectual science, humanism, education, and morals [29]. 
A modern couple of years have considered a flood in the utilization of 
multidisciplinary techniques to consider the hard position of feelings in 
learning. Affective computing is a growing subject uniting scientists and 
professionals from distinctive fields, extending from Artificial Intelli-
gence (AI), and Natural Language Processing (NLP) to cognitive and 
sociology [30]. Emotion data is utilized to enhance studying [31]. Here, 
affirmative and distrustful feelings are perceived with the aid of the 
usage of two models, particularly behavioral logs and biosensors. Fusion 
of it is done using a Bayesian Network [32]. 
Neurological proof indicates that the online studying surroundings 
will no longer be luxurious if the affective states or psychological stip-
ulations of learners are not considered. Here authors have featured a few 
consequences from the neurological literature which display that emo-
tions play a critical job in individual thoughts and knowledge, but in 
addition in critical thinking and conclusion-making of humans. Personal 
Computers (PCs) that will collaborate logically and cleverly with 
humans have to apprehend and express affect [33]. 
Sandanayake and team [34] have constructed a gadget to compre-
hend college students online learning to know overall performance 
whilst estimating the emotional state. They utilized a regression 
approach to categorize emotions. They have gathered the time used up 
on lessons, studying action, chat gathering, taking a look at marks, 
perusing, and course time on LMS. Surveys have been utilized for 
perceiving the learners’ affective states. 
The assessment was carried out by using Khan F.A and group [35] 
set-up methodology to get more correct outcomes. Here learners are 
given a chance to finish lessons at their speed and preferences. The re-
cords used to be gathered in the log report and a Bayesian network is 
used to classify affective states. Correlation between interaction log and 
questionnaire response used to predict the same. The effects had been 
practically the same, but larger realness was once obtained via the 
interaction log method. The model used in this research demonstrates a 
real-time method of getting learners’ affective states through the log of 
interaction and preferences. This effect constantly evaluates modifica-
tions in the learner’s emotional states. 
V. Chitraa [31] led a study on pre-processing techniques for behav-
ioral logs utilized in web usage mining. The facts were once 
pre-processed to clean the records and afterward put in an information 
set. Session ID, Learner ID, and path completion records were used in the 
dataset. The Apriori algorithm was utilized for finding the patterns. 
According to investigations of Pekrun [36], the thoughts related to 
learning change on a massive scale. Anxiety is the most straight was 
inferred. Aside from this, the accompanying emotions related to study-
ing had been boredom, anger, relief, satisfaction, and enjoyment. 
However, their assessment had a constraint of no longer enabling an 
actual conclusion structured on motives of feelings. 
According to Manasi Chakurkar [37], user logs had been saved to 
analyze an area of interest of users. This gave customized advice struc-
tured on the learner’s behavior. The result of this web usage content 
mining was utilized to personalize the e-learning framework itself. 
Some experiments perceived feelings using biosensors [38,39], and 
some made use of a fusion of bio-sensors and facial expressions. The 
sensors would record changes in the nervous system of the body. They 
utilized SVM calculations for making ready data and perceiving feelings 
[40,41]. 
In a few experiments, information is collected from sensor-based 
wearable devices like smartwatches and fit bands. Authors have uti-
lized here Emotion Wear Framework [42]. In the Emotion Wear 
framework, a person sees the content material which is saved on the 
cloud via a smartphone used in the VR headset. The person wears gloves 
that produce quite several signals, which are utilized to understand 
thoughts. The thoughts detected had been specific but there was a delay 
in investigation and the sensor price was associated with it [42,43]. 
Raviraj and colleagues [44] have introduced approach for speech 
emotion recognition using a hybrid meta-heuristic ensemble based 
classification technique. The collected audio speech signals were 
pre-processed and features are extracted from it, which are used to train 
the model. Here, the authors suggest using a “optimized RNN, DBN, and 
ANN” as part of an ensemble classifier. The DBN and ANN findings will 
be used as input to the optimized RNN, which will then provide the 
output. The weight of RNN was fine-tuned to increase the precision of 
speech emotion classification using a hybrid optimization model called 
the Arithmetic Exploration updated Wildbeast Model, which combines 
two optimization models, namely the Arithmetic Optimization Algo-
rithm (AOA) and Wildebeest herd optimization (WHO). Only basic 
emotions like happy, sad etc. are detected here. 
The method for facial emotion recognition utilizing a novel hybrid 
deep belief rain optimization algorithm has been presented by Alamgir, 
F.M., and Alam, M.S [45]. This method combines Rain Optimization 
Algorithm (ROA) with Deep Belief Network (DBN). This classifier can 
classify fundamental emotions like happiness, surprise, fear, etc. with 
greater accuracy. To increase the stability of training even when trained 
for a greater number of iterations with a wider range of data samples, 
more optimized models must be created. 
A hybrid optimization algorithm has been created by Vedavathi and 
a colleague [46] as a method for an effective e-learning recommendation 
system for user preferences. They have employed an improved whale 
optimization algorithm (IWOA) and deep recurrent neural network 
(DRNN). IWOA depends on the chasing conduct of humpback whales. 
Premature convergence causes WOA to become trapped in local optima. 
In IWOA, this problem is solved. Here authors has proposed an 
e-learning suggestion approach that is based on DRNN and IWO calcu-
lations for prescribing e-learning assets to students in e-learning situa-
tions. The new method had demonstrated more accurate results when 
compared to the existing algorithms. 
From the literature survey, it is found that a range of modalities like 
facial expression recognition, questionnaires, interaction log conduct, 
and sensing techniques such as Galvanic Skin Response (GSR), Electro-
cardiogram (ECG), Electroencephalography (EEG), etc. have been used 
by researchers to predict emotions. Facial expressions and sensors have 
privacy issues related to them. There may be a bias from learners when 
questionnaires had been used. So, an interaction behavior log [47] is an 
excellent way to predict an affective state of a learner. 
The literature survey indicates that most of the researchers have 
developed tools, envisioned thoughts, or tried to devise methods of 
adapting content or providing responses to the learner. Due to the 
response, the enhancements have been determined in the performance. 
Many of the researchers have used the techniques such as Neural 
Network, RNN and Deep LSTM. 
Optimization has a lot of importance in Neural Networks. Optimizer 
are a significant piece of the neural network, seeing how they work 
would assist us with picking which one to use for application. In deep 
learning, there is an idea of loss; it reveals to us how ineffectively the 
model is behaving at that current moment. Then, at that point we 
require utilizing this loss to train our network so it can act upon well. 
Basically, we have to assume the loss and attempt to limit it, in light of 
the fact that a lower loss implies our model will do better. The most 
common way of limiting (or expanding) any statistical expression is 
called enhancement. Optimizer are techniques used to alter the traits of 
the neural network like weights and learning rate to lessen the losses. 
Optimization algorithms help in decreasing the losses and to give the 
most exact outcomes achievable. Different optimizers are explored in 
S. Rathi et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
Array 19 (2023) 100315
4
the couple of years. Few of them are “I) Gradient Descent (GD), II) 
Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD), III) Mini-Batch Stochastic Gradient 
Descent (MB-SGD), IV) SGD with Momentum, V) Nesterov Accelerated 
Gradient (NAG), VI) Adagrad, VII) AdaDelta and VIII) Adam”. Each one 
of it is enjoying its benefits and inconveniences. They have challenges 
like may get trap at local minima, Takes quite a while to converge and 
computationally costly. To overcome these challenges a novel optimizer 
is required. 
By looking at literature survey, now, it is time to do an investigation 
of “How to beautify the accuracy of the technique used to predict af-
fective state?” and “Will this prediction have any relationship with the 
complexity of the course taken by the students? What is the effect of 
optimization algorithm while training the Deep LSTM for prediction of 
affective states? 
Here, it is proposed to construct an efficient and accurate prediction 
algorithm that will pick out the learners’ affective states during learning 
online engineering courses of different complexity. Affective states get 
recognized through the use of an interaction behavioral log. The novel 
optimization algorithm is designed to train neural networks used for the 
prediction of affective states. 
2.2. Challenges 
The issues suffered by the classical learning management system are 
enlisted below.  
• To alleviate the impact of lack of supervision.  
• Performance prediction due to per-student assessment response 
sparsity is challenging [10].  
• Procrastination is one of the biggest challenge [11].  
• Identifying affective states for course is a big challenge.  
• The factors affecting student performance due to course complexity, 
learning styles, and affective states need to be addressed  
• Need to identify a novel method for the detection of Affective States.  
• Need to have a novel optimization algorithm for training neural 
networks while predicting Affective States.  
• No standard dataset based on interaction logs is available.  
• No benchmark for labeling the dataset is available. 
Fig. 1. Perceived course complexity: Survey outcome.  
S. Rathi et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
Array 19 (2023) 100315
5
3. Proposed SS-ROA-based deep LSTM for affective state 
prediction 
An e-Learning system should focus on the acquisition of knowledge 
and cognition. The system can use affective state recognition for iden-
tifying emotions while structuring the courses. This research aims to 
develop an efficient method of recognizing e-learners’ emotions for HCI 
study applied to courses of varied complexity. The three courses that 
were selected for the experimental study are Data Structures and Files 
(C1), Data Base Management and System (C2), and Human-Computer 
Interaction (C3) have High, Medium and Low complexity respectively. 
These courses were selected after analyzing data of perceived 
complexity collected from the survey of professionals and teachers. 
To measure the perceived cognitive complexity of various engi-
neering courses, a survey of teachers and computer and IT professionals 
is conducted. As shown in Fig. 1, Data Structures and Files (C1), Data 
Base Management and System (C2), and Human-Computer Interface (C3) 
are considered High, Medium, and Low complex subject respectively. 
A log of interaction with the Learning Management System (LMS) 
was recorded to capture the learning behavior. The log file comprises the 
details of the course, topic, type of topic explored, time spent on 
different activities, and the exam score of learners. Then, the features 
were identified and Deep LSTM [48–50] was performed to identify the 
learner’s affective state. It was trained using the proposed SS-ROA which 
was developed through a combination of the Squirrel Search Algorithm 
(SSA) [51] and Rider Optimization Algorithm (ROA) [52]. Hence, the 
SS-ROA-based Deep LSTM was found more effective in predicting the 
different affective states including engagement, frustration, confusion, 
boredom, anger, and surprise. Finally, a correlation study was per-
formed between affective state outcome with exam scores and course 
completion. Fig. 2 portrays the block diagram of the affective state 
prediction model using proposed SS-ROA-based Deep LSTM. 
As shown in Fig. 2, the learner’s behavior data is recorded for 
identified 3 subjects namely data structures and files, database man-
agement and system, and human-computer interface. These subjects 
have High, Medium, and Low complexity respectively. Each course has 
five units and each unit has topics with ten lectures which contain four 
videos of 1 h, two documents, one PDF, one PPT, and two exams. The log 
is recorded for more than 100 students while studying these subjects. 
Student ID, Course ID, Topic ID, Lecture ID, Type of document (Video/ 
PPT/PDF/DOC), Opening and Closing time is recorded. 
Extracted Features from the recorded data are. 
EF1: Signifies the number of lectures covered. 
EF2: Indicates the number of topics covered. 
EF3: Represents the number of videos covered. 
EF4: Symbolizes the number of documents covered (pdf/doc/ppt). 
EF5: Indicates the number of exams attended. 
EF6: Signifies frequency ID (Morning/evening/afternoon/night). 
EF7: Denotes learning time. 
EF8: Represents occurrence of sign_in. 
The feature vector can be modeled by combining all the aforemen-
tioned features. 
3.1. Affective state prediction of the student using proposed SS-ROA- 
based deep LSTM 
Affective states are events that are used for representing short and 
long-term emotions that are experienced by the user while doing some 
activity. Knowing the changes in the affective states of the learner is very 
helpful in the education field and it is associated with an increase in 
learning outcomes. Here, the proposed SS-ROA-based Deep LSTM is 
developed for the affective state prediction of students daily. The fea-
tures are given as input to the Deep LSTM [18,22]. The Deep LSTM is 
trained using the proposed SS-ROA and is obtained by integrating SS and 
ROA. The proposed algorithm effectively predicts affective states, such 
as frustration, engagement, boredom, confusion, anger, and surprise. 
The architecture of Deep LSTM, training of Deep LSTM and the gener-
ated output are illustrated below. 
3.1.1. Why deep LSTM 
Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) can also handle sequential data. 
They can memorize previous inputs. They suffer from short-term 
memory. For long sequences, it is difficult for RNNs to consider the in-
formation from previous steps. The major concern associated with RNN 
Fig. 2. Block diagram of an affective state prediction model using proposed SS-ROA-based Deep LSTM.  
S. Rathi et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
Array 19 (2023) 100315
6
is, it suffers from the vanishing and exploding gradient problem. Gra-
dients are values that are used for updating the weights of neural net-
works. It never finds optimal weight in both cases. 
In LSTM architecture, the network “decides” whether to modify its 
“internal memory” at each step. By doing so, the layer can keep track of 
important events from earlier time steps to later ones, allowing for much 
richer inference. So Deep LSTM is used for the prediction of affective 
states. 
3.1.2. Architecture of deep LSTM 
The resultant extracted features (EF) acquired from interaction logs 
were fed to the deep LSTM for prediction. It is more beneficial rather 
than other classifiers. It is exceptionally effective to achieve the 
emotional state forecast, using the memory cell of the classifier. Deep 
LSTM uses the previous states and information related to their neigh-
boring states for anticipating further states. It offers prediction by setting 
up the encoding layers. Gates can regulate the flow of information. It 
makes use of three gates Forget, Input, and Output. These gates have a 
very important role in LSTM. 
Forget gate: This gate decides to remember or forget information. 
Input Gate: It decides what data to add from the current input. 
Output Gate: The output gate decides the next hidden state. 
When information is passed and the gate is activated, the informa-
tion is fed to the memory cell. The significant benefit of adjusting the cell 
and the gates is to deal with the information flow. Here, the classifier 
utilizes the past condition of neighbors and the input cell to assess the 
further cell state. 
3.1.3. Deep LSTM training using proposed SS-ROA 
The affect is predicted through deep LSTM, trained by projected SS- 
ROA. The proposed SS-ROA is devised through a combination of SS and 
ROA. Here, the SS [51] is obtained by the dynamic foraging actions of 
squirrels. In warm weather, the squirrels find their foodstuff by gliding 
from one to another tree and expose to different locations of the forest. 
SSA acquires optimum global solutions with good convergence and 
poses the ability for solving complex problems. SSA assists to provide 
constant effectual accuracy. The update equation used in this algorithm 
is considered further in the SS-ROA algorithm. 
Meanwhile, ROA [52] is propelled by deeds of rider gatherings, 
which travel to acquire the target to become a winner. Every single 
gathering plays out a few procedures for arriving at the target. Subse-
quently, it is noticed that it performs affective state prediction with 
enhanced accuracy. Likewise, the ROA is exceptionally powerful. It 
undergoes fictional computing to settle the optimization issues. It has 
less convergence rate and it is more receptive to hyper-parameters. 
Besides, it follows the multi-directional search space and hence it has 
a fast convergence rate that depends on the over-taker position. 
The ROA considers the four groups of riders. Every group follows its 
approach to arrive at the target position. As the name implies the bypass 
rider tries to win by bypassing the leading path. The follower goes after 
the rider who is in the lead position. The over-taker overtakes to arrive at 
the leading position. The attacker takes the position by taking the 
maximum speed to attain the goal. 
According to the researchers [52], the update strategy used by 
over-takers elevates the rate of success so it is used further in SS-ROA. 
Henceforth, by consolidating SSA with the ROA, the presentation of 
an emotional state forecast can be altogether improved. Thus, the newly, 
devised SS-ROA updates the weights of the Deep LSTM. The SS-ROA has 
the capability of fast convergence by avoiding local minima that mini-
mizes the error while mapping the input feature vectors. Thus, a more 
accurate affective state classification is performed. Besides, the cost and 
training time is also being reduced through the optimization process. 
The step of proposed the SS-ROA are given as follows, 
Step1) Random Initialization of Riders: 
The preliminary step is the random initialization of riders in groups. 
Step 2) Error Determination: 
Least Mean Squared Error (MSE) is calculated. The outcome with the 
least MSE is considered the best solution. 
MSerr = 1
d
∑
d
c=1
[ExpectedOutput − Pr edictedOutput]2
(1)  
where, d is number of samples, such as 1 < c ≤ d. 
Step 3) Estimate updates position: 
For determining the winner, the rider’s position is updated. The 
update of the position is explained below: 
According to the Rider Optimization Algorithm, the over-taker’s 
update position increases the rate of getting success. So formula used for 
the same is used in this algorithm. It is represented as, 
Ae+1(h, i) = Ae(h, i) +
[
DR
e (h) ∗ AL(L, i)
]
(2)  
where DR
e (h) signifies direction indicator, i symbolizes coordinate 
selector, AL indicates leading rider’s position, and L indicates leading 
rider’s index. 
In Squirrel Search Algorithm, squirrels are allocated arbitrarily at the 
start. The algorithm consists of three cases in all. As per SSA [20], the 
updated position of squirrels is expressed as, 
Ae+1(h, i) = Ae(h, i) + prBdAe(f, i) − prBdAe(h, i)
(3)  
where Ae(h, i) indicates flying squirrel location that acquired hickory nut 
tree, pr represents random gliding distance, Bd symbolizes gliding con-
stant, Ae(f, i) indicates flying squirrel on acorn nut tree. 
After rearranging equation (3), we get 
Ae(h, i) = Ae+1(h, i) − prBdAe(f, i)
1 − prBd
(4) 
Substitute equation (4) in equation (2) 
Ae+1(h, i) = Ae+1(h, i) − prBdAe(f, i)
1 − prBd
+ DR
e (h) ∗ AL(L, i)
(5) 
After rearranging above equation (5), we get the final updated 
equation of the proposed SS-ROA as 
Ae+1(h, i) = 1 − prBd
−prBd
[−prBdAe(f, i)
1 − prBd
+ DR
e (h) ∗ AL(L, i)
]
(6) 
Step 4) Riding Off time: 
The steps in the algorithm are repeated till a winner is exposed. 
3.1.4. Output 
Thus, the affective state is predicted using the proposed SS-ROA- 
based Deep LSTM. The various states, like confusion, engagement, etc. 
are predicted. Here, the states are predicted for all students of every 
course daily. The affective state having maximum frequency is termed 
an output state. 
4. Results and discussion 
The effectiveness of developed SS-ROA-based Deep LSTM using ac-
curacy and correlation is presented. The analysis of every method is 
done by changing courses. Then, the performance is calculated by 
varying students’ performance. 
4.1. Experimental set-up 
As shown in Fig. 3, the experimentation is performed using two 
setups. 
Set-up-1: The analysis of methods concerning accuracy considering 
affective states with varied courses. In addition, the correlative study is 
analyzed by performing an analysis of affective state versus exam score, 
affective state versus course completion. 
Set-up-2: The analysis of methods concerning accuracy considering 
S. Rathi et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
Array 19 (2023) 100315
7
affective states with varied student performance. In addition, the 
correlative study is analyzed by performing an analysis of affective state 
versus exam score, and affective state versus course completion. 
4.2. Methods used for comparison 
The methods, like Deep LSTM, SVM, and proposed SS-ROA-based 
Deep LSTM are used for the comparative study. 
4.3. Comparative analysis 
The analysis of techniques using accuracy and correlation is done by 
varying courses and students’ performance. 
4.3.1. Analysis using set-up = 1 
The analysis of affective state prediction techniques in terms of ac-
curacy is described with varied courses. In addition, the correlative 
study is analyzed by performing an analysis of affective state versus 
exam score and affective state versus course completion. 
Fig. 4 displays the analysis of methods with accuracy considering 
affective states with courses. Considering courses 1, 2, and 3, the ac-
curacy measured by projected SS-ROA-based Deep LSTM are 0.898, 
0.843, and 0.930 respectively. It is higher as compared to the other 
reputed algorithms Deep LSTM and SVM. 
Fig. 5 displays the comparison of techniques with correlation for 
affective states vs. exam scores. Considering courses 1, 2, and 3, the 
accuracy measured by projected SS-ROA-based Deep LSTM are 0.379, 
0.337, and 0.238 respectively. It is higher as compared to the other 
reputed algorithms Deep LSTM and SVM. 
Fig. 6 displays the comparison of techniques with correlation for 
affective states vs. course completion. Considering courses 1, 2, and 3, 
the accuracy measured by projected SS-ROA-based Deep LSTM are 
0.200, 0.241, and 0.127 respectively. It is higher as compared to the 
other reputed algorithms Deep LSTM and SVM. 
4.3.2. Analysis with set-up = 2 
The analysis of affective state prediction techniques in terms of ac-
curacy is described with varied student performance. In addition, the 
Fig. 3. Analysis of affective state prediction method.  
Fig. 4. Analysis of methods with accuracy considering affective states with courses 
a) Analysis in terms of accuracy considering affective states with courses. 
S. Rathi et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
Array 19 (2023) 100315
8
correlative study is analyzed by performing an analysis of affective state 
versus exam score and affective state versus course completion. 
Fig. 7 displays the comparison of techniques with accuracy for af-
fective states with student performance. Considering courses 1, 2, and 3, 
the accuracy measured by projected SS-ROA-based Deep LSTM are 
0.949, 0.949, and 0.962 respectively. It is higher as compared to the 
other reputed algorithms Deep LSTM and SVM. 
Fig. 8 displays the comparison of techniques with correlation for 
affective states vs. exam scores. Considering courses 1, 2, and 3, the 
accuracy measured by projected SS-ROA-based Deep LSTM are 0.236, 
0.190, and 0.138 respectively. It is higher as compared to the other 
reputed algorithms Deep LSTM and SVM. 
Fig. 9 exhibits the comparison of techniques with correlation for 
affective states vs. course completion. Considering courses 1, 2, and 3, 
the accuracy measured by projected SS-ROA-based Deep LSTM are 
0.227, 0.164, and 0.161 respectively. It is higher as compared to the 
other reputed algorithms Deep LSTM and SVM. 
4.4. Comparative discussion 
Methods are analyzed by using Setup-1, considering different courses 
concerning accuracy and correlation parameter. Through analysis, it is 
observed that maximum accuracy of 0.930 is calculated by projected SS- 
ROA-based Deep LSTM in course 3. The maximum correlation of 0.379 is 
measured by projected SS-ROA-based Deep LSTM for course 1. Hence, it 
can be observed that projected SS-ROA-based Deep LSTM shows 
improved performance in affective state prediction. 
Methods are analyzed by using Setup-2, considering varying student 
performance concerning accuracy and correlation. Throughout the 
analysis, it is noted that the highest accuracy of 0.962 is calculated by 
the proposed SS-ROA-based Deep LSTM for the high-performance stu-
dent category. The maximum correlation of 0.236 is calculated by the 
proposed method in affective states with exam scores for the low- 
performance student category. Hence, it can be observed that the pro-
posed SS-ROA-based Deep LSTM shows improved performance in af-
fective state prediction. 
Fig. 5. Comparison of Techniques with correlation for affective states vs. exam score 
b) Correlation study (Affective state versus exam score). 
Fig. 6. Comparison of techniques with correlation for affective states vs. course completion 
d) Correlation study (Affective state versus course completion). 
S. Rathi et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
Array 19 (2023) 100315
9
The developed affective state method (SS-ROA-based Deep LSTM) 
obtained the best performance in terms of accuracy and correlation. The 
newly devised SS-ROA algorithm has the capability of fast convergence 
rate with the avoidance of local minima. Besides, the most significant 
feature selection it also reduces the computational complexity of the 
network, and the Deep LSTM predicts the time series data more accu-
rately. Thus the tuning of the Deep LSTM with the novel SS-ROA opti-
mization enhances the prediction accuracy that leads to the better 
performance of the system. 
The affective state prediction using the Deep LSTM obtained an ac-
curacy of 0.825 for low performance category students as shown in 
Fig. 7, which is 13.07% lower than the newly devised SS-ROA-based 
Deep LSTM technique. Here, the best performance is achieved due to 
the novel optimization technique that tunes the weights of the classifier 
with the fast convergence rate by avoiding the premature convergence 
that makes the more accurate affective state prediction. The accurate 
affective state prediction makes the correlation study more useful. 
Similarly, the proposed method outperformed all the other state of art 
techniques. 
4.5. Statistical analysis 
The proposed SS-ROA algorithm outperforms the other algorithms 
concerning accuracy and correlation. If Null Hypothesis is “H0: The SS- 
ROA-based Deep LSTM method doesn’t have a significant effect on enhancing 
the accuracy of prediction of affective states in E-learning scenario”. After 
performing a t-Test on the proposed SS-ROA based Deep LSTM and SVM 
results shows that, |t stat|> T Critical and P value < 0.05. So, the Null 
Hypothesis can be rejected, and the Alternate Hypothesis “HA: The SS- 
ROA-based Deep LSTM method has a significant effect on enhancing 
the accuracy of prediction of affective states in E-learning scenario” 
can be accepted. 
The result of the t-Test is shown in Table 1. 
Fig. 7. Comparison of techniques with accuracy for affective states with student performance 
a) Analysis in terms of accuracy considering affective states. 
Fig. 8. Comparison of techniques with correlation for affective states vs. exam score 
b) Correlation study (Affective state versus exam score). 
S. Rathi et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
Array 19 (2023) 100315
10
5. Conclusion 
This paper devises a strategy for affective state prediction. Initially, 
three courses Data Structures and Files (C1), Data Base Management and 
System (C2), and Human-Computer Interface (C3) are employed for the 
experimental study. The three courses can be modeled as High complex 
subject, Medium complex subject, and Low complex subject. These 
courses are studied by different learners using LMS wherein the log file is 
created based on the learning patterns. Thereafter, the features are 
extracted which is further utilized for affective state prediction of the 
learners using Deep LSTM. The Deep LSTM is trained using the proposed 
SS-ROA and is formulated by combining Squirrel Search Algorithm 
(SSA) and Rider Optimization Algorithm (ROA). Here, the predictions of 
affective states like engagement, boredom, anger, happiness, etc. are 
performed. At last, the course and student ID, affective state, exam score, 
and course completion are considered for correlation study. The pro-
posed algorithm outperformed than other methods with the utmost ac-
curacy of 0.962 and the utmost correlation of 0.379 respectively. The 
developed model was stable for the varied levels of complexity of 
courses. It is useful for the applications like course recommendation 
systems, finding students at risk, improving the quality of online cour-
ses, and tracking learners’ progress and performance. In the future other 
databases can be considered for providing briefer analysis. It may be 
possible to develop a multi modal approach that may take input in the 
form of facial expressions, sensor data, and gestures along with a log file. 
Credit author statement 
Snehal Rathi: Conceptualization, Methodology, Formal analysis 
Resources, Software, Validation, Sachin Sakhare: Writing - Review, 
Validation, Investigation. 
Declaration of competing interest 
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence 
the work reported in this paper. 
Data availability 
The authors are unable or have chosen not to specify which data has 
been used. 
References 
[1] Qiu L, Liu Y, Liu Y. An integrated framework with feature selection for dropout 
prediction in massive open online courses. IEEE Access 2018;6:71474–84. 
[2] Mane A Abhijeet, Waykar B Sanjay, Dhanesh Narvekar S. Multimedia resource 
library using video streaming. Proceedings of the International Conference & 
Workshop on Emerging Trends in Technology 2011:1378–9. 
[3] Chen W, Brinton CG, Cao D, Mason-Singh A, Lu C, Chiang M. Early detection 
prediction of learning outcomes in online short-courses via learning behaviors. 
IEEE Transactions on Learning Technologies 2018;12(1):44–58. 
[4] Ghasem Aghaei R, Arya A, Biddle R. A dashboard for affective e-learning: data 
visualization for monitoring online learner emotions. In: Media+ innovate 
learning, association for the advancement of computing in education (AACE); June 
2016. p. 1536–43. 
[5] Liyanagunawardena TR, Parslow P, Williams S. Dropout: MOOC participants’ 
perspective. 2014. 
[6] Sujatha R, Kavitha D. Learner retention in MOOC environment: analyzing the role 
of motivation, self-efficacy and perceived effectiveness. International Journal of 
Education and Development using ICT 2018;14(2). 
[7] Yue J, Tian F, Chao KM, Shah N, Li L, Chen Y, Zheng Q. Recognizing 
multidimensional engagement of E-learners based on multi-channel data in E- 
learning environment. IEEE Access 2019;7:149554–67. 
[8] Hone KS, El Said GR. Exploring the factors affecting MOOC retention: a survey 
study. Comput Educ 2016;98:157–68. 
[9] Komal V Aher, Waykar SB. A survey on feature based image retrieval. Int J Adv Res 
Comput Sci Software Eng 2014;4(10):241–5. 
[10] Yang TY, Brinton CG, Joe-Wong C, Chiang M. Behavior-based grade prediction for 
MOOCs via time series neural networks. IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Signal 
Processing 2017;11(5):716–28. 
[11] Oliv´e DM, Huynh D, Reynolds M, Dougiamas M, Wiese D. A quest for a one-size- 
fits-all neural network: early prediction of students at risk in online courses. IEEE 
Transactions on Learning Technologies 2019;12:171–83. 
[12] Huang L, Wang CD, Chao HY, Lai JH, Philip SY. A score prediction approach for 
optional course recommendation via cross-user-domain collaborative filtering. 
IEEE Access 2019;7:19550–63. 
Fig. 9. Comparison of techniques with correlation for affective states vs. course completion 
d) Correlation study (Affective state versus course completion). 
Table 1 
Result of t-Test of SS-ROA based Deep LSTM and SVM.  
t-Test: Two-Sample Assuming Equal Variances 
Mean 
0.921833333 
Observations 
6 
t Stat 
3.479428884 
P(T ≤ t) one-tail 
0.00296343 
t Critical one-tail 
1.812461102 
P(T ≤ t) two-tail 
0.005926859 
t Critical two-tail 
2.228138842  
S. Rathi et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
Array 19 (2023) 100315
11
[13] Khan FA, Weippl ER, Tjoa AM. Integrated approach for the detection of learning 
styles and affective states in EdMedia+ Innovate Learning. Association for the 
Advancement ofComputing in Education (AACE); 2009. p. 753–61. 
[14] Cocea M, Weibelzahl S. Log file analysis for disengagement detection in e-Learning 
environments. User Model User-Adapted Interact 2009;19(4):341–85. 
[15] Wampfler R, Klingler S, Solenthaler B, Schinazi VR, Gross M. Affective state 
prediction based on semi-supervised learning from smartphone touch data. In: 
Proceedings of the CHI conference on human factors in computing systems; 2020. 
p. 1–13. 
[16] Francis BK, Babu SS. Predicting academic performance of students using a hybrid 
data mining approach. J Med Syst 2019;43(6):162. 
[17] Kai S. Modeling student affective state patterns during self-regulated learning in 
physics playground”. Doctoral dissertation Columbia University); 2019. 
[18] Ibrahim Z, Rusli NM, Janor RM. Predicting students’ academic achievement: 
comparison between logistic regression, artificial neural network, and neuro-fuzzy. 
In: Proceedings of the international symposium on information technology; 2008. 
[19] Shen L, Wang M, Shen R. Affective e-learning: using “emotional” data to improve 
learning in pervasive learning environment. Educ Technol Soc 2009;12(2):176–89. 
[20] Goleman D. Emotional intelligence. NewYork: Bantam Books; 1995. 
[21] Kort B, Reilly R. Analytical models of emotions, learning and relationships: 
towardsan affect-sensitive cognitive machine, vol. 548. MIT Media Lab Tech 
Report No; 2001. 
[22] Cocea M, Weibelzahl S. Eliciting motivation knowledge from log files towards 
motivation diagnosis for adaptive systems. In: Conati C, McCoy K, Paliouras G, 
editors. User Modeling 2007: 11th International Conference, UM 2007, Corfu, 
Greece, June 25-29, 2007, Proceedings (4511 ed., pp. 197-206). (Lecture notes in 
computer science; No. 4511). Springer; 2007. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540- 
73078-1_23. 
[23] D’Mello SK, Craig SD, Witherspoon A, McDaniel B, Graesser A. Automatic 
detection of learner’s affect from conversational cues. Journal of User Modeling 
and User-Adapted Interaction 2008;18(1–2):45–80. 
[24] Weimin X, Wenhong X. E-learning assistant system based on virtual human 
interaction technology, ICCS2007, LNCS. Springer Berlin/Heidelberg; 2007. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/bjet.12324. 
[25] Singh SV, Hiran KK. The impact of AI on teaching and learning in higher education 
technology. Journal of Higher Education Theory & Practice 2022;12(13). 
[26] Hiran KK. Investigating factors influencing the adoption of IT cloud computing 
platforms in higher education: case of Sub-Saharan Africa with IT professionals. Int 
J Hum Cap Inf Technol Prof (IJHCITP) 2021;12(3):21–36. 
[27] Hiran KK. Impact of driving factors on cloud computing adoption in the higher 
education. In: IOP conference series: materials science and engineering (Vol.1131, 
No. 1, p. 012016). IOP Publishing; 2021. April. 
[28] Calvo Rafael, D’Mello K, Sidney. Affect detection: an interdisciplinary Review of 
models, methods and their applications. T. Affective Computing; 2010. https://doi. 
org/10.1109/T-AFFC.2010.1. 1. 18-37. 
[29] Picard, R.W. (1995) Affective Computing. M.I.T Media Laboratory Perceptual 
Computing Section Technical Report No. 321. 
[30] Poria Soujanya, Cambria Erik, Bajpai Rajiv, Hussain Amir. A review of affective 
computing: from unimodal analysis to multimodal fusion. In: Information fusion. 
Elsevier; 2017. p. 98–125. 37, September. 
[31] Chitraa V, Dr Davamani AS. A survey on pre-processing methods for web usage 
data. Int J Comput Sci Inf Secur 2010;7(3). 
[32] Ashwin TS, Guddeti RMR. Impact of inquiry interventions on students in e- 
learning and classroom environments using affective computing framework. User 
Model User-Adapted Interact 2020:1–43. 
[33] Jason Matthew Harley. Chapter 5 - measuring emotions: a survey of cutting edge 
methodologies used in computer-based learning environment research, editor(s. In: 
Sharon Y, Tettegah, Gartmeier Martin, editors. In emotions and technology, 
emotions, technology, design, and learning. Academic Press; 2016. p. 89–114. 
9780128018569. 
[34] Sandanayake TC, Madurapperuma AP, Dias D. Affective ELearning model for 
recognizing learner emotions. International Journal of Information and Education 
Technology 2011;1(No. 4). October. 
[35] Khan F.A, Akbar A, Muhammad Altaf, Shujaat Ali Khan, Ayaz Ahmed, “Automatic 
student modelling for detection of learning styles and affective states in web based 
learning management systems”, DOI 10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2937178, [IEEE 
Access]. 
[36] Pekrun Reinhard, Goetz Thomas, Titz Wolfram. Academic emotions in students’ 
self-regulated learning and achievement”: a program of qualitative and 
quantitative research. Educ Psychol 2002;37. 
[37] Chakurkar Manasi, Prof. Deepa adiga: “A web mining approach for personalized E- 
learning system”. Int J Adv Comput Sci Appl 2014;5(No.3). 
[38] Han-Wen Guo, Yu-Shun Huang, Chien-Hung Lin, Jen-Chien Chien, Koichi, editors. 
Heart rate variability signal features for emotion recognition by using principal 
component analysis and support vectors machine; 2016. 
[39] Abdi H, Williams LJ. Principal component analysis, vol. 2. Wiley Interdisciplinary 
Reviews: Computational Statistics; 2010. p. 433–59. 
[40] Rigas G, Katsis CD, Ganiatsas G, Fotiadis DI. A user independent biosignal based 
emotion recognition method. Lecture Notes In Artificial Intelligence 2007;45(1): 
314–8. 
[41] Wang C, Wang F. An emotional analysis method based on heart rate variability. 
Biomedical and Health Informatics IEEE-EMBS International Conference on; 2012. 
p. 104–7. 
[42] Terence KL, Hui, Simon Sherratt R, editors. Coverage of emotion recognition for 
common wearable biosensorgs; 2018. 
[43] Deigh J. William James and the Rise of the Scientific Study of Emotion. Emotion 
Review 2013;;46(1):4–12. 
[44] Darekar R, Chavan M, Sharanyaa S, Ranjan NM. A hybrid meta-heuristic ensemble 
based classification technique speech emotion recognition. Adv Eng Software 
2023;180:103412. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.advengsoft.2023.103412. 
[45] Alamgir FM, Alam MS. An artificial intelligence driven facial emotion recognition 
system using hybrid deep belief rain optimization. Multimed Tools Appl 2023;82: 
2437–64. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11042-022-13378-x. 
[46] Vedavathi N, Anil Kumar KM. An efficient e-learning recommendation system for 
user preferences using hybrid optimization algorithm. Soft Comput 2021;25: 
9377–88. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00500-021-05753-x. 
[47] Rathi Snehal, Deshpande Yogesh, Nagaral Shashidhar, Narkhede Ankita, 
Sajwani Radhika, Takalikar Varad. Analysis of user’s learning styles and academic 
emotions through web usage mining. In: 2021 international conference on 
emerging smart computing and informatics (ESCI). IEEE; 2021. p. 159–64. 
[48] Xingjian SHI, Chen Z, Wang H, Yeung DY, Wong WK, Woo WC. Convolutional 
LSTM network: a machine learning approach for precipitation now casting. In: 
Advances in neural information processing systems; 2015. p. 802–10. 
[49] Waykar Sanjay B, Bharathi CR. Video object retrieval mechanism with the effective 
video tracking model based on Deep long-short term memory. International 
Journal of Advanced Science and Technology 2020;29(No. 7). 
[50] Rathi SR, Deshpande YD. Course complexity in engineering education using E- 
learner’s affective-state prediction. Kybernetes 2022. https://doi.org/10.1108/K- 
09-2021-0806. ahead-of-print No. ahead-of-print. 
[51] Jain M, Singh V, Rani A. A novel nature-inspired algorithm for optimization: 
squirrel search algorithm. Swarm Evol Comput 2019;44:148–75. 
[52] Binu D, Kariyappa BS. RideNN: a new rider optimization algorithm-based neural 
network for fault diagnosis in analog circuits. IEEE Trans Instrum Meas 2018;68 
(1):2–26. 
S. Rathi et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
