Artiﬁcial Intelligence in the Life Sciences 3 (2023) 100067 
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 
Artiﬁcial Intelligence in the Life Sciences 
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/ailsci 
Editorial 
Data science and data analytics in life science research 
Jürgen Bajorath 
Department of Life Science Informatics and Data Science, B-IT, LIMES Program Unit Chemical Biology and Medicinal Chemistry, Rheinische 
Friedrich-Wilhelms-Universität, Friedrich-Hirzebruch-Allee 5/6, D-53115 Bonn, Germany. 
a r t i c l e 
i n f o 
Keywords: 
Data science 
data analytics 
artiﬁcial intelligence 
big data 
interdisciplinary research 
Data science (DS) [ 1 , 2 ] and data analytics (DA) [3] are closely re- 
lated yet self-contained ﬁelds, which is also reﬂected by the availabil- 
ity of diﬀerent educational programs in DS and DA [4] . Both DS and 
DA concentrate on exploratory data analysis. Common tasks include the 
implementation and application of software tools, algorithms, and sta- 
tistical techniques for data processing, organization, integration, and 
visualization – with the ultimate goal of extracting knowledge from 
data. A major distinguishing feature is the much stronger focus of DS on 
data models. DS preferentially extends the identiﬁcation of data patterns 
and statistical trends through machine learning and predictive model- 
ing [ 1 , 2 ]. On the other hand, DA typically focuses on tasks such as the 
curation of data from a given source or application, followed by extrac- 
tion of insights and knowledge to address speciﬁc questions. Hence, DS 
is generally more algorithm- and prediction-oriented than DA. 
Over the past decade, DS and DA have steadily gained in importance 
due to massively increasing volumes of structured and unstructured data 
in many areas [5–7] . In addition to data volumes, other ‘big data’ char- 
acteristics challenge DS and DA including the speed of data generation, 
data variability, resolution, heterogeneity, or conﬁdence [5–7] . 
Across the life sciences including drug discovery, data heterogeneity 
is a major issue that complicates interdisciplinary research and requires 
strong contributions of DS and DA towards data integration [8] . More- 
over, life science data have discipline-speciﬁc attributes and DS/DA spe- 
cialists must also have scientiﬁc domain knowledge and the ability to 
operate and communicate at interfaces between diﬀerent disciplines. 
Cleary, contributions from DS and DA experts are essential for devel- 
oping data-driven concepts in life science and drug discovery research 
[8] . 
E-mail address: bajorath@bit.uni-bonn.de 
With increasing emphasis on machine learning and artiﬁcial intel- 
ligence in many areas, DS continues to be on the rise. However, this 
does not alleviate the need for DA, especially in speciﬁc project con- 
texts. Learning from data does not depend on machine learning and data 
models. However, careful data analysis and curation are pre-requisites 
for knowledge extraction, regardless of the methods used. 
It is emphasized that DS and DA contributions are integral to the 
scope of AILSCI. For example, the Methods & Protocols manuscript cate- 
gory oﬀers an excellent forum for the communication of new method- 
ological developments in DS and DA and publication of study or data cu- 
ration protocols for speciﬁc applications. Going forward, contributions 
that highlight speciﬁc aspects of data analysis and knowledge extraction 
or particular challenges and possible solutions are strongly encouraged. 
Clearly, machine learning depends on available data and their integrity. 
The better source data are characterized and understood the more likely 
predictions will be successful. Hence, DS, DA, and artiﬁcial intelligence 
research must inevitably be considered in context, emphasizing their 
relevance for AILSCI. 
Declaration of Competing Interest 
The authors declare that they have no known competing ﬁnancial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to inﬂuence 
the work reported in this paper. 
Data Availability 
No data was used for the research described in the article. 
References 
[1] Cao L . Data science: a comprehensive overview. ACM Comput Surv 2017;50:1–42 . 
[2] Dhar V . Data science and prediction. Commun ACM 2013;56:64–73 . 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ailsci.2023.100067 
Received 25 February 2023; Accepted 26 February 2023 
Available online 27 February 2023 
2667-3185/© 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license 
( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ ) 
J. Bajorath 
Artiﬁcial Intelligence in the Life Sciences 3 (2023) 100067 
[3] Runkler TA . Data analytics. 3rd Editon. Fachmedien Wiesbaden: Springer; 2020 . 
[4] Aasheim CL , Williams S , Rutner P , Gardiner A . Data analytics vs. data science: a 
study of similarities and diﬀerences in undergraduate programs based on course de- 
scriptions. J Inf Syst Educ 2015;26:103 . 
[5] Marx V . The big challenges of big data. Nature 2013;498:255–60 . 
[6] Provost F , Fawcett T . Data science and its relationship to big data and data-driven 
decision making. Big Data 2013;1:51–9 . 
[7] Agarwal R , Dhar V . Big data, big science, and analytics: the opportunity and challenge 
for IS research. Inform Syst Res 2015;25:443–8 . 
[8] Bajorath J . Foundations of data-driven medicinal chemistry. Future Sci OA 
2018;4:FSO320 . 
2 
