Editorial
When I was asked in 2018 to take over the editorship of a new gold
open access multidisciplinary journal covering the entire ﬁeld of Com-
puter Science, I accepted with enthusiasm. We started by dividing the
ﬁeld into subﬁelds and building a strong and diverse editorial board. The
inaugural volume appeared in April 2019. As of today, we have published
44 papers in 8 volumes, and Array is now indexed in the Directory of
Open Access Journals. As my other professional activities, including the
responsibility of another journal, demand more time, it is my pleasure to
announce that Professor Jianxin Li, a well-known researcher in database
systems and data mining, will replace me as the new Editor-in-Chief of
Array from January 1st, 2021. I am conﬁdent that the journal will
continue to grow and gain increasing recognition under Professor Li's
guidance. I also wish to thank the publisher Catherine Carnovale, the
managing editor Ashley Freeland, the Journal Manager Suganya S. Dorai,
the publishing content specialist Jacqueline Zhou, the transfer manager
Shaina Raza, and all the associate and area editors for their support, their
dedication and their valuable contributions to the creation of this new
journal.
Thierry Denoeux
As newly appointed Editor-in-Chief, I would like to follow the suc-
cessful path that Array is on, and continuously strengthen the role of
Array as a scientiﬁc forum for knowledge sharing and communication of
both theoretical foundations and real-world applications in all computer
science areas, particularly focusing on interdisciplinary research activ-
ities. With the fast development of computer science and emerging de-
mand of the information technology industry, it is timely to investigate
the enabling technologies and address domain bottleneck issues by
innovating cross-topic research. For instance, traditional structural
health monitoring research heavily relies on sensor networks, machine
learning, and deep learning. But nowadays, it is desirable for us to exploit
the capability of artiﬁcial intelligence, big data, data science, and
knowledge discovery. As another application example, digital adver-
tisement and online recommendation mix the usage of multiple topics,
such as deep learning, computer vision, knowledge bases, intelligent
computing, and cyber security. In order to train models over big and
quickly evolving datasets, we may need to develop innovative method-
ologies for integrating the powerful operability of hardware-based high-
performance computing into the learning process. Therefore, Array will
play an increasingly important role in disseminating these promising
multi-disciplinary research results within the computer science commu-
nity at large.
To reﬂect the growing diversity of the ﬁeld, the Editorial Board has
been formed by worldwide reputable scholars with their wide range of
research expertise. The ﬁeld of computer science has been divided into
11 subﬁelds, including cybersecurity; wireless networks; pattern recognition,
deep learning & machine learning; web intelligence, information systems &
information retrieval; data mining & decision making; blockchain technologies
and access control; data engineering & data science; Health & medical data
analytics; software engineering, edge computing & IoT systems; uncertainty
management and reasoning; and computer vision & image processing. Each
subﬁeld will be covered by two joint area editors. The role of the area
editors will be crucial for maintaining the high scientiﬁc standard of the
journal. The editorial board has also been extended to include a greater
number of associate editors; whose role is to assist in the refereeing
process of papers covering topics for which they are recognized experts.
I hope that the readers of Array will continue to enjoy reading the
journal, and I thank them in advance for continuing to submit their
valuable work to Array.
Jianxin Li
Jianxin Li
Thierry Denoeux
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Array
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/journals/array/2590-0056/open-access-journal
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.array.2021.100054
2590-0056/© 2021 Published by Elsevier Inc. This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
Array 9 (2021) 100054
