Artiﬁcial Intelligence in the Life Sciences 1 (2021) 100001 
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 
Artiﬁcial Intelligence in the Life Sciences 
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/ailsci 
Editorial 
Introducing artiﬁcial intelligence in the life sciences 
Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) is playing an increasingly import role in 
science, business, and everyday life. In science, AI has signiﬁcantly im- 
pacted a number of ﬁelds including, among others, image analysis or 
natural language processing and is spreading out to diﬀerent areas be- 
yond informatics including the life and biomedical sciences. Notably, 
AI is not a new discipline. The term was coined in 1956 and since then, 
AI evolved as a part of computer science and went through cycles of in- 
creasing and decreasing popularity. One of its sub-disciplines is machine 
learning (ML), which has a long history in the natural sciences (for at 
least three decades). A variant of machine learning termed deep learning 
(DL), which employs multi-layered (deep) neural network architectures, 
is largely responsible for the recent popularity of AI across diﬀerent 
ﬁelds, spurred on by the increasing availability of “big data ” in various 
areas, from which DL beneﬁts. This is exempliﬁed by the data deluge in 
online marketing, ﬁnance, or social networks. However, the life sciences 
and drug discovery are also becoming increasingly data-rich. Therefore, 
it is not surprising that ML and DL are currently receiving much atten- 
tion in the life science arena for the extraction of knowledge from data 
and for a variety of predictions. Of note, the terms AI, ML, and DL are 
often synonymously used, but the AI spectrum encompasses much more 
than ML/DL such as expert systems, fuzzy logic, or robotics, which also 
provide opportunities for interdisciplinary research and applications in 
diﬀerent areas. 
In this context, " Artiﬁcial Intelligence in the Life Sciences " ( AILSCI ) has 
been conceptualized as a forum for rapid open access publication of AI 
approaches and applications in the greater life science arena including 
chemical and biomedical sciences as well as drug discovery. Given its 
intended broad coverage and interdisciplinary focus, AILSCI is designed 
to ﬁll a void. Striving for high scientiﬁc quality and for evolving into a 
leading role in communicating AI-driven interdisciplinary research are 
central aspects of its mission. To these ends, a high-caliber Editorial 
Board plays a key role in supporting and shaping the Journal moving 
forward. 
AILSCI provides a variety of article types (as further speciﬁed be- 
low). For Research Articles and Communications , primary data not resid- 
ing in the public domain should be made available as an open access 
deposition upon acceptance to ensure reproducibility of the work. The 
Journal also oﬀers the “Data in Brief ” option for accompanying publi- 
cation of data sets. Furthermore, custom code will play an important 
role in many AI studies. Similar to primary data, custom code should be 
made publicly available as a part of any research investigation where 
its use is essential for the main ﬁndings, hence ensuring reproducibil- 
ity. During review, code should be made accessible and any restrictions 
to access should be speciﬁed. AILSCI partners with Software X , which 
makes it possible to separately publish code originating from AI stud- 
ies. New computational algorithms may be presented without code in 
Methods articles, as long as suﬃcient details (such as pseudo code) are 
provided to enable custom implementation. Such articles will be indi- 
vidually considered by the editors and ﬂexibly handled. 
By design, AILSCI aims to provide opportunities for communication 
of scientiﬁc work from academia, industry, and partnerships between 
commercial enterprises and academic institutions, which is another im- 
portant part of its mission. While AILSCI promotes open science and data 
sharing, intellectual property and proprietary data constraint within the 
industry are well recognized. Such restrictions should, however, not pre- 
clude publication of interesting science from industrial environments. 
Therefore, the Journal also oﬀers oﬀ-the-beaten path article types such 
Perspectives, Conceptual Analysis, Controversial Views, Methods , and Opin- 
ion pieces that provide diﬀerent formats for communication of new 
scientiﬁc developments, case studies, or thought-provoking approaches 
(even if preliminary), without the need for full data disclosure. 
Such contributions are generally encouraged to broaden the spec- 
trum of scientiﬁc publishing, reﬂect on the status of the ﬁeld, and com- 
municate science that departs from the mainstream. For example, for the 
further development of scientiﬁc approaches that are currently viewed 
as "revolutionary" and associated with hype, which certainly applies to 
AI, studies conclusively showing that complex methodologies do not of- 
fer advantages over simpler ones in speciﬁc application scenarios are 
of critical relevance, just as much as new breakthroughs are. It is also 
emphasized that the scope of AILSCI is not limited to computational 
studies, but includes reports of AI-driven experimental work, which are 
highly encouraged. 
As another characteristic feature, AILSCI aims for short editorial han- 
dling and review times. Peer reviews will be limited to two or three 
per submission and referees will be asked to consider potential scien- 
tiﬁc merits of a study as presented, without calling for excessive and 
time-consuming revisions. If those are required to render a manuscript 
publishable, a timely Reject & Resubmit decision is typically beneﬁcial 
to authors and provides several alternatives. Furthermore, “Your Paper 
Your Way ” option alleviates formatting constraints until a paper is ac- 
cepted. Taken together, these criteria aim to streamline the review and 
publication process. 
Going forward, AILSCI will be indexed in Scopus, the Emerging 
Sources Citation Index (ESCI), CiteScore, and the Scientiﬁc Citation In- 
dex (SCI). 
The editors and publisher are excited to launch " Artiﬁcial Intelligence 
in the Life Sciences " and sincerely hope that our authors will enjoy pub- 
lishing their work in this new forum for AI-driven research. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ailsci.2021.100001 
Received 28 January 2021; Accepted 29 January 2021 
Available online 6 March 2021 
2667-3185/© 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license 
( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ ) 
Editorial 
Artiﬁcial Intelligence in the Life Sciences 1 (2021) 100001 
Declaration of Competing Interest 
The authors declare that they have no known competing ﬁnancial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to inﬂuence 
the work reported in this paper. 
Mingyue Zheng 
State Key Laboratory of Drug Research, Shanghai Institute of Materia 
Medica, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 555 Rd. Zuchongzhi, Shanghai, 
China 
Carolina Horta Andrade 
Faculty of Pharmacy, Universidade Federal de Goiás, Rua 240, Qd. 87, 
Setor Leste Universitário, Goiânia - GO, 74605-170, Brazil 
Jürgen Bajorath ∗ 
Department of Life Science Informatics and Data Science, B-IT, LIMES 
Program Unit Chemical Biology and Medicinal Chemistry, Rheinische 
Friedrich-Wilhelms-Universität, Friedrich-Hirzebruch-Allee 6, D-53115 
Bonn, Germany. 
∗ Corresponding author. 
E-mail address: bajorath@bit.uni-bonn.de (J. Bajorath) 
2 
