The clause replacewith(2) exemplifies a goal template, which describes how a goal changes when the taclet is applied. A taclet may consist of multiple goal templates separated by semicolons, indicating that the goal is split by the taclet. If a taclet does not contain any goal templates, the proof branch is closed when the taclet is applied. Additionally, goal templates may include the following clauses.

Due to their simplicity and operational meaning, taclets can be systematically integrated into the graphical user interface of taclet-based interactive theorem provers. In the key system, a mouse click over an expression displays only those taclets whose find-part can be matched with the focused expression, thereby reducing the cognitive burden on the user. For further details on user interaction, refer to an extensive account.

The foundation for our assessment of the correctness of taclets is a semantic formula derived in this section. This formula is declared to be the meaning of a taclet independent of specific taclet application mechanisms, offering a flexible approach to addressing soundness issues. In essence, we define a taclet application mechanism to be correct if and only if taclets with valid meaning formulas are translated into sound rules. Thus, to demonstrate the correctness of a taclet, it suffices to prove the validity of its meaning formula.

Schema variables for logical or program variables can be straightforwardly substituted with new concrete variables. However, it is noteworthy that when instantiating a schematic expression, there is a possibility for two different schema variables of type program variable to be instantiated with the same concrete variable, which is not feasible for variable schema variables based on the definitions of Section 2. The presence or absence of such collisions divides the set of instances of a schematic expression into finitely many classes, all of which must be considered to capture the meaning of the schematic expression.

In this context, at most one of the jump statements represented by the schema variables #jst1, ..., #jstm is selected and executed, depending on the value of the last program variable argument pk (note that the type of pk is int according to the definitions of the last section).

Lemma 6.4 (lifting of taclet applications): Suppose that rtac' is a rule schema described by a taclet tac', and that tac' does not contain skolem symbols (as introduced in Section 5.1). If an instance of rtac' is provided by the definitions of the last section.

We would like to express our gratitude to Martin Giese and Steffen Schlager for their valuable comments on earlier versions of this paper, as well as to Bernhard Beckert and P.H. Schmitt for engaging discussions. Additionally, we extend our thanks to the anonymous referees and workshop organizers.