Path-based temporal logics are commonly used as specification logics, especially in the context of automatic verification. Examples of such logics include CTL* with its fragments CTL and LTL for transition systems, and PCTL for probabilistic transition systems. Despite the shared similarities among these logics, a general unified account of path-based temporal logics does not currently exist.


Computational types are required to capture the usual notions of computation path for such systems. The transition type characterizes the type of individual transitions (usually linear) and determines the notion of computation path, while the computational type specifies how transitions from specific states are structured (e.g., using sets or probability distributions). The distributivity of ‘t’ over ‘f’ then enables the structuring of computation paths from individual states in a similar manner.


It is demonstrated that any commutative monad on a set possesses a canonical distributive law over any shapely polynomial functor (i.e., a functor constructed from identity and constant functors using finite products and arbitrary coproducts). This provides examples of distributive laws of the powerset monad over shapely polynomial functors. Furthermore, the construction of the canonical distributive law (through induction on the structure of the shapely functor) readily generalizes to any category with products and coproducts, thereby also offering examples of distributive laws of the subprobability measure monad over shapely polynomial functors on meas.


Our path-based coalgebraic temporal logics will be rooted in the concept of predicate lifting, as introduced by Pattinson. However, the semantics of these logics will differ somewhat from the standard semantics of coalgebraic modal logics induced by predicate liftings, as defined in the cited work. Furthermore, the notion of predicate lifting used here is more general than the original one and applies to endofunctors on both set and meas.


In the case of the non-empty powerset monad, the above result only implies that the infinite trace map is an op-lax coalgebra morphism, which is weaker than the defining property of the infinite trace map in the cited work, which requires a proper coalgebra morphism. The exploration of sufficient conditions for the infinite trace map to define a proper coalgebra morphism for an arbitrary (affine) monad ‘t’ remains an open question, but we speculate that the local continuity of the functor ‘f’ will be at least a necessary condition.


Future work will extend these findings to arbitrary (non-affine) monads. Besides the powerset, lift, and subprobability measure monads, a non-affine monad of interest is the multiset monad, due to its relevance to graded temporal logic. The examination of the relationship between finite and possibly infinite traces constitutes another area for future exploration.