A diagram's region is any enclosed area that may be empty and is fully enclosed by the diagram's lines. A basic region refers to any region enclosed by a closed curve, while each basic region has a unique label, which is the label of its enclosing curve.

A missing region is a region that can be defined using operations from basic regions but is not represented in the diagram, i.e., it has no area in the diagram. A minimal region is a non-missing region that is not intersected by any lines of the diagram and cannot be thought of as the union of other non-missing regions.

This paper presents a framework for defining heterogeneous rules of inference and aims to define rules in the spirit of the observe rule presented in a previous article. The goal is to only observe information from a diagram when that information is explicitly expressed in the diagram. Two rules, syntactically based and information type-based, are presented and their relationship is characterized.

The main definition in this section is that of strong observation. The goal is to define when something can be observed and when something can be observed to fail. These definitions are separate, and there may be instances where something cannot be observed or observed to fail. Inconsistent diagrams may result in something being able to be observed and observed to fail simultaneously. The intuitions behind these relations of observation are briefly outlined.

The paper also provides a proof sketch, demonstrating that the process of deciding if any region of a diagram is shaded or contains a constant or variable symbol is decidable based on a representation of an Euler/Venn diagram by discrete objects in a machine.

The paper introduces an intermediate representation based on information types to define the observe relation using a generalization of partial structures. By using information types, the information content of the diagram can be more precisely captured based on a framework provided in another work.

The information content of a sentence in a first-order language can be modeled by the class of all total structures that make that sentence true, or by the class of partial structures making the sentence true. Modeling information content by means of partial structures provides a better model of explicit information as it captures logically true sentences and inconsistent information. However, it precludes the possibility of a single minimal partial structure for Euler/Venn diagrams and cannot express certain kinds of information.

The paper concludes with a proof sketch demonstrating how an extension of a structure preserves all features of the original structure, leading to a contradiction if disagreement arises.