During an emergency, accurately predicting the trends in the evolution of public opinion on the network is crucial for governments in effectively managing the circumstances and addressing associated social trends. However, most current public opinion prediction models suffer from drawbacks such as prolonged computation time, limited prediction categories, and low prediction accuracy. To enhance the ability to predict the complex evolution of public opinion, this paper proposes an improved multiobjective gray wolf optimizer (IMOGWO). IMOGWO utilizes logistic and Lotka-Volterra models to initiate the wolf population and enhance population validity. Additionally, it designs a nonlinear function to adjust the population update factor, improving the exploration and exploitation abilities, as well as the local search capability of the wolf population. Moreover, it incorporates an elite retention policy and a Pareto-optimal solution set to fulfill multiple objectives using the principle of a non-dominated solution set. 

Experimental results indicate that the improved multiobjective GWO achieves high accuracy and universality in predicting the evolution trends of diverse types of complex public opinion. This superior performance is observed across various network emergencies used as empirical analysis cases. The proposed model is shown to outperform other tested methods in predicting the evolution trends of various complex public opinions. 

After major emergencies, online public opinion can quickly become a potent social force. Thus, effectively guiding online public opinion is critical not only for the success or failure of emergency response but also for the stability and harmony of society. 

Research on predicting the evolutionary trends of public opinion using internet data is highly relevant in the Chinese context. Although several studies have explored the evolutionary process of public opinion diffusion, research methods typically involve the use of mathematical statistical models, backpropagation algorithms, traditional system theory methods, and machine learning. To address the limitations of existing studies, this paper proposes an IMOGWO to predict the evolutionary trend of public opinion and improve the prediction speed and accuracy. The model combines various strategies, harnessing the adaptability and information feedback mechanism to achieve high accuracy and convergence speed while addressing complex nonlinear characteristics and large data volumes associated with public opinion time-series data.

The paper outlines the unique challenges posed by different types of public opinion events and their characteristics. It emphasizes the importance of applying appropriate mathematical models and parameters tailored to the characteristics of each public opinion event. The improved MOGWO is deployed to iteratively update the prediction of public opinion evolution model and find the optimal model parameters.

Furthermore, public opinion events are influenced by a multitude of factors, and the evolution of public opinion often displays complex nonlinear characteristics and spiraling trends. The combined use of the logistic model and Lotka-Volterra competition model to handle the prediction of public opinion evolution is described, addressing the difficulties associated with multiple types of information about complex public opinion.

The improved multiobjective GWO aims to converge towards the real data trend of actual events, proving effective in improving the convergence accuracy and convergence speed of the algorithm. Experiment results demonstrate the model's strong fitting prediction ability on single-opinion information events.