The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. Section 2 will provide a brief review of the typical definitions related to the Dolev-Yao constraints. Proper definitions for well-formed and quasi well-formed will also be presented. In Section 3, we will use a rewrite system to demonstrate the decidability of satisfiability for well-formed constraints. This result will be extended to the case of quasi well-formed constraints in Section 4. Section 5 will provide a brief explanation of the NP-completeness of our constraints' satisfiability. Section 6 will showcase the potential application of these results in checking opacity with an active intruder. Finally, Section 7 will conclude the paper.

Now that we have established proper definitions for Dolev-Yao constraints, we will illustrate a classic example of a constraint. To achieve this, we find it practical to formalize the classical Dolev-Yao constraint: message m is deducible from the set of messages t, denoted as t h m. This constraint can be described using constraints with[] by quantifying the order in which keys are compromised. Message m will be deducible if there exist k1, ..., kn distinct keys in t or m in such a way that k1 is deducible without any decoding, k2 is deducible using k1 only, and so on. Ultimately, m needs to be deducible from t using only keys k1 to kn.

In this section, we will present an innovative decision procedure for the satisfiability of well-formed constraints. For such constraints using only h, it is well-known that the satisfiability problem is NP-complete. Our decision procedure will operate using a rewriting system over constraints. We will need to prove that our system terminates, that satisfiability for our normal forms is decidable, and finally that our system is correct and complete, i.e., models of a constraint are exactly the models of this constraint once rewritten. When this is established, we can provide a decision procedure for satisfiability, which involves rewriting the constraint to its normal form and then checking satisfiability on this normal form. In comparison to other proofs of decidability of satisfiability for this type of constraints (which are easy to find in the literature), our main objective is to provide a very simple yet extensible decision procedure.

While this result is not entirely novel and can also be found in other sources, the demonstration provided herein appears to be more adaptable to other cases. Notably, when having first-order symbols like f, this theorem will apply quite directly to show the decidability of opacity in a subsequent section.

In this section, we will briefly demonstrate how the previously described method could be used to establish the decidability of opacity when considering the Dolev-Yao model. In previous papers, only the case of a passive intruder was studied. Here, we will begin to extend the decidability results to the case of active intruders.

It should be noted that e and e' must have the same length (in fact, as these sets will be assumed to be similar, this will not be a problem). Moreover, as we intend to perform the same operations on both environments, we require the environments to be ordered, and they could be represented using lists.