A comprehensive review on automation in agriculture usingartiﬁcial intelligence
Kirtan Jhaa, Aalap Doshib,P o o j a nP a t e lc,M a n a nS h a hd,⁎
aGandhinagar Institute of Technology, Gandhinagar, Gujarat, India
bLalbhai Dalpatbhai College of Engineering, Ahmedabad, Gujarat, India
cVishwakarma Government Engineering College, Chandkheda, Ahmedabad, Gujarat, India
dSchool of Technology, Pandit Deendayal Petroleum University, Gandhinagar, Gujarat, India
abstract article info
Article history:Received 6 November 2018Received in revised form 25 May 2019Accepted 25 May 2019Available online 17 June 2019Agriculture automation is the main concern and emerging subject for every country. The world population is in-creasing at a very fast rate and with increase in population the need for food increases briskly. Traditionalmethods used by farmers aren't sufﬁcient enough to serve the increasing demand and so they have to hamper the soil by using harmful pesticides in an intensi ﬁed manner. This affects the agricultural practice a lot and in the end the land remains barren with no fertility. This paper talks about different automation practices likeIOT, Wireless Communications, Machine learning and Arti ﬁcial Intelligence, Deep learning. There are some areas which are causing the problems to agriculture ﬁeld like crop diseases, lack of storage management, pesti- cide control, weed management, lack of irrigation and water management and all this problems can be solvedby above mentioned different techniques. Today, there is an urgent need to decipher the issues like use of harm-ful pesticides, controlled irrigation, control on pollution and effects of environment in agricultural practice. Auto-mation of farming practices has proved to increase the gain from the soil and also has strengthened the soilfertility. This paper surveys the work of many researchers to get a brief overview about the current implementa-tion of automation in agriculture. The paper also discusses a proposed system which can be implemented in bo-tanical farm forﬂower and leaf identiﬁcation and watering using IOT. © 2019 The Authors. Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of KeAi Communications Co., Ltd. This is anopen access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ ).
Keywords:Automation artiﬁcial intelligenceIrrigationMachine learning
Contents1 . I n t r o d u c t i o n ............................................................... 12 . L i t e r a t u r e s u r v e y ............................................................. 33. Artiﬁc i a l n e u r a l n e t w o r k s i n a g r i c u l t u r e ................................................... 34 . A u t o m a t i o n a n d w i r e l e s s s y s t e m n e t w o r k s i n a g r i c u l t u r e ........................................... 55 . I m p l e m e n t a t i o n o f f u z z y l o g i c s y s t e m s i n a g r i c u l t u r e ............................................. 86 . P r o p o s e d i d e a.............................................................. 1 07 . F u t u r e s c o p e ............................................................... 1 08 . C o n c l u s i o n ................................................................ 1 0A u t h o r s c o n t r i b u t i o n .............................................................. 1 1D e c l a r a t i o n o f C o m p e t i n g I n t e r e s t s....................................................... 1 1A c k n o w l e d g e m e n t s.............................................................. 1 1A v a i l a b i l i t y o f d a t a a n d m a t e r i a l ......................................................... 1 1F u n d i n g .................................................................... 1 1C o n s e n t f o r p u b l i c a t i o n ............................................................. 1 1E t h i c s a p p r o v a l a n d c o n s e n t t o p a r t i c i p a t e .................................................... 1 1R e f e r e n c e s.................................................................. 1 1Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 2 (2019) 1 –12
⁎Corresponding author.E-
mail address:Manan.shah@spt.pdpu.ac.in(M. Shah).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aiia.2019.05.0042589-7217/© 2019 The Authors. Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of KeAi Communications Co., Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license ( http:// creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ ).
Contents lists available atScienceDirect
Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture
journal homepage:http://www.keaipublishing.com/en/journals/artificial-intelligence-in-agriculture/1. IntroductionWith the advent of technology in this digital world, we humans havepushed our limit of the thinking process and are trying to coalesce nor-mal brain with an artiﬁcial one. This continuing exploration gave birthto a whole newﬁeld Artiﬁcial intelligence. It is the process by which ahuman can make an intelligent machine. AI comes under the domainarea of computer science which can be able to discern its milieu andshould thrive to maximize the rate of success. AI should be able to dowork based on past learning. Deep learning, CNN, ANN, Machine learn-ing are certain domains which enhances the machine work and helps todevelop a more advance technology.The term IOT is elucidated as“thing to thing”communication. The three main targets are communication, automation and cost saving inthe system. Dr. D.K. Sreekantha, Kavya.A.M provides the in-depth appli-cation of IOT in theﬁeld of agriculture and how it can be helpful to thehumans.AI has penetrated in medical science, education, ﬁnance, agriculture, industry, security, and many other sectors. Implementation of AI in-volves learning process of machines. This brings us to a sub-domain inthis AIﬁeld“Machine learning”. The sole purpose of machine learningis to feed the machine with data from past experiences and statisticaldata so that it can perform its assigned task to solve a particular prob-lem. There are many applications which exist today which includes an-alyzing of data from past data and experience, speech and facerecognition, weather prediction, medical diagnostics. It is because ofmachine learning that the domain of big data and data science hasevolved to such a great extent. Machine learning is a mathematical ap-proach to build intelligent machines.As AI stimulated, many new logics and method were invented anddiscovered which makes the process of problem- solving more simple.Such methods are listed below.1. Fuzzy logic2. Artiﬁcial neural networks (ANN)3. Neuro-fuzzy logic4. Expert systemsAmong all of these, the most widely used and constantly appliedmethod for research purposes is ANN. Our human brain is the most com-plex part of the body. Based on the inter linked neural networks, electricsignals traverses through the neurons with the help of axons. Synapseswhich are at the end of each node passes the signal ahead. ANN methodwas invented by keeping in mind the same concept of the working of thehuman brain. There are various algorithms of this approach such as fortraining this particular model algorithms like Silva and Almeida's algo-rithm, Delta-bar-delta, Rprop, The Dynamic Adaption algorithm,Quickprop are used based on its application. 9 neurons are used in theprocess. ANN is a task- based method which tells the system to operatebased on some inbuilt task rather than a conventional computationalprogrammed task. The architecture of ANN consists of three layers:1. Input layer2. Hidden (middle) layer3. Output layer (Fig. 1)Feedforward back propagation mechanism and its parameters areshown above: Input Layer–7, output layer-1, hidden layer-50, numberof iterations–1200. Activation layer- Sigmoidal function in hiddenand output layer, linear function in input layer.Moreover, Artiﬁcial intelligence and machine learning are mostlyhypothesis and theories. These are programming and algorithms. Forthe implementation of these algorithms and logic based concepts,there should be a hardware- software interface. The system throughwhich this can be achieved is“Embedded systems”. Embedded systems are hardware built systems consisting of memory chips with customsoftware programmed in it (Fig. 2).This paper encompasses the links which make embedded systemsand AI coherent with the agriculture sector. Implementation of AI andexpert systems in agriculture is a narrowly de ﬁned subject. This topic was discussed byMcKinion and Lemmon (1985).
Agriculture is the es- sential part of any country. At present South Korea, China, NorthAmerica are investing trillions of money for development in the agricul-ture sector and implementing more advance technologies. The popula-tion is increasing at a very high rate which is directly related to the
Fig. 1.Artiﬁcial neural network layers.2 K. Jha et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 2 (2019) 1 –12increase in the demand for food. India is a rich source for food crops andespecially for species. The agriculture sector is one of the most sensitivesectors of the Indian economy, supporting all other sectors and spread-ing its importance in far- reaching areas. With the advent of technologyin other industries, it is a very crucial point to implement automation inagriculture.The pressure on the agriculture sector will increase with the con-tinuing expansion of the human population and so agri-technologyand precision farming have gained much importance in today's world.This are also termed as digital agriculture which means the use of hi-tech computer systems to calculate different parameters such as weeddetection, crop prediction, yield detection, crop quality and manymore machine learning techniques (Liakos et al., 2018). This paper dis- cusses about the different applications of ANN, ML, and IOT in agricul-ture and many models which helps in precision farming.2. Literature surveyOver the past 50 years, there has been a sustainable development inartiﬁcial intelligence due to its robustness in the application and is per-vasive in everyﬁeld. One suchﬁeld is agriculture.Agriculture faces many challenges on a daily basis and is not smoothrunning business. Some of the pith problems faced by farmers from seedsowing to harvesting of crops are as follows:1. Crop diseases infestations2. Lack of storage management.3. Pesticide control4. Weed management5. Lack of irrigation and drainage facilities.Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Machine learning has penetrated each andevery category mentioned above.Bannerjee et al. (2018)segregated ad- vancements in AI category wise and gave a brief overview on various AItechniques. Computers and technology started penetrating in this sec-tor from 1983 onwards. Since then, there have been many suggestionsand proposed systems for betterment in agriculture from the databaseto decision making process. Filtering out every process, only AI basedsystems have proved to be the most feasible and reliable one. The AI-based method does not generalize the problem and gives a particularsolution to a particular deﬁned complex problem. The literature surveycovers major breakthroughs in the domain of agriculture from early1980s to 2018. The paper discusses more than ﬁfty advancement in technologies in the sub domain of agriculture. First it discusses penetra-tion of Artiﬁcial neural networks and expert systems to solve abovementioned problems, then machine learning and fuzzy logic system.Lastly it covers automation and IOT in the agriculture.3. Artiﬁcial neural networks in agricultureArtiﬁcial neural networks have been incorporated in the agriculturesector many times due to its advantages over traditional systems. Themain beneﬁt of neural networks is they can predict and forecast onthe base of parallel reasoning. Instead of thoroughly programming, neu-ral networks can be trained.Gliever and Slaughter (2001)used ANN to differentiate weeds from the crops.Maier and Dandy (2000)used neu- ral networks for forecasting water resources variables.Song and He (2005)brought together expert systems and Arti ﬁcial neural networks in predicting nutrition level in the crop. TraditionalES (Expert systems) have considerable backdrops when it is being im-plemented. Use of ANN makes it up to all glitches of ES. The whole sys-tem is built on a single chip computer. Neural networks always prove tobe the best when it comes to predicting methods. Neural networks canpredict the complex mappings if a reliable set of variables are fed. Tododge the problems of frost formation in the ﬁelds of the island of Sicily, Robinson and Mort (1997)developed a prediction model using neuralnetworks. The model isﬁrst to feed with the raw data like humidity,temperature, precipitation, cloud cover, wind direction (all these datawere taken from 1980 to 1983). Then, the data gathered got convertedinto binary data. These data, now are divided into two strings (input andoutput for the neural network model). The back-propagation networkwas used as a neural network predictor. A total of 10 trial sets were de-v
eloped and trained by the model initially. The frost was predicted moreefﬁciently when a range of values of parameters (mentioned above)was taken rather than single values.Within the span of three years, two expert systems had been devel-oped to increase the production of cotton crop. First, COMAX. In 1986,Lemmon made a successful attempt in developing an expert systemcalled Comax (COtton Management eXpert). Lemmon, being the pio-neer in AI in agriculture sector, develped a program called Gossymwhich is microcomputer friendly and bolster the use of Comax(Lemmon, 1986). For theﬁrst ever, the expert system (Comax) was suc-cessfully integrated with a computer model (Gossym) and simulated forthe growth of cotton crops. This expert system was developed in order
Fig. 2.Embedded systems.3 K. Jha et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 2 (2019) 1 –12to operate continuosly throughout the year in cotton crop ﬁelds. Comax takes three parameters of theﬁeld into consideration; scheduling of ir-rigation, maintaining nitrogen content in the ﬁeld, and growth in the cotton crop.Second, COTFLEX. Another expert system for the cotton crop wasdeveloped byStone and Toman (1989). The system was named as COTFLEX. The system was made worked on Pyramid 90× computerwhich used UNIX as its operating system. The system incorporatedtheﬁeld and farm databases to provide important information re-garding the cotton crop to the farmer so that it becomes easy forthe grower to take critical and tactical decisions. The system devel-oped in Texas, and it created simulation models and databases inthe rule-based expert system to help Texan farmers take prudenteconomic and lucrative decisions. After successful testings,COTFLEX was imported to IBM microcomputer and was made openfor the use.Batchelor et al. (1989)discusses about the soyabean crop growthmodel which is deﬁned as SMARTSOY in the paper and the model iscalled SOYGRO. The model is explained by knowledge based approachwhere it is divided into two approachesﬁrst being the positivistic ap- proach stating the attempts to duplicate the processes of domain ex-perts in order to come to a conclusion while the second approachbeing the normative approach which attempts to duplicate the conclu-sions excluding the processes of the domain experts. The damagescaused by insects are determined by systematic method for determiningthe damage rates and the cost control. Here, the positivistic and norma-tive approach collapses because the later method helps it the selectionof insecticide and application rate. However, the systematic methoddoes not help toﬁnd the insect damage rate on yield. This is a majordrawback for generating recommendation because we need to mixboth the approach as the yield reduction is calculated by previous expe-riences of the similar insect attack, pesticides used and the outcomes ofthe crops in the end. The goal to generate recommendation speci ﬁcally for soyabean crop is based on calculation of the damage rate and thecost to treat the plant and gain the yield. This calculation is derived byboth the approaches.An expert system PRITHVI based on fuzzy logic was developed in Ra-jasthan, India byPrakash et al. (2013). The system was designed explic- itly for Soybeans crop. This system gathered its knowledge base fromagricultural ofﬁcers, published literature, and experts of soybeancrops. Fuzzy logic was considered in studying the whole system and ad-vising the farmer as an expert. PRITHVI was divided into ﬁve modules. The main aim of developing this expert system was to help the farmersin the region increase their soybean production. The system usedMATLAB as a user interface module.Researchers developed an expert system which helped the farmerswith when to spray insectisides on the apple fruit to avoid the damagedue to insects and atmosphere. The system was named as POMME.Along with the time, it also advised the farmers what to spray. Insteadof theoretical values from the infection table, here apple scab diseasecycle model was used in POMME. The results of the system were satis-factory and system was approved by the experts who had used it ontrial basis. (Roach et al., 1987).A method is suggesting the use of ANN algorithms for crop predic-tion in smartphones had been successfully tested in 2016 by researchersRavichandran and Koteshwari. A prediction model was developed. Asmentioned above, the prediction model of this system had three layers(Ravichandran and Koteshwari, 2016). The efﬁciency of the model was dependent on the number of the hidden layers. First and foremost, theANN model was built and trained using various algorithms such asSilva and Almeida's algorithms, Delta-bar-delta, Rprop, and variousother toﬁnd the most favourable conﬁguration. Trial and error method was implemented to choose the number of hidden layers. There shouldbe a précised way to scrutinize the selection of some hidden layers be-cause the prediction system's accuracy is dependent on the number ofhidden layers. It was observed in the research that more the numberof hidden layers in the ANN model; the more accurate were thepr ediction.Since the purpose of the system was to make it handy for thefarmers, it is developed on APK platform. The source code was writtenin Eclipse with Java codes in the backhand, and the algorithm was devel-oped using Matlab and ANN toolbox. The whole ﬁle was then extracted on the Android platform so that it can be utilized by smartphones. Be-sides suggesting the crop to the farmer, the system also has the addi-tional advantage of advising the farmer for the fertilizer to be used ifthe farmer wishes to use the crop of his choice. ( Ravichandran and Koteshwari, 2016)(Fig. 3).Evapotranspiration process is imperative for maintaining the stabil-ity in the hydrologic cycle, sustainable irrigation method, and watermanagement. Parameters- Elevation, Mean daily Temperature, Max.daily temperature, Min. daily temperature, Wind Speed, Relatuve Hu-midity, Sunshine Hours, Daylight hours, Latitude, Condition coef ﬁcient. There are more than 20 established method to determine ET which isdependent on several parameters.A profound study was carried out in the valley of Dehradun; Indiawas assessing the importance of the addition of ANN in several tech-niques of estimation of ET. Researchers gathered monthly climate datafrom the Forest research institute (FRI) Dehradun for ET estimation.The methods on which the algorithms were applied were: 1. Penman-Monteith method 2. Levenberg-Marquardt back propagation. It was ob-served that increasing the number of hidden layers in the system re-sulted in instability in the ET estimation. So, training function withoptimum trial and error method is to be chosen for the overall opti-mized estimation of ET. It was observed that out of six training algo-rithms of ANN model, function training with 75% data feed in it wasprecise and had the best number of neurons. Furthermore, there was agauging between PM method and ANN model with the single layerfeed forward back propagation algorithm. ANN model was designedand developed using Matlab. Six algorithms were conjured andassessed. As evapotranspiration is of vital importance in irrigation andwater management, this research manifested the predictive prowessof ANN structure if implemented correctly. ( Nema et al., 2017). Furthermore, also a method was created to discriminate weed fromcrops with the help of image analysis and neural networks. It had the ac-curacy of more than 75% without any beforehand plant information fedinto the system. (Aitkenhead et al., 2003).Shahzadi et al. (2016)devel- oped expert systems based smart agriculture system. The concept of IoTin this system was to send the data to the server so that actuators of theﬁeld should be able to take appropriate decisions. For that, the servershould be intelligent enough to take decisions independently. This sys-tem consists of temperature, humidity, leaf wetness, and soil sensors. Itonly gives the information about theﬁeld and doesn't act on the irriga- tion process.Arif et al. (2012)developed two ANN models to estimate soil mois-ture in Paddyﬁelds using decidedly less meteorological data. Boththese models were then corroborated and validated by studying ob-served and estimated soil moisture values. The ﬁrst ANN model was generated to get the estimate ET. The help of minimum, average, andthe maximum air temperature was taken. To develop the secondmodel, solar radiation, precipitation, and air temperature data was gath-ered. Both these models resulted in the accurate and reliable estimationof soil moisture in the paddyﬁelds by using the least meteorologicaldata, less labor and time consumption.Hinnell et al. (2010)discuss the neuro drip irrigation systems whereANNs were developed to predict the spatial water distribution in thesubsurface. For drip irrigation method to properly function, water distri-bution in the lower level of the soil is of the grave importance. Here,ANNs makes the prediction which comes handy for the user which inturn results in the fast decision-making process. ANN models give theresult of wetting patterns (ﬁrst and second) after the soil is inﬁltrated with the water from the emitter which is on the surface of the land.Thus, the ANN model provides continuous patterns to the user. Also,4 K. Jha et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 2 (2019) 1 –12researchers developed a model to study the yield of the maize crop. Amulti-layered feedforward ANN (MLFANN) is used. To fuel such net-work, learning algorithms like GDA (gradient descent algorithms) andCGDA (Conjugate gradient descent algorithm) are employed. Both thealgorithms have been written and simulated in the MATLAB usingnueral network toolbox (Singh and Prajneshu, 2008). Precision agriculture and WSN applications combine an excitingnew area of research that will greatly improve quality in agriculturalproduction, precision irrigation and will have dramatic reduction incost needed. Furthermore, the ease of deployment and system mainte-nance, monitoring opens the way for the acceptation of WSN systemsin precision agriculture. Using the proposed methodology, in ﬁnding the optimal sensor topology, we contrive to lower implementationcost and thus make WSN a more appealing solution for all kinds of ﬁelds and cultivations. (Keshtgari and Deljoo, 2012).4. Automation and wireless system networks in agricultureIt is imperative for any sector to evolve with time. The agriculturesector had to adapt the breakthroughs and inventions which camealong in automationﬁeld.Yong et al. (2018)came forward with emerg- ing research area of embedded intelligence (EI). Embedded intelligencein agriculture sector includes smart farming, smart crop management,smart irrigation and smart greenhouses. It is necessary for a nation to in-clude these growing technologies in agriculture sector for growth of anation as many sectors are inter-dependent on agriculture. Also, re-searchers of this paper demonstrated Technology roadmap (TRM)which in turn clariﬁes the qualms regarding the areas of agriculturementioned above (smart farming, smart irrigation etc).Taking into consideration the socio and economic vitality of agricul-ture in India, researchersPatil and Thorat (2016)developed a system which predicted grape disease beforehand. Any anomaly in the grapeplant was noticed only after it was infected and this had a considerabledeteriorating effect on the whole vineyard. The system employed vari-ous sensors such as temperature sensor, leaf wetness sensors, and hu-midity sensors in the vineyard. These sensors send the data sensed tothe database in the ZigBee server which is linked to the sensors. Deploy-ment of Wireless System Network (WSN) in any ﬁeld needs to satisfy certain criteria and Zigbee alliance has developed open global standardscalled ZIGBEE. Zigbee compliances of four layers namely physical layer,medium access control layer, network layer, application layer as stated.The three devices: Zigbee Co-coordinator (ZC), Zigbee Router(ZR),Zigbee End Device(ZED) has different function in the WSN. Kalaivani et al. (2011)discusses end to end approach of Zigbee in agriculture.The server will store the data. The server is commissioned with a hiddenMarkov model algorithm in it. This algorithm is present to train the nor-mal data sensed by the sensors and report any aberration in tempera-ture, humidity or leaf wetness which can result in grape disease tofarmer via SMS. Machine learning is blended in the system beforehandfor astute deduction of disease in grapes. The additional advantage of
Fig. 3.Flowchart of ANN-based crop predictor using smartphones.5 K. Jha et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 2 (2019) 1 –12this system is it also suggests the farmer pesticides and paci ﬁes manual effort in the detection of disease. (Patil and Thorat, 2016). While a sim- ilar method of machine learning was employed in monitoring thegrowth of Paddy crops. This system was developed for increasing theyield and productivity of paddy crops. It also proved to be cost effectiveand durable. (Kait et al., 2007)(Fig. 4).The sensors used inFig. 5are for monitoring agriculturalﬁeld are shown inFig. 6. Sensors such as MQ4 and MQ7 are used for NaturalGas sensing and Carbon Monoxide sensing respectively. DHT11 is usedfor Temperature and Humidity monitoring of the environment, soilmoisture sensor is used for measuring soil moisture level and have con-tinuous monitoring. Esp8266 is a wiﬁ module which helps in communi- cation between the hardware system and the device which users use.In one of the research conducted in Ankara, Turkey, implementingIIS (intelligent irrigation system), numerous positive perks were ob-served such as less moisture and temperature stress on soil, ef ﬁcient water consumption, and neglecting human intervention in case ofﬂood irrigation. The developed system works on three units. Base unit(BU), Valve unit (VU), and Sensor unit (SU). The whole system ispowered by solar panels. After the successful installation of every unit,BU will send the address to which the data is to be sent to SU. Sensorsfrom the SU will sense the moisture content and send the detecteddata to a speciﬁc address in the BU. If required, BU will send a signalto VU so that it can calibrate the position of the valve in order to providethe soil with water. However, site- speciﬁc use of automatic irrigation system took birth in the early 21st century; this method proved to bea signiﬁcant success as it reduced the cost, feasibility, and complexityof the developed system. Furthermore, the unit can be set up whichtransports the fertilizers and pesticides in the ﬁeld using the same method. For that, new kind of sensors would have to calibrate for trans-mitting accurate information. (Dursun and Ozden, 2011). Research has been conducted to test the ET based, ICT based, and IISbased technology. In Riyadh, a research was conducted in Wheat andTomatoﬁeld in which both sprinkler and drip irrigation method wereemployed and tested with ICT as well as IIS. A graph of water depth ver-sus growth period of the crop (weekly) was plotted for all threemethods. A concise observation concluded that IIS was far more feasiblein a matter of water usage than ICT and ET based system. It skyrocketedthe frugality of water usage from 18% to a whopping 27%. ( Al-Ghobari and Mohammad, 2011).Also,Kodali and Sahu (2016)presented the use of Losant platformfor monitoring the agriculture farmland and intimate the farmer viaSMS or e-mail if any anomaly is observed by the system. Losant is a sim-ple Iot based most powerful cloud platform. It offers real-time observa-tion of data stored in it irrespective of the position of the ﬁeld.Gutiérrez et al. (2014)came up with an automated irrigation system which usesthe GPRS module as a communication device. The system is pro-grammed into a microprocessor-based gateway which controls the
Fig. 4.Flowchart explaining evapotranspiration process.6 K. Jha et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 2 (2019) 1 –12water quantity. It was proved that water savings were 90% more thanthe conventional irrigation system.Kim et al. (2008)used a distributed wireless network for sensing and control of irrigation process from a re-mote location.To improve efﬁciency, productivity, global market and to reducehuman intervention, time and cost there is a need to divert towardsnew technology named Internet of Things. IoT is the network of devicesto transfer the information without human involvement. Hence, to gainhigh productivity, IoT works in synergy with agriculture to obtain smartfarming.Malavade and Akulwar (2016)focused on role of IoT in agricul- ture that leads to smart framing (Malavade and Akulwar, 2016). Use of wireless communication has changed the standards of com-munication in today's world and this can also raise the standards of ag-riculture automation.Logatchevl et al. (1998)has bifurcated the IOT gateway into different nodes such as actuator, sensor, interface andwireless link which give assistance to communication between them.Frequency estimation and the bandwidth requirement for thiscommunication has also been elaborated which can be very bene ﬁcial for automation.Implementation of WSN (Wireless sensor network) in the agricul-ture sector and its different approaches is de ﬁned by this paper. Many different IEEE standards describe sensor networks, standards like IEEE802.15.1 PAN/Bluetooth, IEEE 802.15.4 ZigBee and many more are nec-essary to know while planning its application. Researchers alsodiscussed about IPV6 the Internet Protocol for wireless communicationand also many hardware system for establishing a WSN. By using WSN,Precision farming is possible and the strategy is used for crop manage-ment. Different data is recorded by the sensors and stored in the system.The system is made to learn by the previous data from the sensors andfuture actions are taken accordingly ( Shiravale and Bhagat, 2014). Ganjegunte et al. (2012)studied three soil moisture sensors inPeacan cropﬁeld and came to a conclusion that the sensors used(ECH2O-5TE, Watermark 200SS and Tensiometer model R) need sitespeciﬁc calibration in order to bring accurate results.
Fig. 5.Grape disease detection system using ML algorithms.
MQ4MQ7DHT11Soil Moisture SensorEsp8266
Fig. 6.Different type of sensors used for detection.7 K. Jha et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 2 (2019) 1 –12The highlighting features of the paper presented by Gondchawar and Kawitkar (2016)includes smart GPS based remote controlledrobot to perform tasks like; weeding, spraying, moisture sensing, birdand animal scaring, keeping vigilance, etc. Secondly, it includes smart ir-rigation with smart control based on real time ﬁeld data. Thirdly, smart warehouse management which includes; temperature maintenance,humidity maintenance and theft detection in the warehouse. Control-ling of all these operations will be through any remote smart device orcomputer connected to Internet and the operations will be performedby interfacing sensors, Wi-Fi or ZigBee modules, camera and actuatorswith micro-controller and raspberry pi.Thermal Imaging is a noncontact and nonintrusive technique whichanalysis the surface temperature of the agricultural ﬁeld and provides valuable feedback to the farmer.Roopaei et al. (2017)discussed the use of cloud based thermal imaging system which helps the irrigationby incorporating the performance of the equipment's and determinethe area ofﬁeld which requires the water most. The absence of unifor-mity will hamper the crop growth and thermal imaging can helpto consolidate this loss.Also, Thermal Imaging is put to use in agricul-ture sector truly because of its wide application. The paper byManickavasagan et al. (2005)discusses various application of thermalimaging like Pre-harvest operations, Field nursery, Irrigation schedul-ing, Yield Forecasting, Green house gases, Termite Attack, Farmmachinery.Katariya et al. (2015)discussed the use of robot in the agricultureﬁeld. The robot is designed to follow the track of white line where actu-ally there is a need to work and other surface is considered as black orbrown. Working of robot is for spraying of pesticide, dropping of seed's,water supply and ploughing. In 2016 a group of researchers came upwith e-Agriculture Application based on the framework consisting ofKM-Knowledge base and Monitoring modules.The systems developedin IOT and Cloud Computing emphasizes on reliable architectures toprovide timely information from theﬁeld over 3G or Wi-Fi. TI CC 3200 (RFID) launchpad was used to build the prototype with other necessarydevices. Knowledge base has advantage over conventional IOT basedsystems; Knowledge Base is constructed to store vast complex struc-tured and unstructured information to assist farmers or even an individ-ual with no prior knowledge of farming. But ﬁnding right information in an appropriate manner is difﬁcult where providing relevant knowledgeshould be distributed not only in an organised and complete manner,but also in absolute way. The knowledge based infrastructure allowsadapting the changes in agriculture for a better extension and addingadvisory services. (Mohanraj et al., 2016).As degree of automation is required in each and every ﬁeld so the human intervention becomes less and it is very important to design alayout in the early stages of the mechanics and electronics. Weed man-agement is the issue which farmers face a lot and computer vision canhelp to solve the issue. There is particular difference between a weedand the desired crop. CNN can help to distinguish among them and no-tify us to cut only the unnecessary plant. CNN has many algorithmswhich can even be used to identify plants and get the data accordinglyfor plantation. (Möller, 2010).R-CNN extensively used in object detection and in automation it isused for fruit detection and counting of fruits. Bargoti and Underwood (2017)discusses the use of R-CNN in fruit detection of orchards, whiletraining the input to the network is 3 channel colour image (BGR) of ar-bitrary size. They have used VGG16 NET with 13 convolutional networkand also ZF network which has 5 convolutional layers. Data augmenta-tion is used because it helps in artiﬁcially enlarging the dataset and changing the variability of the training data. The results discussed bythem are promising as for both mangoes and apples Faster R-CNNoutperformed the ZF network approach. (R-CNN stands for regionalconvolutional neural network).Cloud based decisions and support in the agriculture is boomingnow a days. The Decision support and Automation system (DSAS)helps the farmers of the growers to control all the applications throughits web portal. DSAS as different stages where the it can interconnectmany devices on the single time and give the real time data to thefarmer. The farmer plays the vital role as he can monitor the real timedata and also control all the machine through software's. Systems likespray controller will spray the pesticide on the ﬁeld in a deﬁne
d amount. Similarly, irrigation controller helps to manage irrigation andfertilizer controller manages fertilizer. DSAS works through the datagiven by different sensors like soil moisture sensor, nitrogen sensor,etc. (Tan, 2016).Kumar (2014)used fertility and pH meter to take out the percentageof ingredients of the soil and developed wireless sensor based drip irri-gation system.Ingale and Kasat (2012)used IC 89c52 microcontroller to build a smart irrigation system. The prototype supplies water only whenhumidity and moisture drops below a standard decided value hence itconserves water to a certain extent. A semi-automatic irrigation systemwas developed and tested on theﬁeld of Okra crops (Abelmoschus esculentus). The system used four moisture sensors and PIC16F877Aprocessor was used. The valves in the system turns ON only whenthere is a voltage drop across any two sensors in the ﬁled drops below aﬁxed value and remains ON until the value comes to the decidedthreshold value. (Soorya et al., 2013).5. Implementation of fuzzy logic systems in agricultureSicat et al. (2005)developed an FK-based fuzzy model to decide theland suitability. Various fuzzy sets were generated using farmer's as wellas scientiﬁc knowledge congruently. The sets used S-membership func-tions and were used to determine soil texture, slope, and colour. The re-search work was done in several villages of Nizamabad district ofAndhra Pradesh state of India. In FK-based fuzzy factor maps, it is notnecessary to take the lower and upper limits 0 and 1 respectively. Thisis because in knowledge-driven fuzzy modeling there is no constrainton choosing the membership functions as long as the functions are incontext of the factor which has to be modeled (in this case FK-basedmodel).Another implementation of fuzzy modeling was done for land level-ling bySi et al. (2007). They employed fuzzy control theory in the con-troller of the system. By implementing fuzzy control theory, a precisionbased result was obtained. High accuracy fuzzy control theory translatesthe variables (the deviation in the height of the ﬁeld and expected the height of theﬁeld) into the deﬁned variables sets (E and EC) which con-tains fuzzy terminologies such as ‘High’,‘Very high’and so on. There are nine sets deﬁned for variable set E and two for variable set EC. This the-ory helps the controller deduce the position of the bucket which isinturned will be the height of theﬁeld. The bucket receives the signalfrom the receiver.Sannakki et al. (2011)developed an innovative sys- tem for grading the leaf diseases. The system was segregated into ﬁve parts namely Image acquisition where the researchers have capturedimages of Pomegranate leaves, image pre-processing where the cap-tured image is then resized,ﬁltered, and processed according to the re-quired parameter. Then comes colour image segmentation where k-means clustering is used to isolate the healthy part of leave with the dis-ease infected part. Afterward from the resized image, total leaf area iscalculated, and with the help of the third part, infected disease area ofthe leaf is calculated. Finally, in the last part, with the help of a fuzzy in-ference system, accurate grading of the disease can be taken out.FIS (Fuzzy inference system) was developed by Tremblay et al. (2010)to determine optimum rates of N fertilizer on the basis of ﬁeld and crop features. Also,V
aldés-Vela et al. (2015)implemented FIS to es- timate stem water potential.Kavdir and Guyer (2003)applied FL model in determining the quality of Apple fruit. Gottschalk et al. (2003)devel- oped fuzzy logic based air controllers to maintain the temperature ofstorage facilities for Potato.Escobar and Galindo (2004)came up with a simulation software (SCD) which came in handy for many fuzzybased controllers. The software used rule-based knowledge base withIF. THEN condition type. Its graphical characteristics make the software8 K. Jha et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 2 (2019) 1 –12adaptable to any fuzzy algorithm simulations. Another Fuzzy inferencesystem using IF…THEN condition type was developed by Tilva et al. (2013). The model forecasted plant disease on the base of weatherdata. The system was developed to avoid diseases in plant beforehandas disease occurs in speciﬁc range of temperature and humidity in theweather.India and China alone constitute 2.7 billion people living under thestress of water shortage. Out of overall water consumption, 70% is con-sumed in the agricultural process. Remaining is used in infrastructuralpipelines and other miscellaneous works. Water leakage is inevitableand uncontrollable in cities. Water demand will shoot up by 50% shortlyand this fact cannot be vetoed away. The farming fraternity is the onlyoption in which water usage can be optimized by employing smart irri-gation systems. By inculcating smart irrigation system, wastage of watercan culminate to a great extent can abridge water consumption by 20%.(Gupta et al., 2016).There is a major problem of water wastage and a dearth of water inconventional irrigation methods employed. To give an example, Egyptfaces a problem of water distribution from the Nile river with neighbor-ing countries. Ample research had been carried out to solve the prob-lems faced in the irrigation, process. Many companies have developeda sensor-based smart irrigation system. These systems have been devel-oped for optimal water usage, monitoring of water pollution, and to takecare of some other grave problems. Soil moisture and temperature sen-sors interact directly with embedded components in the ﬁeld and takecare of required water distribution among crops without farmer's inter-action. Water which is to be fed to the farms, either by the means ofsmart irrigation or any other conventional method, should be of agood quality. Researchers have started implementing IOT systems andArtiﬁcial intelligence techniques in aquaculture sector along with agri-culture. The system designed byEncinas et al. (2017)monitors the qual- ity of water by deploying state-of-the-art automation techniques.Wall and King (2004)came up with a smart system which con-trolled valves of sprinklers with the help of temperature and moisturesensors deployed in theﬁeld. However, this system did not considerthe water pollution problem.Miranda et al. (2003)came up with a dis- tributed irrigation system which works on soil water measurement.M2M (machine-to-machine) technology which allows machines to in-teract with each other autonomously and store the data directly in acloud-based server online. This M2M technology is in an incipientstage and is developing steadfastly.Shekhar et al. (2017)developed a technology which allows machines to communicate themselves. Yang et al. (2007)also developed a complete sensor-based intensive irriga-tion method which is self-organizing. This system constructed a bottomand upper layer.Pawar et al. (2018)tried to demonstrate a prototype ofthe small-scale smart irrigation system. Savitha and UmaMaheshwari (2018)considered only automation and IoT I in their quest for an intel-ligent irrigation system.So far, there hasn't been such advent which allows complete free-dom of human intervention. This paper tries to bring forward a method
SrnoCrop/fruitnameTechnology SystemnameResults/description Limitations/future scopes Country Reference1 Tea Object-orientedexpert systemTEAPEST Total of 65 realﬁeld cases were taken fromthe system which evaluated the relevantparameters and the results were almostsatisfactory. The system was stationed in theteaﬁelds for two yearsThe accuracy of the system was only 90%. Theremaining inaccuracy was the result ofinappropriate diagnosis.India (Ghosh andSamanta, 2003)
2 Tea Radial basisfunctionnetworks.ModiﬁedTEAPEST.The hidden layers of this neural networks are31. This hidden layers gave the detectionaccuracy of 99.99%. There was testing error ofonly 1%.The developed system detects only threemajor pests of tea crops. Also it is limited toonly tea and not all the cash crops.India (Banerjee et al.,2017)3 GeneralcropsRule basedexpert systemPEST(PestExpertSystem)The system gave satisfactory results for wichit was developed. (Identiﬁcation and controlof insects).As the system was developed in late 1980'sthe resources and development in this sectorwasn't much and due to it the prototypecouldn't cover many developmentparameters like Crop nutrition, salinity,variety selection etc.Australia (Pasqual andMansﬁeld, 2003)
4 MangoandCassavaArtiﬁcial neuralnetworksN/A The developed model used three neurons inthe hidden layer of the network to identifydryness in the given fruits. This study showedneural networks can be used for procuringdryness patterns in food.The system do not consider beforehandpredictions and assumptions. Also,temperature predictions cannot be donecorrectly.France andMexico(Hernandez-Perezet al., 2004)
5 Hop plant Rule basedexpert systemCorac This was developed for detecting diseaseslike downy mildew, hop aphid and weevil.System provided growth of disease,estimation of harm caused and correcttreatment for the disease in the hop plantThere are models in the system like LANCEand MESA which creates problems whileestimating disease harm and also meteoro-logical data varies according to the localclimate.Czechrepublic(Mozny et al.,1993)
6 Jute Artiﬁcial neuralnetworksN/A With 9 to 5 neurons in the hidden layer, themodel accurately predicted the growth ofjute crops. It used back propagation fortraining the model.Predicted results matched correctly with theobserved results (bark, roots, leaf) and iftrained properly the model can predictresults for different crops.Bangladesh (Rahman and Bala,2010)7
DifferentfruitsFuzzy logic N/A The platform used for grading and classiﬁcation of different fruits is MATLAB.Support vector Machine technique was usedfor classiﬁcation of the fruits and fuzzy logicwas used for grading.There were misclassiﬁcation problems in thedeveloped system. But it can be mitigatedadding features of colour and texture offruits.Malaysia (Mustafa et al.,2009)
8 Wheat ImageprocessingN/A Two machine algorithms SVM and neuralnetworks were used for classiﬁcation process. The accuracy of SVM was 86.8% and neuralnetwork was 94.5% accurate. The algorithmused was more accurate then manuallydeveloped algorithm.More precised algoritmns can be designedwhich will have less computational cost.Additionally various varieties of wheat can beclassiﬁed using different feature sets.India (Punn and Bhalla,2013)
9 Rice Patternclassiﬁcation, Aback propaga-tion neuralN/A Morphological and colour features weretaken into account for developing algorithm.Nine morphological and six colour featureswere acquired from Images. The accuracy ofOnly rice crop was considered in the study.Further infections on various crops can beidentiﬁed and placated using this system.India (Shantaiya andAnsari, 2010)(continued on next page)9 K. Jha et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 2 (2019) 1 –12through which with the help of AI and embedded technology whicheliminates the glitches emphasized in the past.6. Proposed ideaNeed of automation in the agriculture sector is must and there aremany ways it can be implemented in practice. Irrigation is the foremostthing where automation is necessitate for optimal water usage. Soilmoisture sensor helps to monitor the moisture level of the soil andstarts watering the farm as the value get below the threshold level setby the farmer. The embedded system and Internet of Things help to de-velop a compact system which monitors the water level of the farmwithout human interaction.There are many different techniques that we can implement as auto-mation through different forms like using Machine learning, Arti ﬁcial Intelligence, Deep learning, Neural network, Fuzzy logic. The idea is touse any of these extended methods to reduce human intervention andhuman efforts. All this methods have their own advantages and disad-vantages, but the way they are used differentiate them from eachother. The meagre research in theﬁeld of deep learning technique which analyses the dataset of images from the past data fed and clas-siﬁes the plants orﬂowers.Kamilaris and Prenafeta-Boldú (2018) dis- cusses the Deep learning concepts in the agriculture and the effortsthat apply to execute deep learning techniques, in various agriculturalsectors. Deep learning application is required in this ﬁeld as it provides major impact on the modern techniques, it extends the Machine learn-ing by adding more depth into the model. The main feature of the deeplearning is the raw data process to increase accuracy and classi ﬁcation. Plant recognition, fruit counting, predicting future crop yield are themain target where deep learning can be implemented. Large datasetof images are required to train the model, while some techniques usetext data to train the model. Data source, Data pre-processing, Data Var-iation and Data augmentation techniques are necessary for the Deeplearning to train the model. Future of deep learning in agriculture hasmany environments and it can proliferate agriculture sector.Ferentinos (2018)have worked with convolution neural networkmodels and used deep learning in the system by training the modelwith different images of healthy and diseased plants. Plant disease rec-ognition has a high degree of complexity and so many agronomists failto diagnose speciﬁc disease. The model represented perfectly identi ﬁes and gives accuracy upto 99.53%.The idea is to train the model such a way that it identi ﬁes plants or ﬂowers when in future any image is fed to the model. To train themodel, VGG16 is used as it is the simplest model among all otherconvolutional networks. This network is characterized by its simplicity,using only 3 × 3 convolutional layers stacked on top of each other in in-creasing depth. Reducing volume size is handled by max pooling. Twofully-connected layers, each with 4096 nodes are then followed by asoftmax classiﬁer. In VGG16,‘16’stands for the number of weight layersin the network. Keras library in python includes VGG, ResNet, Inception,and Xception network architectures. A large image data of differentplants and differentﬂowers is used to train the model and check theaccuracy. The model then accurately predicts the plant or ﬂower when any random image is fed in the system.This system is necessary in the agricultural sector as every plant hassome particular need of environment. Aﬁxed amount of water at regu- lar time and favourable environmental gases around helps the plant togrow perfectly healthy. By classiﬁcation through deep learning it be-comes easy for the farmers or botanist to grow plant, as by identi ﬁcation of plant and its favourable conditions, farmers and botanist can providesuch environment and proper irrigation.7. Future scopeThe farmers who are young will make more investments in automa-tion with much interest than the elder farmers. The technology which isnew has to be introduced slowly with time. Slowly the agriculture sec-tor is moving towards precision farming in which management will wedone on the basis of individual plant. Deep learning and other extendmet
hods are used to detect the plant orﬂower type, this will help farmers to provide favourable environment to the plant for sustainablegrowth. Eventually the production of more customised fruits and plantswill grow, which leads to an increase in the diversity of products andproduction method. Artiﬁcial intelligence techniques are growing at arapid scale and it can be used to detect disease of plants or any un-wanted weed in the farm by using CNN, RNN or any other computa-tional network. Green house farming can provide a particularenvironment to the plants but it is not possible without human inter-vention. Here, wireless technology and IOT comes in the run and usingthe latest communication protocols and sensors we can implementweather monitoring and control without human presence in the farm.Harvesting of fruits and crops can also be incorporated by robotswhich are specialized in working round the clock for quick harvesting.Application of robotics are vast in farming such as the robots can beused in seeding and planting, fertilizing and irrigation, crop weedingand spraying, harvesting and shepherding. To complete the samework in many cases, it would take approximately 25 to 30 workers.Thermal Imaging can also be implemented by using drones and thermalcamera in it. The drones monitor the farm and gives continuous realtime data of theﬁeld so that the farmers could know in which area oftheﬁeld the water quantity is less and can only start irrigation in thatparticular area. This will prevent waterﬂooding or scarcity of water in theﬁeld and the crops get advent amount of water all the time. Manydifferent integrated approaches can be used to provide a viable environ-ment and increased growth.8. ConclusionAgriculture monitoring is the much necessitate reducing human in-terventions in practice. Day by day demand for food is reaching its highpeak and the without execution of the modern methods in agriculture itis very hard to achieve the increasing demand. Agriculture monitoring isthe prime concern as it helps to reduce labour and increase the produc-tion. Artiﬁcial Intelligence has been implemented in crop selection andto help the farmer in the selection of the fertilizers. With the help of(continued)SrnoCrop/fruitnameTechnology SystemnameResults/description Limitations/future scopes Country Referencenetworks classiﬁcation dataset ranged from 74 to 90%. 10 Lentils Machine Vision N/A A Flatbed scanner was used as a hardware component with a pentium CPU. Variousmethods including K-NN, neural networksetc. were used for colour grading of lentilcrops. Additionally an online neural classi ﬁer was used which gave almost 90% accuracy ingrading of crops.Cost effective and smaller scanner can beused instead of a large scanner which cangive only required information required forlentil classiﬁcation. Owing to the size ofscanner, it gave variety of information whichis less useful for the purpose of classi ﬁcation and grading.Canada (Shahin andSymons, 2001)10 K. Jha et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 2 (2019) 1 –12the database which the user has gathered and speci ﬁed to the system, the machine communicates among themselves to decide which cropis suitable for harvesting and also the fertilizers which promote themaximum growth. Deep learning has wide reach and its application inindustry has received tremendous advancement. Using deep learningis an added advantage over machine learning and it adds depth to ma-chine learning. Many signiﬁcant methods can ensure the farmers withbetter crops and properﬁeld management. This in the end helps inoverall growth of the country as food is the foremost need of anyhuman being. IOT marked its signiﬁcance to help in the real-time mon-itoring of the data. IOT is mainly used in an intelligent watering system.Because, effective use of the available fresh water is essential and withthe advancement in the technology and application of automationwater crisis can be solved. Traditional methods in agriculture haveminor effects in this modern world. Water scarcity and ﬂooding both are the major problems farmers are facing using the traditional ap-proach. Many loop holes in this system and the alarming need to protectthe agricultural land leads to the development of agriculture automa-tion. This paper represents an idea to make a system with the use of sen-sors, IOT and machine learning to automate the traditional practices inagriculture.Authors contributionAll the authors make a substantial contribution to this manuscript.KJ, AD and PP participated in drafting the manuscript. KJ and AD wrotethe main manuscript; all the authors discussed the results and implica-tion on the manuscript at all stages.Declaration of Competing InterestsThe authors declare that they have no competing interests.AcknowledgementsThe authors are grateful to Gandhinagar Institute of Technology,Lalbhai Dalpatbhai College of Engineering, Vishwakarma GovernmentEngineering College and Pandit Deendayal Petroleum Universityforthe permission to publish this research.Availability of data and materialAll relevant data and material are presented in the main paper.FundingNot Applicable.Consent for publicationNot applicable.Ethics approval and consent to participateNot applicable.References
Aitkenhead, M.J., Dalgetty, I.A., Mullins, C.E., McDonald, A.J.S., Strachan, N.J.C., 2003. Weed and crop discrimination using image analysis and arti ﬁcial intelligence methods. Comput. Electron. Agric. 39 (3), 157 –171. Al-Ghobari, H.M., Mohammad, F.S., 2011. Intelligent irrigation performance: evaluation and quantifying its ability for conserving water in arid region. Appl Water Sci 1,73–83.Arif, C., Mizoguchi, M., Setiawan, B.I., Doi, R., 2012. Estimation of soil moisture in paddy ﬁeld using Artiﬁcial Neural Networks. International Journal of Advanced Researchin Artiﬁcial Intelligence. 1 (1), 17 –21.Banerjee, G., Sarkar, U., Ghosh, I., 2017. A radial basis function network based classi ﬁer for detection of selected tea pests. International Journal of Advanced Research in Com-puter Science and Software Engineering. 7 (5), 665 –669. Bannerjee, G., Sarkar, U., Das, S., Ghosh, I., 2018. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture: A Lit- erature Survey. International Journal of Scienti ﬁc Research in Computer Science Ap- plications and Management Studies. 7 (3), 1 –6. Bargoti, S., Underwood, J., 2017. Deep Fruit Detection in Orchards. 2017 IEEE InternationalConference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) 3626 –3633. Batchelor, W.D., McClendon, R.W., Adams, D.B., Jones, J.W., 1989. Evaluation of SMARTSOY: an expert simulation system for insect pest management. Agric. Syst.31 (1), 67–81.Dursun, M., Ozden, S., 2011.A wireless application of drip irrigation automation sup-ported by soil moisture sensors. Sci. Res. Essays 6 (7), 1573 –1582. Encinas, C., Ruiz, E., Cortez, J., Espinoza, A., 2017. Design and implementation of a distrib- uted IoT system for the monitoring of water quality in aquaculture. Wireless Tele-communications Symposium (WTS). 2017, 1 –7. Escobar, C., Galindo, J., 2004.Fuzzy Control in Agriculture: Simulation Software. IndustrialSimulation Conference. pp. 45 –49. Ferentinos, K.P., 2018.Deep learning models for plant disease detection and diagnosis.Comput. Electron. Agric. 145, 311 –318. Ganjegunte, G.K., Sheng, Z., Clark, J.A., 2012. Evaluating the accuracy of soil water sensors for irrigation scheduling to conserve freshwater. Appl Water Sci 2, 119 –125. Ghosh, I., Samanta, R.K., 2003. Teapest: an expert system for insect pest management InTea. Appl. Eng. Agric. 19 (5), 619 –625. Gliever, C., Slaughter, D.C., 2001. Crop verses weed recognition with arti ﬁcial neural net- works. ASAE paper. 01-3104 (2001), 1 –12. Gondchawar, N., Kawitkar, R.S., 2016. IoT based smart agriculture. International Journal of Advanced Research in Computer and Communication Engineering. 5 (6), 838 –842. Gottschalk, K., Nagy, L., Farkas, I., 2003. Improved climate control for potato stores by fuzzy controllers. Comput. Electron. Agric. 40, 127 –140. Gu pta, A., Mishra, S., Bokde, N., Kulat, K., 2016. Need of smart water systems in India. Int. J. Appl. Eng. Res. 11 (4), 2216 –2223. Gutiérrez, J., Medina, J.F.V., Garibay, A.N., Gándara, M.A.P., 2014. Automated irrigation sys- tem using a wireless sensor network and GPRS module. IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas. 63(1), 1–11.Hernandez-Perez, J.A., Garc ıa-Alvarado, M.A., Trystram, G., Heyd, B., 2004. Neural net- works for the heat and mass transfer prediction during drying of cassava andmango. Innov. Food Sci. Emerg. Technol. 5, 57 –64. Hinnell, A.C., Lazarovitch, N., Furman, A., Poulton, M., Warrick, A.W., 2010. Neuro-drip: es- timation of subsurface wetting patterns for drip irrigation using neural networks.Irrig. Sci. 28, 535–544.Ingale, H.T., Kasat, N.N., 2012. Automated irrigation system. Int. J. Eng. Res. Dev. 4 (11),51–54.Kait, L.K., Kai, C.Z., Khoshdelniat, R., Lim, S.M., Tat, E.H., 2007. Paddy growth monitoring with wireless sensor networks. International Conference on Intelligent and AdvancedSystems, IEEE 966–970.Kalaivani, T., Allirani, A., Priya, P., 2011. A survey on Zigbee based wireless sensor net- works in agriculture. IEEE 85 –89. Kamilaris, A., Prenafeta-Boldú, F.X., 2018. Deep learning in agriculture: a survey. Comput. Electron. Agric. 147, 70–90.Katariya, S.S., Gundal, S.S., Kanawade, M.T., Mazhar, K., 2015. Automation in agriculture. International Journal of Recent Scienti ﬁc Research. 6 (6), 4453–4456. Kavdir, S., Guyer, D.E., 2003.Apple grading using fuzzy logic. Turk J Agric. 27, 375 –382. Keshtgari, M., Deljoo, A., 2012. A wireless sensor network solution for precision agricul-ture based on ZigBee technology. Wirel. Sens. Netw. 4 (1), 1 –7. Kim, Y.J., Evans, R.G., Iversen, W.M., 2008. Remote sensing and control of an irrigation sys- tem using a distributed wireless sensor network. IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas. 57 (7),1379–1387.Kodali, R.K., Sahu, A., 2016.An IoT based soil moisture monitoring on Losant platform. 2ndInternational Conference on Contemporary Computing and Informatics, IEEE,pp. 764–768.Kumar, G., 2014.Research paper on water irrigation by using wireless sensor network. In-ternational Journal of Scientiﬁc Engineering and Technology 123 –125 IEERT confer- ence Paper.Lemmon, H., 1986.Comax: an expert system for cotton crop management. Science. 233(4759), 29–33.Liakos, K.G., Busato, P., Moshou, D., Pearson, S., Bochtis, D., 2018. Machine Learning in Ag- riculture: A Review. Sensors. 18 (2674), 1 –29. Logatchevl, A.A., Afanas'evl, V.P., Shkol'nik, S.M., Pursch, H., Jiittner, B., 1998. The behav- iour of vacuum arc discharges at hydrogen impregnated electrodes. IEEE 18th Int.Symp. on Discharses and Electrical Insulation in Vacuum-Eindhoven, pp. 288 –291. Maier, H.R., Dandy, G.C., 2000. Neural networks for the prediction and forecasting ofwater resources variables: a review of modeling issues and applications. Environ-mental Modeling & Software 101 –12
 4. Malavade, V.N., Akulwar, P.K., 2016. Role of IoT in Agriculture. National Conference On “Changing Technology and Rural Development ”.p p .5 6–57. Manickavasagan, A., Jayas, D.S., White, N.D.G., Paliwal, J., 2005. Applications of ThermalImaging in Agriculture–A Review. CSAE/SCGR 2005 Meeting Winnipeg, Manitoba.1–11.McKinion, J.M., Lemmon, H.E., 1985. Expert systems for agriculture. Comput. Electron. Agric. 1 (1), 31–40.Miranda, F.R., Yoder, R., Wilkerson, J.B., 2003. “AS i t e - s p e c iﬁc Irrigation Control System ”, Presented at the ASAE Annu. Int. Meeting, Las Vegas, NV, Jul. 27 –30. Mohanraj, I., Ashokumar, K., Naren, J., 2016. Field monitoring and automation using IOT in agriculture domain. 6th International Conference on Advances in Computing & Com-munications, ICACC 2016, 6 –8 September 2016, Cochin, India, 93, pp. 931 –939.11 K. Jha et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 2 (2019) 1 –12Möller, J., 2010.Computer vision–a versatile technology in automation of agriculture machinery. 21st Annual Meeting Bologna. EIMA International 1 –16. Mozny, M., Krejci, J., Kott, I., 1993. CORAC, hops protection management systems. Comput.Electron. Agric. 9, 103–110.Mustafa, N.B.M., Ahmed, S.K., Ali, Z., Yit, W.B., Abidin, A.A.Z., Md Sharrif, Z.A., 2009. Agri- cultural produce sorting and grading using support vector machines and fuzzylogic. IEEE International Conference on Signal and Image Processing Applications.391–396.Nema, M.K., Khare, D., Chandniha, S.K., 2017. Application of artiﬁcial intelligence to esti- mate the reference evapotranspiration in sub-humid Doon valley. Appl Water Sci 7,3903–3910.Pasqual, G.M., Mansﬁeld, J., 2003.Development of a prototype expert system for identi ﬁ- cation and control of insect pests. Comput. Electron. Agric. 2 (4), 263 –276. Patil, S.S., Thorat, S.A., 2016.Early detection of grapes diseases using machine learning andIoT. Second International Conference on Cognitive Computing and Information Pro-cessing (CCIP), IEEE 1–5.Pawar, S.B., Rajput, P., Shaikh, A., 2018. Smart irrigation system using IOT and raspberry pi. International Research Journal of Engineering and Technology. 5 (8), 1163 –1166. Prakash, C., Rathor, A.S., Thakur, G.S.M., 2013. Fuzzy Based Agriculture Expert System for Soyabean. pp. 1–13.Punn, M., Bhalla, N., 2013.Classiﬁcation of wheat grains using machine algorithms. Inter-national Journal of Science and Research. 2 (8), 363 –366. Rahman, M.M., Bala, B.K., 2010. Modelling of jute production using arti ﬁcial neural net- works. Biosyst. Eng. 105, 350 –356. Ravichandran, G., Koteshwari, R.S., 2016. Agricultural crop predictor and advisor using ANN for smartphones. IEEE 1 –6. Roach, J., Virkar, R., Drake, C., Weaver, M., 1987. An expert system for helping apple growers. Comput. Electron. Agric. 2 (2), 97 –108. Robinson, C., Mort, N., 1997.A neural network system for the protection of citrus cropsfrom frost damage. Comput. Electron. Agric. 16 (3), 177 –187. Roopaei, M., Rad, P., Choo, K.K.R., 2017. Cloud of things in smart agriculture: intelligent ir- rigation monitoring by thermal imaging. IEEE Computer society. 10 –15. Sannakki, S.S., Rajpurohit, V.S., Nargund, V.B., Kumar, A., Yallur, P.S., 2011. Leaf disease grading by machine vision and fuzzy logic. Int. J. Comp. Tech. Appl. 2 (5), 1709 –1716. Savitha, M., UmaMaheshwari, O.P., 2018. Smart cropﬁeld irrigation in IOT architecture using sensors. Int. J. Adv. Res. Comput. Sci. 9 (1), 302 –306. Shahin, M.A., Symons, S.J., 2001. A machine vision system for grading lentils. Can. Biosyst.Eng. 43, 7–14
.Shahzadi, R., Tausif, M., Ferzund, J., Suryani, M.A., 2016. Internet of things based expert system for smart agriculture. Int. J. Adv. Comput. Sci. Appl. 7 (9), 341 –350. Shantaiya, S., Ansari, U., 2010. Identiﬁcation of food grains and its quality using pattern classiﬁcation. International Journal of Computer & Communication Technology. 2(2), 70–74.Shekhar, Y., Dagur, E., Mishra, S., Tom, R.J., Veeramanikandan, M., Sankaranarayanan, S.,2017.Intelligent IoT based automated irrigation system. Int. J. Appl. Eng. Res. 12(18), 7306–7320.Shiravale, S., Bhagat, S.M., 2014. Wireless sensor networks in agriculture sector imple-mentation and security measures. International Journal of Computer Applications.92 (13), 25–29.Si, Y., Liu, G., Lin, J., Lv, Q., Juan, F., 2007. Design of control system of laser leveling machine based on fussy control theory. International Conference on Computer and ComputingTechnologies in Agriculture, pp. 1121 –1127. Sicat, R.S., Carranza, E.J.M., Nidumolu, U.B., 2005. Fuzzy modeling of farmers' knowledge for land suitability classiﬁcation. Agric. Syst. 83, 49–75. Singh, R.K., Prajneshu, 2008.Artiﬁcial neural network methodology for modelling and forecasting maize crop yield. Agric. Econ. Res. Rev. 21, 5 –10. Song, H., He, Y., 2005.Crop nutrition diagnosis expert system based on arti ﬁcial neural networks. Third International Conference on Information Technology and Applica-tions (ICITA'05), Sydney, NSW, 2005, 1, pp. 357 –362. Soorya, E., Tejashree, M., Suganya, P., 2013. Smart drip irrigation system using sensor net- works. International Journal of Scienti ﬁc & Engineering Research 4 (5), 2039 –2042. Stone, N.D., Toman, T.W., 1989. A dynamically linked expert-database system for decisionsupport in Texas cotton production. Comput. Electron. Agric. 4 (2), 139 –148. Tan, L., 2016.Cloud-based decision support and automation for precision agriculture inorchards. IFAC-Papers OnLine. 49 (16), 330 –335. Tilva, V., Patel, J., Bhatt, C., 2013. Weather based plant diseases forecasting using fuzzylogic. Nirma University International Conference on Engineering (NUiCONE). 1 –5. Tremblay, N., Bouroubi, M.Y., Panneton, B., Guillaume, S., Vigneault, P., Be'lec, C., 2010. De- velopment and validation of fuzzy logic inference to determine optimum rates of Nfor corn on the basis ofﬁeld and crop features. Precision Agric. 11, 621 –635. Valdés-Vela, M., Abrisqueta, I., Conejero, W., Vera, J., Ruiz-Sánchez, M.C., 2015. Soft com- puting applied to stem water potential estimation: a fuzzy rule based approach.Comput. Electron. Agric. 115, 150 –160. Wall, R.W., King, B.A., 2004.Incorporating Plug and Play Technology Into Measurementand Control Systems for Irrigation. Management, 2004, Ottawa, Canada August 1 –4. Yang, H. Liusheng, W. Junmin, X. Hongli, Wireless Sensor Networks for Intensive IrrigatedAgriculture,‖Consumer Communications and Networking Conference, 2007. CCNC2007. 4th IEEE, pp.197–201, Las Vegas, Nevada, Jan. 2007. Yong, W., Shuaishuai, L., Li, L., Minzan, L., Arvanitis, K.G., Georgieva, C., Sigrimis, N., 2018.Smart sensors from ground to cloud and web intelligence. IFAC-Papers OnLine 51(17), 31–38.12 K. Jha et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 2 (2019) 1 –12