ORIGINAL ARTICLE
A fuzzy expert system to Trust-BasedAccess Control in crowdsourcingenvironments
Olusegun Folorunso*, Olusegun Afeez Mustapha
Department of Computer Science, Federal University of Agriculture, Abeokuta, NigeriaReceived 13 January 2014; revised 20 June 2014; accepted 3 July 2014
Available online 18 July 2014
KEYWORDSTrust-based access;Control;Fuzzy-expert systems;Crowdsourcingenvironment;Quality assurance;Trust valueAbstract Crowdsourcing has been widely accepted across a broad range ofapplication areas. In crowdsourcing environments, the possibility of performinghuman computation is characterized with risks due to the openness of theirweb-based platforms where each crowd worker joins and participates in the pro-cess at any time, causing serious effect on the quality of its computation. In thispaper, a combination of Trust-Based Access Control (TBAC) strategy andfuzzy-expert systems was used to enhance the quality of human computation incrowdsourcing environment. A TBAC-fuzzy algorithm was developed and imple-mented using MATLAB 7.6.0 to compute trust value ( T
value), priority value as evaluated by fuzzy inference system (FIS) and ﬁnally generate access decisionto each crowd-worker. In conclusion, the use of TBAC is feasible in improvingquality of human computation in crowdsourcing environments.
ª2014 King Saud University. Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
*Corresponding author.E-mail address:folorunsoo@funaab.edu.ng(O. Folorunso). Peer review under responsibility of King Saud University.
Production and hosting by ElsevierApplied Computing and Informatics (2015) 11, 116–129
Saudi Computer Society, King Saud University
Applied Computing and Informatics
(http://computer.org.sa)www.ksu.edu.sawww.sciencedirect.com
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.aci.2014.07.0012210-8327ª2014 King Saud University. Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.1. Introduction
Crowdsourcing is sometimes referred to as human computation, a methodologythat lets humans’ process tasks which are difﬁcult to implement in software.These tasks may include transcription of documents, reviewing of articles or eval-uating the quality of ranking algorithms[20]. Crowdsourcing has recently shownenormous potential in solving highly decentralized target localization tasks [13].I n a crowdsourcing system, tasks are distributed to a population of anonymousInternet users for completion. Man-Ching et al.[12]and John et al.[14]deﬁned crowdsourcing as the use of large distributed groups of people to complete microtasks or to generate information. Because traditional search relevance evaluationrequiring expert assessment is a lengthy process[2,6,8,14], crowdsourcing has gained traction as an alternative solution for these types of high volume tasks[1,2,8].
A crowdsourcing site has two groups of users: requesters and workers. Thecrowdsourcing site exhibits a list of available tasks, associating with reward andtime period, that are presented by requesters; and during the period, workers com-pete to provide the best submission[12]. Meanwhile, a worker selects a task fromthe task list and completes the task because the worker wants to earn the asso-ciated reward. At the end of the period, a subset of submissions is selected, andthe corresponding workers are granted the reward by the requesters [12].
Crowdsourcing is now being pushed by large IT companies such as Amazon,Google, or Yahoo!. They have recognized the opportunities behind such mass col-laboration systems[14]for both improving their own services as business case. Inparticular, Amazon focuses on a task-based crowdsourcing platform calledAmazon Mechanical Turk (AMT)[20]. Requesters are invited to issue human-in-telligence tasks (HITs) requiring a certain qualiﬁcation to the AMT. These crowd-sourcers post mostly simple tasks that, however, require human capabilities. Inparticular, 50% of tasks are processed at a cost of $0.10 and less, most of the tasksare usually also offered in chunks to multiple AMT workers [12,20].
Meanwhile, the major problem with current crowdsourcing environments asdescribed in[5,26]is the lack of manageability as a result of the openness ofWeb based platforms, where anybody can join and participate which make qualityassurance challenging.
From literature, Quality Assurance (QA) is seen as a major determinant ofe-satisfaction in most business-to-consumer (B2C) and crowdsourcing environ-ments inclusive. QA is further designed into a theoretical framework or a model.These models are Rayport and Jaworski 7Cs Framework [19], DeLone and McLean Electronic Commerce Model[7], The ISO 9126 Quality Model (ISO/IEC 9126, 2011), SERVQUAL[17], WebQual 4.0 Model[3], Palmer’s Model [16]and Stefani and Xenos Quality Model[22]. These models were drawn fromthe ﬁelds of information systems, marketing, human–computer interaction anddesign and the researchers ‘‘focus has been on online consumers’’ perspective [4].A fuzzy expert system to Trust-Based Access Control in crowdsourcing environments 117QA factors of online transactions as aggregated from QA models is usuallyexpressed by performance characteristics such as response time, throughput, pre-dictability, availability, scalability, stability, usability, reliability, efﬁciency, func-tionality, speed of download (bit rate), ease of ﬁnding information, timeliness,conﬁdentiality and transaction integrity. In this case, we looked into conﬁdential-ity and transaction integrity by focusing on Trust-Based Access Control (TBAC).
Trust exists in our daily life and thus can be used as a mechanism to makeaccess decisions in networks[27]. Trust models have also been proposed to controlanonymity and uncertainty[9,10]. Several novel access control models based ontrust have been proposed in recent years. TrustBAC extends the conventionalRole Based Access Control (RBAC) with the notion of trust level [25]in which users are assigned to trust levels instead of the roles based on user identities,behavior history, recommendation, etc. The role that is assigned to a user changesalong with the change of the trust level of the user.
Trust management systems have been introduced in order to create a coherentframework to deal with trust[11]. Since the importance of building trust modelshas become vital for the development of some nowadays computer systems theway this trust is derived, that is, the metrics also becomes crucial. Metrics becomevery important for the deployment of trust management systems as the way ofquantifying trust[11]. The simplest way to deﬁne a trust metric is by using a dis-crete model where an entity can be either ‘‘trusted’’ or ‘‘not trusted’’. This can alsobe expressed by using numerical values such as 1 for trusted and 0 for not trusted[11].
However, trust management models cannot address security issues at fullest[18]. There is also need of explicit trust model which address trust access controlfor crowdsourcing environment. Access control mechanism based on trust cal-culations using fuzzy approach is presented in[24]where access feedback is usedfor access control.
This paper proposes the fuzzy expert systems approach for TBAC which isnecessary in capturing the trust calculations and crowd worker identity of contextbased trust relationship in crowdsourcing environments as inputs and access deci-sion as output to the system.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we discuss the rele- vant work in the areas of trust and crowd-sourcing, Section 3is on trust and access model, fuzzy-expert systems design, and CrowdTBAC-fuzzy framework, Section 4 presents results and discussion; and Section5concludes the work.
2. Related work
This section presents discusses some related works that are relevant to ourresearch ideas and purpose stated earlier.
Sara et al.[21]presented a model for users’ reputation in Wikipedia. In theirresearch they ﬁrst parse and mine the entire English Wikipedia history pages in118 O. Folorunso, O.A. Mustaphaorder to extract detailed user edit patterns and statistics. The pattern and statisticswere then used to derive three computational models of a user’s reputation.Finally, these models were validated using ground-truth Wikipedia data associatedwith vandals and administrators and when used as a classiﬁer, the best model pro-duces an area under the Receiver Operating Characteristics (ROC) curve of 0.98.An automated system was developed to estimate the reputation R
i(t)o fa Wikipedia useriat timetbased on its past behavior. The reputation index R
i(t) was assumed to be positive and scaled between 0 and 1 and, for the moment,and is assumed to be loosely interpretable as the probability that iproduces high-quality content. A step was taken toward this long term goal by developingseveral computational models ofR
i(t) and testing them, in the form of classiﬁers,on the available ‘‘ground-truth’’ associated with Wikipedia-known administratorsand vandals. Their approach, which is fairly standard in machine learning appli-cations, requires some explanations. It was reasonable to assume that there exists atrue reputation function that is scaled between 0 and 1 and grows monotonicallyfrom the user with the lowest reputation to the user with the highest reputation.
The ﬁrst of the three models that was proposed in their paper measures the rep-utation of a user as tokens are inserted by the user. In the work, it was discoveredthat a users’ reputation decreases when its earlier tokens inserted were deleted byanother user. The second reputation model measures the time interval betweeninsertion and deletion of content. While the third model was developed as a varia-tion of the second model. (Other works are summarized in Supplementary Table 1.)
3. TBAC-fuzzy framework design
This section explains the Trust-Based Access Control model; trust metrics, fuzzy-expert systems design, TBAC-fuzzy framework and a crowd-sourcing scenario. Inthis case we ﬁrst consider a scenario.
3.1. A crowd-sourcing scenario
Let consider an Internet encyclopedia as a crowd-sourcing environment thatallows everyone that has access to the Internet to make contributions or edit arti-cles online. In such environment, workers are classiﬁed based on their compe-tences and experiences. The crowd workers can freely access the encyclopedianetwork but are allowed to make contributions or edit some certain articles basedon its trust value acquired during the interaction with the host network. The trustvalue of each crowd worker is greatly affected by the number of activities per-formed. The priority level of workers is determined by the rules generated.
The crowd-sourcer speciﬁes a priority value to an existing articles which denotesthe sensitive level of that articles which means a worker must have such speciﬁedA fuzzy expert system to Trust-Based Access Control in crowdsourcing environments 119priority value or more before access can be granted to make contribution to suchan article (Supplementary Fig. 1).
3.2. Trust based access control model for crowdsourcing environments
Trust based access control model computes trust quantitatively based on theirinteraction in a crowdsourcing environment. In order to achieve this, a trust modelmetric is introduced to evaluate the trust of the workers and then use the trustvalue to enforce the access control policy with fuzzy expert system.
Our trust based access control model is described as a 3-tuple set model {Wr, Td,Wt}. This describes the set of workers (Wr), trust degree (Td), and workers’ trust degree (Wt). We further arrived at the following deﬁnition:
Deﬁnition 1.The set of worker (Wr) is a ﬁnite set of group workers. Crowd-workers are classiﬁed into; highly skilled, skilled, semiskilled and un-skilledworker.
Wr¼fwr1;wr2;...;wr ng
Deﬁnition 2.Trust degree (Td) measures the degree of trust of a worker. This
value is derived from a trust metric, which is later classiﬁed in a linguistic (mem-bership) form.
td2Td;tdfhigh;average;low;verylowg
Deﬁnition 3.Worker’s trust degree: is a Cartesian set of a worker to a trust degree.
Wt#Wr/C2Td;
wtðwrÞ¼td;fwr2Wrandtd2Tdg
3.3. Trust metric
An access control policy considers the workers’ trust degree when decidingwhether to grant a worker access to perform tasks. The trust value of a workeris determined as the worker visits the host. A trust metric equation from [15] was adapted so as to compute the trust values of every worker from the crowd.TheT
valueis the trust value of a workerwr2Wron a visit to the host,E iis an events, action or service carried out on the host site by a worker Wr. The value of the weightW
iis assigned to each eventE iby the host[15].
TvalueðwrÞ¼T 0þPni¼0WiEiPni¼0WiþfðtÞð1Þ120 O. Folorunso, O.A. MustaphaT0is the initial trust value assigned to a crowd-worker. The initial value has a rela-tion to the evaluation of trust value of a worker. Hence, the crowd-sourcer deﬁnesT
0value for a new and existing worker.
The termf(t) is added to the equation to reﬂect any time-dependent activity (orinactivity) to suggest gain or loss of reliability. The f(t) value represents error in the model when the worker does not have access to the environment due to a net-work being down or system itself is down.
The trust value of a worker is evaluated based on event performed by theworker. Such an event carries a value and it’s also weighted. An event can be nega-tive if the worker tries to act maliciously; such could be a failure to login or aworker performing brute force attack on the host. The positive value event whichvaries are the normal event that a worker is expected to carry out on a host.
An anonymous worker is classiﬁed as unskilled worker with initial value of 0.0since the worker is new to the environment and the competence is yet to be ascer-tained while other workers (semiskilled, skilled, highly skilled) are known in theenvironment. Anonymous worker can eventually gain recognition to becomeknown in the environment. An existing worker which is known to the environmenthas a level of skills and can be classiﬁed either as skilled worker, semiskilled andhighly skilled depending on the worker’s performance history.
3.4. Fuzzy expert system design
The fuzzy expert system has 2 input values and 1 output. The fuzzy sets (i.e. lin-guistic value) for the input variables and the output variable are as follows:
i. Degree of trust denoted as ‘‘TrustDegree’’ is deﬁned with four fuzzy sets{high,average,low,verylow}. The ‘‘TrustDegree’’ membership functionsare shown inFig. 4of the next section. The fuzzy set ‘‘VeryLow’’, ‘‘Low’’,‘‘Average’’ and ‘‘High’’ sets are in trapezoidal form.ii. Type of crowd worker denoted as ‘‘CrowdWorker’’ with four fuzzy sets(highly skilled worker,skilled worker,semiskilled worker,and un-skilled worker).iii. Priority level denoted as‘‘priority_Level’’with four fuzzy sets{high,average, low,verylow}. The‘‘Priority_Level’’membership functions are also shown inFig. 5where the ‘‘VeryLow’’, ‘‘low’’, ‘‘average’’ and ‘‘High’’ sets are in trape-zoidal form. The linguistic input variableTrustDegree and CrowdWorker aredeﬁned in theTable 2, whileTable 3shows the linguistic output variablePriority_Level. The crisp range value was selected based on the degree ofmembership in the interval [0,1], where 0 and 1 conﬁrms no membershipand full membership respectively.
The membership function is trapezoidal as it is speciﬁed by four parameters ( a, b,c,d) as follows:A fuzzy expert system to Trust-Based Access Control in crowdsourcing environments 121Trapezoidalðx;a;b;c;dÞ¼0;x/C20a
x/C0ab/C0a ;a/C20x/C20b1;b/C20x/C20c
d/C0xd/C0c ;c/C20x/C20d0;d/C20a8>>>>>><>>>>>>:9>>>>>>=>>>>>>;
ð2Þ
An alternative expression using min and max:
Trapezoidalðx;a;b;c;dÞ¼max minx/C0ab/C0a;1;d/C0xd/C0c/C18/C19;0/C18/C19ð3Þ
3.5. TBAC-fuzzy framework for crowdsourcing environments
The proposed framework comprises of the Trust-Based Access Control and fuzzyexpert system. The trust based access control (TBAC) has a model that computesthe trust value of workers. The trust metric operates at the preprocessing while theaccess control module operates at postprocessing module. Supplementary Fig. 2 shows the TBAC and Fuzzy expert system components incorporate into a singleframework.
The TBAC-fuzzy expert system can be explained with the following module ofthe framework.
Preprocessing module:The ﬁrst module of the framework contains the usermodule and trust metric module of the TBAC. At this preprocessing module,Table 2The fuzzy set for the two inputs with their linguistic value and crisp values.
Linguistic variable Fuzzy set (linguistic value) Crisp rangeTrust degree High lP0.75 Average 0.5 6l60.7 Low 0.25 6l60.6 Very low l60.35 Crowd workers Highly skilled worker (HS) HS P0.75 Skilled worker (S) 0.5 6S60.7 Semiskilled worker (SS) 0.25 6SS60.6 Un-skilled worker (US) US 60.35
Table 3Fuzzy set for the output.
Output Fuzzy set Crisp valuePriority_level High_priority 0.75 above Average_priority 0.5–0.75Low_priority 0.25–0.5Very low_priority 0.0–0.25122 O. Folorunso, O.A. Mustaphathe user module classiﬁes workers into different classes while the trust metricmodule computes the trust value of the worker using Eq. (1). The preprocessing module provides a crisp value which serves as the input value to the fuzzy-expert system. These crisp values are forwarded to the fuzziﬁcation moduleand decode to a fuzzy value.Fuzziﬁcation module:In the process of fuzziﬁcation, membership functionsdeﬁned on input variables are applied to their actual values so that the degreeof trust for each rule premise can be determined. The crisp values are fuzziﬁedinto linguistic values.Fuzzy inference engine module:The inference engine consists of the knowledgebase which contains the rules for rating workers (generated rules are availablein the supplementary material).Defuzziﬁcation:In defuzziﬁcation, the fuzzy output set is converted to a crispnumber. Some commonly used techniques are the centroidandmaximum methods.
/C0In thecentroid method, the crisp value of the output variable is computedby ﬁnding the variable value of the center of gravity of the membershipfunction for the fuzzy value./C0In themaximum method, one of the variable values at which the fuzzy sethas its maximum truth value is chosen as the crisp value for the outputvariable.Postprocessing module:In this module, access right is deﬁned on the workersbased on the output result of the fuzzy expert system. The output of the systemshows the priority level of the worker. The environment ﬁlters the worker basedon the output and decides access right to workers that falls within a prioritylevel and thereby improves the quality of the computation. A CrowdTBACFuzzy algorithm is described in (Algorithm available in supplementarymaterial).
4. Simulation, results and discussion
4.1. Result
Our fuzzy expert system trust model is evaluated using a MATLAB fuzzy logictoolbox version 7.0.6. The fuzzy interference system of our TBAC-fuzzy expertsystem has two inputs and an output, a mamdani-type inference and a centroidmethod were used for defuzziﬁcation. The implementation process was carriedout as shown inFigs. 4–8. Firstly, we deﬁned the number of input and the outputon fuzzy interference system editor and deﬁne the membership functions of the lin-guistic variable.
The surface-viewer above reﬂects the trust value relative to trust and workersthat may help us to analyze trust variance.Fig. 8shows the output surface forA fuzzy expert system to Trust-Based Access Control in crowdsourcing environments 123the priority value versus trust value and worker. This priority value output is a fac-tor that controls and enhances the quality assurance of the crowd-sourcingactivities.4.1.1. Simulation
TBAC-fuzzy expert system is simulated in our crowd-sourcing environment sce-nario. The simulation parameters are shown inTable 5with the range of values based on assumptions. In this process, 10 workers of different classes (5 unskilled,2 semiskilled, 2 skilled and 1 highly skilled worker) are considered to make con-tribution in encyclopedia environment. Within the range of values for event andweight deﬁned below, three distinct values are generated using a java program-ming language. The values generated are further used to compute the workers’trust values on the assumption that same events were performed in Table 4.
Figure 4Membership function of TrustDegree.
Figure 5The membership function of an output variable ‘‘TaskPriority’’.124 O. Folorunso, O.A. MustaphaThe initial values (T 0) of the workers are considered in the computation todetermine their actual trust value. In this case, we deﬁned T
0to be 0.00, 0.01, 0.025, and 0.05 for a new worker (unskilled), semiskilled, skilled and highly skilledworkers respectively. The last three workers are the existing workers and are clas-siﬁed based on their past achievements and experiences.
The designed fuzzy rules are simulated using the trust values of crowd-workerswith a fuzzy tool box in MATLAB. The simulation graph above revealed that atask with a priority value of 0.37 can only be performed by workers that gain sucha value or more. The threshold value of 0.37 is been deﬁned by the crowd-sourcer
Figure 6The membership function of CrowdWorkers.
Figure 7The rule surface shows how the membership function of the input variable inﬂuences the outcomeresult.A fuzzy expert system to Trust-Based Access Control in crowdsourcing environments 125for basic trust level. The threshold/user-deﬁned ( Dval= 0.37) value represented by the red line as shown inFig. 9gives the crowd-source an insight into the workerthat is allowed to performed a task. Any worker below the threshold level will bedenied access on the task.
It was observed furthermore that not all the unskilled workers can be allowed tocarry out a task. Individual workers’ priority level is determined by fuzzy rules
Figure 8The surface view which shows the dependency of the output on the two inputs.
Table 4Results of simulation on MATLAB.
Workers crisp value Trust crisp value Priority crisp value Dval= 0.37 (user-deﬁned value to grant access) 0.25 0.3547 0.1271 Denied0.25 0.47668 0.1342 Denied0.25 0.40471 0.3988 Granted0.5 0.53168 0.4864 Granted0.5 0.59501 0.6 Granted0.25 0.53451 0.2257 Denied0.25 0.58843 0.3765 Granted0.5 0.60677 0.3987 Granted0.5 0.65498 0.6 Granted1.0 0.73293 0.7508 Granted
Table 5simulation parameters.
Variable Data type Values range Probability distributionEvents (E) Real 0.0–0.5 UniformWeight (W) Real 0.0–0.1 UniformT
0for highly skilled Real 0.05 UniformT
0for skilled Real 0.025 UniformT
0for semiskilled Real 0.01 UniformT
0for un-skilled Real 0.0 Uniform126 O. Folorunso, O.A. Mustaphagenerated using the two inputs (classes of worker and trust value) to determine theoutput (priority value). The graph also clearly shows that not all two semiskilledworkers can be given access to a task of 0.45 priority value that could be deﬁnedby the crowd-sourcer.
4.2. Discussion
The deﬁned value chosen by the environment signiﬁes the sensitive level of theactivities to be performed. A lower value say 0.2 which could signiﬁes an activitieswhich required worker with little knowledge or experience and this will acceptmore workers which means 2 workers will be rejected and denied access to makecontributions. Whenever a worker visits the host, trust computations were madebased on some events performed on the system. The events on the system havea value assigned and also they are weighted.
In the design architecture, trust metric module compute workers trust andtransform into a crisp value which is then decoded at the fuzziﬁcation module.The surface view inFig. 7shows the dependency of the output on the two inputs.
Postprocessing module of the fuzzy expert system grants access to a worker.This module makes the decision based on the output of the fuzzy system. Thismodule ﬁlters and classiﬁes the needed worker based on a deﬁned priority valueto make contribution or suggestion. The trust metric equation of TBAC (Eq.(1)) was tested with the fuzzy expert system by some generated values. The out-come of the result has it that majority of the workers gained access to performactivities in the crowdsourcing environment while others are denied. Meanwhile,this can be justiﬁed for the fact that half of the workers that participated have little
Figure 9Simulation chart.A fuzzy expert system to Trust-Based Access Control in crowdsourcing environments 127or more experience while the other workers have little or no experience. In thiscase a task with a priority value 0.37 can be worked on by 70% of the workersas shown in the simulation chart inFig. 9. This analysis with the simulation charthelps to enhance the quality assurance of the crowdsourcing activities.
5. Conclusions and future work
This paper addressed the issues of trust in crowd-sourcing alongside its incentiveand how the quality of response from the crowd-workers would be improved. Thepaper identiﬁed answer ranking as a problem in crowd-sourcing leading to cheat-ing by workers. To look for more efﬁcient and reliable way to solve this problem, afuzzy expert system and trust based access control were employed as a singleframework to enforce access control. A trust based access control fuzzy algorithmwas used to compute and assigned trust value to workers. The trust value assignedto crowd-worker serves as one of the inputs to the fuzzy system and access isgranted to workers whose priority value is above threshold level based on thefuzzy output. In this case, the crowdsourcing could be assured that only workerswith little or more experience could perform certain tasks. This however helps toenhance the quality of response from the crowd. Experiment was conducted onTrust-Based Access Control fuzzy algorithm using systematic generated valueson MATLAB. The results indicated that high quality response and service couldbe obtained from CrowdWorkers.
In the future, effort on mood positivity with desired model would be conductedto determine the performance of workers in a crowdsourcing environment.
Appendix A. Supplementary material
Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online ver-sion, athttp://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.aci.2014.07.001.
References
[1] O. Alonso, Guidelines for designing crowdsourcing-based relevance evaluation, ACM SIGIR, 2009.
[2]O. Alonso, D.E. Rose, V. Stewart, Crowdsourcing for relevance evaluation, SIGIR Forum 42 (2) (2008) 9–15
.
[3]S.J. Barnes, R. Vidgen, Measuring web site quality improvements, a case study of the forum measuring website quality improvements: a case study of the forum on strategic management knowledge exchange, Ind.Manage. Data Syst. 103 (5) (2003) 297–309
.
[4] Z. Balfagih, N. Mohamed, M. Mahmud, Search of a model for evaluating the quality of e-commercewebsites, in: Proceedings of ITSIM’08, Malaysia, 2008.
[5]D. Brabham, Crowdsourcing as a model for problem solving: an introduction and cases, Convergence: Int. J.Res. New Media Technol. 14 (1) (2008) 75–90
.
[6] B. Carterette, P.N. Bennett, D.M. Chickering, Here or there: preference judgments for relevance, in:Proceedings of the European Conference on Information Retrieval (ECIR), 2008.
[7]W.H. DeLone, E.R. McLean, The DeLone and McLean model of information systems success, a ten-yearupdate, J. Manage. Inf. Syst. 19 (4) (2003) 9–30
.128 O. Folorunso, O.A. Mustapha[8] G. Dupret, V. Murdock, B. Piwowarski, Web search engine evaluation using click-through data and a usermodel, in: Proceedings of the Workshop on Query Log Analysis WWW, 2007.
[9] Eric Yuan, Jin Tong, Attributed based access control for web services, in: Proceedings of IEEE InternationalConference on Web Services, 2005, pp. 561–569.
[10] V. George, M. Ian, C. Maria, A probabilistic model for trust and reputation, in: van der Hoek, Kaminka,Lespe´rance, Luck and Sen (Eds.), Proc. of 9th Int. Conf. on Au-tonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems(AAMAS 2010), May 10–14, Toronto, Canada, 2010.
[11] Isaac Agudo, Carmen Fernandez-Gago, Javier Lopez, A model for trust metrics analysis, in: 5thInternational Conference on Trust, Privacy and Security in Digital Business (TrustBus ‘‘08), LNCS 5185,Springer, Turin, Italy, 2008, pp. 28–37.
[12] Y. Man-Ching, K. Irwin, L. Kwong-Sak, A survey of crowdsourcing systems, IEEE InternationalConference on Privacy, Security, Risk, and Trust, and IEEE International Conference on Social Computing,2011, pp. 766–773.
[13] V. Matteo, R. Alex, J. Nicholas, Trust-based fusion of untrustworthy information in crowdsourcingapplications, in: Ito, Jonker, Gini, Shehory (Eds.), Proceedings of the 12th International Conference onAutonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems (AAMAS 2013), May 6–10, Saint Paul, Minnesota, USA,2013, pp. 829–836.
[14] L. John, E. Andy, H. Vaughn, B. Lukas, Ensuring quality in crowdsourced search relevance evaluation: theeffects of training question distribution, in: Proceedings of the SIGIR 2010 Workshop on Crowdsourcing forSearch Evaluation (CSE 2010), July 23, 2010, pp. 17–20.
[15] A.R. Patnaik, A.G. Srivastava, A.R. Nayak, Building ﬂexible trust models for E-commerce applications,2006, <http://tecsis.ca/services/2.Trust%20Model.pdf > (accessed 21.11.13).
[16]J.W. Palmer, Web site usability, design, and performance factors, Inf. Syst. Res. 13 (2) (2002) 151–167 .
[17]A. Parasuraman, V.A. Zeithaml, L.L. Berry, SERVQUAL: a multiple-item scale for measuring consumerperceptions of service quality, J. Retail. 64 (1) (1988) 12–40
.
[18] Parikshit N. Mahalle, Pravin A. Thakre, Neeli Rashmi Prasad, Ramjee Prasad, A fuzzy approach to trustbased control in internet of things, IEEE 3rd International Conference on Wireless Communications,Vehicular Technology, Information Theory and Aerospace & Electronics Systems Technology (WirelessViTAE – 2013), Atlanta City, USA: IEEE, 2013.
[19] J.E. Rayport, B.J. Jaworski, E-Commerce. McGraw-Hill Higher Education, NewYork, 2001.
[20] B. Satzger, H. Psaier, D. Schall, S. Dustdar, Auction-based crowdsourcing supporting skill management, Inf.Syst. 38 (4) (2012) 547–560,http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.is.2012.09.003 .
[21] J. Sara, G. Yasser, L. Cristina, B. Pierre, User contribution and trust in Wikipedia, in: Proceedings of the 5thInternational Conference on Collaborative Computing: Networking, Applications and Worksharing,Washington DC, USA, 2009.
[22]A. Stefani, M. Xenos, A model for assessing the quality of e-commerce systems, Proc. PC-HCI 2001 (2001)105–109
.
[23] M. Shunan, H. Jingsha, Z.W. Xunboshuaiand, Access control mechanism based on trust quantiﬁcation,IEEE Second International Conference on Social Computing (SocialCom 2010), volume issue, Minneapolis,USA, August 20–22, 2010, pp. 1032–1037.
[24] C. Sundip, R. Indrajit, TrustBAC: integrating trust relationships into the RBAC model for access control inopen systems. in: Proceedings of 11th ACM Symposium on Access Control Models and Technologies, 2006,pp. 49–58.
[25] M. Vukovic, Crowdsourcing for enterprises, in: Proceedings of the 2009 Congress on Services, IEEEComputer Society, 2009, pp. 686–692.
[26] N. Xudong, L. Junzhou, A trust aware access control in service oriented grid environment, in: Proceedings of6th International Conference on Grid and Cooperative Computing, 2007, pp. 417–422.A fuzzy expert system to Trust-Based Access Control in crowdsourcing environments 129