 AASRI Procedia   5  ( 2013 )  183 – 188 
2212-6716 © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
Selection and/or peer review under responsibility of American Applied Science Research Institute
doi: 10.1016/j.aasri.2013.10.076 ScienceDirect
 A
bD
Abst
Trust
to co
value
trans
 
© 20
Sele
 
Keyw
1. 
S
distr
ensu
distr
mod
have
prop
mod
appr
to co
wher2013 A A
A New P
aDepartm e
Department of C o
tract 
t among entiti e
ompute trust va l
es. Mutual aut h
smitted securel y
013 Publishe d
ection and/or p
words: Distribute d
Introductio n
Security meth o
ributed syste m
ure secure co m
ributed trust m
del for distrib u
e been discus
posed in [7].  
del is propos e
roach is prop o
ompute trust u
re trust is de fASRI Con f
Proposa l
ent of Computer S
omputer Science &
es of a distribu t
lues using fuz z
hentication is e
y using cryptog r
d by Elsevier B
peer review u n
d environment, G
n 
odologies in 
m are identifi
mmunication .
model has bee n
uted system h a
sed in [6]. F o
A behaviou r
ed in [10] th a
osed in [11]. F
using fuzzy. A
fined in term sference on P
l for Dis t
Vijay P
Science & Engin e
& Engineering, B
ted system sup p
zy based appro a
ensured amon g
raphy. The tru s
B.V.  
nder responsi b
Grid, Fuzzy Logic,
grid systems
ed as: trust, a
. It can be u s
n developed fo
as been devel
or wireless c o
ral pattern ba s
at ensures da t
Fuzzy logic c a
Alfarez Abd u
s of direct tru sParallel and 
tributed 
rakasha, M
eering, BBD Uni v
Babu Banarasi D a
 
ports secure en v
ach. The main f
g the communi
st values have a
bility of Ame r
 Trust. 
 [1, 2, 3] is 
authenticatio n
sed for impl e
for ad hoc mo b
oped in [5]. T
ommunicatio n
sed security s
ta security i n
an be used fo r
ul-Rehman an d
st and recom mDistribute d
System 
Manuj Darb
versity, Luckno w
as University, Luc
vironment. In t
focus of the ap p
cating entities
also been used t
rican Applied 
an importan t
n, encryption 
ementing sec u
bile networks 
Trust and rep u
ns, a rendezv o
system is pro
n distributed s
r calculating t r
d Stephen H a
mended trust. d Computin g
Securit y
arib 
w, India, E-mail: v
cknow, India, E-m
his paper, the a
proach is on th e
using trust va l
o generate acc e
Science Res e
t aspect. Sec u
and access c
urity method s
in [4]. A trus
utation based a
ous node bas
posed in [8, 
system. Trus t
rust. Many m
ailers have pr o
In our frame wg and Syst e
y Frame
vijaylko@gmail. c
mail: manujuma @
authors propos e
e dynamic beha
lues. These tr u
ess control poli c
earch Institute 
urity features
control. ‘Trus t
s i n  g r i d  e n v
t and access c
access contro l
ed trust base d
9]. A new a c
tWebRank b a
models have b e
oposed a trus t
work we hav eems 
work 
com 
@gmail.com 
e an approach 
aviour of trust 
ust values are 
cies. 
s required in 
t’ is used to 
vironment. A 
control based 
l mechanism 
d security is 
ccess control 
ased security 
een proposed 
t model [12] 
e direct trust 
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
© 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
Selection and/or peer review under responsibility of American Applied Science Research InstituteOpen access under CC BY -NC-ND  license.
Open access under CC BY -NC-ND  license.184   Vijay Prakash and Manuj Darbari  /  AASRI Procedia   5  ( 2013 )  183 – 188 
 values based on direct communication and updated trust va lue based on direct and feedback trust values. Fixed weighted [13] and variable weighted [14] fuzzy based models have been proposed for evaluation of trust. As evaluation parameters have dynamic significance, hence variable weighted method is used here. This paper is divided into 5 sections; section 2 define s the terminology we have used for defining our grid system also with the data structures used for maintaining the trust values. Section 3defines the fuzzy approach used to calculate the trust value. Then section 4 defines the various security measures used in this framework. Section 5 is conclusion and future scope. 2. Proposed Framework Grid is composed of a number of independent domains. Here, we refer to these domains as Organizations. Each organization is an autonomous domain with its own administrative and security policies. These are denoted as vector O={O
1, O2, O3….. On}, where, O i is the ith organization of the grid environment. These organizations comprises of entities. An entity is represented as 
if where i represents the organization to which entity e belongs, j represents the grade of an entity within the organization x is used as a name for entity to differentiate from different entities. Grade of an entity refers to the level of trust that an organization has over its own entity. Two entities of the same organization can have the same grade.  Each organization has a manager. M
i denotes the manager of organization O i. Grades are allotted by the organization manager, which is responsible for maintaining the trust values of an organization and its entities. Initially M
i assigns same grades to all the entities e  Oi. Gradually, with feedbacks from communicating entities, grade is updated. For any entity e, we have following types of trust values: a) Initial Trust Value: The Trust value assigned for it by any entity with which no communication has occurred in the past. They are based on authentica tion queries. And its value can be either 0 or t
0. The scope of these values is before completion of any transaction. (b ) Direct Trust Value: The Trust generated after an entity has carried out a job. It is based on, initial trust, job success rate, error rate, turnaround time. Its value ranges from   [t
0, 1] and the scope of these values is before completion of job. (c) Reputation: It depends on trust values by other entities. Its value depends on feedba cks after job completion, trust on an organization and grade within organization.  For any organization, we have various trust values,  (a)Initial trust value: It is based on the authentication queries from the highest grade entity. In case, all entities are of the same grade, randomly any entity can be selected. (b) Direct Trust Value: With the competition of job, direct trust values of entities of organization are updated. Direct Trust for O
i = Aggregate function (direct trust values of all communicating entities of O i). The description of the data structures are as follows:   Direct Trust Matrix: An entity 
 has a trust matrix         where columns represents the communicating entities and rows represents the contexts of communications. Above matrix represents that 
has .5 trust over for context C 1 and .2 for context C 2. So, we can say that Qopey
kle
C1 C
2 C
3 .5 .2 .1 .7 .9 .1 .3 .6 0 zmne185  Vijay Prakash and Manuj Darbari  /  AASRI Procedia   5  ( 2013 )  183 – 188 
 entity  is better for context C 1 in view point of  Feedback matrix:  this matrix is sent to the manager of the entity’s organization. For example, lets assume that 
   Oj communicates with e  Oi then, based on its communications its will generate feedbacks and send it to M
j .  M j will aggregate all the received feedback matrices and send to M i.         So in the above matrix we can see, that column represents all the entities of organization O
i. With respect to different contexts, trust values are assigned to the entities with which communication took place. Since there was no communication of 
  with  in terms of C 3 hence it takes value as NA.  Update Trust Matrix: This matrix is generating by up dating the trust matrix with the feedbacks received from different entities. So a join operator is used here to get a combined result from both the matrices.  Updated Trust Matrix = Trust Matrix (+) feedback matrix, here (+) represents join operator.  3. Applying Fuzzy Inference Engine in Trust Computation It is a variable weight based fuzzy evaluation. 3.1 Computation of direct trust matrix: Direct Trust depends on following parameters, initial trust, job success rate, Error rate, turnaround time. Now we need to assign weights to these parameters . Importance of a parameter depends on the instant of time, the trust value is computed. For example, if two entities are going to compute for the first time, then whole weightage will be given to initial trust value. Whereas, after few successful job completions, initial trust will have least weightage. Therefore, these weights will be variable. W
i is weight for Evaluation parameter E
i,  where E= (E 1 E2 E3 E4 )  is the evaluation parameter vector. Value of evaluation is denoted as u 1, 
u2, …. u n  where u i{0, μ m} so, when E i is best u i  = μ m  When E
i is worst i  = 0 
i will be a non increasing differential function in (0,μ m)  
i (u) <  0  Where u  (0,μ m) so, W
i = (u 1, u2 …… u n)  =      3.2 Computation of Feedback matrix  Say few entities of O
j communicate with entities of O i. After completion of job, O j entities will give feedback of O
i entities to M j. On the basis of which feedback matrix will be generated.  Depending upon the grades of e
j entities (which would be variable); then feedback values will be computed. E = {f
1, f2, f3 ……..}    f i – feedback from the entity. 
 = { 1, 2, 3 ……}     i – grade value of ith entity   Qipey
lhe
C1 C
2 C
3 .5 .2 .1 .7 .9 .1 .3 .6 NAzine186   Vijay Prakash and Manuj Darbari  /  AASRI Procedia   5  ( 2013 )  183 – 188 
 So, here weight values  grade values So W
i = (u 1, u2 …… u n) =     condition, entities provide feedback for same context. So, for different contest, different matrices can be developed. 3.3 Computation of update matrix  Here joint operation will be used as:  As, feedback will be received from different managers So E = [Mf
1, Mf 2, ……… Mf 12] where Mf i is feedback from M i 
  = ( 1, 2 ………  n) 
  = trust value of any organization. So, here    weights 
     Organization trust value. So,  W
i = (u 1, u2 …… u n)  =                   
Fig. 1 Space Time Diagram Values for Trust and Grade Values 
4. Defence in depth security  Whenever a new entity/organization wishes to be the part of grid, authentication is required. Security threat could be both ways, it may be possible that a hacker is tr ying to be a part of grid or, it may be possible that a legitimate user is getting connected to a spoofed grid component. So Mutual Authentication is required. In our framework authentication takes place at two levels. Time line diagram below shows how authentication is carried out.  Computes Feedback  Mareix for Oj Updates trust for O
j  feedback mareix Feedback of e
j feedback of e i Updates grade Computers Feedback  Mareix Updates trust for O
i Communications Once job is over Updates  Grade  Job Oj O i M
j Mi e i e j 187  Vijay Prakash and Manuj Darbari  /  AASRI Procedia   5  ( 2013 )  183 – 188 
  
Fig. 2 Time Line Diagram for Mutual Authentication 
Level 1, whenever a new entity wishes to join a grid, it will send request to particular grid entity to which it wants to communicate. This grid entity will check for authentication, by generating certain queries. Only legitimate user will have the correct answers to those queries. In case correct responses are received, grid entity will sent initial trust value (t
o).Else if wrong response will be there then grid entity will assign trust = 0, and an alarm will be generated for all grid entities  informing about this unidentified entity.  Level 2:- When grid entity sends the initial trust, the trust value is sent using public key cryptography. Therefore, an entity can have access to the trust value, only if it has the key to it. Suppose a hacker in any way gets the responses of initial queries, he will be able to cross the first level authentication, but cannot cross level 2 unless presence of key. Keys should be changed periodically because in grid computing, entities may join and leave the grid dynamically, even during the execution. So, Stateless Key Management can be used to securely maintain the keys. The new entity joining the grid must also be s ure of the authentication of grid. Therefore, mutual authentication is necessary. New entity will also generate queries to which grid responses are checked and accordingly trust is established. Here also two levels of security are maintained.  4.1 Access Control  Initially, a new entity will have limited access to resources corresponding to the initial trust t
0.  As the trust values of a new member increases, he is allowed to get more access to resources. Thus, access control policies vary according to the trust values. The manager’s of each entity are responsible for maintaining the access control. Managers maintain the trust value of each entity of other organizations, on the basis of feedback from its own entities. Say, 
want to communicate to then M k is responsible for access control. M k checks the trust value from feedback matrices and accordingly allows 
   
188   Vijay Prakash and Manuj Darbari  /  AASRI Procedia   5  ( 2013 )  183 – 188 
 5. Conclusion and Future Scope   In this paper, trust values have been used to carry out authentication and access control, ensuring a secure grid environment. Fuzzy logic concept is utilized for evaluating the trust. In future, authors would be working for decreasing the computations required for generatin g and updating trust values. Also reputation parameter can be added to ensure secure communication.  References  [1] Shehab M, Ghafoor A, Bertino E., Secure collaboration in a mediator free distributed environment”, IEEE Transactions on Parallel and  Distributed Systems, 2010:19(10), pp.1338-1351. [2] Pallickara S., Ekanayake J., Fox G, A scalable approach for the secure and authorized tracking of the availability of entities in distributed systems, IEEE International Parallel and Distributed Processing Symposium, pp. 1-10, 2007. [3] Anderson R., Security engineering: a guide to building dependable distributed systems, Wiley, 2010. [4] Omar M, Challal Y, Bouabdallah A, Reliable and fully distribted trust model for mobile ad hoc networks”, Computers and Security, 2009: 28(3-4), pp. 199-214. [5] Feng F, Chuang L, Peng D, Li J, A trust and context based access control model for distributed system, 10
th IEEE International Conference on High Performance Computing and Communications, pp 629-634, 2008. [6] Marmol FG, Derez GM, Security threats Scenarios in trust and reputation models for distributed systems, Computers and Security, 2009: 28, pp 545-556. [7] Cheng N, Govindan K. and Mahopatra P., Rendezvous based trust propagation to enhance distributed network security, International Journal of Security and Networks, 2011: 6(2-3), pp 112-122. [8] Ukil, Arijit, Secure Trust Management in Distri buted Computing Systems, Sixth IEEE International Symposium on Electronic Design, Test and Application(DELTA), pp. 116-121, 2011. [9] Uzunov AV, Fernandez EB and Falkner K, Securi ng distributed systems using patterns: a survey, Computers and Security, 2012: 31(5), pp. 681-703. [10] Aneta PM, Implementation of Access Control Model for Distributed Information Systems Using  Usage Control, Security and Intelligent Information System, vol. 7053, 2012, pp. 54-67. [11] Carchiolo V, Longheu A, Malgeri M and Mangioni G, Trust assessment: a personalized, distributed, and secure approach, Concurrency and Computation: Pr actice and Experience, 2012: 24(6), pp. 605-617. [12] Abdul-Rahman A, Hailes S, Supporting Trust in Virtual Communities, 33
rd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences, vol. 6, Dec. 2007, pp. 6007. [13] Tang W, Chen Z, Research of subjective trust ma nagement model based on the fuzzy set theory, Journal of Software, 2003:14(8), pp. 1401-1408. [14] Liao H, Wang Q and Li G, A Fuzzy Logic Ba sed Trust Model in Grid, International Conference on Networks Security, Wireless Communications an d Trusted Computing NSWCTC, pp. 608-614, 2009.  