ORIGINAL ARTICLE
A new comprehensive framework for enterpriseinformation security risk management
Mohamed S. Saleha, Abdulkader Alfantookhb,*
aBradford University, Bradford, United Kingdom
bMinistry of Higher Education, Riyadh, Saudi ArabiaReceived 25 November 2009; accepted 14 February 2011
Available online 6 June 2011
KEYWORDSEnterprise security;Information security;Risk management;Six-sigma;STOPE viewAbstractWith the wide spread use of e-transactions in enterprises, informationsecurity risk management (ISRM) is becoming essential for establishing a safeenvironment for their activities. This paper is concerned with presenting a com-prehensive ISRM framework that enables the effective establishment of the tar-get safe environment. The framework has two structural dimensions; and twoprocedural dimensions. The structural dimensions include: ISRM ‘‘scope’’ andISRM ‘‘assessment criteria’’, while the procedural dimensions include: ISRM‘‘process’’ and ISRM ‘‘assessment tools’’. The framework uses the comprehen-sive STOPE (strategy, technology, organization, people, and environment) viewfor the ISRM scope; while its assessment criteria is considered to be open to var-ious standards. For the procedural dimensions, the framework uses the widelyknown six-sigma DMAIC (deﬁne, measure, analyze, improve, and control) cyclefor the ISRM process; and it considers the use of various assessment tools. It ishoped that the framework would be widely used in the future as an open refer-ence for ISRM.
ª2011 King Saud University. Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
2210-8327ª2011 King Saud University. Productionand hosting by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.Peer review under responsibility of King SaudUniversity.doi:10.1016/j.aci.2011.05.002
Production and hosting by Elsevier*Corresponding author.E-mail addresses:a@fantookh.com,afantookh@mohe.gov.sa(A. Alfantookh).Applied Computing and Informatics (2011) 9, 107–118
King Saud University
Applied Computing and Informatics
www.ksu.edu.sawww.sciencedirect.com
1. IntroductionOne of the essential functions of information technology (IT) governance is riskmanagement, which aims at providing a safe environment for e-business and e-commerce. In support of this function, various IT organizations, concerned withstandards have published different risk management methods. These methodshave been and are being partially or fully adopted by enterprises using IT, andworking in different ﬁelds, for identifying, analyzing, and minimizing risks fortheir IT activities.It would have been more convenient for such enterprises if a comprehensivemethod that accommodates the various requirements of these methods, in a welldesigned and enhanced manner, is available. This would support risk managementcompatibility among enterprises, using IT, providing a common and safe environ-ment for their e-business interaction.This paper is concerned with introducing a comprehensive information securityrisk management (ISRM) framework for enterprises using IT. The structural scopeof the framework is based on the STOPE (strategy, technology, organization, peo-ple, and environment) view which is becoming of increasing importance for struc-turing information security issues over its ﬁve distinct domains ( Saleh et al., 2006, 2007, 2008;Esteves and Joseph, 2008); and the management process of the frame-work is associated with well known six sigma DMAIC (deﬁne, measure, analyze,improve, and control) cyclic phases (Pyzdek, 2003). In addition, the frameworkadds management criteria to its structural issues; and considers evaluation toolsfor its procedural phases. The framework also enables the integration and enhance-ment of the various available risk management methods and standards into itsstructural and procedural components. The paper describes the framework, andemphasizes its importance as a potential open reference for enterprise ISRM.2. Related workNowadays, there are number of different types of risk management methodolo-gies, some of them issued by national and international organizations ( ISO/IEC TR 13335,1998; NIST SP800-30, 2002; AS/NZS 4360, 2004; HB231, 2004; BSIStandard 100-3, 2005; ISO/IEC 27005, 2008), others issued by professional orga-nizations (CRAMM,2001; CORAS, 2003; OCTAVE, 2005; Magerit, 2006;Microsoft, 2006; Mehari, 2007) and the rest presented by research projects ( Kailay and Jarratt, 1995; Smith and Eloff, 2002; Robert and Rolf, 2003; Karabacak andSogukpinar, 2005; Hoffanvik and Stolen, 2006; Mayer et al., 2007 ). Each of these methods has been developed to meet a particular need and hence has a differentobjectives, steps, structure, and level of application. The common goal of thesemethods is to prioritize and estimate the risk value and to suggest the most suitablemitigation plan to eliminate or minimize that risk to an acceptable level ( Vorster and Labuschagne, 2005).108 M.S. Saleh, A. AlfantookhIn spite of the increasing number of standard and commercial risk managementmethods, various reports, surveys, and related literature indicate that the diffusionof the current risk management methods, within organizations has been very lim-ited so far due to lack of awareness, high cost, need for expertise, and long process(NCC, 2000; DTI, 2002). In addition, the trust in these methods is very low due tothe poor results, bulky confused reports and the narrow technological scope(Labushehagneand Eloff, 1998; Spears, 2006). Furthermore, the confused hugenumber of risk management methods (more than 200 now) create a problem toany organization willing to adopt one of these methods and the absent of anagreed reference benchmark or comparative framework for evaluating these meth-ods limit its practical use in assessing the enterprises information security risks(Vorsterand Labuschagne, 2005; Bornman and Labuschagne, 2006; Syalim etal., 2009).Labuschagne and Eloff (1998) argues that most of the available risk manage-ment methods have a scientiﬁc core that emerged from the engineering originsof computing. These traditional methods used to manage enterprises risk and gen-erally focused on the technology and this proposes technical solutions. The major-ity of these methods seldom consider human, organizational, strategic, orenvironmental factors. While technology is a necessary consideration, it is notthe only element requiring recognition (Hang et al., 2008; Werlinger et al., 2009). In addition, the IT-centric approach to security risk analysis does not in-volve business users to the extent necessary to identify a comprehensive set of risksor to promote security awareness throughout the organization ( Lategan and Solms, 2006).Nosworthy (2000)mentioned that in order to apply business conti-nuity measures in a consistent, manageable and cost effective manner an organi-zation-wide approach to a practical business continuity risk analysis should beadopted and applied to the business as a whole and not just the IT department.Recently, many authors suggest the need for a holistic information security riskmanagement method that minimizes the several shortcomings of the traditionalrisk management methods (Niekerk and Labuschagne, 2006; Spears, 2006; Zucca-to, 2006; Anderson, 2007; Huang et al., 2008). The suggested method should bebased on the standards and considers the special characteristics of informationsecurity domain and uses different techniques to combine the standard and profes-sional methods under a comprehensive and practical information security riskmanagement framework (Jung et al., 1999).3. The target enterprise ISRM frameworkThe target ISRM framework has two main parts: one part is concerned with itsstructural view; while the other is associated with its procedural view. The struc-tural view has two dimensions: scope and criteria; while the procedural view alsohas two other dimensions: process and tools. The framework is described in thefollowing, in terms of these four dimensions.A new comprehensive framework for enterprise information security risk management 109/C15The ‘‘scope’’ of the framework is based on the ﬁve STOPE domains of strategy,technology, organization, people, and environment with different levels ofdetails, associated with each domain./C15The management ‘‘criteria’’ of the framework is considered to be associatedwith the controls of the ISO family of information security standards. However,other requirements can also be considered./C15The ‘‘process’’ of the framework adopts the ﬁve cyclic phases of six-sigma modelDMAIC: deﬁne, measure, analyze, improve, and control./C15The support ‘‘tools’’ of the framework may include the various means thatwould promote the work, including: survey tools, mathematical models, andcomputer software.Fig. 1illustrates the structure of the proposed framework. Further explanationsof both its structural view and procedural view are to follow.3.1. The structural view of the frameworkThe structural view of the proposed ISRM framework is described here in terms ofits two dimensions: the STOPE-based scope, and the management criteria.The STOPE-based scopeof the framework would enable mapping the basic ele-ments of the enterprise, associate with IT, to the domains of ‘‘strategy, technology,organization, people, and environment’’. The basic elements of an enterprise, withThe Structural View of the Framework Process Scope 
Enterprise Information Security Risk Management
Improve 
Control Others Benchmarks Cost Requirements 
Criteria 
Previous Work Math/ Comp Info. Collect. Define
Measure 
Analyze Standards 
ToolsE P O T S STRUCTURAL ISSUES 
PROCEDURAL ISSUES
Figure 1The structure of the proposed enterprise ISRM framework.110 M.S. Saleh, A. Alfantookhregards to ISRM, are considered to be its: assets, security challenges, and securitycontrols. These are addressed in the following according to the STOPE-based scope.‘‘Asset management’’ is one of the main clauses of ISO 17799, and has twoobjectives: ‘‘responsibility of assets’’ and ‘‘information classiﬁcation’’. ISO deﬁnesan asset ‘‘as anything that has value to the organization’’ (ISO/IEC17799, 2005). This deﬁnition brings up the consideration of two types of assets: ‘‘tangible’’and ‘‘intangible’’.Table 1maps the tangible assets considered by different refer-ences to the ﬁve STOPE domains; this is a high-level mapping that can be reﬁnedinto sub-levels of further details. The Table also considers intangible assets thatare associated with multiple-domains.Security challengescan be viewed as negative coins of two faces: threats and vul-nerabilities. ISO deﬁnes threat as ‘‘a potential cause of an unwanted incident, whichmay result in harm to a system or organization’’; and it deﬁnes vulnerability as ‘‘a weakness of an asset or group of assets that can be exploited by one or more threats ’’ (ISO/IEC17799, 2005).Table 2maps ISO threats and vulnerabilities to the ﬁveSTOPE domains. With regards to threats, the Table marks them as either: delib-erate (D), accidental (A), or both (D&A).Security controlsare deﬁned by ISO as ‘‘means of managing risk, including pol-icies, procedures, guidelines, practices, or organizational structures, which can beof administrative, technical, management, or legal nature’’. Table 3maps ISO information security clauses, objectives and controls ( ISO/IEC17799, 2005) to the ﬁve STOPE domains.Table 1Enterprise assets considered by different references ( ISO/IEC TR 13335, 1998; CRAMM, 2001 ) mapped on the STOPE domains.STOPE Assets main groupsTangible (Examples) IntangibleS Information: (Policy document) – Goodwill– Service to clients– Public conﬁdence– Public trust– Competitive advantage– Image of the organization– Reputation– Trust in services– Employee moral– Productivity– Loyalty– EthicsT Information: (Data ﬁles)IT services: (Messaging-active directory)Software: System (Solaris), Application (Oracle), Utilities (management tools)Hardware: Hosts (Servers) other (Printers) Communication: Network (Routers), (Cable) O Documents: (Management commitment)Agreements: (Conﬁdentiality-third party) Information: (Research)Other: (User manuals-training material) P IT staﬀ: (IT security manager)Employee: (Senior management)Users: (Inside/Outside)Contractors:(Consultants)Owners:(Stakeholders) E Services: (Heating-lighting-power-AC)Equipment: (Desks-Fax machines-Cables) Physical (infrastructure): (Oﬃces-facilities)A new comprehensive framework for enterprise information security risk management 111The controls of ISO 17799 information security management standards havebeen previously investigated according to the STOPE view, for the purpose of eas-ing their application to enterprises, and achieving safe IT activities ( Saleh et al., 2006, 2007).It should be noted that the framework would not be limited to the issues of theassets, threats, vulnerabilities, and controls considered above, but it would also beopen to other potential issues.The management criteriaof the structural view would appear at all domains ofthe STOPE-scope of the proposed framework. The criteria may specify theTable 2Threats and vulnerabilities considered by different references ( ISO/IEC TR 13335, 1998; CRAMM, 2001) mapped on the STOPE domains.STOPE Challenges main groupsThreats VulnerabilitiesS Policy:(inadequate)T Malicious codes: ( Viruses) D Software: (Conﬁguration errors) Software: (Failures) D&A Hardware: ( Missing patches) Hardware: (Failures) D&A Communication: ( Unnecessary protocol) Communication: (Inﬁltration) D Media: (Electrical interference) O Agreement: (Inadequate) D Document: (No care at disposal) Information: (Errors)DPlanning: (Problems) D Procedures: ( Violations not reported) Procedures: (Incorrect) D&A P Employee: (Sabotage) D Employee: ( Insuﬃcient training) Users: (Inside/Outside/Theft)DCrackers: (Malicious hacking)D E Industrial: (Espionage) D Natural: (Facility in ﬂood zone) Natural: (Earthquake) A Physical: (Unlocked doors) Services: (Power outage)A
Table 3ISO information security clauses, objectives and controls ( ISO/IEC 17799, 2005) mapped on the STOPE domains.STOPE ISO 17799: 2005 BASIC PARTSPart No. Clause No. of objectives/controls/factors S 5 Security policy 1 2 15T 10 Communications and operations management 10 32 18811 Access control 7 25 12012 Information systems acquisition, development, and maintenance 6 16 96O 6 Organization of information security 2 11 827 Asset management 2 5 713 Information security incident management 2 5 1314 Business continuity management 1 5 33P 8 Human resources security 3 9 30E 9 Physical and environmental security 2 13 5915 Compliance 3 10 39Total objectives, controls, and measures 39 133 682112 M.S. Saleh, A. Alfantookhrequired security controls, on the various STOPE domains, relative to cost-beneﬁtanalysis. For the controls considered, it may provide benchmarks to their accept-able levels. In general, the management criteria would be associated with the strat-egy and requirements of the enterprise considered.3.2. The procedural viewThe procedural view of the proposed ISRM framework is described here in termsof its two dimensions: the six-sigma-based process and the support tools.The six-sigma based processhas the ﬁve-phase cyclic process of deﬁne, measure,analyze, improve, and control: DMAIC In the following, the processes of the riskmanagement methods of the standards organizations and of the professional com-panies given above are mapped on the phases of the DMAIC process. Each ofthese phases is then addressed in terms of its objective, input and output.Table 4maps the processes of the key risk management methods, consideredabove, to the six-sigma cyclic phases of: ‘‘deﬁne, measure, analyze, improve,and control’’. This shows how the DMAIC process can accommodate these pro-cesses, providing a potential comprehensive risk management process for the fu-ture. This is enhanced further by giving the functions of each phase, in theprocess, as summarized inTable 5, and explained in the following.The‘‘deﬁne’’phasespeciﬁes the basic elements of the risk management process.This phase would use the output of a previous cycle of the DMAIC process, orstart a new process, depending on the case considered. This phase has a numbersteps as follows:/C15establish the context of the reviewed area;/C15map the existing situation of the enterprise (assets, threats, vulnerabilities, con-trols) to the STOPE domains;/C15specify the owner of each asset;/C15specify the location of each asset;/C15specify the source of the threat;/C15deﬁne the level of detail; and/C15give security requirements.The output of this phase would be a STOPE view of the current state of the ba-sic elements of information security in the considered enterprise.The‘‘measure’’phaseassess the basic elements of the framework according to aspeciﬁed criteria. It receives the output of the ‘‘deﬁne’’ phase and add the follow-ing information to each element:/C15assessment of the current state of assets;/C15assessment of the current state of threats;/C15assessment of the current state of vulnerabilities; and/C15assessment of the current state of controls.A new comprehensive framework for enterprise information security risk management 113Table 4Mapping the processes of key risk management methods to the adopted DMAIC phases of the six-sigma.Six-Sigma Key risk management methodsAS/NZS: 4360 ISO/IEC TR 13335-3 NIST 800-30 OCTAVE CRAMM MicrosoftDeﬁne Communicate andconsult
Risk analysis System characterizations Knowledge of
management–operationalarea–staﬀ
Asset identiﬁcationEstablish the context Create threat proﬁleMeasure Identify risks Threat identiﬁcation Identify key components Asset valuation
Vulnerabilityidentiﬁcation
Evaluate selectedcomponents
Threat and vulnerabilityassessmentAnalyze Analyze risk Control analysis Assessing risk
Likelihood determinationEvaluate risk Impact analysis
Risk determinationImprove Treat risk Safeguards selection Recommended controls Develop protection
strategy
Countermeasure selectionand recommendation
Conducting decisionsupportPolicy and planimplementation
Risk assessment reportCost-beneﬁt analysis andselection of controls
Implement controlsImplementationControl Monitor andreview
Follow-up Test and evaluate Measuring risk
management programeﬀectiveness114 M.S. Saleh, A. AlfantookhThe output of this phase would be a STOPE view of the critical assets, associ-ated with the assessment of the threats and vulnerabilities they are facing, and withthe security controls used.The‘‘analyze’’phaseanalyzes the gap between the current state and the requiredstate of protection from challenges. This will be based on the output of theTable 5The use of six-sigma ﬁve phase cyclic process DMAIC for ISRM.DMAIC Explanation OutputDeﬁneObjective:Specify current state enterprise IS A STOPE view of the current state of the basic elements ofinformation security in theconsidered enterpriseInput:Collect information about enterprise basic elementsAssets Tangible/intangible/owner/locationThreats Deliberate/accidentalVulnerabilities Technical/organizationalControls Existing/plannedMeasureObjective:Assess the current state of information security A STOPE view of the critical assets, associated with theassessment of the threats& vulnerabilities they arefacing, and with the securitycontrols usedInput:Deﬁne stage outputs/expert or owner viewAssets Valuation (direct/indirect)Threats/assets Possible damageVulnerability/asset Weakness in the security measuresControls / assets STOPE/ISO based evaluation approachfor control analysis(Saleh et al., 2007)Assets requirements Conﬁdentiality/availability/integrityAnalyzeObjective:Find the gap between the current state and therequired state of protection A STOPE view of the gapbetween security requirementsand the current state ofsecurity, considering all criticalassetsInput:Assessment of enterprise current state from ‘‘measure’’phase; and ‘‘required securityprotection criteriaModel Development of an analytical modelfor gap analysisEvaluation Using the model to evaluate current stateof security versus required oneGap Determination of the security gap that needsto be closed, so that therequired improvement is achievedImproveObjective:Specify required improvementsto close the gap betweenthe current state andrequired stateA STOPE view of a plan ofaction of what should be doneto close the gap and achievethe required security Input:Required state and current stateDirections Development of directions to close thesecurity gap and achieve therequired improvementPlan Designing an action plan that followsthe directionsControlObjective:Implement improvement, monitor and evaluate;repeat process. Implementation of the plan,operation, performance,process activation Input:Action plan for improvementImplementing The action plan for improvementMonitoring The changing stateDocumentation Documenting the workRe-initiating The DMAIC processA new comprehensive framework for enterprise information security risk management 115‘‘measure’’ phase on the one hand, and on required ‘‘criteria’’ on the other. Thebasic steps of this phase are as follows:/C15development of an analytical model for gap analysis;/C15using the model for the evaluation of the current state versus the required state;and/C15determination of the security gap between the current state and the required state.The output of the phase is a STOPE view of the gap between security require-ments and the current state of security, considering all critical assets.The‘‘improve’’phaseconsiders the security state and the required state. It hasthe following main steps:/C15development of directions to close the security gap and achieve the requiredimprovement; and/C15designing an action plan that follows the directions.The output of the phase is a STOPE view of a plan of action of what should bedone to close the gap and achieve the required security improvement.The‘‘control’’phaseconsiders the improvement plan and performs the followingmain steps:/C15implementation of the plan;/C15monitoring the changing state; and/C15documenting the work.The output of the phase is an improved security, in addition to going into an-other cycle for responding to new requirements and change.3.3. Support toolsThe proposed framework considers that ‘‘support tools’’ would be required for theexecutionofthevariousDMAICphases.Suchtoolshavealsobeenconsideredbypre-vious methods (Saleh and Bakry, 2008). The tools would include, but not limited to:/C15information collection and survey tools;/C15modeling and mathematical tools;/C15computational methods and software packages; and/C15other related or combined tools.4. ConclusionsThis paper has presented a new enterprise ISRM framework that enjoys attractivefeatures for future use. The ‘‘STOPE-scope’’ of the framework enables it toaccommodate the wide range of issues associated with ISRM, in a well structured116 M.S. Saleh, A. Alfantookhand open manner. This does not only integrates the issues that have been consid-ered by other methods, but also permits other or emerging issues to be considered.The six-sigma ‘‘DMAIC process’’ of the framework allows it to accommodate thevarious processes of other ISRM methods in a one uniﬁed and widely acceptedprocess. In addition, the framework respond to the need of using a ‘‘managementcriteria’’, and permits various criterion to be taken into account, including ISOinformation security controls, and considering pre-determined benchmarks. Theframework also considers the use of ‘‘support tools’’ for performing the variousphases of the process efﬁciently as is the case with other ISMR methods. The com-prehensive and ﬂexible nature of the framework makes it a candidate to become an‘‘open reference’’ for ISRM that can be widely used by enterprises seeking safeenvironment for their e-based business. The authors hope that the time to be takentoward the wide scale use of the framework will not be very long.References
Anderson, K., 2007. Convergence: a holistic approach to risk management. Network Security (5), 4–7.AS/NZS 4360, 2004. Risk Management. 3rd ed. Standards Australia/Standards New Zealand, Sydney, Australia,Wellington, New Zealand.Bornman, W.G., Labuschagne, L., 2006. A comparative framework for evaluating information security riskmanagement methods. Technical report, Standard Bank Academy for Information Technology, RandAfrikaans University.BSI Standard 100-3, 2005. Risk Analysis based on IT-Grundschutz-Version 2.0, Federal Ofﬁce for InformationSecurity: Bundesmt Fur Sicherheit in der Informationstechnik, Germany.CORAS, 2003. Available from: <http://coras.sourceforge.net/> (accessed 24.05. 10). CRAMM user guide, 2001. Risk Analysis and Management Method, United Kingdom Central Computer andTelecommunication Agency (CCTA), UK.Department for Trade and Industry DTI, 2002. Information Security Breaches: 2002 Survey, Department forTrade and Industry, London.Esteves, J., Joseph, R.C., 2008. A comprehensive framework for the assessment of e-Government projects.Government Information Quarterly 25, 118–132.HB231, 2004. Information Security Risk Management Guidelines, Australia/New Zealand, Sydney, Australia,Wellington, New Zealand.Huang, J., Ding, Y., Hu, Z., 2008. Knowledge based model for holistic information security risk analysis. In:International Symposim on Computer Science and Computational Technology, 20–22th Dec., IEEE,Shanghai, pp. 88–91.Ida Hoffanvik, Detil Stolen, 2006. A graphical approach to risk identiﬁcation. In: International Conference onModel Driven Engineering Languages and Systems (MoDELS’06), vikyme 4199 of Lecture Notes inComputer Science, Springer Verlag, pp. 574–588.International Standards Organization, 2008. ISO/IEC 27005: 2008. Information Technology-Security Tech-niques-Information Security Risk Management, International Standards Organization, Geneva, Switzerland.ISO/IEC 17799: (E), 2005. Information Technology-Security Techniques-code of Practice for InformationSecurity Management, International Standards Organization, Geneva, Switzerland.ISO/IEC TR 13335, 1998. Information Technology-guidelines for the Management of IT Security – Part 3,International Standards Organization, Geneva, Switzerland.Jung, C., Han, I., Suh, B., 1999. Risk analysis for electronic commerce using case-based reasoning. InternationalJournal of Intelligent Systems in Accounting, Finance and Management 8 (1), 61–73.Kailay, M.P., Jarratt, P., 1995. RAMeX: a prototype expert system for computer security risk analysis andmanagement. Computer & Security 14 (5), 449–463.Karabacak, B., Sogukpinar, I., 2005. ISRAM: information security risk analysis method. Computer & Security24 (2), 147–159.A new comprehensive framework for enterprise information security risk management 117Labushehagne, L., Eloff, J.H., 1998. The use of real-time risk analysis to enable dynamic activation ofcountermeasures. Computer & Security 17 (4), 347–357.Lategan, N., Solms, R., 2006. Towards enterprise information risk management a body analogy. ComputerFraud & Security (12), 15–19.Magerit, 2006. Methodology for Information Systems Risk Analysis and Management: Book1–The Method,Ministerio de Administracones Publicas, Madrid.Mayer, N., Heymans, P., Matulevicius, R., 2007. Design of a modeling language for information system securityrisk management. In: Proceedings of the First International Conference on Research Challenges inInformation Science (RCIS ‘07).Mehari, 2007. Overview, Club de la Securite de I’Information Francais (CLUSIF).Microsoft, 2006. The security risk management guide, Microsoft solutions for security and compliance &Microsoft security center of excellence, Microsoft Corporation, USA.National Computing Center (NCC), 2000. The Business Information Security: 2000 Survey, National ComputingCenter, UK.Niekerk, L., Labuschagne, L., 2006. The PECULIUM model: information security risk management for thesouth african SMME. In: Proceedings of the ISSA from Insight to Foresight Conference, 5–7th July 2006,Sandton, South Africa.NIST SP800-30, 2002. Risk Management Guide for Information Technology Systems, National Institute ofStandards and Technology, USA.Nosworthy, J.D., 2000. A practical risk analysis approach: managing BCM risk. Computer & Security 19 (7),596–614.OCTAVE, 2005. Managing Information Security Risk, Carnegie Mellon, USA.Pyzdek, T., 2003. The Six Sigma Handbook. McGraw-Hill, New York.Robert, C., Rolf, M., 2003. Operationalizing IT risk management. Computer & Security 22 (6), 87–493.Saleh, M.S., Alrabiah, A., Bakry, S.H., 2007. A STOPE model for the investigation of compliance with ISO17799–2005. Journal of Information Management & Computer Security, Emerald 15 (4), 283–294.Saleh, M.S., Alrabiah, A., Bakry, S.H., 2006. Using ISO 17799–2005 security management standard: a STOPEview with six sigma approach. International Journal of Network Management, Wiley 17 (1), 85–97.Saleh, M.S., Bakry, S.H., 2008. An overview of key IT risk management methods. Saudi Computer Journal 6 (2).Smith, E., Eloff, J.H.P., 2002. A prototype for assessing information technology risks in health care. Computer &Security 21 (3), 266–284.Spears, J., 2006. A Holistic Risk Analysis Method for Identifying Information Security Risks: SecurityManagement, Integrity, and Internal Control in Information Systems. ISBN:978-0-387-29826-9. pp. 185–202.Syalim, A., Hori, Y., Sakurai, K., 2009. Comparison of risk analysis methods: mehari, magerit, NIST800-30 andmicrosoft’s security management guide. In: Proceeding of the International Conference on Availability,Reliability and Security, 16–19th March 2009, IEEE, pp. 726–731.Vorster, A., Labuschagne, L., 2005. A framework for comparing different information security risk analysismethodologies. In: Annual Research Conference of Computer Scientists and Information Technologists on ITResearch in Developing Countries – SAICSIT, Conference Proceedings, pp. 95–103.Werlinger, R., Hawkey, K., Beznosov, K., 2009. An integrated view of human, organizational, and technologicalchallenges of IT security management. Information Management & Computer Security 17 (1), 4–19.Zuccato, A., 2006. Holistic security management framework applied in electronic commerce. Computer &Security 26 (1), 256–265.118 M.S. Saleh, A. Alfantookh