Original Article
A novel cloud based auxiliary medical system for hypertensionmanagement
Rui Zhoua,1, Yunshan Caob,1, Rui Zhaoa, Qingwei Zhouc, Jun Shend, Qingguo Zhoua,⇑, Haifeng Zhange
aSchool of Information Science & Engineering, Lanzhou University, Lanzhou, Gansu, China
bDepartment of Cardiology, Gansu Provincial Hospital, Lanzhou, Gansu, China
cDepartment of Nuclear Medicine, Provincial Clinical Hospital of Fujian Medical University, Fuzhou, Fujian, China
dSchool of Computing and Information Technology, University of Wollongong, NSW 2522, Australia
eDepartment of Cardiology, The First Afﬁliated Hospital with Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, Jiangsu, China
article info
Article history:Received 28 October 2016Revised 17 September 2017Accepted 6 October 2017Available online 15 November 2017Keywords:HypertensionTelemedicineCloud computingMobile internetabstract
As a common disease, hypertension (HTN) can lead to severe complications such as heart failure, renalfailure and stroke. However, delayed diagnosis often happens because of no obvious symptoms in earlierstage. This paper addresses the issue through a novel cloud based auxiliary medical system for HTN.Nowadays, telemedicine has been used to diagnose and monitor HTN by sharing and consulting personalhealth status with doctors. Its high ﬂexibility and processing ability have helped to reduce the overall costof medical care and enhanced the control rate. Technically, telemedicine uses communication, holo-graphic imaging and computer science to achieve the management for long-distance patients. This paperpresents a novel system based on cloud computing and mobile Internet, which can provide telemedicineservices for HTN patients. This system could help patients reduce costs, provide ﬂexible communicationplatform and powerful computing services, and also automatically collect patients’ blood pressure status.As an auxiliary medical system, the data of patients can be processed with instant status feedbacks in thecloud environment, thus patients can actually know their current cardiac status and take necessary mea-sures for efﬁcient management. Also, related doctors could help patients resolve mild symptoms out ofofﬁce./C2112017 The Authors. Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of King Saud University. This is anopen access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ ).
1. IntroductionIn recent years, ICT (Information and Communications Technol-ogy) has been playing an important role in health care industry,which introduces the telemedicine into the area of health care[1]. Telemedicine is a technology that combines health care withtelecommunications and information technologies. It providesclinical health care remotely, helps patients who are unable orunnecessary to access to health care services, e.g. in distant ruralcommunities, obtain better health care, and regularly allocatesmedical resources used to deal with emergent situations [1,2]. In the past few years, telemedicine has been considerablydeveloped, which utilizes telecommunication technologies to pro-vide medical information and services [3]. With the emergence of less expensive equipment and simpler manipulation, and theincreasing patient costs and expectations, there is more interestin alternative modes of health care delivery, such as the use of tel-emedicine[4]. Considering the advantages of telemedicine, previ-ous studies have shown its effectiveness that patients can obtainfacilitating health care services via mobile terminals or PC (Per-sonal Computer), which saves time and money from home to hos-pital[5]. Also, telemedicine can optimize the allocation of medicalresources so that emergent situations could be dealt morepromptly. Experts in different medical areas can easily collect nec-essary information and communicate with each other by telecon-ferences, emails, instant messenger, etc. [6,7]. Furthermore as medical data grows, telemedicine could be combined with Big Data
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aci.2017.10.0022210-8327//C2112017 The Authors. Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of King Saud University.This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ ).⇑Corresponding author.E-mail addresses:zr@lzu.edu.cn(R. Zhou),yunshancao@126.com(Y. Cao), rzhao14@lzu.edu.cn(R. Zhao),zhouqingwei.fjmu@gmail.com (Q. Zhou),jshen@ uow.edu.au(J. Shen),zhouqg@lzu.edu.cn(Q. Zhou),haifeng_zhang@163.com (H. Zhang).
1These authors contributed equally to this work and are considered as co-ﬁrstauthors.
Peer review under responsibility of King Saud University.
Production and hosting by ElsevierApplied Computing and Informatics 15 (2019) 114–119
Contents lists available atScienceDirect
Applied Computing and Informatics
journal homepage: www.sciencedirect.com
to make medical analysis more accurate. It can provide a popularand convenient way for those who hope to research the cutting-edge health care technologies[8].For the application of telemedicine, hypertension (HTN) couldbe an entry point. HTN is well known to affect patients and causesevere complications such as heart failure, renal failure and stroke[9–11]. It is characterized by high prevalence with low control andawareness rate[12]. Also, it needs long-term treatment and follow-up care[12]. And with the increasing data of HTN collectedthrough medical equipment, there is an urgent need of efﬁcientand reasonable management and analysis for hypertensionpatients. The traditional way to manage blood pressure is seeingdoctor in clinic, for which it is difﬁcult to treat and monitor HTNin time[13]. According to the advantages of telemedicine, thistechnology is considered to be introduced. With the collected med-ical records, personal health condition can be monitored and ana-lyzed periodically at home, and then the diagnoses or treatmentcan be proposed or improved in time.This paper implements a telemedicine system which introducescloud computing aiming at better management of health status forhypertension patients, and providing basic medical knowledge andalarm of danger status. The system contains mobile client, cloudserver, and web portal to satisfy the requirements of hypertensiontreatment. Cloud server can lastingly store patients’ medicalrecords for long-term treatment, and process data to supervisepatient status. The mobile client adopts Android to provide alow-cost, ﬂexible and general environment to deal with the strongburst of hypertension. In Section2, there is investigation for relatedwork. The system architecture will be shown in Section 3. Section4 presents the system details. Conclusion and future work will be inSection5.2. Related workPrevious research of telemedicine has focused on the issues thathow to collect and transmit medical data. In [14]a monitor plat- form presents a method utilizing sensors to get patients’ data.However the sensors used in the platform are speciﬁc nodes to ﬁn-ish the whole process, which conﬁnes the ﬂexibility and extensibil-ity of this platform. A new way to collect patients’ data is presentedin[15]. Sensors connected to medical equipment can automaticallytransfer patients’ data to cloud. And the client can fetch speciﬁcdata stored in the cloud server and then process. Though it onlypresents a general method and a good framework, it will providea good reference by introducing cloud computing into the frame-work. But it is necessary to collect the medical data through thespeciﬁc medical sensors. The work in [16]proposes a solution based on wireless web access. In this solution, mobile devicesuse processing power from cloud server to HTML parser of a webpage. This work shows how cloud computing is an alternative forprocessing intensive solutions. Huang et al. [17]only presents the analysis and system design of a hypertension intelligent con-trol system.Mair and Whitten[18]reviews the patient satisfaction with tel-emedicine. The patient satisfaction requires further research fromthe perspectives of both patients and hospitals. It inspires somemeaningful issues for telemedicine applications, such as (1) Whichdiagnosis and treatment phase is telemedicine suitable for? (2)What kind of disease can be evaluated for telemedicine applica-tion? (3) What are the expected effects of telemedicine? Consider-ing these issues, Piette et al.[19]tries a hypertension managementusing mobile technology and home blood pressure monitoring intwo Low/Middle-Income Countries: Honduras and Mexico. Itmainly utilizes automated calls for management support. Vilaplanaet al.[20]presents the computer application Hypertension PatientControl (H-PC), which allows patients with hypertension to sendtheir readings through mobile phone Short Message Service(SMS) or e-mail to a cloud computing datacenter. However, Vila-plana et al.[20]did not achieve a reliable telemedicine systemfor characteristics of smart phone. Gokhale [21]shows the details
of whole process that smart phone communicates critical biomet-ric measurements to one’s physician, reduces in-person hospitalvisits, and still allows for the patient to receive feedback fromthe doctor. Mena et al.[22]utilizes Android to monitor and analyzeblood pressure and heart rate data to detect and prevent hyperten-sion, which collects data from sensors that can collect body healthstatus. After processing, doctors can receive data and then feedback with advice. This is a feasible framework for communicationbetween doctors and patients. However, two issues should be con-sidered: one is that how these data are managed and analyzed, andanother is how doctors can deal with these data. Martínez-Alcaláet al.[23]provides a user centric framework to implement teleme-dicine system. Although this framework adopts some methods tomanage and analyze the data, it still has a gap for the analysis ofmedical data. However, it is helpful to provide enough functionsaiming at not only patients but also doctors for the system in thispaper. This paper takes consideration of the cloud computing andcloud storage, hence utilizes them to achieve the data processingof patients’ hypertension symptoms in a much smarter way.3. System designAiming at the features of hypertension, the system presented inthis paper should provide the capacity of long-term storage, ﬂexi-ble and convenient communication, etc. And what is more impor-tant is that the system should provide applicable cloud computingto process the hypertension symptom data. As shown in Fig. 1, the system contains three main components: cloud platform, clientand data collection.3.1. Cloud platformThe cloud platform provides functions of data managing, com-municating and computing. It is the core of this system, and con-tains four parts: instant messenger, database, computing engineand web service. This platform can effectively store and displaymassive patients’ data for long time, and provide distributed com-puting and communication environment for patients and doctors.3.1.1. DatabaseFor cloud computing, database is indispensible. Here database isused to store data from both patients and doctors. It should bedeployed in stable servers and backed up periodically. Taking seri-ous patients who suffer from hypertension as example, they needmeasure blood pressure every half an hour, so there would bealmost 18,000 records for one patient per year. The total numberof records of each hospital should be concerned. For data managingand processing, the security and query efﬁciency should be consid-ered, which is implemented by distributed database in this system.3.1.2. Instant messengerThe cloud platform needs to provide a ﬂexible and convenientcommunicating platform for both doctors and patients. The systemprovides an instant messenger based on XMPP (Extensible Messag-ing and Presence Protocol) in cloud server. As an open standard andprotocol, XMPP can help reduce developing time and cost [24].A s the XMPP network is distributed and there is no central master ser-ver, for the medical system, it is easy and ﬂexible to build novelfunctions on top of XMPP. As XMPP servers can be isolated fromR. Zhou et al. / Applied Computing and Informatics 15 (2019) 114–119 115the public XMPP network, strong security could be built into thecore XMPP speciﬁcations to protect patients’ privacy.3.1.3. Computing engineThis part provides a computing platform when client sendscomputing request. At present, it only provides data statistics.3.1.4. Web serviceWeb service is the main way via which the client can accessdata. Data in web service include patients’ data, treatment planand notice of doctor. Data statistics should be displayed in intuitiveways through website. Doctors cannot only manage their owninformation but also the patients’ data, including download andupload. In details, the cloud platform should contain all servicesas follows:/C15The brief introduction of hypertension and basic measures toprevent, which provides immediate way for those who are notfamiliar with hypertension./C15The introduction to the system, which provides convenientguidance for users./C15Registration of doctors and patients. This is the only way to getprivileges for system use. Once registering successfully, thepatient and doctor have each record. The different registrationbetween the doctor and patient is to verify the qualiﬁcation ofdoctor. This is essential to assure the high quality of treatment./C15Veriﬁcation of doctor. Now the qualiﬁcation of doctor needs tobe veriﬁed manually by the administrator. Main tasks of veriﬁ-cation include checking if the certiﬁcate number existed and ifall information is matched./C15Upload, download and search. Blood pressure data can beuploaded to database and downloaded from website. Differentdata can be searched by time and key word./C15Diagnoses services. Advices given by doctors aiming at specialcase will be added to patients’ record and displayed directlyin website.3.2. ClientWith the wide utilization of smart phones, the client ﬁgures outthe problem about fetching data and communicating with thecloud server. It also provides a ﬂexible instant messenger function.Two clients can send and receive messages in real-time. By meansof client, patients can send the data, which are measured by them-selves to doctors and receive an instant feedback. When the treat-ment plan is changed, the client will be noticed in time. The clientfunctions are similar to website. The difference is that the clientincludes communication part. The details will be described inSection4.The client has the duty to access and view patients’ data easilyand ﬂexibly. So tasks of client mainly contain:/C15Providing instant messenger service./C15Sending computing request to cloud server./C15Accessing data easily.3.3. Data collectionThe system stores and processes the hypertension symptomdata. In this part, software is connected to medical equipment toautomatically collect patients’ data. Then these data are sent tocloud via Internet, which can be either wired connection or wire-less connection. Due to different medical equipment, this systemonly provides functions for speciﬁc equipment so far. This part col-lects data in medicine equipment automatically and transfers tocloud server via Internet.4. System implementationThe combination of Client/Server (C/S) and Browser/Server (B/S)is considered for system implementation, which not only providesﬂexible platform but also supports enough functions to meetrequirements during the whole treatment. The C/S framework
Fig. 1.The structure of hypertension auxiliary medical system.116 R. Zhou et al. / Applied Computing and Informatics 15 (2019) 114–119offers these functions: patients’ data transferring, notice of doctor,information share, and data processing instruction. The B/S frame-work provides easily access to data via Internet.The server processing ﬂow is implemented as Fig. 2. Hadoop is the main framework in the server. It processes the collected data indistributed environment, and is able to extend the server due toincreasing demand. The analyzed results are stored in MySQL data-base, which could be accessed or manipulated via Django models.Tables in database contain: personal information of patients anddoctors including ID, name, introduction, and, blood pressure dataof patients including systolic and diastolic pressure ( Table 1). The background is mainly implemented as four parts: user andauthority management, user information database interface, pushmanagement and instant messenger. As Django is a MVC (ModelView Controller) framework, after the server receives requests,urls.py will distribute the http requests and send to correspondingviews.py for processing. And the built-in engine will render thetemplate pages and return them for page access.As shown inFig. 3, Openﬁre[26,27]is the instant messenger server in the system. For clients, spark [26,28]is for desktop, and smack[26,29]for the mobile with Android. Different clients cancommunicate each other through the server. Now this system onlyprovides text transfer, and media transfer will be implementedlater.The sample data collected is shown as Table 2. There are differ- ent tables and ﬁgures due to gender difference. For more details,there could be the average value of systolic, diastolic pressureand abnormal point to save time for doctors to review massive
Fig. 2.Server background management [25].
Table 1Personal information in database.
ID StringName StringIntroduction StringBlood systolic pressure data NumberBlood diastolic pressure data Number
Fig. 3.XMPP protocol applied in the system.
Table 2Details in blood pressure statistic.
Date (year/month/day) 2013/10/23 Gender FemaleTime (h/min) Systolic pressure (mmHg) Diastolic pressure (mmHg) Pulse pressure (mmHg)0/0 117 81 361/0 120 85 352/0 130 79 513/0 115 83 32Average systolic pressure (mmHg) 120.5Average diastolic pressure (mmHg) 82Average pulse pressure (mmHg) 38.5Abnormal point (h/min) 1/0, 2/0 Reason High diastolic and high systolic pressureAbnormal point (h/min) 2/0 Reason High pulse pressureR. Zhou et al. / Applied Computing and Informatics 15 (2019) 114–119 117data. As high systolic or diastolic pressure could imply prehyper-tension or even hypertension[30], and pulse pressure could implypreclinical cardiovascular disease[31], there are abnormal points according to the high values of these items as reminders.Besides data collection, this paper designs and implements anAndroid application to transfer the health status such as bloodpressure and heart rate to doctors. The statistic data will be pro-duced once client sends a computing request. The connectionbetween Android client and the server is implemented by XMPP.The application provides visualized user interface for the medicalsigns related to hypertension, including heart rate, diastolic andsystolic pressure, and the statistic chart of heart rate during a per-iod of time, etc. (Fig. 4). Also, there are features as reminder anddisease risk evaluation (Fig. 4).5. Conclusions and future worksHypertension is one disease hard to treat due to its features ofstrong burst, long-cycle treatment and high cost. This paper pre-sents a new hypertension auxiliary medical system based on cloud,which is dedicated to improving the patients’ satisfaction aboutthe treatment. The auxiliary medical system aims to help patientstake advantages of the cloud computing ability and cloud storages.This system achieves the communication between doctors andpatients in time, efﬁcient way to manage patients’ data and provid-ing ﬂexibility to access patients’ data. The cloud server enables efﬁ-cient massive data computing. Basically, hypertension symptomsare a bit more complicated and require a much more complexmodel to process the hypertension symptom’s data. So far this partonly provides limited functions, and new functions such as auto-matic treatment making, preparatory data analysis can be imple-mented easily in cloud server. The client has friendly userinterface to access data and provides a convenient way to transferpatients’ data. This system helps patients who are suffering hyper-tension receive better treatment.AcknowledgmentThis work was supported by National Natural ScienceFoundation of China under Grant No. 61402210 and 60973137,Natural Science Foundation of Gansu Province under Grant No.1506RJZA163, Program for New Century Excellent Talents inUniversity under Grant No. NCET-12-0250, Major Project of HighResolution Earth Observation System under Grant No. 30-Y20A34-9010-15/17, Strategic Priority Research Program of the ChineseAcademy of Sciences under Grant No. XDA03030100, Gansu Sci.&Tech. Program under Grant No. 1104GKCA049, 1204GKCA061and 1304GKCA018, The Fundamental Research Funds for the Cen-tral Universities under Grant No. lzujbky-2016-140, Gansu TelecomCuiying Research Fund under Grant No. lzudxcy-2013-4, GoogleResearch Awards and Google Faculty Award, China.References
[1]https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Telemedicine . [2]
D. Hailey, R. Roine, A. Ohinmaa, Systematic review of evidence for the beneﬁtsof telemedicine, J. Telemed. Telec. 8 (suppl. 1) (2002) 1–7
. [3] An Overview of Managed Care < http://web.sph.rutgers.edu/omcweb/ >. [4]
F.F. Fenech, Telemedicine: an educational and healthcare tool, Med. Princip.Pract. 10 (2001) 59–60
.[5]
Keith A. Bauer, Home-based telemedicine: a survey of ethical issues, Cambr.Quart. Healthc. Ethics 10 (2) (2001) 137–146
. [6]
A.G. Ekeland, A. Bowes, S. Flottorp, Effectiveness of telemedicine: a systematicreview of reviews, Int. J. Med. Informat. 79 (11) (2010) 736–771
. [7]
G. Paré, M. Jaana, C. Sicotte, Systematic review of home telemonitoring forchronic diseases: the evidence base, J. Am. Med. Informat. Assoc. 14 (3) (2007)269–277
.[8] Devon M. Herrick, Linda Gorman, John C. Goodman, Health InformationTechnology: Beneﬁts and Problems, National Center for Policy Analysis < http:// www.ncpa.org/pdfs/st327.pdf >. [9]https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hypertension . [10] M. Hamilton, E.N. Thompson, T.K.M. Wisniewski, The role of blood-pressurecontrol in preventing complications of hypertension, Lancet 283(7327) (1964)235–238, doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(64)92344-X (ISSN 0140-6736).[11] Markus MacGill, Hypertension: Causes, Symptoms, and Treatments < http:// www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/150109.php >. [12] Global Health Risks Mortality and Burden of Disease Attributable to SelectedMajor Risks, World Health Organization, 2009.[13] P.E. Drawz, M. Abdalla, M. Rahman, Blood pressure measurement: clinic,home, ambulatory, and beyond, Am. J. Kidney Dis.: Off. J. Nat. Kidney Found. 60(3) (2012) 449–462,https://doi.org/10.1053/j.ajkd.2012.01.026 . [14] J.W.P Ng, B.P.L. Lo, O. Wells, et al., Ubiquitous monitoring environment forwearable and implantable sensors (UbiMon), in: International Conference onUbiquitous Computing (Ubicomp), 2004[15] C.O. Rolim, F.L. Koch, C.B. Westphall, et al., A cloud computing solution forpatient’s data collection in health care institutions, in: Second InternationalConference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine, 2010.ETELEMED’10, IEEE, 2010, pp. 95–99.[16] Y. Xiao, Y. Tao, Q. Li, A new wireless web access mode based on cloudcomputing, in: 2008 PACIIA’08 Paciﬁc-Asia Workshop on ComputationalIntelligence and Industrial Application, vol. 1, IEEE, 2008, pp. 645–649.
Fig. 4.The application user interface.118 R. Zhou et al. / Applied Computing and Informatics 15 (2019) 114–119[17]Youliang Huang, Xing Zhai, Fengying Guo, Sajid Ali, Renquan Liu, Chronicdiseases based on cloud computing platform (hypertension) intelligent controlsystem design and analysis, Int. J. Comput. Eng. Res. (IJCER) 06 (02) (2016) 1–4
. [18]
F. Mair, P. Whitten, Systematic review of studies of patient satisfaction withtelemedicine, BMJ: Brit. Med. J. 320 (7248) (2000) 1517–1520
. [19] John D. Piette, Hema Datwani, Soﬁa Gaudioso, Stephanie M. Foster, JoslynWestphal, William Perry, Joel Rodríguez-Saldaña, Milton O. Mendoza-Avelares, Nicolle Marinec, Hypertension management using mobiletechnology and home blood pressure monitoring: results of a randomizedtrial in two low/middle-income countries, Telemed. e-Health 18 (8) (2012)613–620,https://doi.org/10.1089/tmj.2011.0271 . [20] J. Vilaplana, F. Solsona, F. Abella, et al., H-PC: a cloud computing tool forsupervising hypertensive patients, J. Supercomput. 71 (2) (2015) 591–612,https://doi.org/10.1007/s11227-014-1312-9 . [21] Vaidehee Padgaonkar Gokhale, Enabling Telemedicine with Smartphones,Presented to the Faculty of the Graduate School of the University of Texas atAustin in Partial Fulﬁllment of the Requirements for the Degree of Master ofScience in Engineering, 2011[22] L.J. Mena, V.G. Felix, R. Ostos, et al., Mobile personal health system forambulatory blood pressure monitoring, Comput. Math. Meth. Med. 2013(2013) 598196 (13 pages).[23] C.I. Martínez-Alcalá, M. Muñoz, J. Monguet-Fierro, Design and customizationof telemedicine systems, Comput. Math. Meth. Med. 2013 (2013) 618025 (16pages).[24]https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Comparison_of_instant_messaging_protocols . [25] Chenwei Wang, The Design and Implementation of the XinTang System Basedon Android Platform, Master Thesis, Lanzhou University, 2017.[26] S. Zhao, F. Xia, Z. Chen, et al., Mobimsg: a resource-efﬁcient location-basedmobile instant messaging system, in: 2012 Second International Conferenceon Cloud and Green Computing (CGC), IEEE, 2012, pp. 466–471.[27]https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Openﬁre . [28]https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Spark . [29]https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Smack . [30]https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Blood_pressure . [31] Giovanni de Simone, Mary J. Roman, Michael H. Alderman, Maurizio Galderisi,Oreste de Divitiis, Richard B. Devereux, Is high pulse pressure a marker ofpreclinical cardiovascular disease?, Hypertension 45 (2005) 575–579 http:// hyper.ahajournals.org/content/hypertensionaha/45/4/575.full.pdf .R. Zhou et al. / Applied Computing and Informatics 15 (2019) 114–119 119