A review of imaging techniques for plant disease detection
Vijai Singh ⁎, Namita Sharma, Shikha Singh
GL Bajaj Institute of Technology and Management, Gr. Noida, Uttar Pradesh, India
abstract article info
Article history:Received 20 May 2020Received in revised form 2 October 2020Accepted 2 October 2020Available online 6 October 2020
Keywords:Plant disease detectionMachine learningImaging sensors and systemsPlant disease classiﬁcationImage processingAgriculture is the basis of every economy worldwide. Crop production is one of the major factors affecting do-mestic market condition in any country. Agricultural production is also a major prerequisite of economic devel-opment, be it any part of any country. It plays a crucial role as it even provides raw material, employment andfood to different citizens. A lot of issues are responsible for estimated crop production varying in differentparts of the world. Some of these include overutilization of chemical fertilizers, presence of chemicals in watersupply, uneven distribution of rainfall, different soil fertility and others. Other than these issues one of the com-monly faced challenges across the globe equally includes destruction of the major part of production due to dis-eases. After providing effective resources to the ﬁelds, major section of the production is diminished by the presence of diseases in the plants grown. This leads to focus on effective ways of detection of disease in plants.Presence of various diseases in plant is a major concern among farmers. Plant diseases acts as a major threat tosmall scale farmers as they lead to major destruction in overall food supply. To provide effective measures for de-tection and avoidance of the destruction requires an early identi ﬁcation of type of plant disease present. In recent time major work is being done for the identi ﬁcation of plant disease presents in varied parts of the world affection varied crops. Major work is being done in the domain of identi ﬁcation of causing factors of these diseases. Some of the diseases are marked by the presence of viruses while some are resultant of fungal infection. This becomes amajor issue when the causing factor is not traceable before it has already spread to major production section. Thispaper brings a review on effective use of different imaging techniques and computer vision approaches for theidentiﬁcation and classiﬁcation of plant diseases. Detection of Plant disease is initiated with image acquisitionfollowed by pre-processing while using the process of segmentation. It is further accompanied by different tech-niques used for feature extraction along with classi ﬁcation. In this Paper we present the Current Trends and Chal- lenges for detection of plant disease using computer vision and advance imaging technique.© 2020 The Authors. Publishing services by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of KeAi Communications Co. Ltd. This is an openaccess article under the CC BY-NC-ND license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ ).
Contents1 . I n t r o d u c t i o n ............................................................... 2 3 02 . I m a g i n g s e n s o r s a n d s y s t e m s f o r p l a n t d i s e a s e d e t e c t i o n ........................................... 2 3 03 . L i t e r a t u r e s u r v e y ............................................................. 2 3 13 . 1 . M a g n e t i c r e s o n a n c e i m a g i n g .................................................... 2 3 13 . 2 . P h o t o a c o u s t i c i m a g i n g ...................................................... 2 3 13 . 3 . T o m o g r a p h y........................................................... 2 3 13 . 4 . T h e r m o g r a p h y.......................................................... 2 3 13 . 5 . S p e c t r o s c o p i c a n d i m a g i n g t e c h n o l o g i e s ............................................... 2 3 13 . 6 . M u l t i s p e c t r a l i m a g i n g ....................................................... 2 3 13 . 7 . H y p e r s p e c t r a l i m a g i n g ....................................................... 2 3 13 . 8 . F l u o r e s c e n c e t e c h n i q u e s ...................................................... 2 3 53 . 9 . T h e r m a l i m a g i n g......................................................... 2 3 63 . 1 0 . 3 D i m a g i n g........................................................... 2 3 74. Image classiﬁc a t i o n m e t h o d s f o r p l a n t d i s e a s e d e t e c t i o n ........................................... 2 3 74 . 1 . I n t e r a c t i v e s e g m e n t a t i o n ...................................................... 2 3 7Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 4 (2020) 229 –242
⁎Corresponding author.E-mail address:vijai.cs@gmail.com(V. Singh).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aiia.2020.10.0022589-7217/© 2020 The Authors. Publishing services by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of KeAi Communications Co. Ltd. This is an open access article under the C C BY-NC-ND license (http:// creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ ).
Contents lists available atScienceDirect
Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture
journal homepage:http://www.keaipublishing.com/en/journals/artificial-intelligence-in-agriculture/5 . C h a l l e n g e s a n d f u t u r e t r e n d s....................................................... 2 3 96 . C o n c l u s i o n s ............................................................... 2 4 0R e f e r e n c e s .................................................................. 2 4 0
1. IntroductionAgricultural products are used to cater the dietary needs of animalsas well as human beings. Agriculture has been a part of everyone's lifedirectly or indirectly. It is the way of crop production which results inproviding food, the building block of every human being. Whether ahuman resides in a metro city or lives in a village everyone surviveson this crop production one or the other way. With the advent of civili-zation humans have started cultivating crops like wheat, cotton andothers. With the development in every area of life there has beensome vast development in the domain of agriculture also. Along withthe variation in the types of crops being grown other activities werealso started such as farming, raising cattle etc.But today also crop production largely contributes to the agriculturaloutput. There have been major changes in crop production also. Withthe raising knowledge technology has brought some modernization inthe area of crop production also. Modern agronomy makes the use ofbest technological devices and techniques for the increase in the yield.There has been an increased use of modern tools for easy identi ﬁcation of the suitable conditions for larger crop production. Various types offertilizers and pesticides are being used to bring an increase. Even ge-netically modiﬁed seeds are being tested on a larger scale to pump upthe overall production in any area.Crop production involves taking care of all the activities for thebetter yield across all the seasons. It involves complete analysis ofthe soil being used, the type of seeds used, the major nutrient re-quirement of the particular crop and many others. Yields obtainedfrom the crops, and other sources are being used to meet the dailyneeds of not only the farmers, but for others also. But as every ﬁeld suffers from some form of issues agriculture or crop productionalso faces major challenge in the form of crop diseases. With thehuge demand of food around the world, it becomes necessary tofocus on the crop production. It is aimed to protect the overallyield from any type of loss before reaching to the market. Besides ca-lamities caused by nature such as draught, earthquakes, diseasesalso accounts to major crop yield losses.In context of quality or in the context of quality, yields are re-duced due to various types of plant diseases. Plant disease can be de-scribed as some form of modiﬁcation that hampers the normalprocesses in it. Crop production can be majorly affected by these dis-eases which may reduce the quality and quantity of the overall pro-duced yield. Management of large amount of crop yield involvesvarious timely activities such as keeping a watch for diseases,which reduces it to undesirable stuff. It also involves ﬁnding imme- diate cure for various challenges faced. Disease can affect the overallfunctional capacity of the plant. It may result in reduced growth, lessfruit production, more leaf falls and many other ailments also. Some-times the disease may spread from crop to crop or may be spread bysome pathogen or other means. Sometimes they may be caused bysome fungi or some bacteria. Sometimes even viruses get transferredwith seeds from one place to another.Main reasons of crop diseases are the infections such as insect pests,bacteria, fungi and viruses. These diseases are found and can spread inall parts of the plants like in stem, vegetables, fruits and others can bedetected by one of the listed below:•Discerning the affected area•Retrieving the features set of the affected area•Identifying and categorizing the diseasesFrom a long time, identifying the crop disease is done by the expertsthrough their naked eyes based on their knowledge and experience.Find an expert and contact them is not only a tedious and time consum-ing task but also a very long and expensive method. Therefore, the com-plete process sometimes takes so much time which become time takingfor the disease to be eradicated and also very tedious in case of largeareas (Liu et al., 2020), (Mishra et al. (2020)). Modern techniques available, for plant disease detection, like pro-cessing, similarity identiﬁcation and deep learning based classiﬁcation techniques better in respect of time saving than the old methods used(Nagaraju and Chawla, 2020), (Nagasubramanian et al., 2019), (Kulkarni and Ashwin Patil, 2012), (Jasim and Tuwaijari, 2020), (Sun et al., 2020). They help farmers to improve the quality of crops, alsobringing a reduction of disease occurrence by early detection and timelycuring them (
Sinha and Shekhawat, 2020). In the process of detection of disease, number of imaging techniquesis being used. One of the imaging techniques being used id photo acous-tic imaging, which makes the use of light absorption in case of tissues. Itmakes the use of property of light's absorption by tissues and its conver-sion into heat further resulting in the generation of photo acoustic sig-nals. Here the pressure distribution radiated by tissues further beingmapped and used for imaging purposes. Considering various imagingtechniques one of the important techniques is magnetic resonance im-aging. It can be described as imaging technique that gives detailed im-ages that are mostly used for knowing different types of diseases. Inthis method strong magnets are being deployed generating strong mag-neticﬁeld resulting in proper alignment of the protons. Later applicationof electricﬁeld makes the movement in these protons. Finally turningoff of the rfﬁled sensors help in the detection of energy being releasedfrom movement.Among the various spectroscopies one of the recent methods is ofﬂuorescence spectroscopy. It makes the use of ﬂuorescence measure- ment, being released after the excitation of light with area of interest.Mostly for vegetative studies or plant disease detection laser inducedﬂuorescence are often used on a large scale. These are mostly neededfor identiﬁcation of various physiological states of different plants. Ma-jorly the green leaves are being tested for chlorophyll ﬂuorescence or blue greenﬂuorescence. These help in early identiﬁcation of any type of impairment resulting from major nutrients de ﬁciencies. (Sankaran et al., 2010).Among the recent techniques being used one of the effective imag-ing methodology is using hyper spectral imaging. In this technique elec-tromagnetic spectrum of an image's pixel is being used for the detectionof plant disease present. In this technique wide spectrum of light isbeing used for the analysis of each image's pixel. It helps in the detectionof various diseases in more reasonable manner among the variety ofplants being considered. Hyper spectral imaging is further extendedwhen used with microscopy for higher resolution clear images. Ithelps in microscopic studies at the genotypic level of varied plant leaves.(Rumf et al., 2010).2. Imaging sensors and systems for plant disease detectionDigital Image Analysis has evolved over many years. It ﬁrstly began with the era of 2D image analysis came. Secondly, knowledge based ap-proaches using MRI and CT changed the developmental procedures.Lastly, analysis of fully 3D images was brought to the light. DigitalV. Singh, N. Sharma and S. Singh Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 4 (2020) 229 –242
230model driven approaches were introduced in the beginning and thenafter 1999 till today advanced imaging and computing technologiesare used for better and more realistic visualization as per requirements.Machine Learning methods have also evolved eventually.For identiﬁcation of different plant disease, sensors for imaging sys-tem are deployed to accumulate the data for study of leaves from differ-ent aspect. Various useful imaging techniques include thermal imaging,multispectral imaging,ﬂuorescence imaging, hyper spectral imaging,visible imaging, MRT. Also 3D imaging methods are also tested alongvarious other methods. In next sections we present a state of surveyon these techniques along with their applications in different ways.3. Literature survey3.1. Magnetic resonance imagingAlso termed as NMR, meaning nuclear magnetic resonance scanner,it is mostly known as magnetic resonance imaging device, is usuallyidentiﬁed for its powerful magnets. These magnets are good as they ef-ﬁciently polarize and further excites the focused proton singly includedin water molecules present in the tissue, helping in a detectable signalspatially encoded giving various images of the body. Radio Frequency(RF) pulses are emitted by MRI machines that bind only to oxygen.This system works by initially generating the pulse and transferring itto the examined area of the body. Later they are made to spin in a differ-ent orientation by absorption of the send energy. This is called the res-onance process involved in the MRI.3.2. Photo acoustic imagingPhoto acoustic imaging is a technique that has been derived usinghybrid biomedical imaging that is originated around the photo acousticeffect. It involves the amalgamation of different bene ﬁts such as optical absorption contrast along ultrasonic spatial resolution involved in deepimaging of diffusive and other regime. The studies bring the fact thatphoto acoustic imaging can be used for various purposes such astumor analyzing, mapping of the level of blood oxygen, imaging of thebrain activity, and other disease detection, etc.3.3. TomographyTomography is one of the techniques that involve imaging of a singleplane, or an object giving a tomogram. There are different types of to-mography such as linear, poly tomography, zonagraphy, computedtype or computed axial and Positron Emission type of tomography.3.4. ThermographyOne of the most common applications of it is breast imaging. Usuallyone of the three approaches are being used commonly, the tele- ther-mography, the dynamic angio-thermography and the contact thermog-raphy type. The imaging thermographic digital methods involve theadvantage of the principle derived from metabolic activity. Also vascularcirculation with the area surrounding a developing breast cancer isstudied to detect the higher value.T h ep a p e r( A n n e- K a t r i nMahlein et al., 2012) brings the use of nonin- vasive sensors for detection of plant diseases. Sensors types like thermog-raphy, chlorophyllﬂuorescence and hyper spectral sensors are beingstudied and compared. It is observed t hat hyper spectralsystems record very large amount of data and hence require different approaches to ob-tain result. In thermography, temperature is the crucial parameter. Thechallenge is that the potential of these technologies have not yet beenfully explored. Another challenge is the interpretation of sensor data.This paper (Fang and Ramasamy, 2015) gives the various methods of disease classiﬁcations in plants. Direct method includes PCR (polymer-ase chain reaction), IF (Immuno Fluorescence), (Fluorescence in situhybridization), FCM (Flow cytometry) and ELISA (Enzyme linked im-munosorbent assay) etc. Types of indirect method includes Fluores-cence imaging, also discusses the hyper spectral imaging. The directmethod is widely available but is difﬁcult to operate, time consuming for data analysis and require expert technicians. Also they are notmuch apt for different type of testing. Indirect method can be used inonﬁeld disease detection but lack speciﬁcation of different disease types with the advent of nanotechnology, there is vast advancementof sensitive biosensor whose specify can be further improved using en-zymes, DNA, antibiotics as the detection element.3.5. Spectroscopic and imaging technologiesThe paper compares the technologies like imaging technologiesusing spectroscopy along proﬁling based techniques used to asset inlooking the usual health and disease in leaves. The advantage of usingthese technologies is that they are accurate in detecting pant disease.The challenges which are faced in these techniques is to ﬁnd the opti- mize solution for a de
ﬁnite disease of plant and also automating thetechniques for continuous checking of the plant disease. ( Sankaran et al., 2010).Major oil content makes peanut an important agricultural product.This paper (EwisOmran, 2016) presents a method for early identiﬁca- tion of plant disease. It basically focuses on the study of effect of fungaldisease as leaf spots in peanut plant leaves. Early and late leaf indiceswere identiﬁed with the help of in situ spectroscopy. It further involvedthermal and spectral calculations for differentiating healthy and in-fected plant leaves. Later plant chlorophyll decrease is also being identi-ﬁed as a stress detection factor among the infected leaves.This paper (FedericoMartinelli et al., 2015) describes modern method of identiﬁcation of disease in plants based on nucleic acid andprotein analysis. This paper describes different mobility spectrometerand lateralﬂow devices which will detect early infections directly onﬂuid. It also summarizes that remote sensing technologies coupledwith spectroscopy based methods results in high spatialization andhence help in early identiﬁcation of any infections in plants. The paperdiscusses all these tools and how they are helpful in looking for differentplant disease and also nucleic acid based methods and serologicalmethods.3.6. Multispectral imagingMultispectral imaging techniques use different types of wavebandssuch as of green, as of red, or near infrared wavebands to capture alltypes of images rather it be invisible or being it visible images of fruitsor crops or it being vegetation. For plant diseases detection the multi-spectral images integrate with machine learning and classi ﬁcation algo- rithms which give the information into meaningful data.3.7. Hyperspectral imagingHyper-spectral imaging makes the use of much traditional imagingtechnique along with the spectroscopy to aggregate different spectralinformation simultaneously. The objective of this technique is to ﬁnd the spectrum for involved pixel contributing to the image being consid-ered. In Hyper spectral imaging device is deployed for a wavelength dis-persion and also a transportation stage are present in addition differentfrom the traditional computer vision system. ( Li et al., 2017)(Rumf et al., 2010).T h eh u m a ne y eh a sac a p a c i t yo fv i s i o nf o rad e ﬁnite range from the electromagnetic spectrum that belongs 400 to 700 nm ( Fig. 1) (Amy Lowe et al., 2017). Hyperspectral imaging typically contains number ofrestricted wavelength bands across a spectral range. This brings acolor dataset with useful information, also containing huge spatial reso-lution which contains thousands of data pixels per leaf (Amy Lowe et al., 2017). (SeeTables 1 and 2.)V. Singh, N. Sharma and S. Singh Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 4 (2020) 229 –242
231In plants stresses can be classiﬁed as biotic and non-biotic where bi-otic are being induced by beings as viruses, fungi and others. In paper(Baranowski et al., 2015) hyper spectral imaging and the thermal imag-ing identiﬁes plant stress due to fungi in oilseed rape. Initially the ther-mal images of oilseed rape were being analyzed for temperaturedistributions. Also hyper spectral images were also recorded. Furtherdistributions temperatures were compared using kernel density curves.Spectral analysis of the leaves with different re ﬂectance was again analyzed.Paper (Calderón et al., 2015) gives a description about a method forautomatic classiﬁcation of Verticillium Wilt in olive plants consideringtechniques useful for large scale. Initially thermal and hyper spectral.Images were acquired over large scale olive orchid. Various vegeta-tion indices as optimized soil adjusted vegetation indices were takeninto account while modeling for this study. Correlation coef ﬁcient for completer canopy was also used for determining the level of diseasespread. Later SVM classiﬁcation was done for the bifurcating levels ofdisease. Almond production depends on major environmental factorsas climate, sites, resistance to diseases and others.Paper (López-López et al., 2016) detects early onset of red leaf blotchusing thermal and hyper spectral imagery while studying the infectionspread subjected to different factors. Here Spectral re ﬂectance across vis- ible regions was used for measurement along with near infrared regionalso. Later indices as pigment concentration of chlorophyll, chlorophyllﬂuorescence were considered for comparison. Finally amalgamated in-formation from the different parameters was used for analyzing whiledeveloping model to quantify disease seriousness. Further the informa-tion gained from the analysis was again passed to multiple classi ﬁcation methods as linear discriminate analysis, support vector machine forproper analysis. Also it is found that linear SVM method is more ef ﬁcient in early detection of red leaf blotch.The paper (Cao et al., 2015a) demonstrated that for wheat powderymildew detection, canopy hyperspectral re ﬂectance can be used while analyzing the unhealthy symptoms. It being observed that wheat culti-vators responded more sensitively to canopy re ﬂectance in which wheat cultivars were more susceptible to powdery mildew. The chal-lenge faced here included discriminating the wheat powdery mildewfrom other ailments. This paper (Kamlesh Golhani et al., 2018)d i s c u s s e s various techniques for the processing and detailing of the data used forhyper spectral analysis, giving special emphasis on detection of plantdisease. This paper introduces NN techniques for the development ofspectral disease index (SDI). Data being different from camera images,results in difﬁculty of linearity detection of hyperspectral image. Thevarious challenged faced in NN are like detection of the diseases ofthree categories such as pre symptomatic and asymptomatic for a singleplant.The paper (Lowe et al., 2017) summarizes the techniques to detectdifferent stress in plants and it focuses on hyperspectral imagingmethod to detect the early beginning of disease and to predict aboutthe health of the plant. Various indices are increasing day by day andthey are important to detect speciﬁc criteria for vegetation. For example,vegetation index can be used identify the normal health of the plant butthe challenge is we cannot use the index set for one plant and use it forthe data of another plant.The paper (Mahlein et al., 2013) discusses development of differentdisease index (SDIs) for the identiﬁcation of diseases in crop plants ofsugar beet and the leaf diseases as leaf spot, sugar beet and others. Atdifferent stages of development, hyper spectral signatures were
assessed for both healthy and diseased leaves. For differentiating be-tween diseased and healthy leaves, several optimized indices of diseasewere tested. The advantage of SDI is that SDI disease can be easily distin-guished which is difﬁcult using vegetative indices. The challenge is tosend the generated SDI and to specify its usability for disease monitor-ing on canopy with different sensors.This paper (Mahlein et al., 2017) discusses hyperspectral imagingand data analysis routines to identify and quantify relevant plant dis-eases. Hyperspectral imaging can be helpful in giving new insight intodata of different plant at different level. This paper ( Moghadam et al., 2017) discuses imaging methods (VNIR and SWIR) along ml technolo-gies for the identiﬁcation of TSWW, i.e. Tomato Spotted Wilt Virusincapsicum in plants.The paper (Ochoa et al., 2016) discusses about building a hyper-spectral imaging system for identiﬁcation of Black Sigatoke (BS) diseasefound in plant and its pre-symptomatic responses in banana leaves. To
Fig. 1.Hyperspectralrange in Electromagnetic spectrum (Amy Lowe et al., 2017).V. Singh, N. Sharma and S. Singh Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 4 (2020) 229 –242
232capture images, a highly sensitive VIS-NIR camera is used the HScube images with reduce motion blur. After the step of capturing ofimages another step is performed for enhancement of the qualityof HS images. The paper (Okamoto et al., 2007)p r o p o s e st od e v e l o p a weed detection method using hyperspectral imaging to controlweed detection. According to the species, plants can be categorizedas crops and weeds. Using hyper spectral imaging, ﬁrst of all theplants is segmented from the soil surface. Then image pixel of cropand weed are classiﬁed with the help of species other characteristics.Various classes of variables are generated which are then used fordata compression, followed by the process of extraction of featuresand then on it linear discrimination is applied. Among other advan-tages one of the major advantages is that this classi ﬁcation method can be practically applied.Table 1Analysis of various algorithms.Species Optical technique Application Method Accuracy ReferenceApple Multispectral Imaging Identifying defects in images Rotating in front of camera 90% ( Sankaran et al., 2010) Sugar BeetleavesSupport Vector Machine Comparison between healthy and diseased sugar beet leaves Plants inoculated with pathogens 97% ( Rumf et al., 2010)Pear Plants Near infrared Based technique To identify ﬁre blight disease Spectroscopy based imaging technique ( Sankaran et al., 2010) Grapevines Leaf spectral reﬂectance To identify leaf roll disease Spectroscopy Used 75% ( Sankaran et al., 2010) BlueBerriesElectric nose system To detect post harvest fungal disease Series of gas sensors used ( Sankaran et al., 2010)Onion To identify fungi Molecular Technique (PCR) DNA of disease causing microorganism is extracted and puriﬁed. (Sankaran et al., 2010)Citrus To identify virus Molecular Techniques(PCR) DNA of disease causing microorganism is extracted and puriﬁed (Sankaran et al., 2010)Potato To identify bacteria Molecular Techniques (PCR) DNA of disease causing microorganism is extracted and puriﬁed (Sankaran et al., 2010)Tomato To identify virus Molecular Techniques (PCR) DNA of disease causing microorganism is extracted and puriﬁed (Sankaran et al., 2010)Almond To identify bacteria Molecular Techniques (PCR) DNA of disease causing microorganism is extracted and puriﬁed (Sankaran et al., 2010)Rice To identify bacteria Molecular Techniques (FluoroscenesPCR) DNA of disease causing microorganism is extracted and puriﬁed (Sankaran et al., 2010)Sugarcane PLS based method To identify disease rating For classi ﬁcation of post harvest ( Sankaran et al., 2010) WinterwheatFluorescence Imaging To identify yellow rust Fluorescence images are obtained using camera (Sankaran et al., 2010)Iris leaf Color transform method To identify heterosporium leaf spot Otsu threshold is applied to identify disease spot (Chaudhary et al.,2012b) Rice Leaf Color transform method To identify brown spot Otsu threshold is applied to identify disesae spot (Chaudhary et al.,2012a) Blueberry Color transform method To identify bacterial canker Otsu threshold is applied to identify disesae spot (Chaudhary et al.,2012a) Cotton Particle Sworm Optimization To identify injured leaf spot Feature extraction by PSO and forward
Neural Network 95 (Sladojevic et al., 2016)Tea Leaf Neural Network Ensemble To identify plant disease Feature Extraction and neural network ensemble 91% (Sladojevic et al., 2016)Wheat Hyperspectral imaging Identifying fusarium Rotating in front of camera ( Bauriegel andHerppich, 2014b) Barley Support Vector Machine Hyperspectral imaging To identify drought stress on barley ( Behmann andJorgSteinrucken, 2014) Wheat Hyperspectral reﬂectance To identify wheat powdery mildew Rotating camera ( Cao et al., 2015b) Sugar beetplantSpectral disease indices To identify leaf spot, sugar beet rust, powdery mildew Hyperspectral signatures were assessed ( Mahlein et al., 2013)CapsicumplantHyperspectral imaging(VNIRand SWIR) To detect TSWW(Tomato Spotted Wilt Virus) Collect hypercubes of capsicum plant leaves in VNIR and SWIR range 90% (Moghadam et al.,2017) WinterWheatFusion of hyperspectralandﬂuorescence imagingTo detect yellow rust disease Ground based real time remote system ( Moshou et al., 2005)BananaplantHyperspectral imaging To identify Black Sigatoke Rotating camera ( Ochoa et al., 2016)Weed Hyperspectral imaging To control weed production Capturing images ( Okamoto et al., 2007) Potato Hyperspectral imaging To identify late blight disease Rotating camera ( Ray et al., 2011) CucumberleavesHyperspectral imaging To identify Chlorophyll and cartenoid content in cucumber leaves Finding the pigment distribution incucumber leaves (Zhao et al., 2016)AlmondorchardsHyperspectral imaging andthermal imagery To identify red leaf blotch in almond orchards Use of canopy temperature and vegetation indices (Zhao et al., 2016)Wheat MLP, SOM To identify yellow rust 99% (Moshou et al., 2004) Avocado Hyperspectral sensing, RBF,MLP To identify Laurel wilt disease 98% ( Abdulridha et al.,2016) Cotton NN- SOM To identify disease Reniform Nematode 97% ( Lawrence et al., 2004) Egg Plant Hyperspectral sensor To identify gray mould (Wu et al., 2008) Maize Portable Hyperspectralimaging system Fungal infections (Del Fiore et al., 2010)Wheat QDA Yellow rust
92% (Bravo et al., 2003) Sugarbeet Decision tree (DT) cerospora leaf spot 95% (Cao et al., 2015a) Sugarbeet Decision tree (DT) powdery mildew 86% (Cao et al., 2015b) Sugarbeet Decision tree (DT) leaf rust 92% (Cao et al., 2015a) Grapefruit Spectral InformationDivergence cankerous, normal, greasy spot. Insectdamage, melanose, scab, wind scar) 95.2% (Qin et al., 2009)V. Singh, N. Sharma and S. Singh Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 4 (2020) 229 –242
233Table 2Challenges and future trends.Title Sample plant Method Accuracy Type of disease detected Future work ReferencesIdentiﬁcation of Plant Disease using ImageProcessing Technique Fruit leaves K-mean clustering andrandom forest classiﬁer–Alternaria alternata,Antracnose, BacterialBlight along withCercospora Leaf SpotWork could be extendedto other type of fungaldisease detection(Jhuria et al.,2013)Diagnosis of pomegranate plant diseases usingneural network Pomegranate K-mean clustering and Graylevel co-occurrence matrix(GLCM) method, Backpropagation algorithm90% Bacterial blight, fruit rotand leaf spot inpomegranate plantWork could be extendedto other fruit diseasedetection(Dhakate andIngole, 2015)An Application of image processingtechniques for Detection of Diseases onBrinjal Leaves Using K-Means ClusteringMethodBrinjal leaf Kmeans clustering algorithmalong with Neural-networkfor classiﬁcation.–Cercospora Leaf Spot,Tobacco mosaic virusand Bacterial Wilt.Work can be extended toidentify all possiblediseases(Anand et al.,2016)Detection of Potato Diseases Using ImageSegmentation and Multiclass SupportVector MachinePotato Multiclass support vectormachine classiﬁer, Graylevel Co occurrence Matrix95%Phytophthora infestans(Late blight), Alternariasolani (Early blight).Automatic detection ofseverity of disease(Islam et al.,2017)Wheat Disease Detection Using ImageProcessing Wheat K-means clustering, Neuralnetwork 80.2% Fungal disease of wheatplantImprove the proposedalgorithm for reduction oferror due to classiﬁcation(Gaikwad andMusande,2017) Diseases Detection of Cotton Leaf Spot usingImage Processing and SVM Classi ﬁerCottonleavesK-means clustering, GrayLevel Co-occurrence Matrix,Support Vector Machineclassiﬁer98.46%. Bacterial blight andMagnesium DeﬁciencyWork can be done todevelop a more efﬁcient,and robust system forearly automatic tracing(
Bhimte andThool, 2018)Plant Leaf Disease Diagnosis from ColorImagery Using Co-Occurrence Matrix andArtiﬁcial Intelligence SystemGrape leaves Gray-level co-occurrencematrix, simpliﬁed fuzzyArtmap(SFAM)–Scab disease,downymildew disease, rustdiseaseWork can be done toconsider other diseasesalso.(Khitthuket al., 2018)Detection and Classiﬁcation of Groundnut LeafDiseases using KNN classiﬁerGroundnutLeafFast Feature extractionmethod and k-NN algorithm –Early leaf spot, Late leafspot, Rust,Bud NecrosisCan be done for othergroundnut plant disease(Vaishnnaveet al., 2019) Tea diseases detection based on fast infraredthermal image processing technology Tea Leaves Infrared thermal imagingtechnology –Tea leaf blight Work could be extendedto other type of diseasedetection(Yang et al.,2019)Early detection of plant disease using infraredthermal imaging TomatoesleavesDigital infrared thermalimaging –Tobacco mosaic virus Work could be extendedto other viral diseasedetection on many morespecies of tomatoes(Xu et al.,2006)Automatic Detection of Diseased TomatoPlants Using Thermal and Stereo VisibleLight ImagesTomatoplants leavesColor, depth, andtemperature using thermaland stereo visible lightimages along with SVMClassiﬁer90% FungusOidiumneolycopersigiving powdery mildewWork can be extended tostudy complete canopyscanning on larger scale.(Raza et al.,2015c)
Detection of the dynamic response ofcucumber leaves to fusaric acid usingthermal imagingCucumber Digital infraredthermograph, stomataaperture measurement–Fusarium wilt Work can be extended byconsideration of otherfeatures also(Wang et al.,2013)Huanglongbing (Citrus Greening) DetectionUsing Visible, Near Infrared and ThermalImaging TechniquesOrangeLeavesThermal Imaging and
Visible-near infraredtechniques87% Huanglongbi ng (HLB)diseaseWork can be done on alarger set of canopy.(Sankaranet al., 2013)Registration of thermal and visible lightimages of diseased plants using silhouetteextraction in the wavelet domainTomatoplantsThermal and visible imagingwith stationary wavelettransform–FungusOidiumneolycopersiciwhich causes powderymildew diseaseWork can be furtherextended to stereoimages for 3Dinformation(Raza et al.,2015b)Early sensing of peanut leaf spot usingspectroscopy and thermal imaging PeanutleavesImage Spectroscopy,reﬂectance factor calculation89.3% Fungal disease causingearly leaf spot and lateleaf spotWork can be done forother fungal diseaseinfections(EwisOmran,2016)Thermal imaging of cucumber leaves affectedby downy mildew and environmentalconditionscucumberleavesDigital infraredthermograph, Measurementof stomata conductance–downy mildew Work can be extended byincluding more factors(Oerke et al.,2006)Plant disease detection based on data fusion ofhyper-spectral and multi-spectralﬂuorescence imaging using Kohonen mapsWheat Plant Fluorescence induction andspectral reﬂection method–Yellow Rust Work can be extendedover larger canopy study.(Moshouet al., 2005)Thermal and Chlorophyll-FluorescenceImaging Distinguish Plant-PathogenInteractions at an Early StageTobaccoplants, Sugarbeet plantsChlorophyllﬂuorescenceimaging, thermograph –Tobacco mosaic virusand C. beticola infectionMeasurement can furtherbe extended to morevaried samples.(LauryChaerleet al., 2004)Hyper spectral and Chlorophyll FluorescenceImaging for Early Detection of PlantDiseases, with Special Reference toFusarium spec. Infections on WheatWheat plant Chlorophyll Fluorescencealong with Hyper spectralImaging–Fusarium resultingHead BlightWork can be extended toinvolve various otherplant diseases.(Bauriegel andHerppich,2014b)Hyper spectral and Thermal Imaging of
Oilseed Rape (Brassica napus) Response toFungal Species of the Genus AlternariaOilseed rape thermograph and hyperspectral imaging 80.5% Alternaria fungaldiseaseWork further requiresinvolvement of geneticdata.(Baranowskiet al., 2015)Early Detection of Powdery Mildew Disease inWheat (Triticum aestivumL.) Using ThermalImaging TechniqueWheat Plant thermal imaging,temperature monitoringbefore and after inoculation–Erysiphe graminisfungus causing Powderymildew disease.Work can be used fordeveloping an expertsystem(Awad et al.,2014)Early Detection and Quantiﬁcation ofVerticillium Wilt in Olive Using Hyperspectral and Thermal Imagery over LargeAreasOlive plant Hyper spectral imaginglinear discriminate analysis,support vector machine92.7% Verticillium wilt Work further requires analysis using differentvariation in surroundingconditions(Calderónet al., 2015)V. Singh, N. Sharma and S. Singh Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 4 (2020) 229 –242
234The paper (Ray et al., 2011) discusses late blight disease detection inpotato using hyper spectral reﬂectance data using spectro radiometerover speciﬁc spectral range. It was observed that in 770 –860, also 920–1050 nm range there can be noticeable difference found betweenhealthy and diseased plants of potatoes. This paper discusses the advan-tage of spectral data for identiﬁcation of disease.The paper (Zhang et al., 2012) discusses the use of hyperspectral re-ﬂectance of normal in comparison to infected leaves. This is checkedwith a spectro radiometer is a lab 32 spectral features were extracted,and then they are examined witht-test, correlation analysis,ﬁsher linear discriminant analysis. It was observed that PLSR performed well as com-pared to MLR model. Also FLDA gave accuracy of 90% for heavily damagedleaves. The challenge is to use these methods on ﬁelds i.e. at canopy level. The paper (Zhao et al., 2016) discusses the technique of hyperspectralimaging to identify chlorophyll and carotenoid contents in cucumberplant leaves with major infection cases of angular leaf spot (ALS). Itwas observed that PLSR models results with coef ﬁcient correlation predicting 0.871 and 0.876 for Chlorophyll and Carotenoids. The out-comes showed that hyperspectral imaging with chemometrics is a feasi-ble approach toﬁnd the presence of disease leaf spot in cucumber leaves.The paper (Lopez-Lopez et al., 2016) discusses the application of hyperspectral imagery and high resolution imagery to detect the pres-ence of leaf blotch in almond studied. The paper discusses the use of can-opy temperature and vegetation indices to early identify presence ofdisease. It was observed that all three including chlorophyll ﬂuorescence are prominent in early identiﬁcation of detection in almond plants.3.8. Fluorescence techniquesFluorescence techniques (Fig. 2.) have been widely used for investi-gation of the photosynthetic performance in plants. This technique isvery useful for crop monitoring which allow us to alleviate stress at anearly stage and thus substantially reducing yield losses.In this (Pérez-Bueno et al., 2016) paper the proposed work high-lights the useful beneﬁts of imaging systems based on multicolor ﬂuo- rescence, making use of thermograph for zucchini plants affected bydisorder, caused byDickeyadadantii. Different machine learning tech-nique has been applied which classify the input samples as healthy orinfected samples. (Pérez-Bueno et al., 2016). In paper (Moshoua et al., 2005) the detection of Wheat plant disease is being identi ﬁed with the data fusion techniques. It also shows the use of self-organizingmap neural network on reﬂectance data. It reﬂects the method of iden- tiﬁcation of yellow rust using wheat plant spread over farm area. Latermulti-spectralﬂuorescence imaging systems was done on sampled can-opy. Further leaf disease detection is done using indices as normalizedvegetation and others. This paper shows the use of
ﬂuorescence induc- tion and spectral reﬂection for the disease presence detection.Paper (LauryChaerle et al., 2004) makes use of chlorophyllﬂuores- cence imaging and thermograph for knowing and comparison of infec-tion by fungus and viral infection in plant leaves. Here both the imagingtechniques are used comparatively under different growth scenarios forpathogen plant interaction study. Firstly, the imaging of tobacco leaf isanalyzed for the lesion presence resulting from TVM. Also the usage ofsalicylic acid application on tobacco leaves is further checked by colorreﬂectance. Secondly beet root is again sprayed with Cercosporabeticolaspore solution. Here the different response of different temperaturesresulting in variedﬂuorescence effects is being characterized. Thispaper briefs about the combined usage of multiple types of imagingfor plant and various pathogen combination for early symptomsdetection.Crop quality is also a great factor taken into consideration while es-timation of agricultural overall production. Paper ( Bauriegel andTable 2(continued)Title Sample plant Method Accuracy Type of disease detected Future work ReferencesEarly Detection and Quantiﬁcation of AlmondRed Leaf Blotch Using High-ResolutionHyper spectral and Thermal ImageryAlmondPlantHyper spectral imaging,thermal imaging, lineardiscriminateanalysis,support vectormachine,96.2% Red leaf blotch Work can be further extended using otherclassiﬁcation methods(López-Lópezet al., 2016)
Robustﬁtting ofﬂuorescence spectra forpre-symptomatic wheat leaf rust detectionwith Support Vector MachinesWheat plant Fluorescencemeasurements, supportvector machine classiﬁcation93% Wheat leaf rust Work can be extended for other disease detection atearly stages(Römer et al.,2011)
Fig. 2.Fluorescence Imaging Techniques.V. Singh, N. Sharma and S. Singh Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 4 (2020) 229 –242
235Herppich, 2014a) presents the detection of head blight disease in wheatplants using chlorophyllﬂuorescence and also with hyper spectral im-aging. It signiﬁes the ways in which hyper spectral imaging is being use-ful for higher information density extraction. In this paper the differentimaging techniques are being further highlighted as better methods ofearly bight disease detection.Timely identiﬁcation of disease among the plants may result in bet-ter procurement and agricultural productions. Paper ( Römer et al., 2011) presents a method for differentiating leaf rust wheat leaf fromhealthy leaf at early level. This paper presents pre symptomatic detec-tion and further classiﬁcation using support vector machine method. Italso presents use of Fluorescence detection using ﬂuorescence spec- trometer for collection of various parameters. Further support vectormachine was being used classiﬁcation for healthy and inoculated leaves.Finally,ﬂuorescence signatures used during polynomial ﬁtting presents a technique for detection of disease.The paper (Bauriegel and Herppich, 2014b) discuss about how chlo- rophyllﬂuorescence and hyper spectral imaging, can help in identifyingfusarium head blight in wheat both in laboratory and ﬁeld. Also two methods hyperspectral imaging and CFI analysis are compared seekingtheir usage in detecting fusarium. The CFI methodology is helpful duringthe initial phase of inspection whereas hyperspectral imaging involvesvarious wavelengths in image analysis and thus helps in meaningfulmonitoring of the disease. Hyperspectral imaging is effective while deal-ing with the visibility of infection symptoms. The challenges are that forany image based methodology onﬁeld recording of head blight will re-quire two passages over crop whether the imaging system are used sin-gle or being combined.The paper (Moshou et al., 2005) discusses about combination of im-aging techniques using hyper spectral reﬂection withﬂuorescence for distinguishing yellow rust disease with wheat of the increasing disease,hence the paper discusses about the formation of a real time remotesensing system for disease detection. The images from hyper andmulti spectralﬂuorescence reﬂection, are used toﬁnd the of disease present. It is found that fusing the measurements from the two methodsgave discrimination of 94.5% by using QDA. The methodology used fordate fusion is SOM (self-organizing map) NN. The advantage of using fu-sion of measurements from different optical sensors is that they identifydisease isﬁeld with more accuracy. This methodology shows potentialfor implementing inﬁeld also.3.9. Thermal imagingThis (Fig. 3) is a process that convert the various radiation identi ﬁed from an object to different types of images for extraction of varied fea-tures, analysis along with classifying them. It was ﬁrstly used for defense needs but later gained a major use in different ﬁelds such as engineering techniques used in agriculture.Several instruments and methods have been developed for thermalimaging of plant. The thermal imaging method is very useful for manydifferent operations of agriculture before and after harvesting. For thissite speci
ﬁc Crop management and precision farming, Thermal imagingis an important phenomenon where Plant, soil, and water relationshiphas been studied in detail by several researchers. ( Vadivambal and Digvir, 2011).In paper (Yang et al., 2019) a method has been described for fast de-termination of disease in tea leaves using a method making use of appli-cation of infrared thermal imaging technology. In paper ( Xu et al., 2006) the comparison of different temperature distribution under the effect ofvirus strain-TMV on three species of tomato plant leaves are shown.Here thermal images are being used for the determination of changesin pathogen related proteins and salicylic acid in infected leaves andnormal leaves. It is also highlighted how the transpiration is affectedby pathogen infection.This Paper (Raza et al., 2015a) focus on the involvement of thermaldepth data with visible light image for automatic identi ﬁcation of dis- ease in tomato plant leaves. It shows the way of initial setup done forthe acquisition of visual and thermal images. Here a technique for dis-parity detection has also been proposed.This paper (Wang et al., 2013) gives a way of using digital infraredthermography for detection of the changes as water loss further affect-ing the temperature also. It also shows the importance of identi ﬁcation and prevention of fungal toxin for agricultural needs. In this paper theleaf temperature is observed under variant conditions. It also estimatedstomata apertures by nail varnish method. Later on leaves with
Fig. 3.Thermal imaging.V. Singh, N. Sharma and S. Singh Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 4 (2020) 229 –242
236membrane injury were identiﬁed along with FA content being mea-sured in different temperatures.Here paper (Sankaran et al., 2013) shows the requirement of a sen-sor efﬁcient of determining HLB for overall complete cover. Here infra-red along with thermal images are used for detected HLB-infectedcitrus trees. This paper briefs about the evaluation of the use of multi-spectral images for HLB detection, by the medium of a mobile ground-based sensor. It initially used two multispectral cameras and one ther-mal camera for capturing images from the head of the citrus canopies.It further shows the method of using various indices as the averagespectral reﬂectance, structure insensitive pigment and many others. Italso uses thermal imaging for identiﬁcation of stress due to pathogens in plants. Later on different classiﬁers were used including LDA, BDT,SVM and QDA for classiﬁcation study for many features.Thermal imaging of plant leaves result in early identi ﬁcation of dis- ease thus reducing large agricultural losses. In paper ( Raza et al., 2015b) an algorithm is proposed for the identi ﬁcation of disease in plants using silhouette registration through visible images. Initially thealgorithm detects silhouette through visible light images. It also em-ploys stationary wavelet transform for thermal images for the same. Itmakes use of gradient-based method in this multi scale approach. Thispaper also shows that another method that can be further used for dif-ferent sample using silhouette presence while registering the images.Detection of Plant Disease is possible by digital infrared thermographas temperature measurement is directly related to water quantitydecrease by stomata aperture openings. This paper ( Oerke et al., 2006) shows the study of irregularities presence in plant affected byP. cubensis. It also describes detection of downy mildew through temper-ature difference. Initially the leaves were analyzed for the presence ofdisease by visual inspection various lesions were recorded for sensitizingdisease presence. Later spectral imag e sw e r eu s e dt os t u d yt h ep r e s e n c eof disease on basis of various factors in cluding transpiration rate, stomata apertures and others. Finally, the relation established between electro-lyte leakage and transpiration rate for the disease presence d is analyzed.Paper (Awad et al., 2014) gives a study for early identiﬁcation of disease such as powdery mildew in plants using thermal images of wheat samples. Firstly, wheat leaves were arti ﬁcially infected with Erysiphe graminis fungus for experimental purpose. It also madeuse of greenhouse conditions for complete experimental study. Fur-ther the difference in the temperature was measured in normal andwas compared with the infected leaves under various conditions. Italso shows the various monitoring process after artiﬁcial infection. Further changes in temperatures were analyzed. This paper de-scribes the need for recommended expert system for the detectionof different disease.3.10. 3D imagingIn 2D Imaging data is taken from two different dimensions whichdifferentiate given some denominations of plants such as development,overall height, and yield estimation. Thus, the need of 3D imaging ap-pears as an essential for automatic plant diseases detection. There arevarious techniques for 3-D image acquisition ( Bellmann et al., 2007) (Jarvis, 1983)(Blais, 2004) and 2-D together with 3-D machinery inapplications pertaining to agriculture ( Grift, 2008)(McCarthy et al., 2010). Block diagram of 3-D imaging system is given below in Fig. 4. There are two main 3D representations i.e. one concerned with thesurface and other with the volume presentations. The
ﬁrst one involves the depth details, the surface element and the different points given bytheir dimension coordinates. The volume is also given de ﬁning the vol- umetric component and a frequency component of the model's coordi-nates. In now a day different types of affordable sensors are available.They also exhibhits technologically advanced to a great extent for vari-ous domains like nutrient content, growth level, crop presence, biomassestimation, and height and health status. Plant leaf diseases being fur-ther analyzed using these sensors because the gathered data can beused for quantifying the previously identi ﬁed various production char- acters. (Vázquez-Arellano et al., 2016).Sensors including various types of LIDARs and TOF cameras withtheir sensors, determine the depth using the light velocity ( Fig. 5) (Underwood et al., 2013)(Lachat et al., 2015).4. Image classiﬁcation methods for plant disease detectionMost important step of Leaf image analysis is segmentation. ImageSegmentation is the process which takes an image as a single inputand further partition that particular image into different sub segments.In the area of imaging for classiﬁcation (Fig. 6.) purpose, these segments often constitute various classes of tissues, organs or biologically impor-tant structures. Here image segmentation becomes challenging due tovarious factors including low contrast and other imaging ambiguitiesalong with noise.4.1. Interactive segmentationIt can be described as one of the techniques that are bene ﬁcial where expert can give certain useful information about the seed region or abrief description about the region used to perform segmentation. Fur-ther an algorithm worksﬁne for the reﬁnement including the segmen- tation. There can be other methods also some including manualintervention for providing the different classes of the tissue usingpixel information. Along with all lastly, feedback control principle isalso being involved with segmentation, which adds to other bene ﬁts for the users such asﬂexibility, the automatic removal of issues.There can be numerous methods that have been brought to applica-tion by researchers in last many years; some of them are reviewed asfollowing.Yan Cheng Zhang et al. (2007)brought one of the Selection methodsto light, that makes use of fuzzy curves for the identi ﬁcation of presence of disease in cotton plant leaves. The given technique has been found tobe better in terms of the speed of the execution. It yields a better classi-ﬁcation result without being affected by the local minima issues that areotherwise usually prominent in the nonlinear methods. Savita NGhaiwat also gave a survey of the different types of the classi ﬁcation methods feasible for detection of various diseases in plant leaves(Ghaiwat and Arora, 2014).Al Bashish et al. (2010)discussed one of the segmentation methodbased on K-mean. Here different disease such as cottony meld, tiny
Fig. 4.Block diagram of 3-D imaging.V. Singh, N. Sharma and S. Singh Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 4 (2020) 229 –242
237whiteness is being detected using this. It also shows the use of ANN forfurther identiﬁcation of disease as early scorch and ashen meld presentin various plants. In this paper the results giving accuracy rate of 93% hasbeen discussed. A.Meunkaewjinda et al. (2008), also has given a tech- nique for the early identiﬁcation of disease present in speciﬁcally grape leaves. It also exhibits classiﬁcation using support vector machine.Jaware et al. (2012)has proposed a faster classiﬁcation algorithm. Here different types of diseases such as Early Scorch, Cottony meld and tinywhiteness have been identiﬁed easily using this technique. This methodhas been shown as an optimum method for detection of the varied dis-eases in shorter span of time.Gurjar and Gulhane (2012)briefed about the regularization method.Here a technique has been discussed that involves the use of Eigen fea-tures. It has been highlighted how it is being better than some of theother techniques with respect to accuracy. For the identi ﬁcation of some of the disease caused by fungus such as red spot, it is able towork with an accuracy of 90%.Revathi and Hemalatha (2012)have given disease identiﬁcation method that makes use of detection of edges based on uniform Segmen-tation. One of the disease commonly found in cotton leaves such asFusarium wilt gets easily identiﬁed using this technique. Other typesof diseases as Root rot, Gray mildew, Leaf blight, Bacterial blight, Bollrot, and Leaf curl have also been detected through neural networks.Here application of this method beneﬁcial in smart farming has also been discussed.Madhogaria et al. (2011)have given technique ofclassiﬁcation using individual information of each pixel for classifyingdiseases of plants. It has also shown use of svm. Tian et al. (2010) discussed a technique using different classi ﬁer such as support vector for the early detection of disease present in wheat plant. The disease de-tected here includes leaf blight and powdery mildew.Sannakki et al. (2011)has given the detection of disease profoundlypresent in pomegranate leaves. The technique shown also helps in theidentiﬁcation of the speciﬁc detoriation stage of the disease discussed.Here the use of decision tree learning, fuzzy logic along with Bayesiannetwork has been discussed.Arivazhagan et al. (2013)discussed a technique involving fourstages of early disease detection. It also shows the use of software forthe automatic identiﬁcation. The various stages discussed here includeformation of a color transformation for the given image that is followedby masking of the green pixels. These are further followed by removal ofdeﬁnite threshold values along with segmenting them. Feature extrac-tion and computation of texture information has also been discussed.It is being shown on a data of 500 plant samples including lemon, to-mato, beans, banana and others resulting in an accurate rate of 94%.Anand et al. (2016)have given a technique for the presence of plantdiseases. This work brings about the use of different techniques of imageprocessing for disease detection. It also makes use of arti ﬁcial neural network while identifying these. One of the ﬁlters as Gaborﬁlter has been deployed forﬁltering purpose before complete segmentation. Var-ious features are later trained that helps in differentiating betweenhealthy and unhealthy leaves.Naikwadi and Amoda (2013)
also gave a software solution for early disease detection in different plants. Onlyafter the stage of segmentation, green pixels are detected. These are fur-ther being masked for deﬁnite threshold found using Otsu's method.The technique used provides a precision ranges from 83% to 94%. Patil and Bodhe (2011)makes use of threshold method for segmentation ofthe leaf region. Later in categorization it shows an accuracy of 98.60%.Beyyala and Beyyala (2012)discussed different methods of earlyidentiﬁcation of plant diseases making use of image Processing. PiyushChaudhary et al. (2012b)have given an algorithm for disease detection.It involves the segmentation of spot using varied processing methods inplants. Also a systematic comparison among HIS, cielab and ycbcr colorhas been derived while spot identiﬁcation.The paper (Mohanty et al., 2016) proposes to train a deep neuralnetwork by using 54,306 images having healthy unhealthy leaves bothto identify 26 diseases and 14 crop species. It proposes the use ofSmartphone for diagnosing crop diseases. The model proposes bothclassifying the crop species and identifying the disease on images ofthe plant thus making use of Smartphone for detection of crop disease
Fig. 5.Imaging through TOF Sensors.
Fig. 6.Plant disease detection and classi ﬁcation.V. Singh, N. Sharma and S. Singh Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 4 (2020) 229 –242
238feasible. The shortcoming of this paper is that this model gives higheraccuracy for the dataset for which model is trained. However, if thedata set is collected from different condition, the accuracy of modelwould be reduced. Also the image collected is more focused on onlyupper side of leaves which needs to be elaborated.The paper (Konstantinos P.Ferentinos, 2018)p r o p o s e st h ed e v e l o p - ment of convolution neural network models for detecting and diagnosingdiseases in different leaves making use of deep learning methodologies.In paperSladojevic et al., 2016, proposes the method of deep neural net-works for leaf image classiﬁcation to recognize plant diseases. The modelwhich is developed helps in identiﬁcation of plant diseases. Further amethod for differentiating them has also been shown. Caffe is used togive the training in deep CNN. Theﬁnal accuracy of the trained modelwas 96.3%. The challenge highlighted here includes the collection of im-ages for better accuracy of the model, having apt augmented done.This paper (Rumf et al., 2010)p r o p o s e sap r o c e d u r ef o rd e t e c t i n ga n ddifferentiating between healthy and diseases plant leaves using supportvector machines with vegetative indice. This paper also differentiates be-tween the different diseases like lercospora, powdery mildew and leafrust also identifying the diseases atan initial stage. The leaves are inocu-lated with the different pathogens like lercosporapeticola, uromycesbetacor E rysiphebetac causing lercospora leaf spot, and powdery mildew andhyperspectral data are recorded from these diseases leaves and healthyleaves. In this paper diseased leaves and healthy leaves. This papershows use of 9 vegetation indices for automatic classi ﬁcation. The classi- ﬁcation accuracy has been drastically improved to 97%. The advantageo fu s i n gS V M sm e t h o db a s e do nV i si st h a tt h i sp r o c e d u r ec a na l s oa p p l i e dto other plant pathogen systems.This paper (Chaudhary et al., 2012b) proposes a technique for disease spot detection in affected area since the disease spots inplants are different in color; thispaper proposes color transforma-tion of RGB image to get better segmentation of disease spots. Vari-ous color models like YCbCr and CIELAB are differentiated from ‘A' component of CIELAB model. Then the image which is color trans-formed is passed through medianﬁlter and the spots includes seg- mentation by OTSU threshold. The advantage of this method is thatthe noise introduced by background, vein and camera ﬂash are wiped out using CIELAB model. The only challenge left is differenti-ating the same colored veins from spots.The paper (Behmann and JorgSteinrucken, 2014 ) proposes an ap- proach combining supervised and unsupervised methods to identifydrought stress on barely. The methodology is applied on both polledplants found in drought stress condition or properly watered. Ordi-nal classiﬁcation with support vector machine has been brought to use for visualizing the division of different sections. It also differen-tiates between both easily. Papershows that drought stress is de-tected 10 days earlier than NDVI. The advantages of this methodare that it is an optimum technique for early identi ﬁcation of drought.In now a day's Deep Learning (DL) have an edge over accuracy. Ahuge amount of work has been done for improving the varied DL ar-chitecture that is useful in early classiﬁcation of different types of diseases found in plants. They provide an effective way of many dif-ferent beneﬁts related to agricultural processes. In paper ( Hall et al., 2015), classiﬁcation has been carried out by hybrid CNN. It alsom a k e st h eu s eo fR a n d o mF o r e s t( R F )c l a s s i ﬁer for experimentation giving accurate results. Paper (Kamilaris and Prenafeta-Boldú,2018
)s h o w si t sd r a w b a c kf o ri d e n t iﬁcation of occluded objects. Counting of fruits and leaf were also done using CNN in ( Itzhaky et al., 2018)(Ubbens et al., 2018). For classiﬁcation among different plants, (Raza et al., 2015b)(Kussul et al., 2017)u s e dm o d iﬁed CNN. Plant recognition has been done by the different Deep Learning algo-rithm in (Kussul et al., 2017)(Grinblat et al., 2016)(Singh et al., 2015). For detection and classiﬁcation of Crop different experimentswas performed in (Pound et al., 2017)(Milioto et al., 2017).5. Challenges and future trendsMajor research done in the last few years discussing various types oftechniques have been shown earlier in this paper. The state of art surveywith current challenges on Plant diseases detection has been done andgiven below-This paper (Khitthuk et al., 2018) mainly involves analyzing the dif-ferent plant features based on varied statistics. It also includes the pro-cess of classiﬁcation. Hereﬁrstly the image is processed usingGaussian low passﬁlter. This paper (Vaishnnave et al., 2019)d i s c u s s e s the technique for the early determination of disease such as in ground-nut plant leaves.In paper (Jhuria et al., 2013) images of leaf isﬁrst captured and preprocessed for noiseﬁltering. It also involved image enhancementand application of morphological operation. Later on Kmean clusteringhas been shown for cluster formation. Finally, random forest classi ﬁer enabled the classiﬁcation of different fungal disease as Bacterial blight,Cercospora Leaf spot and asAlternaria alternata. In paper (Dhakate and Ingole, 2015) a system is being shown for the determination of presence of disease in pomegranate plant. Here differ-ent way has been highlighted for training purpose using back propaga-tion method. Bacterial blight, fruit rot were among the major identi ﬁed. It also described the use of k mean clustering for cluster formation of theimages used.This paper (Anand et al., 2016) focus on the identiﬁcation of brinjal plant leaves disease. It showcases the process of pre-processing of theplant leave images. Further K mean clustering has been used, followedby the feature extraction step that is accomplished by using the colorCo-occurrence Method. This highlights the various parameters usedfor the identiﬁcation as Area, perimeter, centroid, and diameter forshowing presence of disease.This paper (Islam et al., 2017) gives a method that involves machinelearning technique along with image processing for detection of pres-ence of disease in potato plant leaves. It shows the importance of earlydetection of disease. Firstly, the region of interest has been extractedby masking the background. Further a multicast support vector classi ﬁer is being for differentiating between the absence and presence of diseaseusing color and texture characteristics. Later Gray Level Co-occurrencemethod is also being placed for extracting speci ﬁc features including ho- mogeneity, correlation contrast, and energy.Detection of disease in plant is the most important step for reductionof agricultural yield losses. Here paper ( Gaikwad and Musande, 2017) involves development of early detection methods for different plant dis-ease. Initially the wheat plant leaves image taken were undergone theprocess of preprocessing. This is further followed by K mean clusteringpartitioning method. Here the basic features extracted include texture,shape and color. It highlights the neural network classi ﬁcation method for the detection of fungal disease presence wheat plant leaves.The challenge in this approach is that it is required to use sensorsalso for practical use in future. In paper ( Padol and Yadav, 2016) the de- tection and further classiﬁcation of grape leaf disease is processed usingSVM classiﬁcation technique. The fungal diseases occurring in grapeleaves being discussed here includes Downy Mildew and Powdery Mil-dew. It also includes the classiﬁcation done through training and testingphases.Increasing huge losses in cotton yield due to various diseases is a cru-cial reason for developing an early disease detection system for cottonplant. In paper (Bhimte and Thool, 2018) a method is proposed for early detection of disease among cotton leaves through Support vectormachine. This paper (Pawar and Jadhav, 2017) proposes a novel method for identifying disease and classiﬁcation. It highlights this process in-volving acquisition. Here k mean clustering algorithm is being used forpomegranate plant leaves analysis. Various features as. Color, morphol-ogy, edges, texture have been extracted and classi ﬁed using ANN method.V. Singh, N. Sharma and S. Singh Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 4 (2020) 229 –242
239Following are the research gaps which are observed and they stillexist in research on Plant diseases detection and classi ﬁcation: a. Automatic cluster centre initialization is lacking.b. improves the proposed algorithm for reduction of error due to clas-siﬁcationc. Can be done for other groundnut plant diseased. To integrates advance imaging technique and Computer vision algo-rithmse. For automatically detection of plant leaf disease algorithms are stillrequired.f. Work further requires analysis using different variation in surround-ing conditions.g. Need an expert System for plant diseases detection.6. ConclusionsThis paper gives an overall review for the various techniques of dis-ease identiﬁcation. It also presents brief summary of different imagingmethods useful for early detection of plant diseases. We present theCurrent Trends and Challenges for detection of plant disease using com-puter vision and advance imaging technique. These techniques includethermal, hyperspectral,ﬂuorescence, Multispectral, and 3D imaging.We have also presented different techniques for early determinationof plant diseases and classiﬁcation. The major techniques are SVM, K-means clustering, Deep learning, and K-NN. This review concludesthat there is a need for efﬁcient method with comparison to the cost in-curred. Also a reliable and efﬁcient sensor deployed for looking fulﬁll- ment of proper criteria of plant health would facilitate advancementsin agriculture. In future, work can be done to develop a more ef ﬁcient, and robust system for early automatic tracing and can be extended toidentify all possible diseases.References
Abdulridha, J., Ehsani, R., Castro, A., 2016. Detection and differentiation between laurel wilt disease, phytophthora disease, and salinity damage using a hyperspectral sens-ing technique. Agriculture 6 (4), 56.Al Bashish, Dheeb, Braik, Malik, Bani-Ahmad, Sulieman, 2010. A framework for detection and classiﬁcation of plant leaf and stem diseases. International Conference on Signaland Image Processing, pp. 113 –118. Anand, R., Veni, S., Aravinth, J., 2016. An application of image processing techniques for detection of diseases on brinjal leaves using k-means clustering method. Interna-tional Conference on Recent Trends in Information Technology (ICRTIT).Arivazhagan, S., Newlin, Shebiah R., Ananthi, S., Vishnu, Varthini S., 2013. Detection of un- healthy region of plant leaves and classi ﬁcation of plant leaf diseases using texture f e a t u r e s .A g r i c .E n g .I n t .C I G RJ .1 5( 1 ) ,2 1 1 –217. Awad, Yasser Mahmoud, Abdullah, Ahmed Ameen, Bayoumi, Tarek Youssef, Abd-Elsalam,Kamel, Hassanien, Aboul Ella, 2014. Early detection of powdery mildew disease inwheat (Triticum aestivum L.) using thermal imaging technique, intelligent systems.Adv. Intell. Syst. Comput. 323. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-11310-4_66 . Baranowski, P., Jedryczka, M., Mazurek, W., Babula-Skowronska, D., Siedliska, A.,Kaczmarek, J., 2015. Hyperspectral and thermal imaging of oilseed rape (Brassicanapus) response to fungal species of the genus Alternaria. PLoS One 10 (3),e0122913.https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0122913 . Bauriegel, E., Herppich, W.B., 2014a. Hyperspectral and chlorophyllﬂuorescence imaging for early detection of plant diseases, with special reference to Fusarium spec. Infect.Wheat Agric. 2014 (4), 32 –57. Bauriegel, Elke, Herppich, Werner B., 2014b. Hyperspectral and chlorophyllﬂuorescence imaging for early detection of plant diseases, with special reference to Fusariumspec. Infect. Wheat Agric. 4 (1), 32 –57. Behmann, Jan, JorgSteinrucken, Lutz Plumer, 2014. Detection of early plant stress re- sponses in hyperspectral images. ISPRS J. Photogramm. Remote Sens. 93, 98 –111. Bellmann, A., Hellwich, O., Rodehorst, V., Yilmaz, U., 2007. IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. A Benchmarking Dataset for Performance Evaluationof Automatic Surface Reconstruction AlgorithmsIEEE, Minneapolis, MN, USA, pp. 1 –8. Beyyala, Arun Kumar, Beyyala, Sai Priya, 2012. Application for diagnosis of diseases. Incrops using image processing. Int. J. Life Sci. Bt. Pharm. Res. 1 (2), 171 –176 2012. ISSN 2250–3137.www.ijlbpr.com. Bhimte, Namrata R., Thool, V.R., 2018. Diseases detection of cotton leaf spot using image processing and SVM classiﬁer. Second International Conference on Intelligent Com-puting and Control Systems (ICICCS).Blais, F., 2004. Review of 20 years of range sensor development. J. Electron. Imaging. 13,231–240.https://doi.org/10.1117/1.1631921 . Bravo, C., Moshou, D., West, J., McCartney, A., Ramon, H., 2003. Early disease detection in wheatﬁelds using spectral reﬂectance. Biosyst. Eng. 84 (2), 137 –145 01 Feb 2003. Calderón, R., Navas-Cortés, J.A., Zarco-Tejada, P.J., 2015. Early detection and quantiﬁcation of Verticillium wilt in olive using hyperspectral and thermal imagery over large areas.Remote Sens. 2015 (7), 5584 –5610. Cao, X., Luo, Y., Zhou, Y., Fan Xu, X., West, J.S., et al., 2015a. Detection of powdery mildewin two winter wheat plant densities and prediction of grain yield using canopyhyperspectral reﬂectance. PLoS One 10 (3), e0121462. https://doi.org/10.1371/jour- nal.pone.0121462.Cao, X., Luo, Y., Zhou, Y., Fan, J., Xu, X., West, J.S., et al., 2015b. Detection of powdery mil-dew in two winter wheat plant densities and prediction of grain yield using canopyhyperspectral reﬂectance. PLoS One 10 (3), e0121462. https://doi.org/10.1371/jour- nal.pone.0121462.Chaudhary, Piyush, Chaudhari, Anand K., Cheeran, A.N., Godara, Sharda, 2012a. Color transform based approach for disease spot detection on plant leaf. Int. J. Comput.Sci. Telecomm. 3 (6) (June 2012).Chaudhary, Piyush, Chaudhari, Anand K., Cheeran, A.N., Godara, Sharada, 2012b. Color transform based approach for disease spot detection on plant leaf. Int. J. Comput.Sci. Telecommun. 3 (6), 65 –70. Del Fiore, A., Reverberi, M., Ricelli, A., Pinzari, F., Serranti, S., Fabbri, A.A., 2010. Early detec- tion of toxic fungi on maize by hyperspectral imaging analysis. Int. J. Food Microbiol.144 (1), 64–71 2010 Nov 15.Dhakate, Mrunmayee, Ingole, A.B., 2015. Diagnosis of Pomegranate Plant Diseases Using Neural Network. Fifth National Conference on Computer Vision. Pattern Recognition,Image Processing and Graphics (NCVPRIPG).EwisOmran, El-Sayed, 2016. Early sensing of peanut leaf spot using spectroscopy and ther-mal imaging. Arch. Agron. Soil Sci. https://doi.org/10.1080/03650340.2016.1247952 . Fang, Yi, Ramasamy, Ramaraja P., 2015. Current and prospective methods for plant dis-ease detection. Biosensorshttps://doi.org/10.3390/bios5030537 . Ferentinos, Konstantinos P., 2018. Deep learning models for plant disease detection and diagnosis. Comput. Electron. Agric. 145 (2018), 311 –318. Gaikwad, Varsha P., Musande, Vijaya, 2017. Wheat disease detection using image process- ing. First International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Information Manage-ment (ICISIM).Ghaiwat, Savita N., Arora, Parul, 2014. Detection and classiﬁcation of plant leaf diseases using image processing techniques: a review. Int. J. Rec. Adv. Eng. Technol. (IJRAET)2( 3 ) ,1–7 ISSN (Online): 2347–2812. Golhani, Kamlesh, Balasundaram, Siva K., Vadamalai, Ganesan, Pradhan, Biswajeet, 2018.A review of neural netwoks in plant disease detection using hyperspectral data. In-form. Proc. Agric. 5 (3), 354 –371 September 2018. Grift, T., 2008.A review of automation and robotics for the bioindustry. J. Biomech. Eng. 1,37–54.Grinblat, G.L., Uzal, L.C., Larese, M.G., Granitto, P.M., 2016. Deep learning for plant identi- ﬁcation using vein morphological patterns. Comput. Electron. Agric. 127, 418 –424. Gurjar, Ajay A., Gulhane, Viraj A., 2012. Disease detection on cotton leaves by Eigen fea- ture regularization and extraction technique. Int. J. Electr. Commun. Soft Comput.Sci. Eng. 1 (1), 1–4.Hall, D., McCool, C., Dayoub, F., Sunderhauf, N., Upcroft, B., 2015. Evaluation of features for leaf classiﬁcation in challenging conditions. Proceedings of the 2015 IEEE WinterConference on Applications of Computer Vision, Waikoloa Beach, HI, USA, 6 –8J a n u - ary, pp. 797–804.Islam, Monzurul, Dinh, Anh, Wahid, Khan, Bhowmik, Pankaj, 2017. Detection of potato diseases using image segmentation and multiclass support vector machine. IEEE30th Canadian Conference on Electrical and Computer Engineering (CCECE).Itzhaky, Y., Farjon, G., Khoroshevsky, F., Shpigler, A., Bar-Hillel, A., 2018. Leaf counting: multiple scale regression and detection using deep CNNs. Proceedings of the BMVC,North East, UK, p. 328.Jarvis, R., 1983. A perspective on range ﬁ
nding techniques for computer vision 1983. IEEE Trans. Patt. Anal. Mach. Intell. 1983 (PAMI-5), 122 –139.https://doi.org/10.1109/ TPAMI.1983.4767365.Jasim, M.A., Tuwaijari, J.M.A.L., 2020. Plant leaf diseases detection and classi ﬁcation using image processing and deep learning techniques. International Conference on Com-puter Science and Software Engineering (CSASE), Duhok, Iraq, 2020, pp. 259 –265 https://doi.org/10.1109/CSASE48920.2020.9142097 . Jaware, Tushar H., Badgujar, Ravindra D., Patil, Prashant G., 2012. Crop disease detection using image segmentation. Proceedings of Conference on Advances in Communica-tion and Computing (NCACC ’12). Jhuria, Monika, Kumar, Ashwani, Borse, Rushikesh, 2013. Image processing for smart farming: detection of disease and fruit grading. IEEE Second International Conferenceon Image Information Processing (ICIIP-2013).Kamilaris, A., Prenafeta-Boldú, F.X., 2018. Deep learning in agriculture, a survey. Comput. Electron. Agric. 147, 70–90.Khitthuk, Chaowalit, Srikaew, Arthit, Attakitmongcol, Kitti, Kumsawat, Prayoth, 2018.Plant leaf disease diagnosis from color imagery using co-occurrence matrix and arti-ﬁcial intelligence system. International Electrical Engineering Congress (iEECON).Kulkarni, Anand H., Ashwin Patil, R.K., 2012. Applying image processing technique to de- tect plant diseases. Int. J. Mod. Eng. Res. 2 (5), 3661 –3664. Kussul, N., Lavreniuk, M., Skakun, S., Shelestov, A., 2017. Deep learning classiﬁcation of land cover and crop types using remote sensing data. IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens.Lett. 14, 778–782.Lachat, E., Macher, H., Mittet, M., Landes, T., Grussenmeyer, P., 2015. First experiences with Kinect v2 sensor for close range 3D modeling. The International Archives ofthe Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences. ISPRS,Avila, Spain, pp. 93–100 Vol. XL-5/W4.V. Singh, N. Sharma and S. Singh Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 4 (2020) 229 –242
240LauryChaerle, DikHagenbeek, De Bruyne, Erik, Valcke, Roland, Van Der Straeten,Dominique, 2004.Thermal and chlorophyll-ﬂuorescence imaging distinguish plant- pathogen interactions at an early stage. Plant Cell Physiol. 45 (7), 887 –896. Lawrence, G.W., Kelly, A.T., King, R.L., Vickery, J., Lee, H.K., McLean, K.S., 2004. Remote Sensing and Precision Nematicide Applications for Rotylenchulus Reniformis Man-agement in Cotton.Li, Xiaona, Li, Ruolan, Wang, Mengyu, Liu, Yaru, Zhang, Baohua, Zhou, Jun, 2017.Hyperspectral Imaging and their Applications in the Nondestructive Quality Assess-ment of Fruits and Vegetables. https://doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.72250 . Liu, Linyi, Dong, Yingying, Huang, Wenjiang, Xiaoping, Du, Ren, Binyuan, Huang, Linsheng,Zheng, Qiong, Ma, Huiqin, 2020. A Disease Index for Ef ﬁciently Detecting Wheat Fu- sarium Head Blight Using Sentinel-2 Multispectral Imagery. 8. IEEE Access,pp. 52181–52191.https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2020.2980310 . López-López, M., Calderón, R., González-Dugo, V., Zarco-Tejada, P.J., Fereres, E., 2016. Early detection and quantiﬁcation of almond red leaf blotch using high-resolutionHyperspectral and thermal imagery. Remote Sens. 2016 (8), 276.Lopez-Lopez, Manuel, Calderon, Rocio, Gonzalez-Dugo, Victoria, Zarco-Tejada, Pablo J.,Fereres, Elias, 2016.Early detection and quantiﬁcation of almond red leaf blotch using high resolution hyperspectral and thermal imagery. Remote Sens. 8, 276.Lowe, Amy, Harrison, Nicola, French, Andrew P., 2017. Hyperspectral Image Analysis tech- niques for the detection and classi ﬁcation of the early onset of plant disease and stress. Plant Methods 13, 80.Madhogaria, Satish, Schikora, Marek, Koch, Wolfgang, Cremers, Daniel, 2011. Pixel-based classiﬁcation method for detecting unhealthy regions in leaf images.Informatikschafft Communities 41. Jahrestagung der Gesellschaft fürInformatik, 4.-7.10.2011, Berlin.Mahlein, A., Kuska, M., Thomas, S., Bohnenkamp, D., Alisaac, E., Behmann, J., Kersting, K.,2017. Plant disease detection by hyperspectral imaging: from the lab to the ﬁeld. Adv. Anim. Biosci. 8 (2), 238 –243.https://doi.org/10.1017/S2040470017001248 . Mahlein, A.K., Rumpf, T., Welke, P., Dehne, H.-W., Plumer, L., Steiner, U., Oerke, E.-C., 2013.Developments of spectral indices for detecting and identifying plant diseases. RemoteSens. Environ. 128 (21), 21 –30. Mahlein, Anne-Katrin, Oerke, Erich-Christian, Steiner, Ulrike, Dehne, Heinz Wilhelm,2012.Recent advances in sensing plant diseases for precision crop protection. Eur.J. Plant Pathol. 133, 197 –209.Martinelli, Federico, Scalenghe, Riccardo, Davino, Salvatore, Panno, Stefano, Scuderi,Giuseppe, Ruisi, Paolo, Villa, Paolo, Stroppiana, Daniela, MircoBoschtti, Luiz, Goulart,R., Davis, Cristina E., Dandekar, Abhaya M., 2015. Advanced methods of plant disease detection. Agron. Sustain. Dev. 35 (1), 1 –25 Springer Verlag/EDP Sciences/INRA, 2015.McCarthy, C.L., Hancock, N.H., Raine, S.R., 2010. Applied machine vision of plants. 2010. Areview with implications forﬁeld deployment in automated farming operations. Intell. Serv. Robot. 3, 209 –217.https://doi.org/10.1007/s11370-010-0075-2 . Meunkaewjinda, A., Kumsawat, P., Attakitmongcol, K., Kaew, Sri, 2008. Grape leaf disease detection from color imagery using hybrid intelligent system. Proceedings of ECTI-CON 2008. 1. Krabi, pp. 513 –516. Milioto, A., Lottes, P., Stachniss, C., 2017. Real-time blob-wise sugar beets vs weeds classi- ﬁcation for monitoringﬁelds using convolutional neural networks. Isprs Ann.
Photogramm. Remote Sens. Spat. Inf. Sci. 4, 41.Mishra, P., Polder, G., Vilfan, N., 2020. Close range spectral imaging for disease detection in plants using autonomous platforms: a review on recent studies. Curr. Robot. Rep. 1,43–48.Moghadam, Peyman, Ward, Daniel, Goan, Ethan, Jayawardena, Srimal, Sikka, Pavan,Hernandez, Emili, 2017.International Conference on Digital Image Computing: Tech-niques and Applications (DICTA). 2017. Plant Disease Detection using HyperspectralImaging, Sydney, NSW, pp. 1 –8. Mohanty, Sharada P., Hughes, David P., Salathe, Marcel, 2016. Using deep learning forimage based plant disease detection. Front. Plant Sci. 7, 1419. https://doi.org/ 10.3389/fpls.2016.01419.Moshou, D., Bravo, C., West, J., Wahlem, S., McCartney, A., Ramon, H., 2004. Automatic de- tection of“yellow rust”in wheat using reﬂectance measurement and neural net- works. Comput. Electron. Agric. 44 (3), 173 –188. Moshou, D., Bravo, C., Oberti, R., West, J., Bodria, L., McCartney, A., Ramon, H., 2005. Plant disease detection based on data fusion of hyper spectral and multi spectral ﬂuores- cence imaging using Kohonen maps. Real-Time Imag. 11 (2), 75 –83. Moshoua, D., Bravoa, C., Obertib, R., Westc, J., Bodriab, L., McCartney, L., Ramona, H., 2005.Plant disease detection based on data fusion of hyper-spectral and multi-spectralﬂuorescence imaging using Kohonen maps. Real-Time Imag. 11 (2), 75 –83.https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.rti.2005.03.003 . Nagaraju, M., Chawla, P., 2020. Systematic review of deep learning techniques in plantdisease detection. Int. J. Syst. Assur. Eng. Manag. 11, 547 –560. Nagasubramanian, K., Jones, S., Singh, A.K., et al., 2019. Plant disease identiﬁcation using explainable 3D deep learning on hyperspectral images. Plant Methods 15, 98.Naikwadi, Smita, Amoda, Niket, 2013. Advances in image processing for detection of plant diseases. Int. J. Appl. Innov. Eng. Manag. 2 (11), 168 –175. Ochoa, Daniel, Cevallos, Juan, Vergas, German, Criollo, Ronald, Romero, Dennis, Castro,Rodrigo, Bayona, Oswaldo, 2016. Hyperspectral imaging system for disease scanning on banana plants. Proc. SPIE 9864, Sensing for Agriculture and Food Quality andSafety VIII, 98640M.Oerke, E.-C., Steiner, Dehne H.-W., Lindenthal, M., 2006. Thermal imaging of cucumberleaves affected by downy mildew and environmental conditions. J. Exp. Bot. 57 (9),2121–2132.https://doi.org/10.1093/jxb/erj170 June 2006. Okamoto, Hiroshi, Murata, Tetsuro, Kataoka, Takashi, Hata, Shun-Ichi, 2007. Plant Classi-ﬁcation for Weed Detection using Hyperspectral Imaging with Wavelet Analysis.https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1445-6664.2006.00234.x .Padol, Pranjali B., Yadav, Anjali A., 2016. SVM classiﬁer based grape leaf disease detection. Conference on Advances in Signal Processing (CASP).Patil, Sanjay B., Bodhe, Shrikant K., 2011. Leaf disease severity measurement using image processing. Int. J. Eng. Technol. 3 (5), 297 –301. Pawar, Rashmi, Jadhav, Ambaji, 2017. Pomogranite disease detection and classi ﬁcation. IEEE International Conference on Power, Control, Signals and Instrumentation Engi-neering (ICPCSI).Pérez-Bueno, M.L., Pineda, M., Cabeza, F.M., Barón, M., 2016. Multicolor ﬂuorescence im- aging as a candidate for disease detection in plant Phenotyping. Front. Plant Sci. 7,1790.https://doi.org/10.3389/fpls.2016.01790 . Pound, M.P., Atkinson, J.A., Townsend, A.J., Wilson, M.H., Grif ﬁths, M., Jackson, A.S., Bulat, A., Tzimiropoulos, G., Wells, D.M., Murchie, E.H., 2017. Deep machine learning pro- vides state-of-the-art performance in image-based plant phenotyping. Gigascience6, gix083.Qin, J., Burks, T.F., Ritenour, M.A., Bonn, W.G., 2009. Detection of Citrus Canker Using Hyperspectral Reﬂectance Imaging with Spectral Information Divergence.Ray, Shibendu Shankar, Jain, Namrata, Arora, R.K., Chavan, S., Panigrahy, Sushma, 2011.Utility of hyperspectral data for potato late blight disease detection. J. Indian Soc. Re-mote Sens. (June 2011) 39 (2), 161.Raza, S.-A., Prince, G., Clarkson, J.P., Rajpoot, N.M., et al., 2015b. Automatic detection of dis-eased tomato plants using thermal and stereo visible light images. PLoS One 10,e0123262.https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0123262 . Raza, Shan-e-Ahmed, Prince, Gillian, Clarkson, John P., Rajpoot, Nasir M., 2015a. Auto-matic detection of diseased tomato plants using thermal and stereo visible light im-ages. PLoS Onehttps://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0123262 . Raza, Shan-e-Ahmed, Sanchez, Victor, Prince, Gillian, Clarkson, John P., Rajpoot, Nasir M.,2015c. Registration of Thermal and Visible Light Images of Diseased Plants Using Silhou-ette Extraction in the Wavelet Domain. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.patcog.2015.01.027. Revathi, P., Hemalatha, M., 2012. Homogenous segmentation based edge detection tech-niques for proﬁcient identiﬁcation of the cotton leaf spot diseases. Int. J. Comput.Appl. 47 (2) (0975–888). June 2012.Römer, Christoph, Bürling, Kathrin, Hunsche, Mauricio, Rumpf, Till, Noga, Georg, Plümer,Lutz, 2011.Robustﬁtting ofﬂuorescence spectra for pre-symptomatic wheat leaf rustdetection with Support Vector Machines. Comput. Electron. Agric. 79 (2), 180 –188 November 2011.Rumf, T., Mahlein, A.K., Steiner, U., Oerte, E.-C., Dehne, H.-W., Plumer, L., 2010. Early detec- tion and classiﬁcation of plant disease with support vector machine based onhyperspectral reﬂectance. Comput. Electron. Agric. 74 (2010), 91 –99. Sankaran, Sindhuja, Mishra, Ashish, Ehsani, Reza, Davis, Cristina, 2010. A review of ad- vance techniques for detecting plant diseases. Comput. Electron. Agric. 72 (1), 1 –13. Sankaran, Sindhuja, Maja, Joe Mari, Buchanon, Sherrie, Ehsani, Reza, 2013. Huanglongbing(Citrus Greening) Detection Using Visible, Near Infrared and Thermal Imaging Tech-niques. ISSN 1424-8220.www.mdpi.com/journal/sensors . Sannakki, S.S., Rajpurohit, V.S., Nargund, V.B., Arun Kumar, R., Yallur, P.S., 2011. Ah y b r i d intelligent system for automated pomegranate disease detection and grading. Int.J. Mach. Intell. 3 (2), 36 –44 ISSN: 0975–2927 & E-ISSN: 0975–9166. Singh, A., Ganapathysubramanian, B., Singh, A.K., Sarkar, S., 2015. Machine learning forhighthroughput stress phenotyping in plants. Trends Plant Sci. 21, 110 –124. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tplants.2015.10.015 . Sinha, Shekhawat, R.S., 2020. Review of image processing approaches for detecting plantdiseases in. IET Image Process. 14 (8), 1427 –1439 196.https://doi.org/10.1049/iet- ipr.2018.6210.Sladojevic, Srdjan, Arsenovic, Marko, Anderla, Andras, Culibrk, Dubravko, Stefanovic,Darko, 2016.Deep neural networks based recognition of plant diseases by leafimage classiﬁcation. Comput. Intell. Neurosci. 2016, 3289801.Sun, J., Yang, Y., He, X., Wu, X., 2020. Northern maize leaf blight detection under complex
ﬁeld environment based on deep learning. IEEE Access 8, 33679 –33688 2020.https:// doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2020.2973658 . Tian, Yuan, Zhao, Chunjiang, Lu, Shenglian, Guo, Xinyu, 2010. SVM-based multiple classi- ﬁer system for recognition of wheat leaf diseases. Proceedings of 2010 Conference onDependable Computing (CDC ’2010), Yichang, China. Ubbens, J., Cieslak, M., Prusinkiewicz, P., Stavness, I., 2018. The use of plant models in deeplearning: an application to leaf counting in rosette plants. Plant Methods 14, 6.https://doi.org/10.1186/s13007-018-0273 . Underwood, J., Calleija, M., Nieto, J., Sukkarieh, S., 2013. A robot amongst the herd: remote detection and tracking of cows. In: Ingram, L., Cronin, G., Sutton, L. (Eds.), Proceedingsof the 4th Australian and New Zealand Spatially Enabled Livestock ManagementSymposium. The University of Sydney, Camden, Australia, p. 52.Vadivambal, R., Digvir, Jayas, 2011. Applications of thermal imaging in agriculture andfood industry—a review. Food Bioprocess Technol. 4, 186 –199.https://doi.org/ 10.1007/s11947-010-0333-5. Vaishnnave, M.P., Suganya, Devi K., Srinivasan, P., ArutPerum, Jothi G., 2019. Detection and classiﬁcation of groundnut leaf diseases using KNN classi ﬁer. IEEE International Conference on System, Computation, Automation and Networking (ICSCAN).Vázquez-Arellano, M., Griepentrog, H.W., Reiser, D., Paraforos, D.S., 2016. 3-D imagingsystems for agricultural applications-a review. Sensors (Basel, Switzerland) 16 (5),618.https://doi.org/10.3390/s16050618 . Wang, Min, Xiong, Yinfeng, Ling, Ning, Feng, Xumeng, Zhong, Zengtao, Shen, Qirong, Guo,Shiwei, 2013. Detection of the Dynamic Response of Cucumber Leaves to Fusaric AcidUsing Thermal Imaging.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.plaphy.2013.02.004 . Wu, D., Feng, L., Zhang, C., He, Y., 2008. Early detection of Botrytis cinerea on eggplant leaves based on near and infrared spectroscopy. Trans. ASABE 51 (3), 1133 –1139. Xu, Huirong, Zhu, Shengpan, Ying, Yibin, Jiang, Huanyu, 2006. Early detection of plant dis- ease using infrared thermal imaging. Proc. SPIE 6381, 638110.V. Singh, N. Sharma and S. Singh Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 4 (2020) 229 –242
241Yang, Ning, Yuan, Minfeng, Pan, Wang, Zhang, Rongbiao, Suna, Jun, Mao, Hanping, 2019.Tea Diseases Detection Based on Fast Infrared Thermal Image Processing Technology,(wileyonlinelibrary.com).https://doi.org/10.1002/jsfa.9564 . Zhang, Jing-Cheng, Pu, Rui-Liang, Wang, JI-Hua, Huang, Wen-Jiang, Yuan, Lin, Luo, Ju-Hua,2012.Detecting powdery mildew of winter wheat using leaf level hyperspectral mea-surements. Comput. Electron. Agric. 85, 13 –23. Zhang, Yan Cheng, Mao, Han Ping, Hu, Bo, Xili, Ming, 2007. Features selection of Cotton disease leaves image based on fuzzy feature selection techniques. IEEE Proceedingsof the 2007 International Conference on Wavelet Analysis and Pattern Recognition,Beijing, China, 2–4N o v .Zhao, Yan-Ru, Li, Xiaoli, Yu, Ke-Qiang, Cheng, Fan, He, Yong, 2016. Hyperspectral imagingfor determining pigment contents in cucumber leaves in response to angular Leasfspot disease. Sci. Rep. 6, 27790 (2016). https://doi.org/10.1038/srep27790 .V. Singh, N. Sharma and S. Singh Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 4 (2020) 229 –242
242