Original Article
A SI model for social media inﬂuencer maximization
Jyoti Sunil Morea,⇑,1, Chelpa Lingamb,1
aDepartment of Computer Engineering, Ramrao Adik Institute of Technology, Nerul, Navi Mumbai, India
bPillai’s HOC College of Engineering and Technology, Rasayani, India
article info
Article history:Received 11 May 2017Revised 11 November 2017Accepted 14 November 2017Available online 15 November 2017Keywords:InﬂuencersSocial network analysisDiffusion modelSI modelMultithreadingMarketing strategiesabstract
Social network mining can be divided into two categories, namely, the study of structural characteristicsand content analysis. One of the most signiﬁcant problem in the context of a social network is ﬁnding themost inﬂuential entities within the network. This task has signiﬁcance in viral marketing, since the mostinﬂuential entities can be targeted for endorsing new products in the market. However, the problem ofdiscovering the most persuasive node in a social network has proved to be NP-hard and also the exactalgorithms cannot be designed. This creates a wide scope for developing approximation methods andalgorithms that are able to produce solutions with proven approximation guarantees. Greedy algorithmserves as a base for most of the existing algorithms designed for dealing with these problems. Greedyalgorithm can achieve a good approximation, but it is found to be computationally expensive.Therefore, in this paper we propose a two level approach, designed based on Suspected-Infected (SI) epi-demic model for maximizing the inﬂuence spread. We further propose that, multithreading approach forimplementation of algorithm for the proposed SI model aids to further elevate the performance of pro-posed algorithm in terms of inﬂuence spread per second./C2112017 The Authors. Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of King Saud University. This is anopen access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ ).
1. IntroductionViral marketing has been acknowledged as an effective market-ing strategy. Eventually a large number of people get connectedthrough social networks, such as Facebook, Flickr, and Twitter.The impact of social network on their lives has increased signiﬁ-cantly. The social inﬂuence acts as a motivating force, governingthe diffusion of the information in the network. Although thereare millions of users on social platforms, the activities of a selectednumber of users are acknowledged and spread through the net-work. These dominant users generate trends and play a signiﬁcantrole to shape or manipulate opinions in social networks. Theseopinions are crucial in areas such as marketing or opinion mining.Many companies have started targeting the key individuals calledinﬂuencers, who are in contextual alignment with their brand andoperate for the companies indirectly for ﬁnding the potential cus-tomers. This is an indirect form of marketing also called inﬂuencermarketing.Social media inﬂuencers are the entities in the social network,who help potential customers make a buying decision by inﬂuenc-ing his opinion, through social networking. An inﬂuencer can beany person who reviews product, posts a blog about a new product,any industry expert or any person who has a potential to inﬂuencepeople. The problem of inﬂuencer identiﬁcation can be presentedas, given a group of individuals which are to be motivated to adopta new product or information, ﬁnd the optimum target subset ofindividuals (seed set), which can further inﬂuence the nodes. Theultimate goal is to maximize the spread the information to a largepopulation.Recently, there are large advances in the social networks ﬁeld. Ithas focused on the study of relationships that includes quantitativemeasures of social networks like inﬂuence, authority, centrality,modularity, connectedness, etc.[1]. Inﬂuence maximization can be deﬁned as the problem of forming an objective function forselecting appropriate target nodes in a social network such thatit maximizes the inﬂuence spread. These target nodes in turn willpropagate the inﬂuence to their connected nodes. This will be help-ful to design marketing strategies or diffuse a new idea in a net-work related work in inﬂuencer detection in social networks.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aci.2017.11.0012210-8327//C2112017 The Authors. Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of King Saud University.This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ ).⇑Corresponding author.E-mail addresses:Jyotis8582@gmail.com(J.S. More),Chelpa.lingam@gmail.com (C. Lingam).
1Afﬁliated to Mumbai University.
Peer review under responsibility of King Saud University.
Production and hosting by ElsevierApplied Computing and Informatics 15 (2019) 102–108
Contents lists available atScienceDirect
Applied Computing and Informatics
journal homepage: www.sciencedirect.com
The major issue of concern here is: how to improve the diffu-sion for the given seed selection? Greedy algorithm proposed byKemp et al.[2], is a signiﬁcant algorithm for selecting the seednodes. This is a NP-Hard problem. Greedy algorithms require opti-mal local choices. The solutions provided by greedy are subopti-mal. Hence there is a need to ﬁnd a solution to get a betteralgorithm which provides maximum inﬂuence spread. The prob-lem of ﬁnding the minimal set of activated nodes to spread infor-mation to the whole network or to optimally immunize anetwork against epidemics can be exactly mapped onto optimalpercolation. The most inﬂuential nodes are the ones forming theminimal set that guarantees a global connection of the network.At a general level, the optimal inﬂuence problem can be stated asfollows: ﬁnd the minimal set of nodes which, if removed, wouldbreak down the network into many disconnected pieces. The nat-ural measure of inﬂuence is, therefore, the size of the largest(giant) connected component as the inﬂuencers are removed fromthe network. Hence an epidemic model, Susceptible-Infected (SI) isused. It is best ﬁtted to deal with the progressive nature of themodel in context.2. Related workKemp et al.[2]proposed a greedy approach for ﬁnding K inﬂu-ential nodes out of all existing nodes. They provided for the ﬁrsttime an approximation guaranteed solution for the greedy algo-rithm. They proposed an analysis framework for ﬁnding the seednodes. This framework is based on submodular functions. Theframework also showed that a feasible solution can be obtainedusing a greedy strategy. They also proposed triggering model andshowed that their proposed approximation algorithm worked bet-ter as compared to other known node selection strategies in socialnetworks.The performance of greedy algorithm for inﬂuence maximiza-tion can be improved by exploiting the submodularity, by anapproach called Cost-Effective Lazy Forward selection (CELF) [3]. Eventually, an improvised algorithm called CELF++ [4]was pro- posed, which exploits the property of submodularity of the spreadfunction.On the other hand, the social network diffusion was also mod-elled[5]using various theories like bond percolation, resulting inthe proposal of Susceptible Infected Recovered (SIR) model. Mean-while, Graph evolution parameters, such as densiﬁcation andshrinking diameters, were analysed [6]for modelling social net- works. Based on global social network metrics, such as between-ness centrality and closeness centrality, a semi-local centralitymeasure was proposed to design an effective ranking method. Thisdesign along with the SIR epidemic model was used to evaluate theperformance of the diffusion model by considering the parameterssuch as the rate of inﬂuence spread and the number of infectednodes i.e. inﬂuenced nodes[7,8]. Later a new heuristic and scalablesolution based on maximum inﬂuence path was proposed [9]. Social networks were analysed for quantifying user inﬂuenceand they dealt with web semantics to learn about inﬂuence inheterogeneous social networks[10–12]. Social inﬂuence was further exploited for the study of human dynamics and humanbehaviour[13–17]. Social networks are evaluated for inﬂuencemaximization[18,19]and a two phase model for information dif-fusion was employed[20]selecting the seed nodes and furtheractivating it in multiple levels. Recently, linear-time implementa-tion of Collective-Inﬂuence (CI) algorithm is used to ﬁnd the min-imal set of inﬂuencers in networks via optimal percolation [21,22]. Further, scalable algorithms were proposed for massively largesocial networks[23].The bond percolation theory and epidemic models are studiedand utilization of the SI epidemic model [24]for modelling the dif- fusion in social networks is proposed. There is majority of workbased on bond percolation and on SIR model. The SI model is pre-ferred since SI model is a progressive model and hence can be bet-ter exploited in the inﬂuence maximization problem.3. Problem discussionDifferent models and frameworks have been deﬁned by differ-ent researchers to obtain an optimal solution for the above statedproblem. Some of the approaches are discussed in this section.Social network can be interpreted as a directed graph G = (V, E)
where V denotes the nodes in the graph, which represent the usersin the social network and E denotes the edges, that represent therelationship between the users. In this context the relationshipwould be that of the inﬂuencer and inﬂuenced node i.e. whoinﬂuences whom. The inﬂuence maximization problem deals withoptimally selecting the seed set of users such that they contributeto maximize the expected spread of inﬂuence or diffusion in thegiven social network, in the context of a given propagation model.Let S
t#V be deﬁned as the active set, containing the activenodes at given time t. The active nodes which participate inspreading the inﬂuence to the next level of inﬂuence will be ter-med as seed nodes. Let S
0be the seed set, containing the seednodes. In other words, the seed nodes in this set are called theseeds of inﬂuence diffusion. These seed nodes are the initial nodesat the root level, which are selected to propagate the inﬂuencethroughout the network. For example, as a marketing strategy,the initial users selected by the promotional campaign of a newproduct, designed as marketing strategy.In progressive diffusion models, the active sets are monotoni-cally non-decreasing and hence the superset, V is ﬁnite, for a ﬁnitenumber of steps and the set of active nodes, S
tremains unchanged. Eventually, the active nodes belonging to the active set leads to theﬁnal active set and is denoted as/(S
0), where S 0is the initial seed set.There exists two classic progressive models, originally proposedin the mathematical sociology, are described as follows:3.1. Independent cascade model (IC model)Independent cascade (or IC) model was the ﬁrst progressivemodel[25,26]. The key characteristic of this model is that diffusionevents associated with every edge in the given social graph aremutually independent.3.2. Linear threshold model (LT model)The linear threshold (or LT) model is a progressive, stochasticinformation diffusion model, proposed by Granovetter [27].3.3. Triggering modelKempe[2]proposed the triggering model, which is mainlybased on two basic propagation models, already discussed above,namely, the IC and the LT models. In IC and LT propagation models,this inﬂuence maximization problem is proved to be NP-hard byKempe et al.[2]. He also showed that the maximization function
rm(S) follows the properties of monotonicity and submodularity.J.S. More, C. Lingam / Applied Computing and Informatics 15 (2019) 102–108 1033.4. Submodularity and monotonicity of a functionThe propagation models i.e. IC, LT and triggering models satisfytwo important properties in terms of their inﬂuence spread func-tion,
r. These properties are submodularity and monotonicity.Submodularity can be interpreted in this context as diminishingmarginal return i.e. when more nodes are added to the seed set,there is no great effect on the performance of the model. In thiscontext, monotonicity can be interpreted as if more elements areadded to a seed set, it cannot reduce the size of the ﬁnal set con-taining the active nodes (inﬂuenced nodes).3.5. Greedy algorithm proposed by Kempe et al. [2]Input: G, k,
rm(S)Output: seed set S,h1. S /2. while |S| < k do3. u argmax
weV/C0S(rm(S + w)/C0 rm(S)); 4. S S[{u}The line 3 of the greedy algorithm is most important. Here, itselects the node that provides the maximum inﬂuence spread, inother words, the largest marginal gain
rm(S + w)/C0 rm(S) with respect to the total expected inﬂuence spread of the seed set incontext i.e. S. This step helps to ensure the submodularity andmonotonicity.Greedy algorithms require the optimal local choices. Greedyalgorithm works only if locally optimal choices have potential tolead to a global optimum and the sub problems are optimal. Butif it fails, then the greedy algorithm performs poorly. The samething is observed here. The greedy algorithm only ﬁnds local min-imum edge at every iteration and hence it fails to reach morenodes. There could be a possibility that in a large perception, thelocal optima is far weaker than global optima. Hence we tried toexploit the graphical structure of the graph.4. Proposed modelThis maximization problem can be expressed as a discrete opti-mization problem. It can be modelled as a graphical model forlearning tree distribution. A discrete approach aims to choose theoptimal set of nodes that constitute an optimal path in a spanningtree, emerging out of the seed node. In other words, ﬁnding a span-ning tree of social graph G of best ﬁt for the triggering nodes (seednodes), such that when the nodes are traced along the given pathlength (also termed as threshold), it provides a subset of the solu-tion i.e. subset of ﬁnal active set.4.1. SI epidemic model – (Susceptible infected model)The SI model[24,28], categorizes the entire population in thecontext into two groups, namely, the susceptible individuals whomay get infected by the given disease i.e. who are likely to getinfected and the other group is that of the infected individuals,who get infected by the disease and further may carry or spreadthe disease to the next set of individuals i.e. susceptible group.Once a susceptible entity becomes infected, he or she gets addedinto the infected set, thereby increasing the size of the infectedset and ultimately decreasing the size of the susceptible set of indi-viduals. We utilize this characteristic of the epidemic model tomodel the inﬂuence spread across a social network. Fig. 1shows the proposed two phase SI model for the inﬂuence maximizationproblem.4.2. Proposed methodFig. 2represents the proposed method. Here, in phase I, we pro-pose that the initial population of the nodes will be the candidatesi.e. susceptible nodes, represented as {S1}. The nodes which get trig-gered i.e. the active nodes will now act as seed set and will be cate-gorized as infected nodes {I}. These infected nodes will now serve asthe inﬂuence carriers. In phase II, the nodes other than the seednodes are all susceptible. Once these susceptible nodes are inﬂu-enced by the seed nodes, they become active nodes. The nodes onceactive do not become inactive. This is the progressive behaviour asstated earlier. Hence it ﬁts in the framework of SI model.Let G be a graph, with initial population assumed as susceptiblefor spread. Let {S} denote the set of seed nodes obtained from thegreedy algorithm, {S1} denote the set of susceptible nodes and {I}denote the set of infected nodes, i.e., the nodes responsible to spreadthe inﬂuence.
lrepresents the threshold, considered as eccentricity,i.e., the maximum distance (using the spanning tree) from givennode v to any other node in the graph. It is the diameter of sub graph,used to ﬁnd diffusion for one infected node
e{I}. This is how we actu- ally compute the reachability of the nodes. We assume that thenodes which are reachable are more likely to get infected. Hence,it is a signiﬁcant parameter in the process of inﬂuence spread algo-rithm. The set {S1} represents graphically all the reachable nodeswhich are at a distance/C20
l. The algorithm can be stated as follows:4.2.1. AlgorithmAlgorithm SI_Inﬂuence_Spread (G, S, S1,h,I ,
W)Input: S,
l
1. Initialize set S /2. Data preprocessing- Build the social network graph.3. Assume initial population as susceptible (S) and identify theseed set from greedy algorithm depending on threshold h 4. Phase I: Identiﬁed nodes become infected i.e. {I} {S} 5. Phase II: For Each node v
e{I}, ﬁnd the set {S1} vi#{S1} such that v
ie{S1} only if vi is at distance/C20 l
Fig. 1.SI-based two phase model.104 J.S. More, C. Lingam / Applied Computing and Informatics 15 (2019) 102–1086. Total_inﬂuence_spread, W(S1) =P{S1} vi
7. return W(S1)8. end ForThe shortest path is traversed using spanning tree which makessure that the vertex with maximum inﬂuence spread is passed tothe next iteration. This leads to an incremental inﬂuence spread.The nodes returned by the above algorithm represents the set ofnodes inﬂuenced by the source node. It is observed that the spreadis wider than the greedy algorithm.Theorem 1.In the SI model,the number of susceptible individualsdecreases monotonically,that is S n+1/C20S n,for all n.We also have that the number of infected individuals increases monotonically ,i.e.,I
n+1/C21 I
n,for all n[28].Proof.The input for the algorithm is a set of infected nodes {I}which are derived from the population by using the greedy algo-rithm. It is clear that the target seed set obtained from the greedyalgorithm is submodular as well as monotonous [2]. No 
NoYes Yes Identify initial susceptible population and threshold 
by Greedy algorithm 
For v
nodes set; Initialize {S1} = 
Compute spread for node 
viIs {I} Em
pty? 
Is v i
reachability =?
Exclude  vi  (not susceptible), cannot help in further spread 
Spread for v is added in set {S1}= {S1} U {v} 
Total influence spread  START 
STOP Discard v from set {I} return set {S1} Check next node of {I} 
Fig. 2.Flowchart for the proposed SI model.J.S. More, C. Lingam / Applied Computing and Informatics 15 (2019) 102–108 105Hence, ifwe are using incremental approach to ﬁnd the inﬂu-ence spread, then the monotonicity is reserved in this approach.Further, experimentally, we have proved that the number of nodesinﬂuenced by a seed set at earlier step n is more than the next step,i.e., n + 1.Theorem 2.The number of susceptible individuals is never negative , S
n/C210,and the number of infected individuals is never more than thetotal population size,I
n/C20N[28].Proof.In our approach, the initial population, i.e., a set of infectednodes is never empty. Hence, even for minimum one seed node ,it is not possible to have susceptible individuals < 0. As we followgraphical model, we know that at least two nodes and one edgewill be required. Hence, if one node is selected as the seed node,i.e., infected node, then the other is susceptible (as it is reachablefrom infected node). Therefore, the set of susceptible individualscan never be negative. In the worst case, where all the nodes areinfected, the susceptible node can be 0 but not negative.On the other hand, the seed nodes, i.e., infected node set {I} cancontain the entire population in the best case. The greedy algo-rithm terminates when the seed node set contains all the nodesof the entire population N. In this case, the seed set becomes uni-versal set. Hence, even if any infected node gets added later, it willbe a subset of universal set and according to set theory, |U| = N, i.e.,the total number of nodes. Hence, the number of infected nodescan be a maximum of N.The computational time can be reduced substantially. Once weget the target nodes using the greedy algorithm, we can simultane-ously execute the algorithm on all the seeds. This is the reason whythe computational time gets reduced. For achieving furtherimprovement in time efﬁciency, we propose to use theMultithreading approach.5. Dataset descriptionWe consider three datasets, available on Stanford Large Net-work Dataset Collection (SNAP), published by Stanford University(Available at:http://snap.stanford.edu/data/com).Table 1repre- sents the features of datasets.6. Working of algorithmThe algorithm will work as follows:Step 1:Input: Set of Susceptable nodesAfter Processing using greedy Algorithm: Susceptible nodes? Infected nodesP?{v1, v2, v3, v4, v5, v6, v7}?seed sets for inﬂuence spread(assuming threshold as 7)Step 2: Input: Set of Susceptible nodes (Those found as infectedin previous step) i.e. {v1, v2, v3, v4, v5, v6, v7}After modelling: Infected nodes{v1}- {v11, v12..., v1n} assuming the threshold as
l
e.g. for dataset citHepTh, the infected nodes for aseed node 204089, for (
l= 7), it inﬂuences 664 nodes (shown inFig. 3).Figs. 3 and 4illustrates the visualization of the inﬂuence spreadfor a node. The central hub (node) is the seed node, selected duringphase I whereas other nodes are the infected nodes during phase II.The inﬂuence is spread by the set of seed nodes. The set of all activenodes at this phase represents the ﬁnal active set. It clearly showsthe effect of threshold on the total spread. As the threshold
l, increases, the total spread shrinks.Table 1Features of the datasets.
Datasets CA-AstroPh Cit-HepTh Cit-HepPh Soc-EopinionsNodes 18772 27770 34546 75879Edges 198110 352807 421578 508837Average clustering coefﬁcient 0.6306 0.3120 0.2848 0.1378Diameter 14 13 12 14
Fig. 3.Sample hybrid algorithm for l= 7 (664 nodes) for seed node 204089 for dataset cit-HepTh (visualization using R).
Fig. 4.Sample hybrid algorithm for l= 6 (2650) for seed node 204089 for dataset cit-HepTh (visualization using R).106 J.S. More, C. Lingam / Applied Computing and Informatics 15 (2019) 102–1087. Results discussionInitially, the seed set is computed using the greedy algorithm.To ﬁnd the inﬂuence spread, the next cascade is found by con-sidering that an edge connecting two nodes mean that one isinﬂuencing the other. Further, by considering the longest amongshortest paths, the given nodes inﬂuenced (which is computedby cascaded operation) will be restricted by speciﬁed threshold(which speciﬁes the path length). The SI model is based on theincremental approach where the spread is cumulative. It exploitsthe graph properties. The spanning tree enables the SI approachto ﬁnd the best possible longest path which helps in increasingthe inﬂuence spread. The greedy approach is restricted to thelocal search. CELF++ is based on the submodularity imposed ongreedy algorithm and CI is based on the adaptive bottom upapproach utilizing the ﬁnite radius of sphere of social networks.The performances of inﬂuence spread with different values ofthresholdsh(l= 6 for SI model) are illustrated in Fig. 5a. Linear (SI) represents the trend of the performance of algorithm as thethreshold varies. The performance elevates linearly with increasein the threshold.Fig. 5bshow the inﬂuence spread per second for differentalgorithms for the dataset CA-AstroPh Dataset. It is clear that theinﬂuence spread is elevated to a large extent by using SI modelas compared to greedy algorithm. The inﬂuence spread per secondshows the signiﬁcant outperformance when a multithreadedapproach is used. CI gives best inﬂuence spread per second butthe total inﬂuence spread is best achieved by SI model as shownin followingFig. 5c. In SI based algorithm, spanning tree data struc-ture is used where in, while pre-processing, the reachability of thenodes is checked for the seed nodes which are shortlisted by thegreedy algorithm. This enables us to obtain the infected nodes.However, the time complexity of the CI-algorithm is better thanthe proposed algorithm because of use of max-heap data structurefor storing and processing the CI values. The ﬁnite radius ‘of the CI sphere, allows to process the CI values in a max-heap data struc-ture[22,23]. The basic idea is that, after each node removal, thereis a need to recompute CI just for a O(1) number of nodes, and ﬁndthe new largest value. It follows bottom up approach. Whereas, inSI based approach, the computations are based on computations ofthe longest possible path among all the shortest paths, which is anincremental approach. Here, the execution time of CI is better thanSI model, but still fails to achieve the inﬂuence spread as good as SImodel. We further propose to use multithreaded approach toobtain a better performance of SI model in terms of execution timeto some extent.The comparison of performance gain for inﬂuence spread of dif-ferent algorithms for dataset CA-AstroPh are as depicted in Fig. 5c. Table 2shows the comparison in terms of performance i.e., inﬂu-ence spread of proposed SI model with other models for differentdatasets.Table 3depicts the performance gain (Inﬂuence spreadper second) by using multithreaded approach for SI model. InTable 3, the performance of multithreaded approach for SI modelis compared with the basic SI model. It is proved that by multi-threading though doesn’t provide the best inﬂuence spread persecond, still manages to give a signiﬁcant boost to the speed ofthe inﬂuence spread. This performance improvement is reportedinTable 3.
Fig. 5a.Inﬂuence spread for CA-AstroPh Dataset.
Fig. 5b.Inﬂuence spread per second for CA-AstroPh Dataset.
Fig. 5c.Inﬂuence spread gain chart for CA-AstroPh Dataset.
Table 2Performance comparison (Inﬂuence Spread) of SI model with other models (
l= 6).
Datasets?Cit-HepTh CA-AstroPh Cit-HepPh Soc-EopinionsSeed set size %gain w.r.t. greedy %gain w.r.t. CI %gain w.r.t. greedy %gain w.r.t. CI %gain w.r.t. greedy %gain w.r.t. CI %gain w.r.t. greedy %gain w.r. t. CI7 685% 552% 189% 102% 444% 405% 56% 20%10 966% 757% 275% 135% 553% 499% 107% 48%15 1246% 922% 405% 178% 698% 581% 172% 79%20 1716% 1222% 476% 193% 859% 686% 285% 143%25 1880% 1283% 595% 233% 963% 735% 355% 179%30 2257% 1489% 692% 262% 1039% 764% 415% 200%J.S. More, C. Lingam / Applied Computing and Informatics 15 (2019) 102–108 1078. Conclusion and future scopeAs discussed in the earlier part, greedy algorithms require opti-mal local choices at each stage with the hope of ﬁnding a globaloptimum. If locally optimal choices yield a global optimum andthe sub-problems are optimal, then the algorithm works. If it fails,then the greedy algorithm performs poorly. This has been con-ﬁrmed by this study too. The greedy algorithm only ﬁnds localminimum inﬂuence spread at every iteration, hence it fails to reachmore nodes. It is observed that the inﬂuence spread observed inthe greedy algorithm is limited and generally requires more runtime. The proposed two phase SI based algorithm performs betterthan greedy algorithm in terms of time and the overall inﬂuencespread. Hence, we show that the graphical structure of the socialnetwork can be exploited to improve the reachability and henceimproving the inﬂuence spread.Here, a novel approach is proposed based on SI epidemic modelfor inﬂuence spread, the longest shortest path concept for reacha-bility and implementation of multithreading for improving thetime efﬁciency which iteratively improves the greedy cascadedmodel exponentially. The inﬂuence spread in this model is maxi-mized as compared to the basic greedy model. The efﬁciency interms of speed is an added beneﬁt. In this study, we evaluatedthe algorithm for different seed sizes with different datasetsagainst different approaches proposed earlier. We observed thatour ultimate aim of maximizing the inﬂuence spread is achievedusing SI Model, but at the cost of execution time. Hence we usedmultithreading to improve the total number of nodes inﬂuencedper second, i.e., indirectly decreasing the computational time.This work provided an overview of the inﬂuencer identiﬁcationand the inﬂuence maximization. This study concludes that by iden-tifying the inﬂuential users in social media, different businessstrategies can be planned, e.g., efﬁcient launching and marketingnew products, targeting the potential consumers, etc. It is obviousthat the inﬂuence maximization and social inﬂuence miningtogether will form the signiﬁcant components to enable extensiveviral marketing through online social networks.Identifying inﬂuential users may be proposed through differentmodels, algorithms and statistical techniques. Also parallel prob-lems like link prediction, social network content analysis, etc.could be considered as potential problems for social network min-ing to deal with in future.References
[1]Jiawei Han, Micheline Kamber, Jian Pei, Data Mining: Concepts andTechniques, Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, 2011
. [2] David Kemp, Jon Kleinberg, Eva Tardos, Maximizing the spread of inﬂuencethrough a social network, in: KDD 03, USA, 2003, pp. 137–146.[3] Jure Leskovec, Andreas Krause, Carlos Guestrin, Christos Faloutsos, JeanneVanBriesen and Natalie Glance, Cost-effective Outbreak Detection in Networks,in: Proceedings of the 13th ACM SIGKDD International Conference onKnowledge Discovery and Data Mining, KDD, 2007, pp. 420–429.[4] Amit Goyal, Wei Lu, Laks V.S. Laxmanan, Celf++: optimizing the greedyalgorithm for inﬂuence maximization in social networks, in: ACM Proceeding,2011, pp. 47–48.[5] Masahiro Kimura, Kazumi Saito, Ryohei Nakano, Hiroshi Motoda, Extractinginﬂuential nodes on a social network for information diffusion, Data MinKnowl Disc, Springer, 2009, pp. 70–97.[6]Jure Leskovec, Jon Kleinberg, Christos Faloutsos, Graph evolution: densiﬁcationand shrinking diameters, ACM Trans. Knowl. Disc. Data 1 (1) (2007)
. [7]
Duanbing Chen, LInyuan Lu, Ming Sheng Shang, Yi-Cheng Zhang, Tao Zhou,Identifying inﬂuential nodes in complex networks, Phys. A: Stat. Mech. Appl.(2011) 47–55
.[8]
Christine Kiss, Martin Bichler, Identiﬁcation of inﬂuencers-measuringinﬂuence in customer networks, Decis. Supp. Syst. (2008) 233–253
. [9] Chi Wang, Wei Chan, Yajun Wang, Scalable inﬂuence maximization forindependent cascade model in large-scale social networks, Data Mining andKnowledge Discovery, Springer, 2012, pp. 1029–1038.[10] Eytan Bakshy, Brian Karrer, Lada Adamic, Social inﬂuence and the diffusion ofuser-created content, in: Proceedings of the 10th ACM Conference onElectronic commerce, 2009, pp. 325–334.[11] Eytan Bakshy, Jake M. Hofman, Winter A. Mason, Duncan J. Watts, Everyone’san inﬂuencer: quantifying inﬂuence on twitter, in: WSDM Proceedings ofFourth ACM International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining, 2011,pp. 65–74.[12] Lei Tang, Huan Liu, Leveraging social media networks for classiﬁcation, DataMining and Knowledge Discovery, Springer, 2011, pp. 447-478.[13] Lu Liu, Jie Tang, Jiawei Han, Shiqiang Yang, Learning inﬂuence fromheterogeneous social networks, Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery,Springer, 2012, pp. 511–544.[14]
Bogart Yail Mrquez, Manuel Castaon-Puga, Juan R. Castro, Eugenio D. Suarez,Jos Sergio Magdaleno-Palencia, Fuzzy models applied to complex socialsystems: modeling poverty using distributed agencies, Int. J. New Comput.Arch. Appl. (IJNCAA) 1 (2) (2011) 292–303
. [15] Na Li, Denis Gillet, Identifying inﬂuential scholars in academic social mediaplatforms, in: ASONAM Proceedings IEEE/ACM International Conference onAdvances in Social Network Analysis and Mining, 2013, pp. 608–614.[16]
Wei Pan, Wen Dong, Manue Cebrian, Taemie Kim, James H. Fowler, AlexSandyPentland, Modeling dynamical inﬂuence in human interaction, ACMTrans. Web (ACM TWEB) (2012) 77–86
. [17] Symeon Papadopoulos, Yiannis Kompatsiaris, Athena Vakali, PloutarchosSpyridonos, Community detection in social media-performance andapplication considerations, Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery, Springer,2012, pp. 515–554.[18] Kundu Suman, C.A. Murthy, S.K. Pal, A new centrality measure for inﬂuencemaximization in social networks, in: 4th International Conference on PatternRecognition and Machine Intelligence (PReMI11), Springer-Verlag, 2011, pp.242–247.[19]
Sankar K. Pal, S.C.A. Murthy, Centrality measures, upper bound, and inﬂuencemaximization in large scale directed social networks, Fundam. Inform. (2014)317–342
.[20]
Swapnil Dhamal, K.J. Prabuchandran, Y. Narahari, Information diffusion insocial networks in two phases, IEEE Trans. Network Sci. Eng. (2016) 197–210
. [21]
F. Morone, H. Makse, Inﬂuence maximization in complex networks throughoptimal percolation, Nature 524 (2015) 65–68
. [22]
Flaviano Morone, Byungjoon Min, Lin Bo, Romain Mari, Hernan A. Makse,Collective Inﬂuence Algorithm to ﬁnd inﬂuencers via optimal percolation inmassively large social media, Sci. Rep. 6 (2016) 30062
. [23]
Sen Pei, Xian Teng, Jeffrey Shaman, Flaviano Morone, Hernan A. Makse,Efﬁcient Collective Inﬂuence maximization in cascading processes with ﬁrst-order transitions, Sci. Rep. 7 (2017) 45240
. [24]
Linda J.S. Allen, Some discrete-time SI, SIR, and SIS epidemic models, Math.Biosci. 124 (1) (1994) 83–105
. [25]
Jacob Goldenberg, B. Libai, E. Muller, Talk of the network: a complex systemslook at the underlying process of word-of-mouth, Market. Lett. (2001) 211–223
.[26]
Jacob Goldenberg, B. Libai, E. Muller, Using complex systems analysis toadvance marketing theory development: modeling heterogeneity effects onnew product growth through stochastic cellular automata, Acad. Market. Sci.Rev. (2001) 1–18
.[27]
M. Granovetter, Threshold models of collective behavior, Am. J. Sociol. (1978)1420–1443
.[28]
Kacie M. Sutton, Discretizing the SI epidemic model, Rose-HulmanUndergraduate Math. J. 15 (2014) 192–208
.Table 3Performance gain (Inﬂuence spread per second) by using multithreaded approach forSI model.
Datasets?CitHepTh CA-AstroPh Cit-HepPh Soc-Eopinions7 123% 150% 71% 129%10 133% 150% 48% 105%15 127% 134% 48% 114%20 154% 142% 51% 104%25 141% 147% 84% 116%30 145% 142% 82% 185%108 J.S. More, C. Lingam / Applied Computing and Informatics 15 (2019) 102–108