 AASRI Procedia   1  ( 2012 )  505 – 511 
2212-6716 © 2012 Published by Elsevier Ltd. doi: 10.1016/j.aasri.2012.06.079 
  2012 AASRI Conference on Computational Intelligence and Bioinformatics 
A Study on Dynamic Collision Detection of Armored Vehicle in Visual Simulation 
Meng Qinghua*, Gao Wei, Guo Xi, Li Qiuyan 
Changchun Institute of Engineering Technology, Changchun, 130117, China 
Abstract 
Under the visual simulation, some cases often are happened such as an armored vehicle penetrating or penetrating through other entities. However, the various existed bounding box models can’t resolve this trouble well. A bounding box method is introduced, the collision test concerning the box have been performed analysis under translation and rotation for an armored vehicle. In order to resolve the trouble existed, the author provides the method of dynamic collision detection in this paper, and set up the dynamic collision detection models for an armored vehicle accordingly. Utilizing OpenGVS through VC++ to create simulation. At the last, feasibility of those models are tested and verified by the contrast tests from simulation results. 
 2012 Published by Elsevier B.V. Selection and/or peer review under responsibility of American Applied Science Research Institute  
Keywords: Visual Simulation; Armored Vehicle; Bounding Box; Dynamic Collision Detection 
1. Introduction Bounding box is a widely used method in collision detection algorithm, and has been thoroughly researched in many applied areas (such as virtual reality and so on) of computer graphics [1], whose basic idea is to use a bounding box with somewhat large volume and simple geometric characteristics to describe a 
 
* E-mail address: mqhwolf@163.com. 
AASRI
Procedia
www.elsevier.com/locate/procediaAvailable online at www.sciencedirect.com
Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.506   Meng Qinghua et al.  /  AASRI Procedia   1  ( 2012 )  505 – 511 
 complex geometric object approximately, and then to approximate the object’s geometric model as closely as possible by constructing tree structure until its geometric characteristics are almost fully obtained, and the collision detection process can also be accelerated through the pre-treatment process (bounding box)
 [2, 3]. This method can handle the collision detection problem of static entities well. However, it often appears such phenomena as armored vehicles penetrating or penetrati ng through other entities in a virtual scene, especially in high-speed motion in the wild. In order to solve this  problem, the authors put forward a method of dynamic collision detection for armored vehicle. 2. Entity Motion and Its Collision Detection Analysis In a virtual scene, the entity is given certain speed, with which the location of the entity at each frame is computed; then the graphics engine is refreshed at a sp eed no more than 30ms per frame; different locations are set up for the entity at each refreshing so that the entity is in motion visually. Collision detection is conducted through the bounding box; if the motion speed is slow, the ground object can be detected before the entity reaches it, and thus not penetrated (as in Fig. 1a); otherwise if the motion speed is fast, the ground object may be penetrated by the entity when the latter is  at the location at time i+1 (as in Fig. 1b), creating such a distortion phenomenon. In the figure, assume that the studied moving entity is a regular cuboid; against its exterior surface is a bounding box for collision detection. For the purpose of study, overlooking observation is conducted. The solid line represents the entity; the dotted line represents the face of the bounding box, perpendicular to the ground surface.   
 
   
Fig. 1. (a) the ground object not penetrated by the entity; (b) sthe ground object penetrated by the entity  
The motion pattern of a moving object is relatively complex; so the motion process of the entity is simplified for the sake of the study. The following study mainly concerns rigid entities. First, the collision detection is carried out when the entity is in translation on horizontal ground; then the collision detection of the entity in fixed-axis rotation is analyzed. Because complex motion of entities can all be reduced to the combination of these two basic motions 
[4]. 2.1. Entity translation and its collision detection analysis Translation is the most common movement in engineering and life, and is also the simplest movement
 [4]. Therefore, to study the motion of an entity in a virtual scene should also start from the study of translation. In translation, an entity can move in a straight line or along a curved pa th. But in a virtual scene, the motion of the entity is embodied by the change in its location at each frame. The location of the entity at the next frame is only associated with its location and speed at the current frame; so the translation between two frames can be regarded as linear motion. The entity is in translation in the geodetic coordinate system (left-handed system) oxyz. The coordinate of the reference point 
'o of the entity at time i in the geodetic coordinate system is set as (ix, iy, iz), the speed of the entity 
iv, and its direction of motion (iD, iE, iJ). iD, iE, iJ refer to the angles formed in 
507  Meng Qinghua et al.  /  AASRI Procedia   1  ( 2012 )  505 – 511 
 terms of the left-hand rule when the entity rotates around X, Y, Z axis at time i[5].        The coordinate of the reference point 
'oat time i+1 in the geodetic coordinate system is (1ix, 1iy, 
1iz), as is shown in Fig. 2. The computation is as follows in terms of Euler method: Where, 
it' means the time of the frame at time i.                                                        (1) Since the entity moves on the horizontal ground, the angle of pitch is 0, i.e. 
iD= 0. So the value of (1ix, 
1iy, 1iz) is computed by ix, iy, iz, iv, it', iE.          
Fig. 2. the entity in translation in the coordinate system oxyz 
When iv is fast, the entity will penetrate the ground object at time i+1. 2.2.  Fixed-axis rotation of entity and its collision detection analysis Fixed-axis rotation is the most common movement in e ngineering. The entity rotates around a fixed axis in the geodetic coordinate system (left-handed syst em) oxyz. The coordinate of the reference point 
'o of the entity at time i in the geodetic coordinate system is set as (
ix, iy, ix); the entity rotates around the line that passes the point 
'o and is perpendicular to the ground surface. The current angle is iM and the angular speed is 
iZ. The angle of the entity at time i+1 is 
1iM , as is shown in Fig. 3. The computation is as follows in terms of Euler method
 [6]: Where, 
it' means the time of the frame at time i. 
i i i it'   ZMM1                                                                           (2)         °¯°®­'   '   '   
i ii i i ii i i i iiii i i i t v x zt v y yt v x x E DDE Dsincossincos cos
111
508   Meng Qinghua et al.  /  AASRI Procedia   1  ( 2012 )  505 – 511 
   
Fig. 3.  the entity in fixed-axis rotation in the coordinate system oxyz 
When iZ is fast, the entity will penetrate the ground object at time i+1. 3. Dynamic Collision Detection Model of Armored Vehicle In light of the above analysis, the static collision detection model (i.e. static bounding box) of armored vehicle entity (entity for short) is first constructed. This model is defined as :  M
s: <T, X, Q, Y, Ȝ>                                                                     (3) Nomenclature 
T the time set, determining the time step length; 
X  the space of the bounding box, through which the external environment acts on the model; for an 
entity, the space of its bounding box varies with the level requirements 
Q the status of the entity; it is the core of modeling and determines the boundar ies of the bounding box; 
the bounding boxes of different entities are generally different 
Y the output set, through which the result of collision detection can be obtained 
Ȝ the output function; when the status of the entity is Q, the input is X, Y can be detected by Ȝ (T, X, 
Q) 
For the purpose of analysis, the bounding box is also a cuboid, and the specifics are as follows:                                                            (4)   
ax, bx, ay, by, az, bz refer to the boundary coordinates of each face of the bounding box in the entity’s coordinate system; after they are converted to the geodetic coordinates by coordinate transformation , the collision information can be obtained by this bounding box.  Since the output function changes with the purpose of th e bounding box, it is required that users define this model according their own requirements. 3.1.  Collision detection model of armored vehicle in translation It can be found by analyzing entity motion and its collision detection that the essence of collision detection of an entity in motion is to detect through a model, and thus know in advance the location of the entity at the next frame and judge whether the entity at this location will overlap or intersect other entity. As is shown in Fig. 4, the ground object is not detected by the entity at time i through the static collision detection model, and since the speed of the entity 
iv is fast, it penetrates the ground object at time i+1. 
°¯°®­d dd dd d  
bababaz z zy y yx x xQ X T Y, ,O509  Meng Qinghua et al.  /  AASRI Procedia   1  ( 2012 )  505 – 511 
 To avoid such a phenomenon, the dynamic collision detection model is thus introduced (see Fig. 2). At time i, the boundary of the entity’s static collision detection model is extended by 
iL, and the bounding box becomes one with the space encircled by the dotted line. Through this bounding box, the collision with the ground object at time i+1 can be detected by the entity at time i, and the location of the ground object can be obtained. Accordingly, the location and motion status of the entity at time i+1 can be set so as to avoid the collision with the ground object at time i+1, and thus avoid the occurrence of penetrating the ground object.        
Fig. 4. Dynamic collision detection of entity in translation 
The bounding box is extended in the direction of iv, and the extended space is determined by iL (related to 
iv and it') and the maximum cross section perpendicular to iv, that is the size of the bounding box is in dynamic change with the speed of the entity. 
iL = ivit'                                                                       (5) The collision detection of the entity in translation is defined as: M
d1: <T d1, X d1, Q d1, Y d1, V d1, Ȝd1>                                                 (6)  Nomenclature 
Td1 ;Y d1 defined in the same way as T and Y in formula (3)  
Vd1  the speed of the entity in translation 
Xd1 the space of the bounding box of the entity in translation, affected by Q d1 and V d and changeable 
Qd1 the status of the moving entity, affected by V d and changeable 
Ȝd1 The output function 
 When the status of the entity is Q
d1, the input is X d1, Y d1 can be detected by Ȝ (T d1, X d1, Q d1, V d1); the specifics are as follows:   (7)   4. Simulation Realization and Verification in Virtual Scene  Based on the above models, the simulation of this mode l is realized by using OpenGVS as visual engine and VC++. The simulation process and results are ju dged and evaluated by many people, who all have considered that this model solves well the problem of armored vehicle penetrating or penetrating through 

°¯°®­d dd d'  d d 
babai i bad d d dz z zy y yt v x x xV Q X T, , ,1 1 1 O
510   Meng Qinghua et al.  /  AASRI Procedia   1  ( 2012 )  505 – 511 
 other entity.  Model verification is conducted and completed by contra st test. First, a wheeled vehicle is used as the rigid entity in the visual scene; then the static bounding box and dynamic bounding box are used to carry out collision detection: passing the same location (relative to th e same reference) in the visual scene at the same speed, the entity is made stop when each model detects the ground object; the locations of the entity are observed and the results are compared; the result of evaluati on is finalized after a number of experiments. Fig. 5 and Fig. 6 show one contrast test.        
Fig. 5. Static collision detection (static bounding box) (a) Time t i; (b) Time t i+1 
        
Fig. 6. Dynamic collision detection  (a) Time t i; (b) Time t i+1 
It can be seen from the above experiment results that the head of armored vehicle in Fig. 5 penetrates the ground object at time t
i+1; while the head of armored vehicle in Fig. 6 stops at the outside of the ground object. 5. Conclusion In this paper, a dynamic collision detection method is put forward for the distortion phenomenon of armored vehicle penetrating the ground object in visual scenes, and a dynamic collision detection model is constructed. The model is verified to be of good de tection effect of collision after simulation and a number of contrast tests, and thus capable of solving the problem mentioned above. The shortcoming of this model is its failure to incorporate the specific shape of armored vehicle in the model, which will be considered in future studies.  References [1]Li Xiaoyan, Yin Hong and Gao Yunfei. A Fast Co llison Detection Aglorithm of Tank In Virtual Battlefield [J]. Command Control and Simulation, 2006, 28(4): 78-81 [2]Hubbard P M.Collision Detection for Interactive Graphics Application[J]. IEEE Transactionon 
511  Meng Qinghua et al.  /  AASRI Procedia   1  ( 2012 )  505 – 511 
 Visualization and Computer Graphics, 1995, 1(3): 218-230 [3]Fabio Policarpo, Aura Conci. Real-Time Collision Detection and Response[J]. IEEE Computer Society (S0018-9162). 2001, 1:376-376 [4]University of Science and Technology Beijing. Engi neering Mechanics [M]. Beijing: Higher Education Press, 1997 