ORIGINAL ARTICLE
A web-based three-tier control andmonitoring application for integratedfacility management of photovoltaicsystems
Apostolos Melionesa,*, Spyros Apostolacosb,1, Angeliki Nouvakia
aDepartment of Digital Systems, University of Piraeus, 80 Dimitriou and Karaoli Str., GR-18534, Greece
binAccess, R&D Center, 12 Sorou Str., 15125 Maroussi, Athens, GreeceReceived 12 November 2012; revised 26 April 2014; accepted 30 April 2014
Available online 10 May 2014
KEYWORDSControl center;Control serviceback-end;Control andmonitoring system;Integrated facilitymanagement system;Solar park;Photovoltaic system;Photovoltaic plantmanagement systemAbstract The architecture of a control system can be designed vertically withthe distinction between functional levels. We adopt this layered approach forthe design and implementation of a network-based control and monitoring appli-cation. In this paper we present the design and implementation of a network-based management application for controlling and monitoring the input andoutput data of remote equipment aiming at performance macro-observation,alarm detection, handling operation failures, installation security, access control,collection and recording of statistical data and provisioning of reports. The mainservices provided to the user and operating over the public internet and/ormobile network include control, monitoring, notiﬁcation, reporting and dataexport. Our proposed system consists of a front-end for ﬁeld (site-level) controland monitoring as well as a service back-end which undertakes to collect, store
*Corresponding author. Tel.: +30 210 4142762; fax: +30 210 4142715.
1Tel.: +30 210 6802300.E-mail addresses:meliones@unipi.gr(A. Meliones),spapost@inaccess.com(S. Apostolacos),nouvaki@gmail. com(A. Nouvaki).Peer review under responsibility of King Saud University.
Production and hosting by ElsevierApplied Computing and Informatics (2014) 10, 14–37
King Saud University
Applied Computing and Informatics
www.ksu.edu.sawww.sciencedirect.com
2210-8327ª2014 King Saud University. Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.aci.2014.04.003and manage data from all remote installations. Hierarchical data acquisitionmethodology and performance macro-observation are according to the IEC61724 standard. We have successfully used our control and monitoring applica-tion for integrated facility management of photovoltaic plant installations; nev-ertheless it can be easily migrated to other renewable energy generationinstallations and remote automation applications in general.
ª2014 King Saud University. Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
1. Introduction
Due to the intensifying climate challenge, green growth is expected to be a veryimportant issue in the next decades. Green growth strategies can help economiesand societies become more resilient as they work to meet demands for foodproduction, transport, housing, energy and water (Huang and Quibria, 2013;Ja¨nique, 2012; Hallegate et al., 2012; Toman, 2012; Brown and Southworth,2008; Gill et al., 2007; Rycrofta et al., 2000). A photovoltaic system (PV System)consists of one or more solar panels which convert sunlight into electric power.PV systems present a rapid growth with the installation of hundreds and thou-sands MWp (megawatt peak) per year and with a signiﬁcant volume of cleanpower contributed to the electrical grid. The research in PV technology andinverters ﬂourishes (Ekins-Daukes, 2013), while important capital is investedmainly because of favorable conditions in most markets, such as feed-in tariff,subsidies etc. (Fthenakis et al., 2009; Bagnall and Boreland, 2008). Combined with the various initiatives for energy efﬁciency, the installations of photovoltaicsystems are steadily increasing. Photovoltaics are shifting from being a negligiblepower generation technology to a mainstream source of power ( Woyte et al., 2013).
Such systems, however, cannot work efﬁciently if operations are not automated.Moreover, the need for improved performance of power systems in terms ofreliability and higher productivity has necessitated more and more applicationof condition monitoring techniques (Wagle et al., 2008; Trovao et al., 2008). Therefore, the need of integrated facility management systems which controland monitor the solar park installations is imperative. The development of auto-mated applications in the energy sector is signiﬁcant, not only in industry but alsofor end-users. End-users increasingly demand products that use less energy, whichconﬂicts with the growing demand for expanded functionality. Control andautomation applications are developing solutions to reduce costs in time, moneyand effort of procedures aiming to improve the quality of relevant services andproducts.Fig. 1depicts a PV system involving the photovoltaic and electricalequipment plus the monitoring system. The photovoltaic equipment comprisesthe solar panels, the solar panels mounting system, the inverters and the sensorbox, while a controller implements the monitoring system.Integrated facility management of photovoltaic systems 15Web-based real-time monitoring systems have been heavily used in the health-care and industrial sectors for many years and can be studied in order to gain sig-niﬁcant experience in diverse application requirements. A typical ﬁnding is thatseveral of the applied monitoring principles, concepts and mechanisms can be eas-ily migrated and adapted to other applications. Numerous efforts employingdiverse software, ﬁeld controller, communication and user interface architectureshave already empowered users by giving them access to real-time energy plant dataand quality observations in a ﬂuid and versatile environment ( Lahti et al., 2011; Sa´nchez-Pacheco et al., 2011; Irmak et al., 2013; Konieczny et al., 2012;Dobriceanu et al., 2009, etc.). A PV plant management solution aims at providingfundamental services and other facilities to business entities in charge of the super-vision of a number of remote installations. The interaction of the users with thesolution relies on the public internet and the GSM/3G network. In this paperwe present the design and implementation of a network-based solar park/PV plantmanagement application for controlling and monitoring the input and output dataof the PV equipment aiming at performance macro-observation, alarm detection,handling operation failures, installation security, access control, collection andrecording of statistical data and provisioning of reports which are stored locallyor sent automatically to the users. The paper deﬁnes a three level architectureinvolving the application, equipment, signals, alarms, and implemented services.The proposed management solution has been designed to provide a number ofservices to the end user for all remote installations:
Figure 1PV System components.16 A. Meliones et al.(i) A monitoring service, operating over the public internet (Web). The user iscapable, through an Internet browser, to get information (parameters, eventsand status) regarding the installations of interest to him/her.(ii) A control service, also operating over the public internet (Web). The user iscapable, through an Internet browser, to control certain aspects of the oper-ation of the remote installations.(iii) A notiﬁcation service, operating both over the Web and the mobile networkand delivering notiﬁcations to the mobile phones or e-mails of the users whohave subscribed to the service whenever certain events related to the installa-tions of interest to them occur.(iv) A report generation and delivery service, operating over the Web and deliv-ering reports to the e-mails of users who have subscribed to the service in aperiodical manner. These reports include information on the installationsregarding operational, maintenance and ﬁnancial aspects.(v) A graphing service, creating comprehensive graphs of parameters and eventsto be presented through the Web interface of the monitoring service or to beincluded in reports, created by the report generation and delivery service.(vi) An export service, allowing the user to store locally in his/her computer dataretained within the PV system management solution.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. The automation system architec-ture is presented in Section2. The main control and automation services providedare described in Section3. A description of the solar park installation, the moni-tored signals and implemented alarms follow in Section 4. Section5illustrates the implemented services via the application screenshots, while Section 6presents the technology used to build the proposed application and the database schema.
2. Automation system architecture
The architecture of a control system can be designed vertically, with the distinctionbetween functional levels (Passino, 2005). Our presented architecture shown inFig. 2consists of three levels. Each of them represents an aspect of system function-ality, presenting the incarnation of the automation pyramid for a solar park automa-tion system (Kastner et al., 2005). The bottom level or the level of devices interactswith the real world and is constituted by the basic equipment of an automation sys-tem. This includes sensors or other measure means according to the ﬁeld of applica-tion, actuators, data converters (digital to analog data and reversely) and routers(Dorf and Bishop, 2010). In addition, PLCs or PACs are employing all necessaryinterfacing and storage functionality deployed at each installation separately. Afterthe collection of data through measurement, counting, metering, they are trans-formed into a representation suitable for transmission and processing (see Fig. 3).
The role of the ﬁeld controllers is very important. They recognize failures andgenerate alarms derived either directly from signals I/O or complex algebraic,Integrated facility management of photovoltaic systems 17Communication ModuleDatabase Reporting ModuleApplication Logic Module
Notification Service Back-Internet gateway SMS gateway
Control/Data Center
LANRouter
PLC PLCPLC
…Internet
Wireless network (2G/3G)
Private/publicnetwork
Sensors, actuators, other equipment Sensors, actuators, other equipment Sensors, actuators, other equipment
Figure 2Automation system architecture.18 A. Meliones et al.combinatorial or sequential functions and processes. Subsequently, they catego-rize and prioritize, store, generate alerts and reports and communicate the statusof the installation to the management centers. There are important reasons as towhy an integrated facility management solution (IFMS) needs a stand-alone infra-structure (the site-level control/monitoring system) installed at the ﬁeld:
/C15Due to the vast variety of equipment that may exist in the installation, it isexpected that the solution has to interface them using an equivalent varietyof physical connection methods and protocols./C15Though occasional loss of communication may occur, the nature of theapplication does not leave much room for data loss, so storage in the ﬁeldis a necessity./C15Scarce bandwidth may be available (e.g. communication with the installa-tion may be carried out through a GPRS connection), so some form of datareduction has to be applied./C15There are certain requirements that mandate the existence of logic in theﬁeld, which operates irrespective of whether a connection to the outsideworld is operational or not.
This infrastructure is essentially a set of programmable networked controllersemploying all necessary interfacing and storage functionality deployed at eachinstallation separately. Therefore, it undertakes the responsibilities of:
/C15Interfacing with all equipment installed in the ﬁeld to acquire data, irrespec-tive of the connection method and/or protocol./C15Reducing the volume of data to something representative, yet less band-width hungry.Real time dataReal time dataEquipment/sensor
Equipment/sensorAcquisitionPrimary parameterPrimary parameter
CalculationDerived parametersDerived parameters
Calculation
Real time dataReal time dataEquipment/sensor
Equipment/sensorAcquisitionPrimary parameterPrimary parameter
CalculationCalculation………State-change eventsState-change events
Max/min value
Max/min value
CalculationMax/min valueMax/min value
Calculation
Figure 3The data acquisition methodology supported by the solution.Integrated facility management of photovoltaic systems 19/C15Conveying events that are generated directly by ﬁeld equipment upon theiroccurrence and generating events that are necessary yet not implementedwithin the equipment in the ﬁeld./C15Storing all necessary parameters and events in a cyclical manner in the caseof failure of the communication with the outside world./C15Implementing all necessary control loops that have to operate locally and inan independent manner.
The middle level is the Data Center which communicates through a public and/or private network with the bottom level. It is also known as automation level. Itsrole is to monitor and control all installations in a centralized manner. The mainpart of the Data Center is the service back end, which undertakes to collect, storeand manage data from all remote installations. More speciﬁcally, the service backend has the following responsibilities:
/C15To collect, store and manage data from a variety of remote sites./C15To transform data and prepare values for vertical access from the manage-ment level./C15To store and manage information regarding the users accessing the service./C15To allow the users to conﬁgure the service back-end itself or the ﬁeld-deployed controllers./C15To allow the users to carry out control functions on the installation./C15To carry out any post-acquisition calculations that may be necessary.
The back-end is scalable to accommodate any number of measurement pointsmerely through the addition of new servers and storage subsystems. The serviceback-end can also provide external interfaces to other software entities, dependingon the customer needs. The service back-end has been designed to provide inter-operation with a variety of third-party controllers and PLCs. For this reason,an independent module, denoted as the Communications Adapter Module(CAM) in the ensuing, has been implemented, which undertakes the task ofacquiring data from the remote installation and feeding them to the serviceback-end as well as conveying data from the service back-end to the remote site.Multiple CAMs are supported. The service back-end also incorporates an Appli-cation Logic Module (the ALM), which calculates the derived parameters. Thismodule can be extended at will with new calculation functions. Other serviceback-end modules include the Notiﬁcation Server Module (NSM), which under-takes the notiﬁcation of the PV management solution users via SMS or e-mailas well as the Reporting Server Module (RSM), which handles the generationand delivery of reports. All necessary data are stored in a database.
The top level is the management level. At this level, information from the entiresystem is accessible. The PV management solution includes a front-end, capable ofoperation with a standard Web browser (Internet explorer, Mozilla Firefox orGoogle Chrome). A uniﬁed interface is presented to the operator and end-users20 A. Meliones et al.for manual intervention in the system. It provides vertical access to the values ofthe automation level, including the modiﬁcation of parameters such as timetables.Alarms are generated for exceptional situations such as technical errors or criticalconditions. The long-term storage of historical data with the ability to give com-mands for reports and statistics is also part of this level.
3. Main control and automation services
The PV management solution models the remote installation as a hierarchical treestructure. The nodes of the tree can be broadly categorized either as nodes repre-senting virtual entities, or nodes representing equipment entities. The former donot contain actual equipment installed in the ﬁeld. Such entities are for examplethe installation itself, a room etc. These nodes are denoted as virtual segmentsin the ensuing. The latter contain a speciﬁc piece of equipment installed in theﬁeld. Such entities are for example the numerous sensors/transducers, speciﬁcequipment etc. These nodes are denoted as asset segments in the ensuing. Both vir-tual and asset segments are used in the ensuing as placeholders for the data thatare handled by the PV management solution. It has to be noted that certain partsof the tree may be absent in certain cases. This model can be arbitrarily extendedto match further customer requirements.
3.1. Installation monitoring basics
The monitoring service of the PV management solution is based on the methodol-ogy presented in the ﬁgure below. The PV management solution supports the col-lection, storage, visualization and post-processing of the whole history of a largevariety of types of information for each node of the hierarchical model presentedabove. These include:
/C15Primary parameters: Primary parameters are calculated as the time-series aver-age of real-time data after a certain set of validations have been applied. Thespan of this average (the recording period) has to be an integer sub-multipleor multiple of an hour. The PV management solution supports any recordinginterval, though it has to be the same for the whole of a single installation.Daily, monthly and yearly averaged values are also supported for each primaryparameter separately. Data acquisition and the calculation of primary parame-ters are considered to be carried out by ﬁeld-deployed controllers in order toreduce the data that are conveyed to the service back-end and minimize band-width requirements./C15Maximum/minimum value parameters: These parameters are assumed to becalculated in much the same way as primary parameters, except for the opera-tion applied on the real-time data. Daily, monthly and yearly maximum/minimum values are also supported. The calculation of maximum/minimumIntegrated facility management of photovoltaic systems 21value parameters is considered to be carried out by ﬁeld-deployed controllers inorder to reduce the data that are conveyed to the service back-end and minimizebandwidth requirements./C15Derived parameters: Derived parameters are calculated using a speciﬁc mathe-matic formula which operates on a speciﬁc set of values or vectors of valuesof primary (and/or other derived) parameters. The PV management solutionprovides the infrastructure that is necessary to carry out all derived parametercalculations in the service back-end so as to further minimize the necessarybandwidth and storage at the remote site. In the case that derived parametersare calculated in the ﬁeld, they can be considered as primary parameters withinthe service back-end. Daily, monthly and yearly values are supported for eachderived parameter separately./C15Raw, real-time data: The service back-end has been designed to store raw, real-time data sets as they are acquired from the ﬁeld-deployed controllers./C15Real-time monitored data: In certain cases, it is necessary to present to the userthe real-time data as they are recorded by the ﬁeld-deployed controllers, withoutany processing or storage. This functionality has to be supported by the equip-ment deployed at the installation./C15Status, states and state-change events:The concept is presented in detail in theremaining paragraphs of this section.
Each parameter sample and event are collected, stored and visualized with theiracquisition time-stamp and engineering unit. Primary and derived parameters aswell as raw real-time data are collected from the ﬁeld based on a time schedule,aligned with the recording period. Status-change events are collected upon theiroccurrence and real-time monitored data upon user request.
The PV management solution records and presents to the user the current statusof entities that are either internal or external to the solution. The status is consid-ered to be a powerful tool in terms of the user getting an immediate grasp onwhether any entity of the installation being monitored or even the PV managementsolution itself operate properly or not. Status information actually encodes theseverity of the condition of each entity independently, which is a number on a scalefrom 0 (everything normal) to 100 (complete disaster). The status update mecha-nism shall become apparent in the ensuing.
Apart from status information, the PV management solution also supports anarbitrary number of state-sets per entity. Each state set encodes a set of states,which are mutually exclusive, i.e. the entity can be found in only one of them. Eachstate of each state set also has a preset severity level associated with it. Changesamong states are triggered by state-change events, which are either directly gener-ated by sensors and equipment connected to the PV management solution (pri-mary events), or by the PV management solution itself (derived events). The PVmanagement solution provides all means necessary for the user to acknowledge(validate) that he/she has been notiﬁed on any speciﬁc state-change event and22 A. Meliones et al.has taken appropriate actions. This acknowledgement is a simple form of book-keeping of user actions for further investigation. Each state-change event is storedand presented to the user per state set with a list of data, including the entity gen-erating the event, the state the event led to in a descriptive form, the event date/time in the timezone of the installation, the date/time of the reception of the eventin the timezone of the installation, and the event acknowledgment status andacknowledgment text.
Since all entities are organized in a hierarchical structure, the current status of acertain entity cannot depend solely on the state (or states) it is into, but the sta-tuses of all underlying entities within the hierarchy are used as well. This is a basicconcept within the PV management solution, since it enables the efﬁcient notiﬁca-tion of the user if something calls for his/her attention. Moreover, this hierarchicalstatus propagation, as it will be denoted in the ensuing, can help the user realizethe effect that an entity being in a certain state of a certain state set has on theoperation of the installation as a whole.
The status of each entity of the installation hierarchy is always equal to themaximum severity of the states of all underlying entities at any given point in time.The statuses of all involved entities are presented to the user in an easily under-standable form (e.g. color encoding, based on a set of severity thresholds) so thathis/her attention is drawn not only to a speciﬁc event but also to the effect it hason the operation of the whole installation. The approach is further clariﬁedthroughFig. 4, presenting an exemplary hierarchy with the related statuses andstate-sets for each node. The related severities are also depicted, so that the hier-archical status propagation is apparent.
3.2. Monitoring service
The main duty of the PV management solution is to provide, in a timely and con-cise manner, information to its user on the operation of a group of remote sites. Asfar as the monitoring service is concerned, the ﬂow of data through the solutionarchitecture is presented inFig. 5. The CAM retrieves information necessary forthe addressing of data items within the site-level control/monitoring system fromthe service back-end. It then connects to the ﬁeld-deployed equipment based on aschedule, collects the necessary data and submits them to the service back-end,
80
51 80
39 80 9 51
5 9 21 80 51 390
State-setStatus
Figure 4The hierarchical status propagation concept.Integrated facility management of photovoltaic systems 23which caches them in case some other module requests them and writes them tothe database. The ALM retrieves the necessary primary data to calculate thederived values, also based on a schedule and submits the results to the serviceback-end, which again caches and stores them in the database. The remainingsoftware modules (the Graphical User Interface, the Reporting Server Moduleand the Notiﬁcation Server Module) connect to the back-end, either in a scheduledmanner or upon user request and collect data in order to depict them or use themin reports or notiﬁcations.
3.3. Control service
The PV management solution allows the user to issue commands toward theequipment within the installation or the solution itself. This functionality is imple-mented through the notion of settings, whose values are considered constant fromthe time they are set until they are reset. Each setting event is stored and visualizedwith its timestamp and engineering unit. A user-inserted comment is also stored.The user is notiﬁed whether his/her action has been successful or not as well aswhether it has been applied yet. As far as the control service is concerned, the ﬂowof data through the solution architecture is presented in Fig. 6. A control
User Interface
Back-end Service
Communication ModuleDatabase
Monitoring & Control SystemReporting ModuleApplication logic moduleNotification Module
Figure 5Monitoring service architecture.
User Interface
Back-end Service
Communication ModuleDatabase
Monitoring & Control System
Figure 6Control service architecture.24 A. Meliones et al.command is issued via the GUI toward the service back-end. This software mod-ule stores the command to the database and forwards it to the CAM, whichretrieves information necessary for the addressing of the controls within thesite-level control/monitoring system from the service back-end. It then connectsto the ﬁeld-deployed equipment and propagates the command. At all times, theuser is notiﬁed via the GUI on the progress of the command he/she has issued.
3.4. Notiﬁcation service
The Notiﬁcation service informs the user on the occurrence of critical events.Notiﬁcation is via emails (internet gateway) or SMS (SMS gateway). The gener-ation of such notiﬁcations is not triggered by individual state-change events butrather by the status changes of each node of the hierarchy which is affected bythem. More speciﬁcally, if the severity of the status goes above a certain user con-ﬁgurable threshold and remains there for a preset period of time, a notiﬁcation isgenerated to alert the user. Additionally, if the status falls below the same thresh-old, another notiﬁcation is generated in order to notify the user on the expirationof the criticality. The user is capable of subscribing to the status changes of andconﬁguring the severity thresholds for each hierarchy node separately. It isunderstandable that if he/she, depending on the subscription he/she has conﬁg-ured, may receive multiple notiﬁcations upon occurrence of the same event orset of events affecting the statuses of a certain set of nodes in the hierarchy.Moreover, the user is capable of subscribing separately to the positive edge (sta-tus going above threshold) or the negative edge (status going below threshold)for each hierarchy node separately. Finally, the PV management solution logsall notiﬁcations sent.
3.5. Reporting service
A very important function is the automatic generation of reports. This serviceuses the Web and delivers reports to e-mails or mobile phones of users who havesubscribed to the service. These reports include information on the operation,maintenance and ﬁnancial situation of the entire system or speciﬁc facilities.The timing and scope are determined by the administrator and the choices ofthe user.
3.6. Data export service
The Data export service allows the user to store locally data that are stored in theapplication. The source of data is primary or derived parameters from any mon-itored entity. The extracted data are in xml ﬁle format or graphic representations.The time frequency of data extraction and export is determined by the user.Integrated facility management of photovoltaic systems 254. Solar park installation
The operation of solar parks/PV plants is based on the photovoltaic effect. Thephotovoltaic effect is the basic physical process in which a photovoltaic cell con-verts sunlight into electricity. A solar park consists of solar panels. Each panel is aset of solar cells and numerous other protective and functional coatings installedonto an aluminum frame as a means of support. They are connected in series untilwe get the desired effect on current output and in parallel until they reach thedesired voltage. As a result, solar panel connection is very important duringinstallation.
A critical equipment of solar parks is battery. The battery stores solar energy toprovide electricity during periods of absence of sun, such as nights and cloudydays. It must be able to be discharged and recharged. Rechargeable batteriesare a bit more expensive than the reserve batteries. Without batteries, a PVC sys-tem can provide electricity only with sunlight. Along with the battery there shouldbe a charge controller. Its role is to provide electricity to the batteries from thesolar panel in a way that prevents the solar panels from overloading the battery.
Lastly, solar parks have power inverters. Solar panels generate electricity to DC(direct current) power. Some devices are powered directly from the panel. How-ever, most devices use high voltage AC (alternating current) power. The powerconverter performs this procedure. It converts low voltage DC from the batteryto high voltage alternating current AC that is required by most householdappliances.
4.1. Signals
Every control and monitoring application controls a number of signals using theappropriate sensing elements. Each transducer gives some type of digital (binaryor discrete) or analog (continuous) signal, or more complex signals in the formof a protocol, e.g. serial. The type of signal depends on the observed physical sizeand the transducer used. Controllers inside an automation system can control andmonitor digital, analog and serial data from sensors, actuators and devices ( Nof, 2009). Our implementation for controlling and monitoring the power of a solarpark uses the following signals:
/C15Power signal:It is an analog signal. This paper suggests an implementationwhich uses AC power. This consists of three components:
oReal/active power:The amount of energy consumed; measured in Watts.oApparent power:The amount of energy delivered from a source to a charger.It must always be greater than that needed from a device to work; measuredin Volt-Amperes (va).oReactive power:The amount of energy that returns to the source in eachcycle because of the stored energy; measured in reactive Volt-Amperes (var).26 A. Meliones et al./C15Temperature signal:It is an analog signal used for checking the proper function-ing of the system in extreme environmental conditions. Sensors measure thetemperature of the installation, both internal (module temperature) and external(air temperature). The ideal temperature for solar power plants is 25 /C176C (77/C176F). When temperature increases, the current increases slightly, while the voltage isreduced too quickly. This results in a lower overall energy output. A generalrule is that the performance of a cell drops by 0.5% per 1 /C176C above the 25/C176C. /C15Humidity signal:It is an analog signal. A sensor measures the humidity of theenvironment which is used for monitoring the proper functioning of the systemespecially when the signal value goes over/under a speciﬁed threshold./C15Wind signal:It is an analog signal used for the same reason as humidity signal.
The system has been tested with real data. These were collected during a periodof one year from a real PV installation which collected and monitored the abovesignals.Fig. 7depicts the annual power produced in our monitored park inrelation with air temperature and humidity in the park area. The maximum per-formance is in May, while the minimum appears in mid-December. The perfor-mance increases during the summer months due to the favorable climate.Apparently, performance change is proportional to temperature change. Mini-mum performance has been recorded during the day of the year with minimumair temperature. This synchronization between the two plots does not happenfor maximum performance. That means that temperature is not the only factor
Figure 7Annual produced power vs. air temperature and humidity.Integrated facility management of photovoltaic systems 27affecting the performance of a solar park. Accurate weather data are essential tothe performance evaluation of the solar plant (inAccess, 2013). The total annual power produced by the solar park reached 1.82 MW.
Fig. 8depicts the power and temperature values across a winter and a summerday. Recordings on 12 August 2010 – a hot summer day with an outside tempera-ture of an average 30/C176C – show a peak of 900 KW. Recordings on 12 December2010 – a cold winter day with an outside temperature of a mere 5 /C176C – show that it is easily and permanently possible to achieve the goal of 70 /C176C and a thermal energy of almost 1.5 MWh in the storage units: a very good result for almost theshortest and coldest day of the year. In both cases, it is observed that the energyproduced (apparent power) by the park is entirely consumed (active power).
4.2. Alarms
Alarms are binary signals which depend on one or more signals and activated by thechanges of their values and situation. In the case of binary digital signals the alarm isactivated by the state change of the signal. In case of analog signals, activation of thealarm takes place when the signal value exceeds or goes under a threshold. Our solarpark control and monitoring application implements the following alarms:
/C15Temperature alarm (air and module alarm): The manufacturer or user sets min-imum and maximum values for air and module temperature in order to controlthe environment of a solar plant system in extreme weather conditions, such asfrosts or large heat waves. Temperature alarms are created when values exceedthese thresholds. The ideal temperature for solar power plants is 25 /C176C (77/C176F).
Figure 8AC power vs. temperature (12 Aug and 12 Dec).28 A. Meliones et al./C15Power loss alarm:This alarm is activated by a combination of factors. Some ofthem are long periods of shadow, battery performance and temperature. Asmentioned before (see temperature signal), the increase in temperature resultsin a lower overall energy output./C15Battery alarm:The amount of kW per hour that a solar panel can produce withbattery life depends on temperature and on sun exposure. The manufacturer oruser sets minimum/maximum thresholds and when the temperature value is outof this range for a long period then a battery alarm is created. The performanceof a battery is reduced below a threshold and battery stops charging over a tem-perature limit./C15Mold alarm:It is created with the logic of speciﬁed thresholds for valid values,as described in temperature alarm./C15Security alarm: Allows a user to control the installation of any disasters/violations, through optical ﬁbers applied to solar panels or used for installa-tion’s fence.
5. Implemented services
The developed PV management solution for controlling and monitoring solarparks implements a group of services, as these are speciﬁed at the previoussections.
5.1. Surveillance
Every installation has cameras in speciﬁed areas according to pairs of coordinates(south, north, west and east). The user can monitor with live video every plant byspecifying the direction s/he wishes, and even handling PTZ (pan, tilt, zoom) func-tionality if available (seeFig. 9).
5.2. Performance
This service is very important because it allows the user to monitor very quicklythe total performance of the park. The user can monitor the current performanceas well as deﬁne speciﬁc periods of time to view a graph of the recorded values.This service allows for macro-observation of the performance of the PV systemin ﬁeld conditions. The user can compare the performance values between days,months, years or certain time intervals and draw useful conclusions (seeFig. 10). Performance analysis and evaluation are based on the procedures andperformance indicators deﬁned in the IEC 61724 standard ( International Electrotechnical Commission, 1998; Emery et al., 2013 ), extended properly to support state-sets and state-change events. Performance monitoring is signiﬁcantlyaffected by the quality and calibration interval of the measurement hardware andIntegrated facility management of photovoltaic systems 29Figure 9Surveillance service.
Figure 10Performance service.30 A. Meliones et al.the professionalism of the installation. The dominant error source in determiningthe system power is determining the plane-of-array irradiance ( Emery and Smith, 2011).
Following the IEC 61724 directives, the PV Management System acquires realtime measurement data from the PV equipment (DC–DC converter or inverter,sensors like pyranometer, temperature and humidity sensors etc.) on ﬁxed periodsof time. The completeness of real-time data is determined and used for further pro-cessing. Derived parameters are calculated using mathematic formulas that oper-ate on speciﬁc sets of values or vectors of values of primary (and/or other derived)parameters covering a set of speciﬁc time spans (always in multiples of the record-ing period), called ‘‘reporting periods’’. IEC61724 presents a number of derivedparameters, related to efﬁciency, yields, losses and performance ratio which canbe used to monitor the performance of a PV system. The ones selected for thePV management system are mean array efﬁciency, array capture losses, and per-formance ratio.
Mean array efﬁciency represents the mean energy conversion efﬁciency of thePV array, which is useful for comparison with the array efﬁciency at its nominaloutput power. The difference in efﬁciency values represents diode, wiring, and mis-match losses as well as energy wasted during plant operation. The array capturelosses represent the losses due to array operation and indicate the amount of timeduring which the array would be required to operate at its rated power to providesuch losses. The maintenance performance ratio is calculated per PV array, PVarray group and the PV plant as a whole only for values of total irradiance whichare above the standard speciﬁed threshold. This threshold is the same for all per-formance ratio calculations.
The PV management system must be capable of calculating derived parametersfor a variety of time spans, which extend into the past. It is understandable thatsince the values of all primary parameters are stored within the solution for everyrecording period, it is possible to post-process that data to produce derived param-eters for any reporting period.
5.3. Data export
Through the data export page the user can select one monitored signal or a groupof signals, the time period of interest for which a plot shall be produced (‘‘from/to’’ selection) and the unit (Xaxis) of representation (days, months, years). Theresults are being represented by graphical plots. The user further has the opportu-nity to store these values locally in an xml ﬁle or send them via email (see Fig. 11).
5.4. Alarm
The alarm service allows the user to check the thresholds and priority for eachsupported signal. The administrator can further set these values. AlarmIntegrated facility management of photovoltaic systems 31notiﬁcations are generated based on these values. Two speciﬁc alarms – batteryand performance – are generated automatically by functions inside the serviceback-end. For these two alarms the user can only deﬁne their threshold in percent-age mode, e.g. a notiﬁcation is being generated when battery reaches 15% of max-imum performance. In addition, this service displays a graphical representation forthe selected alarm in the speciﬁed period allowing the user to easily spot valuesexceeding the predeﬁned threshold which is depicted with a blue area (see Fig. 12).
5.5. Notiﬁcation
The user deﬁnes in his/her proﬁle page which type of communication channel willbe used per type of notiﬁcation and alarm. Three channels are provided by thesystem: (i) SMS to receive notiﬁcations in a mobile phone. (ii) Email, where theuser receives notiﬁcations in the email address ﬁlled in the registration form.(iii) Inbox, which is implemented through a web page of the PV management sys-tem called ‘Notiﬁcations’. This page is accessible through the system environmentof a logged user. It is easy to use and very practical because all the information isgathered together (seeFig. 13).
Figure 11Data export service.32 A. Meliones et al.6. Technology framework
The proposed PV management system has been implemented in Visual Studio2010 with Framework .NET 4. The programming language used is the object-oriented C# language v4.0. The application consists of three projects. The ﬁrstproject is a web site where all .aspx pages are implemented. The aspx pages
Figure 13Notiﬁcation inbox service.
Figure 12Alarm service.Integrated facility management of photovoltaic systems 33comprise the user interface. Each page has its own ﬁle code behind which imple-ments functions of the Application Logic Module.
The second one is a Class Library project named DBTier. This project providesthe Database Access Layer of the PV management solution and establishes theconnection to the system database. It contains ﬁles for each database table andcommunicates with the Application Logic, Reporting Module and NotiﬁcationModule by carrying out insertions and updates or returning feedback via queryresults for every function they operate.
The last project is a WCF Service Library project, which implements the WebService of the PV management application. WCF is an API in the .NET Frame-work for building connected, service-oriented applications. Our PV managementapplication has implemented a Mail Sender Web Service, which sends notiﬁcationemails when an alarm is created. For this purpose we used the System.Net.Maillibrary of the .NET framework. This library contains classes in order to send emailto a designated SMTP server for delivery. Notiﬁcation mails include reports asattachments.
The Visual Studio Integrated Development Environment includes the creationof WCF Service Library for Web Services implementation. The WCF ServiceLibrary is a compiled component that can be expanded as a Web Service or Win-dows Service or even as part of a custom application hosting. When the debuggerstarts, the WCF Service Host (WcfSvcHost.exe) implements the hosting of theWeb Services projects. Then it opens the WCF Test Client (WcfTestClient.exe)and displays a list of service endpoints that have been deﬁned in a conﬁguration
Figure 14Database ER diagram.34 A. Meliones et al.ﬁle. Therefore, the Wcf Test Client tool helps experience the implementation ofWeb Services and allows the users to test their Web Services without having to exe-cute the web application, and to implement the WcfSvcHost hosting without theneed for setting up of Web Services using the IIS (Internet Information Services)Microsoft web server.
The Graphical representations of our application were implemented usingCharting Controls which are embedded in Framework 4.0. With these tools wecan specify the type of graph, the format of the source of data and the ﬁlter of data.
The database on the service back-end was implemented in Microsoft SQLServer 2008 and consists of twelve tables (seeFig. 14):
/C15Park: contains all registered parks./C15Panel: contains all registered panels, each connected to a single park./C15User: contains data for registered users who have access to a solar park./C15Panel data: stores signals’ values. These values derive from the CAM, whichacquires data from the remote installation and calculates values’ average of atime span of 30 s. The values stored are: battery, humidity, wind speed, airand module temperature, as well as active, reactive and apparent power./C15Contact media: contains all available contact media (email-sms-inbox)./C15UserContactMedia: registers the media by which the user is notiﬁed for eachalarm./C15Notiﬁcation: saves all inbox notiﬁcations which are automatically created by thesystem./C15Priorities: contains all available priorities for system’s notiﬁcation (low-medium–high)./C15ParkUser: connects users with parks deﬁning a role for each relation./C15Roles: contains the supported user roles of the system./C15Thresholds: provide minimum and maximum value for all measured signals./C15ParkThreshold: relates each park with its active thresholds.
7. Conclusions
We have developed a ﬂexible modular network-based application which supportsall key services for automatic remote control and management of photovoltaicparks. Our implemented PV management application fully achieved the systemobjectives meeting successfully the initial user requirements. We have presentedin detail a three-tier layered architecture and the according design and implemen-tation of a modular service back-end system including database, notiﬁcation,reporting and arithmetic logic system components. The presented integrated sys-tem allows the easy and convenient monitoring of a real operational environmentand helps the executives to administer their solar parks. The service back-end canprovide online customized monitoring of signal groups and system status, energyIntegrated facility management of photovoltaic systems 35production and environmental beneﬁts in real-time. We have tested our systemwith real data collected and monitored during a period of one year from a2MWp PV plant installation. The monitored panel data included several signals:active, reactive and apparent power, air and module temperature, battery, humid-ity and wind speed.
The presented system is a successful paradigm of automation technology andintegration of front- and back-end system components which can be easilymigrated to solar buildings and even entire solar cities for solar energy exploita-tion, as well as other types of renewable energy generation installations andremote automation applications. The presented remote installation managementsolution targets application areas in need of advanced control and monitoringfunctionality, including:
/C15Interfacing with a variety of equipment employing different communicationmethods and protocols./C15Support of on-site logic and storage to enable remote control loops andintelligent data pre-processing (e.g. event generation, algorithmic operationson real-time data etc.)./C15Storage of near real-time historical data (at a deﬁned sampling rate) to acentral location around the clock./C15Calculation and storage of derived parameters (e.g. key performance indica-tors) on a scheduled basis./C15Hierarchical storage and presentation of data to facilitate post-calculationsand retrieval./C15Access to the stored data over the Web and via an intuitive front-end operat-ing within the browser with the capability to export data to the operator’s PC./C15Event handling assisted by the concept of status propagation and notiﬁca-tions in order to readily alert users./C15Scalability to any number of measurement points.
Future extensions of the presented work will study more novel approaches formonitoring the current produced by arrays (strings) of photovoltaic modulesbased on Wireless Sensor Networks (WSN) technology to let the creation of aself-conﬁguring wireless network of low-power and low-cost devices (no wiresfor data transmission and for supplying power to the devices), in order to dramat-ically reduce the installation cost and time.
References
Bagnall, D.M., Boreland, M., 2008. Photovoltaic technologies. Energy Policy 36 (12), 4390–4396 .
Brown, M.A., Southworth, F., 2008. Mitigating climate change through green buildings and smart growth.Environ. Planning 40 (3), 653–675
.
Dobriceanu, M., Bitoleanu, A., Popescu, M., Subtirelu, E.G., 2009. Electrical stations real-time monitoring usingcombined protection and control systems. IEEE International Symposium on Diagnostics for ElectricMachines, Power Electronics and Drives.36 A. Meliones et al.Dorf, R.C., Bishop, R.H., 2010. Modern Control Systems, twelveth ed. Prentice Hall, ISBN-13: 978–0136024583.
Ekins-Daukes, N.J., 2013. Routes to high efﬁciency photovoltaic power conversion. 39th IEEE PhotovoltaicSpecialists Conference (PVSC), Tampa, FI, USA.
Emery, K., Smith, R., 2011. Monitoring system performance. Photovoltaic module reliability workshop,National Renewable Energy Lab, USA.
Emery, K., Anderberg, A., Campanelli, M., Ciszek, P., Mack, C., Moriarty, T., Osterwald, C., Ottoson, L.,Rummel, S., Williams, R., 2013. Rating photovoltaics. 39th IEEE Photovoltaic Specialists Conference(PVSC), Tampa, FI, USA.
Fthenakis, V., Mason, J.E., Zweibel, K., 2009. The technical, geographical, and economic feasibility of solarenergy to supply the energy needs of the US. Energy Policy 37 (2), 387–399
.
Gill, S.E., Handley, J.F., Ennos, A.R., Pauleit, S., 2007. Adapting cities for climate change: the role of the greeninfrastructure. Built Environ. 33 (1), 115–133
.
Hallegate, S., Heal, G., Fay, M., Treguer, D., 2012. From growth to green growth – a framework, the nationalbureau of economic research, Working Paper No. 17841.
Huang, Y., Quibria, M.G., 2013. Green growth: theory and evidence, world institute for development economicsresearch, Working Paper No. 2013/056.
inAccess, 2013. Solar Plant monitoring: the role and importance of weather data in solar plant performanceevaluation. White paper <http://downloads.inaccess.com/role-and-importance-accurate-weather-data-solar-plant-performance-evaluation>.
International Electrotechnical Commission, 1998. International Standard IEC 61724: Photovoltaic systemperformance monitoring – Guidelines for measurement, data exchange and analysis.
Irmak, E., Bulbul, H.I., Kose, A., Calpbinici, 2013. A web-based real-time industrial energy monitoring system.4th International Conference on Power Engineering, Energy and Electrical Drives, Istanbul, Turkey.
Ja¨nique, M., 2012. Green growth: from a growing eco-industry to economic sustainability. Energy Policy 48, 13–21
.
Kastner, W., Neugschwandtner G., Soucek S., Newman H.M, 2005. Communication systems for buildingautomation and control. In: Proceedings of the IEEE, Special Issue on Industrial Communication Systems, 93(6), pp. 1178–1203.
Konieczny, F., Krumsiek, D., Behr, T., Kruse, A., Aron, R., 2012. Method and control device for controlling anautomating system. United States Patents, US 8190274 B2.
Lahti, J.P., Shamsuzzoha, A. Kankaanpaa, T., 2011; Web-based technologies in power plant automation andSCADA systems: a review and evaluation. IEEE International Conference on Control System, Computingand Engineering (ICCSCE), Penang.
Nof, S.Y. (Ed.), 2009. Springer Handbook of Automation, ISBN 978-3-540-78830-0.
Passino, M.K., 2005. Biomimicry for optimization, Control, and Automation. Part I. 7–55, Springer-Verlag,London, UK.
Rycrofta, M.J., Israelssonb, S., Pricec, C., 2000. The global atmospheric electric circuit, solar activity and climatechange. J. Atmos. Solar-Terrestrial Phys. 62 (17–18), 1563–1576
.
Sa´nchez-Pacheco, F.J., Sotorrio-Ruiz, P.J., Heredia-Larrubia, J.R., Pe ´rez-Hidalgo, F., Sidrach-de-Cardona, M., 2011. Low cost DC lines PLC based Photovoltaic plants parameters smart monitoring communications andcontrol module. International Conference on Power Engineering, Energy and Electrical Drives (POWER-ENG), Malaga.
Toman, M. 2012. Green growth: an exploratory review. WB Policy Research Working Paper 6067. World Bank.
Trovao, J.P., Santos, F.M., Silva, M.J., Jorge, H.M., 2008. A web-based monitoring approach for power systemsin industrial plants. IEEE International Symposium on Industrial Electronics, Cambridge, pp. 1769–1774.
Wagle, A.M., Lobo, A.M., Santosh Kumar, A., Shubhangi Patil, 2008. Real time web-based conditionmonitoring system for power transformers – case study. International Conference on Condition Monitoringand Diagnosis, Beijing.
Woyte, A., Dierckxsens, C., De Brabandere, K., 2013. Photovoltaics in power systems: legends, challenges andsolutions, 39th IEEE Photovoltaic Specialists Conference (PVSC), Tampa, FI, USA.Integrated facility management of photovoltaic systems 37