ABSTRACTS
Experiments on Adaptation of foreign accented speakers in native Arabic ASRsystems
Sid-Ahmed Selouania, Yousef Ajami Alotaibiba
LARIHS Lab. Universite´de Moncton, Campus de Shippagan, Canada
bComputer Engineering Department, King Saud University, Saudi ArabiaE-mail addresses: selouani@umcs.ca, yalotaibi@ccis.ksu.edu.saKeywords:Arabic language, Adaptation, Foreign accents, MLLR, MAP, HMM,WestPoint, LDC, NativeAbstract: This paper addresses the adaptation of Arabic speech recognition sys-tems to foreign accented speakers. This adaptation is accomplished by using theadaptation techniques; namely, the Maximum Likelihood Linear Regression(MLLR), the Maximum a posteriori (MAP), and the combination of MLLRand MAP. The LDC-WestPoint Modern Standard Arabic corpus and HTKtoolkit were used throughout all experiments. The systems were evaluated usingboth word and phoneme levels. Results show that particular Arabic Phonemessuch as pharyngeal and emphatic consonants, that are hard to pronounce fornon-native speakers, beneﬁt from the adaptation process using MLLR andMAP combination. An overall improvement of 7.37% has been obtained.
Peer review under responsibility of King SaudUniversity.doi:10.1016/S2210-8327(11)00015-9 Production and hosting by ElsevierApplied Computing and Informatics (2011) ix–xii
King Saud University
Applied Computing and Informatics
www.ksu.edu.sawww.sciencedirect.com
Assessing the Quality of Web SitesLayla Hasan
a, Emad Abuelrubba
Deptartment of Management Information Systems,Zarqa Private University,JordanE-mail: l.hassan@zpu.edu.jo
bDepartment of Computer Science,Zarqa Private University, JordanE-mail: abuelrub@zpu.edu.joKeywords:e-Commerce, Electronic services, Website criteria, Website evaluation,Website qualityAbstract: This paper reviewed the most recent evaluation criteria methods whichwere used in diﬀerent e-business services. Furthermore, it proposes general cri-teria for evaluating the quality of any website regardless of the type of servicethat it oﬀers. The dimensions of the criteria are content quality, design quality,organization quality, and user-friendly quality. These dimensions together withtheir comprehensive indicators and check list can be used by web designers anddevelopers to create quality websites to improve the electronic service and thenthe image of any organization on the Internet.E-learning in the Saudi Tertiary Education: Potential and ChallengesKhlood Al-Siraihi Al-HarbiUniversity of LeicesterE-mail: ka41@le.ac.ukKeywords:e-Learning, Higher education, Adoption FactorsAbstract:The advent of the Internet in the twenty-ﬁrst century has led to remark-able changes in several aspects of our lives. This advanced technology has becomean essential tool of communication and information, thus oﬀering unique advan-tages to both educators and students. Despite a recent educational revolution inSaudi Arabian educational systems, the issue of access to higher education stillremains one of the more enduring challenges. The need for more delivery modesthat take education to learners wherever they are, and not within the boundariesof the campus, is thus a necessity. E-learning could dramatically increase access totertiary education and training, especially for those learners who were once de-nied learning opportunities for any reason such as health, distance or the like.Yet, successful implementation of e-learning requires an understanding of the is-sues that promote the eﬀective use of the technologies. This article discusses thefactors that inﬂuence e-learning in Saudi higher education through analyzing theperceptions and attitudes of Saudi university students (n. 531). It reports the re-sults of a survey conducted to investigate the acceptance of e-learning in a Saudix Abstractshigher education institution as perceived by university students. The ﬁndings de-monstrated that attitudes toward e-learning, subjective norms, perceived beha-vioral control as well as e-learning systems attributes were critical determinantsof students’ behavioral intention to use e-learning. By explaining students’ beha-vioral intentions, the ﬁndings of this study will help to provide insight into thebest way to promote e-learning acceptance among students.Modeling the Electronic Transactions Acceptance using an Extended TechnologyAcceptance ModelSaid S. Al-GahtaniAssociate Professor of Computer Information Systems (CIS)Administrative Sciences Department King Khalid University, P O Box 1183,Abha, Saudi ArabiaE-Mail: ssalgahtani@kku.edu.saKeywords:e-Commerce, e-Government, On-line transactions, Internet, Trust,Credibility, Risk, Technology acceptance model, TAM, Saudi ArabiaAbstract:The outlook for e-commerce and e-government depends not only onindividuasl acceptance of Internet technologies as viable transaction means,but also on the recognition of the Web as a reliable milieu. In light of this, acomprehensive model describing the factors that drive individuals to accepton-line transactions over the Web was developed and tested. This study attemptsto integrate the well-established technology acceptance model (TAM) with threeconstructs; namely trust, credibility and risk, which are of paramount impor-tance in predicting individual acceptance of on-line transactions.This study seeks empirical support for an extended TAM with three constructsrelated to e-transactions in Saudi Arabia. The structural equation modelingtechnique was used to evaluate the causal model and to examine the reliabilityand validity of the measurement model. Our ﬁndings show that each of trust,credibility and risk plays an important role toward the acceptance of on-linetransactions in the Saudi settings. To view a broader picture of electronic trans-action acceptance in Saudi Arabia, general Internet use with four demographicvariables were also incorporated into the model. We hope this study would con-tribute to a better understanding of individual on-line behavior in the emerginge-commerce and e-government environments. Such understanding would enableSaudi IT policy and decision makers solve problems in moving to the digitaleconomy and information society.Implications for management and practice of these ﬁndings are discussed to im-prove the acceptance of e-commerce and e-government as new technologies inSaudi Arabia.Abstracts xiBook Review: User Interface Design Books
Basit Qureshi
College of Computer and Information System Prince Sultan University, SaudiArabiaUser interface design or user interface engineering is the design of computers,mobile communication devices, software applications, websites with the focuson the user’s experience and interaction. The goal of user interface design isto improve users experience with simplicity and eﬃciency while keeping the de-sign ergonomically sound. In literature this phenomenon is known as ‘‘UserCentered Design’’. The term user friendly is often used as a synonym for usabil-ity which denotes the ease with which people can employ a particular tool orother human-made object in order to achieve a particular goal.The key beneﬁts of usability are increased user eﬃciency and productivity, re-duced development costs and most importantly increased customer satisfaction.The improved interface would also tend to lower the time needed to perform ne-cessary tasks. Usability is now recognized as an important software quality at-tribute, earning its place among more traditional attributes such asperformance and robustness. Indeed, various academic programs in Informa-tion technology and software development around the globe focus on usabilitydesign and engineering. Here we review recently published popular books in thearea of User Interface Design.xii Abstracts