ORIGINAL ARTICLE
Adaptation of foreign accented speakersin native Arabic ASR systems
Sid-Ahmed Selouania,*, Yousef Ajami Alotaibib
aLARIHS Lab., Universite´de Moncton, Campus de Shippagan, Canada
bComputer Engineering Department, King Saud University, Saudi ArabiaReceived 1 February 2009; accepted 1 March 2010
Available online 16 December 2010
KEYWORDSArabic language;Adaptation;Foreign accents;MLLR;MAP;HMM;WestPoint;LDC;NativeAbstractThis paper addresses the adaptation of Arabic speech recognition(ASR) systems to foreign accented speakers. This adaptation is accomplishedby using the adaptation techniques; namely, the Maximum Likelihood LinearRegression (MLLR), the Maximum a posteriori (MAP), and the combinationof MLLR and MAP. The LDC-WestPoint Modern Standard Arabic (MSA) cor-pus and HTK toolkit were used in implementing all experiments. The systemswere evaluated using both word and phoneme levels. Results show that uniqueMSA Arabic Phonemes such as pharyngeal and emphatic consonants, whichare difﬁcult to pronounce for non-native speakers, beneﬁt from the adaptationprocess using MLLR and MAP combination. An overall improvement of7.37% has been obtained. This opens the eyes in beneﬁting from adaptation tech-niques in overcoming the difﬁculties of pronouncing nonnative language pho-nemes.
ª2011 King Saud University. Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
*Corresponding author.E-mail addresses:selouani@umcs.ca(S.-A. Selouani),yaalotaibi@ksu.edu.sa(Y.A. Alotaibi).
2210-8327ª2011 King Saud University. Productionand hosting by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.Peer review under responsibility of King SaudUniversity.doi:10.1016/j.aci.2010.03.001
Production and hosting by ElsevierApplied Computing and Informatics (2011) 9,1–10
King Saud University
Applied Computing and Informatics
www.ksu.edu.sawww.sciencedirect.com
1. IntroductionCharacteristics of a second, non-native language are largely inﬂuenced by the ﬁrst(native) language. As a result, the performance of automatic speech recognitionsystems, usually trained by native speakers, often degrades when they are usedby non-native speakers. This is mainly due to both acoustic and phonological dif-ferences between accents (Hang et al., 2000; Zheng et al., 2005). These differences are not only due to different phoneme inventories of the languages, but even forthe same phoneme, non-native and native speakers pronounce different sounds.The modeling of separate accents remains difﬁcult and inaccurate due to the largenumber of non-native accents and to the insufﬁciency of non-native speech dataavailable for training. It is the reason why many studies propose to adapt nativephoneme models to accented phoneme models using ﬁrst language data. Numer-ous studies have been carried out to improve the automatic recognition of speechuttered by non-native speakers.Fakotakis (2004)worked on the adaptation of standard Greek speech recogni-tion systems to work with Cypriot dialect by using HTK toolkit ( Young, 2006), MLLR, MAP, and combined MLLR and MAP techniques ( Lee and Gauvain, 1993; Leggeter and Woodland, 1995). He considered Cypriot Greek as a variationdialect of standard Greek with the same set of phonemes. He used utterances readfrom isolated digits, digit strings, application words, dates, and dictionary assis-tance names. In this study 500 native Greek speakers were involved in the training,while 450 speakers were used to adapt to the system, and 50 speakers to test it.When the system was trained by pure Cypriot Greek, the performance degradeddue to inadequate training data. The best accuracy improvement was encounteredwith digits strings database and the combined MLLR and MAP technique. Thisimprovement was 2.1%.Bartkova and Jouvet (2004)proposed multiple models for improved speech rec-ognition of non-native French speakers. They addressed the problem of foreignaccent by using acoustic models of the target language phonemes (French pho-nemes in their case) adapted with speech data from three other languages: English,German, and Spanish. Their results obtained for 11 language groups of speakersshowed that error rate can be signiﬁcantly reduced when standard acoustic modelsof phonemes are adapted using speech data from other languages. In their outputs,the highest error rate reduction of 40% was obtained on English native speakers.They improved the recognition performance on almost all language groups, eventhough only three foreign languages were available in their study for acousticmodel adaptation.Hui et al. (2000)worked on principal mixture speaker adaptation for improvedcontinuous speech recognition. They introduced a method that reduced HMMcomplexity by choosing only the principle mixtures corresponding to particularspeaker’s characteristics. This method improved both recognition accuracy (by2 S.-A. Selouani, Y.A. Alotaibi31%) and recognition speed (by 30%) when compared to full mixture speakeradaptation models.The research on Arabic language mainly focuses on Modern standard Arabic,which is used throughout the media, courtrooms and academic institutions of theArabic countries. Previous work on developing ASR was dedicated to dialectaland colloquial Arabic within the 1997 NIST benchmark evaluations, and morerecently on the recognition of conversational and dialectal speech, as it is reportedinKirchhoff et al. (2003). Moreover, and compared to other languages, the Arabiclanguage beneﬁts from very limited number of research efforts. The goal of thispaper is to investigate how adaptation techniques could improve a trained recog-nition system to be used by non-native Arabic speakers to get minimum amount ofdegradation in system accuracy. This adaptation is accomplished by using theadaptation techniques; namely, MLLR, MAP, and combination of MLLR andMAP. The original recognition system was designed for and trained by nativeArabic speakers. Before adaptation, the system was tested by non-native Arabicspeakers and the performance was considered for the sake comparisons with thoseof the adapted systems. We have four adaptation lists and three adaptation tech-niques; hence we have 12 adapted systems. Each system is evaluated at both wordlevel and phoneme level.The organization of this paper is as follows. The second section gives a basicbackground on Arabic language. In the third section, adaptation methods arebrieﬂy presented. Then, the fourth section presents the experimental framework,and the ﬁfth section proceeds with a discussion of the obtained results. Finally,the sixth section concludes and indicates the perspective of this work.2. Basic Arabic language backgroundArabic is a Semitic language, and it is one of the oldest languages in the world to-day. It is the ﬁfth widely used language nowadays (Al-Zabibi, 1990). The Arabic language has many differences when compared to European languages such asEnglish. Some of the other differences are Arabic unique phonemes, phonetic fea-tures, and complicated morphological structures. A major difference lies in theArabic text, where it is written with the absence of any information that leadsto short vowels, geminate, and pharyngealization. This might lead to many iden-tical-looking forms in a large variety of contexts, which decreases predictability incorrect word pronunciation, sentence meaning, and language model rules. Hence,the determination of accurate language model from texts becomes very difﬁcultwhen the type and position of short vowels, for example, are unknown ( United Nations, 2003; Selouani and Caelen, 1998). Modern Standard Arabic (MSA)has 34 basic phonemes, of which six are vowels and 28 are consonants. The Arabiclanguage has fewer vowels than English. It has three long and three short vowels,while American English has at least 12 vowels. Permissible syllables in the Arabiclanguage include the following: CV, CVC, and CVCC, where V indicates a (longAdaptation of foreign accented speakers in native Arabic ASR systems 3or short) vowel, while C indicates a consonant. Arabic utterances can only startwith a consonant.Arabic is characterized by the presence of emphatic and pharyngeal phonemes.There are a total of ﬁve pharyngeal phonemes; among which two are fricatives:/H/ and /C/. These phonemes are characterized by the constriction formedbetween the tongue and the lower pharynx in addition to the rising of the larynx.There are three uvular pharyngeal phonemes, /x/, /G/, and /q/ characterized by aconstriction formed between the tongue and the upper pharynx for /x/ and /G/and a complete closure for /q/ at the same level. On the other hand, there are fouremphatic phonemes: /S/, /D/, /T/, and /Z/. These phonemes are emphatic versionsof the oral dental consonants /s/, /d/, /t/, and /TH/.3. System adaptation methodsThe widely-used adaptation technique is MLLR (Leggeter and Woodland, 1995). It is a parameter transformation technique that has proven successful while using asmall amount of adaptation data. It computes a set of transformations that willreduce the mismatch between an initial model set and the adaptation data. MLLRis a model adaptation technique that estimates a set of linear transformations forthe mean of Gaussian mixture HMM system. The effect of these transformationsis to shift the component means in the initial system so that each state in theHMM is more likely to generate the adaptation data. The MLLR transformationmatrix used to give a new estimate of the adapted mean is stated as:~l¼Wl
0; ð1Þ whereWis then/C2nðnþ1Þtransformation matrix (wherenis the dimensionality of the data) andl
0is the extended mean vector deﬁned as follows:l
0¼½wl1l2...ln/C138T; ð2Þ wherewrepresents a bias offset whose value here is ﬁxed at 1. Hence Wcan be decomposed into:W¼½b
cAc/C138whereA
crepresents ann/C2nregression matrix andb cis an additive bias vector associated with the broad class c. The adaptedkth mean vector for each statei can be written as follows:~l
ik¼A clikþb c: ð3Þ The system adaptation can be accomplished using Maximum a posteriori(MAP) technique (Lee and Gauvain, 1993). For MAP adaptation, the re-estima-tion formula for Gaussian mean is a weighted sum of the prior mean with the max-imum likelihood mean estimate. It is formulated as:4 S.-A. Selouani, Y.A. Alotaibi^lik¼siklikþPTt¼1ntði;kÞx t
sikþPTt¼1ntði;kÞ;ð4Þ wheres
ikis the weighting parameter for thekth Gaussian component in the statei. n
tði;kÞis the occupation likelihood of the observed adaptation data x t. One of the drawbacks of MAP adaptation is that it requires more adaptationdata to be effective compared to MLLR. When MLLR is combined with MAPwe can beneﬁt from both of the techniques. Theoretically, the combination offerscompact transformations for rapid adaptation when only limited amount of datais available, thanks to MLLR, and the asymptotical efﬁcacy of MAP adaptationwhen the amount of data increases. There are many ways to combine MLLR andMAP. We choose to use the MLLR transformed means as the priors for MAPadaptation. Hence, the adapted means can be written as:^l
ik¼sik~likþPTt¼1ntði;kÞx t
sikþPTt¼1ntði;kÞ:ð5Þ The principal difﬁculty in MAP adaptation is to determine the mixing param-eters. As it is commonly used, we chose a single mixing parameter for each modelthat we built, i.e.,s
ik=s.4. Experimental setupThe WestPoint Arabic Corpus, provided byLDC (2002), is used in our experi- ments. It consists of collections of four main Arabic scripts. First is CollectionScript 1, which contains 155 sentences, used by all 74 native Arabic speakers.Script 1 has a total of 1152 tokens and 724 types. Second is Collection Script2, which contains 40 sentences, used by 23 of the non-native speakers. Script 2has a total of 150 tokens and 124 types. Third is Collection Script 3, whichcontains 41 sentences, used by 4 of the non-native speakers. It has a total of138 tokens and 84 types. Finally, there is Collection Script 4, which contains22 sentences, used by 9 of the non-native speakers, all of them are third yearArabic speakers. It has a total of 72 tokens and 59 types. The total number ofdistinct words is 1131 Arabic words. All scripts were written with MSA as the tar-get language and were diacritized. In the LDC-Westpoint database, the amountof data provided by the Arabic native speakers is signiﬁcantly larger than that ofthe data provided by the Arabic non-native speakers. Note that the WestPointcorpus has three phonemes more than the number of MSA phonemes mentionedin the linguistic literature (Kirchhoff et al., 2003; Ouni et al., 2005). These phonemes are: /g/ ‘‘voiced velar stop’’, /aw/ ‘‘back upgliding diphthong’’, and/ey/ ‘‘upper mid front vowel’’. In fact, the phoneme /g/ does not exist in MSAat all, but we think that the WestPoint corpus used it because some native andnon-native speakers are using it popularly in some MSA words. We can conﬁrmAdaptation of foreign accented speakers in native Arabic ASR systems 5this fact by hearing some WestPoint audio ﬁles. On the other hand, the extravowel and diphthong were used because of variations in pronunciations of speak-ers inﬂuenced by English and other Latin languages. This type of phoneme existsin these languages but not in MSA. For our study, we ﬁnally decided to stickwith WestPoint phonemes and transcriptions without any modiﬁcation. We con-sidered this to make it more easy and logical to compare these results with otherresearches results which used the same corpus. Using the same settings and vari-ables values will give more correct and comparable outcomes.4.1. DataFrom the WestPoint corpus we selected four different and disjointed lists; all havebeen chosen randomly from non-native Arabic speakers only. The ﬁrst list calledAD100, contains 100 utterances; the second list called AD150, contains 150 utter-ances; the third list called AD200, contains 200 utterances; the last list calledAD250, contains 250 utterances. The four lists are chosen randomly from all avail-able scripts, speakers, and genders. The designed lists were used to adapt a nativeArabic speaker based system to deal with non-native Arabic speakers. For thispurpose, three different adaptation techniques were used: MLLR, MAP and acombination of MLLR and MAP. The performance is analyzed both at the wordlevel (by incorporating a language model) and at the phoneme level. The phonemelevel permits us to investigate the improvement (if any) of system accuracy on indi-vidual phonemes; hence giving us the chance to analyze the weakness of non-native Arabic speakers’ pronunciation as a phoneme-wise way of analysis. Basedon the above explanations, we refer to our experiments as AD100/MLLR, AD100/MAP, AD100/MLLRMAP, etc.4.2. Recognition platform and parametersThe Hidden Markov Model Toolkit (HTK) (Young et al., 2006) is used for design- ing and testing the speech recognition systems throughout all experiments. Thebaseline system was initially designed as a phoneme level recognizer with threeactive states, continuous, left-to-right, no skip HMM models. The system wasdesigned by considering all 37 MSA phones as given by the LDC catalog. Sincemost of the words consisted of more than two phonemes, context-dependenttriphone models were created from monophone models. The training phaseconsists of re-estimating HMM models by using Baum-Welch algorithm afteraligning and tying the models by using the decision tree method. Phoneme-basedmodels are good at capturing phonetic details. Also context-dependent phonememodels can be used to characterize formant transition information, which is veryimportant for the discrimination of confusable speech units.The parameters of the system consist of a 22 kHz sampling rate with a 16 bitsample resolution, a 25 ms Hamming window duration with a step size of6 S.-A. Selouani, Y.A. Alotaibi10 ms, MFCC coefﬁcients with 22 as the length of cepstral leftering and 26 ﬁlterbank channels of which 13 were the number of MFCC coefﬁcients, and of which0.95 were the pre-emphasis coefﬁcients.5. Results and discussionAll native Arabic speakers’ data provided by the LDC WestPoint corpus were usedfor training the original recognition system. After that, all non-native Arabic speak-ers’ data provided by the same corpus was used for testing the system. As a result ofthat test, the accuracy (correctness) of the system was 89.02% and 93.19% for wordlevel and phoneme level, respectively. This performance is relatively low comparedto the same system but with testing data taken from native Arabic speakers wherethe percentage for word level and the percentage for phoneme level have been,respectively, obtained.Fig. 1shows the system performance for the four adaptationlists and for the three adaptation techniques. This performance is compared to theaccuracy of the system prior to any kind of adaptation.As it can be inferred from the results (cf.Fig. 1), the improvement of systemperformance increases when the size of the adaptation list is increased. Thisperformance is improved rapidly to reach its best at 96.39% which represents a7.37% improvement (at word level) in comparison with the original system. Thisresult is obtained by the adaptation list AD250 and the adaptation combiningMLLR and MAP techniques (i.e., experiment AD250/MLLRMAP). We noticedthat in AD150 and AD250, the combined MLLR and MAP adaptation techniquesgave better performance compared to others.The improvements in accuracy for the different experiments are depicted inTable 1. We notice that there is no ﬁxed rule governing the comparisons of
Figure 1System accuracies for MLLR, MAP and MLLR/MAP techniques with different sizes of adaptationdata.Adaptation of foreign accented speakers in native Arabic ASR systems 7MLLR, MAP, and their combination. In some experiments, MLLR gaveimprovement better that that of MAP. In other experiments MAP gave betteraccuracy improvement. The combined MLLR and MAP techniques sometimesgave less improvement compared to either MLLR or MAP. For instance, exper-iment AD100/MLLRMAP gave 1.97% as accuracy improvement but AD100/MAP gave better performance with a 2.65% improvement. We believe that thisis due to the random choice of sentences used in adaptation. In some cases, morerelevant and speciﬁc Arabic phonemes are included in the adaptation data, whilein other cases, the adaptation set contains less of these phonemes. As a generalobservation, we noticed that MAP gave better accuracy improvements comparedto MLLR, and MLLRMAP gave generally better accuracy improvements com-pared to MAP and MLLR.By investigating the system performances for individual phonemes we can no-tice that the phonemes /H/, /TH/, /g/, /q/, and /z/ gained more improvement intheir performances for all experiments.Table 2shows the increases in performancefor these phonemes for all conducted experiments. Except for phoneme /z/, thesephonemes are Arabic phonemes that cannot be found in English. It is a veryTable 1Accuracy improvement using adaptation techniques with different sizes of adaptation data.Adaptation list Level MLLR (%) MAP (%) MLLRMAP (%)AD100 Word 2.37 3.16 2.56Tri-phone 1.88 2.65 1.97AD150 Word 5.27 5.37 5.74Tri-phone 3.47 3.57 3.64AD200 Word 6.12 5.58 6.08Tri-phone 4.02 3.92 4.06AB250 Word 6.95 6.77 7.37Tri-phone 4.45 4.64 4.80
Table 2Accuracy improvement after adaptation for 4 Arabic speciﬁc phonemes.Adapt list Adapt technique Improvement in accuracies (%) /H/ /TH/ /g/ /q/ /z/ AD100 MLLR 6.9 4.5 11.1 6 8.8MAP 6.1 1 10.7 5.6 8.8MLLRMAP 6.9 5.4 6.2 6.9 10.3AD150 MLLR 6.8 5.8 18.4 7.5 8.8MAP 6.8 4.5 3.8 7.7 9.1MLLRMAP 8.2 5.4 13.6 7.3 10.3AD200 MLLR 10.4 5.4 8.6 8 10.7MAP 8.2 3.6 8.4 8 10.3MLLRMAP 10.6 5.8 6.2 8.6 11AD250 MLLR 9.6 6.7 16 7.3 11.7MAP 11.2 4.9 13.6 9.1 12.1MLLRMAP 10.4 6.7 16 7.8 11.48 S.-A. Selouani, Y.A. Alotaibiencouraging result since the adaptation process permits the enhancement of theperformance of phonemes that are hard for non-native Arabic speakers to pro-nounce, especially /H/ which is a fricative unvoiced non-emphatic pharyngealsound. Thus, in the non-adapted system these sounds and other particular Arabicphonemes produced errors due to the phonological and acoustical changes in-duced by the pronunciation of non-native speakers. Consequently, these resultsconﬁrm that by the means of the adaptation process, the performance of auto-matic recognition of Arabic foreign-accented speech can be signiﬁcantly improved.6. Conclusion and future workAn automatic Arabic speech recognition system was trained by using nativeArabic speakers’ speech data provided by the LDC WestPoint corpus for MSAArabic. After that, the system was adapted to non-native Arabic speakers’ speechdata provided by the same corpus. The adaptation techniques were MLLR, MAP,and a combination of them. The accuracies of the non-adapted system were89.02% for word level accuracy and 93.19% for phoneme level accuracy. The bestsystem accuracy improvement was 7.37% and this was obtained in experimentAD250/MLLRMAP. Among others, the speciﬁc Arabic phonemes /H/, /TH/, /q/, and /H/ known as being hard to pronounce for a non-native Arabic speakergot better accuracy improvements in all experiments.This work will be continued by investigating the performance of an evolution-ary-based technique to give the Arabic speech recognition system an auto-adapta-tion capability in the context of more foreign accents. Also this work will beexpanded to use a better in quality and bigger in size speech corpora. In Additionto this, we are planning to check the effects of other languages (in addition to Eng-lish) as a ﬁrst language of speakers on improving the performance of Arabic ASRsystems. Also we can do it for the opposite way in improving English ASR systemsin case of using them by Arabic native speakers whom can pronounce unique(compared to Arabic) English phonemes such as /p/, /v/, and /g/.References
Al-Zabibi, M., 1990. An Acoustic-Phonetic Approach in Automatic Arabic Speech Recognition. The BritishLibrary in Association with UMI.Bartkova, K., Jouvet, D. 2004. Multiple models for improved speech recognition for non-native speakers. In:SPECOM’2004: 9th Conference of Speech and Computer, St. Petersburg, Russia.Fakotakis, N. 2004. Cypriot speech database: data collection and greek to cypriot dialect adaptation. In: 4thInternational on Language Resources and Evaluation, May 24–30.Hang, C., Change, E., Zhou, J., Lee, K.-F. 2000. Accent modeling based in on pronunciation dictionaryadaptation for large vocabulary mandarin speech recognition. In: International Conference on Speech andLanguage Processing (ICSLP), Beijing, pp. 818–821.Hui, Y., Fung, P., Taiyi, H. 2000. Principal mixture speaker adaptation for improved continuous speechrecognition. In: International Conference on Speech and Language Processing (ICSLP), Beijing.Kirchhoff, K., Bilmes, J., Das, S., Duta, N., Egan, M., Gang, J., Feng, H., Henderson, J., Daben, L., Noamany,M., Schone, P., Schwartz, R., Vergyri, D. 2003. Novel approaches to Arabic speech recognition: report fromthe 2002 Johns-Hopkins Summer Workshop. In: Proceedings of ICASSP 2003, April, vol. 1, pp.344–347.Adaptation of foreign accented speakers in native Arabic ASR systems 9LDC. 2002. Linguistic Data Consortium (LDC) Catalog Number LDC2002S02. <http://www.ldc.upenn.edu/>. Lee, C.-H., Gauvain, J.-L. 1993. Speaker adaptation based on MAP estimation of HMM parameters. In:Proceedings ICASSP, Minneapolis, Minnesota, pp. 558–561.Leggeter, C., Woodland, P., 1995. Maximum likelihood linear regression for speaker adaptation of continuousdensity Hidden Markov Models. Computer Speech and Language 9, 171–185.Ouni, S., Cohen, M., Massaro, W., 2005. Training Baldi to be multilingual: a case study for an Arabic Badr.Speech Communication 45, 115–137.Selouani, S., Caelen, J. 1998. Arabic phonetic features recognition using modular connectionist architectures. In:Interactive Voice Technology for Communication, IVTTA ’98, 98 IEEE 4th Workshop 29–30 Sept. 98,Torino, Italy, pp. 155–160.United Nations. 2003. Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia–United Nations Report, Harmo-nization of ICT Standards Related to Arabic Language Use in Information Society Applications, UnitedNations Report, New York.Young (2006). ‘‘Using POMDPs for Dialog Management.’’ IEEE/ACL Workshop on Spoken LanguageTechnology (SLT 2006), Aruba.Young, S., Evermann, G., Gales, M., Hain, T., Kershaw, D., Moore, G., Odell, J., Ollason, D., Povey, D.,Valtchev, V., Woodland, P. 2006. HTK Version. 3.4, Cambridge University Engineering Department.<http://htk.eng.cam.ac.uk/prot-doc/ktkbook.pdf>.Zheng, Y., Sproat, R., Gu, L., Shafran, I., Zhou, H., Su, Y., Jurafsky, D., Starr, R., Yoon, S. 2005. Accentdetection and speech recognition for shanghai-accented mandarin. In: 9th European Conference on SpeechCommunication and Technology (Eurospeech), Lisboa, Portugal.10 S.-A. Selouani, Y.A. Alotaibi