An Investigation of Biometric Authentication in the Healthcare Environment
Janelle Masona, Rushit Daveb,*, Prosenjit Chatterjeec,*, Ieschecia Graham-Allena, Albert Esterline
a, Kaushik Roya,*
aDepartment of Computer Science, North Carolina A &T State University, 1601 East Market Street, Greensboro, NC, 27411, USA
bDepartment of Computer Science, University of Wisconsin-Eau Claire, 101 Roosevelt Avenue, Eau Claire, WI, 54701, USA
cDepartment of Cyber and Computer Sciences, The Citadel Military College of South Carolina, 171 Moultrie Street, Charleston, SC, 29409, USA
ARTICLE INFO
Keywords:Biometric authenticationDeep learningHealthcarePeriocular biometricsABSTRACT
A vast amount of growth has taken place in the ﬁeld of biometrics and in the healthcare industry. Biometrics provides the ability to identify individuals based on their physical and behavioral characteristics. The fusion ofbiometrics and information systems in the healthcare environment has provided a new approach to determine theidentity of patients. In this paper, we investigate the biometric system and the authentication process usingperiocular biometrics speciﬁcally. We integrate this approach with the healthcare system to provide an advancedmethod to identify the patients securely. We propose a new technique that fuses the use of periocular biometricsand the electronic master patient index in healthcare information systems to identify humans in the healthcareenvironment. A comparative analysis of different periocular biometric recognition methods is conducted andassessed against various traditional and deep learning-based methods in our research study.
1. IntroductionOver the past decade, biometrics has evolved into an extremelypopularﬁeld of study. A vast amount of interest and extensive researchhas led to the development of biometric data as a result. Biometrics, inthe simplest deﬁnition, is the measurement of a human being using thephysical and behavioral characteristics. It enables a human to be iden-tiﬁed and authenticated through a set of recognizable and veri ﬁable biometric data [1], such as face,ﬁngerprint, iris, and voice data (whichare classiﬁed as physiological characteristics [ 2]). These biometric identiﬁers are the distinctive, measurable characteristics that are used tolabel and describe individuals [3]. Behavioral biometrics are used toidentify humans through their unique interactions with technology anddevices. In the early stage, biometric applications, and devices appear tobe consuming the entire world [4]. The global biometric market is ex-pected to grow from 10.60 billion USD in 2016 to an estimated 41.39billion USD by 2025, a 17.06% compound annual growth rate from 2017to 2025 [4].People go to hospitals and clinics, where various forms of physicalidentiﬁcation are provided to a medical professional to determine theidentity of the individual seeking medical attention. In emergencysituations, where the individual is unconscious or unresponsive andwithout any form of identiﬁcation, the medical professional will identifythe person as Jane Doe or John Doe until their identity is established. Inthis situation, having a biometric system that can identify an individualbased on the periocular region of their face would enable medical prac-titioners to identify the unconscious individual more rapidly. In smart-phone technology, additional sensors and security features have beenincorporated in the device to effectively authenticate an individual. Thisallows the individual to have access to their smartphone without apassword or personal identiﬁcation number (PIN).In this research, we investigate the use of biometrics, in particularperiocular biometrics, in conjunction with healthcare information sys-tems. (The periocular region is the facial region in close proximity to theeyes [5].) We begin our research study by providing an overview ofbiometric systems. Next, periocular biometrics is explored to give moredetailed information concerning biometrics. A deeper analysis is pro-vided concerning how modules operate in the biometric system, withexplanations of the enrollment, identiﬁcation, and veriﬁcation processes. The periocular region would be a suitable biometric for smartphones touse to authenticate individuals also. The periocular biometric indicatesthat it is not a biometric that is easily impersonated. Afterwards, we
* Corresponding author.** Corresponding authors.E-mail addresses:jcmason@aggies.ncat.edu(J. Mason),daver@uwec.edu(R. Dave),chatterjee.prosenjit@citadel.edu (P. Chatterjee),iallen@ncat.edu(I. Graham- Allen),esterlin@ncat.edu(A. Esterline),kroy@ncat.edu(K. Roy).
Contents lists available atScienceDirect
Array
journal homepage:www.elsevier.com/journals/array/2590-0056/open-access-journal
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.array.2020.100042Received 16 May 2020; Received in revised form 3 August 2020; Accepted 3 September 2020Available online 11 September 20202590-0056/©2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. This is an open access article under the CC BY license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ ).Array 8 (2020) 100042provide an overview of how the healthcare information system is struc-tured and explain how patients interact with the healthcare system.After assessing biometric and healthcare systems, this research illus-trates how a biometric system will capture the periocular biometrics of apatient in the healthcare environment. The biometric information willthen be enrolled in the patient biometrics identi ﬁcation system. This information will then be connected and associated with the patient ’s enterprise master patient index (EMPI), which is a unique identi ﬁer used in the healthcare information system to identify every patient. As patientsseek additional medical treatment, the biometric systems will be used toidentify them and present their medical history, insurance information,and any other relevant information. To the authors ’knowledge, there is no technology in existence providing this capability to patients in thehealthcare system.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In the next sec-tion, an overview of a biometric system is presented, and an analysis ofperiocular biometrics is given indicating the advantages for this type ofbiometrics. Section3discusses biometric system functionality pertainingto the system modes and modules. It also includes the biometric systemperformance in terms of True Positive Rate (TPR), False Positive Rate(FPR), False Acceptance Rate (FAR) and False Rejection Rate (FRR). Theoverview of the healthcare system is discussed in Section 4. This section also gives the explanation of the master plan index (MPI) and the EMPI asthey relate to the Health Information Management System (HIMS). In-formation pertaining to the patient arrival and registration process isassessed, and the functionality of HIMS is presented in Section 4also. Section5presents the literature review which provides informationabout biometrics, healthcare systems, and security concerns. Section 6 explores our proposed approach for the healthcare system with theintegration of biometrics. Lastly, Section 7concludes with the summa- rization of our research and provides insights for our future work.2. Biometric SystemsSeven factors have been identiﬁed for assessing the suitability of anytrait/characteristic for biometric authentication. Four of the factors arerelated to the human physiological characteristics and the remainingthree are for constructing a biometric system based on human charac-teristics. The factors include universality, uniqueness, permanence,measurability, performance, acceptability, and circumvention [ 6]. Jain et al. explains these characteristics as follows [ 6]:/C15Universality indicates that every person possesses the characteristic./C15Uniqueness means that the characteristic should be suf ﬁciently different to distinguish one individual from the other./C15Permanence implies that the characteristic is not varying over time./C15Measurability (or collectability) is the measurement of the trait/characteristic should be able to be measured easily./C15Performance relates to the accuracy of the system based on opera-tional requirements./C15Acceptability indicates the comfort individuals will have using theirbiometric characteristics that are captured and assessed by thesystem./C15Circumvention relates to the ease with which a characteristic mightbe imitated using fraudulent means.We assess periocular biometrics for identiﬁcation in this research. The authors are aware of the integration of biometric features in smartphonetechnology as they are used to assist with the identi ﬁcation of an indi- vidual. In the next section, an overview of periocular biometrics isintroduced.2.1. Periocular BiometricsPeriocular biometrics is one of the most distinctive subsets of bio-metric information of an individual and it can be used to assist withbuilding a robust biometric authentication system. This form of biometricauthentication system is good for desktop/laptop computers, smart-phones, and tablets as these devices are less affected by PINs, or screen
lock patterns for authentication purposes, swipe screen, password, andﬁngerprint. The periocular region includes the eyes, eyelids, eyelashes,eyebrows, irises, and tear ducts. The important aspect of the inclusion ofthe periocular region in a biometric authentication system is that thisregion of the human face remains almost unchanged with aging, typi-cally. Also, human irises are unique to each individual, and the iris of theleft eye is different from the right eye of any individual. Therefore,mimicking the iris is quite impossible for the imposter attempting toattack the biometric-based authentication system. Some other advan-tages of using periocular biometric information includes that it may lackinformation on the iris (as sometimes prominent iris features cannot becaptured due to an uncontrolled environment) or other parts of the re-gion under consideration and still provide the highest accurate classi ﬁ- cation during biometric authentication. As the periocular region containssufﬁcient sets of biometric features, the feature set extraction from theoriginal images becomes feasible, and the subsequent training and vali-dation during testing becomes robust and highly accurate. Previousresearch [7,8] shows that periocular biometrics can provide accuratemethods of authentication.3. Biometric System FunctionalityIn the following two subsections, the discussion is centered on thefunctionality of system modes and modules in the biometric system.3.1. System ModesThere are two modes of authentication in a system where biometricsare used for authentication. The modes are enrollment and veri ﬁcation (or authentication). In the enrollment mode, a user ’s biometric infor- mation is captured by a biometric reader and stored in a template withinthe database. The stored template contains the user ’s identity to enable authentication. Once the user has been enrolled in the system, the bio-metric information is detected by the biometric sensor and related to theinformation that is stored in the database during the time of enrollment[9]. The transactions with this information need to be executed in asecure manner. During the veriﬁcation mode, the user’s biometric in- formation is captured by the sensor, where a one-to-one evaluation isconducted with the biometric template from the database to make adetermination (or veriﬁcation) of whether the user is in fact the personwho they claim [10]. In the veriﬁcation process, there are three steps thatmust take place, which are [10]: 1) models, also referred to as referencemodels, are created for all the users in the system and stored in a modeldatabase; 2) some samples are matched with the reference models inorder to produce the genuine and impostor scores and to compare withthe threshold; and 3) testing process is conducted. In the veri ﬁcation mode,‘positive recognition’is used often,“where the aim is to prevent multiple people from using the same identity ”[2]. In the identiﬁcation mode, the user’s biometric information is captured by the sensor; how-ever, in contrast to the veriﬁcation mode, a one-to-many evaluation isperformed with the biometric templates from the database to establishthe identity of a user who is unknown [ 10]. During the evaluation, if the system successfully identiﬁes the user based on the biometric template inthe database, where the assessment is within a previously set threshold,then a match is found. Identi
ﬁcation mode can be used either for ‘positive recognition’(so that the user does not have to provide any informationabout the template to be used) or for ‘negative recognition’of the person “where the system establishes whether the person is who he/she(implicitly or explicitly) denies to be ”[2]. These three modes of the biometric system are illustrated inFig. 1.J. Mason et al. Array 8 (2020) 100042
23.2. System ModulesThere are four important mechanisms within the biometric system [ 9] that are distributed throughﬁve modules. Theﬁrst module is the bio- metric sensor, where the biometric information of a user is captured. Thisis the interface between the real world and the biometric system. In ourresearch, we are capturing biometric information related to the user ’s periocular region. All the required pre-processing of the image is con-ducted in the next module. The third module is the feature extractor. Thisis the module where the biometric information captured by the sensor isprocessed to extract feature values. This includes removing artifactsintroduced by the sensor, enhancing the input, or even conductingnormalization if necessary. The fourth module is where the matching isconducted. The feature values are evaluated in comparison to the valuescontained within the biometric template to compute a matching score.This is a critical module, where the correct features of the periocular areaare extracted in the optimal manner. An image of speci ﬁc attributes is used to create a biometric template. The biometric template [ 11]i sa numeric template that is a binary representation of speci ﬁc points in the periocular region of the face. Theﬁfth module is where the decision making occurs. This is where the user ’s identity is established or a claimed identity is accepted or rejected based on the information fromthe previous module [9].Fig. 2(a) is an illustration of how the modulesﬂow in a biometric system.
Fig. 1.Different modes of the biometric system.
Fig. 2.(a) Diagram of the biometric system modules. (b) Classi ﬁcation steps for the biometric authentication.J. Mason et al. Array 8 (2020) 100042
33.3. Biometric System PerformanceA biometric-based authentication system is a fundamentally complexsystem and its overall system performance depends on the hardwareconﬁgurations, the software used, the tools selected, the hardwarecompatibility, the behavior and response time, and external factors thathave direct impact on the input sensors connected to the system. In re-ality, high end system performance using a biometric authenticationsystem is possible under controlled environments. In contrast, an un-controlled environment adversely impacts the input sensors and reducesthe system’s performance. For example, periocular images taken in a low-light background will reduce the matching accuracy of the test objectsduring the validation process. The performance measurements of a bio-metric system are closely tied to the FAR and FRR. Ideally, for both FARand FRR, the values are expected to be zero, i.e., the biometric authen-tication system should accept all genuine users and reject all the imposterattacks on the biometric authentication system. Also, by their very na-ture, FAR and FRR are inversely proportional. Fig. 2(b) provides the steps in biometric classiﬁcation for authentication.4. Healthcare SystemsThe aim of a healthcare system is to take care of the health of thepopulation in all possible ways considering the available resources andcompeting needs. Healthcare systems are described as combining orga-nizational andﬁnancial work delivered to people. Concerns includeproblems of access (for whom and to which services), expenses, and re-sources. Hospitals, clinics, and all other health organizations can differ invarious environments. Healthcare systems are complex and there aremany types of operations that exist in the healthcare environment thatwe need to know related to healthcare systems and their providers. Anexamination of healthcare systems includes the consideration of the waysin which a system addresses commonly held values. From a technicalperspective, indexes have been created in the information system to trackinformation for patients using the MPIs and EMPIs. The next section willprovide an overview of the health information management system.4.1. Health Information Management SystemIn 2009, the United States Government created the American Rein-vestment&Recovery Act (ARRA) to modernize the infrastructure of theUnited States of America, which included the “Health Information Technology for Economic and Clinical Health (HITECH) Act ”[12,13]. The concept of the electronic health records (EHRs) was included in theHITECH Act. HITECH proposed the meaningful use of interoperableEHRs throughout the United States healthcare delivery system as a crit-ical national goal [12]. The United States Congress decided not to de ﬁne “meaningful use”in the law, however they allowed the Department ofHealth and Human Services to complete this action [ 14], which was done in 2010. The concept of“meaningful use”rested on the followingﬁve pillars [12]: 1) improving quality, safety, efﬁciency, and reducing health disparities; 2) engage patients and families in their health; 3) improvecare coordination; 4) improve population and public health; and 5)ensure adequate privacy and security protection for personal healthinformation.It is important to understand that EHRs are more than a digitizedversion of paper charts and other records that healthcare providers mustmaintain for patients [14]. The implementation of EHRs creates areduction in the amount of paperwork that exists in the healthcare in-dustry. Large sums of money were not invested to merely digitize patientmedical records. Policy makers view EHRs as the core of an emerginghealth information technology infrastructure that will improve the na-tion’s healthcare system and the health of Americans [
14]. The HIMS functions in the role of maintaining the structure and or-ganization of information in healthcare and for the health of the patient.There are various components of HIMS that are responsible for differentparts of capturing information about the patient as it relates to health-care, such as the electronic medical records (EMRs), MPI, EMPI, andEHR. This research focuses on MPI and EMPI, which are discussed in thefollowing sub-sections.4.1.1. Master Patient IndexWhen a person undergoes a visit to any healthcare facility, such as theclinic, hospital, etc., to receive any form of treatment, demographic in-formation is captured about the patient, as illustrated in Fig. 3. This in- formation is captured in the MPI. A MPI is an index that is maintainedseparately from the medical record [ 15]. It has two main functions, where it ensures the registration data of a patient is clean and thatredundant records do not exist, as well as linking patient records that arepresent across various Patient Registration Systems (PRS) [ 16]. As data is entered in the PRS it is supplied to the MPI in real-time. Some of thecommon information that is captured is as follows [ 17], patient infor- mation (which includes medical record number, ﬁrst and last name, address, phone number, social security number, etc.), visit information(which contains location, date of the visit, account number), insuranceinformation, providers, and related people (such as emergency, guar-antor, and physician contact information). The information within a MPIis an extremely important component in the accuracy of patient infor-mation, such as identiﬁcation of allergies, medication lists, and priorvisits [17]. According to the HIMS standard, MPI is a valuable referencefor basic demographic information and resident activity within onesource [15].4.1.2. Enterprise Master Patient IndexIndustry efforts like health information exchange (HIE) and theNationwide Health Information Network de ﬁne EMPI as the combination of MPIs of two or more organizations [ 17]. When coupled with the beneﬁts of cloud computing, an EMPI that is continuously maintainedand updated can enhance the scalability and performance of the patientmatching engine [18]. The patient matching engine is a component of anEMPI that can classify different database records as they are related to thesame patient, which is depicted inFig. 3. The functionality of the EMPI expands more than just matching pa-tient records. Once an EMPI exists, it has the ability to synchronize PRSs,locate history about patients outside of the EMR, prevents interfaces inthe system from creating duplicate records, as well as raise alerts whenpatients are present in the hospital or healthcare facility [ 16].4.2. Hospital Registration and Information SystemsVarious healthcare locations have different registration processeswhen a patient arrives for theﬁrst time. When a new patient arrives at thehospital for theﬁrst time [19], the patient signs in by completing regis-tration forms given by the receptionist(s) at the front desk of thehealthcenter facility where treatment is being acquired. Once the regis-tration form is completed and submitted, the patient provides theirhealth insurance identiﬁcation card to the receptionist to have it copiedand have the information on it stored in the healthcare system. The frontofﬁce veriﬁes the health insurance information of the patient on thepayer’s website. Once the veriﬁcation process is completed, the frontofﬁce collects or mails the co-pay fees and issues the receipt of thetransaction to patient. The front ofﬁce creates a new medial chart for thepatient and then notiﬁes the back ofﬁce of a new patient arrival. This process is presented inFig. 4.The focus of a hospital information system (HIS) is the integration ofvarious capabilities and beneﬁts. A HIS is also called the clinical dataframework, which is intended to deal with the clinical, authoritative, andmoney related parts of a medical facility. Once a patient is enrolled in theHIS, all the information of that patient goes to the HIS database, whichsupplies information for the Patient Management System (PMS). A HISprovides the ability to manage clinical information thus allowing theprofessional staff to better manage appointments and billing for theJ. Mason et al. Array 8 (2020) 100042
4patients [20]. All the information received by the PMS goes to the PatientInformation database, where it refreshes the electronic records of thepatients. Once an electronic record gets refreshed, the information of thepatient via the MPI in the database is refreshed simultaneously. Fig. 5 provides an illustration of how the HIS connects to the PMS.5. Related WorkPatient records are viable for patient care, but incomplete patientrecords or wrong information in a patient ’s record can lead to prescribing the wrong prescriptions and misdiagnosis. The issue of security isoftentimes a concern when it comes to con ﬁdentiality of medical
Fig. 3.Classifying different records as they related to the same patient.
Fig. 4.The arrival and registration process for a new patient seeking medical attention at a healthcare location.J. Mason et al. Array 8 (2020) 100042
5information [21]. HIMS is comprised of systems that automate the pro-cess to collect patient information, which eliminates bulky paperwork inhospitals and addresses the shortage of healthcare personnel [ 22]. Consequently, a health management system with integrated ﬁngerprint biometrics could provide some level of security for patients and health-care professionals, as it has been shown in Ref. [ 23]. Patients want to have assurance that the privacy of their records are well kept [ 24]. With the advent of Information Communication Technologies (ICT), re-searchers are working on ways of using ICT to deliver healthcare servicesat low costs. This has led to the development of the Telemedicine,Ehealth, and Wellness (TEW) systems. Besides, the application of ICT toremotely collect and disseminate information in a sensitive domain likehealthcare, raises a number of security related issues. Therefore, inRef. [25] they have investigated a number of TEW systems and haveanalyzed their technologies and security implementations. Patient re-cords that are misrepresented or not well stored have a negative conse-quence resulting in prescribing the wrong prescriptions for patients. Theevolution of advanced technology through biometric authenticationprovides security and privacy in the healthcare system.The research in Ref. [26] implemented a HIMS, called CareMed,which utilizes two-factor authentication practices, speci ﬁcally password and/or PIN andﬁngerprint biometrics. The security is incorporated in thesystem to secure patient health records that are contained within thesystem as it is used by healthcare providers. The authors of [ 27] devel- oped Gellos HMS, which is an HMS using Uni ﬁed Modeling Language (UML), Visual Basic.Net, and a Microsoft Access database. Gellos HMSprovides access to the administrator, patient registration process, thedoctor, and the nurse modules. Multi-factor authentication is incorpo-rated into the system, whereﬁngerprint biometrics and passwordsand/or PINs are used.In [28], the authors focused on how to preserve patient records withbiometrics identiﬁcation in health management systems. The mainfunctionalities of the design and implementation of the system wereachieved with UML and Visual Basic.Net. The client application providesaccess to patient records implemented with Microsoft Access. A dualauthentication technique using a PIN and biometrics was utilized for thepurpose of securing the system. Unlike normal authentication processesinvoked by a user to access the network, biosensors with healthcareapplications normally need to be validated automatically, followed bydata transmission to the remote server without any explicit request.A novel tri-factor user authentication protocol with mutual access isproposed in Ref. [29]. In a tri-factor authentication scenario, a smart cardis physically issued to the user whoﬁrst registers to a system. Each user possesses a smart card for later login and authentication. IntegratedPulmonary Index (IPI) patterns are used for biometrics authenticationbecause body sensor networks have ability to collect IPI patterns andtransmit it to MGW (Management at Gateway) network to form ﬁnal authentication. IPI is an index which uses information from capnographyand pulse oximetry to provide a single value that describes the patient ’s respiratory status [29]. The question was raised by the researchers, “how can we provide an effective form of authentication that is supremelyaccurate, fast, and convenient, operates on multiple devices, platformsand software?”The best solution to these kinds of problems is the use ofbiometric techniques for authentication. The authors identi ﬁed there are lots of biometric methods that have been used for authentication prac-tices in hospitals already.In [30
], the authors reviewed the different biometric techniques usedin healthcare systems such as palm vein scanning, ﬁngerprint identiﬁ- cation systems, proximity authentication, right patient model and biokey. As more hospitals and healthcare systems migrate to computerizedphysician order entry and electronic health records, and more HIEs arebuilt to coordinate care across networks, there is a great need to effec-tively manage data integrity to ensure it is kept free from corruption,modiﬁcation, or unauthorized access [31]. Healthcare can only be effective if the right care is provided to the right patient, using the rightpatient information [32].The performance of combining the use of online signature and voicebiometrics in order to perform robust user authentication is analyzed inRef. [33]. Signatures are veriﬁed using the dynamic programmingtechnique of string matching. Voice is veriﬁed using a commercial off the shelf, software development kit. In order to improve the authenticationperformance, they combine information from both the online signature
Fig. 5.Patient registration in the HIS for the PMS.J. Mason et al. Array 8 (2020) 100042
6and voice biometrics.In [34], the authors propose a template protection scheme as randomrectangular hashing to strengthen the multimodal biometric system. Theperformance of the proposed template protection scheme is measuredusing theﬁngerprint FVC2004 and PolyU palmprint databases. A bio-metric system automatically recognizes the person based on his/herphysiological or behavior characteristics [ 35]. An understanding of the utilization, attitudes, and concerns ofhealthcare consumers and providers regarding biometrics is presented inRef. [36]. Data was analyzed from a survey of 324 adult subjects,including 167 healthcare consumers and 157 healthcare providers.Healthcare providers were found more accepting of biometric technol-ogies than consumers. Feelings about the potential uses and limitations ofbiometrics were found to be more differentiated among providers thanconsumers. Based on theﬁndings, the authors suggest the need foradditional research into the types of biometrics adopted in diversehealthcare settings and into the nature of innovators or early adopters.Some of the practical implications were if biometrics is to gain accep-tance, there seems to be a need for different promotion strategies forproviders and consumers. Identity is important when it is weak. Thehuman body lies at the heart of all strategies for identity management.Secure identiﬁcation is critical in the healthcare system, both to controllogic access to centralized archives of digitized patients ’data, to limit physical access to buildings and hospital wards, and to authenticatemedical and social support. There is also an increasing need to identifypatients with a high degree of certainty. Thereby, future works on bio-metrics technology will include DNA (Deoxyribo Nucleic Acid) analysis,neural wave analysis, and skin luminescence [ 37]. Biometrics has been implemented in several ﬁelds, such as smart- phone technology from un/locking smartphones using ﬁngerprint data or facial recognition technology, boardingﬂights and clearing customs using facial recognition orﬁngerprint data. However, there are severalconcerns that have been raised regarding biometrics. If someone ’s bio- metric data is compromised, it is not possible to get another one. In 2015,5.6 million individuals’ﬁngerprints were stolen in a massive breach fromthe Ofﬁce of Personnel Management (OPM) [ 38]. OPM stated that [38], “The ability to misuseﬁngerprint data is limited. However, this proba-bility could change over time as technology evolves. ” In [39], a conceptual framework for biometrics in healthcare is pre-sented, which consists of four main areas, such as (1) identifying basicelements; (2) examining important processes with special attention to thedigital signature process; (3) reviewing relevant biometrics technologies;and (4) presenting a set of criteria and tradeoffs for evaluating theapplicability of biometrics elements.The essential components of biometrics technologies, along withmulti-biometrics fusion for healthcare systems are presented in Ref. [ 40]. There are critical points in the biometric system when biometric data isclassiﬁed as a‘high risk’. They are when the biometric data is enrolled inthe biometric system as well as when the biometric data is updated [ 41]. There is a possibility the data could get altered with fraudulent data. Forexample, companies are producing applications that require biometric
data to access an application. A company like Wells Fargo says that it willnot store the original images of the biometric data that is used in theauthentication process, however the data will be encrypted [ 42]. None- theless, there have been several instances where biometric hacking hasoccurred on a large scale.Some additional security concerns are that a biometric sensor couldbe fooled and the accuracy of the sensor. If the biometric data of a bio-metric system is compromised, it is not possible to reverse the damagethat has been done. Some vital privacy concerns are present whenconsidering biometrics as a form of identi ﬁcation. In Refs. [43] several privacy concerns are identiﬁed as 1) any collection of data could even-tually get hacked; 2) biometrics may become so commonplace thatpeople become complacent; 3) the data stored in a biometric databasemay be more vulnerable than any other kind of data; 4) some pieces ofyour physical identity can be duplicated; 5) laws governing biometricsare a work in progress, which means your rights might be different fromstate to state. The researchers are aware of these security concerns andwill be taken into consideration when designing and implementing thebiometric system.6. Proposed Periocular Authentication ModuleWe propose utilizing periocular biometrics to identify patients in thehospital/healthcare information systems instead of using a physical de-vice for identiﬁcation. The periocular biometric enables giving moreattention in biometric authentication systems. The periocular is the areasurrounding the eye. Nowadays, most mobile devices (e.g., tablets andsmartphones) have a camera, which we use to acquire periocular imagesnon-invasively. The periocular image is suitable when the camera is notdetailed enough for an iris acquisition. In addition to being resilient tocamera quality, the periocular biometric is not as affected by certainfactors as is the facial biometric. Such factors include facial pose, changesin expression, and occlusion of the face. The authentication module canbe replaced and used for other biometrics including the face, ﬁngerprint, and iris.Biometric authentication systems incorporate classi ﬁcation tech- niques to distinguish the real person from imposters. Deep learningtechniques have played a pivotal role in biometric-based authenticationsystems recently [44]. In this paper, we propose a deep learning-basedmethod to classify the biometric data generated by the patientsenrolled in the healthcare authentication system. During the enrollmentprocess, biometric information from the patient is collected throughsensors and image capturing tools installed by the hospital. The enrolledimage samples will then be trained using a Convolutional NeuralNetwork (CNN) [44]. Through the use of a CNN, a pre-trained neuralnetwork can be deployed, which can reduce the amount of training andprocessing time.This research develops a deep CNN [ 45] to train and test the peri- ocular samples from the patients. Inspired by the AlexNet proposed andimplemented by Krizhevsky, A. et al. [ 45], we implemented a multiclass CNN, denoted as“modiﬁed AlexNet”. We select our input image datasets under controlled environments, for the real time enrollment, training,testing and accuracy validation. The modi ﬁed AlexNet (Fig. 6(a)) has a total of 3 discrete convolution 2D layers, 3 Max Pooling 2D Layers, 1Flatten layer, and 2 Dense 2D layers. We use the sigmoid function insteadof soft-max approach for faster classiﬁcation and validation. Also, we use Binary Cross Entropy, Adam Optimizer with a learning rate of 0.01. InFig. 6 (b), we show the main components of the modi ﬁed AlexNet. We modiﬁed the traditional AlexNet to make the model applicable to peri-ocular authentication. Also, the modiﬁed AlexNet works well for sparse training data.6.1. Enterprise Master Patient IndexPreviously, in Section4, we discussed how current information sys-tems (HIS, MPI, etc.) operate in the healthcare environment. We areproposing our biometric system, which uses periocular biometric infor-mation read by the biometric sensors to identify patients. The biometricsystem will retain its original functionality. The biometric modes ofenrollment, identiﬁcation, and veriﬁcation will operate as previously discussed; see Section4for more information. Additional components ofour system will be placed where the biometric template that is stored inthe system database links to the patient ’s index in EMPI, as seen inFig. 7. The EMPI will connect with the information systems to locate variousEMRs and information of the patient within the HIS. This will reduce theamount of work for the front desk receptionist when interacting withpatients as they arrive. This will also assist nurses, doctors, medical ex-aminers, and others in identifying patients, especially when looking uptheir medical histories. Patients can be identi ﬁed with their unique EMPI from different clinical,ﬁnancial, and administrative systems. The bio-metric information will be stored in the cloud in a database. Fig. 8J. Mason et al. Array 8 (2020) 100042
7illustrates the process of how a patient ’s biometric informationﬂows through the process and is connected to their EMPI.6.2. ArchitectureIn any generic architecture for health organizations, patients mustregisterﬁrst to continue with system services. Our proposed architectureis based on the scenario where a patient is not registered in the HIS. Theprocess begins with the patient’s periocular biometric data beingcaptured and stored in the cloud for theﬁrst time using biometric tech- nology.Fig. 9is a depiction of the sequence of how the biometricauthentication system captures the patient ’s periocular biometrics.Next, a patient index number will be generated and associated to thebiometric data of the patient. The generated patient index becomes theEMPI. A registered patient will allow the scanning of their periocularbiometric data by the biometric sensor technology, which will check theassociated patient index, using the EMPI, for the patient ’s biometric in- formation and records in the HIS. At this point in the process, the patientwill be able to access all of the appropriate services without wasting anyadditional time for data matching. In our architecture, we include veri-ﬁcation, identiﬁcation, and enrollment processes using the CNN archi-tecture, which secures and matches the data. We are using thesestrategies because they create a strong, robust, and secure architecture tomatch periocular biometric data with the EMPI of the particular patient,
Fig. 6.(a) The CNN structure implemented for the periocular biometric authentication system. (b) Convolutional Neural Network Architecture of our modi ﬁed AlexNet. (ReLU: Rectiﬁer Linear Unit).
Fig. 7.The patient’s periocular biometric information gets coupled with the EMPI system.J. Mason et al. Array 8 (2020) 100042
8which gives high accuracy for the matching phase. In summary, thesystem will serve the purpose of securely matching a patient ’s periocular biometric data to get the patient’s EMPI. Once the patient’s data is matched, the newly registered or already registered patient will have anappointment processed by the front desk personnel, who will pass all therequired information to the nurse. The nurse will forward all the medicalinformation of the patient to the doctor. After the completion of theappointment, all the charges for lab services and the pharmacy areupdated in the HIS, which directly connects with the EMPI, as we haveshown previously. Thus, the new information is added and updated in thepatient’s record. Whenever the patient comes for the next appointment,their periocular biometric data will be matched with the updated EMPI ina secured manner, as shown inFig. 10.6.3. Results for Periocular Biometric AuthenticationWe implemented a prototype framework based on periocular bio-metric data. We used the Biometric and Image Processing Lab (BIPLab)Mobile Iris CHallenge Evaluation–Part I (MICHE-I) [46] periocular dataset, which contains color periocular image datasets that are collectedusing Apple iPhone5 and Samsung Galaxy S4 smartphones, where thesubjects are about 10 cm away from the device. The pixel resolution ofthe Apple iPhone 5 and Samsung Galaxy S4 are of high quality.The Apple iPhone5 has a resolution of 960/C21280, and the Samsung Galaxy S4 has a resolution of 1080/C21920. For the Apple iPhone5 datasets, the images were taken from the FaceTime HD (front) camera of1.2 megapixels (MP). For the Samsung Galaxy S4 datasets, the imageswere taken from the CMOS (front) camera of 2.0 MP. The dataset
Fig. 8.Patient biometric information is coupled with their EMPI.
Fig. 9.Sequence diagram for the biometric authentication system.J. Mason et al. Array 8 (2020) 100042
9contains 75 classes of periocular image sets per person. Each class has 16images of the same person. In total, we used 1200 images taken from theApple iPhone 5, and 1200 images taken from the Samsung Galaxy S4smartphones.This research applies the multiclass CNNs for identi ﬁcation of each individual, and their successive validation and testing. We applied themodiﬁed AlexNet on the BIPLab MICHE-I [ 46] periocular dataset for experimental evaluation. The modiﬁed AlexNet is lighter in its layer structure and is much faster than the traditional AlexNet, as proposed inRefs. [45]. The training pattern of the CNNs varies depending on the timeand the memory availability of the CPUs/GPUs. To conduct a realisticexperiment, we ran our CNN architecture on the BIPLab MICHE-I data-sets [46] for multiple times, observed the performances and minutevariations, and recorded the results.Figs. 11 and 12are the experimental results for the classiﬁcations on the BIPLab MICHE-I Apple iPhone 5 periocular image dataset. We ach-ieved signiﬁcant training accuracy and validation accuracy even though75 training classes were used. As the training goes on, the training lossdecreases, as expected, but the validation loss ﬂuctuates due tooverﬁtting. The validation loss did not go below 46.59%, where weneeded to adjust the early stopping range to a negative value to completethe validation. After 20 iterations, we achieved a training accuracy of88.44%, a validation accuracy of 93.33%, and a test accuracy of 88.75%.We achieved a precision of 0.92, recall of 0.89, and the f1-score of 0.89.Figs. 13 and 14are the experimental results for the multiclass clas-siﬁcations on the BIPLab MICHE-I Samsung Galaxy S4 periocular imagedataset. We achieved signiﬁcant training and validation accuracies eventhough 75 training classes were used. We noticed that the training lossdecreased as expected as the training progressed, but the validation lossﬂuctuated again due to the overﬁtting. The validation loss did not reducebelow 46.59%, where we adjusted the early stopping range to a negativevalue to complete the validation. After 20 iterations, we achieved atraining accuracy of 90.31, a validation accuracy of 93.65% before theoverﬁtting started, and a test accuracy of 88.36%. We achieved a preci-sion of 0.93, recall of 0.88, and the f1-score of 0.89.In the next level of our experiment, we focused on different featureextraction techniques and compared the performances. The image-basedfeature extraction can only be possible through the formation of feature
Fig. 10.Patient process using the biometric system and how the information is added in the HIS.
Fig. 11.(a) Training Loss vs. Validation Loss (b) Training Accuracy vs. Validation Accuracy (c) periocular images dataset.J. Mason et al. Array 8 (2020) 100042
10vector sets during the training and enrollment steps, and the extractedfeatures are matched during the recognition steps. There are severalpopular image feature extractions techniques available for periocular orface recognition [47–49]. In this research, we extracted local features,gradient features, and texture-based features from periocular images. Todemonstrate the performance of the deep learning-based approaches andtheir effectiveness with the popular feature extraction methods, weapplied three widely used feature extraction methods. Such methods
Fig. 12.Experimental study done on Apple iPhone 5 BIPLab MICHE-I dataset (a) Test Image from Subject Class (b) Internal Feature Map Layers distribution (c)Confusion Matrix showing that Class 2 got a high concentration level.
Fig. 13.(a) Training Loss vs. Validation Loss (b) Training Accuracy vs. Validation Accuracy.
Fig. 14.Experimental study done on the Samsung Galaxy S4 BIPLab MICHE-I dataset (a) Test Image from Subject Class 7 (b) Internal Feature Map Layers distributi on (c) Confusion Matrix showing Class 7 received a high concentration level.J. Mason et al. Array 8 (2020) 100042
11include the scale-invariant feature transform (SIFT) [ 47] for the local object features extraction, the histogram of oriented gradients (HOG)[48] for the gradient object detection, and the local binary pattern (LBP)[49] for the texture-based image feature extraction. Fig. 15shows the feature elicitation approaches using SIFT, HOG, and LBP. Tables 1 and 2 show the comparative analysis of the approaches applied on SamsungGalaxy S4 and Apple iPhone 5 images.The Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) curves show the veri-ﬁcation performances on the iPhone 5 and Samsung Galaxy S4 datasets.The ROC curve shows the performances of the TPR vs FPR for both of thedatasets, as demonstrated inFigs. 16 and 17. FromFigs. 16 and 17,w e see that the modiﬁed AlexNet shows a reasonable TPR of 98% of on bothof the datasets. The ROC curves inFig. 18show the performance of FAR vs FRR. The average error rates for our proposed model is in the range of(3.2%–6.2%), as shown inFig. 18. The test accuracy reported in thisresearch for the modiﬁed AlexNet was signiﬁcant, according to its deep network architecture. The training and validation processes are reason-ably faster than the other approaches. The modi ﬁed AlexNet used opti- mum CPU/GPU memory and efﬁciently handled high resolution colorimages with precision.FromTable 1, we found that SIFT produced a test accuracy of 83%,whereas the HOG and LBP produced the test accuracies of 80.03% and85.01%, respectively on the Samsung Galaxy S4 periocular dataset dur-ing the time of recognition. We also observed that the execution time ofHOG was lower than the SIFT and LBP approaches, as shown in Table 1. Furthermore, we feed the extracted features elicited from SIFT, HOG, andLBP to our modiﬁed AlexNet individually. We obtained classi ﬁcation accuracies of 85.21%, 82.78%, and 85.7% using the SIFT, HOG, and LBPwith the modiﬁed AlexNet, respectively. We also found that the modi ﬁed AlexNet alone received a highest accuracy of 88.36% on the SamsungGalaxy S4 dataset. The test losses are also shown in Table 1. Modiﬁed AlexNet achieved the lowest loss of 11.64%. We found from Table 1that the modiﬁed AlexNet took the lowest computation effort of 1134.071 s.Table 2shows the results obtained based on the Apple iPhone 5dataset. SIFT, HOG, and LBP achieved the accuracies of 80.49%, 89.5%,and 85%, respectively. We obtained the classi ﬁcation accuracies of 87.11%, 86.52%, and 88.14% using the SIFT, HOG, and LBP, respectivelywhen applying with the modiﬁed AlexNet. The modiﬁed AlexNet aloneachieved an accuracy of 88.4% on the Samsung Galaxy S4 dataset.Table 2also represents the overall comparison of testing losses andcomputational efforts. The HOG obtained the lowest testing loss of10.5%. It is observed fromTable 2that HOG outperformed the other
approaches in terms of testing accuracy and loss; however, the modi ﬁed AlexNet took the lowest computation time of 116.837 s.
Fig. 15.Feature extraction using SIFT, HOG, and LBP on Samsung Galaxy S4 periocular dataset.Table 1Comparison of different periocular recognitions technique and their individualcontribution to the modiﬁed AlexNet.Dataset used: Samsung Galaxy S4.
Image Recognizer/ClassiﬁerTest Accuracy(%)Test Loss(%)Time of Execution percycle (Sec)SIFT 83 17 203.476HOG 80.03 19.97 129.332LBP 85.01 14.99 156.589SIFTþModiﬁedAlexNet85.21 14.79 306.228HOGþModiﬁedAlexNet82.78 17.22 364.946LBPþModiﬁedAlexNet85.7 14.3 201.158Modiﬁed AlexNet 88.36 11.64 113.071
Table 2Comparison of different periocular recognition techniques and their individualcontribution to the modiﬁed AlexNet.Dataset used: Apple iPhone 5.
Image Classiﬁer Test Accuracy(%)Test Loss(%)Time of Execution percycle (Sec)SIFT 80.49 19.51 203.968HOG 89.5 10.5 128.402LBP 85 15 156.593SIFTþModiﬁedAlexNet87.11 12.89 307.054HOGþModiﬁedAlexNet86.52 13.48 365.138LBPþModiﬁedAlexNet88.14 11.86 196.706Modiﬁed AlexNet 88.4 11.6 116.837J. Mason et al. Array 8 (2020) 100042
127. Conclusion&Future WorkA human can be identiﬁed through the measurements of their body.We refer to these measurements as biometrics. The integration of bio-metric data and the physical world offers society biometric applicationsand devices.We propose a biometric system for the healthcare environment. Ourbiometric system presents a novel approach in identifying patients, bothnew and registered, in healthcare information systems. This form ofbiometric authentication is also very applicable for desktop/laptopcomputers, smartphones, and tablets. We propose capturing the peri-ocular biometrics of each patient with their knowledge and consent. Theperiocular region is the area of the face that includes the eyes, eyelids,eyelashes, eyebrows, and irises. Periocular biometrics are unique to eachindividual. We propose linking an individual ’s biometric data with their EMPI, which is the identiﬁer used in healthcare information systems tolocate electronic healthcare records. The EMPI is unique to each patient.Our newly introduced system will assist with protecting data and reducecomputation time relating to patients. We have conducted tests using theBIPLab MICHE-I dataset of our proposed system implemented as a pro-totype framework. The prototype framework utilized multiclass CNNs,speciﬁcally, a modiﬁed version of AlexNet, to test the accuracy of iden-tifying the patient for each periocular biometric image captured on asmartphone; the TPR achieved approximately 98%. We also compare theperformances of the deep neural network architectures with thetraditional and widely used feature extraction approaches, includingSIFT, HOG, and LBP.Our future work consists of investigating how to incorporate ourperiocular biometrics authentication system for employees of healthcareand hospital systems, such as doctors, nurses, physicians, and surgeons,etc. We plan to implement the appropriate physical devices and softwareto capture the periocular data. Then we plan to have volunteers betweenthe ages of 18–60 years assist with generating our own dataset for ourproposed system. We will continue using the modi ﬁed AlexNet CNN machine learning approach to get a better understanding of possibleimplementations of our proposed biometric system. We plan to investi-gate the appropriate mechanisms to use to integrate and incorporate thebiometric technology into the healthcare information system.CRediT author statementJanelle Mason: Conceptualization, Methodology, Validation, Writing–Original draft preparation&Reviewing and Editing. Rushit Dave:Methodology, Writing- Original draft preparation. Prosenjit Chatterjee:Visualization, Methodology (Periocular Recognition Implementation),Writing–Original draft preparation&Reviewing and Editing. Ieschecia Graham-Allen: Conceptualization. Albert Esterline: Validation. KaushikRoy: Conceptualization (Biometrics in health information system),Methodology (Biometric Part), Writing, Editing and Overall Supervision.
Fig. 16.(a) ROC for the SIFT, HOG, and LBP, (b) ROC for the SIFT þmodiﬁed AlexNet, HOGþmodiﬁed AlexNet, and LBPþmodiﬁed AlexNet, and (c) ROC for the modifed AlexNet.J. Mason et al. Array 8 (2020) 100042
13Fig. 17.(a) ROC for the SIFT, HOG, and LBP, (b) ROC for the SIFT þmodiﬁed AlexNet, HOGþmodiﬁed AlexNet, and LBPþmodiﬁed AlexNet, and (c) ROC for the modifed AlexNet.
Fig. 18.Precision vs Recall graph for the implemented modi ﬁed AlexNet on (a) Samsung Galaxy S4 dataset (b) Apple iPhone 5 dataset. *AUC¼Area Under Curve.J. Mason et al. Array 8 (2020) 100042
14Declaration of competing interestThe authors declare that they have no known competing ﬁnancial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to in ﬂuence the work reported in this paper.AcknowledgementThis work is partially supported by NSF under the grant CNS 1900187and partially supported by the U. S. Department of Education under theTitle III Historically Black Graduate Institutions Grant. Any opinions,ﬁndings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this materialare those of the author(s) and do not necessarily re ﬂect the views of NSF and the U. S. Department of Education.References
[1] Thales Group. Biometrics: authentication and identi ﬁcation (2018).https://www .gemalto.com/govt/inspired/biometrics ; 2018, July 05. [2]Ross A, Nandakumar K, Jain AK. Introduction to multibiometrics. In: Handbook ofbiometrics. Boston, MA: Springer; 2008. p. 271 –92. [3]Jain A, Hong L, Pankanti S. Biometric identi ﬁcation. Commun ACM 2000;43(2): 90–8.[4] Thakkar D. Global biometrics market analysis: trends and future prospects.https://www.bayometric.com/global-biometric-market-analysis/ ; 2017, October 23.[5]Kumari P, Seeja KR. Periocular biometrics: a survey. Journal of King SaudUniversity-Computer and Information Sciences; 2019 . [6]Jain AK, Bolle R, Pankanti S, editors. Biometrics: personal identi ﬁcation in networked society. Kluwer Academic Publications; 1999, ISBN 978-0-7923-8345-1 . [7]Dellana R, Roy K. October). Data augmentation in CNN-based periocularauthentication. In: 2016 6th international conference on informationcommunication and management (ICICM). IEEE; 2016. p. 141 –5. [8]Jenkins J, Shelton J, Roy K. October). A comparison of genetic based extractionmethods for periocular recognition. In: 2016 6th international conference oninformation communication and management (ICICM). IEEE; 2016. p. 309 –13. [9]Ross A, Jain A. Information fusion in biometrics. Pattern Recogn Lett 2003;24(13):2115–25.[10]Sahoo SK, Choubisa T, Prasanna SM. Multimodal biometric person authentication: areview. IETE Tech Rev 2012;29(1):54 –75. [11] Avisian Staff. What’s behind the biometric template? Mathematical templatesenhance privacy and usability of biometric systems. https://www.secureidnews.c om/news-item/whats-behind-the-biometric-template/ ; 2011, May 18. [12] Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Introduction | meaningful use | CDC.https://www.cdc.gov/ehrmeaningfuluse/introduction.html ; 2019, September 09. [13] 42 CFR Parts 412. Medicare and medicaid programs; electronic health recordincentive program; proposed rule. In: Part II department of health and humanservices. Federal register, vol. 75; 2010, January 13. p. 1843 –2011. 8,https://www .cms.gov/Regulations-and-Guidance/Legislation/Recovery/downloads/CMS-2009-0117-0002.pdf.[14] Ferris N. ‘Meaningful use’of electronic health records. https://www.healthaffairs. org/do/10.1377/hpb20100824.587990/full/ ; 2010, August 24. [15] AHIMA Long Term Care Task Force. AHIMA ’s long-term care health information practice and documentation guidelines - practice guidelines for LTC healthinformation and record systems. http://bok.ahima.org/Pages/Long%20Term% 20Care%20Guidelines%20TOC/Practice%20Guidelines ; 2013, January 1. [16] Prosch L. What is master patient index?. https://www.thinkoccam.com/what-is-ma ster-patient-index/; 2017, Aug 27.[17] Wiedemann, L. A. "Fundamentals for Building a Master Patient Index." EnterpriseMaster Patient Index (Updated) Available at:
http://library.ahima.org/xpedio/ groups/public/documents/ahima/bok1_048389.hcsp . [18] Nalbandian G. MPI vs. EMPI: comparing patient matching value and performancefor the healthcare enterprise. https://nextgate.com/2018/05/mpi-vs-empi-patient -matching-value/; 2018, May 07.[19] Ayers A. Urgent care association of America. http://www.alanayersurgentcare.com /Linked_Files/UCAOA_Length_of_Stay_2009_03_13.pdf ; 2009, March 13.[20]Vegoda PR. Introduction to hospital information systems. Int J Clin Monit Comput1987;4(2):105–9.[21]Mogli G. Role of Biometrics in healthcare privacy and security management system.Sri Lanka Journal of Bio-Medical Informatics 2012;2(4) . [22]Ikhu-Omoregbe NA, Azeta AA. Design and deployment of a mobile-based medicalalert system. In: E-healthcare systems and wireless communications: current andfuture challenges. IGI Global; 2012. p. 210 –9. [23]Jhaveri H, Sanghavi D. Biometric security system and its applications in healthcare.Int J Tech Res Appl 2014;2(6):15 –20. [24]Bazin A. Biometrics for patient identi ﬁcation—a US case study. ID World Abu Dhabi; 2012. p. 18–9.[25]Mirembe DP. Design of a secure framework for the implementation of telemedicine,eHealth, and wellness services. 2006 . [26]Azeta AA, Iboroma DOA, Azeta VI, Igbekele EO, Fatinikun DO, Ekpunobi E.Implementing a medical record system with biometrics authentication in E-health.In: 2017 IEEE AFRICON. IEEE; 2017, September. p. 979 –83. [27]Azeta AA, Omoregbe NA, Misra S, Iboroma DOA, Igbekele EO, Fatinikun DO,Ekpunobi E, Azeta VI. Preserving patient records with biometrics identi ﬁcation in e- Health systems. In: Data, engineering and applications. Singapore: Springer; 2019.p. 181–91.[28]Díaz-Palacios JR, Romo-Aledo VJ, Chinaei AH. March). Biometric access control fore-health records in pre-hospital care. In: Proceedings of the joint EDBT/ICDT 2013workshops; 2013. p. 169–73. [29]He CG, Bao SD, Li Y. A novel tri-factor mutual authentication with biometrics forbody sensor networks in healthcare applications. Int J Smart Sens Intell Syst 2013;6(3).[30]Manimekalai S. A study on biometric for single sign on health care security system.Int J Comput Sci Mobile Comput 2014;3(6):79 –87. [31] Spence B. Hospitals canﬁnally put aﬁnger on biometrics.http://www.securit yinfowatch.com/article/10473265/hospitals-can- ﬁnally-put-a-ﬁngeron-biometrics; 2011, November 4.[32]Trader J. Why healthcare should evaluate biometrics for patient identi ﬁcation. 2012.[33]Krawczyk S, Jain AK. Securing electronic medical records using biometricauthentication. In: International conference on audio-and video-based biometricperson authentication. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer; 2005, July. p. 1110 –9. [34]Gudavalli M, Kumar DS, Raju SV. Integrated biometric template security usingrandom rectangular hashing. Global J Comput Sci Technol 2014;14(7):32 –8. [35]Jain AK, Flynn P, Ross AA, editors. Handbook of biometrics. Springer Science & Business Media; 2007.[36]Chandra A, Durand R, Weaver S. The uses and potential of biometrics in health care.Int J Pharmaceut Healthc Market 2008;2(1):22 –34. [37]Duquenoy P, George C, Kimppa K. Ethical, legal, and social issues in medicalinformatics. 2008.[38] Pepitone J. OPM hack: 5.6 million ﬁngerprints (not 1.1 million) were stolen. https: //www.nbcnews.com/tech/security/opm-5-6-million- ﬁngerprints-not-1-1-million- were-n432281; 2015, September 20.[39]Mitra S, Gofman M, editors. Biometrics in a data driven world: trends, technologies,and challenges. CRC Press; 2016 . [40]Rakshit RD, Kisku DR. Biometric technologies in healthcare biometrics. In: Designand implementation of healthcare biometric systems. IGI Global; 2019. p. 1 –28. [41] Fauscette M. Biometrics are coming &so are security concerns.https://www.d arkreading.com/endpoint/biometrics-are-coming-and-so-are-security-concerns/a/d-id/1331536; 2018, April 20.[42] Scottile C. As biometric scanning use grows, so does security risk. https ://www.nbcnews.com/mach/mach/biometric-scanning-use-grows-so-do-security-risks-ncna593161; 2016, July 24.[43] (n.d.) Van der Kleut J. Biometrics and biometric data: what is it and is it secure? htt ps://us.norton.com/internetsecurity-iot-biometrics-how-do-they-work-are-they-safe.html.[44]Goodfellow I, Bengio Y, Courville A, Bengio Y. Deep learning 2016;1 . [45]Krizhevsky A, Sutskever I, Hinton EG. Imagenet classi ﬁcation with deep con- volutional neural networks 2017;60(6):84 –90. June 2017. [46]Marsico MD, Nappi M, Riccio D, Wechsler H. Mobile Iris Challenge Evaluationk(MICHE), biometric iris dataset protocols. Pattern Recogn Lett 2015:17 –23. 2015. [47]Lowe D. BObject recognition from local scale-invariant features. In: Proc. 7th int.Conf. Computer vision; 1999. p. 1150 –7. Kerkyra, Greece. [48]Dalal N, Triggs B, Schmid C. May). Human detection using oriented histograms ofﬂow and appearance. In: European conference on computer vision. Berlin,Heidelberg: Springer; 2006. p. 428 –41. [49]Silva C, Bouwmans T, Fr/C19elicot C. An extended center-symmetric local binary patternfor background modeling and subtraction in videos. 2015, March .J. Mason et al.Array 8 (2020) 100042
15