 AASRI Procedia   1  ( 2012 )  106 – 111 
2212-6716 © 2012 Published by Elsevier Ltd. doi: 10.1016/j.aasri.2012.06.019 
 
 2012 AASRI Conference on Computational Intelligence and Bioinformatics  
Application of   RFID Technology for Logistics on Internet of Things 
Chunling Sun* 
School of Information Science and Technology  Heilongjiang University ˈharbin,150080,china   
Abstract 
Radio Frequency Identification RFID is a non-contact automa tic identification technology, which signals through radio frequency automatic identification and access to relevant target data, no need for manual intervention to identify job can work in a variety of harsh environment. Because the logistics in the production control flow with information not to match, more and more can not satisfy a realistic and future demand. Internet of Things overcome traditional the blemish of the form code, be subjected to international logistics field and international community business enterprise biggest concern and research. 
 © 2012 Published by Elsevier B.V. Selection and/or peer review under responsibility of American Applied Science Research Institute  
Keywords:  RFID  Technology˗ Internet of  Things˗ Application 
1.Key Technologies in IOT Internet of Things (The Internet of things) is de fined as: The radio frequency identification (RFID), infrared sensors, global positioning systems, laser sca nners and other information sensing device, according to the agreed protocol, to any article connected to the In ternet up to information exchange and communication, in order to achieve intelligent identify, locate, track,  monitor and manage a network. Internet of Things concept is put forward in 1999. Internet of Things is the "material objects connected to the Internet". This has 
 *.Tel.: +86013503615157; fax: +86045186608716. E-mail address: chunling6666@163.com. 
AASRI
Procedia
www.elsevier.com/locate/procediaAvailable online at www.sciencedirect.com
Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.107  Chunling Sun et al.  /  AASRI Procedia   1  ( 2012 )  106 – 111 
 two meanings: first, the core of networking and infrastruc ture continues to be the Internet, is in the Internet on the basis of the extension and expansion of the network; second, the user-end extended and expanded to any article and articles, information exchange and communication. RFID is a technology with important business value an d huge potential. RFID promises to replace the old barcode and contributes to the real time visibility of the goods, regardless of the location of the supply chain. We find RFID applications in various fields, but its main use is in trac king objects (assets). 2.About RFID technology In its simplest form, RFID is a concept similar to barcode technology, but without requiring a direct visibility of the monitored entities. Just like bar co de systems require a proper optical reader and special tags applied on products, RFID needs a reader equipment an d special tags or cards attached to the products in order for the products to be tracked. 
                                                                    
Fig 1   RFID Reader Block Diagram 
Radio Frequency Identification (RFID) has a long histor y and is part of the technological revolution both current and past. RFID enables quick payment of tolls and quick identification of items. In addition, RFID provides benefits, such as tracking assets, monit oring conditions for safety, and helping to prevent counterfeiting. RFID plays an integral part in the technological revolution along with the Internet and mobile devices, which are connecting the world together All RFID  systems, contain three basic components. The first is the RFID tag that is attached to an asset or item. The tag contains information about that asset or item and also may incorporate sensors. The second component is  the RFID interrogator, which communicates with (also called interrogating) the RFID tags. The third component is the backend system, which links the RFID interrogators to a centralized database. The centralized database contains additional information, such as price, for each RFID tagged item. RFID technologies can be classified into three categories: passive RFID, active RFID, and semi passive RFID. Based on the radio frequency used, the passive RFID technologies are usually categorized into low frequency (LF) RFID, high frequency (HF) RFID, u ltra high frequency (UHF) RFID, and microwave RFID. 
 
Fig 2   Tag, Reader and Host Computer Computer communication network RFID reader RFID tag Antenna 108   Chunling Sun et al.  /  AASRI Procedia   1  ( 2012 )  106 – 111 
  RFID technology has been widespread and nowadays, it can be found in many applications. Some of RFID applications are RFID printer, RFID scanner, RFID reader and RFID antenna. Radio frequency identification or better known as RFID describe a system that transmit s the identity of an object or person wirelessly using radio waves in the form of a unique serial number.  An RFID system may consist of several components: tags transponders, tag reader s, antenna, and interface. In a typical RFID system, individual objects are equipped with a small, inexpensive tag. The tag contains a transponder with a digital memory chip that is given a unique electronic product code. The interrogator, an antenna packaged with a transceiver and decoder, emit s a signal activating the RFID tag so it can read and write data to it. When an RFID tag passes through the electromagnetic zone, it detects the reader's activation signal. The reader decodes the data encoded in the tag's integrated circuit and the data is passed to the host computer. The application software on the host pr ocesses the data, and may perform various filtering operations to reduce the numerous often redundant reads of  the same tag to a smaller and more useful data set. 3.The application of RFID in IOT Although RFID has been around for more than a half cent ury, it is only in recent years that this technology has been gaining significant momentum due to the conv ergence of lower cost and increased capabilities of RFID tags. Currently, RFID is emerging as an important technology for revolutionizing a wide range of applications, including supply chain management, retail, aircraft maintenance, anti counterfeiting, baggage handling, and healthcare. It also heralds the emergence of inexpensive and highly effective pervasive computers that will have dramatic impacts on indivi duals, organizations, and societies. Many organizations are planning or have already exploited RFID in their main operations to take advantage of the potential of more automation, efficient business processes, and invent ory visibility. For example, recent news shows that Wal-Mart has reduced out-of-stocks by 30 percent on  average after launching its RFID program. Many predictions agree that RFID will be worth billions of dollars in new investments.  With IOT enterprises can supervise their every product in real time, and manage their logistics architecture. They not only supervise the circulation in supply chain and share information, but also analyze the information generated from every procedure and fore cast. By forecasting the information from the current procedure of their products, the future trend or th e probability that accident happens is estimated, remedy measures can be adopted or the warning can be given ahead. This can improve enterprises’ ability of responding to the market. IOT can affect the whole supply chain. Firstly it can optimize the supply chain management; secondly it can make sources to be used effectively; thirdly it can make the whole supply chain to be visible so that it can improve the information of supply chain transparency; fourthly the supply chain can be managed in real time; the lastly it can make the supply chain high agility and complete integration. IOT affects the supply chain management in manufacturing link, warehousing link, transportation link and selling link. It makes enterprises even all the whole su pply change response to the varied market quickly so that the adaptability of the supply chain to market verification changes is improved. 4.The future of RFID in IOT While RFID has previously been considered a forwa rd looking technology, its adoption across a variety of industries has seen it become a lot more commonplace. As RFID is being more prevalent across a variety of industries, logistics organizations seeking to gain a co mpetitive advantage are already utilizing the technology in a variety of innovative ways the industry has not seen before. The question that many providers are now asking is: where is RFID going? The answer, it seems, is that the technology has a bright future with more value added features appearing at similar costs.  109  Chunling Sun et al.  /  AASRI Procedia   1  ( 2012 )  106 – 111 
 Now, utilities are revolutionizing their operations usin g smart meters to collect and transmit the amount of power consumed in a household. Smart meters are an example of a technology that is fundamentally changing business operations in electric utilities by recordin g consumption at regular intervals and communicating it back to the utility for monitoring and billing. One may be tempted to think invoking data will be  limited to niche applications, but like RFID in its infancy, it will blossom over time. As networks become  more extensive and less expensive, more devices can be attached to the network to transmit data.  Despite extensive networks, some devices may not have  network connectivity or the device may not be configured to the network yet. For unconnected dev ices, the new technology behind RFID is a superb mechanism for ensuring that the information being gather ed by the device is still transmitted, ensuring up-to- date information and streamlined deployment times. By itself, transmitting tiny amounts of data is not par ticularly powerful, but RFID offers the lowest cost and lowest power which enables a device with the capab ility to invoke data, without adding substantially to the cost of the device. As an addition, transmitting th e data can be performed even when the device is off since RFID can be self-powered. In the system, the enterprises will distribute their products information such as RFID anti-counterfeiting labels information, directory of services and directory of  products to the public platform of the RFID anti- counterfeiting through the Internet. When the consumers receive the product with RFID anti-counterfeiting label, they use the label code to access to the cor porate anti-counterfeiting information services address through RFID-enabled mobile phones or Internet-connected computers equipped with read-write RFID tags, and then call the services to attain product-related inform ation to identify the authenticity of the product.  Taking the RFID-enabled mobile phone for example to show the specific anti-counterfeiting steps when the consumer wants to identify the authenticity of the product. 
 
Fig 3   The process of anti-counterfeiting for products 
Firstly, the consumer gets the corporate anti-counterfe iting server address from the product description or other identifications directly. When receiving the RFID -tagged products, the consumer uses the RFID-enabled The RFID Tags Internet-connected Readers Corporate Anti-Server 
3ǃRead the Tag 
6ǃTransmit the Random Data to Tag
7ǃResend Result after being computed 
8ǃTransmit the Result from the Tag 
9ǃResend the Final Exam Result 4ǃTransmit the Tag Code 
5ǃExam the Code and Produce Random Data 2ǃDownload Program Files 1ǃVisit Service Addresses 110   Chunling Sun et al.  /  AASRI Procedia   1  ( 2012 )  106 – 111 
 phone to visit the Web address and download program files that interact with the server following the prompts. After running and connecting with the server, the phone goes into the interactive process. Secondly, the consumer uses the phone to read the product tag to attain the product’s RFID code and pass it to the anti-counterfeiting server. Once the code matches with the RFID coding standard of the corporate products, the server queries its cryptographic algorithm to produce the random data and passes to the client phone, at the same time the server computes the rand om data according to the cryptographic algorithm and conserves the computing results. Thirdly, the client phone sends the random data to the tag when it received from the server, after the tag’s internal calculation, the result will be sent to the mobile phone and finally be sent by the mobile phone to the server to check. Finally, the server will check the data received fr om its own conservation previously, and resend the information “the product is genuine” to the mobile phone if they are consistent.  5. Conclusion    RFID is a prospective automatic identification method,  being considered by many as one of the most pervasive computing technologies in history. RFID is based on storing and remotely retrieving data using devices called RFID tags or RFID transporters. An automatic identification technology such as an Auto-ID system based on RFID technology is an important asset for inventory systems for two reasons. First of all, the visibility provided by this technology allows an accurate knowledge of inventory level by eliminating the discrepancy between inventory record and physical inve ntory. Secondly, RFID technology can prevent or reduce sources of errors. Benefits of using RFID technology include the reduction of labor costs, the simplification of business processes and the reduction of inventory inaccuracies.  In recent years, with the upsurge of the second generation of the Internet of Things, integrating the RFID technology and the Internet of Things and using them to  the monitoring and anti-counterfeiting for products in the supply chain can make the most use of the advant age of the RFID technology, and the enterprises can achieve real visualization management in products. Therefore, our country enterprises should actively promote the development process of the RFID technology and the Internet of Things and make them as boosters in the management of supply chains. 6. References [1] International Telecommunication Union UIT.ITU Internet Reports 2005: The Internet of Things[R].2005. [2] GUSTAVO R G, MARIO M O, CARLOS D K. Early infrastr ucture of an Internet of Things in Spaces for Learning[C].Eighth IEEE International Conference on Advanced Learning Technologies,2008:381-383. [3] AMARDEO CSARMA,J G. Identities in the Future Internet of Things [J].Wireless Pers Commune 2009, 49: 353363. [4] AKYILDIZ L F,et al. Wireless sensor networks: A survey [J].Computer Networks, 2002, 38:393-422. [5] STANKOVIC J A. Real-Time communication and coordination in embedded sensor networks [J].Proceedings of the IEEE, 2003, 91 (7):1002-1022. [6] CHEN J M,LIN R ZH,SUN Y X. Information processi ng in Wireless Sensor Networks[J].Chinese Journal of Scientific Instrument,27(9),2006:1107-1111. [7] LI F B, LI L. Survey on Wireless Sensor Network Techniques [J].Chinese Journal of Scientific Instrument, 2005, 26(suppl.2). [8] YAN BHUANG G W. Application of RFID and internet of things in monitoring and anti-counterfeiting for products[C].2008 International Seminar on Business and Information Management,2008:392-395. [9] Lu Yan, Yan Zhang, Laurence T. Yang, Huansheng Ning. THE INTERNET OF THINGS--From RFID to the Next-Generation Pervasive Networked Systems. Auerbach Publications. 2008. 111  Chunling Sun et al.  /  AASRI Procedia   1  ( 2012 )  106 – 111 
 [10] J.R. Johnson. “Wal-Mart: RFID Reduces Out-Of-Stocks by Up to 62 Percent.”http://www.dcvelocity.com/articles/rfidww/rfidww2006051  7/walmart_rfid.cfm,visited on 14/07/2006 [11] Z. Asif, M. Mandviwalla. Integrating the supply chain with RFID: A technical and business analysis. Communications of the Association for Information Systems, 1 [12] Shiqing Fan, Ze yu, Hongjun Guo. Affects of IOT on Supply Chain management. China Economics and Trade [J]. 19/2009  