Artiﬁcial cognition for applications in smart agriculture: Acomprehensive review
Misbah Pathana,N i v e d i t aP a t e lb, Hiteshri Yagnikc, Manan Shahd,⁎
aDepartment of Computer Engineering, Silver Oak College of Engineering and Technology, Ahmedabad, Gujarat, India
bDepartment of Computer Engineering, Nirma University Ahmedabad, Gujarat, India
cGuj Info Petro Limited (GIPL), Gandhinagar, Gujarat, India
dDepartment of Chemical Engineering, School of Technology, Pandit Deendayal Petroleum University, Gandhinagar, Gujarat, India
abstract article info
Article history:Received 26 June 2019Received in revised form 6 June 2020Accepted 6 June 2020Available online 10 June 2020
Keywords:Artiﬁcial intelligenceDiseasedAgriculturePrecision farmingPhenotypingAgriculture contributes to 6.4% of the entire world's economic production. In at least nine countries of the world,agriculture is the dominant sector of the economy. Agriculture not only provides the fuel for billions of people butalso employment opportunities to a large number of people. The agricultural industries are seeking innovativeapproaches for improving crop yielding because of unpredictable climatic changes, the rapid increase in popula-tion growth and food security concerns. Thus, arti ﬁcial intelligence in agriculture also called “Agriculture Intelli- gence”is progressively emerging as a part of the industry's technological revolution. The aim of this paper is toreview various applications of agriculture intelligence such as precision farming, disease detection, and crop phe-notyping with the help of numerous tools such as machine learning, deep learning, image processing, arti ﬁcial neural network, deep learning, convolution neural network, Wireless Sensor Network (WSN) technology, wire-less communication, robotics, Internet of Things (IoT), different genetic algorithms, fuzzy logic and computer vi-sion to name a few. With the help of these technologies, the use of the colossal volume of chemicals can be usedreduced, which would result in reduced expenditure improved soil fertility along with elevated productivity.© 2020 The Authors. Publishing services by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of KeAi Communications Co. Ltd. This is an openaccess article under the CC BY license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ ).Contents1 . I n t r o d u c t i o n ............................................................... 8 12 . P r e c i s i o n f a r m i n g ............................................................. 8 23 . D i s e a s e d e t e c t i o n i n p l a n t s ........................................................ 8 44 . C r o p p h e n o t y p i n g ............................................................ 8 65 . F u t u r e s c o p e ............................................................... 8 96 . C o n c l u s i o n ................................................................ 8 9A u t h o r s c o n t r i b u t i o n .............................................................. 8 9A c k n o w l e d g e m e n t s.............................................................. 9 2A v a i l a b i l i t y o f d a t a a n d m a t e r i a l ......................................................... 9 2F u n d i n g .................................................................... 9 2C o n s e n t f o r p u b l i c a t i o n ............................................................. 9 2E t h i c s a p p r o v a l a n d c o n s e n t t o p a r t i c i p a t e .................................................... 9 2D e c l a r a t i o n c o m p e t i n g i n t e r e s t ......................................................... 9 2R e f e r e n c e s.................................................................. 9 2
1. IntroductionOne of the key features that distinguish humans, from everythingelse in the world is intelligence (Pivoto et al., 2018). An approach tomake a computer, a robot, or any machine think the way human thinksand resolve problems is Artiﬁcial Intelligence (Sukhadia et al., 2020; Shah et al., 2020a, 2020b;Kundalia et al., 2020). In the words of Professor McCarthy, artiﬁcial intelligence is“the science and engineering of makingintelligent machines, especially intelligent computer programs ”.B a s i c‘AI’ has existed for decades, via rules-based programs that deliver rudimentarydisplays of‘intelligence’in speciﬁc contexts. Progress, however, has beenArtiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 4 (2020) 81 –95
⁎Corresponding author.E-mail address:manan.shah@spt.pdpu.ac.in(M. Shah).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aiia.2020.06.0012589-7217/© 2020 The Authors. Publishing services by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of KeAi Communications Co. Ltd. This is an open access article under the C C BY license (http:// creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ ).
Contents lists available atScienceDirect
Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture
journal homepage:http://www.keaipublishing.com/en/journals/artificial-intelligence-in-agriculture/limited–because algorithms to tackle many real-world problems are toocomplex for people to program by hand ( Parekh et al., 2020;Patel et al., 2020a, 2020b;Shah et al., 2019a, 2019b, 2019c). What if difﬁculty could be transferred of making complex predictions, the data optimisation andfeature speciﬁcation, from the programmer to the program? This is thepromise of modern artiﬁcial intelligence. A consciousness towards emerg-i n gp r o b l e m s ,a l o n gw i t hap ressing desire to embed artiﬁcial intelligence in larger applications led to the development of reactive arti ﬁcial intelli- gent systems (Agre and Chapman, 1987;Brooks, 1986;Firby, 1987; Garvey and Lesser, 1994).Machine learning is a sub-set of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, where advances are rapid and signiﬁcant (Kakkad et al., 2019). Problems too complex for humans to solve are tackled by Machine Learning by shifting the burdenof decision-making to the algorithm ( Shah et al., 2020a, 2020b;Patel et al., 2020a, 2020b;Panchiwala and Shah, 2020;Talaviya et al., 2020). As AI pioneer Arthur Samuel wrote in 1959, machine learning is the‘ﬁeld of study that gives computers the ability to learn without being ex- plicitly programmed’. The goal of Machine learning is to develop a predic-tion engine for a particular use case by writing a program for every type ofobject needed to identify (Gavhale and Gawande, 2014;Jani et al., 2019; Patel et al., 2020a, 2020b). To solve the problem of writing particular pro- gram for every object to be identiﬁed, Deep Learning crossed the thresh-old. Deep learning is the sub-set of Machine learning which saves thetime and efforts of a programmer neede d to undertake the tasks of feature speciﬁcation or optimisation (Jha et al., 2019;Gandhi et al., 2020;Ahir et al., 2020). Deep learning has revolutionised the world of arti ﬁcial intel- ligence. Artiﬁcial Neural Network is powerful yet veryﬂexible deep learn- ing, with three layer i.e., input layer, output layer and multiple layers-called‘deep neural network’
.B i o l o g i c a ln e r v o u ss y s t e m ,s u c ha sb r a i n ,i n -spired ANN as information-processing paradigm to process information(Sladojevic et al., 2016;Pandya et al., 2020). Using this process, with in- creasing effectiveness we can now:•Process images•Translate between languages in real-time•Use speech to control devices•Predict how genetic variation will effect DNA transcription•Precision agriculture•Crop phenotyping and analysis•Detect tumours in medical images; and more.According to (FAO, 2017), world population growth is slowingdown, in some regions population will continue to expand beyond2050 and even into the next century as more people live in cities thanin rural areas, and this discrepancy is projected to increase as populationgrows. Agriculture feeds the world and the population of the world is in-creasing rapidly (Shah et al., 2018a, 2018b;Shah et al., 2019a, 2019b). In 2019, world population is 7.7 billion and by 2050, the population willwitness an increase by 2 billion, resulting in a total world populationof 9 billion. The environmental strain that is being put on the planetby growing population and industries, including agriculture, is leadingto runway global warming. Various egregious activities cause land deg-radation which results in deterioration in quality of crops; chemical run-off is contributing to dead zones and threatening sea life. Thus, theapplication of artiﬁcial intelligence to agriculture could be very impor-tant in providing potential answers to solve major issues such as pestand disease infestation, inadequate application of chemicals, improperdrainage and irrigation, weed control and yield prediction to name afew (Bannerjee et al., 2018;Adamides et al., 2014). Complex interaction of soil, seed and agro chemicals are the outcome of agricultural product.2. Precision farmingPrecision farming is all about the phrase “Right Place, Right Time, and Right Product”. Precision farming replaces the repetitive and labour inten-sive part of farming with more accurate and controlled techniques thanconventional ones. In 2017,Pivoto et al. (2018), viewed smart farming (SF) as the incorporation of communication technology into machineryequipment as well as sensors to use in agricultural production systems(Pedersen et al., 2008;Ahmed et al., 2016). According toGibbons (2000) andWaheed et al. (2006), advanced information processing technologyfor timely in-season crop management like variable rate technology, air-borne and satellite remote sensing, multispectral and hyperspectralground-based, computer modelling, global positioning systems (GPS),geographic information systems (GIS) are innovative system approacheson which precision agriculture is based. According to Cox (2002), applica- tions of livestock production as well as the spatially-variable ﬁeld opera- tions made possible by satellite Global Positioning System (GPS), areincluded under the general heading of precision agriculture (or PrecisionFarming).Ullah et al. (2017)discussed precision agriculture which collectsdiverse data, integrates several technologies and effectively analyse to im-prove production efﬁciency simultaneously minimises the cost. Yandun et al. (2017)described Precision horticulture as the way to improve prof-itability and productivity in the utilization of assets, hence accomplishingthis objective under the various difﬁculties faced by agribusiness essen-tially because of atmosphere changes, land debasement, accessibility offarmable land, lack of work power and expanding costs. Due to reducedequipment costs, increased computational power and increasing interestin non-destructive food assessment methods, image processing and com-puter vision has grown in recent years in agriculture ( Mahajan et al., 2015; Patrício and Rieder, 2018).Ullah et al. (2017)aimed to review agricultural challenges, differentmethods of precision agriculture based on arti ﬁcial intelligence and ma- chine learning and future directions. According to the survey, therewere technologies useful for precision farming such as GPS/GNSS, mo-bile devices, robotics, driverless tractor, irrigation, Unmanned Arial Ve-hicle (UAV), Internet Of Things (IoT), sensors, variable rate seeding,weather modelling. Data collection, analysis of data, managing decisionsand farming are four main phases of precision farming. Since last twodecades, for precision farming, new technologies have been developedbased on artiﬁcial intelligence such as Artiﬁcial Neutral Networks (ANNs) and fuzzy logic controllers for regulation of temperature andhumidity in artiﬁcially conditioned greenhouses. Also, Khanna and Kaur (2019), presented detailed review considering IOT as the back-bone in theﬁeld of precision farming.The process of classiﬁcation is also of vital importance to the precisionfarming process.Noguchi et al. (1998)used the Generic Algorithm (GA) optimized fuzzy logic duringﬁeld operations to classify crops. In the entiresoybean growth period, it was noticed that results were accurate. Aftersegmenting out the weed, for estimation purposes of the height andwidth of the soybean, ANN was used ( Heckmann et al., 2017). Similarly, Neural Networks and Fuzzy Logic application in the classi-ﬁcation of crops for crop mapping is useful as it ultimately allows thecrop water requirement to be determined. ( Murmu and Biswas, 2015). Fuzzy Logic can further be used for grading crop produce suchas apples (Kavdir and Guyer, 2003), tomatoes (Dorado et al., 2016), let- tuce, cauliﬂower (Ureña et al., 2001) and even mangoes (Teoh et al., 2013). Such processes consist of the image capturing or inputting infor-mation, feature extraction, and then classi ﬁcation and/or grading (Naganur et al., 2012). Based on parameters such as size, shape(Mustafa et al., 2009), colour, aroma, etc. theﬁnal grading of the crop is done on a scale such as on a range of 1 –10. Similarly, the grading of date trees based on the condition and output that they are likely togive can also be done in order to help farmers utilise their resources cor-rectly (Mazloumzadeh et al., 2009).Autonomous mobile robots are also tools used in precision agricul-ture for various different tasks as shown in ( Fig. 1). Autonomous robots have the capability of adapting and learning which is essential to agri-culture which is a dynamic process (Hagras et al., 2002). Most autono- mous robots have sensors for input information which is thenprocessed by the control unit. The robot control system may be based
on fuzzy logic (Hagras et al., 2000). Robots can be used for inspection82 M. Pathan et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 4 (2020) 81 –95and treatment of plants by inbuilt gripper systems and eye-hand sys-tems. (Acaccia et al., 2003). Some other widely used robot applicationsare weed picking (Slaughter et al., 2008) and robotic weed control (Lee et al., 1999) which is based on a machine vision system and in-cludes a precision chemical application system. This seems to be largelybeneﬁcial as hand weed control is an extremely drudging and inef ﬁcient task that increases human labour. In addition to this, robots are used forcrop phenotypic to assess the health of plants. Although different robotsmake the use of different navigation systems, they are generally guidedby a combination of GPS and a human-operated laptop as it moves be-tween rows of plants. Similarly, progress is being made in the use of ro-bots for the harvesting of crops such as apples, grapes, etc.Waheed et al. (2006)investigated the potential of hyperspectral re-mote sensing data to provide better crop management information.Hyperspectral Image processing can be used for all kinds of new and ef-ﬁcient agriculture purposes (Teke et al., 2013)s u c ha sl e a fn i t r o g e n accumulation(Wei et al., 2008), nitrogen deﬁciency, invasive weed spe- cies (Goel et al., 2003), invasive pests like the leafhopper ( Prabhakar et al., 2011), estimation of vegetation parameters.Such as leaf area index (LAI) (Liu et al., 2016), detection of disease in plants (Zhang et al., 2003) and more.In 2006, Waheed, et al., investigated that to classify hyperspectraldata of experimental corn plots into categories of water stress, presenceof weeds and nitrogen application rates classi ﬁcation and regression trees (CART), decision tree algorithm was used. The classi ﬁcationaccuracy was 96% for the irrigation factor, 83% for the nitrogen, and100% for the weed control strategies, was obtained with the spectra atthe early growth stage and single-factor analysis. Based on results itwas concluded that CART decision tree approach was an effective toolfor solving hyperspectral tree problem such as allowing us to obtainfull data as well as helps to take up a decision by describing risk in allthe possible categories. Furthermore to classify hyperspectral data deci-sion trees along with ANN (Goel et al., 2003) or Support Vector Ma- chines (Mercier and Lennon, 2013) are both methods that will workalternatively for pattern recognition in hyperspectral data.Aqeel-ur-Rehman et al. (2014)reviewed WSN technology and theirapplications in different aspects of agriculture, the need of wireless sen-sors in agriculture and reported existing system frameworks in the ag-riculture domain. The main objective of the authors was to use sensorsand network successfully to get numerous bene ﬁts to solve agriculture domain problems. According to the review carried out, it was concludedthat major concerns were that solutions were too complex, costly, thegeneralised solution was lacking for various problems.Keshtgari and Deljoo (2012)used Wireless Sensor Networks(WSNs) for precision agriculture in 2011. WSN are usually used forcollecting, storing and sharing sensed data. The aim is to take controlleddecisions on the root of sensing real-time data of climatology and otherenvironmental properties. To report the design, construction, and test-ing of a distributed inﬁeld WSN, a remote monitoring control, grid to-pologies, was the main objective. The outcome was a drastic reduction
Fig. 1.Autonomous mobile robots used in precision agriculture Figure (a): Robotic Phenotyping ( Bao et al., 2019). (b): Agricultural robot (Ball et al., 2016). (c) Strawberry harvesting Robot (Xiong et al., 2020). (d) Autonomous Robot (e) Robotic Apple Harvester ( Silwal et al., 2017). (f) Autonomous Agriculture Robot “Vinebot”(Hajjaj et al., 2018). (g) Agriculture Robot Use In Field (Beachar et al., 2016). (h) Weed Removing Robot ( Pire et al., 2019) (i) Autonomous Agriculture Robot “BoniRob”(Biber et al., 2012) (j) Agricultual Vehicle Robot ( Galati et al., 2017). (k) Agriculture Robot (Duckett et al., 2018). (l) Agriculture spraying robot ( Adamides et al., 2014).83 M. Pathan et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 4 (2020) 81 –95in cost and improved quality agricultural production and precision irri-gation on combining applications of precision agriculture and WSN.Hakkim et al. (2016), aimed to increase economic returns as well asreduce the energy input and environmental impacts of agriculturethrough precision farming. Tools and equipment used were Global Posi-tioning System (GPS), sensor technologies, geographic informationsystem (GIS), grid soil sampling and variable- rate fertilizer (VRT) appli-cation, crop management, soil and plant sensors, rate controllers, preci-sion irrigation and in pressurized systems, software, yield monitor andprecision farming on arable land, precision farming within the fruits,vegetables and viticulture sectors, precision livestock farming. At last,it was concluded how well and quickly the knowledge need to guidenew technologies can be found in the factor on which success of preci-sion farming depends (Pire et al., 2019).3. Disease detection in plantsPlants are highly prone to disease as they are exposed to the outerenvironment, therefore the prevention and control of disease is amust. Current crop conditions and susceptibility to infection are factorson which the rate of spread of disease depends ( Lucas et al., 1992and Camargoa and Smith, 2009;Gulve et al., 2015). The key to prevent the losses in the yield and quantity in the agricultural products is identi ﬁca- tion of the plant diseases (Khirade and Patil, 2015). Coloured spots or streaks that can occur on the leaves, stems and seeds of the plant arerange of symptoms when plant becomes diseased. Consequently,rapid identiﬁcation of disease remains difﬁcult in many parts of the world. Advances in computer vision by deep learning have paved theway for smartphone-assisted disease diagnosis. Oversized work ofwatching in huge farms of crops, and detecting symptoms of diseaseat early stage is extremely tedious, thus automated techniques are ben-eﬁcial.Bashish et al. (2011)studied that to reply on expert's naked eyeobservation to detect and classify disease is expensive, particularly indeveloping countries. Therefore it was aimed to use image processingbased software solution for automatic detection and classi ﬁcation of plant leaf diseases.Patil and Kumar (2011)aimed to provide various advanced methodsto study plant diseases/traits using image processing to increasethroughput and reduce cost arising from human experts in detectingthe plant disease. To detect diseased leaf, stem, fruit, to quantify area af-fected by disease, toﬁnd shape of affected area, to determine colour ofaffected area, to determine size and shape of fruits, etc. image process-ing is useful. Manual analysis scenario, shifting the rate-limiting stepto image acquisition can be expanded beyond its feasibility study withthe help of automation of image analysis experiments ( Spalding and Miller, 2013).A number of algorithms and methods may be used for classi ﬁcation and detection of disease through computer vision. Deep ConvolutionalNeural Networks were used (Ferentinos, 2018) reaching a 99.53% success rate in identifying the corresponding disease and plant. Neural networkshave also worked for detection of diseases in crops such as rice ( Phadikar and Sil, 2008). K- means algorithm (Mehra et al., 2016), Principal compo- nent analysis (PCA), the coefﬁcient of variation (CV) (Schor et al., 2016), Support Vector Machines (SVM) (Bhange and Hingoliwala, 2015) are also some other alternative and in some cases more ef ﬁcient model basis. In an example study, K-means clustering for classi ﬁcation into two groups: healthy and infected followed by support vector machines(SVM) provided better results rather than ANN. (
Omrani et al., 2014). Bashir and Sharma (2012)used colour and texture to recognize andclassify different agriculture/horticulture whose combinational featureproved to be effective way of disease detection in plants. Using methodslike K-mean clustering, Bayes classiﬁer colour and texture analysis wasused for detection inMalus domestica.A system was developed with the help of networked cameras, sen-sors, and a machine learning algorithm by Israeli start-up Prospera tomonitor crops and warn farmers as soon as plant is sick ( Castro andNew, 2016).Golhani et al. (2018)used available neutral network tech-niques to process hyperspectral data which have special emphasis onplant disease detection.Moshou et al. (2004)used neural networks and more speciﬁcally multi-layered perceptron's to automatically de-tect yellow rust in wheat. Classiﬁcation performance increased from95% to more than 99% using total of 5137 leaf spectra for evaluationwith the help of ANN technology.Modern methods for plant disease detection include combining spec-troscopic and imaging techniques with an autonomous agricultural vehi-cle that can provide information on disease detection at early stages tocontrol the spread of plant diseases ( Sankaran et al., 2010). Molecular methodology and proﬁle based techniques are also available. However,imaging and spectrographic techniques are preferred in cases of visiblesymptoms, take minutes to give results, and can be handled remotely.The aim for performing fusion of data from both hyper-spectral andmulti-spectralﬂuorescence imaging was early detection of disease beforevisible symptoms and it allowed discrimination from healthy plants with94.5% accuracy. (Moshou et al., 2005). Hyper-spectral imaging is a tech-nique that applies a wide spectrum of light to each pixel and this lightstriking the pixels is broken down into spectras and analysed to provideinformation. As in the case of citrus greening, if thermal infrared spectralreﬂectance data is collected for both healthy and diseased plants the re-ﬂectance values for both differ and hence, classi ﬁcation occurs in this manner according to the reﬂectance of each in particular regions(Fig. 2). Similarly, techniques such asﬂuorescence imaging are also used in which the samples give off a very bright ﬂuorescent light or emission light which is studied in contrast to black backgrounds ( Fig. 3). In contrast, Infrared thermal imaging detects the temperature information in crops.Rangarajan et al. (2018)obtained dataset of images of tomato leaves(6 diseases and a healthy class) from PlantVillage for classi ﬁcation of to- mato crop disease (Fig. 2). Two deep learning based architecturesnamely AlexNet and VGG16 (Visual Geometry Group) net was usedand dataset obtained from PlantVillage was provided as input. Accuracynoted of classiﬁcation of 13,262 images were 97.29% for VGG16 (VisualGeometry Group) net and 97.49% for AlexNet. Models performance wasevaluated on the basis of number of images, setting mini-batch sizes andvarying the weight and bias learning weight. It was seen that number ofimages had a signiﬁcant impact on the performance of the models. Fur-ther, it was seen that VGG16 net dropped accuracy when weight andbias learning rate increase. In terms of computational load, good accu-racy was provided by AlexNet with minimum execution time comparedto the deep VGG16 net.Machine Vision-based approaches allow non-destructive detectionof plant disease at early stages in the development process ( Backhauset al., 2011). The process begins with the stage of sample preparationand image acquisition. Then, evaluation, trait identi ﬁcation, and ranking is conducted followed by classiﬁer development which uses SVM meth-odology in most cases (Chung et al., 2016). This machine vision process was used for the detection or recognition of diseases in crops such asrice (Chung et al., 2016), chili-pepper (Ataşet al., 2012), and papaya (Habib et al., 2018) with accuracies 87.9%, 87.50%, 90.15% respectively.Pydipati et al. (2006)aimed to visually differentiate between com-mon citrus diseases using individual leaf colour-texture features by ex-ploring image processing techniques. Machine based-vision approachto detect citrus disease was the main objection of research. Colour co-occurrence method was used to determine whether texture basedhue, saturation, and intensity (HSI) colour features in aggregationwith statistical classiﬁcation algorithms was to be used to identify dis-eased and normal citrus leaves under laboratory conditions. The out-come observed was by using SAS discriminant analysis variable setswas reduced and potential classiﬁcation accuracies was evaluated. Theclassiﬁcation accuracies achieved by SAS discriminant analysis, wasabove 81% on all data models when intensity feature was used, above95.8% when hue and saturation features was used alone but 100% accu-racies were achieved on using HIS features. The analysis concluded thatto classify citrus disease leaves while examining under controlled84 M. Pathan et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 4 (2020) 81 –95Fig. 3.Different imaging techniques used for plant disease detection. (a –d) Disease Detection using Imaging (e –f): Plant disease detection by hyperspectral imaging ( Mahlein et al., 2017). (g–h)Disease Detection using Hyperspectral Imaging (i-j) ( Mahlein et al., 2019). (k–l) Spectroscopy and thermal imaging Source: ( Omrani et al., 2014).
Fig. 2.Platforms for plant disease detection (a): Hyperspectral and chlorophyll ﬂuorescence imaging (Bauriegel and Herppich, 2014 ). (b): Hyperspectral imaging system for disease scanning on banana plants. ( Ochoa et al., 2016). (c): hyperspectral imaging: from the lab to the ﬁeld (Mahlein et al., 2017). (d): Infrared and Thermal imaging for citrus greening detection (Sankaran et al., 2013).85 M. Pathan et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 4 (2020) 81 –95laboratory lighting conditions, such methods can be used. Similar tech-nique for disease detection in chilly plant through leaf image and dataprocessing was adapted byHusin et al. (2012). It is considered as one the most effective and fastest method for disease detection in chillyplant and simultaneously it lowers the production cost of the mainte-nance and produce high quality of chili.An algorithm for image segmentation technique as well as the clas-siﬁcation of plant leaf disease was presented by Singh and Misra (2017) with survey on different disease classiﬁcation technique that can be used for plant leaf disease detection. The Genetic algorithm which gen-erates solutions for optimization was used for image segmentationwhich plays an important role to detect disease in plant leaf disease.Different samples of plants like banana leaf with early scorch disease(Fig. 4), lemon leaf with sunburn disease, rose and bean leaves with bac-terial disease and bean leaf with fungal disease were taken as inputwhose output were segmented images classi ﬁed into different plant dis- ease. Artiﬁcial Neural Network, Bayes Classiﬁer, Fuzzy Logic and Hybrid algorithms can be further used to improve recognition rate in classi ﬁca- tion process.4. Crop phenotypingAll the observable characteristics of an organism that result from theinteraction of its genotype (total genetic inheritance) with theenvironment can be deﬁned asphenotyping. Characteristics may include behavioural properties, biochemical properties, colour, shape and size.Plant statistical acquisition, analysis, and systematic application remaininsufﬁcient (Guo et al., 2017;Singh et al., 2016). According toWalter et al. (2015)quantitative description of the plant's ontogenetical, physio-logical, and anatomical and biochemical properties are plant phenotyping(Zhu et al., 2011;Jay et al., 2015). Further, enormous amount of processes,functions, and structures which are changing during growth and develop-ment characterizes the phenotype. For breeding, cultivar adoption, geno-mics, and phenomics study, efﬁcient evaluation of crop phenotypes is aprerequisite (Liu et al., 2015;Naik et al., 2017). Improvement in yield is the primary objective and problem in plantbreeding.Dee and French (2015)aimed to propose an automated systembased on computer vision which could perform detection and measure-ments from an image without human intervention, as a result, we can ob-tain high throughput with more accuracy in less time and even lessexpensive than traditional methods. According to Coppens et al. (2017) robotized picture investigation strategies permit substantial incrementsin the throughput of characteristics estimations, in this manner counter-ing the supposed phenotyping bottleneck, which considers phenotypicestimations the rate-restricting element in the practical examination ofexplicit genotypes or the evaluation of phenotype execution in plant rear-ing. Therefore, the effectiveness of new phenotyping and genotypingtechniques should be evaluated with additional genetic gain for yield
Fig. 4.Disease In Plants (a–b) Banana leaf Disease. (c –d) Rose leaf Disease. (e) Beans leaf fungal Disease.86 M. Pathan et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 4 (2020) 81 –95that can be obtained by implementation of new techniques, where cost-beneﬁt should be evaluated on the relation to the speed and cost of theadditional genetic gain (van Eeuwijk et al., 2019,Fig. 5. In crop phenotypic, the collection of information in an extremely ef-ﬁcient way in terms of both space and time is required which is why it isnecessary to have a sturdy sensor system. Bai et al. (2016)showed up a system comprised ofﬁve sensors i.e. ultrasonic distance sensors, ther-mal infrared radiometers, NDVI sensors, portable spectrometers, andRGB web cameras for high throughput phenotyping in plant breeding.These multiple sensors were used to measure crop canopy traits fromﬁeld plot, a GPS was used to geo-reference the sensor measurementsand to collect simultaneous environment details two environmentalsensors (a solar radiation sensor and air temperature/relative humiditysensor) were integrated. The results obtained from the soybean andwheatﬁeld with the help of sensor system performance were satisfac-tory and robust in theﬁeld tests. Characteristics of the temporal dynam-ics of these traits were obtained by plotting sensor-based traits as afunction of time. Hence it was concluded that, to collect ﬁeld-based high throughput plant phenotyping data, sensor system could be pow-erful tool for plant breeders.Hyperspectral imaging and non-imaging sensors are alternativevaluable tools which can be used for obtaining information related toboth quantitative and qualitative aspects of resistance in plants towardsplants (Kuska et al., 2015). Four different kinds of hyperspectral sensortechnologies are available: push broom scanner, whisk broom scanner,ﬁlter-based sensor and non-imaging sensor and each one of these tech-nologies have their advantages based on application. They may be ap-plied for the phenotyping of disease resistance in crops ( Mahlein et al., 2019). Moreover, algorithms like Support Vector Machines coupledwith Simplex Volume Maximization are used for the analysis ( Thomas et al., 2018). Support Vectors Machine is the most popular MachineLearning approach used for stress phenotyping. ( Singh et al., 2015) However, more understanding of the process may enable applicationK means clustering, Artiﬁcial Neural Networks (ANN), Gaussian MixtureModels, etc. more efﬁciently.One of the major challenges that are faced with the application ofthis system in phenotyping is the lack of large amounts of data. The ca-pacity of photosynthesis which is one of the most important factors ofplant metabolism can be predicted using leaf re ﬂection spectra. Analysis of a diverse array of leaf spectra revealed major ranges of wavelengthsin which leaf reﬂectance was highly correlated which provides potentialto make efﬁcient prediction models. Prediction models are designedusing a number of technologies such as Partial Least Square Regression(PLSR) which is used to reduce the number of features and Neural Net-works which accounts for the nonlinearity that PLSR does not.A range of sensors can be integrated with the UAV platforms(Sankaran et al., 2015a, 2015b). The sensors are based on spectral inter-actions between the object and the electromagnetic spectrum. An ex-ample of this is reﬂectance in visible and infrared regions at the timeofﬂight. These sensors are used to measure response of plants to bothbiotic and abiotic stress. Examples of stress are water stress, plant nutri-ent deﬁciency stress, and heat stress (Vanegas et al., 2018). UAS-friendly sensors are important because they allow ef ﬁ
cient in- formation fusion. This is demonstrated by the fusion of RGB, multispec-tral and thermal data to estimate soybean ( Glycinemax) biochemical parameters like chlorophyll content, nitrogen concentration, and LeafArea Index (LAI) (Maimaitijiang et al., 2017). In the model, spectral in- dices/features were combined to predict crop parameters using PartialLeast Squares Regression (PLSR), Support Vector Regression (SVR),and Extreme Learning Machine based Regression (ELR) techniques.Another study that proves aerial techniques are adequate for pheno-typing is the use of multispectral imaging collected with UAVs whichwere investigated for evaluation of seedling emergence and springstand of three winter wheat classes in Washington. ( Sankaran et al., 2015a, 2015b) The result was a Strong Pearson's correlation coef ﬁcient of 0.87 between the ground-truth and aerial image-based emergence.Besides this, autonomous ground-based vehicles are also platformsfor crop phenotyping such as a robot that is capable of measurementof plant stalk strength and gathering phenotypic data with an array ofnon-contact sensors (Mueller-Sim et al., 2017). Another platform is tower- based phenotyping (Naito et al., 2017). An architecture that con- sists of a combination of two platforms: an autonomous ground vehicle(Vinobot) and a mobile observation tower (Vinoculer) ( Shaﬁekhani et al., 2017). This system is advantageous in the sense that the groundvehicle could collect data from individual plants, while the observationtower could provide an overview of an entire ﬁeld, identifying speciﬁc plants for further inspection by the Vinobot. Remote sensing and ﬁeld- based platforms are yet other alternatives. ( Deery et al., 2014). The dif- ferent platforms are depicted inFig. 6.The Clustering of crop phenotyping by means of hyperspectral sig-natures using artiﬁcial neutral networks was focused by Seiffert et al. (2010). Under different environmental and nutritional conditions, thequantitative evaluation of number of genetically different tobacco vari-eties (Nicotianatabacum) grown were described. Arti ﬁcial neural net- works were used to analyse the measured hyperspectral signatures.All spatial images were reconstructed and calculated as well, accordingto the colour cluster membership of each pixel, in order to get an appro-priate result. The obtained results were compared in relation to the fea-tures. Hence it concludes feasibility of hyperspectral imaging withsubsequent neutral networks based image analysis.
Fig. 5.Crop phenotyping process (a) Computation for phenotyping diagram ( Shakoor et al., 2017) (b) Image acquisition for phenotyping. ( Coppens et al., 2017)87 M. Pathan et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 4 (2020) 81 –95Fig. 6.Different sensor platforms for crop phenotyping: Figure (a) robotic
ﬁeld platform source: (
Virlet et al., 2017
). (b) Robotic platform (
Shaﬁekhani et al., 2017
) Robotic platform (c) Ground based platform (
Mueller-Sim et al., 2017
). (d) Roboticplatform with arti
ﬁcial vision source: (
Benet et al., 2018
)( e )G r o u n db a s e dp l a t f o r m(
Zhang et al., 2016
) (f) Robotic platform (
Ateﬁet al., 2019). (g) Robotic based platform (
Busemeyer et al., 2010
) (h) UAV platform source: (
Garrido et al., 2019
)(i) Robotic platform (
Atkinson et al., 2019
) (j) Robotic platform (
Vijayarangan et al., 2018
) (k) Robotic platform (
Goggin et al., 2015
) (l) Robotic platform (
Araus et al., 2014
).88 M. Pathan et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 4 (2020) 81 –95Liu et al. (2015)reviewed crop phenotyping under three condi-tions. Theﬁrst was with the help of high-throughput phenotypingtechnique in controlled environments, for example, green housesor specially designed platforms. Some of the sensing techniques forhigh throughput Phenotyping include RGB, 3D Laser Scanning,Multi and hyperspectral Imaging, Fluorescent Sensing, and ThermalIR Cameras (Shakoor et al., 2017). Light detection and ranging (LiDAR) is an alternative remote sensing technology capable of ac-quiring three-dimensional (3D) data accurately. It has its potentialin application to crop Phenotyping and has been successfully usedfor 3D high-throughput crop phenotyping ( Guo et al., 2017). The second was through phenotypic strengthening test undersemi-controlled an environment such as lodge, drought and diseaseresistance. The third technique was multi-environmental traits(MET) in uncontrolled environments, according to farmer's culturalpractices crop plants are managed in it Liu et al., 2015.T h i sp a p e ri s aimed at reviewing research on and the applications of phenotypingtechniques as well as proposing methods for MET improvement.Analysis of test resulted that for unbalanced data the MET analyticalmethods should be adapted. Therefore, it was concluded that there isurgency of research on methods and tools for test design and analy-sis, phenotypic acquisition and management to provide support forthe establishment of reliable crop cultivar MET system, improve-ment of testing efﬁciency and reliability as well as reduction of riskin the selection and introduction of cultivars.Ubbens and Stavness (2017)introduced Deep Plant Phenomicstool which provides pre-trained neural networks for common plantphenotyping activities, besides this it can be easy to train models,hence it can be used by plant scientists for their personal applica-tions. Image based phenotyping tasks were performed with threebenchmark to measure its effectiveness; leaf counting task, mutantclassiﬁcation and age regression tasks.Reynolds et al. (2019)presented the trade-off between invest-ment and manpower costs by reviewing cost-effective imaging de-vices and environmental sensors. In recent years due to decreasingcost of equipment such as low-cost environmental sensors ( Deery et al., 2014) or smartphone embedded mobile imaging sensors(Rousseau et al., 2015), the concept of“affordable phenotyping”or “cost effective phenotyping ”has developed rapidly. Certainly, tocapture image- and sensor- based crop performance datasets ingreenhouses and in theﬁelds- cost effective phenotyping approachhave been utilized. Major costs arise from plant handling and man-power; total costs per plant/microplot, hand-held or robotizedground vehicles; the cost of vehicles carrying sensors representsonly 5–26% of the total costs, these conclusions are context-dependent, in particular for labour cost, the quantitative demandof phenotyping and the number of days available for phenotypicmeasurements due to climatic constraints. Hence, the structure ofcosts in various real-world scenarios was discussed in this reviewpaper.Bolger et al. (2017)attempted to highlight analysis of plant ge-nomes, describing current problems along with how plant genomescan be best leveraged in union with high throughput phenotypingto accelerate selective breeding. In the process of genome assembly,annotation and linking to phenotypic plant data necessary tools arelisted in detail.Paez-Garcia et al. (2015)aimed to improve root traits and pheno-typing strategies. The idea of a combination of phenotypic rootscreening approaches was proposed which ultimately focussed onhigher yields in rain-fed systems by establishing a relation betweenyoung root systems for rapid root screening in the laboratory orgreenhouse. The proposed strategies here can help to incorporate“root breeding”which would result in sustainable agricultural sys-
tems worldwide.Thus, different techniques are discussed and cost-effectiveness isreviewed for better growth as well as quality ( Table 1).5. Future scopeArtiﬁcial intelligence gives agronomists a weapon againstcereal-hungry bugs, provides the solution to various problems like foliardiseases and nutrient deﬁciencies to name a few. Based on the researchreviews, the most popular applications of Arti ﬁcial Intelligence in agri- culture appear to fall into categories such as Agricultural Robotsi.e., companies are developing and programming autonomous robotsto handle essential agricultural tasks such as harvesting crops at ahigher volume and faster pace than human labourers, crop and soilmonitoring in which companies are leveraging computer vision andDeep-Learning algorithms to process data captured by drones and/orsoftware-based technology to monitor crop and soil health, ImageBased Predictive Analytics where machine learning models are beingdeveloped to examine huge volumes of data generated every day onhistorical weather pattern, soil reports, new research, rainfall, pestinfestation, images from Drones and cameras which provide strong in-sights to improve crop yield, Disease detection in whichpre-processing of image takes place to ensure that leaf images are seg-mented into areas like background, non-diseased part and diseasedpart. The diseased part is then cropped and sent to remote labs for fur-ther diagnosis. It also helps in pest identi ﬁcation, nutrient deﬁciency recognition and more. Crop readiness identi ﬁcation: Images of different crops under white/UV-A light are captured to determine how ripe thegreen fruits are. Farmers can create different levels of readiness basedon the crop/fruit category and add them into separate stacks beforesending them to the market. Field management: Using high-de ﬁnition images from drone, real-time estimates can be made during cultivationperiod by creating aﬁeld map and identifying areas where crops requirewater, fertilizer or pesticides. This helps in resource optimization to ahuge extent. From detecting pests to predicting what crops will deliverthe best returns, artiﬁcial intelligence can help humanity confront oneof its biggest challenges: feeding an additional 2 billion people by2052, even as climate change disrupts growing seasons, turns arableland into deserts andﬂoods once-fertile deltas with seawater.6. ConclusionIndustries in the agricultural sector are facing challenges, such ascrop yielding, soil and plant health, weeds and disease can be addressedwith the help of artiﬁcial intelligence-driven technologies. With thehelp of tools available efﬁciency can also be improved drastically. Itcan be inferred from the studies with the support of precision farmingmore pragmatic farming can take place using scienti ﬁc approaches such as remote sensing, GPS, data analytics etc. which helps in improv-ing agricultural yield and reduce potential environmental risk. Besidesthis, with the help of image recognition software, arti ﬁcial neural net- work and many other tools disease can be detected in the plant at anearly stage. Due to disease detection at early stage crop's health can bemonitored and productivity with high quality can be obtained withminimum or negligible loss. Artiﬁcial intelligence in agriculture canalso solve problems such as scarcity of resources as well as labour besolved at large extent. Traditional methods require labours for acquiringcrop traits such as plant height, leaf colour, leaf area index, chlorophyllcontent, biomass and yield, which consumes a lot of time. With thehelp of different techniques discussed, fast and non-destructive highthroughput phenotyping would take place with the advantage of ﬂexi- ble and convenient operation, on-demand access to data and spatial res-olution. This paper is an endeavour to give a thought of automation inagriculture to improve crop quality with productivity, and with mini-mum efforts and time.Authors contributionAll the authors make a substantial contribution in this manuscript.MP, NP, HY, and MS participated in drafting the manuscript. MP, NP,89 M. Pathan et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 4 (2020) 81 –95Table 1Summary of artiﬁcial intelligence technologies used in various sub processes for precision agriculture.Srno.Crop or fruit name Topic Technology Results/description Limitations/future scope Reference1 Soya bean Vision Intelligence for precision farming GeneticAlgorithm (GA),Fuzzy Logic(FL), ArtiﬁcialNeural Network(ANN)The method developed was usedto accurately classify crop andweeds through the entiregrowing periodConstraint condition wasadopted to identify theindividual crop centre. 300training samples were used, soto increase accuracy moretraining samples can be used.Noguchi et al.(1998)
2 Corn Measuring performance in precision agriculture Remote sensing,hyperspectraldata mining,decision treeWith the help of classiﬁcationand regression trees (CART)decision tree algorithmhyperspectral data wasclassiﬁed in categories such aswater stress, presence of weedand nitrogen application ratesand gave accuracy of 75 –100%and best validation results wereobtained at early stage.Accuracy obtained at earlygrowth stage and single factoranalysis was 96% for irrigationfactor, 83% for the nitrogenfactor and 100% for the weedcontrol strategies. At all stageshigh accuracy should beobtained instead of only earlystage.Waheed et al.(2006)
3 N/A A review of wireless sensors and network's application inagricultureWSNtechnologyNeed of wireless sensors andtheir application using WSNtechnology in different aspectsof agriculture is reviews keepingin mind that novice user caneasily select appropriate sensorwhenever needed.In open harsh environment, ifsensor nodes are being placed,they are prone to physicaldamage, blockage andinterference. Failure nodeshould not affect overall task ofthe network to maintain systemreliability.Aqeel-ur-Rehmanet al. (2014)
4 Fauna Remote area plant disease detection using imageprocessingImageprocessing,K-meanclusteringTo recognize and classifydifferentagriculture/horticultureproduced in normal and affectedregions, the colour and texturefeatures can be used which isproved to be very effective fordisease detection inMalusdomesticawith the help ofdifferent methods.In future, Bayes can be utilizedas well as k-means clusteringand principle componentclassiﬁer can be analysed forclassiﬁcation purpose.Bashir andSharma (2012)
5 Citrus groves Identi ﬁcation of citrusdisease using colour texturefeatures and discriminationanalysisMachine vision(colourco-occurrencemethod), imageprocessingtechniquesColour co-occurrence methodwas used to determine whethertexture based hue, saturation,and intensity (HSI) colourfeatures in aggregation withstatistical classiﬁcationalgorithms was to be used toidentify diseased and normalcitrus leaves under laboratoryconditions.Algorithms used would beutilized in outdoor conditions aswell as a combined datasetwould be formed for leaf frontand leaf back in future. Theinherent variability of colourunder natural lightingconditions and shifting fromsingle leaf to leaf canopy
evaluation would also bechallenging.Pydipati et al.(2006)
6 Banana leaf, beans leaf, roseleaf, lemon leaf Detection of plant leafdisease using imagesegmentation and softcomputing techniquesImageprocessing,geneticalgorithmAlgorithm form imagesegmentation technique forautomatic detection andclassiﬁcation of plant leafdisease was surveyed. Firstclassiﬁcation was done usingk-mean clustering with accuracy86.54%, by genetic algorithm93.63% accuracy, SVM classiﬁer showed up 95.71% accuracy.97.6 was average accuracy ofproposed algorithm.Artiﬁcial neutral network, Bayesclassiﬁer, Fuzzy Logic and hybridalgorithms can also be used toimprove recognition rate inclassiﬁcation process.Singh and Misra(2017)
7 Different tobacco varieties(nicotianatabacum) Clustering of cropphenotyping by means ofhyperspectral signaturesusing artiﬁcial neuralnetworksHyperspectralimaging,artiﬁcial neuralnetworksArtiﬁcial neural networks wasused to analyse the measuredhyperspectral signatures. Allspatial images werereconstructed and calculated aswell, according to the colourcluster membership of eachpixel, in order to get anappropriate result. The obtainedresults were compared inrelation to the features.Obtained results were notjudged accurately, since thenumber of genotypes as well asthe size of the statistical samplesintercoms of individual plantswas limited. The resultsconcluded that artiﬁcial neuralnetwork is suitable approach forcrop phenotyping.Seiffert et al.(2010)
8 Cotton crop Fuzzy cognitive map based approach for predictingyield in cotton cropproduction as a basis fordecision support system inprecision agricultureFusion of fuzzylogic andcognitive maptheories.Using software computingtechnique of fuzzy cognitivemaps the process to predictcotton crop productive takeplace. It's simple structure, lesstime consumption andﬂexibilityMore accurate and quickerdecision could be reached wasinterpreted from the resultsobtained.Papageorgiouaet al. (2011)90 M. Pathan et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 4 (2020) 81 –95Table 1(continued)Srno.Crop or fruit name Topic Technology Results/description Limitations/future scope Referenceapplication. to represent knowledge visually and more descriptive is mainadvantage. 9 Carrot seedlings Weed and crop discrimination using imageanalysis and artiﬁcialintelligence methods.Digital imaging(imageanalysis), neuralnetworkTo develop and compare plantmorphology on one side andtraining neural network onother side to distinguishseedlings of speciﬁc crop andweeds from one another.Main disadvantage of plantmorphology is that individualclusters should be analysedusing time consuming methodbesides this the isolation of anentire plant is also notguaranteed. Whereas neuralnetwork gives accuracy at leastas good as the image analysismethod, with an advantage ofﬂexibility with less humanintervention were initialtraining session is needed.Aitkenhead et al.(2003)
10. Fruits (mango, grape,pomegranate), vegetables(beans, bengal gram, soybean,sunﬂower, tomato),commercial crops (chili,cotton, sugarcane), cereals(wheat, maize)Image processing BasedDetection of Fungal Diseasesin PlantsComputer visiontechnique usingimageprocessingalgorithms.The main objective is to detect,to identify and accuratelycompute the primary symptomsof fungal disease. The proposedimage processing methods forfungal disease detection are asfollows:1) Fruit crops: segmentationk-means clustering, featureselection texture, classiﬁersANN, nearest neighbour2) Vegetable crops: segmenta-tion Chan-vase, featureselection local binarypatterns, SVM (Support Vec-tor Machine) classiﬁers, k--nearest neighbour3) Commercial crops: segmen-tation grab-cut, featureselection wavelet based,classiﬁers mahalnobisdistance, PNN (ProbabilisticNeural Network)4) Cereal crops: segmentationk-means clustering, cannyedge detector, feature selec-tion (colour, shape, texture,colour texture), radon trans-form (RT), classiﬁers SVM,nearest neighbourPlan an architecture to remotelymonitor the general symptomsin crop for early diseasedetection using moderntechnologies with highvariability in outdoor conditions.Pujari et al.(2015)
11. Grain crops (maize, rice,wheat, soybean and barley) Computer vision andartiﬁcial intelligence inprecision agriculture forgrain crops: A systematicreviewComputer visioncombined withartiﬁcialintelligencealgorithmsPresents 25 selected paperssystematic assessment for theproﬁcient production of grainsto recognize the applicability ofcomputer vision in agriculture.Computer vision would help tolessen complexity and cost inthe gluten-containing grainsclassiﬁcation from images.GPU (Graphics Processing Unit)and advanced artiﬁcial
intelligence methods alike DBN(Deep Belief Networks) can beexploited to construct robustmethods of computer vision,useful for precision agriculture.Patrício andRieder (2018)
12. Grape plant Real time Grape leaf disease detection Imageprocessing,Artiﬁcial NeuralNetwork (ANN)Developed the automatedtechniques using imageprocessing vision-baseddetection algorithm foridentifying as well as classifyingﬁve diseases (Black rot, Downymildew, powdery mildew,normal and leaf rollﬁrst) whicheffect plants. The developedalgorithm classiﬁed andidentiﬁed the disease withaccuracy of 92.94%.N/A Kakade and Ahire,2015
13. Cucumber plant Research on Cucumber Downy Mildew DetectionSystem based on SVMClassiﬁcation AlgorithmMachine visionsystem andimageprocessingTotal 320 samples were there inwhich 280 were trainingsamples and other 40 were testsamples; distinguished by SVMalgorithm. The correctnessobtained of cucumber downyAutomatic identiﬁcation inagriculture have manyanomalies like slow recognition,low accuracy, and weakadaptability to illumination andhandful recognition methods. ItsZhou et al., 2015
(continued on next page)91 M. Pathan et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 4 (2020) 81 –95HY and MS wrote the main manuscript, all the authors discussed the re-sults and implication on the manuscript at all stages.AcknowledgementsThe authors are grateful to Department of Computer Engineering,Nirma University, Guj. Info Petro Limited (GIPL), Department of Chem-ical Engineering, School of Technology, Pandit Deendayal PetroleumUniversity, and Silver Oak College for Engineering and Technology forthe permission to publish this research.Availability of data and materialAll relevant data and material are presented in the main paper.FundingNot Applicable.Consent for publicationNot applicable.Ethics approval and consent to participateNot applicable.Declaration competing interestThe authors declare that they have no competing interests.References
Acaccia, G.M., Michelini, R.C., Mol ﬁno, R.M., Razzoli, R.P., 2003.Mobile robots in green- house cultivation: inspection and treatment of plants. Proc. of ASER 2003, 1st Interna-tional Workshop on Advances in Service Robotics, 13 –15 March. ISBN: 3-8167-6268- 9 Bardolino, Italy.Adamides, G., Katsanos, C., Christou, G., Xenos, M., Papadavid, G., Hadzilacos, T., 2014. Userinterface considerations for telerobotics: the case of an agricultural robot sprayer.Second International Conference on Remote Sensing and Geoinformation of the Envi-ronment (RSCy2014).https://doi.org/10.1117/12.2068318 . Agre, P.E., Chapman, D., 1987. Pengi: an implementation of a theory of activity. Proceed-ings of the Sixth National Conference on Arti ﬁcial Intelligence, pp. 268 –272. Ahir, K., Govani, K., Gajera, R., Shah, M., 2020. Application on virtual reality for enhanced education learning, military training and sports. Augmented Human Research 5, 7(2020).Ahmed, H., Juraimi, A.S., Hamdani, S.M., 2016. Introduction to robotics agriculture in pest control: a review. Pertanika Journal of Scholarly Research Reviews. 2 (2), 80 –93. Aitkenhead, M.J., Dalgetty, I.A., Mullins, C.E., McDonald, A.J.S., Strachan, N.J.C., 2003. Weed and crop discrimination using image analysis and arti ﬁcial intelligence methods. Comput. Electron. Agric. 39, 157 –171. Aqeel-ur-Rehman, Abbasi, A.Z., Islam, N., Shaikh, Z.A., 2014. A review of wireless sensorsand networks’applications in agriculture. Computer Standards & Interfaces 36 (2),263–270.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.csi.2011.03.004 . Araus, Luis, José, Cairns, J.E., 2014. Field high-throughput phenotyping: the new crop breeding frontier. Trends in Plant Science 19 (1), 52 –61 (Luis, Araus, Jose, Kefauver, Shawn, & C, et al. (2018). Translating high-throughput phenotyping into geneticgain. Trends in plant science).Table 1(continued)Srno.Crop or fruit name Topic Technology Results/description Limitations/future scope Referencemildew detection peaked up to90%. practical implementation willtake large amount of time andefforts. 14. N/A Machine learning (ML) approaches for crop yieldprediction and nitrogenstatus estimation inprecision agriculture: AreviewSensingtechnologiesand MachinelearningtechniquesThis review aimed to illustratethe potential of various machinelearning techniques in thedomain of precision agricultureto efﬁcaciously handle tasks.Various machine learningtechniques used areBack-propagation NeuralNetworks, combination ofConvolution Neural Networkswith Gaussian Processes,M5-Prime regression trees, LeastSquares SVM, Fuzzy cognitiveMap (FCM)In future it was expected to bemore optimized, combination ofmultiple ML and signalprocessing techniques intohybrid systems and dynamiccombination of stationary andmobile equipment for optimaldata collection.Chlingaryan et al.,2018
15. Rice plant Computer Vision Based Approach to Detect Rice LeafDiseases using Texture andColour DescriptorsComputervision, graylevelco-occurrencematrix (GLCM),artiﬁcial neuralnetwork (ANN)Automatic disease detectioncomputer vision based systemwas developed to detect diseasein rice plants which includesthree types of featureextraction; diseased area of theleaf, textural descriptors usinggray level co-occurrence matrix(GLCM) and colour moments. Toselect relevant features andremove redundant ones, geneticalgorithm feature basedselection was employed whichgenerates 14-D feature vector toreduce the complexity. As aresult, accuracy of classiﬁcationalgorithms artiﬁcialAs a result, accuracy ofclassiﬁcation algorithmsartiﬁcial neural network (ANN)and support vector machine(SVM) were 92.5% and 87.5%respectively.Ghyar andBirajdar, 2017
16. Rice plant Measurement of disease severity of Rice crop usingmachine learning andcomputational intelligenceFuzzy logic withk-meanssegmentationand machinevision tooltechniqueThe proposed automated systemimplied about 86.35% accuracy. The study in the future mightconsider large data set as well asmore type of diseases.Sethy et al., 201792 M. Pathan et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 4 (2020) 81 –95Ataş, M., Yardimci, Y., Temizel, A., 2012. A new approach to aﬂatoxin detection in chili pepper by machine vision. Comput. Electron. Agric. 87, 129 –141. Ateﬁ, A., Ge, Y., Pitla, S., Schable, J., 2019. In vivo human-like robotic phenotyping of leaf traits in maize and sorghum in greenhouse. Computers and Electronics in Agriculture163 (Aug 2019).Atkinson, J.A., Pound, M.P., Bennett, M.J., Wells, D.M., 2019. Uncovering the hidden half of plants using new advances in root phenotyping. Curr. Opin. Biotechnol. 55, 1 –8. Backhaus, A., Bollenbeck, F., Seiffert, U., 2011. Robust classi ﬁcation of the nutrition state in crop plants by hyperspectral imaging and arti ﬁcial neural networks. 2011 3rd Work- shop on Hyperspectral Image and Signal Processing: Evolution in Remote Sensing(WHISPERS).https://doi.org/10.1109/whispers.2011.6080898 . Bai, G., Ge, Y., Hussain, W., Baenziger, P.S., Graef, G., 2016. A multi-sensor system for high throughputﬁeld phenotyping in soybean and wheat breeding. Computers and Elec-tronics in Agriculture 128, 181 –192. Ball, D., Upcroft, B., Wyeth, G., Corke, P., English, A., Ross, P., et al., 2016. Vision-based ob- stacle detection and navigation for an agricultural robot. Journal of Field Robotics 33(8), 1107–1130.Bannerjee, G., Sarkar, U., Das, S., Ghosh, I., 2018. Artiﬁcial intelligence in agriculture: a lit- erature survey. International Journal of Scienti ﬁc Research in Computer Science Ap- plications and Management Studies 7 (3), 1 –6. Bao, Y., Tang, L., Breitzman, M.W., Fernandez, M.G.S., Schnable, P.S., 2019. Field-based ro- botic phenotyping of sorghum plant architecture using stereo vision. Journal of FieldRobotics 36 (2), 397–415.Bashir, S., Sharma, N., 2012.Remote area plant disease detection using image processing.IOSR Journal of Electronics and Communication Engineering. 2 (6), 31 –34. Bashish, D.A., Braik, M., Bani-Ahmad, S., 2011. Detection and classiﬁcation of leaf diseases using K-means-based segmentation and neural-networks-based classi ﬁcation. Inf. Technol. J. 10 (2), 267–275.Bauriegel, E., Herppich, W., 2014. Hyperspectral and chlorophyllﬂuorescence imaging for early detection of plant diseases, with special reference to fusarium spec. Infectionson wheat. Agriculture 4 (1), 32 –57. Bhange, M., Hingoliwala, H.A., 2014. Smart farming: Pomegranate disease detection usingimage processing. Procedia Computer Science 58, 280 –288.https://doi.org/10.1016/j. procs.2015.08.022.Beachar, et al., 2016.Bechar, A., & Vigneault, Clément. (2016). Agricultural robots for ﬁeld operations: concepts and components. Biosyst. Eng. 149, 94 –111. Mahlein, A.-K., Kuska, M.T., Thomas, S., Bohnenkamp, D., Alisaac, E., Behmann, J.,Wahabzada, M., Kersting, K., 2017. Plant disease detection by hyperspectral imaging:from the labto theﬁeld. Adv. Anim. Biosci. 8 (02), 238
–243.https://doi.org/10.1017/ s2040470017001248.Benet, B., Dubos, C., Maupas, F., Malatesta, G., Lenain, R., 2018. Development of autono- mous robotic platforms for sugar beet crop phenotyping using arti ﬁcial vision. AGENG Conference.Biber, P., Weiss, U., Dorna, M., Albert, A., 2012. Navigation System of the Autonomous Ag- ricultural Robot“BoniRob”*. Bolger, M., Schwacke, R., Gundlach, H., Schmutzer, T., Chen, J., Arend, D., Oppermann, M.,Weise, S., Lange, M., Fiorani, F., Spannagl, M., Scholzc, U., Klaus, M., Usadela, B., 2017.From plant genomes to phenotypes. J. Biotechnol. 261, 46 –52. Brooks, R.A., 1986.A robust layered control system for a mobile robot. IEEE Journal of Ro-botics and Automation RA-2 (1), 14 –23. Busemeyer, R. Klose, Linz, A., Thiel, M., Tilneac, M., Wunder, E., Ruckelshausen, A., 2010.Agro-Sensor Systems for Outdoor Plant Phenotyping Platforms in Low and High Den-sity Crop Field Plots.Camargoa, A., Smith, J.S., 2009. An image-processing based algorithm to automaticallyidentify plant disease visual symptoms. Biosyst. Eng. 102, 9 –21. Castro, D., New, J., 2016.The promise of artiﬁcial intelligence. Center for Data Innovation 1–48.Chlingaryan, A., Sukkarieh, S., Whelan, B., 2018. Machine learning approaches for crop yield prediction and nitrogen status estimation in precision agriculture: a review.Comput. Electron. Agric. 151, 61 –69. Chung, C.-L., Huang, K.-J., Chen, S.-Y., Lai, M.-H., Chen, Y.-C., Kuo, Y.-F., 2016. Detecting Bakanae disease in rice seedlings by machine vision. Comput. Electron. Agric. 121,404–411.Coppens, F., Wuyts, N., Inzé, D., Dhondt, S., 2017. Unlocking the potential of plant pheno- typing data through integration and data-driven approaches. Current Opinion in Sys-tems Biology 4, 58–63.Cox, S., 2002.Information technology: the global key to precision agriculture and sustain-ability. Comput. Electron. Agric. 36 (2 –3), 93–111. Dee, H., French, A., 2015. From image processing to computer vision: plant imaging growsup. Funct. Plant Biol. 42 (5), iii. https://doi.org/10.1071/fpv42n5_fo . Deery, D., Jimenez-Berni, J., Jones, H., Sirault, X., Furbank, R., 2014. Proximal remote sens-ing buggies and potential applications for ﬁeld-based phenotyping. Agronomy 4 (3), 349–379.https://doi.org/10.3390/agronomy4030349 . Dorado, L.C., Aguila, J.I.C., Caldo, R.B., 2016. Smart farm: automated classifying and grading system of tomatoes using fuzzy logic. Laguna Journal of Engineering and ComputerStudies. 3 (3), 64–72.Duckett, T., Pearson, S., Blackmore, S., Grieve, B., Chen, W.H., Cielniak, G., et al., 2018. Ag- ricultural Robotics: The Future of Robotic Agriculture.FAO, 2017.The Future of Food and Agriculture Trends and Challenges. Food and Agricul-ture Organization of the United Nations, pp. 1 –180. Ferentinos, K.P., 2018.Deep learning models for plant disease detection and diagnosis.Comput. Electron. Agric. 145, 311 –318. Firby, R.J., 1987.An investigation into reactive planning in complex domains. Proceedings
of the Sixth National Conference on Arti ﬁcial Intelligence, pp. 202 –206.Galati, R., Reina, G., Messina, A., Gentile, A., 2017. Survey and navigation in agricultural en- vironments using robotic technologies. IEEE International Conference on AdvancedVideo & Signal Based Surveillance. IEEE.Gandhi, M., Kamdar, J., Shah, M., 2020. Preprocessing of non-symmetrical images for edgedetection. Augment Hum Res 5, 10. https://doi.org/10.1007/s41133-019-0030-5 . Garrido, Francisco José Ostos, Castro, A.I.D., Torres-Sánchez, Jorge, Pistón, Fernando, Peña-Barragán, José M., 2019.High-throughput phenotyping of bioethanol potential in ce-reals using uav-based multi-spectral imagery. Front. Plant Sci. 10, 948.Garvey, A., Lesser, V., 1994.A survey of research in deliberative real-time arti ﬁcial intelli- gence. Real-Time Systems. 6, 317 –347. Gavhale, K.R., Gawande, U., 2014. An overview of the research on plant leaves disease de-tection using image processing techniques. IOSR Journal of Computer Engineering. 16(1), 10–16.Ghyar, B.S., Birajdar, G.K., 2017. Computer vision based approach to detect rice leaf dis-eases using texture and color descriptors. 2017 International Conference on InventiveComputing and Informatics (ICICI). https://doi.org/10.1109/icici.2017.8365305 . Gibbons, T., 2000. Turning a Farm Art into Science —An Overview Ofprecision Farming. URL.http://www.precisionfarming.com . Goel, P., Prasher, S., Landry, J., Patel, R., Bonnell, R., Viau, A., Miller, J., 2003. Potential of air-borne hyperspectral remote sensing to detect nitrogen de ﬁciency and weed infesta- tion in corn. Comput. Electron. Agric. 38 (2), 99 –124.https://doi.org/10.1016/s0168- 1699(02)00138-2.Goggin, Fiona L., Lorence, Argelia, Topp, Christopher N., 2015. Applying high-throughput phenotyping to plant–insect interactions: picturing more resistant crops. CurrentOpinion in Insect Science 9, 69 –76. Golhani, K., Balasundram, S.K., Vadamalai, G., Pradhan, B., 2018. A review of neural net- works in plant disease detection using hyperspectral data. Information Processingin Agriculture 5, 354–371.Gulve, P.P., Tambe, S.S., Pandey, M.A., Kanse, S.S., 2015. Leaf disease detection of cotton plant using image processing techniques. IOSR Journal of Electronics and Communi-cation Engineering. 50–54.Guo, D., Juan, J., Chang, L., Zhang, J., Huang, D., 2017. Discrimination of plant root zonewater status in greenhouse production based on phenotyping and machine learningtechniques. Sci. Rep. 7 (1).https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-017-08235-z . Habib, M.T., Majumder, A., Jakaria, A.Z.M., Akter, M., Uddin, M.S., Ahmed, F., 2018. Ma- chine vision based papaya disease recognition. Journal of King Saud University - Com-puter and Information Sciences 32 (3), 300 –309. Hagras, H., Callaghan, V., Colley, M., 2000. Online learning of the sensors fuzzy member-ship functions in autonomous mobile robots. Proceedings 2000 ICRA. MillenniumConference. IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation. SymposiaProceedings (Cat. No.00CH37065). https://doi.org/10.1109/robot.2000.845161/ . Hagras, H., Colley, M., Callaghan, V., Carr-West, M., 2002. Auton. Robot. 13 (1), 37 –52. Hajjaj, et al., 2018.Hajjaj, S. S. H., & Sahari, K. S. M. (2016). Review of agriculture robotics:Practicality and feasibility. 2016 IEEE International Symposium on Robotics and Intel-ligent Sensors (IRIS). IEEE.Hakkim, V.M.A., Joseph, E.A., Gokul, A.J.A., Mufeedha, K., 2016. Precision farming: the fu- ture of Indian agriculture. Journal of Applied Biology & Biotechnology 4 (6), 068 –072. Heckmann, D., Schlüter, U., Weber, A.P.M., 2017.Machine learning techniques for predicting crop photosynthetic capacity from leaf re ﬂectance spectra. Mol. Plant 10 (6), 878–890.Husin, Z.B., Aziz, A.H.B.A., MdShakaff, A.Y.B., Farook, R.B.S.M., 2012. Feasibility study on plant chili disease detection using image processing techniques. 2012 Third Interna-tional Conference on Intelligent Systems Modelling and Simulation, pp. 291 –296. Jani, K., Chaudhuri, M., Patel, H., Shah, M., 2019. Machine learning in ﬁlms: an approach towards automation inﬁlm censoring. J. of Data, Inf. and Manag. 2019. https://doi. org/10.1007/s42488-019-00016-9 . Jay, S., Rabatel, G., Hadoux, X., Moura, D., Gorretta, N., 2015. In-ﬁeld crop row phenotyping from 3D modeling performed using structure from motion. Comput. Electron. Agric.110, 70–77.Jha, K., Doshi, A., Patel, P., Shah, M., 2019. A comprehensive review on automation in ag- riculture using artiﬁcial intelligence. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture. 2, 1 –12. Kakade, N.R., Ahire, D.D., 2015. Real time grape leaf disease detection. International Jour-nal of Advanced Research and Innovative Research in Education 1 (4), 598 –610. Kakkad, V., Patel, M., Shah, M., 2019. Biometric authentication and image encryption forimage security in cloud framework. Multiscale and Multidiscip. Model. Exp. andDes., 1–16https://doi.org/10.1007/s41939-019-00049-y . Kavdir, Ismail, Guyer, Daniel E., August 2003. Apple grading using fuzzy logic. Turkish Journal of Agriculture and Forestry 2003 27 (6), 375 –382. Keshtgari, M., Deljoo, A., 2012. A wireless sensor network solution for precision agricul-ture based on ZigBee technology. Wirel. Sens. Netw. 4, 25 –30. Khanna, A., Kaur, S., 2019.Evolution of internet of things (IoT) and its signi ﬁcant impact in theﬁeld of precision agriculture. Comput. Electron. Agric. 157, 218 –231. Khirade, S.D., Patil, A.B., 2015. Plant disease detection using image processing. 2015 Inter-national Conference on Computing Communication Control and Automation. IEEEComputer Society, pp. 768 –771. Kundalia, K., Patel, Y., Shah, M., 2020. Multi-label movie genre detection from a movieposter using knowledge transfer learning. Augment Hum Res 5, 11 (2020). https:// doi.org/10.1007/s41133-019-0029-y . Kuska, M., Wahabzada, M., Leucker, M., Dehne, H.-W., Kersting, K., Oerke, E.C., Steiner, U.,Mahlein, A.K., 2015. Hyperspectral phenotyping on the microscopic scale: towardsautomated characterization of plant-pathogen interactions. Plant Methods 11 (1).https://doi.org/10.1186/s13007-015-0073-7 . Lee, W.S., Slaughter, D.C., Giles, D.K., 1999. Robotic weed control system for tomatoes.Precis. Agric. 1, 95–113.https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1009977903204 . Liu, Z., Zhang, F., Ma, Q., An, D., Li, L., Zhang, X., Zhu, D., Li, S., 2015. Advances in crop phe- notyping and multi-environment trials. Front. Agr. Sci. Eng. 2 (1), 28 –37.93 M. Pathan et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 4 (2020) 81 –95Liu, K., Zhou, Q., Wu, W., Xia, T., Tang, H., 2016. Estimating the crop leaf area index using hyperspectral remote sensing. J. Integr. Agric. 15 (2), 475 –491. Lucas, B.G., Campbell, C.L., Lucas, L.T., 1992. Introduction to Plant Diseases: Identi ﬁcation and Management. Van NostrandReinhold, U.S.Mahajan, S., Das, A., Sardana, H.K., 2015. Image acquisition techniques for assessment oflegume quality. Trends Food Sci. Technol. 42 (2), 116 –133.https://doi.org/10.1016/ j.tifs.2015.01.001.Mahlein, A.-K., Kuska, M.T., Thomas, S., Wahabzada, M., Behmann, J., Rascher, U., Kersting,K., 2019.Quantitative and qualitative phenotyping of disease resistance of crops byhyperspectral sensors: seamless interlocking of phytopathology, sensors, and ma-chine learning is needed! Curr. Opin. Plant Biol. 50, 156 –162. Maimaitijiang, M., Ghulam, A., Sidike, P., Hartling, S., Maimaitiyiming, M., Peterson, K.,Shavers, E., Fishman, J., Peterson, J., Kadam, S., Burken, J., Fritschi, F., 2017. Unmanned aerial system (UAS)-based phenotyping of soybean using multi-sensor data fusionand extreme learning machine. ISPRS J. Photogramm. Remote Sens. 134, 43 –58. Mazloumzadeh, S.M., Shamsi, M., Nezamabadi-pour, H., 2009. Fuzzy logic to classify date palm trees based on some physical properties related to precision agriculture. Precis.Agric. 11 (3), 258–273.Mehra, T., Kumar, V., Gupta, P., 2016. Maturity and disease detection in tomato usingcomputer vision. 2016 Fourth International Conference on Parallel, Distributed andGrid Computing (PDGC).https://doi.org/10.1109/pdgc.2016.7913228 . Mercier, G., Lennon, M., 2013. Support vector machines for hyperspectral image classi ﬁca- tion with spectral-based kernels. IGARSS 2003. 2003 IEEE International Geoscienceand Remote Sensing Symposium. Proceedings (IEEE Cat. No.03CH37477). https:// doi.org/10.1109/igarss.2003.1293752 . Moshou, D., Bravo, C., West, J., Wahlen, S., McCartney, A., Ramon, H., 2004. Automatic de- tection of‘yellow rust’in wheat using reﬂectance measurements and neural net- works. Comput. Electron. Agric. 44, 173 –188. Moshou, D., Bravo, C., Oberti, R., West, J., Bodria, L., McCartney, A., Ramon, H., 2005. Plant disease detection based on data fusion of hyper-spectral and multi-spectral ﬂuores- cence imaging using Kohonen maps. Real-Time Imaging 11 (2), 75 –83. Mueller-Sim, T., Jenkins, M., Abel, J., Kantor, G., 2017. The Robotanist: a ground-based ag-ricultural robot for high-throughput crop phenotyping. 2017 IEEE International Con-ference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA). https://doi.org/10.1109/ icra.2017.7989418.Murmu, S., Biswas, S., 2015.Application of fuzzy logic and neural network in crop classi-ﬁcation: a review. Aquatic Procedia 4, 1203 –1210. Mustafa, Nur Badariah Ahmad, Ahmed, Syed Khaleel, Ali, Zaipatimah, Yit, Wong Bing,Abidin, Aidil Azwin Zainul, Sharrif, Zainul Abidin Md, 2009. Agricultural producesorting and grading using support vector machines and fuzzy logic. 2009 IEEE Inter-national Conference on Signal and Image Processing Applications. https://doi.org/ 10.1109/icsipa.2009.5478684. Naganur, H.G., Sannakki, S.S., Rajpurohit, V.S., Arunkumar, R., 2012. Fruits sorting and grading using fuzzy logic. Int. J. Adv. Res. Comput. Eng. Technol. 1 (6), 117 –122. Naik, H.S., Zhang, J., Lofquist, A., Assefa, T., Sarkar, S., Ackerman, D., ...Ganapathysubramanian, B., 2017. A real-time phenotyping framework using ma-chine learning for plant stress severity rating in soybean. Plant Methods 13 (1).https://doi.org/10.1186/s13007-017-0173-7 . Naito, H., Ogawa, S., Valencia, M.O., Mohri, H., Urano, Y., Hosoi, F., ... Omasa, K., 2017. Es- timating rice yield related traits and quantitative trait loci analysis under different ni-trogen treatments using a simple tower-based ﬁ
eld phenotyping system with modiﬁed single-lens reﬂex cameras. ISPRS Journal of Photogrammetry and RemoteSensing 125, 50–62.Noguchi, N., Reid, J.F., Zhang, Q., Tian, L.F., 1998. Vision intelligence for precision farming using fuzzy logic optimized genetic algorithm and arti ﬁcial neural network. ASAE Paper 983034. St. Joseph, MI.Ochoa, D., Cevallos, J., Vargas, G., Criollo, R., Bayona, O., 2016. Hyperspectral imaging sys- tem for disease scanning on banana plants. Spie Commercial + Scienti ﬁcS e n s i n g& Imaging.Omrani, E., Khoshnevisan, B., Shamshirband, S., Saboohi, H., Anuar, N.B., Nasir, M.H.N.M.,2014.Potential of radial basis function-based support vector regression for apple dis-ease detection. Measurement 55, 512 –519. Paez-Garcia, A., Motes, C.M., Scheible, W., Chen, R., Blanca ﬂor, E.B., Monteros, M.J., 2015. Root traits and phenotyping strategies for plant improvement. Plants. 4, 334 –355. Panchiwala, S., Shah, M., 2020. A comprehensive study on critical security issues and chal-lenges of the IoT world. J. of Data, Inf. and Manag. https://doi.org/10.1007/s42488- 020-00030-2.Pandya, R., Nadiadwala, S., Shah, R., Shah, M., 2020. Buildout of methodology for meticu-lous diagnosis of K-complex in EEG for aiding the detection of Alzheimer ’sb ya r t iﬁcial intelligence. Augmented Human Research https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/ s41133-019-0021-6.Papageorgioua, E.I., Markinos, A.T., Gemtos, T.A., 2011. Fuzzy cognitive map based ap- proach for predicting yield in cotton crop production as a basis for decision supportsystem in precision agriculture application. Appl. Soft Comput. 11, 3643 –3657. Parekh, V., Shah, D., Shah, M., 2020. Fatigue detection using artiﬁcial intelligence frame- work. Augmented Human Research 5 (2020), 5.Patel, D., Shah, Y., Thakkar, N., Shah, K., Shah, M., 2020a. Implementation of arti ﬁcial intel- ligence techniques for cancer detection. Augmented Human Research 5 (1). https:// doi.org/10.1007/s41133-019-0024-3 . Patel, H., Prajapati, D., Mahida, D., Shah, M., 2020b. Transforming petroleum downstreamsector through big data: a holistic review. J Petrol Explor Prod Technol 2020. https:// doi.org/10.1007/s13202-020-00889-2 . Patil, J.K., Kumar, R., 2011.Advances in image processing for detection of plant diseases.J. Adv. Bioinforma. Appl. Res. 2 (2), 135 –141. Patrício, D.I., Rieder, R., 2018.Computer vision and artiﬁcial intelligence in precision agri- culture for grain crops: a systematic review. Comput. Electron. Agric. 153, 69 –81.Pedersen, S.M., Fountas, S., Blackmore, S., 2008. Agricultural robots–applications and eco- nomic perspectives. In: Takahashi, Y. (Ed.), Service Robot Applications. InTech, Rijeka,Croatia, pp. 369–382.Phadikar, S., Sil, J., 2008. Rice disease identi ﬁcation using pattern recognition techniques. 2008 11th International Conference on Computer and Information Technology.https://doi.org/10.1109/iccitechn.2008.4803079 . Pire, T., Mujica, M., Civera, J., Kofman, E., 2019. The Rosario dataset: multisensor data forlocalization and mapping in agricultural environments. The International Journal ofRobotics Research 27836491984143. https://doi.org/10.1177/0278364919841437 . Pivoto, D., Waquil, P.D., Talamini, E., Finocchio, C.P.S., Dalla Corte, V.F., de Vargas Mores, G.,2018. Scientiﬁc development of smart farming technologies and their application inBrazil. Information Processing in Agriculture 5 (1), 21 –32.https://doi.org/10.1016/j. inpa.2017.12.002.Prabhakar, M., Prasad, Y.G., Thirupathi, M., Sreedevi, G., Dharajothi, B., Venkateswarlu, B.,2011.Use of ground based hyperspectral remote sensing for detection of stress incotton caused by leafhopper (Hemiptera: Cicadellidae). Comput. Electron. Agric. 79(2), 189–198.Pujari, J.D., Yakkundimath, R., Byadgi, A.S., 2015. Image processing based detection of fun- gal diseases in plants. Procedia Computer Science 46, 1802 –1808. Pydipati, R., Burks, T.F., Lee, W.S., 2006. Identiﬁcation of citrus disease using color texture features and discriminant analysis. Comput. Electron. Agric. 52, 49 –59. Rangarajan, A.K., Purushothaman, R., Ramesh, A., 2018. Tomato crop disease classiﬁcation using pre-trained deep learning algorithm. Procedia Computer Science 133,1040–1047.Reynolds, D., Baret, F., Welcker, C., Bostrom, A., Ball, J., Cellini, F., Lorence, A., Chawade, A.,Khaﬁf, M., Noshita, K., Mueller-Linowi, M., Zhoua, J., Tardieu, F., 2019. What is cost- efﬁcient phenotyping? Optimizing costs for different scenarios. Plant Science. 282,14–22.Rousseau, D., Dee, H., Pridmore, T., 2015. Imaging methods for pheno-typing of plant traits. In: Kumar, J., Pratap, A., Kumar, S. (Eds.), Phenomics in Crop Plants: Trends, Op-tions and Limitations. Springer, Berlin, pp. 61 –74. Sankaran, S., Mishra, A., Ehsani, R., Davis, C., 2010. A review of advanced techniques for detecting plant diseases. Comput. Electron. Agric. 72 (1), 1 –13. Sankaran, S., Maja, J., Buchanon, S., Ehsani, R., 2013. Huanglongbing (Citrus Greening) de- tection using visible, near infrared and thermal imaging techniques. Sensors 13 (2),2117–2130.Sankaran, S., Khot, L.R., Carter, A.H., 2015a. Field-based crop phenotyping: multispectral aerial imaging for evaluation of winter wheat emergence and spring stand. Comput.Electron. Agric. 118, 372 –379. Sankaran, S., Khot, L.R., Espinoza, C.Z., Jarolmasjed, S., Sathuvalli, V.R., Vandemark, G.J.,Miklase, P.N., Carterf, A.H., Pumphrey, M.O., Knowles, N.R., Pavek, M.J., 2015b. Low-al-titude, high-resolution aerial imaging systems for row and ﬁe l dc r o pp h e n o t y p i n g :a review. Eur. J. Agron. 70, 112 –123.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eja.2015.07.004 . Schor, N., Bechar, A., Ignat, T., Dombrovsky, A., Elad, Y., Berman, S., 2016. Robotic disease detection in greenhouses: combined detection of powdery mildew and tomato spot-ted wilt virus. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters 1 (1), 354 –360. Seiffert, U., Bollenbeck, F., Mock, H.-P., Matros, A., 2010. Clustering of crop phenotypes bymeans of hyperspectral signatures using arti ﬁcial neural networks. 2010 2nd Work- shop on Hyperspectral Image and Signal Processing: Evolution in Remote Sensing.https://doi.org/10.1109/whispers.2010.5594947 . Sethy, P.K., Negi, B., Barpanda, N.K., Behera, S.K., Rath, A.K., 2017. Measurement of disease severity of rice crop using machine learning and computational intelligence.SpringerBriefs in Applied Sciences and Technology 1 –11. Shaﬁ
ekhani, A., Kadam, S., Fritschi, F., DeSouza, G., 2017. Vinobot and vinoculer: two ro-botic platforms for high-throughput ﬁeld phenotyping. Sensors 17 (12), 214. https://doi.org/10.3390/s17010214 . Shah, M., Vaidya, D., Sircar, A., 2018a. Using Monte Carlo simulation to estimate geo-thermal resource in Dholera geothermal ﬁeld, Gujarat, India. Multiscale and Multidiscip. Model. Exp. Des. 2018. https://doi.org/10.1007/s41939-018-0008-x . Shah, M., Sircar, A., Shaikh, N., Patel, K., Thakar, V., Sharma, D., Sarkar, P., Vaidya, D., 2018b.Groundwater analysis of dholera geothermal ﬁeld, Gujarat, India for suitable applica- tions. Groundw. Sustain. Dev. 7, 143 –156. Shah, G., Shah, A., Shah, M., 2019a. Panacea of challenges in real-world application of bigdata analytics in healthcare sector. Data, Inf. and Manag., 1 –10https://doi.org/ 10.1007/s42488-019-00010-1 . Shah, M., Sircar, A., Shaikh, N., Patel, K., Sharma, S., Vaidya, D., 2019b. Comprehensive geo-chemical/hydrochemical and geo-thermometry analysis of Unai geothermal ﬁeld, Gujarat, India. ActaGeochim 38, 145. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11631-018-0291-6 . Shah, M., Sircar, A., Varsada, R., Vaishnani, S., Savaliya, U., Faldu, M., Vaidya, D.,Bhattacharya, P., 2019c.Assessment of geothermal water quality for industrial and ir-rigation purposes in the Unai geothermal ﬁeld, Gujarat, India. Groundwater for Sus- tainable Development 8, 59 –68. Shah, D., Dixit, R., Shah, A., Shah, P., Shah, M., 2020a. A comprehensive analysis regardingseveral breakthroughs based on computer intelligence targeting various syndromes.Augment Hum Res 5, 14 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1007/s41133-020-00033-z . Shah, K., Patel, H., Sanghvi, D., Shah, M., 2020b. A comparative analysis of logistic regres-sion, random Forest and KNN models for the text classi ﬁcation. Augment Hum Res 5, 12 (2020).https://doi.org/10.1007/s41133-020-00032-0 . Shakoor, N., Lee, S., Mockler, T.C., 2017. High throughput phenotyping to accelerate crop breeding and monitoring of diseases in the ﬁeld. Curr. Opin. Plant Biol. 38, 184 –192. Silwal, A., Davidson, J.R., Karkee, M., Mo, C., Zhang, Q., Lewis, K.M., 2017. Design, integra- tion, andﬁeld evaluation of a robotic apple harvester. Journal of Field Robotics 34 (6),1140–1159.Singh, V., Misra, A.K., 2017.Detection of plant leaf diseases using image segmentation andsoft computing techniques. Information Processing in Agriculture 4 (1), 41 –49.94 M. Pathan et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 4 (2020) 81 –95Singh, V., Varsha, Misra, A.K., 2015. Detection of unhealthy region of plant leaves using image processing and genetic algorithm. International Conference on Advances inComputer Engineering and Applications.Singh, A., Ganapathysubramanian, B., Singh, A.K., Sarkar, S., 2016. Machine learning for high-throughput stress phenotyping in plants. Trends Plant Sci. 21 (2), 110 –124. Sladojevic, S., Arsenovic, M., Anderla, A., Culibrk, D., Stefanovic, D., 2016. Deep neural net-works based recognition of plant diseases by leaf image classi ﬁcation. Computational Intelligence and Neuroscience, 1 –11https://doi.org/10.1155/2016/3289801 . Slaughter, D.C., Giles, D.K., Downey, D., 2008. Autonomous robotic weed control systems: a review. Comput. Electron. Agric. 61 (1), 63 –78. Spalding, E.P., Miller, N.D., 2013. Image analysis is driving a renaissance in growth mea-surement. Curr. Opin. Plant Biol. 16, 100 –104. Sukhadia, A., Upadhyay, K., Gundeti, M., Shah, S., Shah, M., 2020. Optimization of smarttrafﬁc governance system using arti ﬁcial intelligence. Augment Hum Res 5, 13 (2020).https://doi.org/10.1007/s41133-020-00035-x . Talaviya, T., Shah, D., Patel, N., Yagnik, H., Shah, M., 2020. Implementation of arti ﬁcial in- telligence in agriculture for optimisation of irrigation and application of pesticidesand herbicides. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture https://doi.org/10.1016/j. aiia.2020.04.002.Teke, M., Deveci, H.S., Haliloglu, O., Gurbuz, S.Z., Sakarya, U., 2013. A short survey ofhyperspectral remote sensing applications in agriculture. 2013 6th International Con-ference on Recent Advances in Space Technologies (RAST). https://doi.org/10.1109/ rast.2013.6581194.Teoh, Y.K., Abu Hasan, S., Sauddin Sa Duddin, S., 2013. Automated mango fruit gradingsystem using fuzzy logic. J. Agric. Sci. 6 (1). https://doi.org/10.5539/jas.v6n1p41 . Thomas, S., Behmann, J., Steier, A., Kraska, T., Muller, O., Rascher, U., Mahlein, A.-K., 2018.Quantitative assessment of disease severity and rating of barley cultivars based onhyperspectral imaging in a non-invasive, automated phenotyping platform. PlantMethods 14 (1).https://doi.org/10.1186/s13007-018-0313-8 . Ubbens, J.R., Stavness, I., 2017. Deep plant phenomics: a deep learning platform for com-plex plant phenotyping tasks. Front. Plant Sci. 8. https://doi.org/10.3389/ fpls.2017.01190.Ullah, A., Ahmad, J., Muhammad, K., Lee, M.Y., 2017. A survey on precision agriculture: technologies and challenges. The 3rd International Conference on Next GenerationComputing(ICNGC2017b), pp. 1 –3. Ureña, R., Rodrìguez, F., Berenguel, M., 2001. A machine vision system for seeds quality evaluation using fuzzy logic. Comput. Electron. Agric. 32 (1), 1 –20.van Eeuwijk, F.A., Bustos-Korts, D., Millet, E.J., Boera, M.P., Kruijer, W., Thompson, A.,Malosetti, M., Iwata, H., Quiroz, R., Kuppe, C., Muller, O., Blazakis, K.N., Yug, K.,Tardieu, F., Chapman, S.C., 2019. Modelling strategies for assessing and increasing the effectiveness of new phenotyping techniques in plant breeding. Plant Sci. 282,23–39.Vanegas, F., Bratanov, D., Weiss, J., Powell, K., Gonzalez, F., 2018. Multi and hyperspectralUAV remote sensing: grapevine phylloxera detection in vineyards. 2018 IEEE Aero-space Conference.https://doi.org/10.1109/aero.2018.8396450 . Vijayarangan, S., Sodhi, P., Kini, P., Bourne, J., Wettergreen, D., 2018. High-Throughput Ro- botic Phenotyping of Energy Sorghum Crops. Field and Service Robotics.Virlet, N., Sabermanesh, K., Sadeghitehran, P., Hawkesford, M.J., 2017. Field scanalyzer: an automated roboticﬁeld phenotyping platform for detailed crop monitoring. Func-tional Plant Biology 44.
Waheed, T., Bonnell, R.B., Prasher, S.O., Paulet, E., 2006. Measuring performance in preci- sion agriculture: CART—A decision tree approach. Agriculture Water Management 84,173–185.Walter, A., Liebisch, F., Hund, A., 2015. Plant phenotyping: from bean weighing to image analysis. Plant Methods 11, 14.Wei, F., Yan, Z., Yongchao, T., Weixing, C., Xia, Y., Yingxue, L., 2008. Monitoring leaf nitro- gen accumulation in wheat with hyper-spectral remote sensing. Acta Ecol. Sin. 28 (1),23–32.Xiong, Y., Ge, Y., Grimstad, L., From, P.J., 2020. An autonomous strawberry-harvesting robot: design, development, integration, and ﬁeld evaluation. Journal of Field Robot- ics 37 (2).Yandun, F., Reina, G., Torres, M., Kantor, G., Cheein, F.A., 2017. IEEE/ASME Transactions on Mechatronics. pp. 1–11.Zhang, M., Qin, Z., Liu, X., Ustin, S.L., 2003. Detection of stress in tomatoes induced by late blight disease in California, USA, using hyperspectral remote sensing. Int. J. Appl.E a r t hO b s .G e o i n f .4( 4 ) ,2 9 5 –310. Zhang, Chongyuan, et al., 2016. 3D robotic system development for high-throughput cropphenotyping. IFAC-Papers OnLine 49 (16), 242 –247. Zhou, B., Xu, J., Zhao, J., Li, A., Xia, Q., 2015. Research on cucumber downy mildew detec- tion system based on SVM classiﬁcation algorithm. 3rd International Conference on Material, Mechanical and Manufacturing Engineering, pp. 1681 –1684. Zhu, J., Ingram, P.A., Benfey, P.N., Elich, T., 2011. From lab toﬁeld, new approaches to phe- notyping root system architecture. Curr. Opin. Plant Biol. 14 (3), 310 –317.95 M. Pathan et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 4 (2020) 81 –95