Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Geosciences
Inaugural editorialWelcome to the inaugural volume of Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Geo- sciences (AIIG), theﬁrst fully Open Access journal in the interdisciplinaryarea between the geosciences and artiﬁcial intelligence. This issue fo- cuses on the applications of machine learning (ML) methods to earth-quake detection, to surface seismic data interpretation, spatial prediction(or predictive modeling) in geosciences and ground motion.Magriniet al., proposes a new ML algorithm to detect small, localearthquakes in areas characterized by sparsity of receivers. Fouedjioap- plies to an England’s geochemical dataset a newly developed regressionrandom forest approach. Deep variational autoencoders (VAE) are usedbyLiet al. to create synthetic seismic data and alleviate the problem oflacking labeled seismic data for supervised seismic facies analysis. Zhou et al. uses the mask propagation network (a multi-level convolutionalneural network) to reconstruct fault instance segmentation on 3D seismicdata. Finally, a data collection relating earthquake damage with seismicshaking was proposed byFaenzaet al., which can be used to recalibratefragility curves as well as to train machine learning models.Overall, theﬁrst issue reaches the goal of AIIG to serve as an inter-national, interdisciplinary platform for sharing ideas and solutionsrelated to artiﬁcial intelligence and their applications to geosciences. Weaim to expand the range of topics covered in the next volumes to topicssuch as remote sensing, marine and planetary sciences, in particularcounting on the increasing use of robots and smart sensors in geosciences.Artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) is one of the fastest growing disciplines ininformation technology. Along with diversi ﬁed data, AI-enabled tech- nologies such as image processing, smart sensors, and intelligent inver-sion, are being tested by researchers in a wide variety of geosciencesdomains, such as geology, rock physics, seismicity, hydrology, ecology,marine geosciences, planetary science, environment, remote sensing andGIS, and related areas. Many aspects of machine learning are reachingmaturity, such as deep learning. Others are well established like regres-sion, clustering and support vector machines. Sensors, robotics and othertools that need AI to function independently from human interventionare in their infancy. Geoscientists will have to increasingly adapt tochanges. We can expect many great and interesting new discoveries toemerge from these two combinedﬁelds.Our journal aims to cover all the topics of arti ﬁcial intelligence (AI) in geosciences, from robotics and sensors applied to Earth sciences, to thevast range of machine learning algorithms and implementations used toprocess Earth Sciences data. Another interesting ﬁeld that we welcome is cloud computing and high-performance computing (HPC) in the contextof big data processing. Overall, we want to attract geoscientists who aretransitioning into the big data world, as well as data scientists who an-alyses geo-related data.To achieve these aims of the journal, AIIG will publish rigorously peerreviewed scientiﬁc studies, technicalﬁndings, reviews, short communi- cations, as well as perspectives on the theory and practice of arti ﬁcial intelligence (AI) in geosciences within the following research areas, butare not limited to:/C15AI-based decision support systems/C15AI-based precision geosciences/C15Smart sensors and the Internet of Things/C15Geosciences robotics and automation equipment/C15Geosciences knowledge-based systems/C15Computational intelligence in geosciences/C15AI in geosciences optimization management/C15Intelligent interfaces and human-machine interaction
/C15Machine vision and image/signal processing/C15Machine learning and pattern recognition/C15Neural networks, fuzzy systems, neuro-fuzzy systems/C15Systems modeling and analysis/C15Expert systems in geosciences/C15Big Data and Cloud Computing in Geosciences/C15Automatic navigation and self-driving technologyIn addition, we also welcome suggestions and proposals for specialissues.We will work closely with our editorial board and publishers, re-searchers, scientists, engineers and practitioners. Our excellent boardmember of editors, who are experts in a variety of ﬁelds related to the different aspects of Earth Sciences as well as arti ﬁcial intelligence, quickly review orﬁnd competent available volunteer reviewers toguarantee the quality of our published papers. We promote every singlepaper on social media–Facebook, Twitter, and so on. Papers that suc-cessfully pass through the peer review process will be promoted every-where in theﬁrst two years.We believe AIIG has the potential to rapidly grow into an interna-tionally impactful journal which provides multiple values to the bene ﬁt of the research communities and society at large.
Contents lists available atScienceDirect
Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Geosciences
journal homepage:www.keaipublishing.com/en/journals/artiﬁcial-intelligence-in-geosciences
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aiig.2021.02.001Available online 20 February 20212666-5441/©2021 The Authors. Publishing services by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of KeAi Communications Co. Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY license(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ ).Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Geosciences 1 (2020) 52 –53Hua Wang**
School of Resources and Environment, University of Electronic Sicence and Technology of China, PR ChinaGabriele Morra
*
Department of Physics and School of Geosciences, University of Louisiana at Lafayette, United States**Corresponding author.
*Corresponding author.E-mail address:huawang@uestc.edu.cn(H. Wang). E-mail address:morra@louisiana.edu(G. Morra).H. Wang, G. Morra Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Geosciences 1 (2020) 52 –53
53