Artiﬁcial  Intelligence  in the Life Sciences  1 (2021) 100012 
Contents  lists available  at ScienceDirect  
Artiﬁcial  Intelligence  in the Life Sciences  
journal  homepage:  www.elsevier.com/locate/ailsci  
Research  Article  
AutoOmics:  New  multimodal  approach  for multi-omics  research  
Chi Xu a , # , Denghui  Liu a , # , Lei Zhang  a , # , Zhimeng  Xu a , # , Wenjun  He a , Hualiang  Jiang  b , c , 
Mingyue  Zheng  b , Nan Qiao a , ∗ 
a Laboratory  of Health Intelligence,  Huawei Technologies  Co., Ltd., China 
b Drug Discovery  and Design Center, State Key Laboratory  of Drug Research,  Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 555 Zuchongzhi  Road, 
Shanghai 201203, China 
c Shanghai Institute for Advanced  Immunochemical  Studies, and School of Life Science and Technology,  ShanghaiTech  University,  Shanghai 200031, China 
a r t i c l e i n f o 
Keywords:  
Multi-omics  
Cancer genomics  
Integrative  analysis 
Automatic  machine learning 
Deep learning a b s t r a c t 
Deep learning  is very promising  in solving problems  in omics research,  such as genomics,  epigenomics,  pro- 
teomics,  and metabolics.  The design of neural network  architecture  is very important  in modeling  omics data 
against diﬀerent  scientiﬁc  problems.  Residual  fully-connected  neural network  (RFCN) was proposed  to provide 
better neural network  architectures  for modeling  omics data. The next challenge  for omics research  is how to 
integrate  information  from diﬀerent  omics data using deep learning,  so that information  from diﬀerent  molecular  
system levels could be combined  to predict the target. In this paper, we present a novel multi-omics  integration  
approach  named AutoOmics  that could eﬃciently  integrate  information  from diﬀerent  omics data and achieve 
better accuracy  than previous  approaches.  We evaluated  our method on four diﬀerent  tasks: drug repositioning,  
target gene prediction,  breast cancer subtyping  and cancer type prediction,  and all the four tasks achieved  state 
of art performances.  
Introduction  
With the development  of sequencing  technologies,  researchers  have 
extended  the large scale whole genome  proﬁling  experiments  from ge- 
nomics to epigenetics,  proteomics  and metabolics.  To obtain whole 
omics proﬁling  data from a single sample or individual  is more and 
more popular  in biomedical  researches  [1] . It helps researchers  to ex- 
tract evidences  from diﬀerent  molecular  system levels, to explore  and 
understand  the underlying  biological  mechanisms.  For example,  in can- 
cer research,  researchers  need to conﬁrm  evidences  from cancer cell 
gene expression,  gene mutations,  gene copy number  variations  and gene 
methylations  to form a proper hypothesis,  tools like oncoplot  is devel- 
oped to help visualize  and analyze  the multi-omics  data [2] . 
Deep learning  is very popular  in genomics  research  recently  [3] . Pre- 
vious work have proved the advantage  of Deep Neural Network  (DNN) 
against  traditional  machine  learning  methods,  such as support  vector 
machine  (SVM), logistic  regression  and Xgboost  in single-omics  area [4–
6] . How to apply deep learning  in multi-omics  research  is a new chal- 
lenging  area for researchers.  
The simplest  way to integrate  multi-omics  data is to concatenate  
all the omics data as the input to the DNN. For example,  DeepSynergy  
[7] concatenates  ﬁngerprints  of molecular  structures  of chemicals  and 
∗ Corresponding  author. 
E-mail address: qiaonan3@huawei.com  (N. Qiao). 
# These authors contributed  equally omics data of cancer cell lines directly  as input for the Multi-layer  per- 
ception  (MLP) neuron network.  The problem  is that the data distribution  
of diﬀerent  omics data vary a lot, some omics data even have diﬀerent  
data types, which makes the DNN diﬃcult  to ﬁt a good model. 
The advanced  approach  is to use sub-networks  for each omics data, 
and concatenate  the output of the sub-networks  to predict the targets.  
For example,  MOLI [8] uses three MLP sub-networks  for three omics 
data (cancer  cell line gene expression,  mutation  and CNV in GDSC [9] ), 
then concatenates  the sub-networks  together  for prediction.  PaccMann  
[5] extends  this approach  by using three sub-networks  to model molec- 
ular structures,  omics data and gene interaction  networks  separately.  
The limitation  is that it cannot ﬁne tune or optimize  the sub-networks  
independently.  
The more sophisticated  approach  is to train DNN separately  for each 
omics data, and then concatenate  the embedding  layers together  to 
make the ﬁnal predictions,  for example,  DeepDR  [6] trains autoencoder  
(AE) for gene expression  and gene mutation  separately,  the latent spaces 
are then concatenated  and forwarded  with a MLP to make the ﬁnal pre- 
diction.  
The proposal  of residual  fully-connected  neural network  (RFCN)  im- 
plemented  in AutoGenome  [10] have shown us a good framework  to 
model the single-omics  data, we want to go further to extend it to multi- 
omics research,  by considering  a. the advantage  of RFCN neural network  
architectures;  b. the AutoML  features  from AutoGenome;  c. novel multi- 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ailsci.2021.100012  
Received  2 October  2021; Received  in revised form 6 November  2021; Accepted  6 November  2021 
Available  online 18 November  2021 
2667-3185/©2021  The Authors.  Published  by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND  license 
( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/  ) C. Xu, D. Liu, L. Zhang et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in the Life Sciences 1 (2021) 100012 
Fig. 1. Integrative  analysis  of multi-omics  
data from multiple-origin  samples  and build- 
ing AI models for biomedicine  research.  
model approaches  to integrate  diﬀerent  multi-omics  data. AutoOmics  is 
developed  for this purpose,  users specify the location  of the input omics 
data and the learning  targets,  AutoML  is then used to train the DNN 
model automatically,  after an optimal  model is trained,  model interpre-  
tation module  will be used to explain  the inﬂuence  of each gene to the 
learning  targets.  AutoOmics  supports  both regression  and classiﬁcation  
tasks, it doesn’t require  the users to master tensorﬂow  [11] or pytorch  
[12] to start with. 
We evaluated  the performances  of AutoOmics  on four diﬀerent  
multi-omics  biomedical  tasks: a. drug response  prediction,  b. gene de- 
pendency  prediction,  c. breast cancer subtype  prediction  and d. pan- 
cancer patient stratiﬁcation,  and AutoOmics  outperformed  all the exist- 
ing methods.  The results showed  that AutoOmics  could eﬃciently  inte- 
grate large scale multi-omics  data and generate  explainable  AI models.  
We envision  AutoOmics  to become  a popular  method  in multi-omics  
research.  
Results  
Overview  of AutoOmics  
Researchers  from hospitals,  pharmaceutical  companies  and aca- 
demic institutes  usually  use patient tissues,  animal models and cell lines 
in their research  to study biomedical  problems.  To uncover  the molecu-  
lar level mechanisms,  high throughput  sequencing  technologies  are used 
to proﬁle multiple  types of omics data, such as gene expression,  gene 
mutation,  copy number  variation  (CNV), DNA methylation,  microRNA  
and histone  modiﬁcation  ( Fig. 1 ). By analyzing  the multi-omics  data, re- 
searchers  could formulate  new hypothesis  or create mathematical  mod- 
els for forecasting,  such as drug sensitivity  prediction,  gene dependency  prediction,  patient stratiﬁcations,  and so on. Multi-omics  data represent  
molecular  phenotypes  at diﬀerent  molecular  systems,  each omics data 
have diﬀerent  distributions,  which makes it very challenging  to model 
with. 
AutoOmics  provides  a convenient  framework  to help researchers  to 
build the best multi-model  deep neural networks  for their researches.  
There are four steps in AutoOmics  pipeline  ( Fig. 2 ). Step 1 : Prepare  DNN 
input, diﬀerent  omics data are prepared  into normalized  2-dimensional  
matrixes  with samples  and genes. Step 2 : AutoML  is used to search for 
the best DNN models for each single-omics  data against  the learning  
target, the neuron network  architectures  used in AutoML  search space 
include  MLP, RFCN-ResNet,  RFCN-DenseNet  and Random-wired  RFCN 
[10] (Methods).  Step 3 : The last hidden layers from the single-omics  
models are concatenated  together  as the input for the ﬁnal multi-omics  
DNN model. Step 4 : AutoML  is used again to train the ﬁnal multi-omics  
DNN model against  the learning  target. 
To help researchers  investigate  the DNN model and learn about the 
impacts  of each gene toward each learning  target, we implement  SHap- 
ley Additive  exPlanations  (SHAP)  [13] –a popular  model explanation  
module  into AutoOmics,  which calculates  marginal  contribution  of each 
feature to overall predictions,  and summarizs  the SHAP value to indicate  
potential  feature importance  to the ﬁnal biological  meanings  of interest.  
To systematically  evaluate  the performances  of AutoOmics,  we ap- 
plied AutoOmics  on four diﬀerent  multi-omics  tasks: a. drug response  
prediction,  b. gene dependency  prediction,  c. breast cancer subtype  pre- 
diction and d. pan-cancer  patient stratiﬁcation,  the performances  were 
compared  with both popular  multi-omics  and single-omics  approaches.  
The results showed  signiﬁcant  improvements  of AutoOmics  against  the 
other approaches,  and indicated  AutoOmics  to be a promising  method  
in multi-omics  studies.  
2 C. Xu, D. Liu, L. Zhang et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in the Life Sciences 1 (2021) 100012 
Fig. 2. Scheme of AutoOmics  for automatic  multi-omics  integration  for AI model construction.  Step 1: Collecting  multi-omics  data. Take multi-omics  data of 4 
data types as example,  a gene expression  matrix, a gene mutation  matrix, a copy number variation  (CNV) matrix and a DNA methylation  matrix. Step 2: Use each 
single-type  omics data respectively  as input to train a model for the learning  targets. Four network  structure  classes (MLP, ResNet, DenseNet  and ENAS), numbers  
of layers, numbers  of neurons  per layer and hyperparameter  combinations  (batch size, learning  rate and optimizers)  was performed  to search for a model with the 
highest performance  evaluation  scores as optimal single-omics  models for this single-type  omics data. Then, weights of the all optimal models were ﬁxed, and stopped 
updating  in the following  steps. Step 3: Concatenate  latent layers from all the optimal single-omics  models. Here we chose all the last latent layers and extract the 
corresponding  vector values into a concatenated  vector as the input for Step 4. Step 4: Use the concatenated  vector as input to train a model for the learning  targets 
again. Same to the process in Step 2, search for optimal multi-omics  model. Then, weights of this optimal model was ﬁxed. All the optimal single-omics  (from Step 
2) and multi-omics  (from Step 4) models were combined  together  into a whole network,  as the ﬁnal AutoOmics-based  AI model. 
Drug response  prediction  
New complex  diseases  arise along with changes  in lifestyles  and en- 
vironment,  creating  new challenges  and demands  for new biomedicine  
treatments  [14–16]  . Although  billions  of dollars and tens of years have 
been spent on per de novo drug R&D, the success  rate remains  quite low. 
The main reason comes from safety issues and unclear  mechanisms  of 
actions for new drug candidates  [14] . Drug repositioning,  discovering  
new uses for existing  FDA-approved  drugs, can avoid the safety issues 
and skip toxicity  testing,  shorten  time cost in R&D and increase  success  
rate [15] . Famous  examples  e.g. Sildenaﬁl  initially  for pulmonary  arte- 
rial hypertension  treatment  is later found to treat erectile  dysfunction  
[17] . Large scale screen projects  for cell lines under drug treatments  oﬀer 
rich resources  for drug repositioning.  Genomics  of Drug Sensitivity  in 
Cancers  (GDSC)  [18] database  measures  half maximal  inhibitory  con- 
centration  (IC50). IC50 represents  drug sensitivity  scores for ∼900 can- 
cer cell lines under each of 265 anticancer  drug treatments.  GDSC also 
provides  basal gene expression,  gene mutation,  DNA methylation  etc. 
for the ∼900 cell lines before drug treatments.  Based on GDSC, we aim 
to build an anticancer  drug sensitivity  prediction  model. We took the 
gene expression  and mutation  proﬁles  as features,  and the IC50 values 
of 265 drugs as learning  targets for each cell line to ran AutoOmics.  
We implemented  the optimal  modeling  by scanning  structures  of 
MLP, RFCN-ResNet  and RFCN-DenseNet  with various  layer and neu- 
ron number  setting,  and found that RFCN-DenseNet-based  networks  
3 C. Xu, D. Liu, L. Zhang et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in the Life Sciences 1 (2021) 100012 
achieved  the best performance  for both gene expression  and mutation  
single-omics  models than other structures.  Both of these two networks  
harbored  single dense blocks ( Fig. 3 B) with a net growth  rate of 128 
and 512 respectively;  for the optimal  multi-omics  model part, a direct 
FC ( Fig. 3 B) of MLP rather than RFCN-ResNet  and RFCN-DenseNet  was 
found to be the best option ( Fig. 3 A). Search strategy  and search spaces 
are summarized  in Methods  Section.  The above three searched  models 
in total comprised  the anticancer  drug sensitivity  prediction  model. 
Mean squared  error (MSE) and spearman  correlation  coeﬃcient  
(SCC) of the optimal  single-omics  models of gene expression  were 1.532 
and 0.8717,  and 1.9 and 0.8463 for gene mutation  model. MSE and SCC 
of the optimal  multi-omics  model were obviously  improved,  with an ob- 
viously  decreasing  MSE 0.3266 and increasing  SCC 0.967 (Supplemen-  
tary Figure 3A). We utilized  log-transformed  IC50 < -2 (approximately  
0.135 𝜇M) as standard  threshold  [19] to deﬁne drug sensitive  (posi- 
tive) and resistant  (negative)  groups,  and found that the multi-omics  
model also outperformed  single-omics  models in area under the receiver  
operating  characteristic  curve (AUROC),  precision,  recall and accuracy  
(Supplementary  Figure 3A). Our results demonstrated  a signiﬁcant  im- 
provement  by multi-omics  data integration  using AutoOmics  than only 
using single omics data for deep learning  modeling.  
We compared  the AutoOmics  based drug response  prediction  model 
with popular  existing  models - DeepDR  [6] , PaccMann  [5] and MOLI 
[8] . DeepDR  reports MSE as 1.96 in the original  paper [6] . We re- 
produced  the network  architecture  of DeepDR  and achieved  a MSE as 
1.8793 and F1 as 0.7283 using the same data for AutoOmics,  which 
was signiﬁcantly  outperformed  by AutoOmics  (MSE 0.3266,  F1 0.8907,  
Fig. 3 C). For PaccMann,  we randomly  queried  28 drugs for IC50 pre- 
dictions  from its webserver  to compare  with AutoOmics  predictions,  
and found that AutoOmics  showed  higher AUROC,  area under pre- 
cision recall curve (AUPRC)  and accuracy  in both cell-wise  (AUROC  
0.998 vs. 0.702, AUPROC  0.854 vs. 0.792, accuracy  0.982 vs. 0.768) 
and drug-wise  (AUROC  0.987 vs. 0.708, AUPROC  0.764 vs. 0.742, ac- 
curacy 0.978 vs. 0.705) levels ( Fig. 3 D). For MOLI, it trained  response  
prediction  models for 4 drugs (Paclitaxel,  Gemcitabine,  Cetuximab,  Er- 
lotinib)  using GDSC data, and evaluated  in a patient-derived  xenograft  
(PDX) mice data set [20] . The PDX data includes  gene expression,  mu- 
tation and copy number  variation  (CNV) proﬁles  for 399 mice and uses 
tumor size reduction  as drug response  index to 63 drug treatments.  To 
compare  with MOLI, we predicted  responses  for the 4 drugs by inputting  
the PDX mice gene expression  and mutation  into the AutoOmics  model 
and obtained  predictions  for the 4 drugs. The results showed  that Au- 
toOmics  achieved  higher AUPRC  value for the 4 drugs than MOLI (Pa- 
clitaxel  0.616 vs. 0.24, Gemcitabine  0.558 vs. 0.49, Cetuximab  0.771 vs. 
0.11, Erlotinib  0.7 vs. 0.33, Fig. 3 E). 
In addition,  we compared  AutoOmics  with other strategies  of omics 
data integration:  concatenated  raw input + MLP (F1: 0.707),  VAE la- 
tent + MLP (F1: 0.728),  VAE recon + MLP ((F1: 0.733),  and raw in- 
put + AutoGenome  (F1: 0.725),  gene expression  + AutoGenome  (F1: 
0.7315)  and gene mutation  + AutoGenome  (F1: 0.708),  and we found 
that AutoOmics  showed  the highest  F1 score as 0.891 among all (Sup- 
plementary  Figure 3B). Interestingly,  the F1 scores were sorted as: Au- 
toOmics  > AutoGenome  for gene expression  > AutoGenome  for gene 
expression  and mutation  concatenation  > AutoGenome  for gene mu- 
tation (F1: 0.8907 > 0.7315 > 0.7253 > 0.7075).  It indicated  that 
integrating  multi-omics  raw input data directly  caused neutralization  
of good-performance  data (gene expression,  F1: 0.7315)  and poorly-  
performance  data (gene mutation,  F1: 0.7075),  leading  to worse predic- 
tions (F1: 0.7253)  than that of the good-performance  one. In contrast,  
AutoOmics  largely promoted  the performance  (F1: 0.8907)  better than 
using each single data (Supplementary  Figure 3B). 
When analyzing  importance  of features  contributing  to the ﬁnal 
prediction,  we listed top gene expressions  and gene mutations  ranked 
by SHAP values that showed  highest  importance  to all 265 drug re- 
sponse predictions  ( Figs. 3 F and 4 G). Functional  enrichment  analysis  
showed  that top-50 ranked gene expressions  were enriched  in doxoru-  bicin or daunorubicin  metabolic  process,  regulations  of cell prolifera-  
tion, growth  factor activity  and Wnt signaling  pathway  etc.; and the 
top-50 ranked gene mutations  were enriched  in regulations  of gene ex- 
pression,  cell proliferation  and apoptotic  process  and typical signal path- 
way in cancers.  Genes of the expression  features  enriched  in location  of 
extracellular  space and exosome.  Interestingly,  unlike gene expression,  
the mutation  feature genes were enriched  in location  of mitochondrion  
and endoplasmic  reticulum.  
Besides,  we tested AutoOmics  on gene dependency  prediction.  With 
the help of single-gene  perturbation  techniques  e.g. RNA inference  
(RNAi) and CRISPR  gene editing,  researchers  can perturb  genomes  to 
study eﬀect of single gene on diseases  or biological  processes  (e.g. by 
measuring  mortality  rate of cancer cells following  by a gene RNAi) [21] . 
Through  integrating  basal multi-omics  data of samples  of interest  before 
gene perturbations  and linking to learning  targets of phenotype  data af- 
ter gene perturbation,  researchers  can train a gene dependency  model 
to predict which genes play essential  roles for the phenotype.  In this 
way, the researchers  needn’t  to actual perturb  genes. The Cancer De- 
pendency  Map (DepMap)  [21] includes  CRISPR  screen results on 17,635 
genes for cancer cell lines and corresponding  basal omics datasets  for 
each cell. To focus on cancer causal genes, we narrowed  down the 
screen results to 610 studied  pan-cancer  or cancer-type-speciﬁc  prior- 
ity gene targets [22] , and used gene expression  and mutation  proﬁles  
as features  to run AutoOmics.  AutoOmics  ﬁrstly scanned  network  struc- 
tures of MLP, RFCN-ResNet  and RFCN-DenseNet  with diﬀerent  num- 
bers of layers and neurons,  and outputted  RFCN-DenseNet-based  struc- 
tures with 4 and 5 dense blocks, with net growth  rates as 16 and 8 
respectively,  as the best models for gene expression  and mutation  pro- 
ﬁles (Supplementary  Figure 4A), which achieved  MSE as 0.04011  and 
0.04495,  and SCC as 0.8610 and 0.8521 respectively  (Supplementary  
Figure 4B). Then AutoOmics  scanned  best net structures  following  con- 
catenating  the last hidden layers of the above two models,  and returned  
a three-layer  MLP with neuron numbers  of 32, 32 and 610 (Supple-  
mentary  Figure 4A), which achieved  a better MSE and SCC as 0.03428  
and 0.8777 (Supplementary  Figure 4B). Gene dependency  score < -0.6 
standard  threshold  [21] were set to deﬁne gene perturbation  sensitive  
(positive)  and resistant  (negative)  groups.  And the multi-omics  model 
also outperformed  single-omics  models in ﬁve classiﬁcation  evaluation  
indexes,  which demonstrated  improvement  by multi-omics  data integra-  
tion using AutoOmics  for the task than only using single omics data. For 
performance  comparison,  we constructed  trials same to that of drug sen- 
sitivity prediction,  and it showed  AutoOmics-based  model outperformed  
all other methods  for gene dependency  prediction  task (Supplementary  
Figure 4C). 
We also listed top gene expressions  and gene mutations  ranked by 
SHAP values that showed  highest  importance  to all 610 gene depen- 
dency predictions  (Supplementary  Figures  4D and 4E). Functional  en- 
richment  analysis  showed  that top-50 ranked gene expressions  were en- 
riched in regulations  in signal transduction  and cell proliferation,  im- 
mune response  and renin-angiotensin  system etc, and the location  was 
enriched  in extracellular  exosome  and space. The top-50 mutation  fea- 
ture genes were enriched  in location  of cortical  cytoskeleton.  
Breast cancer subtype prediction  
Large-scale  accumulation  of multi-omics  data and electronic  med- 
ical records  of patient individuals  makes it possible  to study precision  
medicine,  that is, to specify medicine  treatments  for each patient accord-  
ing to their personal  clinical  responses  and physiological  and genomics  
features.  These features  may include  susceptibility  to diseases,  mecha-  
nisms of onsets, prognosis  conditions,  responses  to speciﬁc  treatments  
and genetics  background  etc [23] . For complex  diseases  e.g. cancer,  al- 
though patients  may belong to the same cancer types based on pathol- 
ogy, their responses  to drugs or immune  therapy  often vary largely.  This 
is maybe due to their diﬀerence  in genetics  background  [24] . Therefore,  
4 C. Xu, D. Liu, L. Zhang et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in the Life Sciences 1 (2021) 100012 
Fig. 3. AutoOmics-based  drug response  prediction  model. 
(A) Illustration  of AutoOmics-based  drug sensitivity  prediction  model using GDSC cancer cell line gene expression  and mutation  proﬁles to predict sensitivity  scores 
to 265 anticancer  drugs. 
(B) Illustration  of Automics  basic net units –dense layer units for DenseNet  and FC units. 
(C) Comparison  of AutoOmics  based drug sensitivity  model to DeepDR  using GDSC data. GDSC IC50 values were used as golden-standard  positives.  F1 score and 
MSE score were used for evaluation  comparison.  
(D) Comparison  of AutoOmics  based drug sensitivity  model to PaccMann  using GDSC data. We used SMILES of 28 drugs and 936 cell lines shared in training  sets of 
both our model and PaccMann  for comparison.  GDSC IC50 values were used as golden-standard  positives.  Evaluation  comparison  were performed  in both cell-wise  
and drug-wise.  
(E) Independent  validation  of AutoOmics  based drug sensitivity  model in a PDX mice data set and comparison  to MOLI. Independent  validation  of AutoOmics  in a 
mice PDX data set. We tested the GDSC-IC50-trained  AutoOmics  model on a mice PDX data, which uses tumor size reduction  as learning  targets. Here tumor size 
reduction  quantity  was used as ground truths for performance  evaluation.  4 drugs shared between  our model and MOLI were used for comparison  
(F) Top-10 gene expression  ranked by impact on model output for AutoOmics  based drug sensitivity  model 
(G) Top-10 gene mutation  ranked by impact on model output for AutoOmics  based drug sensitivity  model. 
5 C. Xu, D. Liu, L. Zhang et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in the Life Sciences 1 (2021) 100012 
Fig. 4. AutoOmics-based  cancer subtyping  prediction  model. 
(A) Illustration  of AutoOmics-based  cancer subtyping  prediction  model using TCGA breast cancer patient gene expression,  gene mutation  and protein expression  
proﬁles to predict four breast cancer subtypes.  
(B) Performance  comparison  between  AutoOmics  steps using top-1 accuracy.  Total data were randomly  separated  in 7:2:1 ratio for training,  evaluation  and test 
datasets.  The test dataset was used for top-1 accuracy  calculation.  
(C) Confusion  matrix using predictions  of AutoOmics-based  cancer subtyping  prediction  model. True labels are in the row and predictions  are in the column.  Top-1 
accuracy  for each of the four breast cancer subtypes  and total top-1 accuracy  are indicated.  
(D) Feature importance  analysis.  Top-10 features  ranked by impact on model output are performed  for gene expression  (left), gene mutation  (middle)  and protein 
expression  (right). 
it is necessary  to take advantage  of patients’  multi-omics  data for cancer 
subtyping.  
The Cancer Genome  Atlas (TCGA)  database  includes  six types of 
omics data in patient individual  level for more than 20 cancer types 
[25] . Here we implemented  AutoOmics  to build a classiﬁcation  model 
for breast cancer subtype  prediction  using patients’  gene expression,  
gene mutation  and protein  expression  proﬁles  as features,  and focused  
on four subtypes  of PAM50-proﬁling-test  based, luminal  A, luminal  B, triple-negative  and HER2-enriched  [26] . Apart from searching  optimal  
models using MLP, RFCN-ResNet  and RFCN-DenseNet  structures,  we 
also included  ENAS randomly-generated  structures  for this classiﬁca-  
tion task, and found it showed  outstanding  performance  than RFCN- 
DenseNet  and RFCN-ResNet.  For optimal  single-omics  model of gene 
expression,  AutoOmics  returned  an ENAS-based  model containing  4 FC 
layers with 2048, 128, 256 and 256 neurons  per layer and one skip con- 
nection  concatenating  the 128- and 256-neuron  layer outputs  as input 
6 C. Xu, D. Liu, L. Zhang et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in the Life Sciences 1 (2021) 100012 
of the 256-neuron  layer ( Fig. 4 A). It achieved  top-1 accuracy  0.8533 
for breast cancer subtyping  ( Fig. 4 B), better than published  graph deep 
learning  based model using the same origin of dataset (with an accu- 
racy of 0.8319)  [27] . For optimal  single-omics  models of gene mutation  
and protein  expression,  AutoOmics  returned  both ENAS models with 
three layers and one skip connections  ( Fig. 4 A), showing  top-1 accu- 
racy as 0.573 and 0.787 respectively,  lower than that of gene expression  
( Fig. 4 B). Then AutoOmics  linked all the three models and again gen- 
erated an optimal  model for data integration  as an ENAS-based  three- 
FC-layer  network  with 512, 64 and 16 neurons  ( Fig. 4 A), with an im- 
proved top-1 accuracy  as 0.907 (Luminal  A: 0.939, Luminal  B: 0.778, 
HER2-enriched:  0.889, Basal-like:  1), signiﬁcantly  better than each of 
the single-omics  model ( Fig. 4 B and 4 C). It outperformed  a published  
approach  using SMO-MKL,  which achieved  a 0.798 average  accuracy  of 
any two immunohistochemistry  marker  based subtypes  [28] . When di- 
rectly concatenating  three omics data together,  the top-1 accuracy  was 
0.773, better than that of gene mutation  and worse than gene expression  
and protein  expression  ( Fig. 4 B). 
Then we analyzed  importance  scores represented  by SHAP values 
for each feature to the model outputs.  SHAP value in gene expression  
showed  that RBM20  gene expression  contributed  more in luminal  B 
subtype  than other subtypes  ( Fig. 4 D). The ﬁnding  is accordant  with 
the public results which proves that RBM20  gene expression  is corre- 
lated with PDCD4-AS1/PDCD4,  a tumor suppressor  in TNBC cell lines 
[29] and a subset of TNBC potentially  beneﬁts  therapy  targeting  lu- 
minal subtype’s  typical pathways  [30] . In other examples,  the SHAP 
value of TFAP2B  shows it is an important  gene feature in breast can- 
cer ( Fig. 4 D). It is proven by the HMAN PROTEIN  ATLAS which shows 
TFAP2B  (ENSG00000008196)  is a cancer-related  gene and its expres-  
sion is highest  in breast cancer pathology  data and enriched  in breast 
cancer.  Besides,  SHAP value of TFAP2B  is highest  in luminal  A, which 
is in agreement  with that TFAP2B  is associated  with WNT/ß-catenin  
pathway  in luminal  breast cancer,  and its encoding  protein  AP-2 tran- 
scription  factor regulates  luminal  breast cancer genes [31] . 
In protein  expression  level, based on SHAP values, ER-alpha  ranked 
top 1 among all protein  expression  and showed  important  contribution  
to all four subtypes  in breast cancer ( Fig. 4 D). This phenomenon  is in 
accordance  with the research  of estrogen  receptors  which is a very im- 
portant  marker  for prognosis  and a marker  that is predictive  of response  
to endocrine  therapy  in breast cancer [32] . The loss of ER expression  
portends  a poor prognosis  and, in a signiﬁcant  fraction  of breast can- 
cers, this repression  is a result of the hypermethylation  of CpG islands 
within the ER-alpha  [33] . 
To systematically  analyze  the reliability  of feature importance  re- 
sults, we used SHAP-ranking  top features  to represent  samples  and 
checked  inner- and intra-subtype  similarity  of samples.  It showed  that 
compared  to using all features  representing  samples,  SHAP-top-ranked  
features  could better cluster samples  of the same subtypes  together  and 
distinguish  between  intra subtypes,  which was quantiﬁed  by silhouette  
score (Supplementary  Figures  5–8). The scores achieved  highest  using 
top features  (top 70, 40 and 10 for gene expression,  gene mutation  and 
protein  expression),  and then decreased  when more bottom-ranked  fea- 
tures were included  (Supplementary  Figure 5). It demonstrated  that top- 
ranked features  by SHAP values played a direct role to improve  breast 
cancer subtype  classiﬁcation.  
Additionally,  we built a 24 cancer type prediction  model using 
TCGA pancancer  omics data. AutoOmics  trained  a 6-FC-layer  and 4-skip- 
connection  ENAS network  for gene expression  proﬁles  with top-1 accu- 
racy 0.963, and a 4-FC-layer  and 2-skip-connection  ENAS network  for 
gene mutation  proﬁles  with top-1 accuracy  0.681 (Supplementary  Fig- 
ure 9A and 9B). AutoOmics  linked the two networks  using a 3-FC-layer  
and 1-skip-connection  ENAS network,  achieving  an improved  top-1 ac- 
curacy 0.973 (Supplementary  Figure 9A and 9B). For comparison,  we 
also performed  stacked  ensemble  learning  to link the two networks  by 
using their softmax  target layers rather than last hidden layers as a new 
network  input. We tested both ENAS and MLP for the ensemble  learning  way, and the top-1 accuracy  was consistently  round 0.857, which lied in 
between  that of gene expression  ENAS network  and the gene mutation  
ENAS one, lower than that of AutoOmics  (Supplementary  Figure 9B). It 
demonstrated  that AutoOmics  outperformed  stacked  ensemble  learning  
in this task. 
Discussion  
Genomics  data are widely accumulated  using high-throughput  se- 
quencing  for cell lines, animal models and patient individuals.  Diﬀerent  
omics data types can reﬂect diﬀerent  aspects  of features  for samples,  
thus it is important  to integrate  all omics data for one sample at the same 
time. To address  it, we developed  a multi-omics  data integration  method  
–AutoOmics.  AutoOmics  ﬁrstly builds single-omics  models for each sin- 
gle data, and the latent spaces extracted  from single-omics  models were 
combined  together  and then are subjected  to deep learning  modeling.  
Weights  of single-omics  models are frozen once ﬁnished  training.  
They are no longer updated  in the stage of multi-omics  modeling  us- 
ing combined  latents.  Unlike AutoOmics,  published  methods  e.g. MOLI 
treat each of single-omics  data as a branch of networks  (subnetworks)  
[5] , that is to say, weights  of certain subnetworks  are dependent  on 
other’s subnetworks,  and they are kept updating  simultaneously  follow- 
ing the whole network  training.  This diﬀerence  may be the reason why 
AutoOmics  is outstanding  for eﬃcient  data integration.  AutoOmics  may 
maximally  extract latent that can best represent  learning  targets for each 
data individually.  Our three prediction  tasks also demonstrate  the ex- 
cellent performance  of AutoOmics  over other methods.  DeepDR  uses 
AE to reduce dimension  of omics data. AE is an unsupervised  learning  
method,  in contrast  the data representation  modules  of AutoOmics  are 
a supervised  learning  way –t o learn the latent spaces of omics data 
most relevant  to learning  targets.  We believe  that diﬀerence  in the data 
representation  ways of DeepDR  and AutoOmics  make a key role in the 
performance  diﬀerence  between  them. 
Our data integration  idea is similar to stacking  ensemble  learning  
[34] but not the same. Stacking  ensemble  emphasizes  combining  pre- 
dictions  of individual  models not the latent spaces as we have pro- 
posed. Furthermore,  traditional  methods  take all the multi-omics  data 
as a whole input for a model, but in this paper, we demonstrate  that 
taking each of single-omics  data to build independent  models and then 
performing  combination  as a whole are better choices.  The eﬀective-  
ness of our method  is probably  because  that batch eﬀect, diﬀerence  in 
source of data and value ranges among data cannot be well removed  
by normalization.  Direct combining  raw values of diﬀerent  data types 
will lead to unexpected  bias, thus degrade  performance  of the model 
( Fig. 4 B, Supplementary  Figure 3B, Supplementary  Figure 4B and Sup- 
plementary  Figure 9B). 
As we have claimed  on AutoGenome  [10] , CNN and RNN are not 
suitable  to modeling  genomics  proﬁles  because  features  of genomics  
data are non-Euclidean,  thus pure FC is better. Published  methods  
mainly utilize MLP, where layers only link neighboring  layers [4–6] . It 
is not eﬃcient  to model biological  regulations  and feedback  loops be- 
tween diﬀerent  levels. Thus we introduced  skip connections  in our net- 
work design. We tried RFCN-ResNet  and RFCN-DenseNet  –two classical  
network  structures  with skip connections.  In our experiments,  RFCN- 
DenseNet  was proved to be better than RFCN-ResNet  in both drug sen- 
sitivity and gene dependency  tasks. This is may be due to that densely  
skip-connections  in RFCN-DenseNet  may cover more possible  interac-  
tion combinations  than RFCN-ResNet.  Interestingly,  RFCN-DenseNet  for 
drug sensitivity  is wider (with more number  of neurons  per layer) and 
shallower  (with less number  of layers) than that for gene dependency  
task, no matter using gene expression  or mutation  data ( Fig. 3 A and Sup- 
plementary  Figure 4A), which may imply that these anticancer  drugs 
can inﬂuence  more targets and pathways  initially  than single gene 
perturbations,  but the latter one can expand  deeply in biological  net- 
work. However  RFCN-DenseNet  cannot keep good performance  in can- 
cer subtyping  classiﬁcation  task, both RFCN-ResNet  and RFCN-DenseNet  
7 C. Xu, D. Liu, L. Zhang et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in the Life Sciences 1 (2021) 100012 
showed  low accuracy  and ENAS-based  randomly-generated  network  sig- 
niﬁcantly  outperformed  them. It imply that ENAS can achieve  a larger 
searchable  space than RFCN-DenseNet,  where the structure  of the latter 
one can only be extended  in a ﬁxed manner.  
Taking all above, AutoOmics  is a brand new integration  method  for 
multi-omics  research.  It comprises  novel network  units and network  
architectures  speciﬁcally  designed  for genomics  data. And it also in- 
tegrates  built-in  novel multi-omics  integration  method  for eﬃciently  
taking advantages  of multi-omics  data. Besides,  AutoOmics  also pro- 
vides biological  explanation  for predicted  results by SHAP, which can 
help biologist  to discover  interesting  biological  markers  for research.  
AutoOmics  can surely speed up bioinformatics  and genomics  study and 
aid in dissecting  important  ﬁndings  for biological  researchers.  
Methods  
Hyper-parameter  search.  Hyper-parameter  search method  refers 
to our previous  described  approach  in AutoGenome  [10] . The hyper- 
parameters  in search space are learning  rate, total batch size, momen-  
tum, weight decay, number  of layers in neural networks  and number  of 
neurons  in each layers. 
RFCN-ResNet  Search  Space. Search space are as followings.  1) The 
number  of blocks for ResNet,  default value is [1, 2, 3, 5, 6]. 2) The 
number  of neuros in each layer, default value is [8, 16, 32, 64, 128, 
256, 512, 1024, 2048]. 3) The drop-out  ratio of the ﬁrst layer compared  
with the input layer, selected  from [0.6, 0.8, 1.0] 
RFCN-DenseNet  Search  Space. Search space are as followings.  1) 
The blocks structure  for DenseNet,  default value is [2, 3, 4,3, 4, 5]. 2) 
The growth  rate of neuros in each block, default value is [8, 16, 32, 
64, 128, 256, 512, 1024, 2048]. 3) The drop-out  ratio of the ﬁrst layer 
compared  with the input layer, selected  from [0.6, 0.8, 1.0]. 
Eﬃcient  Neural  Architecture  Search.  ENAS search method  refers 
to our previous  described  approach  in AutoGenome  [10] . Search space 
are as followings.  1) The number  of neurons  in from the 2rd layer to the 
last layer, selected  from [16, 32, 64, 128, 256, 512, 1024, 2048]. 2) The 
connection  relationship  between  diﬀerent  layers. 
Data collection  and preprocessing.  For drug sensitivity  and gene 
dependency  prediction  tasks, we downloaded  gene expression  and 
mutation  data, drug response  data and CRISPR-based  gene depen- 
dency data from GDSC ( https://www.cancerrxgene.org  ) and DepMap  
( https://depmap.org/portal/download/  ) web resources.  Gene expres-  
sion proﬁle includes  1018 cancer cell lines and 17,418 genes. Values 
were log2-transformed.  Gene mutation  data covers 974 cancer cell lines. 
We set discrete  values of 1 and 0 indicating  somatic  mutated  or wide- 
type status and removed  silent mutation  cases, remaining  union set of 
19,350 genes for analysis.  Drug response  data includes  log-transformed  
IC50 values for 990 cancer cell lines representing  response  to 265 sin- 
gle anticancer  drug treatments.  K-nearest-neighbor  algorithms  was per- 
formed  to ﬁll in missing  values for the IC50 response  data by R function  
knn. Gene dependency  data covers 558 cancer cell lines and response  to 
CRISPR  perturbation  of 17,634 human genes. To focus on cancer prior- 
ity gene targets [22] , 610 gene CRISPR  cases were remained  for analysis.  
Cell lines were mapped  using identiﬁers  of Catalogue  Of Somatic  Mu- 
tations In Cancer (COSMIC)  between  datasets,  thus remained  936 cell 
lines for drug sensitivity  task and 324 for gene dependency  task. 
For cancer subtyping  prediction  task, breast cancer patients’  gene ex- 
pression,  mutation  and protein  expression  data were downloaded  from 
TCGA ( https://gdac.broadinstitute.org/  ), where feature numbers  were 
20,531 genes, 16,806 somatic  mutated  genes and 226 proteins  respec- 
tively. Gene expression  values were log2-transformed  and silent muta- 
tions were removed  from gene mutation  data. PAM50-based  subtypes  
for patients  were downloaded  from published  paper [35] . 396 patients  
shared between  the feature data and subtype  data were used for cancer 
subtyping  prediction  task. For pancancer  type prediction,  5780 patient 
samples  with gene expression  and somatic  mutated  gene proﬁles  were 
used for modeling.  Model training,  evaluation  and explanation.  For drug sensitivity  
and gene dependency  tasks, data were randomly  separated  into 8:1:1 
ratio for training,  evaluation  and test data. Evaluation  was performed  
based on 10-fold  cross validation  to calculate  MSE and SCC. Precision,  
recall, accuracy  and AUROC  were calculated  when using a threshold  to 
group positives  and negatives.  For cancer subtyping  task, the ratio was 
set as 6:2:2 in ENAS-based  modeling,  since evaluation  data was used to 
update and determine  net architectures  for ENAS. Data were splitted  in 
a stratiﬁed  manner  to make percentage  of subtypes  equal between  data 
sets. Top-1 accuracy  for the test data was used as ﬁnal evaluation.  All 
evaluation  scores were calculated  using python sklearn  module.  Model 
explanation  is performed  by “SHAP ”module  implemented  within Auto- 
Genome.  AutoGenome  take the best model and raw data as input, when 
calling with “autogenome.explain()  ”. And then AutoGenome  will auto- 
matically  return the SHAP value of each feature for each sample for 
further interpretation.  
Author  contributions  
N.Q. designed  and conceived  the project.  C.X., D.L., L.Z. and Z.X. 
implemented  the AutoOmics  python package  and perform  data exper- 
iment with the help from W.H. under the guidance  of N.Q. C.X., D.L., 
L.Z and N.Q. wrote the paper. N.Q. and M.Z. revised  the manuscript.  All 
authors  read and approved  the ﬁnal manuscript.  
Competing  interests  statement  
The authors  declare  no competing  interests.  
Declaration  of Competing  Interests  
The authors  declare  that they have no known competing  ﬁnancial  
interests  or personal  relationships  that could have appeared  to inﬂuence  
the work reported  in this paper. 
Code availability  
The software  website  could be accessed  from https://autogenome.  
com.cn/AutoOmics/AutoOmics.html  , which contains  the 
software  introduction,  installation  and software  usage. The 
protocols  for speciﬁc  experiments  are also provided  as notebook  
examples  on the website.  
Acknowledgments  
We thank Prof. Mingyue  Zheng for critical reading  and suggestions  
for revision.  
References  
[1] Yngvadottir B , MacArthur DG , Jin H , Tyler-Smith C . The promise and reality of personal genomics. Genome Biol 2009;10:237 . [2] Mayakonda A, Koeﬄer HP. Maftools: Eﬃcient analysis, visualization and sum- marization of MAF ﬁles from large-scale cohort based cancer studies. bioRxiv 2016;052662. doi: 10.1101/052662 . [3]
 Zou J , et al. A primer on deep learning in genomics. Nat Genet 2019;51:12–18 . [4] Shariﬁ-Noghabi H , Zolotareva O , Collins CC , Ester M . MOLI: multi-omics late in- tegration with deep neural networks for drug response prediction. Bioinformatics 2019;35:i501–9 . [5] [1811.06802] PaccMann: Prediction of 
anticancer compound sensitivity with multi- modal attention-based neural networks. https://arxiv.org/abs/1811.06802 . [6] Chiu Y-C , et al. Predicting drug response of tumors from integrated genomic proﬁles by deep neural networks. BMC Med Genomics 2019;12:18 . [7] Preuer K , et al. DeepSynergy: predicting anti-cancer drug synergy with deep learn- ing. Bioinformatics
 2017;34:1538–46 . [8] Shariﬁ-Noghabi H , Zolotareva O , Collins CC , Ester M . MOLI: multi-omics late in- tegration with deep neural networks for drug response prediction. Bioinformatics 2019;35:i501–9 . [9] Yang W , et al. Genomics of drug sensitivity in cancer (GDSC): a resource for thera- peutic biomarker 
discovery in cancer cells. Nucleic Acids Res 2012;41:D955–61 . 
8 C. Xu, D. Liu, L. Zhang et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in the Life Sciences 1 (2021) 100012 
[10] Liu D, et al. AutoGenome: an AutoML tool for genomic research. bioRxiv 2019;842526. doi: 10.1101/842526 . [11] Abadi M , et al. TensorFlow: a system for large-scale machine learning. In: 12th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI 16). USENIX Association; 2016. p. 265–83 . [12] Paszke A
 , et al. PyTorch: an imperative style, high-performance deep learning li- brary. In: Wallach H, et al., editors. Advances in neural information processing sys- tems 32. Curran Associates, Inc.; 2019. p. 8026–37 . [13] Lundberg SM , Lee S-I , et al. A uniﬁed approach to interpreting model predictions. In: 
Guyon I, et al., editors. Advances in neural information processing systems 30. Curran Associates, Inc.; 2017. p. 4765–74 . [14] Ashburn TT , Thor KB . Drug repositioning: identifying and developing new uses for existing drugs. Nat Rev Drug Discov 2004;3:673–83 . [15] Wu Z , Wang Y , Chen L
 . Network-based drug repositioning. Mol Biosyst 2013;9:1268–81 . [16] Xu C , et al. Accurate drug repositioning through non-tissue-speciﬁc core signatures from cancer transcriptomes. Cell Rep 2018;25:523–35 e5 . [17] Langtry HD , Markham ASildenaﬁl . Drugs 1999;57:967–89 . [18] Yang W , et al. Genomics of drug sensitivity in 
cancer (GDSC): a resource for thera- peutic biomarker discovery in cancer cells. Nucleic Acids Res 2013;41:D955–61 . [19] Chang Y , et al. Cancer drug response proﬁle scan (CDRscan): a deep learning model that predicts drug eﬀectiveness from cancer genomic signature. Sci Rep 2018;8:8857 . [20] Gao H , et al.
 High-throughput screening using patient-derived tumor xenografts to predict clinical trial drug response. Nat Med 2015;21:1318–25 . [21] McFarland JM , et al. Improved estimation of cancer dependencies from large-scale RNAi screens using model-based normalization and data integration. Nat Commun 2018;9:1–13 . [22] Behan FM , et al. Prioritization of cancer 
therapeutic targets using CRISPR–Cas9 screens. Nature 2019;568:511–16 . [23] Lu Y-F , Goldstein DB , Angrist M , Cavalleri G . Personalized medicine and human genetic diversity. Cold spring harb. Perspect Med 2014;4 . [24] Wirapati P , et al. Meta-analysis of gene expression proﬁles in breast cancer: toward a uniﬁed understanding of breast cancer subtyping and prognosis signatures.
 Breast Cancer Res 2008;10:R65 . [25] Hudson (Chairperson) TJ , et al. International network of cancer genome projects. Nature 2010;464:993–8 . [26] Bastien RR , et al. PAM50 breast cancer subtyping by RT-qPCR and concordance with standard clinical molecular markers. BMC Med Genomics 2012;5:44 . [27] Rhee, S., Seo, S. 
& Kim, S. Hybrid approach of relation network and localized graph convolutional ﬁltering for breast cancer subtype classiﬁcation. ArXiv171105859 Cs (2017). [28] Tao M , et al. Classifying breast cancer subtypes using multiple kernel learning based on omics data. Genes 2019;10:200 . [29] Jadaliha M , et al. A natural antisense
 lncRNA controls breast cancer progression by promoting tumor suppressor gene mRNA stability. PLOS Genet 2018;14:e1007802 . [30] Hon JDC , et al. Breast cancer molecular subtypes: from TNBC to QNBC. Am J Cancer Res 2016;6:1864–72 . [31] Bogachek MV , et al. Sumoylation pathway is required to maintain the basal 
breast cancer subtype. Cancer Cell 2014;25:748–61 . [32] Hua H , Zhang H , Kong Q , Jiang Y . Mechanisms for estrogen receptor expression in human cancer. Exp Hematol Oncol 2018;7 24–24 . [33] Giacinti L , Claudio PP , Lopez M , Giordano A . Epigenetic information and estrogen
 receptor alpha expression in breast cancer. Oncologist 2006;11:1–8 . [34] Wang G , Hao J , Ma J , Jiang H . A comparative assessment of ensemble learning for credit scoring. Expert Syst Appl 2011;38:223–30 . [35] Koboldt DC , et al. Comprehensive molecular portraits of human breast tumours. Nature 
2012;490:61–70 . 
9 