Automation and digitization of agriculture using artiﬁcialintelligence and internet of things
A. Subeesh ⁎,C . R .M e h t a
ICAR-Central Institute of Agricultural Engineering (CIAE), Bhopal, Madhya Pradesh, India
abstract article info
Article history:Received 26 March 2021Received in revised form 1 November 2021Accepted 25 November 2021Available online 29 November 2021The growing population and effect of climate change have put a huge responsibility on the agriculture sector toincrease food-grain production and productivity. In most of the countries where the expansion of cropland ismerely impossible, agriculture automation has become the only option and is the need of the hour. Internet ofthings and Artiﬁcial intelligence have already started capitalizing across all the industries including agriculture.Advancement in these digital technologies has made revolutionary changes in agriculture by providing smartsystems that can monitor, control, and visualize various farm operations in real-time and with comparable intel-ligence of human experts. The potential applications of IoT and AI in the development of smart farm machinery,irrigation systems, weed and pest control, fertilizer application, greenhouse cultivation, storage structures,drones for plant protection, crop health monitoring, etc. are discussed in the paper. The main objective of thepaper is to provide an overview of recent research in the area of digital technology-driven agriculture and iden-tiﬁcation of the most prominent applications in the ﬁeld of agriculture engineering using arti ﬁcial intelligence and internet of things. The research work done in the areas during the last 10 years has been reviewed fromthe scientiﬁc databases including PubMed, Web of Science, and Scopus. It has been observed that the digitizationof agriculture using AI and IoT has matured from their nascent conceptual stage and reached the execution phase.The technical details of artiﬁcial intelligence, IoT, and challenges related to the adoption of these digital technol-ogies are also discussed. This will help in understanding how digital technologies can be integrated into agricul-ture practices and pave the way for the implementation of AI and IoT-based solutions in the farms.© 2021 The Authors. Publishing servic es by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of KeAi Communications Co., Ltd. This is an openaccess article under the CC BY-NC-ND license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ ).
Keywords:Agriculture automationArtiﬁcial intelligenceDeep learningInternet of thingsSmart farm machinery
Contents1 . I n t r o d u c t i o n ............................................................... 2 7 92. Internet of things and artiﬁc i a l i n t e l l i g e n c e ................................................. 2 7 93 . G e n e r a l i z e d a r c h i t e c t u r e o f A I p o w e r e d I o T e c o s y s t e m f o r a g r i c u l t u r e ..................................... 2 8 04 . A p p l i c a t i o n s o f I o T a n d A I i n a g r i c u l t u r e a u t o m a t i o n ............................................. 2 8 14 . 1 . S m a r t f a r m m a c h i n e r y ....................................................... 2 8 14 . 1 . 1 . N a v i g a t i o n a n d p e r f o r m a n c e m o n i t o r i n g o f t r a c t o r s ..................................... 2 8 14 . 1 . 2 . A u t o n o m o u s t r a c t o r s a n d f a r m m a c h i n e r y .......................................... 2 8 24 . 1 . 3 . U A V o r d r o n e s...................................................... 2 8 44 . 1 . 4 . I r r i g a t i o n s y s t e m s ..................................................... 2 8 44 . 1 . 5 . F e r t i l i z e r a p p l i c a t i o n .................................................... 2 8 54 . 1 . 6 . P e s t a n d w e e d c o n t r o l ................................................... 2 8 54 . 2 . A u t o m a t e d l i v e s t o c k m a n a g e m e n t................................................. 2 8 64 . 3 . G r e e n h o u s e m a n a g e m e n t..................................................... 2 8 74 . 4 . F a r m p r o d u c e s t o r a g e s y s t e m s ................................................... 2 8 85 . C h a l l e n g e s a n d o p p o r t u n i t i e s ....................................................... 2 8 8Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 5 (2021) 278 –291
⁎Corresponding author.E-mail address:subeesh.a@icar.gov.in(A. Subeesh).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aiia.2021.11.0042589-7217/© 2021 The Authors. Publishing services by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of KeAi Communications Co., Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http:// creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ ).
Contents lists available atScienceDirect
Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture
journal homepage:http://www.keaipublishing.com/en/journals/artificial-intelligence-in-agriculture/6 . C o n c l u s i o n s ............................................................... 2 8 9D e c l a r a t i o n o f i n t e r e s t s............................................................ 2 8 9R e f e r e n c e s .................................................................. 2 8 9
1. IntroductionWorld's population is growing at a rapid pace and is estimated toreach 10 billion by 2050. This puts an immense responsibility on the ag-riculture sector to enhance crop production and increase yield per hect-are (FAO, 2017). Several pain points for farmers such as small landholdings, labor shortage, climate change, extreme weather conditions,reduction in soil fertility, etc. are making agriculture less pro ﬁtable. For the last few years, agriculture is continuously challenged by climatechange and other environmental problems and they create a huge hur-dle in achieving enhanced productivity. Two possible options to tacklethe food shortage are increasing land usage and practicing farming inlarge area or adapting best practices and technology support to enhanceproductivity. Considering the case of developing countries with highlypopulated areas where increasing the land area is merely impossible,the only way is to go smarter with the help of cutting edge technologieslike the internet of things (IoT) and allied technologies like Arti ﬁcial In- telligence (AI). The recent advancement in ICT (Information and Com-munication Technology) and associated researches have identi ﬁed the ‘Internet of things’and 'Artiﬁcial Intelligence' as key technologies forrevolutionizing modern agriculture practices. By incorporating the useof digital technologies like artiﬁcial intelligence and internet of things,better insights can be formed effectively from data gathered from theﬁeld and allowing farming practices to be planned systematically withminimal manual labor. Over the decades, the agriculture sector hasrealised the importance of precision farming. Precision farming is a sus-tainable alternative that will enhance production by providing a preciseamount of inputs reducing the overuse of potential environmentallydamaging pesticides and other inputs. Despite the challenges due to cli-mate change and other factors, the digital technology driven agricultureprovides a plethora of methodologies for automating and enhancing ag-riculture production and productivity. Digitization in agriculture en-ables real-time analysis that helps in more effective spraying, landmanagement, water management, and even land surveillance. The useof emerging digital technology will allow the agriculture industry toachieve several other beneﬁts such as reducing input costs and wastage,achieving sustainable practices along with enhancing productivity tomeet the growing food demand. Digital technology driven agricultureis gaining more and more global attention due to the incredibly easyﬁeld management capability and powerful real-time monitoringsystems.Mechanization converted agricultural activities that require days ofhuman sweat and draft animal labor into a few hours of activities. Thiscan be considered as theﬁrst level of automation that transformed agri-culture tasks in developing countries like India. Agriculture mechaniza-tion in India is at an early stage and growing at a rate of 7.5% per annumand this is going to get smarter and faster with the advancement in dig-ital technologies. One of the main issues of recent times is extensivelabor migration. When studying the workforce employed in Indian agri-culture, it was observed that the percentage of agricultural workers tototal workers decreased from 59.1 in 1991 to 54.6% in 2011 and was ex-pected to be 40.6% in 2020 (Mehta et al., 2014). All these were a few main reasons for moving towards mechanization along with reducingthe drudgery. Minimizing the drudgery associated with the agriculturetasks helps the women workers to step forward and make a key contri-bution to agriculture activities.Fig. 1shows the levels of mechanization in the agriculture activitiesof rice crops. In developing countries like India, agriculture mechaniza-tion played a crucial role in uplifting economic growth hammering allthese hurdles (Mehta et al., 2019).Now in the digital era, further automation through digital technolo-gies has widened the horizon of agriculture mechanization especiallywhen backed up with the Internet of things and allied technologies.2. Internet of things and artiﬁcial intelligenceTechnology adoption is the need of the hour as our current tradi-tional farming practices would not be sufﬁcient for meeting the food de- mand. The Internet of things has a huge potential to become a game-changer in agriculture automation and it is already doing wonders intheﬁeld. It is referred to as a network of physical objects called ‘things
’ with network connectivity that can enable these objects to collect andexchange data and interact with the environment ( Matta and Pant, 2019). The application of the internet of things backed up with an ef ﬁ- cient intelligent decision-making system can lead to a signi ﬁcant reduc- tion in human intervention in various agricultural tasks. This intelligentdecision-making is the brain of the system, which decides the success,and failure of automated activities. The amalgamation of the internet
Fig. 1.Mechanization levels for farm operations in rice crop ( Mehta et al., 2019).A. Subeesh and C.R. Mehta Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 5 (2021) 278 –291
279of things with artiﬁcial intelligence results in powerful systems that caneven beat human decisions in terms of accuracy. Arti ﬁcial Intelligence enabled systems are computer systems that can able to perform opera-tions that generally require human intelligence such as speech recogni-tion, visual perception, decision making, and language translations(Yang, 2020). The Internet of things and artiﬁcial intelligence are con- sidered two sides of the same coin when it comes to the automationof agriculture tasks.Being connected to the internet, the main goal of the IoT device is togenerate real-time data and these data are mostly unstructured. Duringthe early stages of IoT, when the device was simpler, the data generatedwere very few and used to trigger simple alert messages without muchprocessing. There, the AI algorithms had no role to play. As the IoT sys-tems got more complex and sophisticated, this huge data (Big Data)gave rise to the need for data analysis. AI algorithms have the capabilityto handle and derive meaningful insights from the data which can leadto high-quality decision-making. Problem solving and automation havebeen made quite simple by the introduction of new logic and methodssuch as Machine Learning, Natural Language Processing, Machine Vi-sion, Artiﬁcial Neural Network (ANN) etc. Out of all these, Machinelearning and ANN are the most widely applied methods in researchesrelated to automation in agriculture (Jha et al., 2019). Machine learning algorithms can work with labeled (supervised learning) as well as unla-beled data (unsupervised learning). Most of the data driven automationand related operations follow the supervised learning algorithms. Thecurrent agriculture automation systems highly rely on the Arti ﬁcial Neural Network (ANN) which performs well on complex classi ﬁcation tasks. ANN is inspired by the biological neurons and is architectured ina layer fashion. The architecture enables them to learn complex non-linear relationships. Deep learning based computer vision techniquesthat are widely used in agriculture automation are generally builtbased on Convolutional Neural Network (CNN).CNN has made tremendous progress and has shown exemplary per-formance in image segmentation, classiﬁcation, detection, and retrieval related tasks, thus reviving the interest of scienti ﬁc community in ANNs (Cireşan et al., 2012;Indolia et al., 2018). The powerful learning ability of CNN is mainly due to the multiple feature extraction stages using aset of layers and convolution operations ( Fig. 2). For a CNN model to classify an image, it has to go through a series of layers that areconvolutional (with kernels/ﬁlters), pooling and fully connected layers.Convolution layer is responsible for extracting the features from the im-ages using kernels. A 2D kernel is a matrix of weights that slides over theinput image data and performs elementwise multiplication with thepart of the input that it is currently on, then it sums the results to a singlepixel. This repetitive sliding operation generates a feature map of theimage. Convolutional operations with different kernels are helpful inoperations such as edge detection, sharpening, blurring, etc. This outputof the convolutional kernels is assigned to the activation units, wherethe non-linearity is added to the model. Tanh, Singmoid and ReLU arethe most commonly used activation functions. Pooling operation is per-formed in the next stage of the CNN in which a signi ﬁcant reduction in number of parameters is performed especially when the images are toolarge. Max pooling, average pooling, min pooling and sum pooling arethe important pooling operations applied over the feature map. Maxpooling identiﬁes the largest element from the output of previouslayer. Average pooling identiﬁes the average of each patch from the fea-ture map. In the next step, the matrix of values is ﬂattened to vector form and fed to a fully connected neural network. With all these fea-tures, a neural network model is constructed and activation functionssuch as softmax or sigmoid are used to classify the outputs into the var-ious classes based on the identiﬁed probability. Over the years, therewere modiﬁ
cations in-depth and structure of CNN and this resulted inimproved performance and learning capacity. The work ﬂow operations in image classiﬁcation using CNN is given inFig. 3. There are several deep learning architectures commonly used forimage classiﬁcation such as AlexNet (Krizhevsky et al., 2012), VGGNet (Simonyan and Zisserman, 2015), GoogLeNet (Szegedy et al., 2014), InceptionNet (Szegedy et al., 2016), ResNet50 (He et al., 2015), DenseNet (Huang et al., 2018), XceptionNet (Chollet, 2017), EfﬁcientNet (Tan and Le, 2020)a n dN A S N e t(Adam and Lorraine, 2019), etc.Table 1shows the major CNN architectures used by re-searchers for image classiﬁcation.Brieﬂy, the Internet of Things and Artiﬁcial Intelligence have enough potential for revolutionizing the agriculture sector to ful ﬁll the increas- ing food demand and reduce the drudgery of agriculture workers.3. Generalized architecture of AI powered IoT ecosystem for agricul-tureAn IoT based agriculture automation system comprises multipletechnologies glued together for achieving the intended task. At the low-est level of the system, it has the IoT sensors deployed on the targetedsite (Fig. 4). This could beﬁelds for soil monitoring, ear tag for cattle,or sensors deployed in a greenhouse, farm machines, and so on. AnIoT device used in the agricultural site has multiple components. Rasp-berry Pi, Arduino, and Beagle Bone are some of the most commonlyused devices, which normally have limited processing memory butcan communicate effectively to outside using the communication mod-ule. They can send/receive signals from the external environment(Fig. 5). Any changes in the environment are captured by the sensorson a real-time basis and will be sent to a remote server or cloud throughan IoT Gateway. The remote server/cloud server is responsible for datamanagement. Data are normally stored in the database. Since the dataare huge and unstructured, traditional relational databases are not pre-ferred for storing this sort of data. NoSQL databases are mostly adoptedacross the cloud and found to be the best ﬁt for the unstructured data and faster accessibility. Features like auto-scaling, availability, and secu-rity make cloud servers a good choice for IoT based applications.In an AI-enabled data pipeline, the data are retrieved from the data-base as CSV, Excel, Images, or any format that can be handled by the an-alyzing program. The data pre-processing involves mainly the datacleaning in terms of removing outliers, normalizing, and so on. For a su-pervised algorithm, the data are divided into a train, validation and testset. Based on the data and the type of operation to be performed, a
Fig. 2.Architecture of convolutional neural network.A. Subeesh and C.R. Mehta Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 5 (2021) 278 –291
280variety of algorithms can be applied to the data. Table 2shows a sum- mary of various AI/ML algorithms that are commonly used for agricul-ture applications. A model is created and trained using the trainingdataset and to check the performance and accuracy of the model, thevalidation and test data are utilized. K-Fold Cross-validation methodsare widely used to check model stability. Confusion matrices and theprecision, recall values derived are used to estimate the quality of a clas-siﬁcation model. In the case of image data, CNN (Convolutional NeuralNetwork) and its architecture variations have given very promising re-sults. CNN is a type of artiﬁcial neural network with a speciﬁc architec- ture that uses convolution operation to extract image features. Once themodel is properly validated, it can be deployed in the cloud for generat-ing results for unknown data. Now based on the incoming data, the AImodel can generate intelligent predictions and decisions and thesecan be further communicated to the farmers or utilized for initiatingany operations in the farm. Farmers who are equipped with a smart-phone can easily get the recommendation, prediction results in simplerforms, and take necessary actions. The noti ﬁcations can be in the form ofSMS and email. During the recent period, farmer-friendly mobile andweb applications are also widely used for communicating informationto the farmers. The farmer can control the farm activities through mo-bile applications as well. They can send control signals and accordingly,the actuators can perform necessary actions.4. Applications of IoT and AI in agriculture automationAI-powered IoT ecosystem has tremendous potential to make thefarming practice more controlled and precise by introducing smarterapplications. The scope of recent advancements in these technologiesis endless in agriculture practices as it can automate complex taskswith minimal manual intervention. The brief details of applications ofAI and IoT in Agricultural Engineering are given below ( Fig. 6).4.1. Smart farm machinery4.1.1. Navigation and performance monitoring of tractorsModern farmers use various farm equipment and machinery to per-form various agriculture tasks. Among those, tractors are considered themost essential and irreplaceable farm power unit. Undoubtedly tractorsare an integral part of farm mechanization and constantly helping toraise agriculture productivity day by day. Being a vital part of the agri-culture mechanization system, the performance monitoring of thetractor-implement system is very crucial.The tractor performance monitors measure, record, and help in re-motely visualizing the entire operation. The parameters generallytaken into consideration are power, fuel consumption, draught andwheel slip. Optimization of these parameters can greatly improve thetractor performance. The draught was measured by strain-gaugemounted on a ring transducer at the front end of the drawbar. Thefuel consumption was measured by a positive displacement ﬂow meter and wheel speed by using toothed gears and magnetic pick-ups
Fig. 3.Pre-trained CNN model based image classi ﬁcation pipeline.
Table 1Comparison of Common CNN based deep learning architectures.Model Year Image Size Depth Size (in MB)No. of Parameters(million)AlexNet 2012 227 × 227 8 227 61VGG16 2014 224 × 224 16 515 138VGG19 2014 224 × 224 19 535 144GoogleNet 2014 224 × 224 22 27 7.0InceptionV3 2015 299 × 299 48 89 23.9ResNet50 2015 224 × 224 50 96 25.6ResNet101 2015 224 × 224 101 167 44.6Xception 2017 299 × 299 71 85 22.9MobileNet 2017 224 × 224 53 13 3.5DarkNet53 2018 256 × 256 53 155 41.6A. Subeesh and C.R. Mehta Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 5 (2021) 278 –291
281(Grogan et al., 1987). A data acquisition system is also handy for moni-toring the performance wherein the transducers are mounted for mea-suring the various operational parameters. The spatial mapping of thetractor-implement performance can be made possible using the Differ-ential Global Position System (DGPS). Global Positioning System (GPS)acts as a major component of this system that provides spatial values.This enables the system to measure, record, and monitor the perfor-mance of the tractor-implement system relative to the position. Sincethe performance of a tractor-implement system is in ﬂuenced by thefactors of soil condition and land slope, this mapping system is highlybeneﬁcial for calculation of the cost of crop production within the ﬁeld boundary (Yahya et al., 2009;Yule et al., 1999). Farms in developed countries now have tractors with an in-builtnavigation system and sensors, monitoring all macro-scopic andmicro-scopic elements in theﬁeld. Nowadays, as farms have becomemore and more connected and internet-enabled, the real potential ofthe internet of things and allied technologies can be effectively utilizedin monitoring the performance of tractors. A general system that mon-itors the tractor navigation and performance includes both hardwareand software parts. The hardware section encompasses the essentialsensors for measuring geo-location, fuelﬂow, and power consumption and these data are transferred to a processing unit or PCB. With a suit-able communication technology like LPWAN (Low Powered WideArea Network), the data are transferred to the network. For the softwareside, web applications developed by connecting with the real-time andscalable database is utilized (Civele, 2019).4.1.2. Autonomous tractors and farm machineryThe agriculture sector is continuously challenged by the shortage ofskilled laborers and low productivity. The advancement in technologyhas introduced tractors, cultivators, and plows that require minimumhuman dependency (Mehta et al., 2021). Farmland is undoubtedly the best place for the use of autonomous machines since they are freefrom crowds and pedestrians and activities can be carried out with min-imum risk. Sensors like radars and lasers are generally used in an auton-omous vehicle to identify any obstacles and handle them intelligently.But the same cannot be applied in the case of tractors as it cannot distin-guish between grass and obstacles. So it cannot be operated like normalautonomous vehicles. One general approach is to use GNSS (Global Nav-igation and Satellite System) using which the machine can locate its po-sition and move to an area autonomously. But since the system wouldbe unaware of the surroundings, this can lead to a collision. Also, in anorchard like environment, autonomous driving will not be possible
Fig. 4.Generalized internet of things –artiﬁcial intelligence/machine learning work ﬂow for agricultural solutions.
Fig. 5.Architecture of an IoT device.A. Subeesh and C.R. Mehta Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 5 (2021) 278 –291
282Table 2AI/ML algorithms and applications in agriculture.ML/AL Algorithm Type Applications DescriptionConvolutionalNeuralNetworkClassiﬁcation Plant Disease Classiﬁcation (Ashwinkumar et al., 2021;Atila et al., 2021;Bedi and Gole, 2021;Rangarajan Aravind et al., 2020 ;Singh et al., 2021)Seed Classiﬁcation (Loddo et al., 2021;Nie et al., 2019) Crop Classiﬁcation (Zhong et al., 2019) Weed Identiﬁcation (Dyrmann et al., 2016;Hu et al., 2021;Yu et al., 2019)Land Cover Classiﬁcation (Pan et al., 2020)Models used are: AlexNet, VGG16, VGG19, InceptionV3,DenseNet201, MobileNet, EfﬁcientNet, Xception,InceptionResNetV2 and NASNetMobileSqueezeNet and Data consist of Images and Videos
Object Detection Behavior Recognition in cattle and goat ( Fuentes et al., 2020;Jiang et al., 2020)Weed Detection (Puerto et al., 2020) Identiﬁcation of Productive Tillers (Deng et al., 2020)Models used: Faster R-CNN, SSD, YOLO models, Mask-RCNN (Forsegmentation), Data source is Image/Video.Support VectorMachinesClassiﬁcation andRegressionSoil Moisture Estimation (Liu et al., 2016b;Malajner et al., 2019; Taneja et al., 2021)Vegetable/Fruit Grading (Cen et al., 2016;Yimyam and Clark, 2016)Disease Detection (Islam et al., 2017;Omrani et al., 2014;Selvaraj et al., 2013)Stress detection (Karimi et al., 2006;Naik et al., 2017
) Insect Detection (Kasinathan et al., 2020)Classiﬁcation of linear and non-linear data, Image classi ﬁcation
Naïve Bayes Classiﬁcation Stress detection ( Naik et al., 2017) Weeds Identiﬁcation (Mursalin and Mesbah-Ul-Awal, 2014 ; Pereira et al., 2012)Vegetable Grading (Cen et al., 2016) Disease Detection (Phadikar et al., 2013;Stegmayer et al., 2013)Classiﬁcation using probabilistic model
Tree BasedModelsClassiﬁcation andRegressionStress detection (Naik et al., 2017) Crop Classiﬁcation (Ok et al., 2012;Tatsumi et al., 2015) Environment Monitoring (Shackelford et al., 2018) Crop Yield Prediction (Jeong et al., 2016) Weed Detection (Alam et al., 2020;De Castro et al., 2018; Gašparovićet al., 2020)Tree based classiﬁcation and Regression.
K-NN Model Classiﬁcation Stress detection ( Naik et al., 2017) Weed Detection (Ahmad et al., 2011) Seed Classiﬁcation (Kurtulmuşand Unal, 2014) Vegetable/Fruit Grading (Cen et al., 2016;Yimyam and Clark, 2016)Insect Detection (Kasinathan et al., 2020)Classiﬁcation using non-parametric instance based model
Recurrent NeuralNetworks andLSTMTime SeriesAnalysis andClassiﬁcation
Land Cover Classiﬁcation (Rußwurm and Körner, 2018;Sun et al., 2019)Agricultural Yield and Price Forecasting ( Haider et al., 2019;Khaki et al., 2020;Kurumatani, 2020) Disease localization (Lee et al., 2020)Nutrient Analysis(Moon et al., 2019)Text classiﬁcation, Summarization, Time series analysis,Forecasting.
Fig. 6.Agriculture automation applications using AI-IoT.A. Subeesh and C.R. Mehta Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 5 (2021) 278 –291
283with GNSS as the satellite positioning will be less accurate. So recent au-tonomous systems in agriculture are heavily dependent on stereo-cameras, sensors and deep learning algorithms. RGB camera with mul-tiple infrared cameras is used to capture the depth images via stereomatching. A popular object detection algorithm YOLO ( Redmon et al., 2016), which is based on CNN, is used for object detection. This detectsthe objects in the bounding boxes of pixels ( Inoue et al., 2019). In the in- dustry abroad, tractor manufacturers like John Deere and Case IH havealready started offering autonomous tractors to the farmers. Case IH'sconcept tractor was enabled with cameras and LiDAR (Light Imaging,Detection, and Ranging) which can accurately identify the obstacles.Faster RCNN (Ren et al., 2016) and SSDs (Liu et al., 2016a) are other few object detection models that are being utilized for object detectionin agriculture applications.Autonomous tractors, rice transplanters, and harvesters have beendeveloped by researchers with nearly the same human ef ﬁciency using deep learning based computer vision methods. The autonomousfruits harvester prototype consisted of mainly an image acquisitionmodule and followed by an image manipulator module that wasmounted on a self-propelled carrier ( Blok et al., 2016). The input was fed into the computer vision-based object detection algorithm to iden-tify the vegetables and fruits for harvesting.4.1.3. UAV or dronesEven though the initial introduction of drones was into military appli-cations, slowly it has capitalized on agriculture applications. The intro-duction of drones into agriculture has become another breakthrough inautomating many of the agriculture tasks such as pesticide spraying,land monitoring, etc. Agricultural drones are a class of Unmanned Aerialvehicles (UAVs) considered as aircraft without a human pilot aboard. Ageneric drone system is shown inFig. 7. The ground station is responsiblefor communicating to the drone with the help of protocols such asMavelink. Most of the ground control stations are equipped with a userinterface to monitor the drone. The hardware is essential in controllingthe row, pitch, and yaw for the UAVs. The drone device consists of actu-ators and motors for performing necessary operations, a set of sensorssuch as laser, radar, camera, gyroscope, accelerometer, compass, GPSreceiver for reading the environment information and a central process-ing unit. To communicate with this, the remote control is used andcommunication is done in the radio frequency range. UAVs are capableof monitoring hectares ofﬁelds in a singleﬂight using the thermal and multi-spectral cameras mounted on them ( El Hoummaidi et al., 2021; Mogili and Deepak, 2018). The cameras can capture the bands with dif-ferent wavelengths and based on the reﬂectance values, indices such as Normalized Difference Vegetation Index (NDVI) can be calculatedusing the formula.NDVI¼R
INR–RRED ðÞ=R INRþR RED ðÞWhere, R
INR=R eﬂectance in the Near Infra-red band, R RED= Reﬂectance in the Red range of the red band.NDVI value ranges from−1 to 1 and 1 being the highest density ofcrops (Bhandari et al., 2012; Reinecke and Prinsloo, 2017 ) and 0 indi- cates no vegetation. These kinds of analyses help to access the healthof the crops and identify the pest attacks.The pesticide application is another key focus area of drone applica-tion. The two main components of the system are the spraying systemand the controller. The spraying system is normally attached to thelower part of the UAV and is connected to the pesticide tank. The nozzleof the sprayer is activated using the controller. At present, the agricul-tural sector has embraced drone technology with both hands to trans-form modern precision farming (van der Merwe et al., 2020). In India, start-up and research organizations are leveraging the opportunity ofdrones in agriculture to make data-driven decision-making on the soilas well as crop health monitoring. The opportunities for drone-based so-lutions in India are endless as the landscape makes ground-based sur-veys costly and time-consuming. The major challenge is setting clearregulations for drone usage (Sylvester, 2018).4.1.4. Irrigation systemsFor our future food requirement, efﬁcient usage of water has para- mount importance and the “per drop more crop”strategy has been identiﬁed for right utilization of the scarce water resources. Technolog-ical intervention for efﬁcient water management has been started foryears, but the evolution of the Internet of Things (IoT) has taken it to an-other level. The complete workﬂow of an irrigation system can be intel-ligently automated using the Internet of things and decision supportsystems enabled with artiﬁcial intelligence and cloud computing(Fig. 8). The soil moisture, temperature, and humidity sensors act as
Fig. 7.High level architecture of drones.A. Subeesh and C.R. Mehta Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 5 (2021) 278 –291
284the major source of data that are fed into the system. For a detailed anal-ysis, the data are stored in a database where historic data can be utilizedfor training the model. The artiﬁcial neural network serves as the good-to-go classiﬁcation technique which can be trained with data takenfrom the database for building the model. Once the model is trained, itcan be further used to classify unknown data. Real-time monitoring ismade possible by transferring the data from the sensors through proto-cols like MQTT. In MQTT, the data are published to topics and only thosewho subscribed to the topics can only view the data. The advantage ofusing MQTT is that it is lightweight and can be managed easily by thenetwork. The processing unit will be ready to accept requests from out-side and the module contains a relay and motor connected to it. Thedata can be visualized in an MQTT dashboard ( Nawandar and Satpute, 2019).In remote locations where water scarcity is profound, irrigationheavily depends on underground water. Depending on the water levelinside the well, the pumps should be turned on and off. Diesel engineoperated pumps are generally water-cooled, so the condition of lowwater level can also damage the pump. Hence, proper monitoring ofwater level inside the well may be considered along with the irrigationplanning. In regions with water scarcity and power shortage, an IoTbased solar energy system for smart irrigation can be developed. Inthose systems, during sunshine, the battery can be charged using solarenergy. As in other irrigation systems, these systems are also equippedwith sensors for measuring soil moisture, humidity, and temperature.Along with that, theﬂow rate can also be controlled using aﬂow rate sensor. These systems are designed to focus on the energy-savingcriteria in mind. A control algorithm using fuzzy logic adds value tothe existing irrigation method. Using various combinations of theinput values, conditions can be made to operate the water pump on ap-propriate occasions. Remote monitoring using mobile or web applica-tions makes these systems accessible from anywhere ( Al-Ali et al., 2019).4.1.5. Fertilizer applicationAlong with the presence of weeds, under or over-application of fer-tilizers is another major reason for low yield from the agricultural land.Soil testing is inevitable before adding the fertilizers and this reveals thenutrient requirements of the crop. Because of the complex laboratoryprocedures, the farmers often skip this process. These days, organiza-tions are motivating the farmers to go digital and practice technology-enabled farming practices. IoT technology can help in the applicationof fertilizers more smartly. Nitrogen (N), phosphorous (P) and potas-sium (K) levels can be measured using an NPK sensor which can be de-signed using light-emitting diodes (LED), light-dependent resistor, andresistors. The sensor works based on the Colorimetric and photo-conductivity principles. The values from the NPK sensor are directlyread into a processing unit or system-on-chip. Further analysis is carriedout either using fog computing or edge computing. Fog computing isperformed by the processor directly in contact with the sensors andedge computing is done by an edge server connected through the inter-net. Fuzzy logic helps to analyze and arrive at a conclusion about theamount of fertilizer that needs to be applied. Since cloud services likegoogle cloud platforms provide scalable, timely, uninterrupted serviceand this option can be utilized for SMS service. The recommended fertil-izer quantities are generally sent as text messages to the farmer's mobilephones (Lavanya et al., 2019).The low-cost SPAD has been developed at CIAE, Bhopal for indirectmeasurement of chlorophyll content of leaves of crops in the ﬁeld. It is a compact handheld, portable unit and can be plugged into OTG enabledandroid smartphone for display and data logging of SPAD values. Ithelps in assessment of the nitrogen requirement of the crop.4.1.6. Pest and weed controlThe targeted application of herbicide for controlling weeds remainsa challenge as it induces harmful effects such as health andenvironment-related problems. Moreover, conventional weeding
Fig. 8.Automated irrigation systems using internet of things.A. Subeesh and C.R. Mehta Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 5 (2021) 278 –291
285methods apply herbicides uniformly in the entire ﬁeld irrespective of the presence of weeds and result in increased herbicide cost and moreGHG emissions. To avoid all these problems, one effective approach isto develop a site-speciﬁc system combining the Internet of Things, Ro-botics, and advanced image analysis techniques. For weed detectionon aﬁeld, both RGB and Infrared (IR) imaging sensors can be used.These captured images from theﬁelds are fed into a pre-processingcomponent. The pre-processing component is responsible for resizing,transforming, alteration of the color spaces, and normalization opera-tions. Segmentation is performed on the pre-processed output whichgroups the associated pixels for forming a connected object that has ho-mogeneous properties. This includes separating the plants from the soiland other backgrounds and collecting only the vegetation part. The es-sential features from the segments are taken out in the next stage calledfeature extraction. These include biological morphology, spectral fea-tures, visual textures and spatial contexts. The extraction and combin-ing of various features result in an increased dimensionality. Foreffectiveness, only the essential feature combinations are selectedusing various algorithms such as Stepwise Linear Discriminant Analysis(SWLDA), Principal Component Analysis (PCA), Linear DiscriminantAnalysis (LDA), and so on. For theﬁnal classiﬁcation of weeds and crops, either conventional machine learning-based classi ﬁcation or deep learning-based algorithms can be employed. Two major classi ﬁers that are broadly applied in weed detection are support vector machines(SVM) and artiﬁcial neural networks. The SVMs have been successfullyused inﬁelds for the identiﬁcation of weeds in maizeﬁelds (Akbarzadeh et al., 2018). Based on the recent studies, Convolutional Neural Network(CNN) is found to outperform the other classi ﬁers while analyzing the image. The only limitation of the CNN is that when the features arelarge, and many parameters are to be learned. It imparts heavy compu-tational load and demands higher hardware costs. This can be bypassedusing pre-trained models which can give the state of the art perfor-mance (Wang et al., 2019).Internet of Things based systems for weed control are enabled withprocessing components or system-on-chip such as Raspberry Pi, sen-sors, cameras, and sprayer (for spraying the herbicide on the weed).The vital part of the system is handled by an arti ﬁcial intelligence- based weed classiﬁcation model, which identiﬁes and separates the weed from the crop. The convolutional neural networks are used forbuilding image classiﬁers that can give high accuracy. Based on the out-put of the classiﬁer model, the sprayer gets triggered. The IoT- basedweed control system is very promising automation as it can drasticallydecrease the usage of herbicides and thus a signi ﬁcant reduction in health-related problems (Dankhara et al., 2019). Traditional pest control methods are heavily dependent on thechemicals and the consumers are increasingly concerned about the im-pact of these on the soil and human health. Various strategies can beplanned for saving crops from pests using the internet of things. Remotemonitoring of pests and their activities such as codling moths in appleorchards can be done using IoT devices. This helps to get prepared forthe counter measures. Weather also plays a key role in increasing thepopulation of pests. IoT can help remote weather monitoring very pre-cisely and at a very low cost. Another key aspect to be considered iscrop health. Image processing and AI-enabled systems can automati-cally assess crop growth and alert the probabilities of pest attacks. Oneof the recent trends that have been observed in pest control is the devel-opment of early warning models. These models are big-data driven and
as aﬁrst step collect various information that can cause pest growth.This involves real-time data collection from the ﬁelds which are related to soil, weather, other environmental conditions, and a neural networkis trained to predict the degree of pest occurrence in the ﬁeld (Cai et al., 2019). Object detection using Faster R-CNN (faster region-basedconvolutional neural network) is also found to be very effective inpests identiﬁcation in large farms and greenhouses ( Karar et al., 2021). Innovative spraying equipment such as air-assisted sprayers, ULVsprayers, ultrasonic sensor-based sprayers, canopy sprayers, andelectrostatic sprayers can improve the efﬁcacy of spray. This will reduce the application rate as well as the number of sprays in the ﬁeld and hor- ticultural crops, thereby, reducing the pesticide requirement, hazards ofover-application, and reducing the pollution of soil and groundwater.4.2. Automated livestock managementLivestock plays a vital role in rural development and the livelihood.Studies show that there is a huge yield gap since the farmers are follow-ing old age practices. The biggest concern is how to manage and orga-nize the growth of this livestock sector in such a way that the yieldgap can be minimized. Due to this, there is a research opportunitywith the help of advanced technologies that can provide a sustainablesolution. The Precision Livestock Farming (PLF) system automates thecomplete process of monitoring, analyzing and decision making thusensuring the health and wellbeing of the livestock.Backyard poultries are one of the old age practices of most of therural villages and a great asset to the women groups. A poultry manage-ment system facilitates automation through real-time advanced dataanalysis (Ren et al., 2020). There are three main sections for precisionpoultry farming namely the environment, precision feeding system,and poultry welfare. Environment monitoring systems comprisemulti-sensors that are capable of reading temperature, humidity, andgases like CO2and ammonia which can impact the bird's health. Also,deep learning-based prediction models can predict the broiler weightup to 72 h in advance. Robotics also serves as an essential technologyin managing poultry activities (Astill et al., 2020). Autonomous robots can enhance bird health by inducing the movement of birds. Advancedrobots can aerate the litter on the poultry ﬂoor. This will decrease the chance of infections and prevent diseases like Salmonella. The precisionfeeding systems can precisely control the intake of feed. Recent re-searches have proved that precision-fed broiler breeders contribute tomore fertile eggs (Zuidhof et al., 2017). Welfare monitoring systems, on the other hand, are equipped with non-invasive technologies likedigital imaging and vocalization analysis which are backed up with ad-vanced big data analytics.Behavior analysis of cattle provides better insights into their health,early disease detection, feed intake, heat, and estrus events. Monitoringall the cattle on the farm is often a tedious job and requires close obser-vation. Animal-attached sensors are one solution that can be employedfor automated monitoring and may be implemented in various smalland large-scale cattle farms (Williams et al., 2020). The current behavior monitoring and analysis automation system is commonly equippedwith components such as sensors attached to the leg, neck, or ear of an-imals, sensor nodes to process and transmit the observations, and an AI-enabled model to update the status of the animal ( Fig. 9). The machine learning models developed are fed with the time-series data generatedfrom the sensors. It is often a good practice to select only the relevantfeatures required to build the AI model. For this feature selection,methods are employed which identify the best combination of featuresthat can be handy in performing the decision making based on the sta-tistical importance of a combination of features. The algorithm perfor-mance is evaluated in two approaches viz. Leave Out One Animal(LOOA) and Stratiﬁed Cross-Validation (SCV). In LOOA, the data fromall the remaining animals act as the test set and others become the train-ing set. In the SCV approach, data from all the animals are combined andevaluated similar to the K fold cross-validation ( Rahman et al., 2018). The productivity on a dairy farm is heavily dependent on the ef ﬁ- cient and timely reproductivity of the cattle. The traditional system ofartiﬁcial insemination is not accurate because of the lack of techniquesfor timely identiﬁcation of the estrus and calving events. Automatedsystems using sensors like accelerometer, pedometer, temperature sen-sor, etc. can collect information about the current state of the cattle. Dur-ing estrus and calving events, their activity duration and patterns varyfrom a normal state. From the data collected, an arti ﬁcial intelligence model can analyze this pattern to identify anomalies in the activityA. Subeesh and C.R. Mehta Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 5 (2021) 278 –291
286and thereby conclude that the cow is undergoing the calving or estrusevent. The most important three parameters that can determine thestate of the cattle are hourly ruminating time, feeding time, and restingtime. These can be easily obtained from the accelerometer data. The ru-minating time and feeding time are extracted from the accelerometermounted on the neck and standing time from the accelerometermounted on the leg of the cattle. While detecting the cattle is in estrusor not, any binary classiﬁcation models such as logistic regression canbe used (Benaissa et al., 2020).An IoT based livestock management system requires complex deci-sion making, often the data analysis is performed on the cloud or remoteservers. This is because of micro-controller inside the collar or ear, hasvery limited processing and consumes a lot of power in complex com-putations. Livestock automation systems are also data-driven andthese livestock data are generally unstructured. It can fall into any cate-gories of text, image, audio and so on. Generally, the statistical methodsperform poorly on the unstructured and noisy data. In simple classi ﬁca- tion problems and pattern recognition, multi-layer perceptron feed for-ward neural networks work well ( Gutierrez-Galan et al., 2018). However, for image analysis, Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN)and their variations are proved to be much more accurate.4.3. Greenhouse managementMaintaining the environmental variables inside the greenhouse is atedious activity due to involvement of many parameters. These ﬂuctua- tions in climate can damage the crops as well, so it is one of the areaswhere technological intervention can make the life of farmers easierthan ever before. The local climate and environment parameters ofmodern greenhouses can be measured using sensors. Wireless SensorNetworks with a large number of nodes have the capability to performsensing, actuating, and communicating the information to the stake-holders. The architecture generally consists of a wireless sensor networkdata management sub-systems and a base station which are responsiblefor monitoring (Akkaşand Sokullu, 2017). For data storage, a remote server or cloud server is preferred. The general architecture of the sys-tem is quite similar to other IoT based monitoring systems. Along withthe monitoring, a signiﬁcant level of actuation can also be done withthe help of these systems. The systems can be connected with anyconnecting protocols like bluetooth or zigbee and collect the moisturedata from the soil. The connected micro-irrigation system can get trig-gered when the moisture level is below the threshold level. Similar ac-tivities can be performed in case of temperature and humidity as well.The data can be made available in a public dashboard that can beaccessed remotely from any location. Providing summary data on adaily basis can help in planning for the upcoming days ( Ullah et al., 2018).Another looming issue that greenhouses currently face is the pest at-tacks because of the favourable conditions inside the greenhouse. So In-tegrated Pest Management (IPM) is one of the core aspects of ef ﬁcient greenhouse implementation. The most basic method that generally im-plemented is the use of sticky paper traps which can attract pests. Thissticky paper can give the approximate population density of the pest.This helps in planning precise pest control and management strategies.This manual inspection can further be automated using image process-ing algorithms which partially solves this problem. To have a fully auto-mated system, the micro-controller enabled monitoring can beemployed. This method can collect sticky paper images using RGB cam-eras installed in various locations of the greenhouse. The core process-ing element of the system is Raspberry Pi or Arduino with an RGBcamera interfaced with it. The sensor nodes are designed normally ina waterproof structure and the nodes can be connected in a topologylike a star, such that they can send the data to the outside world throughthe Gateway. Images can be transferred to the remote server using HTTPPOST protocol. Further image analysis can be performed at the server.Theﬁndings of the analysis are directly visible in a dashboard main-tained by the server. Conventional machine learning algorithms likeSVM (Support Vector Machines) with a suitable kernel (radial basis ker-nel) can be used for analysis purposes. Labeling of the insects is done bythe entomologists so that the data can be modelled and trained effec-tively for identiﬁcation of unknown pests (Rustia et al., 2020). Object detection models are also found to be effective in identifying tinypests present in the greenhouses (Li et al., 2021). Prior to the actual cultivation of crops inside the greenhouses, it isrecommended to go for an evaluation of the micro-climatic conditionsinside the greenhouses. This helps in an optimal design of energy-
efﬁcient greenhouses with adaptive climate control methods. Data ac-quisition and interpretation help to monitor and plan strategies for min-imizing the cost of cooling systems that are often affordable for growers.Also with the help of the IoT and decision support system, a relationshipcan be established between the micro-climate variation and the growthof the crops which can help the growers, a better insight about the cropgrowth rate before the cultivation. A model that is built processes thedata from theﬁeld which may include temperature, humidity, vapourpressure, solar radiation, etc. and simulates the comfort ratio for differ-ent growth stages of the crops. This can be used to plan better control
Fig. 9.Smart collar system for smart dairy management.A. Subeesh and C.R. Mehta Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 5 (2021) 278 –291
287recommendations for managing the greenhouses effectively ( Shamshiri et al., 2020).4.4. Farm produce storage systemsDespite all the technologies and innovations that have become a partof the regular agricultural activities, some tasks such as monitoring thefarm produce storage systems continued to be done manually. A verysmall human error in this activity can create a recurring and seriousissue for the farm and supply chain beyond. As there is a common ten-dency to look at the technology for assistance, the internet of things canprovide a good solution in this case as well. Wireless sensor nodes canbe effectively used for monitoring the quality of the farm produce insidethe storage units. For ensuring the optimum temperature and humidityinside the storage, temperature and humidity sensors can be deployed.The time series values of the sensor reading may vary by a small margin.Cumulative values are derived from this to assess the temperature andhumidity variations in storage system. The threshold for each of theseparameters is set with respect to the farm produce stored in the storagestructure. Sensor nodes to the internet through a gateway and data ag-gregation is performed at the remote database server. Connecting thedata insights to the graphical user interface can help the farmers locallymonitor the storage conditions. This technique is adopted by farmersand widely used in seed potato storage systems in developed countries(Tervonen, 2018). Detection and removal of pesticide residues are alsovery important during the storage to ensure food safety. For effectivedetection of pesticide residues, CNN models can be applied on thehyperspectral images of the fruits and vegetables ( Jiang et al., 2019). A cold storage management system is generally designed to operatein a controlled environment. Automated cold storage systems are alsobeneﬁcial for storing agricultural produce for a longer duration. The sys-tem design remains the same as that of the normal storage system ex-cept automation using IoT. Connecting an appropriate alarmingsystem or mobile application that can help in local monitoring and con-trol of the system (Kumar et al., 2018). Apart from the temperature andhumidity of the container, often the carbon monoxide levels are alsomonitored for better control using MQ sensors. Some of the storage sys-tems use LDR sensors for providing proper lighting and smoke sensorsto detect any forms ofﬁre. If the system does not require advanced an-alytics, the data are managed locally than in the cloud platforms.5. Challenges and opportunitiesDespite the fact that technology can revolutionize the agriculturesector, a lack of technical knowledge among farmers to use thetechnology-led machinery is a major challenge in the ecosystem. Thebest way to tackle this is to keep the farmers in mind while developingthe systems. The designers need to focus on the user interface in thecase of digital products and providing solutions in local languages arethe possible ways to overcome the challenge. The quality and cost ofthe devices and sensors are major concerns for small scale farmers, toadopt the advanced technology. The reliability of the system also hasparamount importance in IoT solutions. The decision made using thedecision support systems directly impacts the agriculture practices soany threats to the operation or failure of any component will lead to re-liability issues. Regarding the data management and security of the gen-eral IoT applications, being a network of small objects which are widelydistributed, IoT systems have very limited resources in terms of theirprocessing and storage. Proper data management strategies are to beemployed to make the most out of these resource constraint networks.Since the IoT devices are heterogeneous, interoperability is very crucialand the devices need to be in proper synchronization for a better oper-ation. The presence of multiple vendors and a large number of devicesmake this a difﬁcult task. The data from the IoT devices are increasingday by day and horizontal scaling will be required at any point in time(Villa-Henriksen et al., 2020). The heterogeneity of the data from thedevices is also a major challenge that has been addressed by re-searchers, as the data can be structured, semi-structured, or even un-structured.The system should be able to handle and process all forms of data.Designing cloud-based architecture for IoT applications can be used totackle this challenge as the cloud service can provide immense comput-ing power, huge storage capacity, and is highly scalable. Also in the caseof AI algorithms, the quality and quantity of data decide the quality ofdecision making. Getting a huge volume of quality data is a big concernfor building AI-based models.Fig. 10showsﬁve major challenges in the adoption of IoT and analyt-ics solutions and it is clear that security is a major concern among all(Bosche et al., 2018). The agriculture solutions deal with very less per-sonal data as compared to other health care and military applications.Still, the farm and crop information is passed through a channel, there
05101520253035404550
Security IT/OT Integra/g415on Unclear ROI Technical Exper/g415seInteroperabilityPercentage of Respondents
Challenges Iden/g415ﬁed
Fig. 10.Top 5 barriers in the adoption of IoT/analytics solutions ( Bosche et al., 2018).A. Subeesh and C.R. Mehta Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 5 (2021) 278 –291
288are high chances for a security breach. The communication delay is an-other major area that needs to be focused on. Since IoT solutions aretargeted to work in real-time, the messages and information passed tothe end user should reach them on time. Any delayed information willbe of no use as the user has to act on it spontaneously.IoT and AI systems are continuing to grow and they enhance the op-portunities for increased value creation and capture. Despite all thechallenges, they are expected to contribute in future to make agricultureautomated and smart. There are opportunities for these technologies intransforming the agriculture activities. The evolution of 5G technologywill be pivotal in enhancing the opportunity of the Internet of thingsin the upcoming years. 5G is having a hundred times better capacitythan 4G networks and this can incredibly contribute to increased inter-net speed. Since the communication delay is a constraint of current IoTsystems, this will be solved by the evolution of 5G, wherein the responsecan be obtained faster than the blink of an eye. The sensors and embed-ded technologies will continue to be cheaper and widely available in thefuture and will make IoT very promising in the future. The growth of Ar-tiﬁcial intelligence and advanced algorithms fuel up the decision mak-ing of smarter applications.6. ConclusionsIn this work, a comprehensive review of digitization and automationin agriculture using AI and IoT has been presented. When it comes todigitization and automation in agriculture, IoT and AI play a key rolein every phase of farming activities during pre and post-harvest opera-tions. Adoption of these technologies from crop monitoring to autono-mous harvesting robots are slowly transforming agriculture andmaking the life of farmers easier and faster.The following conclusions can be drawn from the study.•Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Internet of Things are contributing signi ﬁ- cantly in the area of modern agriculture by controlling and automat-ing farming activities.•Data generated by various sensors are of paramount importance andrequire to be managed and analysed using machine learning anddeep learning based approaches to foresee upcoming challenges infarming practices.•The potential areas of application of digitization and automation in ag-riculture include the development of smart farm machinery, smart ir-rigation systems, weed and pest control, fertilizer application,greenhouse management, storage systems, etc.•Classiﬁcation and object detection using Convolutional Neural Net-works (CNN) and their variants have made immense contributionsin solving image recognition and automating agricultural activities.•The challenge in the adoption of digitization lies in the security part.The local networks have to be secured against interference fromother networks as the approach is fully data-driven.•IoT and AI-enabled products are becoming cost-effective and robust,their widespread adoption in the agricultural ﬁeld is inevitable.The most recent information and analysis of deep learning modelspresented in the paper can enrich the future of researchers, agricultureentrepreneurs and other stakeholders for selecting the best models andtechniques for the implementation of a speci ﬁct a s k .Declaration of interestsThe authors declare that they have no known competing ﬁnancial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to in ﬂu- ence the work reported in this paper.References
Adam, G., Lorraine, J., 2019. Understanding Neural Architecture Search Techniques.ArXiv190400438 Cs Stat.Ahmad, I., Siddiqi, M., Fatima, I., Lee, S., 2011. Weed classi ﬁcation based on Haar wavelet transform via k-Nearest Neighbor ( k-NN) for real-time automatic sprayer control sys- tem. Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on Ubiquitous InformationManagement and Communication. 2011. ICUIMC. https://doi.org/10.1145/1968613. 1968634.Akbarzadeh, S., Paap, A., Ahderom, S., Apopei, B., Alameh, K., 2018. Plant discrimination bysupport vector machine classiﬁer based on spectral reﬂectance. Comput. Electron. Agric. 148, 250–258.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compag.2018.03.026 . Akkaş, M.A., Sokullu, R., 2017. An IoT-based greenhouse monitoring system with Micazmotes. Procedia Comput. Sci., The 8th International Conference on Emerging Ubiqui-tous Systems and Pervasive Networks (EUSPN 2017) / The 7th International Confer-ence on Current and Future Trends of Information and Communication Technologiesin Healthcare (ICTH-2017) / Afﬁliated Workshops. 113, pp. 603 –608.https://doi.org/ 10.1016/j.procs.2017.08.300. Al-Ali, A.R., Al Nabulsi, A., Mukhopadhyay, S., Awal, M.S., Fernandes, S., Ailabouni, K., 2019.IoT-solar energy powered smart farm irrigation system. J. Electron. Sci. Technol. 17,100017.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jnlest.2020.100017 . Alam, Mansoor, Muhammad, Alam, Roman, M., Tufail, M., Khan, U., Khan, M., 2020. Real-Time Machine-Learning Based Crop/Weed Detection and Classi ﬁcation for Variable- Rate Spraying in Precision Agriculture. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICEEE49618.2020. 9102505.Ashwinkumar, S., Rajagopal, S., Manimaran, V., Jegajothi, B., 2021. Automated plant leafdisease detection and classiﬁcation using optimal MobileNet based convolutionalneural networks. Mater. Today Proc. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matpr.2021.05.584 . Astill, J., Dara, R.A., Fraser, E.D.G., Roberts, B., Sharif, S., 2020. Smart poultry management:smart sensors, big data, and the internet of things. Comput. Electron. Agric. 170,105291.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compag.2020.105291 . Atila, Ü., Uçar, M., Akyol, K., Uçar, E., 2021. Plant leaf disease classi ﬁcation using EfﬁcientNet deep learning model. Ecol. Inform. 61, 101182. https://doi.org/10.1016/ j.ecoinf.2020.101182.Bedi, P., Gole, P., 2021. Plant disease detection using hybrid model based on convolutionalautoencoder and convolutional neural network. Artif. Intell. Agric. 5, 90 –101.https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.aiia.2021.05.002 . Benaissa, S., Tuyttens, F.A.M., Plets, D., Trogh, J., Martens, L., Vandaele, L., Joseph, W., Sonck,B., 2020. Calving and estrus detection in dairy cattle using a combination of indoor lo-calization and accelerometer sensors. Comput. Electron. Agric. 168, 105153. https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.compag.2019.105153 . Bhandari, A.K, Kumar, A., Singh, G.K., 2012. Feature Extraction using Normalized Differ-ence Vegetation Index (NDVI): A Case Study of Jabalpur City. Procedia Technology6, 612–621.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.protcy.2012.10.074 . Blok, M.P., Barth, R., den van Berg, W., 2016. Machine vision for a selective broccoli har- vesting robot. IFAC-Pap. 66 –71. Bosche, A., Crawford, D., Jackson, D., Schallehn, M., Schorling, C., 2018. Unlocking Oppor- tunities in the Internet of Things. Bain & Company.
Cai, J., Xiao, D., Lv, L., Ye, Y., 2019. An early warning model for vegetable pests based onmultidimensional data. Comput. Electron. Agric. 156, 217 –226.https://doi.org/10. 1016/j.compag.2018.11.019. Cen, H., Lu, R., Zhu, Q., Mendoza, F., 2016. Nondestructive detection of chilling injury in cu-cumber fruit using hyperspectral imaging with feature selection and supervised clas-siﬁcation. Postharvest Biol. Technol. 111, 352 –361.https://doi.org/10.1016/j. postharvbio.2015.09.027.Chollet, F., 2017.Xception: Deep Learning with Depthwise Separable Convolutions.ArXiv161002357 Cs.Cireşan, D., Meier, U., Masci, J., Schmidhuber, J., 2012. Multi-column deep neural networkfor trafﬁc sign classiﬁcation. Neural Netw. 32, 333 –338.https://doi.org/10.1016/j. neunet.2012.02.023.Civele, Ç., 2019. Development of an Iot based tractor tracking device to be used as a pre-cision agriculture tool for Turkey ’s agricultural tractors. Sch. J. Agric. Vet. Sci. 6, 199–203.https://doi.org/10.36347/SJAVS.2019.v06i09.001 . Dankhara, F., Patel, K., Doshi, N., 2019. Analysis of robust weed detection techniquesbased on the internet of things (IoT). Procedia Comput. Sci., The 10th InternationalConference on Emerging Ubiquitous Systems and Pervasive Networks (EUSPN-2019) / The 9th International Conference on Current and Future Trends of Informa-tion and Communication Technologies in Healthcare (ICTH-2019) / Af ﬁliated Work- shops. 160, pp. 696–701.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procs.2019.11.025 . De Castro, A., Torres-Sánchez, J., Peña-Barragán, J.M., Jiménez-Brenes, F., Csillik, O., López-Granados, F., 2018. An automatic random forest-OBIA algorithm for early weed map-ping between and within crop rows using UAV imagery. Remote Sens. 10. https://doi. org/10.3390/rs10020285.Deng, R., Jiang, Y., Tao, M., Huang, X., Bangura, K., Liu, C., Lin, J., Qi, L., 2020. Deep learning-based automatic detection of productive tillers in rice. Comput. Electron. Agric. 177,105703.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compag.2020.105703 . Dyrmann, M., Karstoft, H., Midtiby, H.S., 2016. Plant species classi ﬁcation using deep convolutional neural network. Biosyst. Eng. 151, 72 –80.https://doi.org/10.1016/j. biosystemseng.2016.08.024. El Hoummaidi, L., Larabi, A., Alam, K., 2021. Using unmanned aerial systems and deeplearning for agriculture mapping in Dubai. Heliyon 7, e08154. https://doi.org/10. 1016/j.heliyon.2021.e08154. FAO, 2017.The Future of Food and Agriculture: Trends and Challenges. FAO.Fuentes, A., Yoon, S., Park, J., Park, D.S., 2020. Deep learning-based hierarchical cattle be-havior recognition with spatio-temporal information. Comput. Electron. Agric. 177,105627.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compag.2020.105627 .A. Subeesh and C.R. Mehta Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 5 (2021) 278 –291
289Gašparović, M., Zrinjski, M., Barković,Đ., Radočaj, D., 2020. An automatic method for weed mapping in oatﬁelds based on UAV imagery. Comput. Electron. Agric. 173, 105385.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compag.2020.105385 . Grogan, J., Morris, D.A., Searcy, S.W., Stout, B.A., 1987. Microcomputer-based tractor per-formance monitoring and optimization system. J. Agric. Eng. Res. 38, 227 –243. https://doi.org/10.1016/0021-8634(87)90091-6 . Gutierrez-Galan, D., Dominguez-Morales, J.P., Cerezuela-Escudero, E., Rios-Navarro, A.,Tapiador-Morales, R., Rivas-Perez, M., Dominguez-Morales, M., Jimenez-Fernandez,A., Linares-Barranco, A., 2018. Embedded neural network for real-time animal behav-ior classiﬁcation. Neurocomputing 272, 17 –26.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neucom. 2017.03.090.Haider, S.A., Naqvi, S.R., Akram, T., Umar, G.A., Shahzad, A., Sial, M.R., Khaliq, S., Kamran,M., 2019.LSTM Neural Network Based Forecasting Model for Wheat Production inPakistan (Agronomy).He, K., Zhang, X., Ren, S., Sun, J., 2015. Deep Residual Learning for Image Recognition. ArXiv151203385 Cs.Hu, C., Thomasson, J.A., Bagavathiannan, M.V., 2021. A powerful image synthesis andsemi-supervised learning pipeline for site-speci ﬁc weed detection. Comput. Electron. Agric. 190, 106423.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compag.2021.106423 . Huang, G., Liu, Z., van der Maaten, L., Weinberger, K.Q., 2018. Densely Connected Convolutional Networks. ArXiv160806993 Cs.Indolia, S., Goswami, A.K., Mishra, S., Asopa, P., 2018. Conceptual understanding ofconvolutional neural network- a deep learning approach. Procedia Comput. Sci.132, 679–688.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procs.2018.05.069 . Inoue, K., Kaizu, Y., Igarashi, S., Imou, K., 2019. The development of autonomous naviga-tion and obstacle avoidance for a robotic mower using machine vision technique.IFAC-Pap., 6th IFAC Conference on Sensing, Control and Automation Technologiesfor Agriculture AGRICONTROL 2019. 52, pp. 173 –177.https://doi.org/10.1016/j. ifacol.2019.12.517.Islam, M., Dinh, A., Wahid, K., Bhowmik, P., 2017. Detection of Potato Diseases UsingImage Segmentation and Multiclass Support Vector Machine. https://doi.org/10. 1109/CCECE.2017.7946594. Jeong, J.H., Resop, J.P., Mueller, N.D., Fleisher, D.H., Yun, K., Butler, E.E., Timlin, D.J., Shim,K.-M., Gerber, J.S., Reddy, V.R., Kim, S.-H., 2016. Random forests for global and re-gional crop yield predictions. PLoS One 11. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone. 0156571.Jha, K., Doshi, A., Patel, P., Shah, M., 2019. A comprehensive review on automation in ag-riculture using artiﬁcial intelligence. Artif. Intell. Agric. 2, 1 –12.https://doi.org/10. 1016/j.aiia.2019.05.004.Jiang, B., He, J., Yang, S., Fu, H., Li, T., Song, H., He, D., 2019. Fusion of machine vision tech-nology and AlexNet-CNNs deep learning network for the detection of postharvestapple pesticide residues. Artif. Intell. Agric. 1, 1 –8.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aiia. 2019.02.001.Jiang, M., Rao, Y., Zhang, J., Shen, Y., 2020. Automatic behavior recognition of group-housed goats using deep learning. Comput. Electron. Agric. 177, 105706. https://doi. org/10.1016/j.compag.2020.105706 . Karar, M.E., Alsunaydi, F., Albusaymi, S., Alotaibi, S., 2021. A new mobile application of ag-ricultural pests recognition using deep learning in cloud computing system. Alex.Eng. J. 60, 4423–
4432.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aej.2021.03.009 . Karimi, Y., Prasher, S.O., Patel, R.M., Kim, S.H., 2006. Application of support vector machinetechnology for weed and nitrogen stress detection in corn. Comput. Electron. Agric.51, 99–109.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compag.2005.12.001 . Kasinathan, T., Singaraju, D., Uyyala, S.R., 2020. Insect classi ﬁcation and detection inﬁeld crops using modern machine learning techniques. Inf. Process. Agric. https://doi.org/ 10.1016/j.inpa.2020.09.006. Khaki, S., Wang, L., Archontoulis, S.V., 2020. A CNN-RNN framework for crop yield predic-tion. Front. Plant Sci. 10.https://doi.org/10.3389/fpls.2019.01750 . Krizhevsky, A., Sutskever, I., Hinton, G.E., 2012. ImageNet classiﬁcation with deep convolutional neural networks. In: Pereira, F., Burges, C.J.C., Bottou, L., Weinberger,K.Q. (Eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. 25. Curran Associ-ates, Inc, pp. 1097–1105.Kumar, T.N.A., Lalswamy, B., Raghavendra, Y., Usharani, S.G., Usharani, S., 2018. Intelligent food and grain storage management system for the warehouse and cold storage. Int.J. Res. Eng. Sci. Manag. 1.Kurtulmuş, F., Unal, H., 2014. Discriminating rapeseed varieties using computer vision andmachine learning. Expert Syst. Appl. 42. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2014.10.003 . Kurumatani, K., 2020. Time series forecasting of agricultural product prices based on re-current neural networks and its evaluation method. SN Appl. Sci. 2, 1434. https:// doi.org/10.1007/s42452-020-03225-9 . Lavanya, G., Rani, C., Ganeshkumar, P., 2019. An automated low cost IoT based FertilizerIntimation System for smart agriculture. Sustain. Comput. Inform. Syst. https://doi. org/10.1016/j.suscom.2019.01.002 . Lee, S.H., Goëau, H., Bonnet, P., Joly, A., 2020. Attention-based recurrent neural networkfor plant disease classiﬁc a t i o n .F r o n t .P l a n tS c i .1 1 .https://doi.org/10.3389/fpls. 2020.601250.Li, W., Wang, D., Li, M., Gao, Y., Wu, J., Yang, X., 2021. Field detection of tiny pests fromsticky trap images using deep learning in agricultural greenhouse. Comput. Electron.Agric. 183, 106048.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compag.2021.106048 . Liu, W., Anguelov, D., Erhan, D., Szegedy, C., Reed, S., Fu, C.-Y., Berg, A.C., 2016a. SSD: Sin-gle shot multibox detector. In: Leibe, B., Matas, J., Sebe, N., Welling, M. (Eds.), Com-puter Vision–ECCV 2016, Lecture Notes in Computer Science. SpringerInternational Publishing, Cham, pp. 21 –37https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319- 46448-0_2.Liu, D., Mishra, A.K., Yu, Z., 2016b. Evaluating uncertainties in multi-layer soil moisture es-timation with support vector machines and ensemble Kalman ﬁltering. J. Hydrol. 538, 243–255.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhydrol.2016.04.021 .Loddo, A., Loddo, M., Di Ruberto, C., 2021. A novel deep learning based approach for seedimage classiﬁcation and retrieval. Comput. Electron. Agric. 187, 106269. https://doi. org/10.1016/j.compag.2021.106269 . Malajner, M., Gleich, D., Planinsic, P., 2019. Soil type characterization for moisture estima-tion using machine learning and UWB-time of ﬂight measurements. Measurement 146, 537–543.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.measurement.2019.06.042 . Matta, P., Pant, B., 2019.Internet-of-things: genesis, challenges and applications. J. Eng.Sci. Technol. 14, 1717–1750.Mehta, C.R., Chandel, N.S., Rajwade, Yogesh, 2021. Smart farm mechanization for sustain- able Indian agriculture. Agric. Mech. Asia Afr. Lat. Am. 50, 99 –105. Mehta, C.R., Chandel, N.S., Senthilkumar, T., 2014. Status, challenges and strategies for farm mechanization in India. Agric. Mech. Asia Afr. Lat. Am. 45, 43 –50. Mehta, C.R., Chandel, N.S., Jena, P.C., Jha, A., 2019. Indian agriculture counting on farm mechanization. Agric. Mech. Asia Afr. Lat. Am. 50, 84 –89. Mogili, U.R., Deepak, B.B.V.L., 2018. Review on application of drone systems in precisionagriculture. Procedia Comput. Sci., International Conference on Robotics and SmartManufacturing (RoSMa2018). 133, pp. 502 –509.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procs. 2018.07.063.Moon, T., Ahn, T.I., Son, J.E., 2019. Long short-term memory for a model-free estimation ofmacronutrient ion concentrations of root-zone in closed-loop soilless cultures. PlantMethods 15, 59.https://doi.org/10.1186/s13007-019-0443-7 . Mursalin, M., Mesbah-Ul-Awal, M., 2014. Towards classi ﬁcation of weeds through digital image. 2014 Fourth International Conference on Advanced Computing Communica-tion Technologies. Presented at the 2014 Fourth International Conference on Ad-vanced Computing Communication Technologies, pp. 1 –4https://doi.org/10.1109/ ACCT.2014.101.Naik, H.S., Zhang, J., Lofquist, A., Assefa, T., Sarkar, S., Ackerman, D., Singh, A., Singh, A.K.,Ganapathysubramanian, B., 2017. A real-time phenotyping framework using ma-chine learning for plant stress severity rating in soybean. Plant Methods 13, 23.https://doi.org/10.1186/s13007-017-0173-7 . Nawandar, N.K., Satpute, V.R., 2019. IoT based low cost and intelligent module for smartirrigation system. Comput. Electron. Agric. 162, 979 –990.https://doi.org/10.1016/j. compag.2019.05.027.Nie, P., Zhang, J., Feng, X., Yu, C., He, Y., 2019. Classi ﬁcation of hybrid seeds using near- infrared hyperspectral imaging technology combined with deep learning. Sensors Ac-tuators B Chem. 296, 126630.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.snb.2019.126630 . Ok, A., Akar, Ö., Gungor, O., 2012. Evaluation of random forest method for agricultural crop classiﬁcation. Eur. J. Remote Sens. 45, 421 –432. Omrani, E., Mohtasebi, S., Band, S., Saboohi, H., Anuar, N., Md Nasir, M., Khoshnevisan, B.,2014. Potential of radial basis function-based support vector regression for apple dis-ease detection. Measurement 55. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.measurement.2014.05. 033.Pan, S., Guan, H., Chen, Y., Yu, Y., Nunes Gonçalves, W., Marcato Junior, J., Li, J., 2020. Land-cover classiﬁcation of multispectral LiDAR data using CNN with optimized hyper-parameters. ISPRS J. Photogramm. Remote Sens. 166, 241 –254.https://doi.org/10. 1016/j.isprsjprs.2020.05.022. Pereira, L.A.M., Nakamura, R.Y.M., de Souza, G.F.S., Martins, D., Papa, J.P., 2012. Aquatic Weed Automatic Classiﬁcation Using Machine Learning Techniques.Phadikar, S., Sil, J., Das, A.K., 2013. Rice diseases classi ﬁcation using feature selection and rule generation techniques. Comput. Electron. Agric. 90, 76 –85.https://doi.org/10. 1016/j.compag.2012.11.001. Puerto, A., Pedraza, C., Jamaica-Tenjo, D.A., 2020. A deep learning approach for weed de-tection in lettuce crops using multispectral images. AgriEngineering 2. https://doi. org/10.3390/agriengineering2030032 . Rahman, A., Smith, D.V., Little, B., Ingham, A.B., Greenwood, P.L., Bishop-Hurley, G.J., 2018.
Cattle behaviour classiﬁcation from collar, halter, and ear tag sensors. Inf. Process.Agric. 5, 124–133.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.inpa.2017.10.001 . Rangarajan Aravind, K., Maheswari, P., Raja, P., Szczepa ński, C., 2020. Chapter nine - Crop disease classiﬁcation using deep learning approach: an overview and a case study. In:Das, H., Pradhan, C., Dey, N. (Eds.), Deep Learning for Data Analytics. Academic Press,pp. 173–195https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-819764-6.00010-7 . Redmon, J., Divvala, S., Girshick, R., Farhadi, A., 2016. You only look once: uni ﬁed, real- time object detection. 2016 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recog-nition (CVPR). Presented at the 2016 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pat-tern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 779 –788https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.2016.91 . Reinecke, Marthinus, Prinsloo, Tania, 2017. The in ﬂuence of drone monitoring on crop health and harvest size. 1st International Conference on Next Generation ComputingApplications (NextComp), 5 –10https://doi.org/10.1109/NEXTCOMP.2017.8016168 . Ren, S., He, K., Girshick, R., Sun, J., 2016. Faster R-CNN: Towards Real-Time Object Detec- tion with Region Proposal Networks. ArXiv150601497 Cs.Ren, G., Lin, T., Ying, Y., Chowdhary, G., Ting, K.C., 2020. Agricultural robotics research ap-plicable to poultry production: a review. Comput. Electron. Agric. 169, 105216.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compag.2020.105216 . Rußwurm, M., Körner, M., 2018. Multi-temporal land cover classi ﬁcation with sequential recurrent encoders. ISPRS Int. J. Geo-Inf. 7, 129. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijgi7040129 . Rustia, D.J.A., Lin, C.E., Chung, J.-Y., Zhuang, Y.-J., Hsu, J.-C., Lin, T.-T., 2020. Application ofan image and environmental sensor network for automated greenhouse insect pestmonitoring. J. Asia Pac. Entomol. 23, 17 –28.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aspen.2019.11. 006.Selvaraj, A., Shebiah, N., Ananthi, S., Varthini, S., 2013. Detection of unhealthy region of plant leaves and classiﬁcation of plant leaf diseases using texture features. Agric.Eng. Int. CIGR J. 15, 211 –217.Shackelford, G.E., Haddaway, N.R., Usieta, H.O., Pypers, P., Petrovan, S.O., Sutherland, W.J.,2018. Cassava farming practices and their agricultural and environmental impacts: asystematic map protocol. Environ. Evid. 7, 30. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13750-018- 0142-2.A. Subeesh and C.R. Mehta Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 5 (2021) 278 –291
290Shamshiri, R.R., Bojic, I., van Henten, E., Balasundram, S.K., Dworak, V., Sultan, M.,Weltzien, C., 2020. Model-based evaluation of greenhouse microclimate using IoT-sensor data fusion for energy efﬁcient crop production. J. Clean. Prod. 263, 121303. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2020.121303 . Simonyan, K., Zisserman, A., 2015. Very Deep Convolutional Networks for Large-Scale Image Recognition. ArXiv14091556 Cs.Singh, P., Verma, A., Alex, J.S.R., 2021. Disease and pest infection detection in coconut treethrough deep learning techniques. Comput. Electron. Agric. 182, 105986. https://doi. org/10.1016/j.compag.2021.105986 . Stegmayer, G., Milone, D.H., Garran, S., Burdyn, L., 2013. Automatic recognition of quaran-tine citrus diseases. Expert Syst. Appl. 40, 3512 –3517.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa. 2012.12.059.Sun, Z., Di, L., Fang, H., 2019. Using long short-term memory recurrent neural network inland cover classiﬁcation on Landsat and cropland data layer time series. Int. J. RemoteSens. 40, 593–614.https://doi.org/10.1080/01431161.2018.1516313 . Sylvester, G., 2018.E-Agriculture in Action: Drones for Agriculture. FAO, Bangkok,Thailand.Szegedy, C., Liu, W., Jia, Y., Sermanet, P., Reed, S., Anguelov, D., Erhan, D., Vanhoucke, V.,Rabinovich, A., 2014.Going Deeper with Convolutions. ArXiv14094842 Cs.Szegedy, C., Ioffe, S., Vanhoucke, V., Alemi, A., 2016. Inception-v4, Inception-ResNet and the Impact of Residual Connections on Learning. ArXiv160207261 Cs.Tan, M., Le, Q.V., 2020.EfﬁcientNet: Rethinking Model Scaling for Convolutional NeuralNetworks. ArXiv190511946 Cs Stat.Taneja, P., Vasava, H.K., Daggupati, P., Biswas, A., 2021. Multi-algorithm comparison topredict soil organic matter and soil moisture content from cell phone images.Geoderma 385, 114863.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.geoderma.2020.114863 . Tatsumi, K., Yamashiki, Y., Canales Torres, M.A., Taipe, C.L.R., 2015. Crop classi ﬁcation of uplandﬁelds using random forest of time-series Landsat 7 ETM+ data. Comput. Elec-tron. Agric. 115, 171 –179.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compag.2015.05.001 . Tervonen, J., 2018. Experiment of the quality control of vegetable storage based on theinternet-of-things. Procedia Comput. Sci., The 9th International Conference on Ambi-ent Systems, Networks and Technologies (ANT 2018) / The 8th International Confer-ence on Sustainable Energy Information Technology (SEIT-2018) / Af ﬁliated Workshops. 130, pp. 440 –447.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procs.2018.04.065 . Ullah, M.W., Mortuza, M.G., Kabir, M.H., Ahmed, Z.U., Supta, S.K.D., Das, P., Hossain, S.M.D.,2018. Internet of things based smart greenhouse: remote monitoring and automaticcontrol. DEStech Trans. Environ. Energy Earth Sci. 0. https://doi.org/10.12783/dteees/ iceee2018/27803.van der Merwe, D., Burchﬁeld, D.R., Witt, T.D., Price, K.P., Sharda, A., 2020. Chapter one -drones in agriculture. In: Sparks, D.L. (Ed.), Advances in Agronomy. Academic Press,pp. 1–30https://doi.org/10.1016/bs.agron.2020.03.001 . Villa-Henriksen, A., Edwards, G.T.C., Pesonen, L.A., Green, O., Sørensen, C.A.G., 2020. Inter-net of things in arable farming: implementation, applications, challenges and poten-tial. Biosyst. Eng. 191, 60 –84.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biosystemseng.2019.12.013 . Wang, A., Zhang, W., Wei, X., 2019. A review on weed detection using ground-based ma-chine vision and image processing techniques. Comput. Electron. Agric. 158,226–240.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compag.2019.02.005 . Williams, L.R., Moore, S.T., Bishop-Hurley, G.J., Swain, D.L., 2020. A sensor-based solution
to monitor grazing cattle drinking behaviour and water intake. Comput. Electron.Agric. 168, 105–141.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compag.2019.105141 . Yahya, A., Zohadie, M., Kheiralla, A.F., Giew, S.K., Boon, N.E., 2009. Mapping system fortractor-implement performance. Comput. Electron. Agric. 69, 2 –11.https://doi.org/ 10.1016/j.compag.2009.06.010 . Yang, L.B., 2020. Application of arti ﬁcial intelligence in electrical automation control. Procedia Comput. Sci., Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference onMechatronics and Intelligent Robotics (ICMIR-2019). 166, pp. 292 –295.https://doi. org/10.1016/j.procs.2020.02.097 . Yimyam, P., Clark, A.F., 2016.3D Reconstruction and Feature Extraction for AgriculturalProduce Grading. pp. 136 –141. Yu, J., Sharpe, S.M., Schumann, A.W., Boyd, N.S., 2019. Deep learning for image-basedweed detection in turfgrass. Eur. J. Agron. 104, 78 –84.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eja. 2019.01.004.Yule, I.J., Kohnen, G., Nowak, M., 1999. A tractor performance monitor with DGPS capabil-ity. Comput. Electron. Agric. 23, 155 –174.https://doi.org/10.1016/S0168-1699(99) 00029-0.Zhong, L., Hu, L., Zhou, H., 2019. Deep learning based multi-temporal crop classi ﬁcation. Remote Sens. Environ. 221, 430 –443.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rse.2018.11.032 . Zuidhof, M.J., Fedorak, M.V., Ouellette, C.A., Wenger, I.I., 2017. Precision feeding: innova-tive management of broiler breeder feed intake and ﬂock uniformity. Poult. Sci. 96, 2254–2263.https://doi.org/10.3382/ps/pex013 .A. Subeesh and C.R. Mehta Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 5 (2021) 278 –291
291