Blockchain: A new safeguard for agri-foods
Jie Xua,⁎,S h u a n gG u ob,c,D a v i dX i ed,Y a x u a nY a ne
aDepartment of Food Science and Technology, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA
bGXChain, Hangzhou, China
cInnovhope Inc. MA, USA
dWalmart China, Shenzhen, China
eCollege of Engineering, Nanjing Agricultural University, Nanjing, Jiangsu, China
abstract article info
Article history:Received 15 July 2020Received in revised form 15 August 2020Accepted 15 August 2020Available online 21 August 2020
Keywords:BlockchainFood and agricultureFood safetyFood supply chainTraceabilityTransparencyBlockchain implementation in agriculture has begun. Blockchain is recognized as an emerging technology in theagri-foods industry which may provide an ef ﬁcient and robust mechanism for enhancing food traceability and a transparent and reliable way to validate quality, safety, and sustainability, of agri-foods. However, the technologyis in its nascency, therefore, this review was written to foster discussion and encourage the application ofblockchain technology, especially in the agri-food industry. In this review, the working principle of blockchainfor data recording and tracking is brie ﬂy described. The collaboration models for the current blockchain applica- tions on agri-foods are summarized. Furthermore, the speci ﬁc utilization of blockchain to enhance safety and quality of agri-foods is discussed in four aspects: enhance the data transparency, realize data traceability, improvethe food safety and quality monitoring, and reduce the cost of ﬁnancial transactions. A case study on a Walmart pork traceability system has been provided to demonstrate how blockchain may be used to enhance the foodtraceability. Finally, challenges and future trends of blockchain technology in agri-foods concerning data/costmanagement, data security, and data integration are discussed. Blockchain technology reveals a promisingapproach to foster a future of agri-foods system in a way that is safer, healthier, more sustainable, and reliable.© 2020 The Authors. Publishing services by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of KeAi Communications Co. Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ ).
1. IntroductionBlockchain technology, also referred to as distributed ledger tech-nology, is a type of public bookkeeping protocol executed by a networkof computing systems. The networked computing systems execute apre-determined protocol to maintain a record of transactions, whichare stored in“blocks.”Each block of the blockchain includes data(e.g., one or more records/transactions), a hash value of the immedi-ately preceding block, and a hash value of the contents of the currentblock. Blockchain is different from a normal database in that there arespeciﬁc rules about how data is added to the blockchain. First, the dataadded to the blockchain cannot conﬂict with other data that is alreadyon the blockchain, thus data stored on a blockchain must be consistent.Second, data may only be appended to a blockchain (e.g., new data can-not be inserted into a previously recorded block), and thus data storedon a blockchain is immutable. Third, every computing system executingthe blockchain protocol must agree on what the state of the data storedon the blockchain is (e.g., the blockchains stored in each computing sys-tem operating the blockchain protocol must be the same). Finally, apublic blockchain is not owned by a central party, and thus no singleentity can unilaterally modify the state of the blockchain. Blockchain iscapable of providing immutable data records and traceable transactionhistory, which provides great potential to enhance ef ﬁciency, transpar- ency, and traceability (Tripoli and Schmidhuber, 2018). Blockchain is a rapidly evolving technology, and with broad applicability, it appearsset to change many areas of public and private life. In the food and agri-culture industry, drastic efforts have been made to consolidate the datatraceability of blockchain technology to improve the safety/quality ofthe global food supply chain and international distribution ( Steiner et al., 2016;Tian, 2016;Kamath, 2018;Lin et al., 2018). The safety of agri-foods is of paramount importance for global fooddistribution. Safety issues may arise for agri-foods during the pre/post-harvest processing and production ( Lin et al., 2018). For example, during pre/post-harvesting, the quality/safety of agri-foods may becompromised by, excessive use of pesticides, fertilizers with additivechemicals, or heavy metal residues caused by irrigating with wastewa-ter (Tse et al., 2017). During production, the quality/safety of agri-foodsmay be compromised by, the adulteration of inferior products, inten-tionally mislabeling the origin of a food product, mislabeling theproduction and/or expiration date, and the like. Most often, these safetyissues are caused by the lack of an efﬁcient monitoring or tracking sys- tem and pose a great threat to the health of human beings. We are notguaranteeing that blockchain technology is a panacea for all theseArtiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 4 (2020) 153 –161
⁎Corresponding author.E-mail address:xu.4037@osu.edu(J. Xu).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aiia.2020.08.0022589-7217/© 2020 The Authors. Publishing services by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of KeAi Communications Co. Ltd. This is an open access article under the C C BY-NC-ND license (http:// creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ ).
Contents lists available atScienceDirect
Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture
journal homepage:http://www.keaipublishing.com/en/journals/artificial-intelligence-in-agriculture/issues, but it can provide one approach for better monitoring of agri-foods from farm to table, as well as a mechanism to more closely con-nect the participants of the food supply chain and regulators. The datatransparency and inclusivity of blockchain technology may signi ﬁcantly reduce the related food safety risks underlying deliberate fraud, poormanagement, and lack of regulation.Blockchain represents an emerging technology in the ﬁeld of agri- foods, which may improve the safety and quality of agri-foods andtransform many aspects of the agricultural industry. This review seeksto deﬁne blockchain technology and provides a comprehensive analysisof blockchain technology applications in the agriculture-foods area. Thecurrent model for implementing blockchain in the agri-foods industry issummarized, case-studies representing diverse applications ofblockchain technology are discussed, and the opportunities and chal-lenges of blockchain in the food industry are presented. The informationpresented in this study would contribute a better understanding of howblockchain technology could be implemented in agri-foods to realize abetter performance of food safety, quality, and sustainability.2. Related works2.1. Working principle of blockchainThe name Blockchain wasﬁrst introduced in 2008 to describe thedistributed ledger technology underlying Bitcoin. Brie ﬂy, Bitcoin is a type of virtual currency for digital transections, which bypasses theneed for intermediaries (e.g. banks, payment gateways, etc.) ( Tripoli and Schmidhuber, 2018). The main problem solved by Blockchain tech-nology is bypassing the need for trusted third parties (e.g., banks, insur-ance companies, etc.) by building a trustless decentralized ledger whichenables secure peer-to-peer (P2P) transactions based on cryptographi-cally secure methods such as Hash functions ( Steiner et al., 2016). The working principle of blockchain is brie ﬂy elucidated inFig. 1.A h a s hv a l u ei sv e r ym u c hl i k eaﬁngerprint and the hash algorithm is con-structed so that the smallest change in the source (e.g., the datacontained in a block) produces a completely different and unpredictablehash value. In the blockchain system, every time a transaction occurs, aunique hash value (consisting of a string of numbers and letters) isassigned to the transaction. At the same time, the validity of each trans-action must be approved or checked by other computing systems exe-cuting the blockchain protocol (also referred to as nodes), and if atransaction is changed, the nodes are able to detect the change by read-ing the hash value. Once approved, the transactions can be stored in ablock of the blockchain. As each block includes both a hash value forits contents, as well as the hash value of the immediately precedingblock, a chain of blocks is thus formed, and a change in the contents ofany previously recorded block would change the associated hashvalue for the block and thus break the chain. The contents of blocksare no longer changeable once they are uploaded to the blockchain.However, new blocks can be appended to the blockchain to incorporatefurther transactions since blockchain can update itself periodically(e.g., every 10 min).The decentralized and distributed nature of the data maintained by ablockchain ensures a high level of integrity and security, without relyingon a trusted third party. Blockchains provide a high degree of transpar-ency, since it is based on a P2P communication protocol, and the con-tents of the blockchain can be viewed by anyone. That means, everynode has access to the contents of the entire blockchain and can searchthe record of previously recorded transactions. All the records in theblockchain are immutable and the system can detect any change tothe recorded data during the addition of each new block. Each nodecan exchange data autonomously and securely and thus, the securityof the whole network is guaranteed.2.2. Collaboration model of blockchain technology in agri-foodsThe current cooperation model is built on the partnership of a foodcompany and a blockchain company. The food company is responsiblefor providing information related to agri-foods, and the blockchain com-pany is responsible for providing technical support, such as platformbuild-up and database maintenance, etc.Numerous companies are developing blockchain technology glob-ally, including Coinbase, Chronicled, Facebook, Circle, Binance, SALTLending, Ripple, Steem, etc. Most of them are in the ﬁeld ofﬁnance,
Fig. 1.Schematic diagram of the blockchain working principle.154 J. Xu et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 4 (2020) 153 –161such as fundraising, cryptocurrency exchange, digital assets, loans, andcross-border payment, which will not be discussed in this review.Some companies working to incorporate blockchain technology intothe agricultural-food industry include IBM, Ripe.io, Transparent Path,Greenfence, OpenSC, Hungry Coin, FoodlogIQ, and the like. These com-panies are summarized inTable 1.The speciﬁc applications that the listed businesses are developingare included but not limited to:•Setting up agri-food supply chain traceability systems for fresh fruits,vegetables, and meats (Tian, 2016); •Providing a lower price for consumers by removing retailers and en-abling consumers to purchase groceries directly from manufacturers(Hay, 2018);•Enhancing the traceability of seafoods to decrease seafood fraud andmislabeling.Table 2provides several examples of current collaboration modelsusing blockchain to bring transparency and traceability of agri-foodsto global food supply chains. The different food industries and foodsinvolved are also listed.IBM has been recognized as the leading enterprise blockchain pro-vider. IBM Food Trust program has been exploring ways to utilizeblockchain technology to create a secure, shared, and permissioneddigital record of agri-food data, which enables participants on thenetwork to access tools and data to improve food safety and become aproactive contributors to bettering the food system as a whole ( Trust). IBM has built specialized modules for particular use cases. The Tracemodule provides the ability for supply chain participants to trace foodproducts from upstream sources to downstream destinations. The de-tailed tracking information provided by the trace module givesconsumers and partners access to a history of agri-foods products' originand destination. The Data Entry and Access modules provide the abilityto upload, manage, and access data to the blockchain. The Certi ﬁcation module provides an easy way to manage the entire supply chain. Allthe modules can strengthen brand trust, increase supply chain ef ﬁ- ciency, and improve food safety. Moreover, blockchain technologymay enable instant food recalls by designating the original contamina-tion in the food supply chain, which could result in greater consumerconﬁdence in the quality and safety of food products ( IBM, 2019). Many food companies have collaborated with IBM to increase foodsafety by developing tracing systems. Each step in the life of a food prod-uct, including where a particular food product was produced andwhere/how the food product was processed, may be recorded viablockchain, enabling the consumers to be better informed regardingthe food products they consume, as well as preventing unsafe foodsfrom being consumed. The companies currently developing suchsystems are generally large-scale enterprises or raw ingredient supplycompanies, such as Walmart, Carrefour, Nestle, Tyson Foods, Kelloggs,Raw Seafood Inc., etc. (Armonk, 2017).Start with an example, Farmer connect is an industry-driven initia-tive that uses digital identity and blockchain to drive digital connectivityTable 1Examples of blockchain foods and agriculture startups and the of ﬁcial website.Name Website ApplicationTransparent Path https://xparent.io/ Farm-to-distributor traceabilityIBM Food Trust https://www.ibm.com/blockchain/solutions/food-trust Track-and-trace Ripe.io https://www.ripe.io/ Transparent digital food supply chain Greenfence https://origin.greenfence.com/ Food traceability Hungry Coin http://hungrycoin.net/ Restaurants, traceable tokens AgriChain https://agrichain.com/ Enabling peer-to-peer agricultural transactions AgriDigital https://www.agridigital.io/ Process complex agricultural transactions through smart contracts AgriLedger http://www.agriledger.io/ Supporting farmers in tracing food origins, transactions TE-FOOD https://tefoodint.com/ Identiﬁcation tools, farm-to-table food traceability Mixing Bowl http://mixingbowlhub.com/the-blockchain-of-food/ Food supply chain management Provenance https://www.provenance.org/ Transparency traceability OriginTrail https://origintrail.io/ supply chains data sharing Avenews = GT https://www.avenews-gt.com/ supply chain transparency Owlchain https://www.owlting.com/obs A tracing system for pork Ambrosus https://ambrosus.com/#features Customized combination of robust sensors, biosensors and food tracers Foodcoin https://fcegroup.ch/ Smart contracts Lokaal Market https://lokaal.market/ Traceability regulations FoodLogiQ https://www.foodlogiq.com/ Food supply chain management
Table 2Examples of collaboration models using blockchain technology in agri-foods area.Blockchain Company Food Company Partners Food Products Country ReferencesIBM Walmart, Carrefour, Nestle, Unilever, FarmerConnect, Tyson, Foods, Raw Seafoods Inc. Cermaqsalmon and Labeyrie, El OrdeñoMousseline purée, scallop, pork, lettuce, mangoslices, infant nutrition, line chicken, coffee beans,seafoods (shrimps and claims)US, China,UK, France,EcuadorArmonk (2017),IBM(2019),IBM (2020)Kamath (2018) SAP Target, Kelloggs, Tate & Lyle, Johnsonville, Natura &Co and Maple Leaf, Bumble Bee yellowﬁn tuna, US Lawton (2019)FoodlogIQ Tyson Foods, Subway, UK's Food Standards Agency,Testo, AgBiome Innovations, Tomato, coffee, US Jones (2018a),Jones(2018b) SIM Refresco, Albert Heijn Orange juice Dutch Hejin (2018) JD.com InterAgri Pure Black Angus Beef Australia, ChinaJD.com (2018)OpenSCNestlé Milk and palm oil Switzerland, New ZealandNestlé (2019)OriginTrail&TagItSmart Plantaze Grape, wine, Montenegro, ChinaOriginTrail (2018)BloomBloc Malaysian Palm Oil Council (MPOC) Palm oil Malaysia Bernama (2020)155 J. Xu et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 4 (2020) 153 –161from the farm to the consumer. Farmer Connect and IBM have devel-oped a new consumer-facing mobile application named “Thank My Farmer”, which allows consumers to trace coffee through the supplychain back to its origin. Blockchain technology has been used in thissystem to connect the different contributors in the global supply chainof coffee, which includes farmers, exporters, shippers, importers,roasters, retailers, distributors, and consumers ( IBM, 2019). Traceability provides the ability for consumers or other interested parties to deter-mine if coffee was sourced responsibly and sustainably. Consumerscan choose to patronize or support food suppliers who employ sustain-able practices.3. Blockchain technology for agri-food applications3.1. Data transparencyTraditionally, the food supply chain management and interactionsare unidirectional. Most of the participants in the supply chain canonly connect with entities immediately downstream, which means up-stream agents can communicate with downstream agents, e.g., a manu-facturer can communicate with a restaurant, but the restaurant cannotcommunicate with the manufacturer ( Tse et al., 2017). The usage of blockchain can make the agri-foods supply chain management more re-liable and efﬁcient. Blockchain can link all aspects of the food supplychain with a traceable and immutable data system ( Fig. 2). For example, if a consumer purchased an item from a retailer, andthe expiration data indicated the food was still safe to consume, butafter consuming the food the consumer got diarrhea, the ﬁrst reaction that the consumer might take would be to contact the retailer. After-ward, if the retailer wants to determine the cause of the issue, theretailer might ask help from the local regulator, since the regulatoracts as the central controller that is able to connect with multipleparticipants of the supply chain, such as farmers, processors, manufac-turers, retailers, and restaurants. However, the number of regulatedparticipants is quite limited, and the source of the issue may be a non-regulated entity, such as the distributor, packer, trader, etc. Also, tracingthe origin of an issue is normally difﬁcult in conventional systems, sinceno single entity possesses all of the information, and some informationis obfuscated because of trade secrets. Therefore, in current supplychains, the process of tracing the origin of an issue may be time-consuming, labor-intensive, inefﬁcient, and sometimes inconclusive.Because of this, many food safety issues are ignored or under-reportedsince consumers might hesitate to attempt to determine the source ofa particular issue, since the process is so lengthy and often inconclusive.Blockchain technology may be able to address the above issues, byleveraging the decentralized-distributed P2P communication describedinSection 2.1.F r o mFig. 3, it is clear to see that all the participants areconnected in the blockchain system and the communication model isinteractive and bidirectional. Every participant can be regarded as anode and each node has access to all the information recorded in theblockchain. That means, for the same example that we used, the con-sumer does not need a middleman (regulator) to ﬁnd the source of the issue, but can track all the information on the purchased itemthrough the entire supply chain, since the consumer has direct connec-tions to all the participants. This is a vivid example of using blockchainfor data transparency.For agri-foods supply chain management, the real advantage is thereliability of the data maintained on the blockchain combined withthe fact that it acts as a central location to store all aspects of data relatedto the life cycle of a food. For regulators, the advantages over conven-tional supply chain models are obvious. The same data-sharing systemcan be utilized by the regulators to simply access supply chain informa-tion by cell phone or other computing devices, as opposed to going todifferent locations physically to perform an audit of each step in the
Fig. 2.Blockchain can connect multiple participants in the food supply chain.156 J. Xu et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 4 (2020) 153 –161supply chain of the food item. Some published reviews on usingblockchain for food supply chain management can be referred(Kshetri, 2018).3.2. Data traceabilityBlockchain can be used as a node database, which can track the dig-ital data for each food item passed through different participants in thefood supply chain, e.g. farmers, food processors, packers, distributors,and eventually store shelves. Currently, data traceability implementedby blockchain has been realized in many agri-foods, such as wine(Lakhani and Iansiti, 2017), plant food (Galvez et al., 2018; Matzembacher et al., 2018), poultry (Peters, 2017), etc. With blockchain, supply chain managers can seamlessly track everything remotely in adistributed ledger, from expiration dates to warehouse temperatures(Kaye, 2016). In contrast with the traditional methods which rely oninformation supervision centers to transfer and share the information,all the information uploaded in the blockchain system is provided byﬁrst-hand sources, such as farms, markets, warehouse centers, transportvehicles, consumers, etc. Data acquisition is the ﬁrst step to realize data traceability, and there are several approaches for data acquisition, suchas sensor-RFID, cameras, etc. The parameters that can be traced fromdifferent blockchain participants are included in Fig. 4. For data from the farms, radio-frequency identi ﬁcation technology (RFID) has been used to track the movement of livestock ( Tse et al., 2017). The information on the farm location, soil and fertilizer informa-tion, etc. can be recorded and uploaded manually. The data during pack-ing can be uploaded manually by the packer, such as the quantity of theitems packed, package conditions, and packing time and date. For datain the manufacturing facilities, cameras can be utilized to monitor theentire process lines in the slaughterhouse, all the processing data, suchas temperature, time, relative humidity, are recorded automatically viasensors. The worker needs to manually enter the product informationand other relevant information, such as production date, time, location,and packaging information and food safety data, such as temperature,grade assigned by an inspector, or any other lab results. During thetransportation, all the vehicles are installed with sensors that can testtemperature and relative humidity during shipment, the alarm systemwill help to correct if conditions exceed established thresholds. Thechange of locations and shipping details have been monitored by globalposition systems (GPS). Similarly, geographic information systems(GIS) have been successfully applied to tracing crops ( Qu et al., 2007). Tracking food products through each step of the supply chain wasaccomplished using smart-tagged bar codes. Bar codes are used forpackaged products. The system creates a unique ID for the speci ﬁc food type. Initially, the unique ID links to a null record since no informa-tion is recorded in the system or associated with this ID. Then, the IDwill be assigned to a unique bar code and physically given to theworkers in the form of a tag. When the products are cut and packaged,the bar codes created by the system will be added to the blockchain.The workers are responsible for applying the tags to the products andscanning the barcode, this adding the ID to the blockchain. The devicesused to scan the bar codes may be a smartphone, or portable device suchas an intelligent bar code reader, or a computer. All the data input willbe uploaded automatically to the blockchain system. Also, theblockchain ensures all related data was uploaded and remotely moni-tored by related managers.3.3. Food safety and quality monitoringReal-time food tracing systems built on blockchain technology pro-vide an information platform enabling all the supply chain members
Fig. 3.Comparison of (A) traditional and (B) decentralized food supply chain models.157 J. Xu et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 4 (2020) 153 –161to access all information associated with a particular food item, provid-ing openness, transparency, neutrality, reliability, and security, to foodsupply chains (Tian, 2017). The information that can be monitored byblockchain technology that is related with food safety and quality aresummarized inTable 3(Zhang et al., 2014;Lin et al., 2018;Gao et al., 2020;Talaviya et al., 2020).For global supply chains, food safety is essential to prevent cross-contamination and food pathogen outbreaks, which may be caused byworldwide shipment, and which may have a multi-national impact.Other safety issues associated with food production and processing in-clude, improper sanitation procedures, failure of processing to eliminatepathogens, improper storage conditions, cross-contamination of han-dlers, etc. (Scott et al., 2009;Xu, 2019;Sokołowska and Nasiłowska, 2020). If all the information regarding the origin and handling of fooditems can be tracked and monitored by the blockchain, the above-indicated risks will be signiﬁcantly reduced or potentially eradicatedand, thus improving the safety of agri-foods.One example of how blockchain technology may bene ﬁcially impact food quality is provided by the mango pilot program in the UnitedStates. The mango pilot program monitors the quality or maturity ofmango slices during international transportation from Mexico usingblockchain technology (Kamath, 2018). This can be applied to other fresh fruits that have perishability issues during production and trans-portation. The environmental factors (temperature, moisture), and thequality-related characteristics, such as appearance (color, size, etc.),physical damages (bruise, etc.) or biological damages (worms, etc.)will be critical for monitoring or estimating the quality of supply.Applications of blockchain technology to agriculture are only just be-ginning, thus the properties listed inTable 3that are currently able to be tracked via blockchain are quite limited. Currently, tracking theprovenance of agri-foods is the most popular application of blockchainto supply chain tracing, while tracking other properties related to foodsafety-quality is becoming more popular ( Tama et al., 2017;Feng et al., 2020). Tracking additional food properties beyond those relatedto food origin and food quality-safety needs more systematic studyand research on using blockchain technology.3.4. AgricultureﬁnanceAgriculturalﬁnances normally involve cross-border payments be-tween different countries and participants, including farmers, sellers,buyers, traders, etc. The traditional payment model is complex and in-volves lots of paper-heavy settlement processes, signi ﬁcantly reducing the efﬁciency of the transactions.
Table 3Food properties for safety and quality assessment.Properties for safety assessment Properties for quality assessmentInternalfactorInitial microbialﬂora, pesticideresiduals, artiﬁcial colorant, foodpathogen contamination, foodallergen, toxin, heavy metalcontamination, sick poultry andlivestock, abuse use of foodadditives & chemicals, etc.Appearance (color, shape, size,shape), surface defect (bruise,worm) texture, ripeness, nutrient(sugar, water content, etc.),ﬂavor, volatile, provenance, falsiﬁcation,inferior, etc.ExternalfactorTemperature, relative humidity,sanitation procedure, CIP,shelf-life, etc.Temperature, relative humidity,light, gas concentration, etc.
Fig. 4.Potential traced data by the blockchain system for different participants.158 J. Xu et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 4 (2020) 153 –161Blockchain technology can realize rapid and real-time payments foragriculturalﬁnancial services, and thus, reduce the transaction costs andrisks while increasing cashﬂow and working capital (Tripoli and Schmidhuber, 2018). Blockchain technology, such as Ripple, can be usedto solve the problem of cross border payments. Since Ripple uses virtualcurrency, such as Bitcoin and Ethereum for ﬁnancial transactions, Ripple has drawn much attention from both investors and developers in thepast 10 years. The use of cryptocurrency on a blockchain network as a uni-versal currency for use in the agri-foods supply chain can greatly reduceexchange fees among different currencies, transaction fees, and time.Blockchain technology allows fast and safe payments at a reducedcost. The traditional payment approach normally takes 3 –5 days, and some time passes through several banks acting as middlemen, resultingin high transaction fees, placing a great burden on agri-food workers, es-pecially those in developing countries. In contrast, payments made viablockchain could reduce the cost to less than $2, regardless of the trans-action amount. The payments made via blockchain could be settled inless than 10 min. No bank approval would be required, and no inspec-tions needed. More efﬁcient supply chains and agriculturalﬁnancial transactions would lead to greaterﬁnancial inclusion and stronger busi-ness development.4. Case study4.1. Pork traceability system by WalmartIn 2016, the retail giant Walmart established the Walmart Food SafetyCenter in Beijing and invested $25 million to build global food safetyusing IBM's blockchain solution (Kamath, 2018). Proof of concept (POC) and blockchain pilots have been established for two products:mango slices, and fresh-cut pork products, in the U.S. and China, respec-tively (IBM, 2017). Because of the differences between these two coun-tries, different information is used in each system. One differencebetween the pork pilot and mango pilot is that the pork pilot focusesmore on product traceability within the nationwide. In the mango pilot,the product traceability is international due to the transitional transpor-tation of mango products between Mexico and the United States, also,the quality or maturity of the mango slices is the focus. While in China,Chinese consumers are more interested in the source of the products,and thus the location for pork production is recorded. In this review,we will discuss the Walmart pork traceability system in China.China is the world's largest pork importer and producer, with an an-nual pork consumption of 12.7 million tons ( Gale, 2017). Several scan- dals have occurred in China, challenging the public's perception of thequality and reliability or indicated origin of the pork products, such aswater-injected pork, or pork products contaminated with clenbuterol,a banned drug that causes pigs to shed fat ( Leng et al., 2019). For these reasons, Chinese consumers are eager to know the provenanceof the meat products, and the inspection information during the pro-cessing steps. However, due to the lack of regulation and quality inspec-tions, the source and the quality of most pork products are not easy tomonitor. Therefore, there is an urgent need to increase meat qualityand safety during the pork production process. Blockchain technologyhas the potential to improve pork safety by increasing the transparencyof the pork supply chain.The current pork traceability system implemented in China has beenvalidated using fresh-cut pork products. A diagram illustrating the cur-rent pork traceability system is shown in Fig. 5. The detailed description of the main steps is summarized below:A. Tracking factor identiﬁcation: theﬁrst step is to identify the factorfor traceability. This is likely to the critical control point in Hazardanalysis and critical control point (HACCP). At this early stage, thesource of the products or the inspection information during thepork processing line is the tracking identi ﬁcation point. B. Training: a special training has been provided by IT support to theemployees of the manufacturers in the pork pilot plant. This steptells the employees how to use the app or portable detection device,which includes data uploading, data scanning, data collecting, dataprooﬁng, etc.C. Pork processing: at this step, pigs in the slaughterhouse are
slaughtered. The inspection information is collected from the pigproviders at this stage. Then, the pigs are cut into different partsand pre-packaged into different products for end-user consumption.D. ID build-up: the geographical location information can be collectedby creating a vendor ID. For each item, the speci ﬁci t e mn u m b e r should be created, which is linked with product information, suchas production data and time, location, source, inspection data, etc.The amount of the same item is also recorded by applying thesame amount of code segment. In this case, each item will have a dif-ferent barcode number for tracking.E. First-connection to blockchain: then, when the products are proc-essed and ready for shipment, the barcode number for each productis recorded and linked with the vehicle. This step is the ﬁrst time at which product information is uploaded to the blockchain, whichprovides the location of the shipping information. In this case, theorigin or the source of the product is recorded.F. Second connection to blockchain: when the products are delivered tothe grocery stores, the location of the receiving stores will be recordedautomatically by GPS. This is the second time that the information isuploaded to the blockchain system, which will provide the receivingstore, the number of items delivered, and the delivery time.G. Selling and storage: the delivered pork is put in the storage room andlabeled for price. A special bar code is attached with each item en-abling the consumer to access all product information stored on theblockchain including processing and transportation information.H. Consumers: when the consumers purchased the pork, they can scanthe barcode on the item and access the product information via mo-bile device.5. Challenges5.1. How to manage the agriculture supply chain as a whole?The whole supply chain includes many participants and building agood connection between all of them is very challenging using
Fig. 5.Flow chart of Walmart pork traceability system by blockchain159 J. Xu et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 4 (2020) 153 –161conventional systems. Currently, the successful model built by Walmarthas received much attention and is being further developed. More workis needed before sufﬁcient connectivity between supply chain partici-pants is achieved. In this case, an international community should bebuilt to monitor or manage the participants and provide policies orguidance on the proper usage of blockchain technology.Another issue is the blockchain system built by different companiesor countries might not be compatible for data sharing with other dis-tinct blockchains. This will raise a challenge if a certain product hasbeen transported between countries using separate blockchains. Thus,issues exist regarding which country or company's blockchain systemshould be adopted as the central blockchain, or how information maybe transmitted between blockchains. Thus, how to make the wholeblockchain accessible for all sectors is hard to solve.5.2. How to ensure the data sets are accurate, open, and safe?The blockchain itself is trustless, however, the information thatgets recorded on the blockchain could be falsi ﬁed, so how the data that gets incorporated into the blockchain is ensured to be accurateis of critical importance. Currently, most of the data uploaded inthe blockchain is manually uploaded. However, there are very lim-ited measures in place to ensure this manually reported informationis valid.Currently, the data stored by blockchain is not completely open tothe consumers. In this case, the use of blockchain to track products ismore like a supplier self-inspection tool. That means, when out-breaks occur, the suppliers can use the data as a proof to provide tothe inspectors or governmental regulators. In this case, consumer-friendly scan systems should be created to make the data more ac-cessible to consumers. The consumer can use the scan function oftheir cell phone to trace the source of products of interest. No specialdevices are needed to get the origin or transportation data from theconsumer end.Concern of the manufactures. Once the data has been uploaded tothe blockchain, there is no way to change it. The consumers can checkthe information through the number stored in the blockchain. It de-pends on how the manufactures would like to be open to the con-sumers. For some big companies with suf ﬁcient regulations and management, it might be easy, but for some small-scale industries,which do not have good manufacturing practices, they might not bewilling to share all the information to the consumers.Moreover, the safety of transactions using capital currencies(e.g., non-crypto currencies) is still a major challenge. The systemmight be hacked by someone. Since there are no regulators or super-vision systems for blockchain system management, more work isneeded to improve the safety of the blockchain transaction systemin general.5.3. How to beneﬁtm o r ea g r i - f o o d s ?The current challenge facing blockchain systems is how to extendthese use cases to beneﬁt other products. Since different productshave different properties, and concerns of the consumers may be differ-ent for each distinct product. For example, for fresh fruits and vegeta-bles, the consumers might care more about the pesticide residuesinstead of their origin; for frozen seafoods, the consumers care moreabout their authenticity and provenance, and if they have been thawedor re-frozen during transportation; for high-quality fresh-cut meat, suchas Kobe beef, or high-value fruits, such as jackfruit or dragon fruits, thequality change during shipment is of great concern. In this case, moretracking factors should be identiﬁed according to the product types. Monitoring each of these different parameters will provide achallenge for the data uploader as well as the blockchain system.Training and technical issues might occur when dealing with otherfood properties.5.4. How to deal with pre-existing data?How to use the blockchain system to combine with the pre-existingdata is another challenge. Currently, each manufacture has their owndata system, which have large volumes of information on the detailsof the products. The current challenge for blockchain technology ishow to bridge the gap between local farms or manufacturers and uploadthe pre-existing data to the blockchain or cloud to create a largerdata set.Another beneﬁt of blockchain technology is its potential to transferthe gathered data to government regulatory platforms. This will helpthe government regulatory agencies perform a better job tracking, mon-itoring, and auditing the entirety of the food supply chain ( Tse et al., 2017). However, how can systems be built to ensure the manufacturersreport cases to the governmental systems or regulation systems byusing the blockchain system? This is even more challenging if the foodsafety regulation systems are different between local governments, orbetween local and national governments. The application programminginterface (API) should be built into the blockchain system to connect thepre-existing data from food providers and should be con ﬁgured to con- nect or report all the data into the governmental systems. In this case,
once the centralized data storage system has been built by the food sup-pliers, the API can connect to the different local governmental systems.Then, the different data from different suppliers can be linked togetherby blockchain. In this case, the food suppliers or manufacturers do nothave to report the case to the local government, since the blockchaincan behave like a middleman to transfer the data from food suppliersto the government.5.5. How to manage the extra cost?The core of the blockchain system is data collection and acquisition.Currently, the special ID code built for item identi ﬁcation will increase the cost of packaging. The price of barcode labels can be various and ifthe cost is too high, for some low-price products, it will be challengingto scale-up applications to all food products. The labeling machinemight need to be modiﬁed or re-installed toﬁt the special need of the barcode tag. For production lines without automation, the labor costfor attaching tags on products will be high. Also, the labor cost of man-ually scanning and recording barcodes, or the cost of automated scan-ning equipment and IT staff to support said equipment, may alsoincrease the cost. The cost of the sensors for temperature, humidity,or oxygen is quite expensive and this will increase the expenses aswell. The blockchain system should be further developed based ondifferent manufacturing systems and the extra cost will surelyarise, such as link build-up, speedand capacity of transactions, etc.The good news is that the blockchain system developed by Walmarthas been applied successfully in a n ut production line in Vietnam. The blockchain system can be applied in the canning and sealing sys-tem for tag attachment, without the need for buying new specializedequipment. All relevant product information is stored in the Vechainblockchain.6. Conclusions and future trendsThere is much excitement surrounding blockchain technology inboth the public and private sectors. Recently, there have been effortsto adopt blockchain technologies in the agri-foods area, yet there isstill a great deal of unrealized potential. Decentralized, distributedblockchain technology enables better agri-foods management with bet-ter traceability and transparency. Digitally tracking products from farmto consumer presents an opportunity for companies to then applyblockchain technologies to improve food safety and quality. However,many challenges, both technical and regulatory, remain to be solved be-fore more large-scale adoption of blockchain technology for a diverserange of agri-foods is realized.160 J. Xu et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 4 (2020) 153 –161CRediT authorship contribution statementJie Xu: writing the original draft, reviewing, and editingShuang Guo: consulting and editingDavid Xie: consulting and editingYaxuan Yan: drawingﬁguresAcknowledgmentNoﬁnancial support is used in this review. The authors declared thatno conﬂict exists.References
Armonk, N.Y., 2017.IBM Announces Major Blockchain Collaboration with Dole, Driscoll ’s, Golden State Foods, Kroger, McCormick and Company, McLane Company, Nestlé,Tyson Foods, Unilever and Walmart to Address Food Safety Worldwide.Bernama (2020). "Blockchain, direct to consumer communication can help uplift palmoil's image." fromhttps://www.theedgemarkets.com/article/blockchain-direct-con-sumer-communication-can-help-uplift-palm-oils-image . Feng, H., et al., 2020.Applying blockchain technology to improve agri-food traceability: areview of development methods, bene ﬁts and challenges. J. Clean. Prod. 121031. Gale, F., 2017.China’s Pork Imports Rise along with Production Costs (United States De-partment of Agriculture).Galvez, J.F., et al., 2018.Future challenges on the use of blockchain for food traceabilityanalysis. TrAC Trends Anal. Chem. 107, 222 –232. Gao, Z., et al., 2020.Real-time hyperspectral imaging for the in- ﬁeld estimation of straw- berry ripeness with deep learning. Arti ﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 4, 31 –38. Hay, D., 2018.INS Ecosystem (INS) Overview: Blockchain for the Grocery Supply Chain.Hejin, A., 2018.Albert Heijn and Refresco Make Orange Juice Chain Transparent.IBM, 2017. Maersk and IBM Unveil First Industry-Wide Cross-Border Supply Chain Solu-tion on Blockchain. press release,IBM.com, March 5. www-03.ibm.com/press/us/ en/pressrelease/51712.wss. IBM (2019). "IBM, Raw Seafoods Collaborate to Use Blockchain to Help Improve SeafoodTraceability and Sustainability While Addressing Fraud.".IBM (2020). "Farmer Connect Uses IBM Blockchain to Bridge the Gap Between Consumersand Smallholder Coffee Farmers." from https://newsroom.ibm.com/2020-01-06- Farmer-Connect-Uses-IBM-Blockchain-to-Bridge-the-Gap-Between-Consumers-and-Smallholder-Coffee-Farmers . JD.com (2018). "JD Ramps up Australian Imports with InterAgri Partnership on Pure BlackAngus Beef.".Jones, K., 2018a.FoodLogiQ Announces Blockchain Pilot Alongside Industry Leaders.Jones, K., 2018b.FoodLogiQ, Subway®/IPC, and GS1 US Join Forces to Present onBlockchain at National Restaurant Association ’s (NRA) Restaurant Innovation Summit in Dallas.Kamath, R., 2018.Food traceability on blockchain: Walmart ’s pork and mango pilots with IBM. The Journal of the British Blockchain Association 1 (1), 3712.Kaye, L., 2016. "Responding to food safety concerns, Walmart invests $25 million inChina." from.http://www.triplepundit.com/story/2016/responding-food-safety-con-cerns-walmart-invests-25-million-china/21896/ . Kshetri, N., 2018.1 Blockchain’s roles in meeting key supply chain management objec-tives. Int. J. Inf. Manag. 39, 80 –89. Lakhani, K., Iansiti, M., 2017.The truth about blockchain. Harv. Bus. Rev. 95 (1), 119 –127. Lawton, G., 2019.How Bumble Bee Is Using SAP Blockchain for Food Traceability.Leng, Y., et al., 2019.A method to detect water-injected pork based on bioelectrical im-pedance technique. Journal of Food Measurement and Characterization 13 (2),1341–1348.Lin, J., et al., 2018.Blockchain and IoT based food traceability for smart agriculture. Pro-ceedings of the 3rd International Conference on Crowd Science and Engineering.Matzembacher, D.E., et al., 2018. An integration of traceability elements and their impactin consumer’s trust. Food Control 92, 420 –429. Nestlé (2019). "Nestlé breaks new ground with open blockchain pilot.".OriginTrail (2018). "Utilizing Smart Sensors to Prevent Wine Fraud —OriginTrail's Pilot With TagItSmart.".Peters, A., 2017.In China, you Can Track your Chicken on-you Guessedit-the Blockchain.Q u ,X . - H . ,e ta l . ,2 0 0 7 .Studies on GIS based tracing and traceability of safe crop product inChina. Agric. Sci. China 6 (6), 724 –731. Scott, V.N., et al., 2009.Control ofSalmonellain low-moisture foods I: minimizing entry of Salmonellainto a processing facility. Food Prot. Trends 29 (6), 342 –353. Sokołowska, B., Nasiłowska, J., 2020.Controlling Spoilage and Pathogenic Microorganisms in Beetroot (Beta vulgaris) Juice by High Hydrostatic Pressure. Elsevier, Safety Issuesin Beverage Production, pp. 79 –104. Steiner, J., et al., 2016.Blockchain: The Solution for Transparent in Product Supply Chains.A white paper was written by Project Provenance Ltd.Talaviya, T., et al., 2020.Implementation of Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture for Opti- misation of Irrigation and Application of Pesticides and Herbicides (Arti ﬁcial Intelli- gence in Agriculture).Tama, B. A., et al. (2017). A critical review of blockchain and its current applications. 2017international conference on electrical engineering and computer science (ICECOS),IEEE.Tian, F. (2016). An agri-food supply chain traceability system for China based on RFID &blockchain technology. 2016 13th international conference on service systems andservice management (ICSSSM), IEEE.Tian, F., 2017.A supply chain traceability system for food safety based on HACCP,blockchain & internet of things. 2017 International Conference on Service Systemsand Service Management, IEEE.Tripoli, M., Schmidhuber, J., 2018. Emerging opportunities for the application of blockchain in the agri-food industry. FAO and ICTSD: Rome and Geneva. Licence:CC BY-NC-SA 3.Trust, I. F. "IBM Food Trust. A new era for the world's food supply.". from https://www. ibm.com/blockchain/solutions/food-trust . Tse, D., et al., 2017.Blockchain application in food supply information security. 2017 IEEEInternational Conference on Industrial Engineering and Engineering Management(IEEM), IEEE.Xu, J., 2019.Control ofSalmonellain Low-Moisture Foods: Thermal Death Kinetics and Mi-crobial Validation of Radio-Frequency Processes Washington State University.Zhang, B., et al., 2014.Principles, developments and applications of computer vision forexternal quality inspection of fruits and vegetables: a review. Food Res. Int. 62,326–343.161 J. Xu et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 4 (2020) 153 –161