BOOK REVIEWS
Review of books in the area of User Interface DesignUser interface design or user interface engineering is the design of computers,mobile communication devices, software applications, websites with the focuson the user’s experience and interaction. The goal of user interface design is to im-prove users experience with simplicity and efﬁciency while keeping the design ergo-nomically sound. In literature this phenomenon is known as ‘‘User CenteredDesign’’. The term user friendly is often used as a synonym for usability which de-notes the ease with which people can employ a particular tool or other human-made object in order to achieve a particular goal.The key beneﬁts of usability are increased user efﬁciency and productivity,reduced development costs and most importantly increased customer satisfaction.The improved interface would also tend to lower the time needed to perform nec-essary tasks. Usability is now recognized as an important software quality attri-bute, earning its place among more traditional attributes such as performanceand robustness. Indeed, various academic programs in Information technologyand software development around the globe focus on usability design andengineering.Here we review recently published popular books in the area of User InterfaceDesign.Helen Sharp, Yvonne Rogers and Jenny Preece, Interaction Design: BeyondHuman-Computer Interaction, Publisher: Wiley; 2 edition (March 23, 2007),ISBN-13: 978-0470018668Beyond Interaction Design is an important book for designing effective andcapable interfaces to software applications. The book provides a comprehensive
Peer review under responsibility of King SaudUniversity.doi:10.1016/j.aci.2010.12.001 Production and hosting by ElsevierApplied Computing and Informatics (2011) 9,7 9–82
King Saud University
Applied Computing and Informatics
www.ksu.edu.sawww.sciencedirect.com
look at the entire set of requirements involved with design. The authors show thatthere is much more to systems design than end-user requirements and CGI scripts.Effective HCI is a multi-disciplinary area including psychology, sociology, anthro-pology, information systems, and computer science. The book notes that there hasnever been a greater need for interactions designers and usability engineers to de-velop current and next-generation interaction technologies. To be successful in theinterface design game, programmers need a mixed set of skills, which is not an easytask.Interaction Design comprises 15 densely packed chapters that integrate all ofthe various cognitive, social, and other issues that are germane to interaction de-sign. Chapter 1 provides an overview of what makes for good and bad designs.Chapter 3 gets into the psychological aspect of HCI and looks at cognition andhow users interact with the systems they implement. None of the books makesfor easy reading, as the topics at hand are often multifaceted and complex.Chapter 6 deals with the process of interaction design and for the most part endsthe psychological approach, while Chapters 7 through 10 deal with the actualdesign of the system. The book has a number of real-world case studies, and alsoincludes interviews with various authorities on HCI.Ben Shneiderman, Catherine Plaisant, Maxine Cohen, Steven Jacobs, Designingthe User Interface: Strategies for Eﬀective Human-Computer Interaction - 5thedition, Publisher: Pearson /Addison Wesley 5th edition (2009), ISBN: 0-321-26978-0Designing the User Interface: Strategies for Effective Human-ComputerInteraction provides a comprehensive introduction to the dynamic ﬁeld ofhuman-computer interaction (HCI). An expanded author team brings unparal-leled industry and academic experience to this latest edition. Practical techniques,research-supported design guidelines, and a multitude of current examples andﬁgures illustrate good design principles and practices, effectively guiding readersthrough their ﬁrst HCI design projects.Covering just about every major HCI topic, from basic usability and designprocesses to design for mobile and social environments, this book offers a verybroad summary of the ﬁeld. It also introduces more advanced topics, such assearch interfaces and information visualization among others giving readers entrypoints into important trends.Steven Heim, The Resonant Interface: HCI Foundations for Interaction Design,Publisher: Pearson /Addison Wesley (January 1, 2008), ISBN: 978-0-321-37596-4In an age of ubiquitous computing it is essential that Interaction Design bebased on the rich foundation of HCI research and knowledge. The ResonantInterface does that and more. It moves beyond the traditional scope of human-computer interaction (HCI) and is based on the concept of active learning that80 Basit Qureshiintegrates theory and practice. The author reasons for using design standards andthe detailed consequences of poor design are backed up by research. He givesspeciﬁc recommendations for standards, such as typefaces, point size, label andcaption styles. He explains and uses good short hand throughout the book foritems as ‘‘signal’’ versus ‘‘noise.’’ This is handy to quickly distinguish betweenthings that are good/favorable/communicative/useful compared to things thatare interfering/obstructive/not useful. This is an excellent book for anyone want-ing to understand the ‘‘why’’ of good screen design and then learn the ‘‘what.’’Laura Leventhal, Julie Barnes, Usability Engineering: Process, Products &Examples, Publisher: Prentice Hall; 1 edition (May 3, 2007), ISBN-13: 978-0131570085This comprehensive introduction to usability engineering takes a project-basedapproach to the development process. The book provides detailed coverage of thefundamentals without unnecessary depth or breadth, focusing readers on under-standing the goals and processes of usability engineering. It also covers the entireusability engineering lifecycle, emphasizing select techniques and methodologies;illustrates the user interface development process with examples from a med-ium-scale development example.Each chapter’s introduction describes key design concepts that are often misun-derstood, such as affordances, visual hierarchy, navigational distance, and the useof color. These give a deeper understanding of why the patterns work, and how toapply them with more insight.Matt Jones, Gary Marsden, Mobile Interaction Design, Publisher: Wiley(February 10, 2006), ISBN-13: 978-0470090893Mobile Interaction Design concentrates on developing interfaces and deviceswith a great deal of sensitivity to human needs, desires and capabilities. The bookpresents key interaction design ideas and successes in an accessible, relevant way.It provides ideals and techniques which will enable designers to create the nextgeneration of effective mobile applications. Critiques current mobile interactiondesign (bloopers) to help designers avoid pitfalls. Design challenges and workedexamples are given to reinforce ideas. Also it discusses the new applications andgadgets requiring knowledgeable and inspired thinking about usability and design.The book has informal case studies of actual product design methods used byNokia, HP and other companies.Barbara Ballard, Designing the Mobile User Experience, Publisher: Wiley (April16, 2007), ISBN-13: 978-0470033616Designing the Mobile User Experience provides the experienced product devel-opment professional with an understanding of the users, technologies, devices,BOOK REVIEWS 81design principles, techniques and industry players unique to the mobile and wire-less space. The author describes the different components affecting the user expe-rience and principles applicable to the mobile environment, enabling the reader tochoose effective technologies, platforms, and devices, plan appropriate applicationfeatures, apply pervasive design patterns, and choose and apply appropriateresearch techniques. This book also provides WAP design advice and detailed ad-vice for FlashLite, UIOne, SVG, tat, Java, and other environments.Basit Qureshi
College of Computer and Information Systems, Prince Sultan University, Saudi Arabia E-mail address:qureshi@psu.edu.saAvailable online 16 December 201082 Basit Qureshi