ORIGINAL ARTICLE
Clear and present danger: Interventiveand retaliatory approaches to cyberthreats
Danilo V. Bernardo*
Db2P Research Institute, Bathurst Street, Sydney, NSW 2000, AustraliaReceived 3 May 2014; revised 14 September 2014; accepted 23 November 2014
Available online 4 December 2014
KEYWORDSCybersecurity;Cyber warfare;Cyberattacks;Interventive;Retaliatory;Intelligence sharingAbstract Organizations, including governments, have been attempting toaddress cyber threats for years by deploying technologies (e.g., security perimeterdefences). These technologies are overarching policies and regulations designed toencourage resilient cybersecurity strategies that safeguard not only data, but alsoproperties and human lives. Implementing these technologies is one thing, butensuring their effectiveness is another. Lack of effectiveness and inability to satisfyexisting government requirements and approaches in dealing with cyber threatsand attacks are likely to continue until better approaches are employed. Theseapproaches may emanate from effective regulations, intelligence gathering andsharing, and good security practices to workable alliances and interactions withother communities. This work is proposing approaches based on the premise thatcybersecurity strategies must adhere to and be guided by the effectiveness criteria:that is, intervention and retaliatory approaches should be employed and utilized onthe basis of their empirically demonstrated effectiveness to combat cyber threats.
ª2014 The Author. Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of King SaudUniversity. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/3.0/ ).
*Tel.: +61 475 195 839.E-mail address:bernardan@gmail.com. Peer review under responsibility of King Saud University.
Production and hosting by ElsevierApplied Computing and Informatics (2015) 11, 144–157
Saudi Computer Society, King Saud University
Applied Computing and Informatics
(http://computer.org.sa)www.ksu.edu.sawww.sciencedirect.com
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.aci.2014.11.0022210-8327ª2014 The Author. Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of King Saud University.This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/3.0/ ).1. Introduction
In achieving effective cybersecurity (http://belfercenter.ksg.harvard.edu/events/6230/intelligence_in_the_private_sector.html, 2014), as in employing effectivecyber warfare preparation and governance, the importance of quickly recognizingcyber threats concerns the most basic elements of their identiﬁcation, recognition,and employment of appropriate courses of action.
It is a challenge for policy makers and practitioners to effectively determinepotential threats as early as possible. Hence, when cyber strategies ( http:// belfercenter.ksg.harvard.edu/events/6230/intelligence_in_the_private_sector.html,2014; Bernardo and Chua, 2013) are examined, there is an ideal opportunity toobserve the means through which organizations, governments in particular,become challenged in adjusting to the expectations of their stakeholders underthe conditions of alliances, cooperativeness, socio-demographic values, and otherpractical inﬂuences.
In these conditions, the opportunity must be explored to develop processes andapproaches that are survivable long-term. These conditions, however, do notreﬂect effective governance and, most of all, effective strategies in dealing withcyber threats, because these conditions are: ﬁrstly, inﬂuenced by practitioners’ lackof effective interventive approach that falls short of compliance with the regula-tions and exercise of better security mechanisms; and secondly, found to be lack-ing comprehensive and effective retaliatory approach to launch mitigationstrategies (e.g., counterattacks, etc.).
Attaining viable strategies to address cyber threats and attacks remains a chal-lenge (http://belfercenter.ksg.harvard.edu/events/6230/intelligence_in_the_private_sector.html, 2014; Bernardo and Chua, 2013) due to lack of concentration ontailoring approaches to address appropriate actions to cyber threats: (a) key butuninformed practitioners are too conservative in meeting their agenda to carryout their own strategies on dealing with cyber threats; (b) another is the slownessof legitimate governments to move beyond mere identiﬁcation of cyber threats byintroducing enforceable regulation and actions, and viable solutions to curb andaddress them, and to fully recognize the importance of alliances with industriesand other governments to have uniﬁed and effective approaches to combat cyberthreats.
Central to the process of this phenomenon is the general perception that trivi-alizes cyber threats and cyber security practices and the kind of impact that led tothe lack of effective approaches. Consequently, practitioners become more reluc-tant to stably carry out their responsibilities and raise their level of awareness inorder to minimize threats.
Theory and research into cyber security should therefore shift across variousperspectives, and not be limited to: (1) retaliatory and interventive approaches,(2) compliance to existing regulations, (3) multi-way process and contemporaryview of cybersecurity as fundamentally an emergent necessity of interaction andCyber threats as a clear and present danger 145alliances in which governments and industries jointly develop stronger cyber-polic-ing and intelligence-sharing capabilities, and (4) appropriate statistical methods toachieve effective threat detection and sustainable solutions.
Interventive approach is introduced, addressing, in particular, the underlyingpractitioners’ low level of awareness and their limited intelligence sharing, in termsof capabilities and access, and knowledge in dealing with cyber threats on a largescale, and implementing speciﬁc courses of action in given circumstances (duringthe onset of conﬁrmed cyber attacks).
Methods for developing retaliatory approach, on the other hand, is reviewedand investigated. These include ways to detect and subsequently derail the sourceof the cyber attacks, and to execute defence mechanisms that can lead to infra-structure shutdown to halt further attacks and minimize damage to properties.These mechanisms can include terminating communication services across regio-nal domains (e.g., DNS-domain name services) that provide the means to channelcollaborative cyber attacks.
This work captures the importance of effective cybersecurity strategies from thestandpoint of statistical representations (Berger and Wolpert, 1988) to symbolic interactionism (Blumer, 1969; Bernardo and Smith, 1994), which represents a shifting relationship between practitioners and governments attempting to ﬁt theirlines of agenda together to develop effective and interactive cybersecuritystrategies.
This paper is organized as follows: Sections2provide an overview of criteria andmethods, Sections3 and 4highlight discussions, andSection 4concludes this work.
2. Guide to developing cybersecurity approaches
Competing requirements (e.g., regulations, technology, intelligence, goals, etc.)produced effectively advance, control-capable approaches, which can be used toguide practitioners.
These approaches form strategies on cybersecurity that can assist and enablepractitioners to select and employ consistent determination relevant to their infra-structure, and which have been found to be effective for the desired outcome(Bernardo et al., 2009; Bernardo and Chua, 2013). These approaches should con-tain components that refer to the requirements that can be systematically variedwithin the intervention process, and which are capable of reliable deploymentacross organizations. To meet these requirements, concepts and variables mustbe clearly identiﬁed, deﬁned, and linked to empirical referents.
Statements of interventive and actions of retaliatory approaches must containexplicit predictions of the relationship between the inputs (processes), tacticalcourses of action and the desired outcomes (e.g., minimization of threats and val-idations of enforced mechanisms, and introduction of strike back mechanisms).
Interventive statements and actions of retaliation of this nature serve threeindispensable functions: (1) they facilitate and deliberate selection of intelligence146 D.V. Bernardowork by practitioners of a given approach from a number of possible alternativeson the basis of its applicability to a particular situation and infrastructure; (2) theyprovide the framework within which their empirical validity can be tested – that is,they enable practitioners to design cybersecurity architectures and infrastructuresin which the effectiveness of both interventive and retaliatory assumptions can berigorously investigated and validated; and (3) they facilitate tactical countermea-sures and counterattacks, whenever possible, to halt any efforts of derailmentand curtailment of services solely dependent on cyber-technology.
These criteria must be met if the creation of both approaches is to contributemeaningfully to knowledge capable of guiding practice in cybersecurity. Of thesecriteria, two basic ones will be used for classifying both approaches: (1) whetherthe interventions and retaliation – the independent variables or components –are empirically denotable and can be reliably enacted by practitioners and, there-fore, replicated in the subsequent review and in practice and (2) the extent to whichthe outcomes against which the effectiveness of interventions and counter-attacksis assessed are measured with sufﬁcient validation to allow reliable replication toother organizations across the geographical locations.
2.1. Expected outcome
The utility of differentiating the outcomes of the deﬁned interventive and retalia-tory approaches depends on the speciﬁc goal set in a particular effort to addresscyber threats. The attainment of maximum outcomes (MO) denotes the extentto which the effort is successful and determines the organization’s readiness tocombat cyber threats, whereas intermediate outcomes (IO) are those deemed tobe necessary preconditions of the maximum outcomes.
This work relies on the efﬁcacy of interventions and retaliations that legiti-mately targets either intermediate or maximum outcomes. However, the evalua-tion effort concerns the extent to which problems are addressed successfullythrough interventive and retaliatory approaches; therefore maximum outcomesmust be included as dependent variables.
The central focus in this work is concerned where existing efforts appropriatelyaddress the different needs for effective practice, and the analysis in this work isguided by the goal set in the preceding sections. Existing works and practices par-ticularly in major industries (e.g., telecommunications, transportation and electric-ity), though limited, have been analyzed to assess the relative emphasis on cybersecurity research, which can contribute to the community of practice on the effec-tiveness of both approaches and the relationship between replicability of theseapproaches. With some countries or organizations lacking cybersecurity prepared-ness and guidelines, this work focuses on available roadmaps and collected datasets available, instead of government-restricted classiﬁed information.Cyber threats as a clear and present danger 1472.2. Sampling
It is important to select industries (e.g., academe, governments, and private ﬁnan-cial sectors) and provide an assessment period to reasonably represent the primarycurrent thrusts of cybersecurity research. The practices are focused on organiza-tions across the US, UK, Asia Paciﬁc (especially on those recently targeted bycyber attacks, such as Philippines, South Korea, Vietnam, the US, and Australia).This work builds on initially collected data from 3 identiﬁed organizations(Bernardo, 2012, 2013; Bernardo and Chua, 2013) with regional presence in theUK, US and Asia, and focuses on one recently completed survey on risks andthreats on cloud computing. The choice of the work speciﬁcally on cloud comput-ing in this sample can be considered more opportunistic rather than monolithic.Given the recent popularity of cloud computing across governments and industriesand due its identiﬁed risks, the choice has been alluded to the beneﬁts of under-standing the current trends and of further underscoring the importance of cyberthreats across many infrastructures.
To observe a situation where cyber threats are suspected to be taking place, it isimportant to deﬁne that central to the interaction where these occur is the signif-icant process of identifying and differentiating cyber attacks from the otherattacks (i.e., localized) that occur on a certain period; considering the impact ofthese attacks into account; and responding by acting according to the existingcourses of action.
The outcome of this observation inﬂuences the development of cybersecurityapproaches. However, this observation should be supported by statistical repre-sentations to provide empirical evidence. These further solicit and substantiatethe development of approaches that require resources.
2.3. Statistical representations
There has been a continuing thrust to identify and quantify attacks, which consid-ered incidents to determine appropriate mitigation strategies to obfuscate them.Organizations developed and improved their courses of action, including identiﬁ-cation and frequencies of incidents to determine if they are localized or if these areconsidered large-scale cyber attacks. These plans include statistical representa-tions, which are tailored to the organizations and practitioners of attacks, as dis-cussed in 3.1.1 (Bernardo, 2012, 2013; Bernardo et al., 2009; Bernardo and Chua,2013).2.3.1. Ranking method
di¼Xmj¼1
jrij/C0cjjði¼1;...;nÞ:ð1Þ148 D.V. Bernardowheren= individuals/organizations andm= risk areas. Letrijbe the rank of the ith organization on thejth risk (i=1 ,...nandj=1 ,...m)(Bernardo, 2013; Bernardo et al., 2009).
Ifcjis the group rank for thejth risk, then theith organization’s absolute dis-tance from the group ranking.
Data collected in the following works (Bernardo, 2012, 2013; Bernardo andChua, 2013) were also relevant to supply components for representation in Eq.(1). Results fromBernardo (2012, 2013)are found onTable 1.
Additionally, we look at the works (Bernardo, 2012, 2013; Bernardo and Chua,2013; Bernardo and Hoang, 2012; Bernardo and Smith, 1994 ) surveyed across organizations in different industries using basic frequency analysis and correlationmethod (FC).2.3.2. Frequency and correlation method (FC)
/C15f(i) frequency of incidentsiin given space./C15u(a) correlation of frequency of incidents identiﬁed assuming speciﬁc numberof attacks isa(is a numerical representation of attacks).
/C0uðaÞ¼R06i6nfðiÞpði/C0aÞð2Þ
P(x) is frequency of incidents identiﬁed across a given period tas example we
selected one organization adopting cloud computing.
The data (Table 1) are gathered through a case survey conducted (http:// belfercenter.ksg.harvard.edu/events/6230/intelligence_in_the_private_sector.html,2014). Full results of this particular work are found onAppendix.
The ranking of each threat is gathered from the result of the survey conductedwith organizations with 35,000 clients based in Melbourne, Australia, Hong Kong,and Malaysia (Bernardo, 2012, 2013; Bernardo et al., 2009; Bernardo and Chua,2013).
From Eq.(1), the ranking is organized from survey returned.
Thereof,
Sequence = CR1CR2CR4CR6
Table 1Common threats of cloud computing.CR11 Uncoordinated change controls and misconﬁgurations .095CR22 Inadequate Access Control Management .090CR33 Single point of failure/coding .082CR44 Single tier security .080CR55 Poor IP pool management .073CR66 Loose data distribution .070CR77 Cross tenancy workloads .065CR88 Unmonitored/unassigned resources .058CR99 Lack of conﬁguration information and uniformity .052CR1010 Inherent risks of cloud computing .045CR1111 Environmental/calamities .033Cyber threats as a clear and present danger 149Number of attacks = 3
Frequency of each threat is found onTable 1and summarized inFig. 1.
Note that CR1 ranks the highest as shown in the ﬁgure, with CR 11 ranking thelowest.
From Eq.(2)so here,
uðaÞ¼0:095pð1/C0aÞþ0:090pð2/C0aÞþ0:082pð3/C0aÞþ0:080pð4/C0aÞ þ0:073pð5/C0aÞþ0:070pð6/C0aÞþ0:065pð7/C0aÞþ0:058pð8/C0aÞ þ0:052pð9/C0aÞþ0:045pð10/C0aÞþ0:033pð
11/C0aÞ
Most plausible sequence based onu
–a=2 ,u(a)=.0410–a=3 ,u(a)=.0575 CR1CR2CR4CR6–a=4 ,u(a)=.0252–a=5 ,u(a)=.0190
The threat value is 3 which is CR4 (Single Tier Security).
We arrived to CR4 since we set an initial value of 0 when determining u.
The result highlights that threat is localized albeit the accuracy of this descrip-tion is depending on the frequencies and threat’s criticality. Criticality is deﬁned byBernardo (2012) and Bernardo and Chua (2013).
00.020.040.060.080.1
Uncoordinated change 
…Inadequate Access …Single point of …Single /g415er securityPoor IP pool managementLoose data Distribu/g415onCross tenancy workloadsUnmonitored/unassigne…
Lack of conﬁgura/g415on 
…
Inherent risks of Cloud …Environmental/Calami/g415es1234567891011 CR1CR2CR3CR4CR5CR6CR7CR8CR9CR10CR11
Figure 1Ranking and Correlation.150 D.V. BernardoCriticality¼cost/C3Freq of Threat sþcost/C3mitigationð3Þ
Eq.(3)represents the cost involved when a threat arises and the costs to mitigate
it. This therefore does not necessarily means that the higher the frequency of athreat occurring, the least likely it is localized.
Threats are considered large scale when they have high frequencies and withhigh costs, that is – the criticality and impact are considered high by practitioners.2.3.3. Practical application: Stochastic matrix and Markov process ( Brooks, 1998)
The next method is validating threats. Given that the ﬁrst state validation of a sus-pected threat, (Bernardo and Chua 2013; Bernardo, 2012).
I (TCP/IP Threats validation) 30%
II (Application threats validation) 20%
III (Others/Users/Environmental threats validation) 50%
We need to determine the rate of the second, third, and fourth validations,assuming that the transition probabilities for the given intervals are presentedby the matrix
A¼To I To II To III0:80:10:1 From I0:10:70:2 From II0:00:10:9 From III
Remark.A square matrix with nonnegative entries and row sums all equal to 1 iscalled stochastic matrix.Atherefore is a stochastic matrix. A stochastic process(Berger, 2006; Brooks, 1998) for which the probability of entering a certain statedepends only on the last state occupied (and on the matrix governing the process)is called a Markov process (Bernardo and Chua, 2013; Bernardo and Smith, 1994). Note: Markov Process is a prerequisite example in understanding how theapproach can be beneﬁcial in identifying threats and generating courses of action.
Solution.From matrixAand the ﬁrst state we can compute the second state:
I (Network related threat validation) 0 :8/C330þ0:1/C320þ0:50¼26½%/C138 II (Localized threat validation) 0 :1/C330þ0:7/C320þ0:1/C350¼22½%/C138 III (Other threat validation) 0 :1/C330þ0:2/C320þ0:9/C350¼52½%/C138:
The sum is 100%, as it should be. We present this in matrix form. Let the col-umn vector x denote the ﬁrst stat. Thus,Cyber threats as a clear and present danger 151xT= [30 20 50]. Letydenote the second state.
Then
yT¼xTA¼½30 20 50/C1380:80:10:10:10:70:200:10:9
¼½26 22 52/C138
Similarly, for the third and fourth we get the state vectors, as you may verify,
zT¼yTA¼ðxTAÞA¼xTA2¼½23:02 3:25 3:8/C138u
T¼zTA¼ðxTA2ÞA¼xTA3¼½20:72 23:92 55:36/C138:
In the second state, the network related threat validation will be 26%, the localized
threat validation is 22% and the other threat validation 52%. For the third statethe corresponding ﬁgures are 23%, 23.2%, and 53.8%. For the fourth state, theyare 20.72%, 23.92% and 55.36%.
The above example can assist in achieving reasonable estimations for how val-idations should be performed in future threat identiﬁcation using basic Markovprocess. The inputs (Brooks, 1998; Chen et al., 2007; Congdon, 2003; Goldstein,2006; O’Hagan and Forster, 2004) and assumptions to be accurate, they mustbe based on data collected on ﬁeld.
2.4. Summary
The methods highlight essential approaches in determining ways to effectivelyidentify and address cyber attacks. This means that from the point of view of the-ory, practice, and method, cyber attacks may be observed and validated throughdirect observation; one may also experience it, comparing by gauging the existingcriteria, using the techniques and methods presented, and benchmarking themagainst the others as the attacks continue to unfold over time.
The initial observation of the recent cases is the discovery of lack of effectivestrategies, technologies, and resources to carry out effective cybersecurity. Thisobservation is made as a result of static, one-way observation on incidents thatreportedly occurred. One-way observation means observing circumstances withlimited interaction (e.g., lack of active data gathering, of active participation ofthose involved, and of consistent monitoring and review, to name a few). Dealingwith reports of cyber attacks must therefore involve a dynamic multi-way complexprocess of interactions and intelligence sharing between those who are tasked totake courses of action and those who are directly affected by them and thosewho deﬁned governance and compliance (e.g., emergency response group, govern-ment funded groups, and industry).
It is not uncommon to view such interactions as interpretation of reality ofeffective collaboration through strong alliances. These interactions and interpreta-tions, however, can break down at any stage throughout the process. Therefore, it152 D.V. Bernardois important that uniﬁed approaches (e.g., a combination of approaches onTable 4) are developed through acceptable methods.
Statistical representations certainly provide ways to deﬁne and determineimportant inputs for the use of methods and processes in determining threat pro-ﬁles for practitioners. These are important to collectively introduce sustainableapproaches to deal with cyber threats.
Low awareness of cyber threats and lack of satisﬁable and uniﬁed approachesto address them stem from lack of collaboration, compliance to regulations,and, most importantly, methods to developing common strategies.
3. Discussion and framework
Trends in the development of conceptual framework to detect cyber threats haveparalleled those in speciﬁc regions (Bernardo et al., 2009; Bernardo and Smith,1994) where threats have occurred and/or are continuing. In recent years, theproblem of cyber threats has become an identiﬁable issue for many organizationsthat can be addressed by the appropriate intervention.
The problem of cyber threats can be drawn from a cultural or anthropologicalreason, or just merely lack of political will to invest resources to develop effectiveintervention strategies.
This work proposes conﬂict-enculturation (awareness and adaptation of envi-ronment susceptible to attacks) as a model of tackling cyber threats through alli-ances, intelligence sharing, participation and interaction. The major thrust of thisapproach has been the deep concern for the analysis of meaning, in which govern-ments consider the use of cyber warfare and community involvement to advancecybersecurity and adapt to the demands of peoples’ dependency on the Internet.
It is therefore important to raise fundamental questions, such as: (1) Have socialand cultural behaviors of both governments and industries toward cyber threatsplayed an important role in deﬁning interventive and retaliatory approaches toaddress cyber threats? (2) What approaches speciﬁc to governments are requiredto tackle these threats? (3) How do governments and industries achieve outcomesthat meet their respective cybersecurity agenda?
These questions are best conducted in longitudinal studies across industries. Aperiodic analysis of trends may assist in creating methods that raise awareness andaddress concerns on how cyber threats can be quickly identiﬁed, validated, andresolved. Nonetheless, securing cyber-infrastructure remains a challenge to many,especially in an era of cyber threats.
To introduce a brief review of the substance underlying the perspectives oncyber threats,Table 3highlights a partial framework of the ingredients for deter-mining cyber threats. There are similarities between each approach, illustratingtheir efﬁcacy.
As presented earlier in Section2, the approaches onTable 2highlight the attain- ment of maximum outcomes (MO), which denotes the extent to which the effort isCyber threats as a clear and present danger 153successful and determines the organization’s readiness to combat cyber threats,whereas intermediate outcomes (IO) are those deemed to be necessary precondi-tions of the maximum outcomes.
Surveys and studies focusing on the efﬁcacy of interventive and retaliatoryapproaches may legitimately target either intermediate or maximum outcomes.
To consider the proposed approaches, it is best to frame a practical architec-ture, as part of the overall goal of achieving maximum outcomes (MO).
As a guide,Tables 5 and 6highlight the critical components deﬁned in this workfor the creation of a security strategy. The components include, but are not limitedto, the selected methods discussed in Section2.
Speciﬁc components for retaliatory approach (Table 6) focus on countermea- sures and counterattacks where cyber attacks have been mounting – highlightingTable 2Values ofu.Au(a)Au(a)A(a)Au(a) 0 .0482 3 .0575 6 .0660 9 .02671 .0364 4 .0252 7 .0442 10 .06352 .0410 5 .0190 8 .0202 11 .0262
Table 3High level framework.Cyber threats – more of social andpolitical and less of a technical failure Interaction/participation and cyber threatsanalysis multi-way process Cyber threats motivate initial perspectiveswhich are culturally adaptive Relationship between governments extendedto group dynamics Induced propensities, attitude and values towardregulations and diﬀering demographical andcultural perspectivesCommunity functions as joint agentsinﬂuencing individual response in the contextof cyber threats Interact with various contexts with disregardfor exercising sensitivity and respect Strategies constructed through interactionamong participants to channel and exchangeviewpoints to raise awareness of existing cyberthreats
Table 4General approaches.Approaches Outcomes Maximum/ intermediate Alliances, collaboration Practice based participation IOInterventive approach Practice based approach, tailored solution, security architecture MOCyber security community of practice Speciﬁc requirements of cyber big data a security MOIntegration of government regulations oncyber security strategies into industries(particularly those in public utilities, e.g.,transportation, electricity, water andcommunications to name a few)Establishment of community of practicerelated to focusing on cyber threats. MO/IOCollaborated eﬀorts addressing issues withpractical solutions and long term outcomes154 D.V. Bernardothe need for governments and organizations to form better approaches to controland minimize damage.
The trends of alliances encourage participation and interaction that providegreater access to many experts and tools. Awareness of the issue, of course, canbe achieved and raised through tailored approaches. Some organizations, how-ever, have limited opportunities to forge alliances that encourage participation,but engaging with other communities is an important step to developing interac-tion that can result in feasible approaches.
4. Conclusion
The introduction of satisﬁable approaches ensures that there exists an ongoingprocess encompassing all of the broadly identiﬁable stages within the deﬁnedcybersecurity strategy.Table 6Speciﬁc components under retaliatory approach.Stages and components Determination for the oﬀensive actionsDEFENCES Strike back capabilities, system tracking and review ISOLATION Blocking sources, shutting systems and core infrastructures SURVEILLANCE Review attacks and determine courses of actions ie., intervention from agencies, advicefrom regulatorsTable 5Speciﬁc components under interventive approach.Stages and components Determination for security architectureValidation method (Bernardo, 2012) Accurately detect anomalies postimplementation of systems that supportinfrastructures Type post implementationSDL (Bernardo, 2013) Microsoft’s’ Security Development Lifecycle (SDL) has set a standard for software andproduct development. This describes asecurity requirement deﬁnition at the initialphase of the projects, one that involves ananalysis of threat modeling at the systemsdesign phase, a static program analysis at theimplementation phase, and the penetrationtest at the test phase (Bernardo, 2013)Type all cycle
Ranking method (Bernardo, 2013; Bernardoet al., 2009; Bernardo and Chua, 2013)/correlationPrioritizing risks to ensure appropriatemitigations put in placeType PRE and POSTOther tailored components (Securitytechnology, governance and processes) Technical architecture focusing on integratingviable security mechanisms and technologies.Governance and StandardsCyber threats as a clear and present danger 155The important element in contemporary cybersecurity, however, is the fact thatcyber threats are not solely a technical phenomenon, but also a social one, result-ing from an act of behavior that stems from cultural or political action that occursthroughout a cyber attack.
Integrating viable interventive and retaliatory approaches within the cybersecu-rity strategy through alliances, technology, processes, rules of engagement, intelli-gence gathering and sharing, statistical methods, participation and interactionwith communities of practice (where their use may signiﬁcantly achieve concomi-tant economic and political risks that will not derail national security and inﬂictdamage to one’s assets) remains an important case for organizations to consider,especially today when cyber threats are prevalent.
The increasingly complex threats to organizations, furthermore, highlight theneed to explore the use of intelligence by industries to develop the proposedapproaches. According to the recent work (http://belfercenter.ksg.harvard.edu/events/6230/intelligence_in_the_private_sector.html, 2014 ), governments are unable to share classiﬁed information about threats. As a result, practitionersare creating their own intelligence capabilities within their organizations. Thework (http://belfercenter.ksg.harvard.edu/events/6230/intelligence_in_the_private_sector.html, 2014), which involved corporate leaders, strongly raises questionsabout the need of industry intelligence gathering and sharing, such as, ‘‘How docompanies organize to obtain it, and how can the government support them?’’‘‘Is this a growing trend?’’ ‘‘How do companies collaborate in intelligence?’’‘‘How do the governments view private intelligence efforts?’’ ‘‘How do privateand government intelligence entities relate to one another?’’ and ‘‘What does thisall mean for the future of intelligence work?’’
Future work will be focused on exploring these compelling questions.
Appendix A
Code Rank Risks/threats (2011/year) Likelihood Impact Frequencies Counter measures ActionCR11 Uncoordinatedchange controls andmisconﬁgurationsModerate M .095 Applicable governance,control and auditingAvoidCR22 Inadequate AccessControl ManagementModerate M .090 Role-based accesscontrolReduceCR33 Single point offailure/codingModerate M .082 Service downtime ReduceCR44 Single tier security Likely H .080 Predicate and homomorphic encryptionsAvoidCR55 Poor IP poolmanagementModerate M .073 Lock step approach inIP assignment andre-assignmentReduce(continued on next page)156 D.V. BernardoReferences
Berger, J.O., 2006. The case for objective Bayesian analysis. Bayesian Anal. 1, 385–402 .
Berger, J.O., Wolpert, R.L., 1988. The Likelihood Principle. The Institute of Mathematical Statistics, Haywood,CA
.
Bernardo, D.V., 2012. Securing the cloud, dispelling fears: ways to combat climate change ‘Network-BasedInformation Systems (NBiS), 15th International Conference, 26–28 Sept. 2012, pp. 787–793.
Bernardo, D.V., 2013a. Utilizing security risk approach in managing cloud computing services. 15th InternationalConference Network-Based Information Systems (NBiS), Sept, 2013.
Bernardo, D.V., Chua, B.B., 2013. Random validation and fault detection method in systems implementations.13th International Conference on Intelligent Systems Design and Applications (ISDA).
Bernardo, D.V., Hoang, D., 2012. Security risk assessment: toward a comprehensive practical risk management.Int. Inf. Comput. Sec. 5 (2), 77–104
.
Bernardo, J.M., Smith, A.F.M., 1994. Bayesian Theory. Wiley, New York .
Bernardo, D.V., Chua, D.B., Hoang, D., 2009. Quantitative security risk assessment: An empirical method. IEEECISIM2009 Proceedings.
Blumer, H., 1969. Symbolic Interactionism: Perspective and Method. Prentice-Hall Inc., NJ .
Brooks, S.P., 1998. Markov Chain Monte Carlo Method and its application. J. R. Stat. Soc. Ser. (The Statisticia)47 (1), 69–100
.
Chen, T.Y., Huang, D., Tse, T.H., Yang, Z., 2007. An innovative approach to tackling the boundary effect inadaptive random testing. In: Proceedings of the 40th Annual Hawaii International Conference on SystemSciences, p. 262a.
Congdon, P., 2003. Applied Bayesian Models. Wiley, Chichester, UK .
Goldstein, M., 2006. Subjective Bayesian analysis: principles and practice. Bayesian Anal. 1, 403–420 .
http://belfercenter.ksg.harvard.edu/events/6230/intelligence_in_the_private_sector.html (accessed 10.02.14).
O’Hagan, A., Forster, J.J., 2004. Bayesian Inference, 2nd ed., Vol. 2B, Edward Arnold, London.Appendix A(continued)CR66 Loose datadistributionModerate M .070 Speciﬁc data ownershipand storage managementReduceCR77 Cross tenancyworkloadsModerate M .065 Platform attestation,ensuring CSP meetsSLA/OLAReduceCR88 Unmonitored/unassigned resourcesLikely H .058 Applicable governance,control andauditingAvoidCR99 Lack of conﬁgurationinformation anduniformityUnlikely L .052 Eﬀective dependencymap for eachresource/tenantReduceCR1010 Inherent risksof cloud computingModerate M .045 Virtual private cloudat the premium rate,segregatinglogical and physicalinfrastructuresAvoidCR1111 Environmental/calamitiesUnlikely L .033 Applicable mitigationstrategies, and governance ,disaster andbusiness continuityprogramsReduceCyber threats as a clear and present danger 157