Artiﬁcial  Intelligence  in the Life Sciences  3 (2023) 100070 
Contents  lists available  at ScienceDirect  
Artiﬁcial  Intelligence  in the Life Sciences  
journal  homepage:  www.elsevier.com/locate/ailsci  
Conformal  eﬃciency  as a metric  for comparative  model  assessment  
beﬁtting  federated  learning  
Wouter  Heyndrickx  a , ∗ , Adam  Arany  b , Jaak Simm  b , Anastasia  Pentina  c , NoéSturm  d , 
Lina Humbeck  e , Lewis  Mervin  f , Adam  Zalewski  g , Martijn  Oldenhof  b , Peter Schmidtke  h , 
Lukas  Friedrich  i , Regis Loeb b , Arina  Afanasyeva  j , Ansgar  Schuﬀenhauer  d , Yves Moreau  b , 
Hugo  Ceulemans  a 
a Janssen Pharmaceutica  NV, Turnhoutseweg  30, Beerse 2340, Belgium 
b KU Leuven, ESAT-STADIUS,  Kasteelpark  Arenberg 10, Heverlee 3001, Belgium 
c Machine Learning Research,  Research & Development,  Pharmaceuticals,  Bayer AG, Berlin 10117, Federal Republic of Germany 
d Novartis Institutes for BioMedical  Research,  Novartis Campus, Basel CH-4002,  Switzerland  
e Medicinal  Chemistry  Department,  Boehringer  Ingelheim  Pharma GmbH & Co. KG, Birkendorfer  Str. 65, Biberach an der Riss 88397, Federal Republic of Germany 
f Molecular  AI, Discovery  Sciences, R&D, AstraZeneca,  Cambridge,  UK 
g Amgen Research (Munich)  GmbH, Staﬀelseestraße  2, Munich 81477, Federal Republic of Germany 
h Discngine,  79 Avenue Ledru Rollin, Paris 75012, France 
i Global Research & Development,  Merck KGaA, Frankfurter  Strasse 250, Darmstadt  64293, Federal Republic of Germany 
j Modality Informatics  Group, Digital Research Solutions,  Advanced  Informatics  & Analytics,  Astellas Pharma Inc., 21, Miyukigaoka,  Tsukuba-shi,  Ibaraki 305-8585,  
Japan 
a r t i c l e i n f o 
Keywords:  
Small molecule  drug discovery  
MELLODDY  
QSAR 
Federated  multitask  learning 
Applicability  domain 
Uncertainty  a b s t r a c t 
In a drug discovery  setting, pharmaceutical  companies  own substantial  but conﬁdential  datasets.  The MELLODDY  
project developed  a privacy-preserving  federated  machine  learning  solution  and deployed  it at an unprecedented  
scale. Each partner built models for their own private assays that beneﬁtted  from a shared representation.  Estab- 
lished predictive  performance  metrics such as AUC ROC or AUC PR are constrained  to unseen labeled chemical  
space and cannot gage performance  gains in unlabeled  chemical  space. Federated  learning  indirectly  extends 
labeled space, but in a privacy-preserving  context,  a partner cannot use this label extension  for performance  
assessment.  Metrics that estimate  uncertainty  on a prediction  can be calculated  even where no label is known. 
Practically,  the chemical  space covered with predictions  above an uncertainty  threshold,  reﬂects the applicabil-  
ity domain of a model. After establishing  a link to established  performance  metrics,  we propose the eﬃciency  
from the conformal  prediction  framework  (‘conformal  eﬃciency’)  as a proxy to the applicability  domain size. A 
documented  extension  of the applicability  domain would qualify as a tangible  beneﬁt from federated  learning.  
In interim assessments,  MELLODDY  partners  reported  a median increase  in conformal  eﬃciency  of the federated  
over the single-partner  model of 5.5% (with increases  up to 9.7%). Subject to distributional  conditions,  that eﬃ- 
ciency increase  can be directly interpreted  as the expected  increase  in conformal  i.e. low uncertainty  predictions.  
In conclusion,  we present the ﬁrst indication  that privacy-preserving  federated  machine  learning  across massive 
drug-discovery  datasets  from ten pharma partners  indeed extends the applicability  domain of property  prediction  
models. 
1. Introduction  
The partial virtualization  of the drug discovery  process  is widely con- 
sidered  as one of the more promising  avenues  to improve  time and cost 
eﬃciencies  in the pharmaceutical  industry,  including  small-molecule  
drug-discovery  modeling  by means of machine  learning  techniques  [1] . 
In this context,  machine  learning  models are typically  built based on pro- 
∗ Corresponding  author. 
E-mail address: wheyndri@its.jnj.com  (W. Heyndrickx)  . prietary  and experimental  compound  activity  datasets  that are directly  
available  to a single-partner.  As the quantity  and diversity  of data is a 
central factor in the quality and usefulness  of machine  learning  models,  
an appealing  approach  is the collaboration  between  competing  pharma-  
ceutical  companies  and research  groups through  multipartner  machine  
learning.  Competing  pharmaceutical  companies  have built up distinct  
chemical  libraries  with limited overlap  [2–4] . For instance,  comparing  
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ailsci.2023.100070  
Received  2 December  2022; Received  in revised form 3 March 2023; Accepted  10 March 2023 
Available  online 1 April 2023 
2667-3185/©2023  The Authors.  Published  by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND  license 
( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/  ) W. Heyndrickx, A. Arany, J. Simm et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in the Life Sciences 3 (2023) 100070 
the Bayer and Schering  compound  libraries  yielded  a mere 1.5% of du- 
plicates,  largely traceable  back to external  vendor chemistry,  and 6.8% 
of shared scaﬀolds  [4] . A company’s  library will typically  drive experi- 
mental exploration  of its own distinct  chemical  space, in its biology  of 
interest.  Any models trained  on this experimental  data will reﬂect such 
distinct  chemical  space. Modeling  approaches  that can leverage  com- 
pound activity  datasets  from various  companies,  have the potential  to 
also cover complementary  regions  of chemical  space. However,  com- 
pound libraries  are at the core of the intellectual  property  of a pharma-  
ceutical  research  organization  and as such highly conﬁdential.  There- 
fore, only privacy-preserving  machine  learning  approaches  can be con- 
sidered,  which avoid directly  sharing  compounds,  activity  data, assay 
metadata  and predictions  among partners  but instead  leave those stored 
securely  on the server of their respective  owners  behind a ﬁrewall.  
The current  state of collaborative  multipartner  learning  is focused  
on single-task  learning.  A ﬁrst example  can be found in MAIP (Malaria  
Inhibitor  Prediction)  where multiple  partners  coordinated  to create a 
single consensus  model for the eﬀect of small drug-like  compounds  on 
malaria,  by exchanging  the naïve Bayes classiﬁers  and without  reveal- 
ing any conﬁdential  training  data [ 5 , 6 ]. In another  example,  relating  to 
brain tumor image segmentation,  federated  machine  learning  [7] was 
employed  to leverage  sensitive  medical  images across institutions,  with- 
out exchanging  these images [8] . Only the model updates  were sent to a 
secure server for aggregation  and harmonization  during every training  
round [9] . 
Multitask  learning  expands  on single-task  learning  by simultaneously  
learning  several tasks [ 10 , 11 ]. Multitask  modeling  tends to boost perfor- 
mance for binary classiﬁers  in the small-molecule  drug-like  space [12–19]
 . A beneﬁcial  eﬀect on the predictive  performance  is understood  to 
require  some degree of overlap  in the compound  space, in combination  
with correlation  between  the activities  in this space [16] . In a collabora-  
tive perspective,  single-task  learning  implies  the disclosure  of an inter- 
est and data investment  in the common  task. For collaborative  multitask  
learning  on the other hand, this does not necessarily  hold. Nevertheless,  
collaborative  multitask  learning,  as opposed  to single-task  learning,  is 
considerably  less well explored  in drug discovery.  
The context  of the current  paper is the Machine  Learning  
Ledger Orchestration  for Drug Discovery  (MELLODDY)  project 
( https://www.melloddy.eu/  ), which combines  multitask  learning  with 
privacy-preserving  federated  learning,  to unprecedentedly  train on 
data warehouse  scale datasets  of ten major pharmaceutical  companies  
(i.e., Amgen,  Astellas,  AstraZeneca,  Bayer, Boehringer  Ingelheim,  GSK, 
Janssen,  Merck, Novartis,  and Servier)  [20] . In this multitask  context,  
all partners  can train their own, private tasks, unbeknownst  to the other 
participants.  During training,  model updates  are exchanged  securely  and 
synchronized  [21] . Thus, the model is informed  by compound  activities  
at other pharma  partners,  aiming for a more generalized  and predictive  
model. To assess any such beneﬁt,  traditional  performance  metrics  such 
as the area under the receiver  operating  characteristic  curve (AUC ROC) 
or the area under the precision-recall  curve (AUC PR) are calculated.  
These require  known activities  (labels:  ‘active’/‘inactive’),  hereby limit- 
ing their use to parts of chemical  space where the evaluating  partner  has 
known activities.  Additional  beneﬁt from federated  learning  can how- 
ever be expected  in the chemical  space of the other partners.  But their 
compounds  and activities  remain hidden from the evaluating  partner.  
Here, uncertainty  metrics,  which do not require  knowledge  of activities,  
oﬀer a practical  approach  to evaluate  such gains of federated  learning.  
One family of uncertainty  metrics  originates  from the spread in 
predictions  across a family of individual  models.  Ensemble-based  ap- 
proaches  such as the random  forest algorithm  [22] and others [23] pro- 
duce a spread in scores across base estimators  that can be consid-  
ered as a measure  of the uncertainty.  But already  the single-scalar  out- 
put from a neural network  binary classiﬁer  can be interpreted  proba- 
bilistically,  often after calibration  of these outputs  by aligning  the ex- 
pected error with the output by means of an independent  calibration  
set. Conformal  prediction  (CP) is a model-agnostic  framework  for assess- 
ing the conﬁdence  in predictions  [24–27]  . In the binary classiﬁcation  
setting it states whether  the prediction  can be conﬁdently  assigned  to 
one of the two classes,  or not. In the latter case, assignment  is to both 
or neither  of the classes,  indicating  high uncertainty  on the prediction.  
The applicability  domain  can be deﬁned  as the chemical  space in which 
the model makes predictions  with suﬃcient  reliability  [ 28 , 29 ], imply- 
ing suﬃcient  relevant  support  in the training  data for the prediction.  
As such, the fraction  of single class label predictions  was proposed  as a 
metric of the size of a model’s  applicability  domain.  This fraction  was 
termed as the eﬃciency  from the conformal  prediction  framework  (fur- 
ther referred  to as conformal  eﬃciency),  in line with common  deﬁnition  
[ 27 , 30–33 ]. 
In summary,  this work establishes  the conformal  eﬃciency  as appli- 
cability  domain  metric and applies it to intermediate  federated  models 
from the MELLODDY  project,  hereby addressing  the question  whether  
such federated  models have an extended  applicability  domain  compared  
to local models.  
2. Methods  
2.1. Training  data 
Each participating  pharma  partner  committed  in the range of 
100,000  –2 million  compounds  and 350,000–35  million  labels to the 
Year 2 MELLODDY  dataset.  This amounts  to the bulk of their data 
warehouse  volumes  of absorption,  distribution,  metabolism,  excretion,  
and toxicity  (ADMET)  and bioactivity  data. In total, modelling  in- 
volved more than 100,000  tasks across all partners.  MELLODDY-TUNER  
[34] is a data preparation  package  developed  as part of the MELLODDY  
project.  Its main features  are: (i) SMILES  standardization  based on RD- 
Kit v2020.09.1.0  [35] ; (ii) binary molecular  ﬁngerprint  calculation  (in 
this work extended-connectivity  ﬁngerprints;  ECFP6,  folded to 32k bits) 
[36] through  the GetMorganFingerprint  function  in RDKit; (iii) replicate  
aggregation  according  to assay type; (iv) ﬁltering  of tasks that do not 
meet the task size or fold distribution  quora for inclusion  in training  and 
evaluation  datasets;  (v) splitting  of the dataset in folds according  to a se- 
lected folding scheme,  in this case based on the scaﬀold  network  [37] as 
implemented  in RDKit [38] . This approach  enables  diﬀerent  partners  in 
the federated  learning  exercise  to assign compounds  to folds consistently  
without  having to exchange  any sensitive  structural  information  [39] . 
Five folds were created,  out of which three were used for training,  one 
for validation,  and one as test fold. To avoid possible  bias in evaluation,  
acyclic and phenylic  compounds  were assigned  to the training  set; (vi) 
binarization  of the activity  values and addition  of auxiliary  tasks with 
shifted thresholds  compared  to the main task of interest,  while still al- 
lowing for user-deﬁned  expert values. From any single assay, at most 
ﬁve tasks were derived  by varying  the threshold  resulting  in diﬀerent  
class balances.  To avoid any dominance  of assays with a higher number  
of derived  tasks during training,  MELLODDY-TUNER  produces  a task 
weighting  ﬁle for further machine  learning  which assigns 1/N weights  
to all tasks, with N being the number  of derived  tasks from that assay 
[40] . Full details on the data preparation  are described  elsewhere  [20] . 
2.2. Modeling  
Single-partner  and multipartner  model training  occurred  on the fed- 
erated platform  to ensure maximal  comparability  and consisted  of two 
distinct  types. The so-called  Phase 1 models were trained  on three folds, 
while the Phase 2 models were trained  on four folds. Phase 1 models 
had a validation  fold available  and were used to determine  the optimal  
hyperparameters.  Thereafter  the Phase 2 models were trained  on four 
folds with optimal  hyperparameters  from Phase 1 [21] . Hyperparame-  
ter optimization  for the single-partner  models was performed  through  
grid search with the parameters  shown in Table S1, and by evaluat-  
ing AUC PR. Hyperparameter  optimization  for the multipartner  mod- 
2 W. Heyndrickx, A. Arany, J. Simm et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in the Life Sciences 3 (2023) 100070 
els was through  grid search with diﬀerent  hyperparameters,  such as a 
higher network  size to accommodate  the increase  of data compared  to 
the single-partner  setting.  For both the single-partner  and multipartner  
models,  the same dataﬁles  outputted  by MELLODDY-TUNER  were used. 
The network  architecture  was a feedforward  multilayer  perceptron  us- 
ing SparseChem  v0.8.2 [41] and minimizing  the binary cross entropy  as 
loss function  through  stochastic  gradient  descent.  The implementation  
on the federated  platform  is described  elsewhere  [21] . The test set was 
partitioned  into two subsets of distinct  scaﬀolds  and comparable  size, 
with one of the two selected  as calibration  set, and the other as evalu- 
ation set. Platt scaling [42] was performed  in a post-processing  step by 
ﬁtting a logistic  regression,  as implemented  in scikit-learn  [43] , to the 
logits and true labels. Predictive  probabilities  p(y| x ) were transformed  
to predictive  information  entropies  H by: 
𝐻 [ 𝑝 ( 𝑦 |𝒙 ) ] = − ∑
𝑦 ∈𝑌 𝑝 ( 𝑦 |𝒙 ) log 2 𝑝 ( 𝑦 |𝒙 ) 
with x being the input vector and y a class from the set of classes Y. 
Hence high entropy  corresponds  to high uncertainty  in the class predic- 
tion when predictive  probabilities  are far from 0 to 1. 
2.3. Conformal  eﬃciency  
In the binary classiﬁcation  setting,  a prediction  with a conformal  
predictor  can have four distinct  outcomes:  a prediction  set containing  
both class labels {0,1}, none of the class labels {}, or a single class label 
{0} or {1}. The metric of conformal  eﬃciency  is deﬁned  as the fraction  
of single class label predictions:  
CE = 𝑛 { 1 } + 𝑛 { 0 } 
𝑛 { 1 } + 𝑛 { 0 } + 𝑛 { } + 𝑛 { 0 , 1 } = 𝑛 { 1 } + 𝑛 { 0 } 
N 
With e.g. n {1} indicating  the number  of single active class label com- 
pounds,  and N the total number  of predicted  compounds  for that task. 
Higher values can be a consequence  of two eﬀects: (i) having a larger 
separation  between  the two classes,  lowering  the instances  attributed  
to both classes,  or (ii) having fewer instances  not attributed  to either 
class. A positive  diﬀerence  in conformal  eﬃciency  ( ΔCE) between  the 
multipartner  and single-partner  model is associated  with uncertainty  
reduction.  Inductive  Mondrian  CP is applied,  where the prediction  for 
each class is estimated  separately  using an individual  calibration  set 
per class [ 26 , 30 , 44 , 45 ]. The code is based on an implementation  from 
Toccaceli  [46] . 
The conformal  prediction  framework  provides  formal guarantees  on 
error rates, by calibrating  a nonconformity  function,  most often based 
on the predictive  probability  outputted  by the model. Exchangeability  is 
assumed  between  calibration  and test set, which is related to but slightly  
weaker  than the independently  and identically  distributed  (IID) condi- 
tion. In situations  where the test set less closely resembles  the calibra-  
tion set, the assumption  of exchangeability  might not hold, and no for- 
mal statements  on the error rates can be made. As is discussed  below, 
such a drop in exchangeability  is not sudden  and abrupt,  but gradual  
upon moving  away from the calibration  set, similar to a type of ero- 
sion or wear, and does not necessarily  eliminate  the usefulness  of the 
conformal  prediction  framework  and its quantities  such as eﬃciency.  
An appropriate  choice of nonconformity  function  is essential  for a con- 
formal predictor.  Ideally,  the nonconformity  scores are related to the 
uncertainty  in the class prediction.  Since the single-scalar  output from 
a neural network  binary classiﬁer  already  is indicative  of the error rate 
and hence the uncertainty,  basing the nonconformity  function  on the 
model’s  output is a natural  choice. Concretely,  the nonconformity  func- 
tion here was the positive  and negative  predictive  probability  of the 
active class p(y = 1| x ) for the inactives  and actives,  respectively.  It can 
be noted that any function  is potentially  applicable  as nonconformity  
function.  Even an uninformative  constant  function  independent  of the 
input can be selected,  but in this case the guaranteed  error rates will be trivially  achieved  by producing  prediction  sets containing  both class la- 
bels {0,1} regardless  of the input [47] . Hence, a proper nonconformity  
function  is required  to achieve  a reasonable  eﬃciency.  
Irrespective  of the measure  of uncertainty,  it should be noted that 
there are two sources  of uncertainty:  aleatoric  uncertainty  arises from 
the inherently  stochastic  nature of the data (e.g., a compound  with ac- 
tivity close to the activity  threshold),  while epistemic  uncertainty  arises 
from the lack of similar data [48] . Diﬀerent  uncertainty  measures  per- 
tain to diﬀerent  aspects  of uncertainty.  While the spread in model out- 
puts from an ensemble-based  model measures  the epistemic  uncertainty,  
the output itself is related to both epistemic  and aleatoric  uncertainty  
[ 48 , 49 ]. As the nonconformity  function  in this work was based on the 
model output,  the conformal  eﬃciency  will reﬂect both epistemic  and 
aleatoric  uncertainty.  
The conformal  eﬃciency  per task is calculated  as metric, and sub- 
sequently  the diﬀerence  between  the multipartner  and single-partner  
setting was made to obtain the ΔCE ( Fig. 1 ). Only tasks of suﬃcient  
size, class balance,  and predictive  quality were considered.  Concretely,  
a size quorum  of minimally  25 actives and inactives  in the calibration  
set was imposed.  For Phase 1 models this corresponded  to the valida- 
tion fold, while for Phase 2 models this corresponded  to approximately  
half of the test fold. In addition,  tasks meeting  this quorum  but failing 
to achieve  an AUC ROC of 0.6 or higher on the calibration  set were 
dropped  from the analysis.  Only tasks of main interest  were consid-  
ered. Any auxiliary  tasks, including  those resulting  from thresholding  
schemes,  were similarly  dropped.  A signiﬁcance  level ( 𝜀 ) correspond-  
ing to an expected  maximal  error rate of 0.05 and hence a conﬁdence  
level of 0.95 was selected  unless stated otherwise.  Higher eﬃciencies  
are typically  observed  at higher signiﬁcance  levels such as 0.20 [47] . 
In a practical  drug discovery  setting,  where false positives  can be costly 
due to subsequent  unsuccessful  experimental  validation,  lower signiﬁ- 
cance levels such as 0.05 are preferable  since these will typically  push 
models to more conservative  behavior  by increasing  n {0,1} and decreas-  
ing n {1} [ 26 , 44 ], leading  to higher conﬁrmation  rates (albeit lower than 
the conﬁdence  level) [50] . 
2.4. Datasets  for conformal  eﬃciency  exploration  
For exploring  the relationship  between  the conformal  eﬃciency  and 
the predictivity,  three datasets  were used. The ﬁrst two datasets  were 
created  by splitting  the test fold in two parts (termed  ‘1/2 test‘ and ‘2/2 
test’) and preventing  scaﬀolds  based on the scaﬀold  network  [37] to 
occur in both parts simultaneously.  A third dataset (termed  ‘unseen’)  
was created  by selecting  compounds  that were withheld  from the MEL- 
LODDY  dataset,  and compounds  that were generated  after the composi-  
tion of the MELLODDY  dataset.  Only the scaﬀolds  not already  occurring  
in the MELLODDY  dataset were retained.  So, the latter dataset contains  
compounds  that are, from a scaﬀold  point of view, novel to the model. 
2.5. Datasets  for uncertainty  estimation  
Table 1 shows an overview  of the datasets  used for uncertainty  es- 
timation.  Several  datasets  are designated  as unlabeled,  indicating  that 
no activity  data was available  for these compounds.  On the other hand, 
the labeled  type indicates  that the compound-task  combinations  carried 
labels derived  from experimental  measurements.  
Regarding  the labeled  datasets,  ‘Training  folds 1–3 ′ , ‘Validation  fold’, 
and ‘Test fold’ resulted  from the ﬁve-fold  split of the internal  MELLODDY  
dataset from the individual  pharma  partners,  respectively.  Only labeled  
compound-assay  pairs were included  in this dataset,  allowing  model 
training  and calculation  of performance  metrics  requiring  labels. Any 
unlabeled  data points for compounds  in these folds were excluded  from 
these datasets  (but these compounds  were eligible  for sampling  to com- 
pose unlabeled  datasets,  see below).  For Phase 2 models,  the validation  
fold was part of the training  data, and the evaluation  was carried out on 
half of the test fold, with the other half used for calibration.  
3 W. Heyndrickx,  A. Arany, J. Simm et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence  in the Life Sciences 3 (2023) 100070 
Fig. 1. Schematic  of the conformal  eﬃciency  metric calculation.  
Table 1 
Overview  of datasets  used for uncertainty  estimation.  
Dataset Index Size (# compounds)  Selection  Source Type Median number of set ECFP bits 
Training fold 1 (labeled compound-assay  pairs) §1 Large ∗ All Internal Labeled Partner-dependent  
Training fold 2 (labeled compound-assay  pairs) §2 Large ∗ All Internal Labeled Partner-dependent  
Training fold 3 (labeled compound-assay  pairs) §3 Large ∗ All Internal Labeled Partner-dependent  
Validation  fold (labeled compound-assay  pairs) §4 Large ∗ All Internal Labeled Partner-dependent  
Test fold (labeled compound-assay  pairs) §5 Large ∗ All Internal Labeled Partner-dependent  
Compounds  in training folds§ 6 10,000 Randomly  sampled Internal Unlabeled  Partner-dependent  
Compounds  in validation  fold§ 7 10,000 Randomly  sampled Internal Unlabeled  Partner-dependent  
Compounds  in test fold§ 8 10,000 Randomly  sampled Internal Unlabeled  Partner-dependent  
ExCape-ML[19]  9 10,000 Randomly  sampled External Unlabeled  68 
ChEMBL 25 - MELLODDY-TUNER[34]  10 10,000 Randomly  sampled External Unlabeled  69 
DUD-E[54]  11 10,000 Randomly  sampled External Unlabeled  68 
SCUBIDOO[57]  12 9994 All External Unlabeled  63 
Commercial  catalog 1 ‡ 13 5309 All External Unlabeled  61 
Commercial  catalog 2 ‡ 14 10,000 Randomly  sampled External Unlabeled  64 
DrugSpaceX[58]  15 10,000 Randomly  sampled External Unlabeled  78 
FDA-approved  small-molecule  drugs[55,56]  16 3981 All External Unlabeled  53 
‡ Source is undisclosed.  
§See methods  section for additional  details. 
∗ Exact size in terms of number of compounds  diﬀers between  the partners  but substantially  exceeds 10,000 in all cases. 
Regarding  the unlabeled  datasets,  a variety of external  and internal  
datasets  was assimilated  in order to evaluate  the models’  uncertainty,  
as shown in Table 1 . For each of these unlabeled  datasets,  a 10,000-  
molecule  sub-sample  was selected,  unless there were less molecules  
available,  in which case no sampling  was done, and the full dataset se- 
lected. The collection  of datasets  aimed to cover a wide chemical  variety,  
while guaranteeing  the property  of drug-likeness.  
The public dataset ExCape-ML  [19] combines  a number  of published  
libraries  such as PubChem  [51] in an eﬀort to consolidate  the publicly  
available  bioactivity  data. The ChEMBL  25 [52] dataset was prepared  by 
the MELLODDY  consortium  and released  through  MELLODDY-TUNER  
[34] . 
The DUD-E (Directory  of Useful Decoys,  Enhanced)  dataset contains  
commercially  available  compounds  from ZINC [53] , which are suitable  
as decoys derived  from an active ligand in docking  experiments  against  
a speciﬁc  target [54] . Here the 10,000 compounds  were drawn from 
the decoys for the ‘diverse’  set of targets consisting  of AKT1, AMPC, 
CP3A4,  CXCR4,  GCR, HIVPR,  HIVRT,  and KIF11. It can be mentioned  
that although  ligand-based  machine  learning  approaches  with the DUD- 
E dataset would be problematic  due to the decoys being selected  as 
maximally  dissimilar  to the targets’  known ligands  [54] , here merely 
the predictions  for other targets and assays are of interest.  
The library labeled  ‘FDA-approved  small-molecule  drugs’ contains  
all small-molecule  drugs from the DrugCentral  public resource  [ 55 , 56 ]. 
Data extraction  was performed  in September  2019. The ‘Commercial  catalog  1 and 2 ′ datasets  were obtained  from undis- 
closed commercial  vendors  and contain  drug-like  compounds  typically  
used in early screening.  
In addition  to these datasets  containing  existing  external  chem- 
istry, an attempt  was made to include  novel chemistry  that exists 
only virtually  but is still synthetically  tractable.  SCUBIDOO  is an ex- 
ample of such a dataset where ∼8000 existing  building  blocks were 
combined  with 58 robust organic  reactions  commonly  employed  in 
drug discovery,  resulting  in 21 million  virtual molecules.  Here the 
‘S’ dataset was used, containing  9994 molecules,  which constitutes  a 
small but representative  sample of the full dataset [57] . Another  ex- 
ample is the DrugSpaceX  database  which has been created  by apply- 
ing expert-deﬁned  transformations  such as bioisostere  replacements,  
ring opening/closing,  homologization  or linker replacements  to 2215 
approved  small molecule  drugs, resulting  in over 100 million  com- 
pounds.  The 10,000 selected  compounds  were sampled  from the ‘sam- 
ple set’ (S) containing  937,230  molecules  after a ﬁrst transformation  
step [58] . 
Internal  libraries  were also included  into the analysis,  which origi- 
nate from each of the pharma  partners.  While some of these compounds  
are known in the public space, the majority  is presumed  to exclusively  
form part of the internal  library and is subject to privacy  concerns.  The 
compounds  in the training,  validation  and test fold ( Table 1 ) were hence 
a set of internal  compounds  partitioned  through  the fold splitting  tech- 
nique. 
4 W. Heyndrickx, A. Arany, J. Simm et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in the Life Sciences 3 (2023) 100070 
While there may be some degree of overlap  with the internal  MEL- 
LODDY  datasets  for these unlabeled  datasets  (e.g., publicly  available  
compounds  may be part of the internal  library or may even belong to 
the training  or validation  set), this was not expected  to contribute  signif- 
icantly to the results due to the small overlap  expected  between  public 
and proprietary  datasets  and the sparsity  of the labeled  activity  ma- 
trix (far below 1%). Indeed,  predictions  on the unlabeled  datasets  are 
dense, i.e. across all tasks, while the predictions  on the labeled  datasets  
are sparse, since a prediction  is only generated  where there is an ac- 
tual label available.  The degree of identical  overlap  of the unlabeled  
datasets  with the internal  MELLODDY  datasets  in the 32k bit descriptor  
space was investigated  by three pharma  partners,  and the ﬁndings  were 
in line with expectations:  (i) the FDA-approved  small-molecule  drugs 
were clearly most highly overlapping  with the internal  library,  suppos-  
edly due to their use as reference  compounds;  (ii) the virtual libraries  
(SCUBIDOO,  DrugSpaceX)  had very low overlap  (but nonzero);  and (iii) 
the other external  datasets  were in-between  these two extremes.  
3. Results  
3.1. Outline 
This work addresses  the question  whether  federated  models have 
an extended  applicability  domain  as measured  through  the conformal  
eﬃciency  compared  to local models.  To this end, the following  steps 
were undertaken:  
1) The behavior  of conformal  eﬃciency  as uncertainty  metric was in- 
vestigated,  contrasted  with other uncertainty  metrics,  and found to 
behave intuitively.  
2) It was shown that conformal  eﬃciency  on a task level, even in sce- 
narios most challenging  the exchangeability  assumption,  still corre- 
lated with performance  metrics  requiring  labels. Hence, it can be 
argued that the uncertainty  from conformal  eﬃciency  was justiﬁed.  
3) This correlation  broke down under similar conditions  for ΔCE, how- 
ever the task-aggregated  ΔCE maintained  its direction.  
4) The task-aggregated  ΔCE was applied  to the local and federated  
model and revealed  lower uncertainty  and hence an extended  appli- 
cability  domain  for the latter. This result was conﬁrmed  with ΔPlatt- 
scaled entropy.  
3.2. Comparison  of uncertainty  metrics 
In this section,  the choice for selecting  the conformal  eﬃciency  over 
other, established  uncertainty  metrics  is elaborated  upon, by demon-  
strating  some key ﬁndings,  without  therefore  embarking  on an exten- 
sive benchmarking  study. In the spirit of transparency  and reproducibil-  
ity, calculations  were performed  on public datasets  with code that was 
made publicly  available.  The metrics  included  single model approaches,  
where predictive  probabilities  can be used directly  as input for the non- 
conformity  function  of the conformal  predictor  or the calculation  of the 
predictive  entropy.  In case of predictive  entropy,  the eﬀect of calibra-  
tion by Platt scaling is investigated.  Ensemble-type  approaches  consider  
uncertainty  metrics  based on the spread of multiple  predictive  prob- 
abilities,  such as the variance  of the predictive  probabilities  and the 
information  gain (IG; also known as mutual information)  [ 59 , 60 ]. 
Both variance  and IG are established  methods  to estimate  the un- 
certainty,  but in the studied  setting these uncertainty  metrics  exhibited  
overconﬁdence.  Indeed,  Fig. S1 demonstrates  that, counter-intuitively,  
the uncertainty  of these metrics  decreased  with distance  from the train- 
ing set. The overconﬁdence  in predictions  on out-of-domain  data points 
of neural networks  (including  networks  with rectiﬁed  linear unit (ReLU) 
non-linearities)  has been observed  elsewhere)  [ 61 , 62 ] and deeper anal- 
ysis falls outside  the scope of this paper. In contrast,  the predictive  en- 
tropy exhibited  the expected  behavior  of increasing  uncertainty  under 
the same conditions,  as did the conformal  eﬃciency  (Fig. S2). To estimate  the robustness  of the uncertainty  metrics,  their behav- 
ior was investigated  under changing  model conditions,  such as training  
data volume  and hidden layer size, inﬂuencing  the regularization  of the 
model. A clearly overtrained  model might produce  predictive  probabil-  
ities close to 0 and 1, indicating  low uncertainty,  while a model with 
excessive  regularization  might produce  predictive  probabilities  close to 
0.5. Fig. S3 demonstrates  this behavior.  By varying  the size of the hid- 
den layer in a single-layer  network  for a public benchmark  dataset,  
entropy  was high at very small network  sizes ( < 5) for predictions  in 
both labeled  and unlabeled  space, reﬂecting  higher uncertainty.  It then 
dropped  sharply  with increasing  layer sizes, indicating  very low uncer- 
tainty. Regarding  the training  set size, larger training  sets presumably  
extend the chemical  space covered  by the model, resulting  in a lower 
uncertainty  on a common  test set. However,  such an eﬀect was not 
observed  for the uncalibrated  entropy.  For the largest networks,  only 
the smallest  training  set of 100 training  samples  displayed  somewhat  
higher entropy  values compared  to the other training  set sizes. Apply- 
ing calibration  to the predictive  probabilities  through  Platt scaling did 
eﬀectively  address  this overconﬁdence.  Also, the Platt-scaled  entropy  
favorably  did not display  a strong dependency  on the degree of regular-  
ization through  the hidden layer size, and when more training  data was 
involved,  a lower uncertainty  is observed,  aligned  with expectations.  
Calibration  to estimate  class probabilities  through  the conformal  pre- 
diction framework  had a similar eﬀect on the uncertainty  estimation  as 
calibration  via Platt scaling.  No pronounced  dependency  on the degree 
of regularization  through  the layer size was found and adding training  
data reduced  uncertainty  as expected  through  higher eﬃciency.  These 
ﬁndings  underline  the beneﬁcial  eﬀect of calibration,  either through  the 
conformal  predictor  framework,  or Platt scaling,  when comparing  pre- 
dictive probabilities  from two distinct  models.  
Finally,  both conformal  eﬃciency  and the Platt-scaled  entropy  show 
favorable  characteristics  such as (i) a relative  insensitivity  to a wide 
range of hyperparameter  selections,  (ii) an expected  behavior  when 
moving  away from the training  set, and (iii) an expected  behavior  in 
relation  with the amount  of data added. In this work, the conformal  ef- 
ﬁciency  was selected  due to its ﬂexibility  as distribution-free  method  
and the interest  conformal  prediction  has attracted  in the industry  in 
the context  of small molecule  activity  modelling  [ 30–32 , 63 ]. 
3.3. Conformal  eﬃciency  
The metric of eﬃciency  is deﬁned  as the fraction  of single class label 
predictions,  ({0},{1}).  Such single class label predictions  are consid-  
ered to signal conﬁdence  of the model as one of both class assignments  
is substantially  more likely than the other. On the other hand, predic- 
tion sets with none ({}) or both labels ({0,1}) constitute  low conﬁdence  
and high uncertainty.  In the current  study, most of the modelled  tasks 
generated  high uncertainty  prediction  sets containing  both labels, while 
empty prediction  sets were absent. 
Decreases  in uncertainty  measured  by ΔCE between  the multipartner  
and single-partner  model suggest  better generalization  of the multipart-  
ner model to some regions  outside  a partner’s  chemical  space. However,  
a decrease  in uncertainty,  albeit a positive  sign, does not necessarily  im- 
ply an increase  in predictive  performance.  In other words, decreases  in 
uncertainty  might not be justiﬁed.  To address  this point, the relationship  
between  the conformal  eﬃciency,  and more established  performance  
metrics  that require  labels was explored  from both a theoretical  and 
empirical  perspective.  
First, a theorical  relationship  between  the conformational  eﬃciency  
and the recall (TPR) and speciﬁcity  (TNR) was established  and illus- 
trated in Fig. 2 . This treats a single typical task, with low signiﬁcance  
level. Three regions  along the x-axis can be observed,  delimited  by q n 
and q p . These are the quantiles  associated  with the thresholds  for nega- 
tive and positive  class label predictions,  respectively,  over all classes.  
As such, 0 < q < q n contains  single inactive  predictions  {0}, and the 
negative  eﬃciency  equals the width of the area. 1 > q > q p contains  single 
5 W. Heyndrickx, A. Arany, J. Simm et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in the Life Sciences 3 (2023) 100070 
Fig. 2. Relationship  between  the recall (TPR) and speciﬁcity  (TNR) on one 
hand, and the conformal  eﬃciency  on the other. Stylized  representation  of a 
typical case at a low signiﬁcance  level ( 𝜀 ), for one modelled  task. It should be 
noted that realistic speciﬁcity  and recall curves will not be smooth nor symmet-  
ric (see Fig. S5 for a numerical  example  and the provided  code for generation).  
q n and q p are the quantiles  associated  with the thresholds  for negative  and pos- 
itive class label predictions,  respectively.  
active predictions  {1}, and the positive  eﬃciency  equals the width of 
this area. The remaining  area, q p < q < q n , contains  both class label pre- 
diction sets {0,1}. The total eﬃciency  is the sum of the positive  and 
negative  eﬃciency  and q p < q < q n does not contribute  to the eﬃciency.  
The validity  is deﬁned  as the fraction  of compounds  labeled  correctly.  
The validity  of the calibration  set will be at least 1- 𝜀 by design, for both 
classes individually  in class-balanced  Mondrian  CP. 
The dark orange area will contribute  fully to the validity  for both 
classes,  since assigning  both labels is always correct.  The light orange ar- 
eas contribute  to the validity  for one of both classes,  while the white area 
contains  the incorrect  predictions,  amounting  to 𝜀 ∗ P or 𝜀 ∗ N predictions.  
For the actives,  the recall will be 1- 𝜀 at q p , while for the inactives,  the 
speciﬁcity  will be 1- 𝜀 at q n . This is because  CP will set q p and q n to allow 
at most an error rate of 𝜀 , implying  FN ≤ 𝜀 ∗ P and FP ≤ 𝜀 ∗ N. Hereby  follows  
1-(FP/N)  = 1-FPR = TNR ≥ 1- 𝜀 for the negative  class at q n . In other words, 
the conformal  predictor  will refrain from assigning  class labels for the 
riskiest  samples,  which puts a lower bound on the recall/speciﬁcity.  
Hence for the calibration  set, there is a direct link between  the re- 
call/speciﬁcity  and the eﬃciency.  q n and q p will shift according  to 
the quality of the classiﬁer.  Better class separation  and accompanying  
higher recall/speciﬁcity  will push q n and q p closer together,  hereby 
increasing  the eﬃciency.  In summary,  the speciﬁcity  at the quantile  
threshold  for negative  class label prediction  q n for the calibration  set 
determines  the positive  eﬃciency  and vice versa. A similar relationship  
exists for the recall and the negative  eﬃciency.  Hence it follows  that 
eﬃciency  can inform on the predictive  performance  of the model. 
In the preceding  section the calibration  set was considered  for both 
calibration  and eﬃciency  calculation.  Exchangeability  in this situation  
was guaranteed  since the datasets  were identical.  In practice,  consid-  
erations  of exchangeability  become  relevant  when applying  conformal  
prediction  to unseen datasets.  The strength  of the link between  the 
recall/speciﬁcity  and the eﬃciency  will depend  on the degree of ex- 
changeability,  and this is explored  empirically  in the following  section.  
Three datasets  were considered.  Arguably,  the ‘1/2 test’ and ‘2/2 test’ 
datasets  were closer to the training  set of the model than the ‘unseen’  
dataset,  since the latter contained  novel scaﬀolds  added to the internal  
library only after the composition  of the MELLODDY  dataset.  As the 
‘1/2 test’ and ‘2/2 test’ were part of the MELLODDY  dataset,  one might 
expect scaﬀolds  present  here to bear more similarity  to the scaﬀolds  
in the training  set, as they could be to a greater degree the result of 
incremental  changes  to scaﬀolds.  The ‘unseen’  dataset was considered  to be the best approximation  of true unlabeled  space, i.e. novel chemistry  
outside  of a partner’s  chemical  domain  where no labels were available.  
From Fig. 3 , the impact of successive  deviations  from the ideal- 
ized case is illustrated.  In an idealized  case, with perfect exchange-  
ability, there is a clear relationship  between  the eﬃciency  and the re- 
call/speciﬁcity.  
The recall and speciﬁcity  both consider  one point on their respective  
curves, corresponding  to one threshold.  Therefore,  a ﬁrst deviation  that 
could be considered  was switching  recall/speciﬁcity  for a predictive  per- 
formance  metric that considers  the full range of thresholds.  Calibrated  
AUC PR, a rebalanced  version  of AUC PR facilitating  task comparisons  
[64] , is such a metric. In this case, the relationship  between  the eﬃ- 
ciency and predictive  performance  was conserved  quite well over all 
tasks, with a Pearson  correlation  coeﬃcient  (r) of 0.88. 
A second deviation  from the idealized  case was swapping  either the 
calibration  or the evaluation  set. This was thought  to present  a chal- 
lenge to the exchangeability,  since the datasets  were constructed  in such 
a way to prevent  any scaﬀolds  occurring  in both. Two eﬀects could be 
observed.  The eﬀect of changing  the calibration  set was somewhat  more 
impactful  than changing  the evaluation  set. And moving  from ‘1/2 test’ 
to ‘unseen’  aﬀected  the r more than from ‘1/2 test’ to ‘2/2 test’, presum-  
ably due to the similarity  and higher exchangeability  between  the latter 
two. 
A ﬁnal deviation  consisted  of swapping  both the calibration  and the 
evaluation  set. The lowest r value was observed  for the ‘unseen’  dataset 
as calibration  set, which is consistent  with the previous  observations.  
Despite  these conditions  that maximally  challenged  exchangeability,  
still a reasonable  correlation  r near 0.5 was being observed.  This sug- 
gests that at least some correlation  will remain when pushing  out further 
into unlabeled  space. 
Having  established  the stability  of the relationship  between  the pre- 
dictive performance  and the conformal  eﬃciency,  a next step was to 
investigate  how the conformal  eﬃciency  itself behaved  under devia- 
tions from perfect exchangeability.  The upper half of Fig. 4 illustrates  
that the predictive  performance  was highly correlated  between  ‘1/2 test’ 
and ‘2/2 test’. This correlation  dropped  when challenging  exchangeabil-  
ity more with the ‘unseen’  dataset,  with a lower predictive  performance  
on the ‘unseen’  dataset,  in part reﬂective  of temporal  data drift. This 
is mirrored  in the conformal  eﬃciencies,  when calculated  on the same 
evaluation  set and varying  the calibration  set. Hence, calibrating  the 
conformal  predictor  on the ‘unseen’  dataset led to lower eﬃciencies.  
The eﬀect of varying  the evaluation  set and keeping  the calibration  set 
constant  was similar but less pronounced,  leading  to higher r (Fig. S4). 
In the lower half of Fig. 4 the correlation  between  the deltas for 
diﬀerent  datasets  is shown to have dropped  substantially,  being much 
closer to zero, for both the delta calibrated  AUC PR and the ΔCE. The 
ﬁnding  to some degree compromises  a task-level  performance  evalua-  
tion between  the single-partner  and multipartner  models,  since observed  
gains would not be consistent  between  datasets.  On an aggregated  level, 
the eﬀect was more stable, as the highest  density  of tasks was routinely  
found in the upper right quadrant,  regardless  of the dataset.  To ensure 
that the observed  shift from the origin was not due to stochastic  eﬀects, 
a permutation  analysis  was performed  where the set of single-partner  
and multipartner  model predictions  were randomly  interchanged  for a 
single task. So, a task had only two options:  it kept it predictions  as is, 
or it exchanged  all predictions  between  single-partner  and multipartner.  
Due to the multitude  of tasks, many combinations  were possible.  It was 
found that the observed  shift was much larger than expected  based on 
chance if single-partner  and multipartner  models were producing  inter- 
changeable  predictions  ( Fig. 4 , bottom  right). This suggested  that the 
overall gains in predictive  performance  in the multipartner  case, can be 
retrieved  from the overall ΔCE. As the gains in predictive  performance  
for the multipartner  model are discussed  in detail elsewhere  [20] , we 
refrain from further analysis  here, but merely establish  the link between  
the delta predictive  performance  and the delta conformal  eﬃciency  at 
an aggregated  level. 
6 W. Heyndrickx, A. Arany, J. Simm et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in the Life Sciences 3 (2023) 100070 
Fig. 3. Linear correlation  between  the predictive  performance  (calibrated  AUC PR) and the conformal  eﬃciency  upon successive  deviations  from an idealized  case 
with perfect exchangeability.  Plots show the density of tasks (kernel density estimation).  The linear trendline  is shown in orange. The ‘1/2 test’ dataset is consistently  
used for calibrated  AUC PR calculation.  
The ‘unseen’  dataset was considered  to be the best approximation  of 
true unlabeled  space, i.e., novel chemistry  outside  of a partner’s  chem- 
ical domain  where no labels were available.  The lack of labels prohib-  
ited metrics  such as the calibrated  AUC PR, and conformal  eﬃciency  
became  the estimate  of choice when projecting  out to unlabeled  space. 
Hence, a realistic  situation  when evaluating  the MELLODDY  models for 
generalization  to novel types of chemistry,  was to calibrate  on the test 
fold, and calculate  the conformal  eﬃciency  on an unlabeled  set, here 
approximated  by the ‘unseen’  dataset.  Fig. 5 shows the eﬀect of that 
situation  against  a reference  where exchangeability  was ensured  since 
the ‘unseen’  dataset was used for both calibration  and calculation  of the 
eﬃciency.  In this situation  the link to the predictive  performance  was 
better preserved.  Calibrating  instead  on a part of the test set now weak- 
ened the relationship  between  the task conformal  eﬃciencies.  For the 
middle and higher end of the eﬃciency  range, the observed  eﬃciencies  
tended to overestimate  the reference  eﬃciencies.  For the aggregated  val- 
ues, in conclusion,  calculating  the conformal  eﬃciency  on an unlabeled  
set, might have overestimated  the predictive  performance  by roughly  
25% based on the location  of the maximal  density.  This overestimation  
can be related to the reported  drop in eﬃciency  upon updating  the cal- 
ibration  set without  model retraining  to account  for data drift [ 33 , 65 ]. 
Indeed,  generally  higher eﬃciencies  were observed  for predictions  on 
the ‘unseen’  dataset with part of the test fold as calibration  set (reﬂective  
of data drift), than with the ‘unseen’  dataset as calibration  set (absence  
of data drift). 
3.4. Federated  gains 
The aggregation  of the ΔCE for all partners  over all unlabeled  
datasets  is shown in Table 2 , revealing  that all partners  showed  a pos- 
itive median  ΔCE. Lower uncertainty  predictions  in the multipartner  
setting appear as positive  values, and vice versa, any increase  in uncer- 
tainty is reﬂected  in negative  values. The median  increase  over all part- 
ners was 5.5%, while the highest  reported  increase  for a partner  was 
9.7%. Further  zooming  in on the individual  partners  in Table 2 , half re- 
ported 0% to 5% median  ΔCE gains regardless  of the type of chemistry  and the other half reported  5% to 10% gains. In terms of predictions,  
a 10% gain in ΔCE corresponded  to the classiﬁer  producing  10% more 
predictions  where the it was conﬁdent  enough  to assign a single label. 
Distinguishing  next between  chemistry  originating  from external  and 
internal  sources  ( Table 1 ), it can be observed  that both showed  a similar 
picture,  being positive  and in a similar range, and neither  of the two 
being consistently  higher ( Table 2 ). The mean values were generally  
higher than the median  values. 
Next, the variation  of the ΔCE values for a range of datasets  was 
investigated.  The datasets  originated  from sources  having varied com- 
positions  with the goal of eﬀectively  capturing  wide regions  of small- 
molecule  drug-like  space to obtain a general  view. Fig. 6 details the 
behavior  of the individual  datasets,  both unlabeled  and labeled  for each 
partner  individually,  through  displaying  the distribution  of ΔCE over 
the tasks. A decrease  in uncertainty  in the multipartner  setting appears  
as a distribution  above the zero line, and vice versa, any increase  in 
uncertainty  is reﬂected  in distributions  below the zero line. In line with 
Table 2 , the median  ΔCE values were predominantly  positive,  indicating  
a decrease  in uncertainty  in the multipartner  setting.  Some observations  
can be made. First, there were markedly  higher gains in unlabeled  space 
compared  to labeled  space. Comparing  an unlabeled  dataset with rep- 
resentative  ΔCE values, such as ChEMBL  25 - MELLODDY-TUNER,  with 
the test set, nine out of ten partners  (except  partner  H) reported  quartiles  
1 to 3 to all be higher in the unlabeled  space. The gains in the unlabeled  
space were also fairly consistent  between  the diﬀerent  datasets,  even 
between  internal  and external  chemistry,  as compounds  in the training,  
validation  and test folds were more in line with other unlabeled  datasets  
than with the test set. In particular,  whereas  the labeled  space ΔCE val- 
ues had interquartile  ranges containing  zero and medians  around zero, 
this was not the case for the datasets  in unlabeled  space, which more 
often tended to have positive  medians  and interquartile  ranges with the 
ﬁrst quartile  close to zero. For the data that the models had seen dur- 
ing training  (training  folds 1–3 and in case of Phase 2 models also the 
validation  fold), interquartile  ranges containing  zero and median  val- 
ues around zero might be expected,  but this was also the case for the 
test set, despite it being unseen during training.  Although  the test set 
7 W. Heyndrickx,  A. Arany, J. Simm et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence  in the Life Sciences 3 (2023) 100070 
Table 2 
Overview  of the delta conformal  eﬃciency  ( ΔCE) for all partners  A-J, for unlabeled  datasets  (See Table 1 for details).  
Partner Median ΔCE Mean ΔCE 
External chemistry  Internal chemistry  Any chemistry  External chemistry  Internal chemistry  Any chemistry  
A 9.3% 7.1% 8.7% 12.4% 9.8% 11.7% 
B 8.0% 7.4% 7.8% 10.2% 8.3% 9.7% 
C 4.3% 4.9% 4.5% 6.0% 6.2% 6.1% 
D 6.5% 5.6% 6.2% 7.9% 6.9% 7.6% 
E 4.4% 4.3% 4.4% 7.7% 4.9% 6.9% 
F 10.5% 8.1% 9.7% 11.6% 5.4% 9.9% 
G 4.8% 5.8% 4.9% 5.4% 4.1% 5.1% 
H 0.4% 1.4% 0.7% 1.1% 2.5% 1.5% 
I 2.2% 3.8% 2.7% 3.1% 4.4% 3.4% 
J 5.4% 6.4% 5.7% 7.0% 6.9% 6.9% 
Mean 5.6% 5.5% 5.5% 7.2% 5.9% 6.9% 
Fig. 4. Correlation  of conformal  eﬃciency  with performance  metrics requiring  
labels. Left: linear correlation  between  the predictive  performance  (calibrated  
AUC PR) on diﬀerent  evaluation  sets. Right: linear correlation  between  the con- 
formal eﬃciency  with diﬀerent  calibration  sets. Top: metrics.  Bottom:  metric 
deltas. Plots show the density of tasks (kernel density estimation).  The gray- 
shaded contour plot in the bottom right shows the distribution  of maximal  den- 
sities from the permutation  experiments  where the set of single-partner  and mul- 
tipartner  model predictions  for a task were interchanged  randomly.  The purple 
plus sign ( + ) marks the maximal  density. Fig. 5. Comparison  of conformal  eﬃciency  calculation  when calibrating  on part 
of the test fold and calculating  eﬃciency  on the ‘unseen’  dataset, to the situa- 
tion using the ‘unseen’  dataset for both. Plots show the density of tasks (kernel 
density estimation).  The purple plus sign ( + ) marks the maximal  density. The 
linear trendline  is shown in red. The diagonal  is shown in orange. 
showed  a somewhat  greater decrease  of uncertainty  compared  to those 
other four internal  labeled  datasets,  its ΔCE values were still more in line 
with those labeled  datasets  than with datasets  where no label is avail- 
able. This observation  indicates  that the test set was not representative  
of unseen types of chemistry.  
Although  the gains in the unlabeled  space were fairly consistent  be- 
tween datasets,  some diﬀerences  could be noticed  to recur for most part- 
ners. For instance,  the DrugSpaceX  dataset tended to show lower values, 
with nine out of ten partners  reporting  the lowest gains across all un- 
labeled  datasets.  On the other hand, the FDA-approved  small-molecule  
drugs were among the datasets  showing  the largest decrease  in uncer- 
tainty, with seven out of ten partners  reporting  the highest  ΔCE val- 
ues ( Fig. 6 ). Such ﬁndings  indicate  that some property  of the unlabeled  
dataset can aﬀect the observed  ΔCE. Indeed,  a relationship  between  the 
size of the molecules  and the ΔCE was found. Unlabeled  datasets  with 
smaller  molecules,  such as the FDA-approved  small-molecule  drugs, 
tended to show higher ΔCE values than datasets  with larger molecules,  
such as DrugSpaceX.  Fig. 7 shows that this relationship  held for interme-  
diate sizes as well. Similar  observations  can be made by considering  the 
ΔPlatt-scaled  entropy,  such as the consistent  decrease  of uncertainty  for 
unlabeled  space, a markedly  diﬀerent  behavior  between  unlabeled  and 
labeled  space and the ﬁner distinctions  between  the unlabeled  datasets  
(Fig. S6). 
The overall ΔCE can be split into two parts: one related to the inac- 
tive predictions,  and one related to the active predictions  ( Fig. 2 ). Fig. 8 
shows that the inactive  predictions  contributed  more, but importantly  
not exclusively  to the ΔCE. This was somewhat  expected  considering  
the general  class balance  of the tasks, which tended to be dominated  
by inactives.  Hence, both actives and inactives  will be predicted  more 
conﬁdently  in the multipartner  setting.  
8 W. Heyndrickx, A. Arany, J. Simm et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in the Life Sciences 3 (2023) 100070 
Fig. 6. Predictive  uncertainty  analysis  via the distribution  of delta (multipartner  minus single-partner)  conformal  eﬃciency  ( ΔCE) for several datasets  over all tasks 
for all partners  A-J. Lighter shades represent  the unlabeled  datasets,  darker shades the labeled datasets  ( Table 1 ). 
Fig. 7. Relationship  between  the size of the molecules  in unlabeled  datasets  (in 
terms of number of set ECFP bits), and the delta conformal  eﬃciency  ( ΔCE). 
The lines indicate  the various partners.  
The possible  sensitivity  of uncertainty  metrics  on the hyperparam-  
eters may invoke questions  whether  the comparison  of these metrics  
between  the single- and multipartner  models trained  with diﬀerent  hy- 
perparameters  can be meaningful.  To ensure that any observed  trends 
were not spuriously  due to hyperparameters,  single- and multipartner  
models from several hyperparameter  combinations  were investigated.  
Similar  trends were observed  when (i) varying  the single-partner  hyper- 
parameters  in local training  while deteriorating  model performance  by 
a limited degree ( < 0.5% AUC PR overall);  (ii) switching  from Phase 2 
to Phase 1 models.  Figs. S7 and S8 provide  detailed  results.  
4. Discussion  
The main research  question  of this work is whether  federated  mul- 
titask learning  extends  the applicability  domain  of property  prediction  
models compared  to single-partner  settings.  Based on intermediate  fed- 
erated models from the MELLODDY  project,  this work proposes  the con- 
formal eﬃciency  as a means to measure  the applicability  domain  exten- 
sion through  predictive  uncertainty  diﬀerences.  
Considering  that the applicability  domain  can be deﬁned  as the 
chemical  space in which the model makes predictions  with suﬃcient  Fig. 8. Median delta (multi- minus single-partner)  conformal  eﬃciency  ( ΔCE) 
for several datasets  over all tasks for all pharma partners.  Top: ΔCE consid- 
ering only inactive  predictions.  Bottom:  ΔCE considering  only active predic- 
tions. Lighter shades represent  the unlabeled  datasets,  darker shades the labeled 
datasets  ( Table 1 ). 
reliability  [ 28 , 29 ], an extension  of the applicability  domain  can be re- 
lated to a decrease  in predictive  uncertainty.  Several  studies have shown 
the good performance  of uncertainty  measures  for applicability  domain  
estimation  [ 26 , 66–72 ], on par or superior  to other common  approaches  
as distance-based  or geometric  techniques  in the input space [23] or 
latent space of the neural network  [73] . The former would require  ele- 
vated access to the set of training  data across partners,  prompting  pri- 
vacy concerns.  Conceptually,  the applicability  domain  pertains  to the 
epistemic  uncertainty  as samples  inside the applicability  domain  can 
still be predicted  with high uncertainty  if they are inherently  noisy or 
ambiguous.  
A number  of authors  have related the applicability  domain  with con- 
formal predictors  in binary classiﬁcation  [ 26 , 74 , 75 ]. More speciﬁcally,  
one interpretation  is to consider  prediction  sets with both class labels to 
9 W. Heyndrickx, A. Arany, J. Simm et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in the Life Sciences 3 (2023) 100070 
be inherently  noisy, hence of high aleatoric  uncertainty,  but inside the 
applicability  domain,  while empty prediction  sets can be considered  of 
high epistemic  uncertainty  and outside  of the applicability  domain  since 
they are diﬀerent  from the known instances  of the existing  classes [74] . 
In the current  study, contrastingly,  a change in uncertainty  measured  
through  the eﬃciency  was linked directly  to the applicability  domain  
extension,  without  making  the distinction  whether  a high uncertainty  
prediction  was associated  with none or both class labels. Such appli- 
cability  domain  obtained  through  conformal  predictors  and its depen- 
dency on a user-speciﬁed  error level diﬀers conceptually  from the appli- 
cability  domain  obtained  with distance-based  or geometric  techniques  
in the input space. 
In a sense, the objective  of estimating  the applicability  domain  ex- 
tension  based on uncertainty  metrics  is somewhat  related to other ap- 
proaches  to estimate  the model quality and generalization  without  re- 
quiring  access to labels. The Predicting  Generalization  in Deep Learn- 
ing (PGDL)  competition  is an example  where complexity  measures,  data 
augmentation  techniques,  and representation  analyses  are studied  that 
predict the level of generalization  for a model, likewise  without  requir- 
ing labels [76] . Another  example  is based on the decomposition  of model 
weight matrices  [77] . 
To select an uncertainty  metric, in §3.2. conformal  eﬃciency  was 
compared  to other established  uncertainty  metrics  such as predictive  
entropy,  variance,  and IG. Unlike conformal  eﬃciency  and entropy  that 
behaved  intuitively,  variance  and IG showed  counterintuitive  behavior  
and were therefore  deprioritized  as a suitable  uncertainty  metric. The 
choice for CE as the ﬁnal metric was further favored  by its ﬂexibility  as 
distribution-free  method  and its use in industrial  settings  [ 30–32,63  ]. 
Nevertheless,  the main ﬁnding  of an extended  AD for the federated  
model was also conﬁrmed  with the Platt-scaled  entropy.  
A decrease  in predictive  uncertainty  leads to more accurate  under- 
lying predictions  with well-calibrated  models,  but in other situations  
models may display  an unjustiﬁed  or ‘empty’  decrease  of uncertainty  
that does not correspond  to predictive  gains. To address  this challenge,  
in §3.3. a relationship  was established  between  conformal  eﬃciency  and 
performance  metrics  requiring  labels. Theoretically,  a strong link with 
the TPR and TNR was demonstrated  that is valid at low signiﬁcance  lev- 
els, providing  novel insight into the nature of the eﬃciency.  Empirically,  
the relationship  between  conformal  eﬃciency  and calibrated  AUC PR 
at task level was showcased  for several settings  in which the exchange-  
ability assumption  is increasingly  challenged.  A decent correlation  (r > 
0.50) was found even in the most challenging  of settings,  with an ‘un- 
seen’ dataset that originated  after the model training  and did not con- 
tain any scaﬀolds  included  in the training,  validation,  or test sets. This 
‘unseen’  dataset was arguably  the best possible  approximation  of unla- 
beled space within the boundaries  of the available,  realistic,  industrial  
data. Thus, the uncertainty  from CE seemed  justiﬁed  as CE continued  to 
correlate  with established  predictive  performance  metrics,  even where 
exchangeability  could no longer be assumed.  
Exchangeability  is typically  conﬁrmed  by evaluating  the validity  on 
a held-out  set. One of the fundamental  challenges  faced in this work, 
is that potential  beneﬁts  of federated  learning  may well manifest  in 
regions  of chemical  space, where no labels are available  to the eval- 
uating partner  because  they are only explored  by other partners.  This 
space was represented  by composing  so-called  unlabeled  datasets  based 
on varied drug-like  libraries  from diﬀerent  sources.  Such absence  of 
labels precludes  any calculation  of the validity.  Conformal  prediction  
formally  assumes  the exchangeability  of the calibration  and test sets, 
in which case it guarantees  to adhere to a user-speciﬁed  error level. 
In this work, conformal  prediction  was intentionally  applied  on com- 
pounds  lying outside  of the internally  labeled  chemical  space of every 
participating  pharma  partner  and thus were expected  to be diﬀerent  
from the calibration  set. No formal guarantee  of exchangeability,  nor of 
error levels on the unlabeled  datasets  can therefore  be claimed.  The less 
plausible  the exchangeability  assumption,  the more loose becomes  the 
interpretation  of conformal  eﬃciency  as a metric of AD. Importantly,  this loss of correlation  is not abrupt,  but gradual,  reﬂecting  a gradual  
erosion  of the plausibility  of exchangeability  and interpretability  of eﬃ- 
ciency. Even at maximally  challenging  conditions,  as closely as possible  
resembling  unlabeled  space, the correlation  with performance  metrics  
requiring  labels, and hence its interpretability,  had eroded but was not 
lost. 
Undoubtedly  there is a tension  between  the formal guarantees  on 
error rates that accompany  a perfect exchangeability  and the erosion  of 
the exchangeability  assumption  speciﬁcally  for unlabeled  compounds  
that is relevant  for practical  drug discovery  settings.  One of such prac- 
tical settings  could be virtual screening  to discover  novel chemical  scaf- 
folds with activity.  Federated  models hold promise  here, considering  
the chemical  space covered  by a federated  model is the combination  of 
chemical  spaces of the individual,  contributing  partners,  and therefore  
indications  of activity  might appear in unexplored  regions  of chemical  
space due to other partners’  data. Due to privacy  constraints,  each party 
only has access to the labels of its own compound  libraries.  This con- 
strains the approach  to uncertainty  metrics  that do not require  labels 
derived  from meticulous  experimentation.  
After having established  the CE as uncertainty  metric, the behavior  
of ΔCE was investigated.  Varying  calibration  and evaluation  datasets  
for ΔCE yielded  only very low correlations.  Importantly,  the task- 
aggregated  ΔCE maintained  its direction,  prompting  the use of the task- 
aggregated  ΔCE to investigate  the extension  of the AD for the federated  
models.  It should be noted that this sensitivity  to the dataset at hand 
of the ΔCE was found to be similar to that of the Δcalibrated  AUC PR 
and therefore  should not be seen as a comparative  disadvantage  of ΔCE. 
Additionally,  uncertainty  metrics  such as CE explicitly  take information  
of the predicted  compounds  into account,  in contrast  to labeled  metrics  
where the best estimation  of model predictive  performance  on held-out  
data is the value resulting  from evaluating  the test set, regardless  of the 
nature of the predicted  compounds.  
In §3.4. the main research  question  of the extension  of the AD for the 
federated  models was evaluated.  While a portion  of the tasks increased  
uncertainty  for the federated  models,  the positive  task-aggregated  ΔCE 
indeed indicated  an overall decrease  in uncertainty  compared  to the 
single-partner  model, hence suggesting  extension  of the applicability  do- 
main as beneﬁcial  eﬀect. Such decrease  in uncertainty  was particularly  
present  where no labels were available,  regardless  of the source of chem- 
istry, including  internal  chemistry.  The eﬀect was consistent  across the 
ten MELLODDY  partners.  Based on the observation  that the ΔCE might 
overestimate  the performance  gain by 25% (see above for discussion  
on Fig. 5 ), a 4.1% increase  in conformal  eﬃciency  was estimated  to be 
more reﬂective  of the predictive  performance  gain than the 5.5% me- 
dian conformal  eﬃciency  increase  reported  across partners  ( Table 2 ). 
The ﬁndings  were conﬁrmed  with the ΔPlatt-scaled  entropy  similarly  
showing  a task-aggregated  decrease  in uncertainty.  
One of the other aspects  that became  apparent  is that the ΔCE val- 
ues of the test set were found to be generally  closer to those of the 
training  set and validation  set than to the datasets  where no labels were 
available.  This can serve as an additional  indication  of the erosion  of 
the exchangeability  assumption  for unlabeled  compounds.  The follow- 
ing considerations  may help explain  this observation.  
First, the test set can be similar to the training  and validation  set due 
to limitations  related to splitting  an internal  dataset into ﬁve folds. The 
underlying  idea of the scaﬀold-based  splitting  approach  is to separate  
distinct  areas of chemical  space and to assign them to diﬀerent  folds 
thus avoiding  overconﬁdent  predictive  performance  estimates.  While 
scaﬀold-network-based  splitting  achieves  far better separation  of similar 
molecules  into diﬀerent  folds than random  splitting,  some structurally  
very similar compounds  might still be assigned  to diﬀerent  folds due to 
not sharing  the same scaﬀold  [39] . Switching  to other splitting  schemes  
such as sphere exclusion  clustering  was not expected  to fundamentally  
alter the picture based on its limited performance  gain over scaﬀold-  
network-based  splitting  [39] . While scaﬀold-based  splitting  challenges  
the exchangeability  between  the folds, the relative  nearness  of ΔCE be- 
10 W. Heyndrickx, A. Arany, J. Simm et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in the Life Sciences 3 (2023) 100070 
tween the test fold and the other labeled  datasets  compared  to unlabeled  
datasets  indicated  that the eﬀect is relatively  small compared  to the ero- 
sion of the exchangeability  assumption  for unlabeled  datasets.  
Secondly,  the internal  data at a pharmaceutical  company  might not 
be representative  of the drug-like  chemical  space at large. The devia- 
tion between  the test set (low uncertainty  decrease)  and the unlabeled  
compounds  in the test fold (high uncertainty  decrease)  suggests  that 
the occurrence  of labels is biased to certain regions  that are already  
informed  by the single-partner  model. Hence, the probability  of a com- 
pound being tested in an assay is not random.  Reasons  include  known or 
suspected  activity  against  a similar target or membership  of a commonly  
used screening  library,  and series bias or analogue  bias due to drug dis- 
covery focusing  on a relatively  narrow  set of related compounds  during 
chemical  synthesis  and subsequent  testing [78] . Additionally,  factors re- 
lated to the composition  of the internal  compound  library might impede  
the creation  of a fold that represents  truly unseen chemistry.  Since inter- 
nal libraries  only cover a fraction  of the total drug-like  chemical  space, 
and typically  contain  many related compounds  through  the occurrence  
of chemical  series, they cannot be expected  to be general.  All these fac- 
tors and others [79] may contribute  to the observed  diﬀerence  between  
labeled  and unlabeled  datasets.  
As discussed,  the predictive  uncertainty  from diﬀerent  unlabeled  
datasets  is fairly consistent  and exceeds  that of the labeled  datasets.  
The observation  that both external  and internal  chemistry  decrease  in 
uncertainty,  suggests,  perhaps  contrary  to the expectation  [80] , that it 
is possible  to acquire  knowledge  about one’s own compounds  on one’s 
own assays through  the other partners’  data in the federated  multipart-  
ner learning.  The observed  stark diﬀerence  in ΔCE (and ΔPlatt-scaled  
entropy)  for the labeled  and unlabeled  datasets  supports  the choice to 
explicitly  investigate  unlabeled  data separately,  where validity  calcula-  
tion is out of reach. 
Despite  this general  picture,  diﬀerences  between  the unlabeled  
datasets  existed.  The ‘FDA-approved  small-molecule  drugs’ dataset gen- 
erally showed  a larger uncertainty  decrease  in the multipartner  setup 
than the other unlabeled  datasets,  while the ‘DrugSpaceX’  dataset 
showed  relatively  lower uncertainty  decreases.  One might consider  the 
explanation  that such FDA-approved  small-molecule  drugs likely exist 
in the internal  libraries  of many partners  as reference  compounds,  and 
as such, have many activity  measurements  associated  with them, con- 
tributing  to their ability to exchange  information  on diﬀerent  tasks dur- 
ing the federated  multipartner  learning.  Since the DrugSpaceX  dataset 
consists  of virtual compounds  with virtually  zero overlap  with pharma  
libraries,  one might attribute  the lower uncertainty  decrease  to the lack 
of overlap.  However,  in opposition  to this explanation,  the other virtual 
library (SCUBIDOO)  did not exhibit such behavior,  and a strong rela- 
tionship  between  the ΔCE and the data sets’ molecular  size in terms of 
median  number  of set ECFP bits was found. When switching  from ΔCE to 
ΔPlatt-scaled  entropy,  similar observations  such as the markedly  diﬀer- 
ent behavior  of unlabeled  compared  to labeled  space and the ﬁner dis- 
tinctions  between  the unlabeled  datasets  were made. While this show- 
cased that shifted predictive  probabilities  play an essential  part, the 
ΔPlatt-scaled  entropy  still required  a calibration  set hereby triggering  
exchangeability  considerations  similar to those for ΔCE. 
5. Conclusions  
Federated  learning  holds the promise  of substantial  predictive  per- 
formance  gain in the chemical  space informed  by other partners’  data, 
where no labels are available  to the evaluating  partner.  Any evaluation  
requiring  labels, would trap the evaluating  partner  in its own space, 
blind for any changes  beyond  that space. Since uncertainty  metrics  do 
not require  labels, conformal  eﬃciency  was proposed  as a metric to 
estimate  a model’s  applicability  domain,  after establishing  a theoreti-  
cal and empirical  relationship  with established  predictive  performance  
metrics  requiring  labels. Such relationship  was shown for low signiﬁ- 
cance levels, and for situations  where the exchangeability  assumption  is maximally  challenged.  This suggested  that decreases  in uncertainty  as 
measured  with conformal  eﬃciency  correspond  to predictive  beneﬁts,  
even for unlabeled  datasets.  
An overall increase  of the ΔCE was observed  in the unlabeled  space. 
Such increase  remarkably  occurred  for both internal  and external  chem- 
istry and could not be recovered  from the labeled  test fold, indicating  
that this fold was not representative  of unlabeled  types of chemistry.  
The decrease  in uncertainty  suggested  an extension  of the applicabil-  
ity domain  of the federated  model and qualiﬁed  as a tangible  beneﬁt of 
federated  learning.  On average,  MELLODDY  partners  reported  a median  
increase  in ΔCE of the federated  over the single-partner  model of 5.5% 
(with increases  up to 9.7%), signifying  that the models stemming  from 
the federated  learning  will produce  up to 10% more low uncertainty  
(i.e., single class label) predictions.  
As an outlook,  the insight into the conformal  eﬃciency  at these low 
signiﬁcance  levels and its establishment  as applicability  domain  metric 
could extend its usage in the future, particularly  for large scale multitask  
model comparisons.  
In conclusion,  based on interim  MELLODDY  results,  the ﬁrst indi- 
cation is presented  that privacy-preserving  federated  machine  learning  
across massive  drug-discovery  datasets  from ten pharma  partners  indeed 
extends  the applicability  domain  of property  prediction  models.  
Briefs 
Based on interim  results from the MELLODDY  project,  the ﬁrst indi- 
cation is presented  that privacy-preserving  federated  machine  learning  
across massive  drug-discovery  datasets  from ten pharma  partners  indeed 
extends  the applicability  domain  of property  prediction  models.  
Data and software  availability  
The massive  underlying  datasets  are proprietary  and cannot be 
shared,  but code for the analysis,  particularly  relating  to the calibration  
and calculation  of uncertainty  metrics  can be found at https://github.  
com/melloddy/conformal  _ eﬃciency  . A small-scale  public dataset on 
carboxylic  acids and other acids to reproduce  selected  results from the 
SI has been provided  at https://zenodo.org/communities/melloddy/  . 
Funding  sources  
This project has received  funding  from the Innovative  Medicines  Ini- 
tiative 2 Joint Undertaking  under grant agreement  N° 831472.  This 
Joint Undertaking  receives  support  from the European  Union’s  Hori- 
zon 2020 research  and innovation  program  and EFPIA. This research  
received  funding  from the Flemish  Government  (AI Research  Program).  
Y.M., A.A., J.S., M.O., and R.L. are aﬃliated  to Leuven.AI  - KU Leuven  
institute  for AI, B-3000,  Leuven,  Belgium.  
Declaration  of Competing  Interest  
The authors  declare  that they have no known competing  ﬁnancial  in- 
terests or personal  relationships  that could have appeared  to inﬂuence  
the work reported  in this paper. W.H., H.C., A.P., N.S., A.S., L.H., A.Af., 
L.M., A.Z., L.F. were employees  of Janssen,  Bayer, Novartis,  Boehringer  
Ingelheim,  Astellas,  AstraZeneca,  Amgen and Merck, respectively,  dur- 
ing the study. 
CRediT  authorship  contribution  statement  
Wouter  Heyndrickx:  Conceptualization,  Methodology,  Investiga-  
tion, Data curation,  Formal analysis,  Software,  Writing  –original  draft, 
Writing  –r e v i e w  & editing.  Adam Arany:  Conceptualization,  Formal 
analysis,  Investigation,  Methodology,  Writing  –review  & editing.  Jaak 
11 W. Heyndrickx, A. Arany, J. Simm et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in the Life Sciences 3 (2023) 100070 
Simm: Conceptualization,  Methodology,  Formal analysis,  Writing  –re- 
view & editing.  Anastasia  Pentina:  Data curation,  Investigation,  Writ- 
ing – original  draft, Writing  –r e v i e w  & editing.  Noé Sturm:  Data cu- 
ration, Investigation,  Writing  –review  & editing.  Lina Humbeck:  Data 
curation,  Investigation,  Writing  –review  & editing.  Lewis Mervin:  Data 
curation,  Writing  –r e v i e w  & editing.  Adam Zalewski:  Data curation,  
Investigation,  Writing  –review  & editing.  Martijn  Oldenhof:  Concep-  
tualization,  Methodology,  Formal analysis,  Writing  –review  & editing.  
Peter Schmidtke:  Data curation,  Investigation,  Writing  –review  & edit- 
ing. Lukas Friedrich:  Data curation,  Investigation,  Writing  –review  & 
editing.  Regis Loeb: Conceptualization,  Methodology,  Formal analysis,  
Writing  –review  & editing.  Arina Afanasyeva:  Investigation,  Data cu- 
ration, Writing  –review  & editing.  Ansgar  Schuﬀenhauer:  Conceptu-  
alization,  Methodology,  Writing  –review  & editing.  Yves Moreau:  Con- 
ceptualization,  Methodology,  Formal analysis,  Writing  –review  & edit- 
ing. Hugo Ceulemans:  Conceptualization,  Methodology,  Formal anal- 
ysis, Funding  acquisition,  Writing  – original  draft, Writing  –r e v i e w  & 
editing.  
Data availability  
The code for the analysis  (https://github.com/melloddy/conformal_  
eﬃciency)  and a public dataset to reproduce  results from the 
SI (https://zenodo.org/communities/melloddy/)  has been made 
available.  
Acknowledgment  
We are grateful  to Luc Geeraert  for excellent  scientiﬁc  writing  assis- 
tance, and to Thanh Le Van for stimulating  discussions.  
Supplementary  materials  
Supplementary  material  associated  with this article can be found, in 
the online version,  at doi: 10.1016/j.ailsci.2023.100070  . 
References  
[1] Vamathevan J, Clark D, Czodrowski P, Dunham I, Ferran E, Lee G, Li B, Madabhushi A, Shah P, Spitzer M, Zhao S. Applications of machine learn- ing in drug discovery and development. Nat Rev Drug Discov 2019;18:463–77. doi: 
10.1038/s41573-019-0024-5 . 
[2] Engels MFM, Gibbs AC, Jaeger EP, Verbinnen D, Lobanov VS, Agraﬁotis DK. A cluster-based strategy for assessing the overlap between large chemical libraries and its application to a recent acquisition. J Chem Inf Model 2006;46:2651–60. doi: 
10.1021/ci600219n . 
[3] Kogej T, Blomberg N, Greasley PJ, Mundt S, Vainio MJ, Schamberger J, Schmidt G, Hüser J. Big pharma screening collections: more of the same or unique libraries? the AstraZeneca-Bayer Pharma AG case. Drug Discov Today 2013;18:1014–24. doi: 
10.1016/j.drudis.2012.10.011 . 
[4] Schamberger J, Grimm M, Steinmeyer A, Hillisch A. Rendezvous in chemical space? Comparing the small molecule compound libraries of Bayer and Schering. Drug Dis- cov Today 2011;16:636–41. doi: 
10.1016/j.drudis.2011.04.005 . 
[5] Bosc N, Felix E, Arcila R, Mendez D, Saunders MR, Green DVS, Ochoada J, Shelat AA, Martin EJ, Iyer P, Engkvist O, Verras A, Duﬀy J, Burrows J, Gardner JMF, Leach AR. MAIP: a web service for predicting blood-stage malaria inhibitors. J Cheminform 2021;13:13. doi: 
10.1186/s13321-021-00487-2 . 
[6] Verras A, Waller CL, Gedeck P, Green DVS, Kogej T, Raichurkar A, Panda M, Shelat AA, Clark J, Guy RK, Papadatos G, Burrows J. Shared consensus machine learning models for predicting blood stage malaria inhibition. J Chem Inf Model 2017;57:445–53. doi: 
10.1021/acs.jcim.6b00572 . 
[7] Brendan McMahan H, Moore E, Ramage D, Hampson S, Agüera y Arcas B. Communi- cation-eﬃcient learning of deep networks from decentralized data. In: Proceedings of the 20th international conference on artiﬁcial intelligence and statistics, AISTATS 2017, 54; 2017. p. 1273–82 
. 
[8] Sheller MJ, Reina GA, Edwards B, Martin J, Bakas S. Multi-institutional deep learning modeling without sharing patient data: a feasibility study on brain tumor segmen- tation. Brainlesion 2019;11383:92–104. doi: 
10.1007/978-3-030-11723-8_9 . 
[9] Yang Q, Liu Y, Chen T, Tong Y. Federated machine learning: concept and applica- tions. ACM Trans Intell Syst Technol 2019;10:1–19. doi: 
10.1145/3298981 . 
[10] Ruder S. An overview of multi-task learning in deep neural networks, ArXiv. (2017) arXiv: 1706.05098. 
http://arxiv.org/abs/1706.05098 . 
[11] Caruana R. Multi-task learning. Mach Learn 2018;28:41–75. doi: 10.1023/ 1007379606734 
. [12] Unterthiner T, Mayr A, Klambauer G, Steijaert M, Wegner J, Ceulemans H, Hochre- iter S. Deep learning as an opportunity in virtual screening. Adv Neural Inf Process Syst 2014;27:1–9 
. 
[13] Ramsundar B, Kearnes S, Riley P, Webster D, Konerding D, Pande V. Mas- sively multitask networks for drug discovery, ArXiv. (2015) arxiv ID: 1502.02072. 
http://arxiv.org/abs/1502.02072 . 
[14] Kearnes S, Goldman B, Pande V. Modeling industrial ADMET data with multitask networks, ArXiv. (2016) arXiv ID: 1606.08793. 
http://arxiv.org/abs/1606.08793 . 
[15] Lenselink EB, Ten Dijke N, Bongers B, Papadatos G, Van Vlijmen HWT, Kowalczyk W, Ijzerman AP, Van Westen GJP. Beyond the hype: deep neural networks outper- form established methods using a ChEMBL bioactivity benchmark set. J Cheminform 2017;9:1–14. doi: 
10.1186/s13321-017-0232-0 . 
[16] Xu Y, Ma J, Liaw A, Sheridan RP, Svetnik V. Demystifying multitask deep neu- ral networks for quantitative structure-activity relationships. J Chem Inf Model 2017;57:2490–504. doi: 
10.1021/acs.jcim.7b00087 . 
[17] Mayr A, Klambauer G, Unterthiner T, Steijaert M, Wegner JK, Ceulemans H, Clev- ert DA, Hochreiter S. Large-scale comparison of machine learning methods for drug target prediction on ChEMBL. Chem Sci 2018;9:5441–51. doi: 
10.1039/c8sc00148k . 
[18] Wenzel J, Matter H, Schmidt F. Predictive multitask deep neural network mod- els for ADME-Tox properties: learning from large data sets. J Chem Inf Model 2019;59:1253–68. doi: 
10.1021/acs.jcim.8b00785 . 
[19] Sturm N, Mayr A, Van TLe, Chupakhin V, Ceulemans H, Wegner J, Golib-Dzib JF, Jeliazkova N, Vandriessche Y, Böhm S, Cima V, Martinovic J, Greene N, Vander Aa T, Ashby TJ, Hochreiter S, Engkvist O, Klambauer G, Chen H. Industry-scale application and evaluation of deep learning for drug target prediction. J
 Cheminform 2020;12:1–13. doi: 
10.1186/s13321-020-00428-5 . 
[20] Heyndrickx W, Mervin L, Morawietz T, Sturm N, Friedrich L, Zalewski A, Pentina A, Humbeck L, Oldenhof M, Niwayama R, Schmidtke P, Simm J, Arany A, Drizard N, Jabal R, Afanasyeva A, Loeb R, Harnqvist S, Holmes M, Pejo B, Telenczuk M, Holway N, Rieke N, Zumsande F, Clevert D, Krug
 M, Green D, Ertl P, An- tal P, Marcus D, Do Huu N, Fuji H, Pickett S, Acs G, Boniface E, Beck B, Sun Y, Gohier A, Engkvist O, Göller A.H, Moreau Y, Galtier M.N, Ceulemans H. MEL- LODDY : cross pharma federated learning at unprecedented scale unlocks beneﬁts in 
QSAR without compromising proprietary information, 2022. https://chemrxiv. org/engage/chemrxiv/article-details/6345c0f91f323d61d7567624  
. 
[21] Oldenhof M, Ács G, Pejó B, Schuﬀenhauer A, Holway N, Sturm N, Dieckmann A, Fortmeier O, Boniface E, Mayer C, Gohier A, Schmidtke P, Niwayama R, Kopecky D, Mervin L, Rathi PC, Friedrich L, Formanek A, Antal P, Rahaman J, Zalewski A, Heyn- drickx W, Oluoch E, Stößel M, Van čo M,
 Endico D, Gelus F, de BoisfosséT, Darbier A, Nicollet A, Blottière M, Telenczuk M, Nguyen VT, Martinez T, Boillet C, Moutet K, Picosson A, Gasser A, Djafar I, Arany Á, Simm J, Moreau Y, Engkvist O, Ceule- mans H, Marini C, Galtier M. Industry-scale orchestrated federated learning for drug discovery, 
ArXiv. (2022) arXiv ID: 2210.08871. http://arxiv.org/abs/2210.08871 . 
[22] Breiman L. Random forests. Mach Learn 2001;45:5–32. doi: 10.1023/A: 1010933404324 
. 
[23] Mervin LH, Johansson S, Semenova E, Giblin KA, Engkvist O. Uncer- tainty quantiﬁcation in drug design. Drug Discov Today 2021;26:474–89. doi: 
10.1016/j.drudis.2020.11.027 . 
[24] Vovk V, Gammerman A, Shafer G. Algorithmic learning in a random world, 2005. doi: 
10.1007/b106715 . 
[25] Cortés-Ciriano I, Bender A. Concepts and applications of conformal predic- tion in computational drug discovery, ArXiv. (2019) arXiv ID: 1908.03569. 
http://arxiv.org/abs/1908.03569 . 
[26] Norinder U, Carlsson L, Boyer S, Eklund M. Introducing conformal prediction in predictive modeling. A transparent and ﬂexible alternative to applicabil- ity domain determination. J Chem Inf Model 2014;54:1596–603. doi: 
10.1021/ ci5001168 
. 
[27] Norinder U, Spjuth O, Svensson F. Synergy conformal prediction applied to large ‑s c a l e bioactivity datasets and in federated learning. J Cheminform 2021:1–11. doi: 
10.1186/s13321-021-00555-7 . 
[28] Netzeva TI, Worth AP, Aldenberg T, Benigni R, Cronin MTD, Gramatica P, Ja- worska JS, Kahn S, Klopman G, Marchant CA, Myatt G, Nikolova-Jeliazkova N, Patlewicz GY, Perkins R, Roberts DW, Schultz TW, Stanton DT, Van De Sandt JJM, Tong W, Veith G, Yang C. Current status of methods for deﬁning
 the applicabil- ity domain of (quantitative) structure-activity relationships. ATLA Altern Lab Anim 2005;33:155–73. doi: 
10.1177/026119290503300209 . 
[29] Hanser T, Barber C, Marchaland JF, Werner S. Applicability domain: to- wards a more formal deﬁnition. SAR QSAR Environ Res 2016;27:893–909. doi: 
10.1080/1062936X.2016.1250229 . 
[30] Sun J, Carlsson L, Ahlberg E, Norinder U, Engkvist O, Chen H. Apply- ing Mondrian cross-conformal prediction to estimate prediction conﬁdence on large imbalanced bioactivity data sets. J Chem Inf Model 2017;57:1591–8. doi: 
10.1021/acs.jcim.7b00159 . 
[31] Morger A, Mathea M, Achenbach JH, Wolf A, Buesen R, Schleifer KJ, Landsiedel R, Volkamer A. KnowTox: pipeline and case study for conﬁdent prediction of po- tential toxic eﬀects of compounds in early phases of development. J Cheminform 2020;12:1–17. doi: 
10.1186/s13321-020-00422-x . 
[32] Garcia de Lomana M, Morger A, Norinder U, Buesen R, Landsiedel R, Volkamer A, Kirchmair J, Mathea M. ChemBioSim: enhancing conformal prediction of in vivo toxicity by use of predicted bioactivities. J Chem Inf Model 2021;61:3255–72. doi: 
10.1021/acs.jcim.1c00451 . 
[33] Morger A, Garcia de Lomana M, Norinder U, Svensson F, Kirchmair J, Mathea M, Volkamer A. Studying and mitigating the eﬀects of data drifts on ML model performance at the example of chemical toxicity data. Sci Rep 2022;12:1–13. doi: 
10.1038/s41598-022-09309-3 . 
[34] MELLODDY-TUNER, (2021). https://github.com/melloddy/MELLODDY-TUNER . 
12 W. Heyndrickx, A. Arany, J. Simm et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in the Life Sciences 3 (2023) 100070 
[35] Landrum G. RDKit: open-source cheminformatics software, (2021). 
http://www.rdkit.org/ . 
[36] Rogers D, Hahn M. Extended-connectivity ﬁngerprints. J Chem Inf Model 2010;50:742–54. doi: 
10.1021/ci100050t . 
[37] Varin T, Gubler H, Parker CN, Zhang JH, Raman P, Ertl P, Schuﬀenhauer A. Com- pound set enrichment: a novel approach to analysis of primary HTS data. J Chem Inf Model 2010;50:2067–78. doi: 
10.1021/ci100203e . 
[38] Kruger F, Stieﬂ N, Landrum GA. RdScaﬀoldNetwork: the Scaﬀold net- work implementation in RDKit. J Chem Inf Model 2020;60:3331–5. doi: 
10.1021/acs.jcim.0c00296 . 
[39] Simm J, Humbeck L, Zalewski A, Sturm N, Heyndrickx W, Moreau Y, Beck B, Schuf- fenhauer A. Splitting chemical structure data sets for federated privacy-preserving machine learning. J Cheminform 2021;13:1–14. doi: 
10.1186/s13321-021-00576-2 . 
[40] Humbeck L, Morawietz T, Sturm N, Zalewski A, Harnqvist S, Heyndrickx W, Holmes M, Beck B. Don’t overweight weights: evaluation of weighting strate- gies for multi-task bioactivity classiﬁcation models. Molecules 2021;26:6959. doi: 
10.3390/molecules26226959 . 
[41] Arany A, Simm J, Oldenhof M, Moreau Y. SparseChem: fast and accurate ma- chine learning model for small molecules, ArXiv. (2022) arXiv ID: 2203.04676. 
http://arxiv.org/abs/2203.04676 . 
[42] Platt J. Probabilistic outputs for support vector machines and comparisons. Advances in Large Margin. Classiﬁers 1999:61–74 
. 
[43] Pedregosa F, Varoquaux G, Gramfort A, Michel V, Thirion B, Grisel O, et al. Scikit-learn: machine learning in Python. J Mach Learn Res 2011:6. 
https://arxiv.org/abs/1201.0490 . 
[44] Bosc N, Atkinson F, Felix E, Gaulton A, Hersey A, Leach AR. Large scale comparison of QSAR and conformal prediction methods and their applications in drug discovery. J Cheminform 2019;11:1–16. doi: 
10.1186/s13321-018-0325-4 . 
[45] Norinder U, Boyer S. Binary classiﬁcation of imbalanced datasets using conformal prediction. J Mol Graph Model 2017;72:256–65. doi: 
10.1016/j.jmgm.2017.01.008 . 
[46] Toccaceli P. MICP, (2023) (n.d.). https://github.com/ptocca/ . 
[47] Alvarsson J, Arvidsson McShane S, Norinder U, Spjuth O. Predicting With conﬁ- dence: using conformal prediction in drug discovery. J Pharm Sci 2021;110:42–9. doi: 
10.1016/j.xphs.2020.09.055 . 
[48] Hüllermeier E, Waegeman W. Aleatoric and epistemic uncertainty in machine learn- ing: an introduction to concepts and methods. Mach Learn 2021;110:457–506. doi: 
10.1007/s10994-021-05946-3 . 
[49] Kendall A, Gal Y. What uncertainties do we need in Bayesian deep learn- ing for computer vision? Adv Neural Inf Process Syst 2017:5575–85. 
https://arxiv.org/abs/1703.04977 2017, Decem . 
[50] Linusson H, Johansson U, Boström H, Löfström T. Reliable conﬁdence predictions using conformal prediction. Lect Notes Comput Sci 2016 (Including Subser. Lect. Notes Artif. Intell. Lect. Notes Bioinformatics). doi: 
10.1007/978-3-319-31753-3_7 . 
[51] Kim S, Chen J, Cheng T, Gindulyte A, He J, He S, Li Q, Shoemaker BA, Thiessen PA, Yu B, Zaslavsky L, Zhang J, Bolton EE. PubChem in 2021: new data content and improved web interfaces. Nucleic Acids Res 2021;49:D1388–95. doi: 
10.1093/nar/gkaa971 . 
[52] Gaulton A, Hersey A, Nowotka ML, Patricia Bento A, Chambers J, Mendez D, Mu- towo P, Atkinson F, Bellis LJ, Cibrian-Uhalte E, Davies M, Dedman N, Karlsson A, Magarinos MP, Overington JP, Papadatos G, Smit I, Leach AR. The ChEMBL database in 2017. Nucleic Acids Res 2017;45:D945–54. doi: 
10.1093/nar/gkw1074 . 
[53] Sterling T, Irwin JJ. ZINC 15 - ligand discovery for everyone. J Chem Inf Model 2015;55:2324–37. doi: 
10.1021/acs.jcim.5b00559 . 
[54] Mysinger MM, Carchia M, Irwin JJ, Shoichet BK. Directory of useful decoys, en- hanced (DUD-E): better ligands and decoys for better benchmarking. J Med Chem 2012;55:6582–94. doi: 
10.1021/jm300687e . 
[55] Ursu O, Holmes J, Bologa CG, Yang JJ, Mathias SL, Stathias V, Nguyen DT, Schürer S, Oprea T. DrugCentral 2018: an update. Nucleic Acids Res 2019;47:D963–70. doi: 
10.1093/nar/gky963 . 
[56] Ursu O, Holmes J, Knockel J, Bologa CG, Yang JJ, Mathias SL, Nelson SJ, Oprea TI. DrugCentral: online drug compendium. Nucleic Acids Res 2017;45:D932–9. doi: 
10.1093/nar/gkw993 . 
[57] Chevillard F, Kolb P. SCUBIDOO: a large yet screenable and easily search- able database of computationally created chemical compounds optimized toward high likelihood of synthetic tractability. J Chem Inf Model 2015;55:1824–35. doi: 
10.1021/acs.jcim.5b00203 . 
[58] Yang T, Li Z, Chen Y, Feng D, Wang G, Fu Z, Ding X, Tan X, Zhao J, Luo X, Chen K, Jiang H, Zheng M. DrugSpaceX: a large screenable and synthetically tractable database extending drug space. Nucleic Acids Res 2021;49:D1170–8. doi: 
10.1093/nar/gkaa920 . [59] Smith L, Gal Y. Understanding measures of uncertainty for adversarial example de- tection. In: Proceedings of the 34th conference on uncertainty in artiﬁcial intelli- gence 2018, UAI 2018, 2; 2018. p. 560–9 
. 
[60] Houlsby N, Huszár F, Ghahramani Z, Lengyel M. Bayesian active learning for classiﬁcation and preference learning, ArXiv. (2011) arXiv ID: 1112.5745. 
http://arxiv.org/abs/1112.5745 . 
[61] Hein M, Andriushchenko M, Bitterwolf J. Why relu networks yield high-conﬁdence predictions far away from the training data and how to mitigate the problem. In: Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition; 2019. p. 41–50. 2019-June. doi: 
10.1109/CVPR.2019.00013 . 
[62] Nguyen A, Yosinski J, Clune J. Deep neural networks are easily fooled: high con- ﬁdence predictions for unrecognizable images. In: Proceedings of the IEEE confer- ence on computer vision and pattern recognition; 2015 
. 
[63] Kumar K, Chupakhin V, Vos A, Morrison D, Rassokhin D, Dellwo MJ, Mc- Cormick K, Paternoster E, Ceulemans H, Desjarlais RL. Development and imple- mentation of an enterprise-wide predictive model for early absorption, distribu- tion, metabolism and excretion properties. Future Med Chem 2021;13:1639–54. doi: 
10.4155/fmc-2021-0138 . 
[64] Siblini W, Fréry J, He-Guelton L, ObléF, Wang Y.Q. Master your metrics with cali- bration, ArXiv. (2019) 457–69. doi: 
10.1007/978-3-030-44584-3 . 
[65] Morger A, Svensson F, Arvidsson McShane S, Gauraha N, Norinder U, Spjuth O, Volkamer A. Assessing the calibration in toxicological in vitro models with conformal prediction. J Cheminform 2021;13:1–14. doi: 
10.1186/s13321-021-00511-5 . 
[66] Dragos H, Gilles M, Alexandre V. Predicting the predictability: a uniﬁed approach to the applicability domain problem of qsar models. J Chem Inf Model 2009;49:1762–76. doi: 
10.1021/ci9000579 . 
[67] Tetko IV, Sushko I, Pandey AK, Zhu H, Tropsha A, Papa E, Öberg T, Todeschini R, Fourches D, Varnek A. Critical assessment of QSAR models of environmental toxicity against tetrahymena pyriformis: focusing on applicability domain and overﬁtting by variable selection. J Chem Inf Model 2008;48:1733–46. doi: 
10.1021/ci800151m . 
[68] Liu R, Wallqvist A. Molecular similarity-based domain applicability metric eﬃ- ciently identiﬁes out-of-domain compounds. J Chem Inf Model 2019;59:181–9. doi: 
10.1021/acs.jcim.8b00597 . 
[69] Sheridan RP. Three useful dimensions for domain applicability in QSAR models using random forest. J Chem Inf Model 2012;52:814–23. doi: 
10.1021/ci300004n . 
[70] Sheridan RP. The relative importance of domain applicability metrics for estimat- ing prediction errors in QSAR varies with training set diversity. J Chem Inf Model 2015;55:1098–107. doi: 
10.1021/acs.jcim.5b00110 . 
[71] Klingspohn W, Mathea M, Ter Laak A, Heinrich N, Baumann K. Eﬃciency of diﬀerent measures for deﬁning the applicability domain of classiﬁcation models. J Chemin- form 2017;9:1–17. doi: 
10.1186/s13321-017-0230-2 . 
[72] Mathea M, Klingspohn W, Baumann K. Chemoinformatic classiﬁcation methods and their applicability domain. Mol Inform 2016;35:160–80. doi: 
10.1002/minf.201501019 . 
[73] Janet JP, Duan C, Yang T, Nandy A, Kulik HJ. A quantitative uncertainty metric con- trols error in neural network-driven chemical discovery. Chem Sci 2019;10:7913–22. doi: 
10.1039/c9sc02298h . 
[74] Forreryd A, Norinder U, Lindberg T, Lindstedt M. Predicting skin sensitizers with conﬁdence —U s i n g conformal prediction to determine applicability domain of GARD. Toxicol Vitr 2018;48:179–87. doi: 
10.1016/j.tiv.2018.01.021 . 
[75] Norinder U, Rybacka A, Andersson PL. Conformal prediction to deﬁne applicability domain –a case study on predicting ER and AR binding. SAR QSAR Environ Res 2016;27:303–16. doi: 
10.1080/1062936X.2016.1172665 . 
[76] Jiang Y, Foret P, Yak S, Roy DM, Mobahi H, Dziugaite GK, Bengio S, Gunasekar S, Guyon I, Neyshabur B. NeurIPS 2020 competition: predicting generalization in deep learning, ArXiv. (2020) arXiv ID: 2012.07976. 
http://arxiv.org/abs/2012.07976 . 
[77] Martin CH, Peng TS, Mahoney MW. Predicting trends in the quality of state-of-the-art neural networks without access to training or testing data. Nat Commun 2021;12:1–13. doi: 
10.1038/s41467-021-24025-8 . 
[78] Rohrer SG, Baumann K. Maximum unbiased validation (MUV) data sets for virtual screening based on PubChem bioactivity data. J Chem Inf Model 2009;49:169–84. doi: 
10.1021/ci8002649 . 
[79] Wallach I, Heifets A. Most ligand-based classiﬁcation benchmarks reward memorization rather than generalization. J Chem Inf Model 2018;58:916–32. doi: 
10.1021/acs.jcim.7b00403 . 
[80] Martin EJ, Zhu XW. Collaborative proﬁle-QSAR: a natural platform for building col- laborative models among competing companies. J Chem Inf Model 2021;61:1603–16. doi: 
10.1021/acs.jcim.0c01342 . 
13 