Deep learning methods for biotic and abiotic stresses detection andclassiﬁcation in fruits and vegetables: State of the art and perspectives
Sèton Calmette Ariane Houetohossoua,⁎, Vinasetan Ratheil Houndjia,b, Castro Gbêmêmali Hounmenoua, Rachidatou Sikirou
c, Romain Lucas Glele Kakaïa
aLaboratoire de Biomathématiques et d'Estimations Forestières, Faculty of Agronomic Sciences, University of Abomey-Calavi, 04 BP 1525, Cotonou, B enin
bInstitut de Formation et de Recherche en Informatique, University of Abomey-Calavi, 01 BP 526, Cotonou, Benin
cLaboratoire de Défense des Cultures, Centre de Recherches Agricoles d'Agonkanmey, Institut National des Recherches Agricoles du Bénin (INRAB), 01 BP 884, Cotonou, Benin
abstract article info
Article history:Received 1 September 2022Received in revised form 21 July 2023Accepted 8 August 2023Available online 10 August 2023Deep Learning (DL), a type of Machine Learning, has gained signi ﬁcant interest in manyﬁelds, including agricul- ture. This paper aims to shed light on deep learning techniques used in agriculture for abiotic and biotic stressdetection in fruits and vegetables, their bene ﬁts, and the challenges faced by users. Scienti ﬁc papers were col- lected from Web of Science, Scopus, Google Scholar, Springer, and Directory of Open Access Journals (DOAJ)using combinations of speciﬁck e y w o r d ss u c ha s :’Deep Learning’OR’Artiﬁcial Intelligence’in combination with fruit disease’, vegetable disease’,‘fruit stress', OR‘vegetable stress' following PRISMA guidelines. From the initial 818 papers identiﬁed using the keywords, 132 were reviewed after excluding books, reviews, and the irrelevant.The recovered scientiﬁc papers were from 2003 to 2022; 93 % addressed biotic stress on fruits and vegetables. Themost common biotic stresses on species are fungal diseases (grey spots, brown spots, black spots, downy mildew,powdery mildew, and anthracnose). Few studies were interested in abiotic stresses (nutrient de ﬁciency, water stress, light intensity, and heavy metal contamination). Deep Learning and Convolutional Neural Networkswere the most used keywords, with GoogleNet (18.28%), ResNet50 (16.67%), and VGG16 (16.67%) as the mostused architectures. Fifty-two percent of the data used to compile these models come from the ﬁelds, followed by data obtained online. Precision problems due to unbalanced classes and the small size of some databaseswere also analyzed. We provided the research gaps and some perspectives from the reviewed papers. Further re-search works are required for a deep understanding of the use of machine learning techniques in fruit and veg-etable studies: collection of large datasets according to different scenarios on fruit and vegetable diseases,evaluation of the effect of climatic variability on the fruit and vegetable yield using AI methods and more abioticstress studies.© 2023 The Authors. Publishing servic es by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of KeAi Communications Co., Ltd. This is an openaccess article under the CC BY-NC-ND license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ ).
Keywords:Deep learningPredictionFruitsVegetablesStressAgricultural yield
Contents1 . I n t r o d u c t i o n ............................................................... 4 72. Clariﬁc a t i o n o f c o n c e p t s a n d t e r m i n o l o g i e s ................................................. 4 82 . 1 . H i s t o r y o f d e e p l e a r n i n g ...................................................... 4 82 . 2 . D e e p l e a r n i n g a r c h i t e c t u r e s .................................................... 4 82 . 2 . 1 . I m p o r t a n c e o f o p t i m i z a t i o n t e c h n i q u e s ........................................... 4 82 . 3 . P l a n t s a b i o t i c a n d b i o t i c s t r e s s e s.................................................. 4 83 . M e t h o d o l o g y.............................................................. 4 83 . 1 . D e s c r i p t i o n o f t h e r e s e a r c h s t r a t e g y ................................................. 4 83.2. Deﬁn i t i o n o f t h e r e s e a r c h q u e s t i o n s ................................................. 4 93 . 3 . L i t e r a t u r e s y n t h e s i s a n d a n a l y s i s.................................................. 5 04 . R e s u l t s a n d d i s c u s s i o n .......................................................... 5 0Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 9 (2023) 46 –60
⁎Corresponding author.E-mail address:ariane.houetohossou@labef-uac.org (S.C.A. Houetohossou).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aiia.2023.08.0012589-7217/© 2023 The Authors. Publishing services by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of KeAi Communications Co., Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http:// creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ ).
Contents lists available atScienceDirect
Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture
journal homepage:http://www.keaipublishing.com/en/journals/artificial-intelligence-in-agriculture/4 . 1 . B i b l i o m e t r i c a n a l y s i s o f k e y w o r d s .................................................. 5 04 . 2 . R Q 1 : W h a t i s t h e o b j e c t i v e b e h i n d t h e u s e o f t h e D L o r A I t e c h n i q u e s ?................................. 5 14 . 3 . R Q 2 : W h a t a r e t h e s p e c i e s o f f r u i t s a n d v e g e t a b l e s c o n s i d e r e d ?.................................... 5 14 . 4 . R Q 3 : W h a t t y p e o f s t r e s s w a s s t u d i e d ?............................................... 5 24 . 5 . R Q 4 : W h a t a r e t h e t y p e a n d t h e s o u r c e o f d a t a u s e d ? ......................................... 5 24 . 6 . R Q 5 : W h a t i s t h e c o u n t r i e s - w i s e d i s t r i b u t i o n o f t h e s e l f m a d e - d a t a ? .................................. 5 24 . 7 . R Q 6 : W h a t m o d e l s w e r e u s e d ? ................................................... 5 24 . 7 . 1 . C l a s s i c a l m a c h i n e l e a r n i n g a l g o r i t h m s f o r s t r e s s d e t e c t i o n i n f r u i t s a n d v e g e t a b l e s ........................ 5 24 . 7 . 2 . D e e p l e a r n i n g a p p r o a c h e s ................................................. 5 34 . 8 . R Q 7 : W h a t a r e t h e h y p e r - p a r a m e t e r s u s e d t o i m p l e m e n t t h e m o d e l s ? ................................. 5 54 . 9 . R Q 8 : W h a t a r e t h e e v a l u a t i o n m e t r i c s ?............................................... 5 54 . 1 0 . R Q 9 : W h a t a r e t h e p e r f o r m a n c e s a c h i e v e d ? ............................................. 5 64 . 1 1 . R Q 1 0 : W h a t a r e t h e g a p s a n d p e r s p e c t i v e s ............................................. 5 65 . C o n c l u s i o n............................................................... 5 8F u n d i n g................................................................... 5 8R e f e r e n c e s .................................................................. 5 8
1. IntroductionFruits and vegetables contain dietaryﬁber, which helps to lower the risk of cardiovascular disease and obesity ( Slavin and Lloyd, 2012). They also provide vitamins, particularly C and A, and minerals essential forhuman well-being. For example, 100 g of fruit contains 2 to 14.8 g of di-etaryﬁber, 61 to 89.1 g of water, and 90 to 646 Kcal of energy ( Slavin and Lloyd, 2012). Despite their importance to human life, many stressfactors induce a considerable loss of their productivity. Stressors includebiotic factors caused by living organisms such as viruses, bacteria, fungi,parasites, and abiotic factors, caused by non-living organisms such aslight intensity, water quantity, nutrient de ﬁciency, and other environ- mental and climate factors (Goncalves et al., 2005;Hao et al., 2020). For instance, early blight is one of the most common diseases on toma-toes and can cause severe yield losses and many fruit lesions ( Blancard, 2012;Brahimi et al., 2017). Likewise, wilting of Solanaceae, namely to-mato, pepper, potato, and eggplant, is a genuine concern for farmers; to-mato wilt can cause losses up to 100% ( Sikirou et al., 2015). As abiotic stress, weak or high light can signiﬁcantly affect crop physiology and morphology (Hao et al., 2020). Furthermore, when irrigation is minimal,and the plants are exposed to high water stress, they will die withoutany possibility of recovery (Wakamori et al., 2020). Likewise, nutrient deﬁciency can cause many diseases that signi ﬁcantly affect plant yield. For instance, deﬁciencies in three major mineral elements of plantscan be observed through blossom end rot (BER) for Calcium, green oryellow shoulder and mottled maturation for Potassium, and palergreen and uniform yellow or chlorosis on leaves for nitrogen ( Tran et al., 2019). When diseases are not quickly identiﬁed and treated ade- quately, the production of hectares ofﬁelds can be destroyed. Therefore early identiﬁcation of crop diseases and stress is essential for best pro-ductivity. Common stress and disease detection approaches focusmainly on visual recognition (Ferentinos, 2018). However, not all farmers have the experience to recognize disease symptoms to applythe appropriate treatment. Then, they call on experts who are not al-ways available. In addition, visual recognition is a time-consumingand laborious task that often fails to meet recognition accuracy require-ments (Liu et al., 2020;Dutot et al., 2013). These errors lead to the abu- sive use of pesticides, destroying the soil and harming consumers'health. Thus, some approaches have been proposed to automate theclassiﬁcation of diseases. Those approaches are based on machine learn-ing and computer vision that use handcrafted features extracted fromimages by experts. Thus, the learning is not fully autonomous due tothe dependence on handcrafted features ( Breitenreiter et al., 2015; Brahimi et al., 2017). Deep Learning is an old concept based on arti ﬁcial neural networks. It wasﬁrst used in 1943 when Warren McCulloch andWalter Pitts published theirﬁ
rst mathematical and computationalmodel of the biological neuron (McCulloch and Pitts, 1943). Deeplearning has become popular in recent years thanks to three main as-pects: the ever-increasing power of computers, which allows the crea-tion and training of neural networks with many hidden layers, theavailability of big data and large datasets, and the possibility of usingcloud computing. The functioning of biological neurons inspires ANN.ANN consists of an input layer, one or more hidden layers, and an outputlayer. Deep Learning consists of more than one hidden layer. Moreover,the hidden layers are of different types, such as convolutional andpooling layers. A DL system is self-teaching, learning by ﬁltering infor- mation through many hidden layers. Due to its ability to extract rawdata directly, DL is used to overcome the limitations of the methodsbased on handcrafted feature extraction. Since the ﬁrst DL technique was introduced, many modiﬁcations have been made to achieve variousarchitectures. Identifying the different DL techniques used so far, theirlimitations, and the users' main issues is important. A certain numberof papers did similar works. For instance, Santos et al. (2020)provided a brief overview of DL applications in agriculture. They de ﬁned several DL architectures, including Deep Belief Networks (DBN), FullyConvolutional Networks (FCN), and Convolutional Neural Networks(CNN). They then discussed the various applications of DL in agriculture,including disease detection (focusing on 6 papers), crop identi ﬁcation (4 papers), land cover (3 papers), and weed identi ﬁcation (3 papers). Similarly,Paul et al. (2020)proposed a review of agricultural advance-ment based on machine learning and computer vision techniques.They focused on the details related to image acquisition and image pro-cessing techniques. They also presented the machine learning tech-niques commonly used, among which DL belongs. Singh et al. (2018) also reviewed recent works in which DL concepts were used for plantstress phenotyping from digital images. The review compared DLmethods to other techniques in decision accuracy, data size require-ments, and applicability in various scenarios. Despite all these works,the real challenges of using DL for stress detection in fruits and vegeta-bles are missing in the literature. In addition, none of the authors usedartiﬁcial intelligence and DL to address both abiotic stress and parasiticattacks in plants. The interest in focusing on biotic and abiotic stresses inplants is crucial since plants are designed to live in an environmentwhere these two types of stress interact ( Atkinson and Urwin, 2012). For example, drought stress can expose plants to pathogens. Therefore,focusing on the two types of stress would be an excellent asset for goodmonitoring to improve crop yield. This paper provided an analysis of themain stresses that face fruits and vegetables, the DL methods used toovercome them, their limitations, and some perspectives.The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2clariﬁes the concepts and terminologies used in this paper. The methodologyis described inSection 3.Section 4then presents theﬁndings and their discussion with the perspectives, and Section 5concludes the work.S.C.A. Houetohossou, V.R. Houndji, C.G. Hounmenou et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 9 (2023) 46 –60
472. Clariﬁcation of concepts and terminologiesThis section provides the history of the concept of Deep learning andab r i e fd eﬁnition of the different terminologies considered.2.1. History of deep learningDeep Learning is a subset of Machine Learning (ML), an Arti ﬁcial In- telligence (AI)ﬁeld. ML is aﬁeld of study that allows computers to learnwithout being explicitly programmed ( Samuel, 1959). Deep learning is built on artiﬁcial neural networks inspired by the human brain's func-tioning. The concept of artiﬁcial neurons wasﬁrst used in 1943 by McCulloch and Pitts, who showed that neurons could be combined tobuild a Turing machine (McCulloch and Pitts, 1943). In a neural net- work, successive layers are connected to learn concepts. The simplestnetworks have only two layers: an input and an output layer, each ofwhich can have several hundred, thousands, or even millions of neu-rons. As the number of neurons increases, so does the network's abilityto learn more and more abstract representations. Rosenblatt (1958) invented the perceptron, a formal neuron, the smallest possible neuralnetwork, whose activation function is a step function called LinearThreshold Function. The perceptron has many inputs and weights foreach input. The perceptron has an algorithm that allows it to learn theweights of the information from a set of data with labels ( Rosenblatt, 1958). However, Minsky and Papert showed that perceptrons havesome limitations (Minsky and Papert, 1969). Thus, research on neural networks was stopped for a decade. The following important milestonewas multilayer perceptrons (MLPs) with the backpropagation algo-rithm introduced in 1985 by Ackley to revive the ﬁeld. MLPs are neural networks that aim to classify more complex data than a perceptron. Todo this, the MLP examines each piece of data and updates the weight ofeach neuron in each layer of its network to best classify that database.Later in 1988, Neocognitron, a hierarchical neural network capable of vi-sual pattern recognition, was proposed ( Fukushima, 1988). Then, Convolutional Neural Network with Backpropagation for documentanalysis was developed by LeCun ( LeCun et al., 1998). A so-called deep neural network has at least two hidden layers (there can be asmany as desired). Deep learning has been revolutionized since the2010s with the creation of several architectures.2.2. Deep learning architecturesModiﬁcations of model architecture are an essential factor in im-proving the performance of models. The ﬁrst Deep Learning has ex- perienced considerable modiﬁcations up to the present day. Suchmodiﬁcations include structural reformulation, regularization, nor-malization, and parameter optimizations ( Alzubaidi et al., 2021). These mainly occurred due to the reorganization of the processingunit and the development of novel blocks. In particular, the mostnovel results were performed using network depth. Some examplesof Deep Learning architecture are A lexNet, ZefNet, Visual geometry g r o u p( V G G ) ,G o o g L e N e t ,R e s N e t ,I n c e p t i o n - V 3 ,I n c e p t i o n –V4, DenseNet, ResNet, Xception, Recurrent neural networks (RNN),Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM), Gated Recurrent Units (GRU),Autoencoders, Restricted Boltzmann Machines, Deep belief net-works.2.2.1. Importance of optimization techniquesIn Machine Learning, optimization is done each time a model istrained: the learning algorithm optimizes the values of the model pa-rameters to minimize the prediction error on the training dataset.However, the hyperparameters are not optimized during training.The number of layers in a neuralnetwork, the number of neurons
per layer, etc., are hyperparameters that are not optimized duringtraining. The choice of values for the hyperparameters in ﬂuences the quality of theﬁnal model, sometimes strongly. On the otherhand, the manual selection of the best hyperparameter values canbe complex, even for the most expe rienced data scientists. Thus, there are simple search algorithms, such as Grid Search or RandomSearch, to explore the search space and retain the best-explored so-lution. These simple algorithms are bene ﬁcial if the number of possi- ble combinations of hyperparameter values is quite limited and thesearch space is simple. Still, their use becomes prohibitive for largerand more complex search spaces, as is the case for the most sophis-ticated models. The problem of optimizing the hyperparameters ofa Machine Learning model is generally related to the optimizationwith mixed variables (discrete/continuous). Indeed, somehyperparameters can take integer v alues, others real values, others strings of characters. Moreover, it is only possible to ef ﬁciently com- pute the gradients of the model p erformance (e.g., the accuracy score) concerning the hyperparameters. Finally, the search spacecan be pretty signiﬁcant and complex if the number ofhyperparameters is high enough. Based on this re ﬂection, this is an ideal application for optimization algorithms.2.3. Plants abiotic and biotic stressesStress can be deﬁned as any state of discomfort for the plant. Manystressors, including abiotic and biotic factors, can slow or inhibit plantdevelopment and growth. Biotic factors include diseases, infections,and pest attacks. Infections can be bacterial, fungal, or viral. Viral dis-eases are caused by viruses which are tiny micro-organisms with a ge-nome composed of Deoxyribonucleic Acid (DNA) and Ribonucleic Acid(RNA). They reproduce inside a living organism. Filamentous parasiticfungi cause fungal diseases. These fungi are disseminated by spores ormycelium present in the soil and penetrate the plant organism throughstomata or roots. They then appear as spots on fruits, leaves, or seedlingsand cause wilting, leaf dieback, and root rot. In contrast, phytopatho-genic bacteria cause bacterial diseases. These bacterias live as parasiteson the plants and cause cankers and soft rots. Abiotic stress factors in-clude drought (water stress), excessive watering (waterlogging), ex-treme temperatures (cold, frost, and heat), salinity, mineral toxicity(Verma et al., 2013), nutrient deﬁciencies, and soil contamination byheavy metals such as cadmium and lead. In response to stress, plantsslow down their metabolism and decrease energy expenditure. Stressreduces growth, photosynthesis, and therefore yield. When a plant isstressed, it prevents its normal development, and its yield can no longerbe optimal.3. MethodologyThe methodology was organized into three subsections. The ﬁrst de- scribed the research strategy, the second de ﬁned the research ques- tions, and the last presented the literature synthesis and statisticalanalyses.3.1. Description of the research strategyScientiﬁc articles were searched in databases such as GoogleScholar, Science Direct, Web of Science, Scopus, Springer, and Direc-tory Of Open Access Journals (DOAJ). The following keywords wereused:‘Deep Learning’OR‘Artiﬁcial Intelligence’in combination: ‘AND’with‘fruit disease’,‘vegetable disease’,‘fruit stress’,O R‘vegeta- ble stress’. The last papers were assessed on July 4, 2022. No timeinterval was speciﬁed during the search process since Deep Learningis a relatively new technique, and we want to retrieve as many articlesas possible. Therefore, 818 research papers were identi ﬁed, including journal articles (original and review articles), conference papers, andbook chapters. Two hundred forty-six of the documents were dupli-cates. Identiﬁcation was followed by a screening process that includedreading the title, abstract, and content of the paper to ensure that itwas related to the use of DL to detect stress on fruits and or vegetables.S.C.A. Houetohossou, V.R. Houndji, C.G. Hounmenou et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 9 (2023) 46 –60
48By screening the titles and abstracts, 363 other papers were excluded.After the content screening, we removed 50 irrelevant articles, 12 lit-erature reviews, and 15 book chapters. Among the irrelevant articles,some address stress on species other than fruits and vegetables usingartiﬁcial intelligence or Deep Learning, while others refer to stress butdo not use artiﬁcial intelligence or Deep Learning methods. Before ex-cluding them from theﬁnal selection, we checked references cited insystematic reviews, books, and articles on related topics. Finally, 132articles were included in the study. Thirteen of the 132 articles werenot free of charge. We have therefore used only their abstracts. Themethodology described was inspired by the Preferred Systematic Re-views and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) guidelines ( Page et al., 2021) and Fig. 1summarizes it.3.2. Deﬁnition of the research questionsResearch questions help to structure better the systematic literaturereviews. Ourﬁrst concern was the objective behind using AI and DLmethods to detect stress in fruits and vegetables. Then, we identify thespecies to which the techniques were applied and the type of stressinvolved. Data being an essential element for any model, we de ﬁned the data's type, size, and source. We also looked at the countrieswhere the authors have installed experiments to collect the data. Inaddition, several algorithms and implementation frameworks in theliterature are used for given tasks. Thus, we have de ﬁned them through the selected studies. Moreover, we sought to determine the models'hyperparameters, performances, and evaluation metrics. Finally,
Fig. 1.PRISMAﬂow diagram of the selection process.S.C.A. Houetohossou, V.R. Houndji, C.G. Hounmenou et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 9 (2023) 46 –60
49we have identiﬁed the challenges that researchers and practitionersface. An explicit reformulation of each research question is given inTable 1.3.3. Literature synthesis and analysisThe literature synthesis was done in three parts. The ﬁrst part con- cerns the bibliometric analysis and some general descriptive statistics.VOSviewer was used for the network of the keywords co-occurrence(van Eck and Waltman, 2022). VOSviewer provides a range of intuitivevisualization, mainly for analyzing bibliometric maps. The second partfocuses on the answers to the research questions. The occurrences ofeach response were used to calculate the frequencies. Similar termswere merged to make analysis easy. Some variables were analyzed to-gether to get insight from their study. Results were presented in tables,pie charts, or bar charts. The data analysis was conducted in the Ana-conda environment using the Spyder Notebook framework, with Py-thon 3.9.12. The libraries used to synthesize data frames Figures werePandas, Matplotlib and Numpy. We have also used the function: ‘ggplot’ of the package:‘ggplot2’(Wickham, 2016) of R software (RC o r eT e a m , 2021). Furthermore, the geographical location of the collection sites wasrepresented using QGis. The last part was synthesizing the gaps andranking them based on their relevance and making recommendationsfor new studies.4. Results and discussionThe use of Artiﬁcial intelligence in classifying and detecting bioticand abiotic stresses in fruits and vegetables is recent, as shown inFig. 2. Theﬁrst papers in this area appeared in 2003, followed by onepaper in 2006. A rapid progression was observed from 2019 to 2021,with a peak of 34 papers in 2020. This increase is evidence of re-searchers' interest in using AI and DL methods for early disease detec-tion, as precision agriculture has become a necessity to face thechallenges related to food security. Twelve papers were publishedfrom January 2022 to July 2022. Most of the papers are journal articles.Conference proceedings account for about 36% of the total number ofpapers.4.1. Bibliometric analysis of keywordsKeywords are the words or groups of words that inform the criticalaspects addressed by a research paper. For more precision, we elimi-nated inconsistencies by merging similar keywords such as ‘CNN’, ‘cnns’, and‘convolutional neural networks ’.Table 2shows the top 10 most frequent keywords of the reviewed articles, their number of occur-rences, weight links, and total link strength. The weight links are thenumber of connections of a keyword with other keywords indicatingits importance. The total link strength represents the total strength ofthe co-occurrence links of a given keyword with other keywords.Fig. 3completesTable 2by illustrating the keyword co-occurrence net-work. According to thisﬁgure, we distinguish two main periods in thehistory of detecting and classifying diseases and stress in fruits and veg-etables using artiﬁcial intelligence methods. Theﬁrst period, theﬁrst cluster of the map, concerns the time when classical machine learningmethods were employed through segmentation using k-means cluster-ing. The K-means clustering algorithm groups pixels with common at-tributes that belong to a particular segment. The support vectormachine (SVM) constitutes the core of this cluster. It has 13 occurrencesand 22 connections (
Table 2) with other words, including‘artiﬁcial neu- ral networks (ANN)’,‘k-means clustering’,‘decision tree’,‘disease detec- tion’,‘defect detection’, etc. Indeed, k-means clustering was used tosegment images. In contrast, SVM, ANN, random forest, and decisiontree classiﬁed the diseases. The emergence of deep learning methodsmarks the second period represented by the second cluster. Deep learn-ing constitutes the cluster's core with 36 occurrences, 29 connections,and 72 total link strengths (Table 2). The group of words‘deep learning’ is linked to other keywords such as: ‘Convolutional neural network’,‘re- current neural network’,‘feature extraction’,‘data augmentation’,‘gen- erative adversarial network ’,‘transfer learning’,‘ﬁne tuning’, ‘classiﬁcation’,‘agriculture’etc. Indeed, deep learning methods such asconvolutional neural networks and recurrent neural networks wereborn during this period. Unlike classical machine learning methods,these methods aim to extract features directly from images. Theirperformance has improved thanks to the increased databases usingalgorithms such as generative adversarial networks. In addition, usingpre-trained models through transfer learning, the models areﬁne-tuned and can classify images with much better accuracy forprecision agriculture.
Table 1Research questions.Nubmer Research questions1 What is the objective behind the use of the DL or AI technique?2 What species was concerned?3 What type of stress was involved?4 What are the types and source of data used?5 What is the countries-wise distribution of the self made-data?6 What models were used?7 What are the hyper-parameters used to implement the models?8 What are the evaluation metrics?9 What are the performances achieved?10 What are the gaps and perspectives?
Fig. 2.Year-wise distribution of the articles.
Table 2Top 10 most used keywords from the assessed papers.Keywords Occurrences Weight Links Total link strengthDeep Learning 36 29 72Convolutional Neural Networks 28 29 56Feature extraction 16 25 43Support Vector Machines 13 22 33Image processing 12 17 23Transfer learning 10 15 26Classiﬁcation 9 11 17Machine learning 8 12 17k-means clustering 7 8 12Artiﬁcial neural network 6 9 11S.C.A. Houetohossou, V.R. Houndji, C.G. Hounmenou et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 9 (2023) 46 –60
504.2. RQ1:What is the objective behind the use of the DL or AI techniques?According to the authors, the objectives behind using Deep Learningand AI techniques are diverse. After careful analysis of each paper, wehave grouped these objectives into three main categories: the detectionof biotic stress, the detection of abiotic stress, and the improvement ofthe robustness of the models.In theﬁrst group, we have four sub-objectives. The ﬁrst was the au- tomatic detection of diseases in 46.46% of the collected papers. The sec-ond sub-objective of this group was the detection of vegetable diseases(9.45%). The third of this group concerned the detection of both fruitand vegetable diseases in 7.87% of the papers. The fourth is the fruitsand vegetable disease segmentation in 3.94% of the papers. The secondmain objective of 5.5% of the articles was the automatic detection of abi-otic stress, including nutrients deﬁciency, water stress, light stress, andmetal contamination. The last main group includes three sub-objectives.Theﬁrst is using complex backgrounds to improve the robustness of themodels. It accounts for 11.02% of the papers. The second represents8.66% of the documents that use hybrid models to improve algorithms'robustness. The use of transfer learning to improve the accuracy of pre-diction models and reduce the time and cost of calculations in 7.09% ofthe articles constitute this group's last sub-objective. Table 3illustrates the objectives thus described and the percentage values given to each.4.3. RQ2: What are the species of fruits and vegetables considered?Papers considered in this review focused on 28 different species offruits and vegetables, namely: apple ( Malus domesticaBorkh.), tomato (Solanum lycopersicumL.), grape (Vitis viniferaL.), lemon (Citrus lemon L.), peach (Prunus persicaL.), orange (Citrus sinensisL.), cucumber (Cucumis sativusL.), strawberry (Fragaria anassaL.), cherry (PrunusaviumL.), banana (Musa paradisiacaL.), mango (Mangifera indicaL.), po- tato (Solanum tuberosumL.), pepper (Capsicum annuumL.), lettuce (Lactuca sativaL.), pear (Pyrus communis L.), guava (Psidium guajava L.), pomegranate (Punica granatumL.), cabbage (Brassica oleraceaL.), sugar beet (Beta vulgarisL.), raspberry (Rubus idaeusL.), carrot (Daucus carotaL.), pumpkin/Squash (Cucurbitaspp.), jackfruit (Artocarpus heterophyllusLam.), olive (Olea europaeaL.), plum (Prunus domesticaL.), avocado (Persea americanaMill), pineapple (Ananas comosusL.) and papaya (Carica papayaL.) (
Table 4). Of all these species, apple and tomato are the most investigated, with 35 and 33 occur-rences, respectively, representing 16.67% and 15.71%. This is easily ex-plained because apple is the most consumed fruit in the world ( Feng et al., 2021) while tomato is the second most consumed vegetableafter the potato (Kabas et al., 2022). In 2019 the world production of ap-ples reached 7,620,288 t (Oviedo-Mireles et al., 2021) while the world's annual tomato production was 160 million tonnes ( Bazrafshan et al., 2022).The worldwide interest in these two products justi ﬁes that they are the object of enough essential work to increase their productivity. After
Fig. 3.Map of the most used keywords network.
Table 3Objectives behind the use of DL or AI methods for stress detection.Objective category Objectives Frequency (%)Biotic stress detectionFruits diseases 46.46Vegetables diseases 9.45Fruits and vegetables diseases 7.87Fruits and vegetable segmentation 3.94 Abiotic stress detection Abiotic stress 5.51Model improvement with complex background 11.02hybrid models 8.66transfer learning 7.09S.C.A. Houetohossou, V.R. Houndji, C.G. Hounmenou et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 9 (2023) 46 –60
51apple and tomato, grape, lemon, peach, orange, cucumber, and straw-berry came next with 16, 14, 13, 12, 11, and 10 occurrences, respec-tively. The least considered species are jackfruit, olive, plum, avocado,pineapple, and papaya, with one study for each.4.4. RQ3: What type of stress was studied?The species of fruits and vegetables identi ﬁed face two types of stress: biotic and abiotic. Diseases constitute about 85% of the bioticstress factors, and pest attacks make up 7.93%. Viral, fungal, and bacte-rial infections are fruits and vegetables' main biotic stress factors. Fungaldiseases are the most dominant. All species' most common fungal dis-eases are grey spots, brown spots, black spots, downy mildew, powderymildew, and anthracnose. Regarding abiotic stress, only 6.34% ofassessed papers deal with it and address aspects such as light intensity,nutrient deﬁciency, heavy metal contamination, and water stress. Threestudies (Tran et al., 2019;Fuentes et al., 2017;Li et al., 2021) focused on nutrient deﬁciencies in respectively grape, tomato, and sugar beet. Inaddition, three other studies were about the cadmium concentration,the lead concentration, and the light intensity of lettuce ( Xin et al., 2020;Zhou et al., 2020;Hao et al., 2020). We did not get any article that used DL to predict abiotic stress due to climate change. The low per-centage of abiotic stress indicates the lack of interest in this stress detec-tion on fruits and vegetables using artiﬁcial intelligence and DL.4.5. RQ4: What are the type and the source of data used?Training of the DL models requires large input databases. Becausedata is the most important input of models, it is necessary to ensuretheir quality. The data used are essentially images (92%). The otherdata types are climatic data: mean temperature, minimum tempera-ture, maximum temperature, rainfall, wind speed, humidity, solar,a n ds u n l i g h t .T h er e v i e w e dp a p e r su s e da b o u t5 0 %o ft h ed a t at h e ycollected in theﬁeld, while 28% relied on the plant village databases(www.kaggle.com/charuchaudhry/plantvillage-tomato-leaf-dataset). PlantVillage is a free downloadable web dataset containingimages of 54,303 healthy and diseased leaves, divided into 38 categoriesby species and disease. Species include apple, blueberry, cherry, corn,grape, orange, peach, pepper, potato, raspberry, soybean, squash, straw-berry, and tomato. Diseases are bacteri al, fungal, and viral infections. The remaining 18% used data from AI Challenger 2018, ImageNet, Crowd AI,PlantDisease, Coffee leaf, etc. The sensors used to collect this data arecameras, smartphones, and drones.4.6. RQ5: What is the countries-wise distribution of the self made-data?Fig. 4presents the map of the experimental site of data collectionfrom the selected studies. It shows that most papers used data collectedin Asia (14, 6, 4, and 3, respectively, from China, India, South Korea, andBangladesh), followed by the United States of America, Europe (Italy,Germany, United Kingdom, Greece, and Latvia). In addition, therewere some efforts from North Africa (Algeria and Egypt), AustralAfrica (South Africa), and East Africa (Tanzania). From the selectedstudies, West Africa was not represented ( Fig. 4).4.7. RQ6: What models were used?Deep Learning applications have accelerated exponentially over thelastﬁve years thanks to the advancement of powerful computing de-vices such as graphics processing units (GPU). Thus, this section con-siders the classical machine learning algorithms and ends with deeplearning.4.7.1. Classical machine learning algorithms for stress detection in fruitsand vegetablesClassical Machine Learning methods are either supervised, semi-supervised, unsupervised, or reinforcement based. In supervised learn-ing, the datasets are labeled, which means that the output parametersand expected results must be speciﬁed. Accuracy must also be adjustedduring the learning process. Examples of algorithms in supervisedlearning are linear regressions, support vector machines (SVM), deci-sion trees, etc. Semi-supervised learning methods combine labeledand unlabelled data. Algorithms of this type are fuelled by certain infor-mation through labeled categories, suggestions, and examples. Thenthey create their labels by exploring the data on their own, accordingto a rudimentary scheme or the guidance of data scientists. One exam-ple is the naive Bayes classiﬁ
er that uses Bayes' theorem based on con-ditional probabilities. Researchers employ this algorithm to recognizeclasses of objects on labeled data sets. Then, the algorithm is trainedon unlabelled data. Once this cycle is completed, the researchers associ-ate the labels and restart the training. This technique is mainly used inthe context of natural language processing. Unlike supervised algo-rithms, unsupervised algorithms are not trained. Unsupervised algo-rithms depend on extensive learning methods to identify patterns bycombing unlabelled training data sets and observing correlations.Some examples are K-means clustering, Principal Component Analysis(PCA), and A priori. Reinforcement learning algorithms are built on re-ward and penalty systems. The algorithm is assigned a goal and triesto get closer to it to obtain maximum compensation. It relies on limitedinformation and learns from its previous actions. These algorithms maydepend on a pattern (a model); they must follow prede ﬁned steps, and the number of errors and trials is limited. Other algorithms do not relyon a scheme and interpret with each new attempt. Supervised and un-supervised methods are most commonly used for stress detection infruits and vegetables.4.7.1.1. Supervised machine learning. Samajpati and Degadwala (2016) propose the classiﬁcation of apple fruit diseases from the extraction offeatures and colors. Random forest classiﬁers were used for disease clas- siﬁcation. Still, on apple,Omrani et al. (2014)were interested in detect- ing three-leaf diseases (Alternaria, black spot, and apple leaf miner)using support vector regression based on the radial basis function. Theauthors compared ANN and SVM as a classi ﬁer and found that SVM per- formed better. Note that the data used are unbalanced between theTable 4Common and scientiﬁc names of species and occurrence frequency.Common name Scientiﬁc name Occurrence Frequency (%)AppleMalus domestica 35 16.67 TomatoSolanum lycopersicum 33 15.71 GrapeVitis vinifera 16 7.62 LemonCitrus lemon 14 6.67 PeachPrunus persica 13 6.19 OrangeCitrus sinensis 12 5.71 CucumberCucumis sativus 11 5.24 StrawberryFragaria anassa 10 4.76 CherryPrunus avium 9 4.29 BananaMusa paradisiaca 8 3.81 MangoMangifera indica 8 3.81 PotatoSolanum tuberosum 6 2.86 PepperCapsicum annuum 5 2.38 LettuceLactuca sativa 4 1.90 PearPyrus communis L. 4 1.90 GuavaPsidium guajava 3 1.43 PomegranatePunica granatum 3 1.43 CabbageBrassica oleracea 2 0.95 Sugar beetBeta vulgaris 2 0.95 RaspberryRubus idaeus 2 0.95 CarrotDaucus carota 2 0.95 Pumpkin/SquashCucurbitaspp. 2 0.95 JackfruitArtocarpus heterophyllus 1 0.48 OliveOlea europaea 1 0.48 PlumPrunus domestica 1 0.48 AvocadoPersea americana 1 0.48 PineappleAnanas comosus 1 0.48 PapayaCarica papaya 1 0.48S.C.A. Houetohossou, V.R. Houndji, C.G. Hounmenou et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 9 (2023) 46 –60
52three classes considered. Nine classiﬁcation algorithms are used for jackfruit disease classiﬁcation in Bangladesh (Habib et al., 2022). Among the algorithms, Random Forest performed better than all otherclassiﬁers, with an accuracy of almost 90%. In addition, Vakilian and Massah (2013)implemented a device for detecting two fungal diseasesof cucumbers. Inoculated plants are used as input for the ANNbackpropagation algorithm, giving an acceptable performance. Zhang and Wu (2012)developed a classiﬁcation method based on multiclassSVM in several steps. Theﬁrst step consisted of the background removalof acquired images with a split-and-merge algorithm. The second stepinvolved extracting each fruit image's color histogram, texture, andshape features for feature space composition. In the ﬁnal step, the multiclass SVM was constructed. They come up with the Gaussian Ra-dial Basis Kernel achieving the highest classi ﬁcation accuracy of 88.2%. InRazmjooy et al. (2012), they used SVM sequential minimal optimiza-tion (SMO) to reach 95% accuracy for the classi ﬁcation of potato defects.4.7.1.2. Unsupervised machine learning. Dubey et al. (2013)proposed the defect segmentation of apple fruits using k-means clustering in twosteps. Theﬁrst step consisted of pixel clustering based on color and spe-cial features. The second step used the merged clustered block to a spe-ciﬁc number of regions. Likewise, K-means clustering was used forsegmentation in the case of any infection ( Samajpati and Degadwala, 2016). Moreover,Omrani et al. (2014)employed K-means clustering to segment the region of interest in apple leaves. However, waveletand grey-level co-occurrence matrix techniques were used to get thetexture features. Also discussing segmentation of the diseased region,Rozario et al. (2016)suggested a computer vision-based approach infruits and vegetables using K-means clustering, modi ﬁed K-means clus- tering, and the Otsu method. In Bangladesh, an agromedical expert sys-tem for detecting and classifying papaya fruits has been developed(Habib et al., 2020). The system uses K-means clustering to detect thedisease-infested region on a leaf. Still, in Bangladesh, another agro-medical expert system for jackfruit detection and classi ﬁcation has been developed (Habib et al., 2022). The system also uses K-means clus-tering to detect the disease-infested region on a leaf. PCA was employedto reduce the dimensions of the feature space in Zhang and Wu (2012). Moreover, for potato defect detection and size sorting, Razmjooy et al.(2012)provided a system based on mathematical binarization and de-fect segmentation using color-based classi ﬁers.4.7.2. Deep learning approachesDepending on the learning task, four deep learning approaches canbe considered: deep supervised, deep semi-supervised, deep unsuper-vised, and deep reinforcement learning.4.7.2.1. Deep supervised learning.The deep supervised learning tech-nique deals with labeled data. It considers a collection of inputs and re-sultant outputsx
i,yiðÞ. For instance, we want to predictbyiknowing the inputx
iand will obtain a loss valuelbyi,yi/C0/C1. Then, the network parame- ters are repeatedly updated to get an improved estimate for the pre-ferred outputs (Alzubaidi et al., 2021). There are several supervised DL techniques, and the most common are convolutional neural networks(CNNs) and recurrent neural networks (RNNs).Convolutional neural networks, also known as CNN or ConvNet, aredeep learning algorithms that take the input image, assign weights/biases to the components of the image, and then classify the entire pic-ture. Based on the resolution and size of the image, it is transformed intoan array. Each entry consists of a number between 0 and 255 for RGB(Red Green Blue) systems. This number represents the pixel intensityof the image. CNN's structure consists of three layers: the convolutionallayer, the pooling layer, and the fully connected (FC) layer. The ﬁrst layer makes extraction of high-level features. It convolved the imagewith aﬁlter or kernel using the formula:Z¼X∗f, whereXandfare the input image and theﬁlter, respectively. The second layer intendsto reduce the spatial size of the image representation and the computa-tional and processing overhead of neural networks. It also extracts keypositionally and rotationally invariant features. The last layer uses theﬂattened output of the previous pooling/convolution layer as input.Flattened means that a 3D matrix or array is expanded into a vector.Speciﬁc mathematical calculations are performed for each FC layer.After the vector has passed through all the fully connected layers, thesoftmax activation function is used in the last layer to calculate theprobability that input will belong to a particular class. This process is re-peated for other classes and individual images within those classes. Ittrains the network and teaches you, for instance, to distinguish between
Fig. 4.Countries-wise distribution of self-data collected.S.C.A. Houetohossou, V.R. Houndji, C.G. Hounmenou et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 9 (2023) 46 –60
53healthy and diseased.Fig. 5shows that most papers used GoogleNet,ResNet50, and VGG16 for stress classiﬁcation in fruits and vegetables. These are the architectures of convolutional neural networks (CNN).The CNN technique has performed well on tasks such as disease identi-ﬁcation on apple fruit (Agarwal et al., 2019;Alharbi and Arif, 2020;Jiang et al., 2019;Sheikh et al., 2020), detection and diagnosis of damage tojackfruit by pests and diseases (Orano et al., 2019;Kukreja and Dhiman, 2020), tomato disease identiﬁcation (Ashok et al., 2020; Mkonyi et al., 2020;Aﬁﬁet al., 2021;Brahimi et al., 2017), mango dis- ease classiﬁcation (Chouhan et al., 2019;Singh et al., 2018), guava dis- ease detection (Farhan Al Haque et al., 2019;Howlader et al., 2019), strawberry disease diagnosis (Park et al., 2018;Sheikh et al., 2020; Aﬁﬁet al., 2021;Ferentinos, 2018), abiotic light stress grading in lettuceleaves (Hao et al., 2020), citrus disease identiﬁcation (Pan et al., 2019), diagnosis of multiple cucumber infections ( Tani et al., 2018), and grape diseases classiﬁcation (Thet et al., 2020;Sheikh et al., 2020). One can attribute the widespread use of CNNs to their outstanding per-formance in solving a wide range of problems, particularly those involv-ing images (A l z u b a i d ie ta l . ,2 0 2 1). In addition to performance, there areother advantages to using CNN models. For instance, the reduction ofweight and convolutional neurons (Agarwal et al., 2019), the capability to transfer learning (Aﬁﬁet al., 2021;Thet et al., 2020), the possibility todeploy the models in a mobile application ( Orano et al., 2019; Ferentinos, 2018;Sheikh et al., 2020;Pan et al., 2019
), the alleviation of training time required (Atabay, 2017), the lower computational com- plexity (Ferentinos, 2018), and the simplicity of the model (Singh et al., 2018). Moreover, several open-source CNN software have been madeavailable. However, unbalanced data often hurt CNN models perfor-mance (Hao et al., 2020). Apart from CNNs, there are other superviseddeep learning models, including Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN).The Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN) technique is specialized insequences of dataxtðÞ¼x1ðÞ,...,xτðÞwith the time step index t rang- ing from 1 toτ. It uses the knowledge gained from its previous state asan input value for the current prediction. Therefore, it can help achieveshort-term memory in a network and effectively manage time-baseddata systems. There are two different types of RNN: Long Short TermMemory (LSTM) and Gated Recurrent Units (GRUs). The LSTM is con-ceived to use memory to forecast data in temporal sequences. It hasthree gates: input, output, and oblivion. The GRUs also predict time se-quences via memory but have two gates: Update and Reset. The RNNmethod works best for tasks where a single input is connected to a sin-gle output and a single input is associated with such an output se-quence. It also works best with a series of inputs that produce a singleoutput, such as sentiment analysis, and a set of inputs that create a set
Fig. 5.Deep Learning models considered in the assessed papers.S.C.A. Houetohossou, V.R. Houndji, C.G. Hounmenou et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 9 (2023) 46 –60
54of outcomes. The technique is used to measure water stress in tomatoplants based on images, environmental data (temperature, relative hu-midity, vapor pressure difference, and scattered light), and stem diam-eter (Wakamori et al., 2020).4.7.2.2. Deep semi-supervised learning. In Deep semi-supervised learning, the learning process is based on partially-labeled datasets. That is, weare in a situation where few labeled learning examples are availableand many unlabelled samples (Ouali et al., 2020). The proportion of la- beled examples is generally relatively small, ranging from 1 to 10% ofthe total number of instances (Ouali et al., 2020). Text document classi- ﬁers are among the most common examples of semi-supervised learn-ing applications because it is challenging to retrieve large numbers oflabeled text documents. Generative adversarial networks (GANs) aresometimes used in the same way as this technique. GANs are composedof two models: the Generator, which generates new samples based onthe approximate distribution of the original dataset, and the Discrimina-tor, which is used to distinguish the original dataset from the data gen-erated by the Generator. Another variant of GANs techniques is DeepConvolutional Generative Adversarial Networks (DCGANs). DCGANstechniques helped in estimating the severity of citrus diseases, improv-ing the model learning performance ( Zeng et al., 2020). The advantage of these techniques is to minimize the amount of labeled data needed(Alzubaidi et al., 2021). One of the drawbacks of this technique is irrel-evant input functions that exist in training data and can lead to incorrectdecisions (Alzubaidi et al., 2021). GANs techniques are also known to beunstable to train (Zeng et al., 2020).4.7.2.3. Deep unsupervised learning.This technique allows running thelearning process without labeled data available. The model is supposedto organize the data on its own, based on the input data's features, todiscover the data's unknown structure or relationship. This approachoften includes Generation network technology, dimensionality reduc-tion, and clustering. Some members of the DL family are working wellon Nonlinear dimensionality reduction and clustering tasks. These in-clude Restricted Boltzmann Machine (RBM) and Autoencoder.The Restricted Boltzmann Machine (RBM) or Boltzmann Ma-chine: is a generative unsupervised model that learns a probabilitydistribution from the original dataset and infers data it has neverseen before. The RBM has an input layer and one or more hiddenlayers. It uses a neural network with neurons connected to neuronsin the same layer and other neurons in other layers. The nodes areconnected in a circle. In contrast to all deterministic network models,the RBM model is called stochastic. It is ideal for system monitoringand handwritten digit recognition (eg: check veri ﬁcation and crimi- nal evidence). The advantage of RBM is its possibility to encode anydistribution due to its expressiveness and computational ef ﬁciency. In addition, using hidden layer activation as input to other modelsis a helpful feature to improve performance. This technique is morechallenging to train.Autoencoders are unsupervised deep learning techniques used tolearn efﬁcient data coding (Kunapuli and Bhallamudi, 2021). They consist of four orﬁveﬂat, two symmetric deep belief networks.Half of the network encodes, and the other half decodes. Theautoencoder learns essential functions in the data by minimizing re-construction errors between input and output data ( Abirami and Chitra, 2020). There are an equal number of neurons in the outputlayer and the input layer with Autoencoders. Autoencoders are ﬂex- ible due to both linear and nonlinear transformations in encoding(Abirami and Chitra, 2020).Autoencoder was used to predict and classify early and late phe-nomena resulting from macronutrient de ﬁciencies in tomato plants (Tran et al., 2019) and for detection of lead concentration in lettuce(Xin et al., 2020
). In general, the most crucial drawback of unsuper-vised learning methods is their inability to provide accurateinformation from the data sorting and computational effort ( Singh et al., 2019).4.7.2.4. Deep reinforcement learning. Developed in 2013 with Google DeepMind (Mnih et al., 2015;Alzubaidi et al., 2021), Deep reinforce- ment learning is the process by which an agent interacts with the envi-ronment to change its state. The agent takes action accordingly based onthe observation made. Agents interact with the situation to help the net-work achieve its goals. This network model has an input layer, an outputlayer, and some hidden layers, and the state of the environment is theinput layer itself. The model serves as a continuous attempt to predictfuture rewards for actions taken in a particular situation. This learningis much more challenging to perform because it cannot use the simpleloss function (Alzubaidi et al., 2021) compared to the traditional deepsupervised method. In addition, there are two crucial differences be-tween deep supervised learning and deep reinforcement learning.First, one does not have full access to the function requiring optimiza-tion. That is, one needs to query through the interaction. Second, thestate being interacted with is founded on an environment in whichthe input is based on previous actions ( Arulkumaran et al., 2017; Alom et al., 2019;Alzubaidi et al., 2021).4.8. RQ7: What are the hyper-parameters used to implement the models?Fig. 6shows four hyperparameters of DL models: the activationfunctions, the pooling methods, the optimizers, and the loss functions.The activation functions are added at each layer of the DL model. Theyenable the algorithm to learn and understand something extremelycomplicated and non-linear between the inputs and response variables.Relu (Rectiﬁed Linear Unit) was preferred mainly (80 %) over the other Sigmoid, Tanh, and LeakyRelu. Because of its mathematical simplicity:y = max(0,x), Relu uses less expensive operations. Therefore, its trainingrate is fast (Kukreja and Dhiman, 2020), and it improves convergence and rectiﬁes vanishing gradient problems. LeakyRelu is an extension ofthe Relu function. The Sigmoid function is S-shaped and is used for bi-nary classiﬁcation problems such as 0 healthy and 1 diseased. It isexpressed by:y¼1=1þexp/C0xðÞT h ea c t i v a t i o nf u n c t i o nT a n hi sa ne x -tension of the Sigmoid function. It can be calculated using the expressiony¼1=1þexp
/C02x/C0/C1/C0/C1/C01 Max pooling operators were used more thanaverage pooling (Fig. 6). The objects of interest produce the highest pixelvalues, so taking the maximum value in a block will be better than theaverage. In addition, max-pooling acts as a noise canceller and providesbetter performance than average pooling.The optimizers are algorithms used to minimize the loss function.The Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) and Adam(Adaptive MomentEstimation) were the most used, respectively, with 52 %and 27%.T h e SGD frequently updates the model parameters and allows using largedata sets with less memory. Adam optimizer proposes an adaptivelearning rate for each parameter.The loss function’Categorical cross-entropy was used in more than75% of the papers. The categorical cross-entropy function deals withprobabilities. Each of the predicted probabilities is compared to the ac-tual value of the class output (0 or 1), and a score is calculated. In con-trast, the Contrastive loss function operates on the data pointsgenerated by the network and their positions relative to each other(Khosla et al., 2020). Then, the Categorical cross-entropy seems betterfor image classiﬁcation tasks.4.9. RQ8: What are the evaluation metrics?The most frequently used metrics for assessing model performanceare accuracy, precision, recall, and F1 score ( Fig. 7). Accuracy or Classiﬁ- cation Accuracy (CA) measures the effectiveness of a model as the per-centage of correct predictions where the top class (the one with thehighest probability) as indicated by the model, is the same as the targetS.C.A. Houetohossou, V.R. Houndji, C.G. Hounmenou et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 9 (2023) 46 –60
55label as annotated beforehand by the author ( Kamilaris and Prenafeta- Boldu, 2018). When precision (P) is the fraction of true positives (TP,correct predictions) from the total amount of relevant results, the Recall(R) is the fraction of TP from the total amount of TP and false negatives(FN). The F1 score is the harmonic average of precision (P) and recall(R). For multi-class classiﬁcation problems, each metric gets averagedamong all the classes. The following formulas are used to computethem (Kamilaris and Prenafeta-Boldu, 2018 ): CA¼TPþTNðÞ=TPþTNþFNþFPðÞ ð 1ÞP¼TP=TPþFPðÞR¼TP=TPþFNðÞ ð 2ÞF1¼2∗TP∗FPðÞ=TPþFPðÞ ð 3ÞThe R2 and the root mean square error (RMSE) are the few ob-served regression metrics. The RMSE is the square root of the meansquare error. It is used to measure the standard deviation of the re-siduals. The coefﬁcient of determination or R-square is the propor-tion of the variance of the dependent variable that the linearregression model explains. The R2 is a scale-free score, whichmeans that regardless of whether the values are small or large, theR-square value will be less than one. The R2 and RMSE are calculatedusing the following formulas.RMSE¼ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1N/C18/C19∑Ni¼1yi/C0by/C0/C12s ð4ÞR
2¼1/C0∑yi/C0by/C0/C12
∑yi/C0yðÞ2ð5Þ4.10. RQ9: What are the performances achieved?We consider the most used evaluation metric (accuracy) to groupthe best-performing models reported by the authors into ﬁve classes. Theﬁve classes are deﬁned as follows: class 1 from 95 to 99.99%, class2 from 90 to 94.99%, class 3 from 80 to 89.99%, class 4 from 70 to79.99%, and class 5 from 50 to 69.99%. We then calculated the occur-rence of each model in a class and reported it as a frequency. This wasdone for two purposes. Theﬁrst one is to identify the best models ofall those written by the authors. The second purpose is to check if thebest ones are also the most commonly used. We assume that a modelwould be best if it has been mentioned each time with at least a 90% ac-curacy value. Thus, a model must fulﬁll two criteria to be considered ‘best’.T h eﬁrst criterion is that it has to be represented in the ﬁrst class. The second criterion is that the model is neither in class 3 nor inclass 4 or 5. According toFig. 8, only ResNet 50 and AlexNet meet thecriteria and can therefore be considered the ‘best’models. Of the top three most used models, GoogleNet, VGG16, and ResNet50, onlyResNet50 is among the best according to our criteria. One concludesthat the most used models are not all included in the best ones.4.11. RQ10: What are the gaps and perspectivesThe automatic detection and classiﬁcation of stress in fruits and veg- etables is a useful approach that eases the task of both the farmer andthe specialist of plant pathology. Indeed, it allows non-experiencedfarmers to monitor their plants and apply timely measures to optimizeyield. The plant pathologist can no longer travel long distances to assistthe farmer. However, there areﬁve signiﬁcant gaps linked to the use of these methods. Theﬁrst one, the most important of the whole process,from training to testing the model, is related to the data. Data challengeis on the one hand due to the source and, on the other hand, the quantity
Fig. 6.Hyper parameters: (a) activation functions, (b) Pooling methods, (c) Optimizers, (d) Loss functions.S.C.A. Houetohossou, V.R. Houndji, C.G. Hounmenou et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 9 (2023) 46 –60
56of data. Collecting data representing the characteristics of several dis-eases at different stages requires careful monitoring, ﬁnancial means, time, and patience. It constitutes a constraint for researchers who, toremedy this, use online databases to train their models. For example,in more than 45% of the papers studied, the data used were obtained on-line (Hong et al., 2020;Zeng et al., 2020;Zhou et al., 2021;Adedoja et al., 2019;Agarwal et al., 2019;Pan et al., 2019;Zheng et al., 2019; Rangarajan et al., 2018). Plantvillage is the most popular of all the onlinedatabases and is found in 28% of the articles reviewed. They offer thepossibility of having many images of several species. However, theseare images taken in the laboratory. These pictures are mostly infestedleaves with a homogeneous background ( El-Kereamy et al., 2016). They do not show different illumination levels given the time of daythe photo would be taken in theﬁeld, the crop substrate, or any otherfeatures observed in a naturalﬁeld environment. As a result, theseimages do not reﬂect what is happening in theﬁeld. Another challenge related to the data is their small quantity which sometimes creates animbalance in classes. Indeed, there are some diseases whose symptomsare not easily observed in theﬁeld. Thus, collecting data to balance theserare classes with other frequent classes is not always straightforward.From the reviewed papers, many authors faced unbalanced classesproblem in their training data (Fenu and Malloci, 2021;Tani et al., 2018;Kodors et al., 2021;Fuentes et al., 2017;Liu et al., 2020). In addi- tion, if the number of observations in some classes is minimal, it will bechallenging to represent between the classes, which will causeproblems in validation or creating test samples. For instance, Fuentes et al. (2017)considered 0.9% of their dataset for the minimum classand 43% of the data in the maximum class, while Kodors et al. (2021) used 6% of the observations in the minimum class while 65% repre-sented the maximum class. Theﬁnal consequence is the reduction ofthe global performance of the model. Of the studied articles, 20% usedunbalanced data. Some augmentation methods, such as blur, rotation,contrast enhancement, etc., are used to overcome over ﬁtting and class imbalance. However, these methods still do not re ﬂect what is observed in the actual situation. Apart from augmentation methods, transferlearning is also used for small databases and unbalanced classes.However, even transfer learning does not improve the model's accuracywhen the imbalance is enormous. The second gap is the consequence oftheﬁrst. Indeed, the models deployed with data of homogeneouscharacteristics or unbalanced classes suffer from bias and over ﬁtting. The unbalanced classes create problems because one doesn't getenough insight into the class on which the model is based. Then, opti-mized results were not obtained for imbalanced classes in real time.The models show good performances on training data but havedifﬁculty generalizing. Theﬁnal consequence is the reduction of theglobal robustness of the model. The third gap is the non-classi
ﬁcation of the severity of some attacks. Although necessary, the infection's se-verity was not implemented in some models ( Orano et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2020;De Luna et al., 2019). In particular, (Wang et al., 2020) and (De Luna et al., 2019) proposed to detect whether appleand tomato fruits were defective or not. But there are several levels ofdefectiveness in general. Thus, the merchant would be more pro ﬁtable if the algorithm categorized the severity of defects. Therefore, the lessattacked ones can be sold and the more attacked ones isolated quickly
Fig. 7.Evaluation metrics used within the reviewed papers.S.C.A. Houetohossou, V.R. Houndji, C.G. Hounmenou et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 9 (2023) 46 –60
57to avoid losing everything. The fourth gap is related to the types of stressstudied. Most of the work focuses on the early detection of biotic stress,such as diseases. Very little work has focused on abiotic stress due tonutrient deﬁciency, water (water stress), heavy metal contamination,and light quantity. At the same time, no work has been done onpredicting stress due to climate change in fruits and vegetables. Indeed,climate change has many side effects in our lives. Thus, we recommendthat AI-based models be developed to predict the impact of abioticstress related to climate change on fruits and vegetables. It wouldallow us to start thinking aboutﬁnding mitigation measures. Finally,the early detection of several diseases on the same leaf using AI methodsremains a real challenge. Because, in the ﬁeld, it is not uncommon to ﬁnd several diseases or pest attacks on the same leaf. Experimentsshould be implemented to collect mega data with various characteris-tics on different species of fruits and vegetables. These data should bemade available to researchers to have robust models that work well inreal situations.5. ConclusionApplications of Deep Learning in agriculture have been steadily ad-vancing in recent years. This review presented recent work in agricul-ture to identify and classify biotic and abiotic stresses in fruits andvegetables. The effectiveness of the models was evaluated based onthe data sources, the models used, the hyper parameters adopted, andthe evaluation metrics used. Finally, the limitations of the papers andsome perspectives were presented. The ﬁnding is that most of thedeep learning techniques used had a good performance but needed tobe improved. This review also provides research guidelines for scientistswho intend to work in this area.FundingThis work was supported by the German Academic Exchange Ser-vice (DAAD) and the scholarship program ”Artiﬁcial Intelligence for De- velopment (AI4D) in Africa”, funded by the International DevelopmentResearch Centre (IDRC) and the Swedish International DevelopmentCooperation Agency (SIDA), and managed by the African Centre forTechnology Studies (ACTS).Declaration of Competing InterestThe authors declare that they have no known competing ﬁnancial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to in ﬂu- ence the work reported in this paper.References
Abirami, S., Chitra, P., 2020. Chapter fourteen - energy-ef ﬁcient edge based real- time healthcare support system. In: Raj, P., Evangeline, P. (Eds.), The Digital Twin Paradigm for Smarter Systems a nd Environments: The Industry Use Cases. Elsevier, Advances in Computers, pp. 339 –368https://doi.org/10.1016/ bs.adcom.2019.09.007.Adedoja, A., Owolawi, P.A., Mapayi, T., 2019. Deep learning based on NASNet for plant dis-ease recognition using leave images. icABCD 2019 - 2nd International Conference onAdvances in Big Data, Computing and Data Communication Systems, pp. 1 –5https:// doi.org/10.1109/ICABCD.2019.8851029 .
Fig. 8.Models classiﬁcation based on the achieved performances.S.C.A. Houetohossou, V.R. Houndji, C.G. Hounmenou et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 9 (2023) 46 –60
58Aﬁﬁ, A., Alhumam, A., Abdelwahab, A., 2021. Convolutional neural network for automaticidentiﬁcation of plant diseases with limited data. Plants 10, 1 –16.https://doi.org/10. 3390/plants10010028.Agarwal, M., Kaliyar, R.K., Singal, G., Gupta, S.K., 2019. Fcnn-Lda: a faster convolution neu-ral network model for leaf disease identi ﬁcation on apple’s leaf dataset. Proceedings of 2019 International Conference on Information and Communication Technologyand Systems, ICTS 2019, pp. 246 –251https://doi.org/10.1109/ICTS.2019.8850964 . Alharbi, A.G., Arif, M., 2020. Detection and classi ﬁcation of apple diseases using convolutional neural networks. 2020 2nd International Conference on Computerand Information Sciences, ICCIS 2020, pp. 1 –5https://doi.org/10.1109/ICCIS49240. 2020.9257640.Alom, M.Z., Taha, T.M., Yakopcic, C., Westberg, S., Sidike, P., Nasrin, M.S., Hasan, M., VanEssen, B.C., Awwal, A.A.S., Asari, V.K., 2019. A state-of-the-art survey on deep learningtheory and architectures. Electronics 8. https://doi.org/10.3390/electronics8030292 . Alzubaidi, L., Zhang, J., Humaidi, A.J., Al-Dujaili, A., Duan, Y., Al-Shamma, O., Santamaría, J.,Fadhel, M.A., Al-Amidie, M., Farhan, L., 2021. Review of deep learning: concepts, cnnarchitectures, challenges, applications, future directions. J. Big Data 8, 53. https://doi. org/10.1186/s40537-021-00444-8 . Arulkumaran, K., Deisenroth, M.P., Brundage, M., Bharath, A.A., 2017. Deep reinforcementlearning: a brief survey. IEEE Signal Process. Mag. 34, 26 –38.https://doi.org/10.1109/ MSP.2017.2743240.Ashok, S., Kishore, G., Rajesh, V., Suchitra, S., Sophia, S.G., Pavithra, B., 2020. Tomato leafdisease detection using deep learning techniques. 2020 5th International Conferenceon Communication and Electronics Systems (ICCES), pp. 979 –983https://doi.org/10. 1109/ICCES48766.2020.9137986 . Atabay, H.A., 2017.Deep residual learning for tomato plant leaf disease identi ﬁcation. J. Theor. Appl. Inf. Technol. 95, 6800 –6808. Atkinson, N.J., Urwin, P.E., 2012. The interaction of plant biotic and abiotic stresses: fromgenes to theﬁeld. J. Exp. Bot. 63, 3523–3543.https://doi.org/10.1093/JXB/ERS100 . Bazrafshan, O., Ehteram, M., Latif, S.D., Huang, Y.F., Teo, F.Y., Ahmed, A.N., El-Sha ﬁe, A., 2022. Predicting crop yields using a new robust bayesian averaging model based onmultiple hybrid anﬁs and mlp models. Ain Shams Eng. J. 13. https://doi.org/10. 1016/j.asej.2022.101724.Blancard, D., 2012.Tomato Diseases. Snd edition ed. Quae.Brahimi, M., Boukhalfa, K., Moussaoui, A., 2017. Deep learning for tomato diseases: classi-ﬁcation and symptoms visualization. Appl. Artif. Intell. 31, 299 –315.https://doi.org/ 10.1080/08839514.2017.1315516 . Breitenreiter, A., Poppinga, H., Berlin, H., Technik, F., 2015. Deep learning. Nature 521, 2015.Chouhan, S.S., Kaul, A., Singh, U.P., 2019. A deep learning approach for the classi ﬁcation of diseased plant leaf images. Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on Com-munication and Electronics Systems, ICCES 2019, pp. 1168
–1172https://doi.org/10. 1109/ICCES45898.2019.9002201 . De Luna, R.G., Dadios, E.P., Bandala, A.A., Vicerra, R.R.P., 2019. Tomato fruit image datasetfor deep transfer learning-based defect detection. Proceedings of the IEEE 2019 9thInternational Conference on Cybernetics and Intelligent Systems and Robotics, Auto-mation and Mechatronics, CIS and RAM 2019, pp. 356 –361https://doi.org/10.1109/ CIS-RAM47153.2019.9095778 . Dubey, S.R., Dixit, P., Singh, N., Gupta, J.P., 2013. Infected fruit part detection using k-means clustering segmentation technique. Int. J. Interact. Multimedia Arti ﬁc. Intellig. 2, 65.https://doi.org/10.9781/IJIMAI.2013.229 . Dutot, M., Nelson, L.M., Tyson, R.C., 2013. Predicting the spread of postharvest disease instored fruit, with application to apples. Postharvest Biol. Technol. 85, 45 –56.https:// doi.org/10.1016/J.POSTHARVBIO.2013.04.003 . El-Kereamy, A., Meitz-Hopkins, J.C., Testolin, A., Salathé, M., Mohanty, S.P., Hughes, D.P.,2016. Using deep learning for image-based plant disease detection. Front. Plant Sci.7, 1419.https://doi.org/10.3389/fpls.2016.01419 —www.frontiersin.org. Farhan Al Haque, A.S., Haﬁz, R., Hakim, M.A., Rasiqul Islam, G.M., 2019. A computer visionsystem for guava disease detection and recommend curative solution using deeplearning approach. 2019 22nd International Conference on Computer and Informa-tion Technology, ICCIT 2019, pp. 1 –6.https://doi.org/10.1109/ICCIT48885.2019. 9038598.Feng, S., Yi, J., Li, X., Wu, X., Zhao, Y., Ma, Y., Bi, J., 2021. Systematic review of phenolic com-pounds in apple fruits: compositions, distribution, absorption, metabolism, and pro-cessing stability. J. Agric. Food Chem. 69, 7 –27.https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jafc. 0c05481.Fenu, G., Malloci, F.M., 2021. Using multioutput learning to diagnose plant disease andstress severity. Complexity 2021. https://doi.org/10.1155/2021/6663442 . Ferentinos, K.P., 2018. Deep learning models for plant disease detection and diagnosis.Comput. Electron. Agric. 145, 311 –318.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compag.2018.01. 009.Fuentes, A., Yoon, S., Kim, S.C., Park, D.S., 2017. A robust deep-learning-based detector forreal-time tomato plant diseases and pests recognition. Sensors (Switzerland) 17.https://doi.org/10.3390/s17092022 . Fukushima, K., 1988.Neocognitron: a hierarchical neural network capable of visual pat-tern recognition. Neural Netw. 119 –130. Goncalves, J.F.D.C., Barreto, D.C.D.S., Santo, U.M.D., Fernandes, A.V., Sampaio, P.D.T.B.,Buckeridge, M.S., 2005. Growth, photosynthesis and stress indicators in young rose-wood plants (aniba rosaeodora ducke) under different light intensities. Braz.J. Plant Physiol. 17, 325–334.https://doi.org/10.1590/S1677-04202005000300007 . Habib, M.T., Majumder, A., Jakaria, A.Z., Akter, M., Uddin, M.S., Ahmed, F., 2020. Machinevision based papaya disease recognition. J. King Saud Univ. Comp. Inform. Sci. 32,300–309.https://doi.org/10.1016/J.JKSUCI.2018.06.006 . Habib, M.T., Mia, M.J., Uddin, M.S., Ahmed, F., 2022. An in-depth exploration of automatedjackfruit disease recognition. J. King Saud Univ. Comp. Inform. Sci. 34, 1200 –1209. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.JKSUCI.2020.04.018 .Hao, X., Jia, J., Gao, W., Guo, X., Zhang, W., Zheng, L., 2020. MFC-CNN : an automatic grad-ing scheme for light stress levels of lettuce ( Lactuca sativaL.) leaves. Comput. Elec- tron. Agric. 179, 105847.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compag.2020.105847 . Hong, H., Lin, J., Huang, F., 2020. Tomato disease detection and classi ﬁcation by deep learning. Proceedings - 2020 International Conference on Big Data, Arti ﬁcial Intelli- gence and Internet of Things Engineering, ICBAIE 2020, pp. 25 –29https://doi.org/ 10.1109/ICBAIE49996.2020.00012 . Howlader, R., Habiba, U., Faisal, R.H., Rahman, M., 2019. Automatic recognition of guava leaf diseases using deep convolution neural network. 2019 International Conferenceon Electrical, Computer and Communication Engineering (ECCE), pp. 1 –5. Jiang, P., Chen, Y., Liu, B., He, D., Liang, C., 2019. Real-time detection of apple leaf diseasesusing deep learning approach based on improved convolutional neural networks.IEEE Access 7, 59069–59080.https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2914929 . Kabas, A., Fidan, H., Kucukaydin, H., Atan, H.N., 2022. Screening of wild tomato species andinterspeciﬁc hybrids for resistance/tolerance to tomato brown rugose fruit virus(tobrfv). Chil. J. Agric. Res. 82, 189 –196.https://doi.org/10.4067/S0718- 58392022000100189.Kamilaris, A., Prenafeta-Boldu, F.X., 2018. Deep learning in agriculture: a survey. Comput.Electron. Agric. 147, 70–90.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compag.2018.02.016 . Khosla, P., Teterwak, P., Wang, C., Sarna, A., Tian, Y., Isola, P., Maschinot, A., Liu, C.,Krishnan, D., 2020.Supervised contrastive learning. Advances in neural informationprocessing systems 33, 18661 –18673. Kodors, S., Lacis, G., Sokolova, O., Zhukovs, V., Apeinans, I., Bartulsons, T., 2021. Apple scabdetection using CNN and transfer learning. Agron. Res. 19, 507 –519.https://doi.org/ 10.15159/AR.21.045.Kukreja, V., Dhiman, P., 2020. A deep neural network based disease detectionscheme for Citrus fruits. Proceedings - International Conference on Smart Elec-tronics and Communication, ICOSEC 2020, 97 –101.https://doi.org/10.1109/ ICOSEC49089.2020.9215359 . Kunapuli, S.S., Bhallamudi, P.C., 2021. Chapter 22 - a review of deep learning models for medical diagnosis. In: Kumar, P., Kumar, Y., Tawhid, M.A. (Eds.), Machine Learning,Big Data, and IoT for Medical Informatics. Academic Press, pp. 389 –404 Intelligent Data-Centric Systems.LeCun, Y., Bottou, L., Bengio, Y., Haffner, P., 1998. Gradient-based learning applied to doc- ument recognition. Proc. IEEE 521, 2278 –2324. Li, L., Zhang, S., Wang, B., 2021. Plant disease detection and classi ﬁcation by deep learning - a review. IEEE Access 9, 56683 –56698.https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2021. 3069646.Liu, B., Ding, Z., Tian, L., He, D., Li, S., Wang, H., 2020. Grape leaf disease identi ﬁcation using improved deep convolutional neural networks. Front. Plant Sci. 11, 1 –14.https://doi. org/10.3389/fpls.2020.01082. McCulloch, W.S., Pitts, W.H., 1943. A Logical calculus of the Ideas Immanent in Nervous Activity. Pergamon Press PLC.Minsky, M., Papert, S., 1969.Perceptron. MIT Press.Mkonyi, L., Rubanga, D., Richard, M., Zekeya, N., Sawahiko, S., Maiseli, B., Machuve, D.,2020. Early identiﬁcation of Tuta absoluta in tomato plants using deep learning. Sci.Afr. 10, e00590.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sciaf.2020.e00590
. Mnih, V., Kavukcuoglu, K., Silver, D., Rusi, A., Veness, J., Bellemare, M., Graves, A.,Riedmiller, M., Fidjeland, A., Ostrovski, G., 2015. Human-level control through deep reinforcement learning. Nature 529, 33.Omrani, E., Khoshnevisan, B., Shamshirband, S., Saboohi, H., Anuar, N.B., Nasir, M.H.N.M.,2014. Potential of radial basis function-based support vector regression for apple dis-ease detection. Measurem. J. Int. Measurement Conf. 55, 512 –519.https://doi.org/10. 1016/J.MEASUREMENT.2014.05.033 . Orano, J.F.V., Maravillas, E.A., Aliac, C.J.G., 2019. Jackfruit fruit damage classi ﬁcation using convolutional neural network. 2019 IEEE 11th International Conference on Human-oid, Nanotechnology, Information Technology, Communication and Control, Environ-ment, and Management, HNICEM 2019 https://doi.org/10.1109/HNICEM48295.2019. 9073341.Ouali, Y., Hudelot, C., Tami, M., 2020. An Overview of Deep Semi-Supervised Learning.https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2006.05278 arXiv:2006.05278 [cs, stat]. Oviedo-Mireles, J.C., Soto-Parra, J.M., Sanchez, E., Yanez-Munoz, R.M., Perez-Leal, R.,Noperi-Mosqueda, L.C., 2021. Salicylic acid and nutrient immersion to maintainapple quality and bioactive compounds in postharvest. Notulae Botanicae HortiAgrobotanici Cluj-Napoca 49. https://doi.org/10.15835/nbha49312409 . Page, M.J., McKenzie, J.E., Bossuyt, P.M., Boutron, I., Hoffmann, T.C., Mulrow, C.D.,Shamseer, L., Tetzlaff, J.M., Akl, E.A., Brennan, S.E., Chou, R., Glanville, J., Grimshaw,J.M., Hróbjartsson, A., Lalu, M.M., Li, T., Loder, E.W., Mayo-Wilson, E., McDonald, S.,McGuinness, L.A., Stewart, L.A., Thomas, J., Tricco, A.C., Welch, V.A., Whiting, P.,Moher, D., 2021. The PRISMA 2020 statement: an updated guideline for reportingsystematic reviews. BMJ 372. https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.n71 . Pan, W., Qin, J., Xiang, X., Wu, Y.A.N., Tan, Y.U.N., Xiang, L., 2019. A smart mobile diagnosissystem for Citrus diseases based on densely connected convolutional networks. IEEEAccess 7, 87534–87542.https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2924973 . Park, H., Jeesook, E., Kim, S.H., 2018. Crops disease diagnosing using image-based deeplearning mechanism. Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on Computingand Network Communications, CoCoNet 2018, pp. 23 –26https://doi.org/10.1109/ CoCoNet.2018.8476914.Paul, A., Ghosh, S., Das, A.K., Goswami, S., Das Choudhury, S., Sen, S., 2020. A Review onAgricultural Advancement Based on Computer Vision and Machine Learning. vol.937. Springer, Singapore.https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-13-7403-6_50 . R Core Team, 2021.R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing. R Founda-tion for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria.Rangarajan, A.K., Purushothaman, R., Ramesh, A., 2018. Tomato crop disease classi ﬁcation using pre-trained deep learning algorithm. Procedia Comp. Sci. 133, 1040 –1047. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procs.2018.07.070 .S.C.A. Houetohossou, V.R. Houndji, C.G. Hounmenou et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 9 (2023) 46 –60
59Razmjooy, N., Mousavi, B.S., Soleymani, F., 2012. A real-time mathematical computermethod for potato inspection using machine vision. Comput. Math. Appl. 63,268–279.https://doi.org/10.1016/J.CAMWA.2011.11.019 . Rosenblatt, F., 1958.The Perceptron: A Probabilistic Model for Information Storage andOrganization in the Brain. American Psychological Association.Rozario, L.J., Rahman, T., Uddin, M.S., 2016. Segmentation of the region of defects in fruitsand vegetables. Int. J. Comp. Sci. Inform. Security 14, 399 –406.https://doi.org/10. 1016/J.MEASUREMENT.2014.05.033 . Samajpati, B.J., Degadwala, S.D., 2016. Hybrid approach for apple fruit diseases detectionand classiﬁcation using random forest classi ﬁer. International Conference on Com- munication and Signal Processing, ICCSP 2016, pp. 1015 –1019https://doi.org/10. 1109/ICCSP.2016.7754302. Samuel, A.L., 1959.Machine learning. Technol. Rev. 62, 42 –45. Santos, L., Santos, F.N., Oliveira, P.M., Shinde, P., 2020. Deep learning applications in agri- culture: a short review. In: Silva, M.F., Lu ıs Lima, J., Reis, L.P., Sanfeliu, A., Tardioli, D. (Eds.), Robot 2019: Fourth Iberian Robotics Conference. Springer InternationalPublishing, Cham, pp. 139 –151. Sheikh, M.H., Mim, T.T., Reza, M.S., Hena, M.H., 2020. Leaf diseases detection for commer-cial cultivation of obsolete fruit in Bangladesh using image processing system.Proceedings of the 2019 8th International Conference on System Modeling andAdvancement in Research Trends, SMART 2019, pp. 271 –275https://doi.org/10. 1109/SMART46866.2019.9117505 . Sikirou, R., Ezin, V., Festonand, B., Afoha, E., Sètondji, A.P., Djindé, T.F., Ouessou, I., 2015.Geographical distribution and prevalence of the main tomato fungal wilt diseasesin Benin. Int. J. Biol. Chem. Sci. 9, 603. https://doi.org/10.4314/ijbcs.v9i2.3 . Singh, A.K., Ganapathysubramanian, B., Sarkar, S., Singh, A., 2018. Deep learning for plantstress phenotyping: trends and future perspectives. Trends Plant Sci. 23, 883 –898. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tplants.2018.07.004 . Singh, U.P., Chouhan, S.S., Jain, S., Jain, S., 2019. Multilayer convolution neural network forthe classiﬁcation of mango leaves infected by anthracnose disease. IEEE Access 7,43721–43729.https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2907383 . Slavin, J.L., Lloyd, B., 2012. Health bene ﬁts of fruits and vegetables 1. Adv. Nutr., 506 –516 https://doi.org/10.3945/an.112.002154.506 . Tani, H., Kotani, R., Kagiwada, S., Uga, H., Iyatomi, H., 2018. Diagnosis of multiple cucum-ber infections with convolutional neural networks. Proceedings - Applied ImageryPattern Recognition Workshop 2018-Octob, 1 –4https://doi.org/10.1109/AIPR.2018. 8707385.Thet, K.Z., Htwe, K.K., Thein, M.M., 2020. Grape leaf diseases classi ﬁcation using convolutional neural network. Proceedings of the 4th International Conference onAdvanced Information Technologies, ICAIT 2020, pp. 147 –152https://doi.org/10. 1109/ICAIT51105.2020.9261801 .Tran, T.T., Choi, J.W., Le, T.T.H., Kim, J.W., 2019. A comparative study of deep CNN in fore-casting and classifying the macronutrient de ﬁciencies on development of tomato plant. Appl. Sci. (Switzerland) 9.
https://doi.org/10.3390/app9081601 . Vakilian, K.A., Massah, J., 2013. An arti ﬁcial neural network approach to identify fungal diseases of cucumber (cucumis sativus l.) plants using digital image processing. 46,pp. 1580–1588.https://doi.org/10.1080/03235408.2013.772321 . van Eck, N.J., Waltman, L., 2022. VOSviewer Manual. CWTS. p. 54. Verma, S., Nizam, S., Verma, P., 2013. Biotic and Abiotic Stress Signaling in Plants.Springer, pp. 25–49https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4614-6372-6_2 chapter 1. Wakamori, K., Mizuno, R., Nakanishi, G., Mineno, H., 2020. Multimodal neural networkwith clustering-based drop for estimating plant water stress. Comput. Electron.Agric. 168, 105118.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compag.2019.105118 . Wang, H.J., Mou, Q., Yue, Y., Zhao, H., 2020. Research on detection technology of variousfruit disease spots based on mask R-CNN. 2020 IEEE International Conference onMechatronics and Automation, ICMA 2020, pp. 1083 –1087https://doi.org/10.1109/ ICMA49215.2020.9233575. Wickham, H., 2016.ggplot2: Elegant Graphics for Data Analysis. Springer-Verlag,New York.Xin, Z., Jun, S., Yan, T., Quansheng, C., Xiaohong, W., Yingying, H., 2020. A deep learningbased regression method on hyperspectral data for rapid prediction of cadmium res-idue in lettuce leaves. Chemom. Intell. Lab. Syst. 200, 103996. https://doi.org/10. 1016/j.chemolab.2020.103996 . Zeng, Q., Ma, X., Cheng, B., Zhou, E., Pang, W., 2020. GANS-based data augmentation forcitrus disease severity detection using deep learning. IEEE Access 8,172882–172891.https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2020.3025196 . Zhang, Y., Wu, L., 2012. Classiﬁcation of fruits using computer vision and a multiclass sup-port vector machine. Sensors (Basel, Switzerland) 12, 12489 –12505.https://doi.org/ 10.3390/S120912489.Zheng, Z., Pan, S., Zhang, Y., 2019. Fruit tree disease recognition based on convolutionalneural networks. Proceedings - 2019 IEEE International Conferences on UbiquitousComputing and Communications and Data Science and Computational Intelligenceand Smart Computing, Networking and Services, IUCC/DSCI/SmartCNS 2019,pp. 118–122https://doi.org/10.1109/IUCC/DSCI/SmartCNS.2019.00048 . Zhou, X., Sun, J., Tian, Y., Lu, B., Hang, Y., Chen, Q., 2020. Development of deep learningmethod for lead content prediction of lettuce leaf using hyperspectral images. Int.J. Remote Sens. 41, 2263 –2276.https://doi.org/10.1080/01431161.2019.1685721 . Zhou, C., Zhou, S., Xing, J., Song, J., 2021. Tomato leaf disease identi ﬁcation by restructured deep residual dense network. IEEE Access 9, 28822 –28831.https://doi.org/10.1109/ ACCESS.2021. 3058947.S.C.A. Houetohossou, V.R. Houndji, C.G. Hounmenou et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 9 (2023) 46 –60
60