Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
ScienceDirect
 AASRI Procedia   7  ( 2014 )  107 – 113 
Man
Abst
Thisacti
v
custo
enha
activ
mitig
deve
© 20
Sele
Keyw
1.In
G
reaso
natu
etc.the har
m
dereDesign
nitha P.V.1
tract
paper presents
ve filter. Custo m
om power par k
anced operatio n
ve filter provid e
gation is done b
loped and oper
013 Publishe d
ection and/or p
words:  Custom p o
ntroduction 
Good quality p
on for the p o
ure of the powAnother imp
o
power by i n
monics.Most o
egulation poli c2013 2nd A
n and D
1, Jishnu S a
Department
Amrita
 an improved o
m power devic e
k (CPP). CPP d
n of CPP is pr o
es the harmoni c
by means of s e
ation is verifie d
d by Elsevier B
peer review u n
ower devices; cu s
power is esse
ower quality a
er system it a l
ortant concer n
ntroducing c u
of the power q
cies it is nec eAASRI Co n
evelop m
ankar V.C .
of Electrical an d
a school of Engi n
Correspondin g
E-mail a d
operation of th e
es operated for 
delivers high q u
oposed with G T
c and reactive p
eries active filt e
d using MATL A
B.V. 
nder responsi b
stom power park ;
ntial for the p
arises due to 
lways addres s
n is on the use
urrent harmo n
quality issue s
essary for th enference o n
ment of a
.2, Anjana P
d Electronics En g
neering,1Bangal o
g author. Tel.:+ 9
ddress:manjulagn
e Custom pow e
multiple custo m
uality high reli a
TO based stati c
power support f
er with a newl y
AB/ Simulink m
bility of Ame r
; static transfer s w
proper worki n
source unreli a
ses number o f
 of nonlinear 
nics in the s
s can be miti g
e utilities to pn Power an d
a Mini C
P.2, Visal R
gineering, Amrita 
ore Campus, 2Amr
914763801280 e x
air@am.amrita. e
er park with a n
mers in an ind u
able supply th a
c transfer switc h
for the par k wh
y proposed con t
model.
rican Applied 
witch; shunt acti v
ng of the eq u
ability and l o
f power qualit y
loads. The n o
system whic h
gated by use o
provide the r ed Energy S y
Custom P
Raveendra n
VishwaVidyape e
ritapuri Campus
xt.2308; 
edu
newly propose d
ustrial area for m
an from the ut i
h, shunt and s e
hile voltage sag /
trol algorithm. 
Science Res e
ve filter; series ac t
uipment espec
oad side issue
y issues such 
on-linear devi c
hitself somet i
of custom po w
equired quali tystems 
Power P a
n2 and Ma n
etham
d control algori t
m a common p l
ility at differe n
eries active filt
/swell and voltThe entire mo
earch Institute 
tive filter.
ially sensitiv e
s. Owing to t
as interruptio n
ces worsens t h
imes constit u
wer devices [ 2
ty of power tark
njula G.N a
thm for series 
latform called 
nt grades. The ers.The shunt 
tage harmonic del of CPP is 
e loads. The 
the dynamic 
n, sag, swell 
he quality of 
utes voltage 
2]. With the 
to the loads, air2
© 2014 Elsevier B. V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/3.0/).Peer-review under responsibility of Scientific Committee of American Applied Science Research Institute
2212-6716 © 2014 Elsevier B. V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/3.0/).Peer-review under responsibility of Scientific Committee of American Applied Science Research Institutedoi: 10.1016/j.aasri.2014.05.037 
108   P .V . Manitha et al.  /  AASRI Procedia   7  ( 2014 )  107 – 113 
`impossible for most situations and now days cannot provide different grades of power.  In such a context a custom power park (CPP) can be built and operated so as to provide different grades of power to same ordifferent customers at different tariffs.The different grades are achieved by incorporating different devices in the park which will be discussed in later sections. The CPP concept is very much applicable to industrial or commercial areas which can account up to few megawatts of loads[2]. Each customer can have different grades of power depending of their load requirements. For example an industry or a shopping mall has critical or noncritical loads. Industries may have very critical loads such as process control, robotic tools etc. which   even cannot suffer small variation in the power quality level. The CPP will address such issues. In this paper the coordinated control scheme is developed to have a control of the connected equipment and loads so as to deliver different grades of power w ith load and source issues. Another important concern is over the voltage detection scheme. As fast the system can respond to the voltage variations the more effectively the system work. Here abc to dq0 transformation algorithm is used for voltage detection.  The shunt active filter achieves the harmonic and reactive compensation through Icos  algorithm [5]. The series active filter provides the voltage support and voltage harmonic compensation by a newly proposed algorithm which is very fast and easy to implement. The entire operation of the CPP is verified in MATLAB/Simulink model. 2. Operation of the CPP Custom Power Park has mainly the CPP substation/park to with two incoming feeders’ namely preferred and alternate feeder. The park/substation consists of a STS (static transfer switch), a DG (diesel generator), Shunt active filter(ShAF), and a series active filter(SeAF). The park delivers mainly three different categories of power named as A, AA, AAA. The three different grades of power are supplied as per the customer demand. A category power is delivered to the least critical loads and AA to the next level of priority and AAA to the highly critical loads which cannot tolerate the power failure of even a second. The STS with the help of coordinated control can detect the voltage of the preferred or alternate feeder and switches to the higher voltage feeder. The power is qualified by means of  the shunt active filter and series active filter which eliminates harmonics, sags or swells. In case of failure of both the feeders the power to the critical loads such as AA and AAA are provided by the diesel generator. For the time interval where the DG has to start up and synchronised the power to the most critical category whic h is the AAA are provided by the series active filter. 3. Equipment employed in CPP For Power Quality Improvement The major equipment in the CPP includes 3.1 Static Transfer Switch Static Transfer Switch (STS) is used to transfer the loads of the park from the preferred feeder to the alternate feeder in case of voltage reduction in the preferred feeder. It consists of antiparallel connected thyristors/gate turn off thyristors per phase. The thyristor based STS usually takes few milliseconds to half a cycle [6]. The GTO based switches can achieve a fast transfer [7] because of the turn off capability by applying a reverse current in the gate. As the load transfer is very fast and absence of commutating circuits etc. is indeed advantageous for the park. The only problem is the requirement of a high negative current to turn off the GTO. Another important aspect is the protection of equipment in the park [1].  109  P .V . Manitha et al.  /  AASRI Procedia   7  ( 2014 )  107 – 113 
3.2
T
of th
elim
inve
filter
3.3
T
load
serie
abso
whic
start
(dep
oper
prop
ared
deriv
detemul
t
The gen
e
3.4
prefe
seco
voltaFig.
Shunt Active F
The shunt acti v
he industrial l
minates the ha r
erter connecte d
r is theIcos  Series Active 
The series acti v
ds. At certain t
es active filte r
orb the exces s
ch the SeAF p
tup delay of t h
pending on D G
ration of proc e
posed one in w
done as show n
ving the fun d
ctor and it is 
tiplied with r a
source volta g
erated by co m
Diesel Gene r
The DG/RE S
ferred and alt e
onds. Instead 
age/ current s o1. Series Active F
Filter.
ve filter provi
loads may be 
rmonics alon g
d to the syste m
algorithm [5] .
Filter.
ve filter (Se A
time the volt a
r provides vo l
s voltage, pro v
provides 100 %
he DG. Thus S
G startup an d
ess controls, h
which fast sa g
n in Fig.1. T h
damental voltdivided with 
ated bus volt a
ge is subtrac t
mparing the fil t
rator /Renew a
S should be c a
ernate ones. It of using D
G
ource inverte rFilter Controller d
des the reacti v
harmonicall y
g with the rea c
m through co u
.
AF) provides t h
age of both t h
ltage support 
vided for val u
% voltage sup p
SeAF should b
d synchroniza t
hospital critic a
g/swell elimi n
he source vol t
age. The ma g
the fundame
age magnitud e
ted from V PC
ter reference v
able Energy S u
apable of pro v
generally ta k
G the renewa b
rs which can adiagram
ve and harmo
y polluting lo a
ctive power i s
upling induct o
he voltage su p
he feeders go e
to the AAA l
ues up to 10 %
port when bo t
be capable of 
tion time). It 
al loads/ sens
nation along w
tage having h
gnitude of t h
ntal voltage t
e for generati n
C* for gettin g
voltage and a c
upport system s
viding the ent i
kes some time
ble power ca n
achieve with n
nic power su p
ads such as m
ssues. It consi s
or. The algori t
pport and vol t
esbelow 90% oads. In case 
% of over vol t
th the feeder v
supporting th e
eliminates th e
itive instrum e
with eliminat i
harmonics, sa g
he filtered vo l
to obtain unit 
ng ideal volta
g the series f i
ctual filter vol t
s for park ba c
ire AA and A
 to start up a n
n be supplie d
no time delay o
pport for the A
motor drives e t
sts of a shunt 
thm used to i m
tage harmoni c
of the nomi n
of increase o
tages. Anoth e
voltages fall b
e entire AAA 
e voltage har m
ents etc. The a
ion of harmo n
g and swell is 
ltage is dete c
amplitude si n
ge at PCC af t
ilter referenc e
tage.
ck up
AAA loads in c
nd synchroni z
d to the AA 
or very small 
AA and AAA 
tc. The shunt connected v
o
mplement the 
c elimination f
nal voltage.Suf the voltage 
er situation th
below 60% a n
loads for 3 t o
monics whic h
algorithm use d
nics in the su p
fed to low p a
cted by mean
ne wave (U ab
ter compensa t
e voltage. Th e
case of failur e
zation is com p
and AAA lodelay.  
loads. Most active filter 
oltage source shunt active 
for the AAA ch times the levels it can ere exists in 
nd during the 
o 5 seconds 
h causes mal d is a newly 
pply voltage 
ass filter for 
ns of a peak 
c). It is then 
tion (V PCC*). 
e pulses are 
e of both the 
pleted in few ads through 
110   P .V . Manitha et al.  /  AASRI Procedia   7  ( 2014 )  107 – 113 
`Fig.2. Control dia gram flow chart 
4. Control of CPP 
In order to achieve the different grades of power it is necessary to have proper control of the devices and loads. The control is done by a CPP control center which continuously monitor the preferred and alternate voltages and based on the higher required voltage level , it switches between preferred and alternate feeders. In case of low level of voltages at both the feeders, it isolates both the feeders by controlling the STS. At that time it isolates the A loads and AA loads and control the series active filter to provide required voltage levels to the entire AAA loads and send signals to the DG to start up. After the DG startup it picks up the AAA and AA loads.   The control scheme flow chart is shown in Fi g.2, which is similar to that of mentioned in [2] and [3] except the DG turn on and DG ready checking capabilities.Depending on the voltage detection scheme the speed of operation (isolation and switching) will vary.The voltage detection scheme used is the abc to dq0transformation method.The detection scheme is similar to [3]. The measured voltage is converted to dq0 axis with abc to dq0 transformation technique, then passed through a second order mid rejection filter to attenuate the voltage transients and send to the CPP main controller for conditional checking. 5. Simulation of  CPP Model The first section of the simulation shows the effectiveness of the controller fo r the CPP to switch between preferred feeder and alternate feeder so as to maintain a steady voltage at the CPP loads. The second sectionexplains the effectiveness of series active filter to elimin ate sag/swells/elimination of voltage, the shunt active filter to eliminate current harmonics and reactive power requirements, so that desired voltage quality and levels are maintained at the AA and AAA loads. The simulation circuit is shown in the Fig.3.The load and system conditions are: Voltage – 415 V, A loads – 10kW, 1 kvar, AA loads - 10kW, 1 kvar, Diode bridge rectifier with R load, AAA loads – 10kW. In order to achieve the variation in the voltage magnitude and voltage harmonic injection, two programmable power s upplies are used.Another power supply is used instead of DG. The controller for the entire system is modeled using mat lab function block.  111  P .V . Manitha et al.  /  AASRI Procedia   7  ( 2014 )  107 – 113 
Fig.4 .Voltage and current at preferred and alternate feeders and the available voltages at A, AA, and AAA loads. 
Fig.3. Simulation dia gram  
112   P .V . Manitha et al.  /  AASRI Procedia   7  ( 2014 )  107 – 113 
`Fig.5. Source voltage, filter injectedvoltage and voltage at AAA load point of the CPP duringvarious events of source feeder sa g, swell, volta
ge harmonics
The input to this controller is provided through the preferred and alternate feeder detected voltages. It checks the preferred and alternate voltages and switches as per the co nditions as shown in flow chart. Up to 0.05 second the preferred and alternate voltages are set to nominal values. From 0.05– 0.1 the preferred voltage is dropped to 80% of nominal value at that instant the load is switched over to the alternate feeder which has nominal voltage. For the time 0.1-0.15 the preferred voltage is restored to nominal voltage and switch back to preferred feeder. At 0.15 second both the feeder voltage dropped to 50%. At this instant the A loads are isolated and AA and AAA loads are taken by the DG set (assuming no delay for startup). At 0.25 second the preferred and alternate voltage is restored and entire loads are switched to the preferred feeder. The various conditions of A, AA, AAA load volta ges are shown along with the preferred and alternate feeder voltages in Fig.4. The A loads gets uninterrupted power for all times except at failure of both feeders The AA and AAA loads are able to receive uninterruptable power at all the times as shown in Fig.4. Fig.5 shows the performance of the series active filter in the park. To evaluate the effectiveness different events have created. The events are assumed to occur at both the feeders simultaneously. So it will affect the A and AA loads. Initially the system or feeder voltage is assumed to be nominal and at 0.05 s system voltage 
.Fig.6. Voltage and current of  phase ‘a’ of the utility supply during shunt filter off and on.
113  P .V . Manitha et al.  /  AASRI Procedia   7  ( 2014 )  107 – 113 
has reduced to 70%. The A and AA loads are receiving low voltage same as the feeder voltage whereas AAA voltage is maintained due to the series active filter support. At 0.125s the voltage has increased to120%.At this event also the AAA loads are receiving nominal voltage. At 0.2s harmonics is injected to the system voltage and this has no effect on the AAA load operation due to the voltage harmonic compensation capability of the series active filter. Thus the AAA loads are resistible to feeder voltage issues.  The performance of the shunt active filter in the park is shown in Fig.6. Up to 0.15s the shunt active filter is off and the source current is harmonically distorted. At 0.15s the shunt active filter is switched on, which makes the current drawn from the source in phase and sinusoidal by providing harmonic compensation for the nonlinear loads and reactive compensation for the AA and AAA loads in the park. 6. Conclusion Developed a control scheme for the custom power park and the operation of the CPP is verified through MATLAB Simulink model. The loads of the CPP at various conditions of sag/swell etc. are receiving the nominal available voltage by switching between preferred and alternate feeders. The shunt active filter provides the harmonic and reactive power support to the AA and AAA loads and making the point of common coupling (PCC) current in phase with the PCC voltage. The series active filter eliminates all the voltage side issues to the AAA loads. The current harmonic elimination along with voltage issues suppression ensures the delivery of high quality power to loads. Thus the park is able to deliver high quality power than from a normal utility feeder for A loads and also well-conditioned different qualities of power to AA and AAA loads by utilizing shunt and series filters. This helps th e customer to choose any level or multiple levels of power according to the sensitivity and reliability requirements. The effectiveness of the park can be improved by using special voltage detection schem es, operation with dynamic loads etc. which canbe considered as thefuture enhancements to this work. References [1] A. Ghosh and A. Joshi, “The concept and operating principles of a mini custom power park,” IEEE Trans. on Power Delivery, vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 1766-1774, 2004. [2] N.G. Hingorani, “Overview of custom power applications,” in IEEE–PES Summer Meeting Panel Session on Application of Custom Power Devices for Enhanced Power Quality , San Diego, CA, 1998. [3] M.EminMeral, Ahmet Teke, CagatayBayindir, Mehmet Tumay, “Power quality improvement with an extended custom power park”, Electrical Power Systems Research, 2009, vol 79,  pp1553-1560. [4] Arindam Ghosh, RitwikMajumder, Gerard Ledwich, and FiruzZare, “Power Quality Enhanced Operation and Control of a Microgrid based Custom Power Park”, International Conference on Control and Automation Christchurch, New Zealand, December 9-11, 2009 pp. 1669-1674. [5]G.Bhuveneswari and ManjulaG.Nair, “Design, Simu lation, and Analog Circuit Implementation of a Three- Phase Shunt Active Filter Using the I cos   Algorithm,” IEEE Transactions on power delivery, vol. 23, no. 2, pp.1222-1235, 2008. [6] M.N. Moschakis and N. D. Hatziargyroiu, A   Detailed    Model for a Thyristor Based Static Transfer Switch, IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery, Volume: 18, Issue: 4, Oct. 2003,     pp. 1442 – 1449. [7] Ramesh.Pachar, Harpal Tiwari, “Performance Evaluation of Static Transfer Switch”,  WS
 EAS Transactions on systems and control, vol.3, issue 3, pp.137-148, 2008. [8] J.H.Akagi, Y.Kanazawa, and A.Nabae, “Instantaneous reactive power compensators comprising switching devices without energy storage components,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Appl., vol. IA-20, no. 3, pp. 625–630, May/Jun. 1984. 