 AASRI Procedia   3  ( 2012 )  474 – 480 
2212-6716 © 2012 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. Selection and/or peer review under responsibility of American Applied Science Research Institutedoi: 10.1016/j.aasri.2012.11.075 
 D
Abst
Navi
navig
navig
RFID
indoo
robot
on th
the ta
 © 2
0
Sele
 
Keyw
1. In
M
indu
abili
Nav
build
of re
the r
locatDevelo p
M.M. Ra s
1,2,
tract 
igation is an i m
gate in unkno w
gation is fulfill e
D tags, and RF I
or environmen t
t’s position wh i
he location of R
arget tag. 
012 Publishe d
ection and/or p
words: Omni rob o
ntroduction 
Mobile robot 
ustry. It is im p
ity of a robo t
igation can b
ding.Self-loc a
eference. Pat h
robot's curren t
tions in the r o
The aim of t h2012AAS R
pment o f
System
shida,1,Nor 
,3Department of
mportant techni q
wn environmen t
ed through so m
ID reader is de
ts. The RFID r e
ile the RFID ta g
RFID tag. The a
d by Elsevier B
peer review u n
ot; Robot navigat i
navigation s y
portant due to
t to determin e
e divided int o
alization mea n
h planning is e
t position and 
obot frame of r
his project is tRIConferen
f Omni D
m usin g 
r Saidahbt M
of Mechatronic s
Gombak, K u
que in the fiel d
ts accurately. B
me technique. I n
veloped. The m
eader is mount e
gs is are place d
actuator will b e
B.V.  
nder responsi b
ion; Reader; tra n
ystem has b e
 its ability to 
e its own po s
o three main 
ns robot’s abi l
effectively a n
a position of 
reference. 
to develop O mceonModel
Directio n
RFID f o
MohdZainb
s Engineering, I
uala Lumpur.a m
 
d of mobile rob
By determining 
n this paper, a m
main idea is to 
ed on the mobi
d at difference l o
e move accordi n
bility of Ame r
nsponde r 
ecome an ap p
navigate the 
sition in its fr
fundamental 
lity to establi s
n extension o f
a goal locati o
mni Direction aing,Identifi
nal Mob i
or Mult i
b.2,Faridat u
International I s
mahbub@iium. e
otics. A major the positions 
a
modular navig a
test the ability le robot to co
m
ocation . The p
ng to the angle 
rican Applied 
pealing chall e
location in u n
frame of refe r
which are s e
sh its own p o
f localization, 
on while map b
al Robot Nav icationand C
ile Rob o
ple Ob je
unbinti Mo h
slamic Univers i
edu.my 
field of mobil e
and selecting a 
ation technique of mobile rob
o
mmunicate wit h
osition of mob i
between the r o
Science Res e
enge in both 
nknown envir o
rence and the
elf-localizatio n
osition and or i
in that it req u
building can b
igation syste mControl 
ot Navi g
ect 
hammad Z
ity Malaysia 
e robot system motion contro
l
in relation wi t
ot to navigate t h
h the RFID tag s
ile robot is det e
obot’s current p
earch Institute 
research an d
onment. Nav i
n find its tar g
n, path plann i
ientation wit h
uires the dete
be any notati o
m using RFID ation 
ainc,3 
is required to 
l of the robot, 
th signal from 
he location in 
s to determine 
ermined based 
positioned and 
d production 
igation is the 
get location. 
ing and map 
hin the frame rmination of 
on describing for multiple 
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
© 2012 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. Selection and/or peer review under responsibility of American Applied Science Research Institute Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.475  M.M. Rashid et al.  /  AASRI Procedia   3  ( 2012 )  474 – 480 
 destinations. Both Omni robot and RFID system must be integrated to each other in the way of controlling the whole system. Omni robot is concerned due to its ca pability of mechanical manipulator and is capable of tethered and autonomous operation. It also focuses on RFID system which relies on navigation module using customized features of RFID technology. RFID system c onsists of tags, reader with antenna, and software. When an RFID reader scans the tag, a pulse of radio en ergy is sent out and the tag sends back the inventory control number. The objectives of this paper are; 
 To design and develop Omni directional mobile  robot that can move in indoor environment. 
 To perform navigation by allocating identification tag at certain located area. 
 To develop an efficient algorithm in providing better solution during navigation and to go particular target.  2. Methodology  Following is the desired algorithm of mobile robot navi gation system to navigate desired location of RFID tag by identifying the angle between the tags and the reader which is mounted on the mobile robot.Navigation elaborates the desired algorithm of mobile robot navigation system to navigate location of RFID tag by identifying the angle between the tags and the re ader which is mounted on the mobile robot.  Initially, the robot is pre-programmed with an order list of tag numbers in defining the position of the tag whereas the current target angle is determined by calcu lating current goal location. When the known ID is achieved, the target transponder is detected through the signal backscatter ed from all the tags within the communication range. The calculation after input received by the two antennas is recorded and computed using; 
   (1) The mobile robot is then updating its headed by turn right and left and checked whether the angle between calculated and compass is reached. If not, it will turn until it found the correct angle. If yes, mobile robot is moving forward and detected more points. Mobile robot is then identifying current tag whether it is goal or not. If goal, it will stop. If not it will calculate current to goal angle and compare through continuous loop until it find the goal.  3. Omni Robot  The Omni directional mechanismhave three axis and angle (x,y,
) movement abruptly in a two dimensional space, which ease to increase robot mobility and more keen access to limited spaces compared withconventional two wheel driven robot [1]. Yukawa et al. further explained that Omni-directional mechanism in the robot consists of four wheel units with a driving  mechanism and a steering wheel mechanism. Since the four wheel units drive and steer independently, the position and direction of the mobile robot can be controlled with a high degree of accuracy [2]. Omni robot is becoming technically demanding for users in industrial and business sectors Figure 1. Many Omni robot navigation system products are appearing within medium and long term propositions that lead to development of variety technology advancement in the future. The most common and popular navigation technique s suggested in the state of the art generally fall under one of the following categories: dead-reckoning based, landmark-based, vision based, and behaviour technique based [3]. 476   M.M. Rashid et al.  /  AASRI Procedia   3  ( 2012 )  474 – 480 
  
Figure 1: Two wheel mobile robot 
A. Navigation The fundamental requirement for mobile robot through navigation is to estimate the position of the autonomous mobile robot. In earlier research, there are several methods used to estimating the robot position for example path planning, trajectory planning, algorithmic explorati on and path execution with self- localization. The goal of autonomous robot navigation is  built for a system in which dynamically guide and control the mobile robot from its start positions to a predefined end position. According to the previous research, it is state that the robot successfully done their task if the robot can efficiently interpret the data from the sensor [4].  The first method used in previous rese arch is self-localization. This method used the passive RFID tag where placed on the floor. The advantages of this method is that there does not required any information regarding the RFID tag except their ID number. Besides that, this method is used without need for the robot to stop temporarily to observe the RFID tag [5]. In addition, it is required to calculate the distance between the robot and the wall at the time robot passes the specific area to smoothly organize the movement of  the robot. Other than that, by using the trajectory planning and path planning, we can estimate the position of the mobile robot. The differences between this method is that the presence of moving and avoiding the obstacle. The path planning used common approach by performing the specific algorithm to determine the shortest path. While for the trajectory planning in the presence of obstacle and find out the path and motion along the path. Furthermore, effective approach can be used by combining the dead reckoning and external sens ing by using the metric model. By using the odometry, the approximate current pose can be obtaining but maintain the pose estimate [4]. 
 Figure 2: Active–Driving Wheel in Two Dimensions 
B. Two wheel mobile robot Omni Directional robot locality is identical by 3-coordinates: position (x, y) and robot direction angle 
 in an absolute frame. Therobot can mimic the waywhich [5-8] acquired from the current posture (x, y, 
) in analignment space. Figure 2 shows an active driving two-wheeled robotwhereC is the centre ofmotion of the robot. The platformscentre of gravity of is at the origin (o), and (Vx, Vy)represents linear speed or tangential velocity, and w is the angular velocity. Here,r is the radius of the wheels, and D for azimuth length between the wheels [9]. Robot linear speed is defined by th e absolute velocity (Vx, Vy) (Cartesian)in the platform 
477  M.M. Rashid et al.  /  AASRI Procedia   3  ( 2012 )  474 – 480 
 coordinate system at the origin (o), and w for the angular velocity [9-11]. Theta ( ) denotesthe heading angle of the turn in radians. The system is represented in (x, y) coordinate (and orientation) varying with respect to time. At any instant, the x the y coordinates of the robo t’s centre point are changing based on its speed and orientation. While the time varying states, the physical laws governs the behaviour of the mobile robot but the system is time invariant.
….(1), (2), …..(3),  
 (4) ….(5), (6), (7), (8), 
…..(9) ….(10)  …..(11) Where:
= right wheel angular velocity, = left wheel angular velocity,D = azimuth distance between the wheels, 
= wheel radius, = tangential velocity, or linear velocity, and = angular velocity, or steering velocity of the robot. The control inputs = (
,) and our control outputs = (X, Y, ). Therefore, desired trajectory is X (t), Y (t), 
 (t).However, it is difficult to study 3rd order and nonlinearsystem. Some nonlinear equations can be approximated by linear equations under certain conditions. Most of the system behaves like a linear system has a trajectory called the nominal traject ory. In this case chosen conditions for the system behaviour and modelled a linear system are followed.
(12), (13) 
…….(14), (15),                        
(16),  (17), (18) (19) 
………(20) 
……….(21)   (22) Both wheels have the same initial speed. 4 Result  Data from in table 1 are collected to check whether the tag is detected fast or not. This experiment is aimed to verify the counting number of passive tag that can be detected in 5.3 sec at a distance of 1cm.This passive tag can be detected at the range of 150mm.Each trial is tested to check detected  tag during navigation. Each trial in figure 4 summarizes the path taken by mob ile robot to reach its target.For trial 1 and 2, only five tag is detected, while trial 3, 4, and 6, six tag is detected  and both trial 4 and 5, seven tag is detected. This experiment results in random decision path which will be taken by each trial.        Table 1: Numbers of ID tag detect in 5.3 sec  
Figure 3: ID detection for each trial 
Several trials as shown in table 2 have been conducted to evaluate time elapse for the mobile robot to reach the goal from the starting point. Each of tag has been  named accordingly based on the ID tag positions. Trial Tag Detected(name) Count
1 Red 93 
2 Stop 79 
3 Blue 82 
4 Blue black 84 
5 Dark blue 88 Trial vs Tag Detected478   M.M. Rashid et al.  /  AASRI Procedia   3  ( 2012 )  474 – 480 
 Acco
head
 To 
g
 
Figur
a) nee
d
right
forw
the p
has p
due lon
g
head
simu
happ
altho
by th
5. Chav
e
enviording to fig u
ding can be c a
get exact rotat i
re 4: Time elapse 
Testin g and To verify w
h
d to be consi d
t if compass 
ward when co m
probability fo r
The results d o
proved that e v
to late reacti o
g and thus cau
ded to the ta g
ultaneously. S
pens due to l e
ough it reach e
he mobile rob onclusion Basic develo
p
e been met si n
ironmen t. Theure 5, mobile 
alculated usin g
ion of mobile 
to reach goal po s
Evaluation
hether the m o
dered literall y
angle is gre a
mpass angle i s
r the robot to m
oes not accur a
verything sho
on of RFID a n
ses delay for l
g, instead th e
Some readin g
ess read rang
ed the tag poiot is closed t
o
pment of this 
nce the aims a
e result showrobot naviga
g; 
…robot; 
sition 
obile robot is m
y. At first, pr o
ater than hea d
s equal to hea d
move forwar d
ately headed t
uld be in the 
ntenna to read 
looping. Duri n
e antenna coi
g is missed d u
e of the readnt. Trials sho
o the ideal dis p
robot has be e
are to develo p
s that the pr oation is alwa y
..(23) ,
……
…
moving acco r
ogramming i n
ding, turn lef t
ding angle. H o
d by ±1 is im p
the mobile ro b
right track if the tag at tim
e
ng the proces s
ls must be a t
uring naviga t
er. Mobile r o
w that possi b
placement. 
en constructe d
p and design t h
ototype mod eys updating it s
……
….(26)  
….(28) 
rdingly and a c
nstruction is u
t if compass 
owever, the r o
possible. The n
bot to the go a
the procedur e
e it reached t a
s, the antenna
t the centre o
tion process a
obot someho w
bility to reduc e
d and tested. G
he Omni mo b
el of mobile rs angle until 
…(24), 
chieved the o
uploaded to t h
angle is less 
obot doesn’t m
n, the instructi o
al, but in idea l
es is follow a c
ag. Moreover, could not re
a
of the tag so 
as this probl e
w didn’t mov e
e error is wh e
Generally, the
bile robot use d
robot with R Fit finds the g
… 
objectives, se v
he microcontr o
than headin g
move accordi n
on is adjuste d
l condition th e
ccordingly. T h
the program m
ad tag accordi n
that it can r
em occurs. T h
e to the cent r
en the displac objectives o
f
d for navigati o
FID system i soal. Current (25) 
       (27)
veral testing oller to turn 
g, and move 
ngly because 
d by ±3.  
e calculation 
his might be 
ming is quite 
ngly when it 
read the tag 
his problem 
re of the tag ement taken 
f this project 
on in indoor 
s able to be 
479  M.M. Rashid et al.  /  AASRI Procedia   3  ( 2012 )  474 – 480 
 applied in real situation. In addition, the position of the mobile robot is determined based on information provided by the tag and the orientation information by the compass while the angle between the robot’s current direction and the target tag is used to provid e action to the actuators.Intelligent controller might be applied to the system to reduce an error. Moreover, suitabl e sensor such as ultrasonic sensor might be used to avoid obstacles in indoor environment. 
Figure 5: Navigation path 
References [1] San, K. and Dong H. K., (2007). A design and implementation of moving object tracking system  for omni-directional robot, International Conference on Control, Automa tion and Systems 2007 Oct. 17-20, 2007 in COEX, Seoul, Korea, 1790-1793. [2] Yukawa, T., Matsumoto, T., Okano, H., & Hosoya, O. (2006). Development of an omni-directional mobile robot with two or more cameras an d navigation based on cell map information, 32nd Annual 
Conference onIEEE Industrial Electronics, IECON 2006, 213-218. [3] Miah, M.S., & Gueaib, W. (2007).  An RFID-Based Robot Navigation System with a Customized RFID Tag Architecture, 18, 25-30. [4] Feng Lu (2004), Shape Registration using optimization for mobile ro bot navigation, 1-153. [5] Kimuro, Y., Takarabe, S., & Hasegawa, T.(2007). Machine Learning Approach to Self-Localization of Mobile Robot using RFID Tag,Advanced intelligent mechatronics, 2007 IEEE/ASME international conference,1-6. [6] Martinussen, E. S., and Arnall, T. (2009). Designing with RFID, Proceedings of the Third International Conference on Tangible and Embedded Interaction (T EI'09), Feb 16-18  2009, Cambridge, UK, 343-350. [7] Miah, M.S., & Gueaib, W. (2007), Intelligent Parallel Parking of a Car- Like Mobile Road Using RFID Technology,  International Workshop on Robotic and Sensors Environments, 1-6. [8] Hae, D.C., Sibum, J., Heejae, J., & Sang, W. A. (2004). Using RFID for Accurate Positioning: Journal of Global Positioning Systems, 3, 32-39. [9] Nuha.N (2005), H-Infinity Control Of An Autonomous Mobile Robot, 1-85. [10] Finkenzeller.K (2003), RFID Handbook: Fundamentals and Applications in Contactless Smart Cards and Identification(2
nd Ed.),Germany, John Wiley & Sons Ltd. 
480   M.M. Rashid et al.  /  AASRI Procedia   3  ( 2012 )  474 – 480 
 [11] Heesung Chae & Sangik Na (2007). Mobile Robot Navigation using RFID and Vision Sensor. 2007 International Symposium on Information Technology Convergence, 52-57. 