Editorial: Opening up computer science
I am proud to introduce the inaugural issue of Array, a new interna-tional open access multidisciplinary journal published by Elsevier. Incontrast with the many specialized journals published by Elsevier orother publishers, Array has the particularity of covering the entire ﬁeld of Computer Science. Our ambition with Array is to ensure fast dissemi-nation of up-to-date research results from a broad spectrum of topics,including: Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Machine Learning and Robotics; Com-puter Systems and Architecture; Computer Vision, Speech and PatternRecognition; Control&Signal Processing; Cyber Security; Data, Knowl-edge and Intelligent Systems; Industrial Engineering; InterdisciplinaryApplications; Medical Informatics and Biomedical Engineering; Micro-electronics and Hardware; Multimedia and HCI; Networks and Commu-nications; Operational Research and Decision Systems; Scienti ﬁc Computing; Software Engineering, and Theoretical Computer Science.Interdisciplinary contributions crossing boundaries within ComputerScience, or between Computer Science and other ﬁelds, are especially welcome.Following a current trend in scholarly publishing, Array is a gold openaccess journal. This means that authors pay article processing charges tocover publication costs. In exchange, their paper is made publicly andquickly accessible to everyone, without the need for subscription fees. Asa result, research results are disseminated all over the world to a broadreadership, including academia, industry, and practitioners, which maysigniﬁcantly increase their visibility and potential impact.Manuscripts to be published in Array must be novel, technicallysound, and clearly presented. Array accepts regular papers and shortertechnical notes. In addition to research papers presenting new results,review articles as well as discussion and opinion papers are alsowelcome. Together with regular issues, the journal will publish specialissues of topical interest in all areas of computer science, and we will bemore than happy to discuss suggestions for such issues with you.The review process of Array complies with the best standards ofacademic publishing. We believe that feedback from peers allowingiterative paper improvement is an integral part of scienti ﬁc publishing, and what distinguishes it from electronic preprint repositories. Papersmeeting journal criteria will undergo a single-blind review process, uti-lizing a minimum of two external referees. We aim at a fast reviewprocess without compromising on the rigor and quality of the evaluation.To achieve this goal, we have started to assemble an impressive EditorialBoard of leading researchers from all areas of computer science, to befurther expanded as the journal will get up to speed. We realize thataccepting to become a member of the Editorial Board is a seriouscommitment and we would like to thank all Associate Editors for theirsupport.In addition to its commitment to a rigorous review process, Array alsosupports the best scientiﬁc practice, including reproducible research. Inparticular, authors of papers published in Array are strongly encouragedto make their datasets and/or their code publicly accessible via a re-pository of their choosing.My main purpose as Editor-in-Chief is to promote Array as one of thebest journals in Computer Science, bringing researchers from differentsubﬁelds to signiﬁcantly advance the science and technology of digitalinformation processing and meet the challenges of the 21st century In-formation Age. I hope that many of you will share the enthusiasm of theEditorial board and the publisher, and I am looking forward to receivingyour best contributions.Declaration of Competing InterestThe authors declare no conﬂict of interest.Thierry Denoeux Universit/C19e de Technologie de Compi/C18egne, Compi/C18egne, France
Contents lists available atScienceDirect
Array
journal homepage:www.elsevier.com/journals/array/2590-0056/open-access-journal
https://doi.org/10.1016/S2590-0056(19)30005-0Received 20 May 2019; Received in revised form 22 July 2019; Accepted 27 August 20192590-0056Array 1-2 (2019) 100005