Editorial
When I was asked in 2018 to take over the editorship of a new goldopen access multidisciplinary journal covering the entire ﬁeld of Com- puter Science, I accepted with enthusiasm. We started by dividing theﬁeld into subﬁelds and building a strong and diverse editorial board. Theinaugural volume appeared in April 2019. As of today, we have published44 papers in 8 volumes, andArrayis now indexed in the Directory of Open Access Journals. As my other professional activities, including theresponsibility of another journal, demand more time, it is my pleasure toannounce that Professor Jianxin Li, a well-known researcher in databasesystems and data mining, will replace me as the new Editor-in-Chief ofArray from January 1st, 2021. I am con ﬁdent that the journal will continue to grow and gain increasing recognition under Professor Li'sguidance. I also wish to thank the publisher Catherine Carnovale, themanaging editor Ashley Freeland, the Journal Manager Suganya S. Dorai,the publishing content specialist Jacqueline Zhou, the transfer managerShaina Raza, and all the associate and area editors for their support, theirdedication and their valuable contributions to the creation of this newjournal.Thierry DenoeuxAs newly appointed Editor-in-Chief, I would like to follow the suc-cessful path thatArrayis on, and continuously strengthen the role ofArrayas a scientiﬁc forum for knowledge sharing and communication ofboth theoretical foundations and real-world applications in all computerscience areas, particularly focusing on interdisciplinary research activ-ities. With the fast development of computer science and emerging de-mand of the information technology industry, it is timely to investigatethe enabling technologies and address domain bottleneck issues byinnovating cross-topic research. For instance, traditional structuralhealth monitoring research heavily relies on sensor networks, machinelearning, and deep learning. But nowadays, it is desirable for us to exploitthe capability of artiﬁcial intelligence, big data, data science, andknowledge discovery. As another application example, digital adver-tisement and online recommendation mix the usage of multiple topics,such as deep learning, computer vision, knowledge bases, intelligentcomputing, and cyber security. In order to train models over big andquickly evolving datasets, we may need to develop innovative method-ologies for integrating the powerful operability of hardware-based high-performance computing into the learning process. Therefore, Arraywill play an increasingly important role in disseminating these promisingmulti-disciplinary research results within the computer science commu-nity at large.To reﬂect the growing diversity of theﬁeld, the Editorial Board has been formed by worldwide reputable scholars with their wide range ofresearch expertise. Theﬁeld of computer science has been divided into11 subﬁelds, including cybersecurity;wireless networks;pattern recognition, deep learning&machine learning;web intelligence,information systems& information retrieval;data mining&decision making;blockchain technologies and access control;data engineering&data science;Health&medical data analytics
;software engineering, edge computing&IoT systems;uncertainty management and reasoning; andcomputer vision&image processing. Each subﬁeld will be covered by two joint area editors. The role of the areaeditors will be crucial for maintaining the high scienti ﬁc standard of the journal. The editorial board has also been extended to include a greaternumber of associate editors; whose role is to assist in the refereeingprocess of papers covering topics for which they are recognized experts.I hope that the readers of Array will continue to enjoy reading thejournal, and I thank them in advance for continuing to submit theirvaluable work to Array.Jianxin LiJianxin LiThierry Denoeux
Contents lists available atScienceDirect
Array
journal homepage:www.elsevier.com/journals/array/2590-0056/open-access-journal
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.array.2021.1000542590-0056/©2021 Published by Elsevier Inc. This is an open access article under the CC BY license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ ).Array 9 (2021) 100054