EDITORIAL
This issue of Saudi Journal for Applied Computing and Informatics is the sec-ond issue of the eighth volume for the year 2010.This issue contains four articles of scientiﬁc research in the area of Informa-tion Technology that serves the business sector, which is in accordance with thepolicies of this journal. These articles are:1. ‘‘Experiments on Adaptation of foreign accented speakers in native ArabicASR systems’’ by Sid-Ahmed Selouani
a, Yousef Ajami Alotaibib a
LARIHS Lab. Universite´de Moncton, Campus de Shippagan, CanadaE-mail: selouani@umcs.ca
bComputer Engineering Department, King Saud University, Saudi ArabiaE-mail: yalotaibi@ccis.ksu.edu.saIn this paper the authors addressed the adaptation of Arabic speech recogni-tion systems to foreign accented speakers. This adaptation is accomplished byusing the adaptation techniques; namely, the Maximum Likelihood Linear Re-gression (MLLR), the Maximum a posteriori (MAP), and the combination ofMLLR and MAP. The LDC-WestPoint Modern Standard Arabic corpus andHTK toolkit were used throughout all experiments. The authors evaluated thesystems and presented interesting results that provide higher improvementswhile using a combination of MLLR and MAP.2. ‘‘Assessing the Quality of Web Sites’’ by Layla Hasan
a, Emad Abuelrubb a
Department of MIS, Zarqa Private University, Jordan
bDepartment of Computer Science, Zarqa Private University, JordanThe authors presented a new review of the most recent evaluation criteriamethods which were used in diﬀerent e-business services. Furthermore, they pro-Applied Computing and Informatics (2011) 9,v i–viii
King Saud University
Applied Computing and Informatics
www.ksu.edu.sawww.sciencedirect.com
Peer review under responsibility of King SaudUniversity.doi:10.1016/S2210-8327(11)00014-7 Production and hosting by Elsevierposed new general criteria for evaluating the quality of any website regardless ofthe type of service that it oﬀers. The dimensions of the criteria are content qual-ity, design quality, organization quality, and user-friendly quality. The authorsshowed that these dimensions together with their comprehensive indicators andcheck list can be used by web designers and developers to create quality websitesto improve the electronic service and then the image of any organization on theInternet.3. ‘‘E-learning in the Saudi Tertiary Education: Potential and Challenges’’ byKhlood Al-Siraihi Al-Harbi, University of Leicester, UK E-mail: ka41@le.ac.uk The paper addresses the factors that inﬂuence e-learning in Saudi higher edu-cation through analyzing the perceptions and attitudes of Saudi university stu-dents. The author reports the results of a survey conducted to investigate theacceptance of e-learning in a Saudi higher education institution as perceivedby university students. The author demonstrated that attitudes toward e-learn-ing, subjective norms, perceived behavioral control as well as e-learning systemsattributes were critical determinants of students’ behavioral intention to use e-learning.4. ‘‘Modeling the electronic transactions acceptance using an extended technol-ogy acceptance model’’ By Said S. Al-Gahtani, Administrative Sciences Depart-ment, King Khalid University, P.O. Box 1183, Abha, Saudi ArabiaThe author attempts to integrate the well-established technology acceptancemodel (TAM) with three parameters; namely trust, credibility and risk, whichare of paramount importance in predicting individual acceptance of on-linetransactions. This study seeks empirical support for an extended TAM withthree constructs related to e-transactions in Saudi Arabia. The author showsthat each of trust, credibility and risk plays an important role toward the accep-tance of online transactions in the Saudi settings.In addition to these four articles, this issue includes one book review:Book Review ‘‘User Interface Design Book Review’’ By Basit Qureshi, PrinceSultan University, Saudi ArabiaE-mail: Qureshi@cis.psu.edu.saThis review discussed diﬀerent new books that focus on the development ofthe user interfaces. The key beneﬁts of usability are increased user eﬃciencyand productivity, reduced development costs and most importantly increasedcustomer satisfaction. User interface design or user interface engineering is thedesign of computers, mobile communication devices, software applications,websites with the focus on the user’s experience and interaction. The goal of userinterface design is to improve users experience with simplicity and eﬃciencywhile keeping the design ergonomically sound. In literature this phenomenonEditorial viiis known as ‘‘User Centered Design’’. The author reviewed a set of recently pub-lished popular books in the area of User Interface Design.I hope that this issue will contribute in increasing the reader’s knowledge inthe ﬁeld of Communications and Information Technology and take us closerto ICT best practice.Professor Majed Abdullah Al-Mashari Al-Saudviii Editorial