Original Article
EELAM: Energy efﬁcient lifetime aware multicast route selection formobile ad hoc networks
N. Papannaa,⇑, A. Rama Mohan Reddyb, M. Seethac
aDept. of CSE, Sree Vidyanikethan Engineering College, Tirupati, India
bDept. of CSE, S.V University College of Engineering, Tirupati, India
cDept. of CSE, GNITS, Hyderabad, India
article info
Article history:Received 2 August 2017Revised 15 December 2017Accepted 24 December 2017Available online 26 December 2017Keywords:Ad hoc networksMulticast routingAdaptive genetic evaluationabstract
MANET (Mobile Ad hoc Network) consists the nodes that are self-energized and shall be able to accom-modate limited energy levels, and usually the nodes transmit the data using the intermediate nodes tothe ones that are not in hop levels. In such conditions, the lifetime of the intermediary nodes turn outto be a critical factor, and hence only when the routes are having maximum residual energy and the onesthat have high, spend minimal energy for transmitting the data is very important. In terms of route selec-tion, the emphasis is much on multicast routing and the route discovery, and the efﬁcient nodes selectionhas to take place with emphasis on QoS. Hence, the energy efﬁcient multicast route discovery process hasgained signiﬁcant importance, and there are many potential solutions depicted in the process. EnergyEfﬁcient Lifetime Aware Multicast (EELAM) Route Selection strategy for MANETs is the proposed multi-cast route discovery approach that is developed using the adaptive genetic algorithm. EELAM worksbased on tree topology that differentiates to other tree based on multicast routing topologies by adaptingevolutionary computation strategy deﬁned as genetic algorithm, which shall play a critical role in termsof selecting optimal intermediate nodes with maximal residual energy and minimal energy usage. Theﬁtness function that devised for the adaptive genetic algorithm targeted for improving the energy con-sumption ratio, improving the residual batter life and towards improving the multicasting scope. Theprocess and the methods that are adapted are contemporary and is different to the traditional geneticalgorithms, and still the outcome as depicted in the experimental results reﬂect the fact that theEELAM is the best of in its class that can support in addressing the limitations in the current solutionsand towards managing improved route discovery./C2112017 The Authors. Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of King Saud University. This is anopen access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ ).
1. IntroductionMANETs the mobile ad hoc networks constitutes usage fromvaried range of computing devices like the laptops, mobiles andother computing solutions. The network connects of the mobilestake place in the form of node connects and predominantlyused in the current scenario. Alongside the classiﬁed range ofcommunication, even in the routine communication too, the roleof mobile communication has become an integral part. Networkpartition results as a part of network topology being classiﬁed inthe MANET[1].Among the key factors that depict the outcome for a system,energy-efﬁcient-multicast plays a very vital role for MANETs. Oneof the critical issues that envisaged in the process is that as themobile nodes usually operated on limited batteries, often switch-ing is leading to more battery consumption, and it could lead toaffecting the nodes in a signiﬁcant manner, as the data transmis-sion between the nodes might get impacted and it could lead tomore challenges.There are numerous studies that have been carried out earlier interms of solutions for nodes that are aware of energy consumption,in the routing protocol for MANETs[2]. In MANET, there are varied was of power-aware algorithm solutions that are proposed toensure that node energy is saved[3].
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aci.2017.12.0032210-8327//C2112017 The Authors. Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of King Saud University.This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ ).⇑Corresponding author.E-mail addresses:n.papanname@gmail.com(N. Papanna),ramamohansvu@ yahoo.com(A. Rama Mohan Reddy),smaddala2000@yahoo.com(M. Seetha). Peer review under responsibility of King Saud University.
Production and hosting by ElsevierApplied Computing and Informatics 15 (2019) 120–128
Contents lists available atScienceDirect
Applied Computing and Informatics
journal homepage: www.sciencedirect.com
Power aware metrics are critical objective of majority of thestudies, which focused on increasing the node and lifetime of thenetwork[4]. The power aware routing metrics, those depicted in[5]are resourceful for transmitting data to the destination fromthe source.In another model that has been depicted in a study on conserv-ing energy in the transmission, MTPR has been projected whichworks on minimizing the utilization of power for transmissionfrom the nodes to the participating nodes in a path. From theinputs depicted in the study, it is imperative that the requiredpower for transmission is relative to the distance between corre-sponding two nodes. This model reﬂects on multicast routs withlarge number of nodes, and the crux is that it is not consideringthe leftover energy of the battery of the nodes involved in theroute, hence it lasts the focus on lifetime of each node.In the other model of MBC[6], the solution is about minimizingthe path cost and hence worked on the reverse modeling of theresidual energy of the nodes depicted in corresponding path.Compared to the wired networks, the complexity of multicast-ing in the wireless networks are much higher because of the inter-ferences and mobility related issues. Multicast is an activecommunication and the concerted correspondence processbetween various nodes. Flooding based multicasting is one pre-dominant strategy that evinces control packet overhead as high,and emphasized to generate minimal levels of data trafﬁc in thenetwork. However, the challenge is that the issue of scalability isa major constraint in the case of both the solutions. In the caseof multicast protocols, there are varied factors that inﬂuence thesolutions for MANETs, and categorically the issue of node mobility,is a key issue. The crux in the process is about the need for morebandwidth in terms of updates, by taking more of control messagepackets and high consumption of power.In the proposed paper, the focus is on developing an energy efﬁ-cient multicast algorithm for MANETs. In the proposed solution,the factor is that the data packets transmitted from source to thegroup destinations using a node, and such nodes relies on the pathwith higher efﬁciency of residual battery powers and relay-capacities. The other objective of the proposal is to minimize theprocess overhead to select possible multicast routes betweensource and destination. In regard to this, the depicted model is con-cluding the routes from destination to source, which is novel thatcompared to other contemporary models.The proposed model explained in detail in the further sectionsconstituting Section2as the related work, followed by Section 3 as discussion of outline of the proposed algorithm. In terms ofexperimental setup and the related performance analysis, Section 4 depicts the process outcome, followed by Section 5depicting the conclusion and the scope of further research work.2. Related workIn the process of increasing the network lifetime, the power-aware routing plays a vital role, and there are certain solutions thatdeveloped earlier for the same. In the case of Broadcast Incremen-tal Power (BIP) algorithm[7], the process is that the systemexploits the nature of wireless communication environments andthe addresses that are essential in the process of handling theenergy efﬁcient operations in the system. Emphasis in the modelis depicting multicast tree that broadcasts with minimal energyconsumption. This model is fundamentally designed on the basisof Prim’s algorithm[7].Genetic Algorithm based multicast routing [8,9]are focused towards achieving the stability and energy efﬁcient outcome interms of mobile ad hoc network routing is an effective system thatcan make signiﬁcant difference in terms of energy consumption.The key purpose of this model is towards evaluating the signalstrength for stable levels in the hop links and shall be used furthertowards concluding the ﬁtness in terms of stability and energyusage in the multicast tree. One of the signiﬁcant constraints inthis process is that though it aims at reducing the cost of batterylife, still in terms of complexity observed in the process could beattributed to Genetic Algorithm. The other GA based multicast treerouting protocol[10]for HAP-satellite architecture[11]is depicted in contemporary literature. The QoS metrics called cost, band-width, and delay are consider to assess the ﬁtness of the newlyformed multicast trees (chromosomes). The cost metric denotesthe energy consumption. The other contemporary model [12]that builds over Genetic algorithm is aimed to detect dynamic shortestpath, and dynamic multicast route. The Link-stability, and energyefﬁciency is two critical objectives of the model depicted in [13], which is also based on genetic algorithm.The probabilistic evolutions and evolutions complexity are theconstraints of these GA based models, which are carried from tra-
ditional GA evolution process. Henceforth probabilistic route accu-racy in regard to routing quality factors is often evinced, which isdue to the probabilistic evolutions of the traditional GeneticAlgorithm.The evolutions carried in GA are probabilistic, since the initialchromosomes (multicast routes) are formed randomly. In addition,the parent chromosomes those were used as input to crossoversalso being retained along with newly formed chromosomes dueto crossover process.In regard to overcome this, and to achieve route discoverydeterministic process, this manuscript is preparing initial chromo-somes using the route discovery process called EACNS [14]. Later the process of the genetic algorithm is using these chromosomesin crossover process. Moreover, among the parent chromosomesand newly formed chromosomes, the best ﬁt will be survive andrest will be pruned from the chromosome list, which is progressiveevolution strategy. Due to this the number of evolutions are deter-ministic and limits the evolutions process complexity.Profoundly the algorithms that are designed with intension ofpower efﬁciency was based on cluster-based or by adapting thetree-based models. In the later model, emphasis is on developingtree-based solutions that are highly efﬁcient in power manage-ment, and depending on source, they further classiﬁed asmulticast-source or single-source algorithms. Some of the powerefﬁcient single-source multicast models deﬁned are MIP, S-REMITand RBIP[15].In[16]G-REMIT was proposed as an alternative tree-based mul-ticast to enable routing between multiple sources and sinks. Thecritical objective of the model is to achieve multicasting with min-imal energy consumption. REMiT is another model with emphasistowards reducing the consumption levels of energies and improv-ing network lifetime. L-REMit model proposed with objective ofreﬁning the lifetime of the network for the source-based trees. G-REMiT model is more about reducing the energy consumptionamidst the group-shared trees.In[17,18], the study has discussed contemporary solutionsthose enables multicasting. The emphasis of these models is toenhance the network life time. The MLMH [18]depicted a metric called EEM (Energy Efﬁciency Metric), which is the result of aggre-gate hop-count values and relative levels of increment of lifetime.Lifetime-Aware-Multicast-Tree (LAM) works on maximizing thelifetime by identifying a route with minimal levels of energy con-sumption and exploits the multicast lifetime [19]. The other method of Prioritized-overlay-multicast algorithm shall worktowards improving the effectiveness and efﬁcacy of the superim-pose multicast in MANET, by ensuring that there is effective role–based-prioritized trees[20].N. Papanna et al. / Applied Computing and Informatics 15 (2019) 120–128 121The other method MAODV proposed in [21]is an extended ver- sion of AODV that targets improvisation of the process, where allmulticast group constituted as a tree that leads by the root nodethat broadcasts the data packets to the nodes involved in corre-sponding tree. Any corrections, rectiﬁcations and repairing of thetree carried out using the MAODV protocol core. MP-MAODV dis-cussed in[22]is an extended model ofMAODVand works on mul- tipath selection and establishment, and handling the process ofmultipath route maintenance along with other functions like loaddistribution. The MP-MAODV is capable to build multicast treewith multiple sources and multiple sinks that enables bidirectionalsharing. In addition, the MAODV is one of the shortest routing withleast levels of hops routing, however, the MP-MAODV is much rig-orous in terms of establishing the maximum possible number ofmulticast routes between so node and multiple sinks that isadapted in the backup route.Multicasting via the application of time reservation, as well asadaptive control for energy efﬁciency (MC-TRACE) [23]is generally an energy efﬁcient real-time multicast routing procedure for datacommunication in MANETs. It is worth pointing out that MC-TRACE is generally the extended MH-TRACE [24]that generally supports multicasting routing ability.Efﬁciency in the consumption of energy gained through allow-ing the nodes, which are idle and can be switched to sleep nodefrequently and through the elimination of majority of redundantdata receptions. The MC-TRACE depicts signiﬁcance to minimizethe transmission delay and battery dissipation, whereas the band-width efﬁciency is similar that compare to ODMRP [25]. The ability of minimal energy consumption appeared in MC-TRACE evincingthe greater possibility of signiﬁcant QoS in multicast routing, aswell as bandwidth efﬁciency. However, the lack of robust architec-ture is the main challenge.High stable power conscious multicast algorithm (HSPMA) [26] which is mainly aimed at improving the lifespan of the networkand the node, considering the two main metrics, residualbattery-capacity as well as the relay-capacity which is vital for car-rying out multicasting. Lowering the energy dissipation at nodescorresponding to multicast route leads to maximal lifespan of thenetwork. Multicast group size may become a huge challenge whenit comes to the determination of the performance of the network.In addition, the additional control information is vital when com-parison done between the power conscious routing protocols andthe regular protocols that do not take into consideration energyas one of the main concerns. The network’s life span increased byabout 20 percent on average. However, there is the creation ofadded control trafﬁc.Lu and Zhu[27]addressed a novel multicast routing protocolcalled EDCMRA that aimed to achieve Energy-efﬁciency and delaysensitive data transmission. The EDCMRA is based on Genetic Algo-rithm that is considering the energy dissipation and delay as ﬁt-ness metrics in objective function to select optimal routes. Thealgorithm uses the Possible Multicast trees those traced in routerequest process as initial input chromosomes, and uses the com-mon subtree of the any of given two multicast tress as crossoverpoint. It is a highly efﬁcient and effective algorithm, but the pro-cess time is inversely proportionated to the network size.EGMP (Efﬁcient geographic multicast protocol) [28]petitions the network into set of virtual zones to achieve effective manage-ment of group membership. In order to this, a network wide zoneoriented bidirectional tree is formed in each virtual zone. Theexperimental study that compared the ERGMP with ODMRP andSPBM evincing that the ratio of packets delivered through EGMPis considerably high that compared to OBMRP and SPBM. The min-imal control packet overhead is observed in multicasting process ofthe EGMP than the other two protocols. However, there is gener-ally less efﬁciency with regards to the usage of energy.The fuzzy oriented demand on multicast routing protocol(FBODMRP)[29]has been proposed as a highly efﬁcient means ofdelivering information from the node at the source to differentnodes, which are the receivers. The main objective of FBODMRPmainly entails establishing small, high quality as well as highlyefﬁcient forwarding group. When FBODMRP is compared toODMRP, it is worth pointing out that fuzzy based approach resultsinto higher packet delivery ratio, very low control information uti-lization as well as delays in the environment, which is highlydense. In addition, power saving option is greater if there is needfor low control overhead. As future work, the fuzzy rules mayuse over the cognitive networks. This depicted model plays a rolein increasing the rates of packet delivery by 40 percent, and theratio of delay and energy dissipation reduced relatively to 35 and45 percent. However, the loss rate is proportionating to networkdensity.MANETs uses omni directional antennas. At the same time, theyare having limited energy resources in the protocol, which havebeen proposed. In the suggested distributed minimum energy mul-
ticast (DMEM)[30]focus is mainly on the reduction of the total RFenergy which is highly vital for multicast communication. It isworth pointing out that the DMEM algorithm is highly effectivein performance and in the delivery of the results. In an environ-ment of low mobility, the protocol generally accomplishes the bestof medium, as well as a huge volume multicast groups. For thehigher mobile networks, it is worth pointing out that DMEM isgenerally regarded to be highly effective efﬁcient and effectivewith regards to saving energy, as well as when it comes to ensuringthat the overheads are adequately and effectively controlled. Thismodel is highly efﬁcient both with regards to saving energy andalso operation overhead. However, In case there is link breakage,there is the dwindling of process’ performance.Least energy for every bit for multicasting [31]in the MANET generally concerns linear program in which the least energy forevery bit achieved through the adoption of network coding. Theprocess time required for an optimal network coding solution is30th part of the time taken by an optimal routing strategy. Futureresearch should characterize with an average gain. Generally, net-work coding is having a number of beneﬁts when a comparison isdone between it and optimal routing with regards to energy, aswell as computational efﬁciencies. However, the characterizationof admissible rate region is highly complex.In the case that multicast transmission from multiple sources tomultiple sinks, the main challenge, which is faced generally, entailsthe development of MEM tree to enable the conveyance of multi-cast data. This results into the minimization of the whole con-sumption of power for packet conveyance within the tree. Thereis the building of least energy multicast tree. However, it is onlyappropriate to the ad hoc networks that build by symmetric place-ment of the nodes.The model depicted in[32]is a multicasting process that entailsthe all-to-all transmission. Critical objective of the model depictedis multicast sessions, which is framing the multiple sessions fromthe overall transmissions required. The nodes related to each mul-ticast session contains a message for sharing with the other node.There is a reduction in the total energy that consumed, however, itdemands exclusive construction of multicast routing tree.The model depicted in[33]is considering the node mobility andenergy dissipation as critical objectives, which is referred as mobil-ity based energy efﬁcient multicasting (M-EEMC). M-EEMC is cou-pled with tree, as well as mesh based routing techniques for theminimization of the levels of consumption of energy. Performanceassessment of the protocol, which proposed with ODMRP generallypoints out that M-EEMC is delivering better ration of packet deliv-ery and brings about lesser energy dissipation as well as lesser122 N. Papanna et al. / Applied Computing and Informatics 15 (2019) 120–128packet delay. There is the dissipation of minimal amounts ofenergy. However, it involves a complicated set of algorithm.The limits observed in regard to these benchmarking models isthat the multicast scope of a node is not considered and no evi-dence of accurate selection of multicast route with minimal energyconsumption and maximum lifetime, which are signiﬁcant inestablishing stable route.Hence, the contribution of this manuscript aimed to establisha best-ﬁt multicast route that consumes minimal energy totransmit and retains maximum lifetime of the route. In orderto this, the proposal relied on adaptive genetic algorithm thatuses multicast scope, energy consumption ration and reservebattery ratio in ﬁtness assessment. The adaptive genetic algo-rithm adapted for optimal multicast route selects the sub-treeswith dynamic number of nodes and optimal ﬁtness as crossoverpoints to perform mutations, which is signiﬁcant to reduce thecomputational overhead that usually found in traditional GeneticAlgorithm strategies.The suggested protocols EEMPMO in [34]makes use of the idea of zone building and they generally construct a multicast tree withalternative root node that replaces the primary root node as andwhen required. The depicted tree is capable to perform bidirec-tional transmissions[35]. Because the root node charged withthe responsibility of routing, there is the dire need for more energyconsumption in comparison to the other nodes. Performance andreliability, which pertains to reduced overhead, as well as usageof lesser power, as well as lesser bandwidth is gathered thoughthe use of the protocol which was proposed. The scalability, as wellas less control overhead are the critical strength of the EEMPO.However, the procedure involved in selection of highly appropriatenode as the standby node may result into various kinds of delay inperformance, however, it may enhance the protocol’s overallefﬁciency.3. Adaptive genetic algorithm based multicast route selectionAn adaptive genetic algorithm (GA) is a method for solving bothconstrained and unconstrained optimization problems based on anatural selection process that mimics biological evolution. Thealgorithm repeatedly modiﬁes a population of individual solutions.At each step, the genetic algorithm randomly selects individualsfrom the current population and uses them as parents to producethe children for the next generation. Over successive generations,the population ‘‘evolves” toward an optimal solution.Generates a population of points at each iteration. The bestpoint in the population approaches an optimal solution.Adaptive Generic Algorithms (AGAs) is one of the afﬂuent algo-rithms, and pc (probabilities of crossover) and the mutation (pm),certainly determines the level of accuracy and the quantum ofspeed that the genetic algorithms can attain. Rather than takingany ﬁxed values in to account, in the case of the adaptive algo-rithms, the emphasis is on gathering inputs from the populationdiversity as well as in terms of sustaining the convergence capac-ity. In the AGA model[36], the ﬁtness values of the solutions arevital in terms of determining pc and pm values for the solutions,whereas, in the case of CAGA[37], the decision of pc and pm depends more on the optimization states of the population. Thescope of combining GA with the other set of optimization methodsshall be more proﬁcient as the GA is very effective in ﬁnding goodglobal solutions, but the challenge is about its limitations in termsof ﬁnding the absolute optimum using the last few mutations.Some of the other techniques like the hill climbing method andother such solutions are certainly effective and efﬁcient in ﬁndingthe most favorable in a conﬁned region, but in the case ofalternating GA and the hill climbing methods can result in moreeffective outcome.Of the adaptive genetic algorithm properties explored, thegenetic algorithm used here in this manuscript evinces the adapt-ability at cross over point selection, such that maximum number ofnodes in sequence having ﬁtness more than the given threshold.This strategy of crossover point selection defuses the number ofevolutions, hence the computational complexity will be evincedminimal that compared to traditional GA [37]. The Energy efﬁcient and lifetime aware multicast route discovery strategy that pro-posed here in this manuscript explored following.3.1. Formation of chromosomes (Genotype)All possible Multicast Routes to transmit data between selectedsource and multiple destination nodes has to be discovered ini-tially. The multicast routes formed as tree structures, which builtfrom the selective nodes. LetMT¼ft
1;t2;...;tjMTjgbe the set of Multicast Routes selected by route request process adapted fromMAODV[21]. Further, these set of Multicast Routes used as initialchromosomes for adaptive genetic evolution. In order to identifythe ﬁtness of the newly formed chromosomes from the crossoverprocess, the ﬁtness function is derived, which uses proposedheuristics derived in our earlier contribution called EACNS [14] that briefed in following section.3.2. The metric used to estimate the ﬁtness of the multicast treeThe Metrics used to estimate the ﬁtness of the multicast treeMT¼ft
1;t2;...;t n/C01;tngare/C15Ratio of Energy Consumption: Metric deﬁnes usual energy con-sumption per unit of transmission at the egress node levels. Themetric value derived based on mean of consumed energy forunit of transmission amidst nodes to the nodes that connectedat successor levels, and the values expected to be minimal./C15Reserved Battery Life: It details the lifetime of a node that is partof the routing process. The metric estimates battery life essen-tial for routing and the idle time value of battery life, battery lifeimpacted because of contingency like max battery consumption(mbc), which deducts mbc based on the estimated battery life(ebl). Resulting value of the assessment has to be positive andhigher that the deﬁned threshold./C15Multicast Scope: It deﬁnes the feasible quantum of child nodes.The combination of these metric values such that a node havingmax number of child nodes with minimum energy consumptionand maximum reserve battery life represents corresponding nodeis optimal.Similarly the combination of these metric values such thatthe average of child nodes is maximum with average of energyconsumption is minimum and average of reserve battery life ismaximum represents the corresponding multicast tree isoptimal.The assessment of these metrics at each node carried out asfollows.3.2.1. Assessing energy consumption ratioThe energy consumption at every node is the average of energyconsumption observed to transmit a unit of data to all child nodesfrom the corresponding node.ecðt
iÞ /// is vector contains the energy utilization ratio of allnodes in multicast treet
iN. Papanna et al. / Applied Computing and Informatics 15 (2019) 120–128 1231. For each Nodefn9n2t igBeginec
n!CN n u// a vector denoting energy utilization essentialfor transmission of a frame to all child nodes denoted as setCN
n
2. For each child nodefcn9cn2CN ngBegin
qw¼wðtn!cndÞ/C10k// desired frequency qwis exponential of the number of frequency ranges, the number frequency rangesfrom the Euclidian distance
tn!cnobserved between noden and corresponding child nodecnis
tn!cn
d, heredis the frequency range observed at node nand notationkis the exponential loss of the frequency.
ecn!cn¼ðqw/C10eÞþðe0/C10kÞð 1Þ
//Here in Eq.(1)/C15The notationec
n!cnrepresents the energy consumed fortransmission of a frame from node nto corresponding child nodecn/C15
eis energy essential for transmitting a frame under fre-quencyw/C15
e0is the energy consumption resulting because of overheadof other factors[27].ec
n!CN n ec n!cn
// energy consumption between node nand corresponding child nodecnis added to the setec
n!CN n
End //End of loop in line 2nec
ti hec n!CN ni// mean energy consumption amidst nand all corresponding child nodesCN
nis moved to the setnec ti
that contains usual energy consumption observed for allnodes in multicast treeEnd // end of loop in line 1ec
ti¼Pjnec tijj¼1fej9ej2nec tig// the energy consumption totransmit a frame by multicast tree t
i
3.2.2. Assessing reserve battery lifeThe reserve battery life of a given node estimated as follows.Initially, the product of energy consumption ratio, max quan-tum of frames to be transmitted and aggregate number childnodes will measure and further the resultant value of this pro-duct will deduct from the actual battery life of the correspondingnode.For every Nodefn9n2t
igBegin
rbln¼mbl n/C0ðhec n!CN ni/C2fc/C2jCN njÞ
//The product of energy consumption ratio node n, max number of frames to be transmitted, and the aggregate ofchild nodes is diffused from the max battery life mbl
nof nodenthat referred as preserved battery life rbl
nof the noden.EndFurther, the average of reserve battery life observed for allnodes in given multicast tree considered as the tree levelreserve battery liferbl
ti3.2.3. Assessing multicast scoperblðt
iÞ u//A vector comprises the information ofreserve battery life of all the nodes in L
i
nnlðL iÞ u// A vector which constitutes size of allprobable neighbor nodes fromslðL
iÞinterlinked to every nodefsnd9snd2L
igbased on deﬁned metric constraintsmcs
ti /// is an empty set contains the multicast scope ofeach node in the given tree1. For each Nodefn9n2t
igBeginmcl
n¼1// max possible nodes to connect as child nodes to thenodenthat initialized with 12. For each child nodefcn9cn2CN
ngbeginifððmbl
n/C0ðhec n!CN ni/C2fc/C2mcl nÞÞ>rbl nÞBegin mcl
nþ¼1EndElse Beginmcl
n/C0¼1mcs
ti mcl n
Go to loop in line 1End3. End // of loop in line 24. End // of loop in line 1
The given tree level multicast scope is the average of multicastscope observed at each node of the corresponding treehmcs
tii.
3.3. Fitness functionThis section explores the process of estimating the tree level ﬁt-ness in regard to energy efﬁciency and route longevity, which is asfollows.For given parent treest
p;tqand the resultant child treest i;tj, assess the values for metrics, energy consumption ratio (see Sec-tion3.2.1), reserve battery life (see Section 3.2.2and multicast scope (see Section3.2.3)1.ifðrbl
ti>rbl sÞBegin// if the reserve battery life of the multicast tree t
iis more than the thresholdrbl
sgiveni.ifðec
ti<ec tp_ec ti<ec tqÞBeginThe energy consumption ratio of the tree t
iis less than the energy consumption ratio of target tree t
port qthen the ﬁtness of treet
iis optimalEnd // of if in line iii. Elseðec
ti¼ec tp_ec ti¼ec tqÞ^ðmcs ti>mcs tp_mcs ti>mcs tqÞ BeginConﬁrm that the treet
iis with optimal ﬁtnessiii. End //of else in line ii2. End // end of if in line13. Else BeginThe ﬁtness of the treet
iis not optimal, hence treet iis not prone to select for routing4. End // of else in line 3
In the similar passion explored above ﬁnd the ﬁtness of the t j124 N. Papanna et al. / Applied Computing and Informatics 15 (2019) 120–1283.4. Adaptive GA for multicast route selectionThe optimal energy efﬁcient multicast route among the possiblemulticast routes discovered done by using evolutionary computa-tion strategy called Adaptive Genetic Algorithm (GA) [36]. Selec- tion of distinct range of nodes in sequence as crossover pointsreduces the computational overhead of GA, which applies set ofinitial multicast routes asMT¼ft
1;t2;...;tjMTjg. The algorithm description follows and the same is visualized in ﬂowchart (seeFig. 1).3.4.1. The optimal multicast route discovery functionAGA-Main (MT) BeginLettMTbe the clone of given set of multicast trees MT depicted by EACNSLetMT /be the empty set used tostore the multicast trees formed by AGAFind cross overpoints (common node sequence with ﬁtness greater thanthe given threshold in given both multicast trees) that isnot begin at ﬁrst node in both input multicast trees asfollows.1.
8jtCLji¼1fti9ti2tMTgBegin // for each multi cast treet i
2.8jtMTjj¼1ftj9tj2tMT^i–jgBegin// for each multicast treet j, which is not the other treet
i
3.for eachffmtgp9fmtgp2ti^p¼1tojt ijgBegin //node sequence as sub treefmtg
pwith optimal ﬁtness inmulticast treet
i
4.for eachffmtgq9fmtgq2tj^q¼1tojt jjgBegin //node sequence as sub treefmtg
qoptimal ﬁtness in multicast treet
j
5. Ifðfmtgp/C17fmtgq^p–1ÞBegin// if subtreefmtgpof treet i
is identical to subtreefmtgqof treet j
/C15The subtree that be present before the crossover pointfmtg
pint iand the sub tree that is present after the cross-over pointfmtg
qint jare allied with crossover pointfmtgp
that leads to new multicast treet psuch that the multicasttreet
pwhich wasn’t present in MTt
p t i 
tp t j!
/C15The sub tree that exists before the crossover pointfmtgpin t
jand the sub tree that exists after the crossover pointfmtg
pin clustert iare connected with crossover pointfmtg
pthat forms new multicast treet qsuch that the mul- ticast treet
qdoes not exist in MTt
q t j 
tq t i!
/C15Estimate the ﬁtness of thet i;tj;tp;tq(see Section3.3)/C15Ifðf
tp/C171Þ//if ﬁtness of the treet pis qualiﬁed then addt p
toMT
MT t p
/C15Ifðftq/C171Þ//if ﬁtness of the treet qis qualiﬁed then addt q
toMT
MT t q
End If // of step 56. End For //of step 47. End For //of step 38. End For//of step 29. End For//of step 110.MT MT[
MT11. Multicast Tree setMTis redeﬁned by eliminatingmulticast trees that are close to other multicast tree if any,using the following steps12.
8jMTji¼1fti9ti2MTgBegin13.
8jMTjj¼1ftj9tj2MT^i–jgBegin14. Ifðt
i,tjÞthen //t iandt jroughly equal depending onnumber of nodes that are in common to both treesMT MTnt
i// deletet ifromMT15. End If //of step 1416. End For //of step 13
(continued on next page)
Fig. 1.The optimal multicast route discovery function.N. Papanna et al. / Applied Computing and Informatics 15 (2019) 120–128 12517. End For //of step 1218. IfðMT–tMTÞthen AGA-Main (MT) 19. End Function AGA-MainThis signiﬁes each stable and optimal clusters, and then selectthe multicast tree fromMTunder contextual requirements.3.4.2. Selecting best ﬁt multicast routeUpon completion of the adaptive genetic algorithm process, theresultant multicast trees can be ordered in the priority of descend-ing order of energy consumption and ascending order of multicastscope in sequence and then the best ﬁt Multicast Route among theMTwill be selected.4. Empirical analysis and results explorationIn terms of conducting the experimentation of the process, in anarea of 1000 mts/C21000 mts, set of nodes placed in a random man-ner, and using the Network Simulator [38]the testing process has been carried out. In the testing process, an ad hoc network simu-lated with randomly placed nodes with pause time of 2 s intervalduring their mobility from present location. Metrics that consid-ered for the simulation depicted in Table 1. In the placement of each node, with 25%, 50%, 75% and broad-cast range with four distinct multicast groups are spawned, whichcan lead to process that is more emphatic. Also, the power sum isnormalized in order to reduce the minimum heuristic solution to 1.The results that discussed about average numbers over 100 setsand routes formed with the range of nodes between 10 and 45.4.1. Performance analysisMany metrics like energy consumption, thorough put delay, andthe network lifetime processes are adapted, which could affect thenetwork performance to great extent. Also, the outcome from theexperimental results is depicted for the ﬁve models, and the com-parative analysis of all the ﬁve models has also been depicted inthe experimental results.4.2. Network lifetimeFor the experimental study, nodes in the range of 10 to 45 cho-sen, and the nodes have been deployed within the deﬁned area.Around 5–20 packets/sec has been sent between the nodes, andall the nodes moved at 2 mts/sec. The group quantum and theage of network depicted inFig. 2, while engaged, the results afﬁrmthe performance of EELAM in keeping most of nodes alive forlonger tenure, than the other models. When the group size hasbeen managed to 40, the output from EELAM is about managingthe nodes alive for a period of 8530 sec, which is signiﬁcantly highthat compared to the other benchmarking models (see Fig. 2).Fig. 3 reﬂects the kind of nodes that are alive during the simulation time(indicating in the multicast routes selected under each of thebenchmarking models). The outcome from EELAM results has beendepicting the better performance among the models that observedat different time intervals (seeFig. 3).4.3. Energy consumptionInFig. 4, the emphasis is on Energy Consumption ratio for var-ied time instances that presumes no energy consumption occursinitially. The results depicted nFig. 4evincing that EELAM is opti- mal that compared to other benchmarking models. The node levelenergy dissipation in EELAM is linearly proportionate to transmis-
Table 1Metrics and the related values adapted for simulation.
Metric ValueSimulation time 2000 sNetwork Range 1000/C21000 mts Transmission power 1400 mWVoltage 5 VTrafﬁc type CBRCBR packet size 512 bytesMobility model Random waypointFrequency 2.4 GHzChannel capacity 2 MbpsTransmission range 150 mtsIdle power 830 mWNode mobility 0–20 mts/secReceiving power 1000 mWPause time 1 secGroup size 3, 6, 9, 12, 15
Fig. 2.Max life time of the routes with divergent number of nodes observed forEELAM and benchmarking models.
Fig. 3.Percentage of nodes alive in selected route observed for EELAM andbenchmarking models at different intervals.
Fig. 4.Comparison of Energy Consumption Ratio observed for EELAM andbenchmarking models at divergent time intervals.126 N. Papanna et al. / Applied Computing and Informatics 15 (2019) 120–128sion time. Hence, the EELAM evinced the less consumption thatcompared to the other models.4.4. ThroughputWhen dense number (here in experiments 45) mobile nodes areinvolved in route with varied node mobility speeds in range of 0 to30 mts/sec and transmitting 5 packets per second, it is imperativethat the mobility is vice versa to throughput. In the tests, resultsEELAM has worked well in the range of node mobility ranges 0–30 mts/sec and other models considered evinced signiﬁcant down-fall in throughput proportionate to the increase in speed (seeFig. 5). From the review of the experimental results, it is imperativethat the minimal fall in throughput along with the increasingmobility of the nodes evinced for EELAM.4.5. End-to-end delayEnd-to-end delay can be termed as time consumption for apacket to travel amidst source to destination. In the test conditionwith mobile nodes positioned in various locations in the deﬁnedareas, and with the node mobility capability of 8–30 mts/sec,transmitting the data at 5 packets/sec. Fig. 6depicts the delay at different time intervals observed for multicast routes traced byEELAM and other benchmark models. The EELAM has transmittedthe data at signiﬁcantly low that compared to the other (see Fig. 6). Using the metrics of Reserve Battery Life, Packet Delivery Rationand End-to-End delay ratio, the EELAM performance also analyzedfor multicast trees formed by divergent number of nodes. From themetric volumes that are obtained in the networks build with diver-gent count of nodes reﬂecting the fact that EELAM is scalable androbust. Inputs and metrics observed depicted in Figs. 7–9.
5. ConclusionEnergy Efﬁcient and Lifetime aware Multicast (EELAM) routediscovery for mobile ad hoc networks is the model that designedto address the issues pertaining to curtailing the consumption ofenergy and maximizing the route lifetime. The proposed topologyEELAM is effective in terms of assessing the optimality of the mul-ticast tree by ensuring that three crucial metrics Reserve BatteryLife, Energy Consumption Ratio and multicast scope evaluated.The adaptive genetic algorithm is used to identify energy efﬁcientlifetime aware multicast tree, which is balancing the process over-head by selecting sub-trees having dynamic number of nodes withoptimal ﬁtness as crossover points and further reﬁning input chro-mosomes by comparing the ﬁtness with child chromosomesformed. The signiﬁcance of the EELAM assessed through the simu-lations build by network simulator called NS2. In order to this, therouting performance metrics, such as packet delivery ratio, end-to-end delay, throughput versus mobility, and energy consumption
Fig. 5.Comparison of throughput observed for EELAM and benchmarking models atdivergent mobility speed.
Fig. 6.Comparative analysis of end-to-end delay observed for EELAM and bench-marking models at divergent time intervals.
Fig. 7.Comparison of End-to-End Delay observed for routes formed by divergentcount of nodes.
Fig. 8.Comparative analysis of Packet Delivery Ratio observed for routes formed bydivergent count of nodes.
Fig. 9.Energy Reserves Ratio observed at different simulation intervals.N. Papanna et al. / Applied Computing and Informatics 15 (2019) 120–128 127ratio used. The results obtained for these metrics from the multi-cast route discovered by EELAM compared to the other benchmarking models such as EACNS, EDCMRA, HSPMA, and MC-TRACE. These metrics were also compared between the multicastroutes formed with divergent count of nodes those discovered byEELAM, which is in order to evince the scalability and efﬁcacy ofthe proposed model. Insights learnt from this model motivatingus to redeﬁne the Adaptive Genetic Algorithm, such that the ﬁtnessfunction can use fuzzy reasoning to estimate the ﬁtness of thegiven multicast route.References
[1] Mario Cˇagalj, Jean-Pierre Hubaux, Christian Enz, Minimum-energy broadcastin all-wireless networks: NP-completeness and distribution issues, in:Proceedings of the 8th Annual International Conference on MobileComputing and Networking, ACM, 2002.[2] Intae Kang, Radha Poovendran, Maximizing static network lifetime of wirelessbroadcast ad hoc networks, in: IEEE International Conference onCommunications, 2003, ICC’03, vol. 3, IEEE, 2003.[3]
Jeffrey E. Wieselthier, Gam D. Nguyen, Anthony Ephremides, Algorithms forenergy-efﬁcient multicasting in static ad hoc wireless networks, Mob.Networks Appl. 6 (3) (2001) 251–263
. [4] Wei-Hsiang Cheng, Chung-Yi Wen, Kai-Ten Feng, Power-controlled hybridmulticast routing protocol for mobile ad hoc networks, in: IEEE 63rd VehicularTechnology Conference, 2006, VTC 2006-Spring, vol. 3, IEEE, 2006.[5] Suresh Singh, Mike Woo, Cauligi S. Raghavendra, Power-aware routing inmobile ad hoc networks, in: Proceedings of the 4th Annual ACM/IEEEInternational Conference on Mobile Computing and Networking, ACM, 1998.[6]
Weifa Liang, Xiaoxing Guo, Online multicasting for network capacitymaximization in energy-constrained ad hoc networks, IEEE Trans. Mob.Comput. 5 (9) (2006) 1215–1227
. [7] Jeffrey E. Wieselthier, Gam D. Nguyen, Anthony Ephremides, On theconstruction of energy-efﬁcient broadcast and multicast trees in wirelessnetworks, in: INFOCOM 2000, Nineteenth Annual Joint Conference of the IEEEComputer and Communications Societies, Proceedings, IEEE, vol. 2, IEEE, 2000.[8]
Shengbo Yang, Chai Kiat Yeo, Bu-Sung Lee, Toward reliable data delivery forhighly dynamic mobile ad hoc networks, IEEE Trans. Mob. Comput. 11 (1)(2012) 111–124
.[9] Youngmin Kim, Sanghyun Ahn, Jaehwoon Lee, An efﬁcient multicast dataforwarding scheme for mobile ad hoc networks, in: ICOIN, 2005.[10] Floriano De Rango et al., Multicast QoS core-based tree routing protocol andgenetic algorithm over an HAP-satellite architecture, IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol.58(8) (2009) 4447–4461.[11] Ernestina Cianca et al., Integrated satellite-HAP systems, IEEE Commun. Mag.43(12) (2005) supl-33.[12] Hui Cheng, Shengxiang Yang, Genetic algorithms for dynamic routingproblems in mobile ad hoc networks, in: Evolutionary Computation forDynamic Optimization Problems, Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2013, pp. 343–375.[13]
Floriano De Rango, Francesca Guerriero, Peppino Fazio, Link-stability andenergy aware routing protocol in distributed wireless networks, IEEE Trans.Parallel Distrib. Syst. 23 (4) (2012) 713–726
. [14] N. Papanna, A. Rama Mohan Reddy, M. Seetha, Exploratory assessment basedchild nodes selection (EACNS): energy efﬁcient multicast routing topology formobile ad hoc networks, in: Proceedings of International Conference onCommunication and Networks, Springer, Singapore, 2017.[15]
B. Wang, S.K.S. Gupta, S-REMiT: an algorithm for enhancing energy-efﬁciencyof multicast trees in wireless ad hoc networks, Proc. IEEE (2003) 3519–3524
.[16] Bin Wang, Sandeep K.S. Gupta, G-REMiT: an algorithm for building energyefﬁcient multicast trees in wireless ad hoc networks, in: Second IEEEInternational Symposium on Network Computing and Applications, 2003,NCA 2003, IEEE, 2003.[17]Pariza Kamboj, A.K. Sharma, Power aware multicast reactive routing protocol(PAMRRP), IJCSNS 8 (8) (2008) 351
. [18]
Sufen Zhao, Liansheng Tan, Jie Li, A distributed energy efﬁcient multicastrouting algorithm for MANETs, Int. J. Sensor Networks 2 (1-2) (2007) 62–67
. [19] Wen-Lin Yang, Constructing energy-efﬁcient multicast trees with delayconstraints in ad hoc networks, in: Advanced Information Networking andApplications, 2005, AINA 2005, 19th International Conference on, vol. 1, IEEE,2005.[20] Juan J. Gálvez, Pedro M. Ruiz, Antonio F.G. Skarmeta, Spatially disjointmultipath routing protocol without location information, in: Local ComputerNetworks, 2008, LCN 2008, 33rd IEEE Conference on, IEEE, 2008.[21] Elizabeth M. Royer, Charles E. Perkins, Multicast operation of the ad-hoc on-demand distance vector routing protocol, in: Proceedings of the 5th AnnualACM/IEEE International Conference on Mobile Computing and Networking,ACM, 1999.[22] N. Kamal, A study of energy efﬁciency of multicast routing protocols for manet,2013.[23]
Bulent Tavli, Wendi Heinzelman, Energy-efﬁcient real-time multicast routingin mobile ad hoc networks, IEEE Trans. Comput. 60 (5) (2011) 707–722
. [24]
Bülent Tavli, Wendi B. Heinzelman, MH-TRACE: multihop time reservationusing adaptive control for energy efﬁciency, IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun. 22 (5)(2004) 942–953
.[25]
Sung-Ju Lee, William Su, Mario Gerla, On-demand multicast routing protocolin multihop wireless mobile networks, Mob. Networks Appl. 7 (6) (2002) 441–453
.[26]
Golla Varaprasad, High stable power aware multicast algorithm for mobile adhoc networks, IEEE Sens. J. 13 (5) (2013) 1442–1446
. [27]
Ting Lu, Jie Zhu, Genetic algorithm for energy-efﬁcient QoS multicast routing,IEEE Commun. Lett. 17 (1) (2013) 31–34
. [28]
Xiaojing Xiang, Xin Wang, Yuanyuan Yang, Supporting efﬁcient and scalablemulticasting over mobile ad hoc networks, IEEE Trans. Mob. Comput. 10 (4)(2011) 544–559
.[29]
Alireza shams Shaﬁgh, Kamran Abdollahi, Marjan Kouchaki, Improvingperformance of on demand multicast routing protocol by fuzzy logic, WorldAppl. Sci. J. 13 11 (2011) 2323–2337
. [30]
Song Guo, Oliver Yang, Localized operations for distributed minimum energymulticast algorithm in mobile ad hoc networks, IEEE Trans. Parallel Distrib.Syst. 18 (2) (2007) 186–198
. [31]
Yunnan Wu, Philip A. Chou, Sun-Yuan Kung, Minimum-energy multicast inmobile ad hoc networks using network coding, IEEE Trans. Commun. 53 (11)(2005) 1906–1918
.[32]
Weifa Liang et al., Minimum-energy all-to-all multicasting in wireless ad hocnetworks, IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun. 8.11 (2009)
. [33]
N. Fareena, A. Shunmuga Priya Mala, K. Ramar, Mobility based energy efﬁcientmulticast protocol for MANET, Proc. Eng. 38 (2012) 2473–2483
. [34]
Pariza Kamboj, Ashok K. Sharma, Energy efﬁcient multicast routing protocolfor MANET with minimum control overhead (EEMPMO), Energy 8.7 (2010)
. [35] Ajita Sethi et al., A survey of QoS multicast protocols for MANETs, J. NetworkCommun. Emerg. Technol. (JNCET) 6(3) (2016). www.jncet.org. [36]
Mandavilli Srinivas, Lalit M. Patnaik, Adaptive probabilities of crossover andmutation in genetic algorithms, IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cybernet. 24 (4) (1994)656–667
.[37]
Jun Zhang, Henry Shu-Hung Chung, Wai-Lun Lo, Clustering-based adaptivecrossover and mutation probabilities for genetic algorithms, IEEE Trans. Evol.Comput. 11 (3) (2007) 326–335
. [38] Teerawat Issariyakul, Ekram Hossain, Introduction to Network Simulator NS2,Springer Science & Business Media, 2011.128 N. Papanna et al. / Applied Computing and Informatics 15 (2019) 120–128