Evaluation of recurrent neural networks as epileptic seizure predictor
Luciano Bongiorni, Alexandre Balbinot*
Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul -UFRGS, Graduate Program in Electrical Engineering - PPGEE, Brazil
ARTICLE INFO
Keywords:EpilepsyCategorical predictionRecurrent neural networks (RNN)LSTMElectroencephalography(EEG)Intelligent diagnosisABSTRACT
The occurrence of epileptic seizures is a problem that makes everyday life dif ﬁcult for many people who suffer from this disorder, which may causes risks to the subjects and people around them. The possibility of predictingepileptic seizures could create a way to minimize risks associated with these attacks. Through computationalanalysis of Electroencephalography (EEG) signals, a variation of Recurrent Arti ﬁcial Neural Network (RNN), of Long Short Term Memory (LSTM) type, was developed in an attempt to classify segments of EEG signals that occurbefore the onset of epileptic seizures, segments which evince the pre-ictal state. Using an EEG database of pe-diatric subjects with intractable seizures, groups of patients were created, then redundant EEG channels wereselected and reduced by only 25%. Temporal and spectral features were extracted to improve the evaluation ofdata patterns related to seizures. Besides using the unprocessed data, two techniques were proposed, ﬁrst using the superposition of inputs, then anticipating targets in the training data. A third technique was also proposed byjoining theﬁrst two. Finally, two LSTM structures were created. The proposed Neural Network achieved highaccuracies above 99%; however, the results showed that it was not possible to classify pre-ictal regions by usingthis combination of architecture and individuals. Furthermore, it was observed that the Neural Network was ableto classify ictal regions with up to 61% sensitivity and 99% speci ﬁcity, conﬁrming the capacity of RNNs of LSTM type to assimilate temporal patterns in EEG data.
1. IntroductionEpilepsy is a brain disorder caused by abnormal activity, which isobservable through neural electrical biosignals. Epilepsy can incur inepileptic seizures, events in which the epileptic individual feels sensorydisturbances, commonly accompanied by strong pain and involuntarymuscular contraction [1,2]. Due to the bioelectrical nature of seizures,Electroencephalography (EEG) is a direct means of analyzing it. Throughthe acquisition of EEG signals, useful information can be processed andused for monitoring individuals who suffer from this disorder.There are several ways of predicting seizures, ranging from their ownclinical analysis to EMG [3] and the monitoring of diverse electrical andbioelectrical variables [4]. Among all these techniques, the Artiﬁcial Neural Network (ANN) is an intelligent computational technique, usuallyfed and trained with EEG data with theﬁnal purpose of extracting sig- niﬁcant features from the data and learning how to generalize it to newinputs of the same kind.A special class of ANN is the Recurrent Neural Network (RNN), whichholds an internal structure with a feedback loop. This kind of ANN is ableto store information regarding previously analyzed inputs, establishingrelations which consider not only the current inputs, but also a sequenceof past inputs. In this way the RNNs can make predictions consideringsequences of data, making it suitable to analyze temporal signals. Due tothe vanishing or exploding gradient seen in RNNs training when pre-sented with long sequences [5], the Long Short Term Memory (LSTM) [ 6, 7] variation of RNNs was proposed in order to alternately forget orconsider new data into the memory, making it a better structure to dealwith long sequences of data, like EEG signals.Through the employment of intelligent computation techniques, it ispossible to minimize human error in epileptic signals analysis andimplement an evaluation process of neurological signals, presentinggeneralization in the characterization of epileptic events. Thus, in casethe algorithms here proposed are able to abstract the stochastic variationof cerebral signals [8], obtained through EEG, and extract features thatsufﬁciently describe epileptic events, it would be possible to predict thoseevents, allowing the own epileptic individual, relatives or professionalsof the medical area to take appropriate actions with a certain anteced-ence to the epileptic event.This workﬁrst presents the study of the data obtained from thePhysionet database [9], following the selection and labeling process of
* Corresponding author.E-mail address:alexandre.balbinot@ufrgs.br(A. Balbinot).
Contents lists available atScienceDirect
Array
journal homepage:www.elsevier.com/journals/array/2590-0056/open-access-journal
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.array.2020.100038Received 30 October 2019; Received in revised form 6 August 2020; Accepted 9 August 2020Available online 2 September 20202590-0056/©2020 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. This is an open access article under the CC BY license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ ).Array 8 (2020) 100038several cases within the database. Then clusterization of cases in groupsis proposed in order to improve the training and evaluation of the ANN,alongside a channel reduction aimed to decrease the computational loadof the algorithm. After the data sets are structured, feature extractiontechniques are proposed, using temporal and spectral analysis likeStandard Deviation and Short Time Fourier Transform (STFT). Thepre-processing of data includes the proposal of two techniques toimprove the ANN accuracy, being those of the data superposition tech-nique and the anticipation of target data, both for the training phase ofthe algorithm. Finally, the LSTM network is developed, using twostructures due to the techniques proposed, and its performance isanalyzed by the training accuracy, and the sensitivity (true-positive rate)and speciﬁcity (true-negative rate) of the predictions.Given the previous discussions presented in a summarized manner,this work focuses on the implementation and investigation of the ef ﬁ- ciency of speciﬁc algorithm techniques of neural networks in the pre-diction of epileptic events. In a more speciﬁc fashion, the objectives are:/C15analyze an EEG database of individuals with the occurrence ofrecurrent epileptic events;/C15analyze the extraction of signal patterns presenting signi ﬁcant cor- relations with pre-ictal segments;/C15develop an algorithm with LSTM ANN for early prediction of epilepticseizures;/C15analyze the latency of the algorithm in determining epileptic events.2. MethodologyGiven the objective of developing an RNN for pre-ictal segmentscategorization, the network structure and feature extraction aim tocapture the most signiﬁcant mathematical patterns that can yield highclassiﬁcation accuracy. The proposal for this method is presented inFig. 1.The method starts by selecting and grouping patients based on thenumber of epileptic events presented in the recordings, then only EEGchannels common to all recordings are maintained and the data entriescontaining epileptic events are added in a target column vector. The datapre-processing step starts with channel reduction to less than a quarter ofthe channels selected, followed by the extraction of 5 temporal andspectral features, just as data normalization and target encoding. The lastproposed technique consists of the proposal of two data manipulationtechniques - input signals superposition and anticipation of target values,both for training data. Finally, considering the two techniques proposed,two RNN structures are created to test the accuracy, sensitivity, andspeciﬁcity in identifying pre-ictal regions.For measuring the accuracy of this proposed method, the metrics usedwere ANN training accuracy, classiﬁcation speciﬁcity, and classiﬁcation sensitivity. The sensitivity, as shown in Equation (1), stands for the rate between true-positives and the sum of it with false-negative predictions,and the sensitivity stands for the rate between true-negative predictionsand the sum of it with false-positive predictions, just as shown in Equa-tion(2):
Fig. 1.Solution overview presented as a block diagram.L. Bongiorni, A. Balbinot Array 8 (2020) 100038
2Sensitivity¼TPTPþFN (1)Specificity¼
TNTNþFP (2)2.1. Data selectionFocusing on the analysis of pre-ictal signal pattern classi ﬁcation, instead of the acquisition of such signals, an open database was chosenfor this work. The database selected was obtained from Ref. [ 9,10], which consists of scalp EEG data of 22 children with intractable epilepticseizures, gathered by a group of Massachusetts Institute of Technologyand Children’s Hospital Boston professionals. Each record was obtainedusing the 10–20 International System for electrodes, using 256 samplesper second with a 16 bits ADC, being the values recorded in microvolts.These records were labeled using information about the time of occur-rence of epileptic events, in such a way that each entry had a new columnindicating if a seizure was occurring at the time of data capturing or not.The recordings displayed a different series of channels, so the morefrequent channels present in the recordings were selected, resulting inFP1-F7, F7-T7, T7-P7, P7-O1, FP1-F3, F3-C3, C3-P3, P3-O1, FZ-CZ, CZ-PZ, FP2-F4, F4-C4, C4-P4, P4-O2, FP2-F8, F8-T8, T8-P8.Patients in this database displayed an unbalanced number of epilepticoccurrences, and due to this fact they were grouped in a ﬁrst patient group with 3 patients showing 10 or more events, a second group of 9patients with 6–9 events and a third group of 12 patients with 5 or fewerevents in the set of recordings.Considering that the increase in speciﬁcity rate can have a correlation with inter-ictal regions, and also considering that the ANN can be proneto learn much better only one kind of region if there is a data unbalance(ex: these data sets signals are almost entirely inter-ictal), it is proposed acombination of stratiﬁed and random sampling methods. This samplingstrategy aims to better evaluate the ANN performance, taking intoconsideration the density of the epileptic events to improve representa-tion of ictal signals.The sampling is accomplished by creating four training groups, asseen inTable 1, based on the three groups of patients discussed earlier inthis chapter. The groups and selection criteria are: Group 1) All patientsfrom the patient group with more epileptic events; Group 2) The ﬁrst patient from each of the three patient groups; Group 3) Three patientsfrom full randomization including all patients groups; Group 4) Onerandom case from each group.The training groups created includes 10 subjects, using 104 h of EEGdata.2.2. Data pre-processingAiming to obtain features with a higher probability of correlationwith the pre-ictal regions (based on preliminary tests), pre-processing ismade with the data before training and testing the ANN. The pre-processing steps are shown inFig. 2:Atﬁrst, a channel reduction is proposed, due to the excessive volumeof data, then feature extraction is made, followed by data normalizationto better analyze each channel disregarding the difference in intensity ofthe electricﬁeld captured by the EEG electrodes in different brain re-gions, andﬁnally, two data manipulation techniques are proposed in anattempt to better assess pre-ictal regions and its characteristics.2.2.1. Channel reductionThe use of an excessive number of channels incurs huge computa-tional load, in addition to undesired factors like greater data acquisitioncomplexity, related costs, energy consumption and read time for portableacquisition equipment, patient discomfort, and especially data over-ﬁtting due to redundant data [11].Among previous works [12], obtained less than 10% of the variationin sensitivity and speciﬁcity when using only the C3-C4 channel, incomparison with the results when using all 11 available EEG channels.[13
], which used the same database as the present work, applied theDecision Trees algorithm to identify EEG channels with a greatercontribution in correct seizure classiﬁcation, identifying the channels FZ-CZ, F3-C3, and P3-O1 as the most relevant channels for classi ﬁcation, although pointing out that it was a patient-speci ﬁc result. Also using the Physionet Database [14], evaluated the performance of using from 2 to 6out of 22 channels. Initially, a 60% accuracy was obtained when using 22channels; with 5–6 channels, the accuracy increased to 70%; ﬁnally, with 3–4 channels, the accuracy was the same as with 22 channels.It is proposed to select the top 4 most frequent channels present in thecombinations that provided the higher accuracy in Ref. [ 14] work, being them F7-T7, F8-T8, FP2-F8, and T8-P8, with 87%, 67%, 60% and 53%participation, respectively, in the best combinations. It was consideredthat, even though there are channels that may not present the best resultswhen used alone, they might produce good results when used inconjunction.2.2.2. Feature extraction and data preparationEpileptic seizure EEG data presents a variety of patterns, which arenot easily identiﬁed. Feature extraction is applied as an attempt to obtainfeatures of the EEG signals by transforming raw data.To obtain preliminary understandings, the Short Time FourierTransform (STFT) of an entire record is presented in the Fig. 3, showing the spectrum throughout the temporal samples, with superposing rect-angles identifying the occurrence of epileptic seizures.As seen inFig. 3, there are abrupt temporal and spectral variations inimminence and the occurrence of epileptic events (highlighted by whiterectangles superimposed to the graph). Similar variations occur in othersections without epileptic events, such as right after 500 and 3000 s,indicating atﬁrst that there is no coherent pattern variations in epilepticevents, but it should be considered that not only the frequency patterncharacterizes the regions of interest, but rather a set of characteristicsconsidered simultaneously in ANN training.To better evaluate the spectral behavior for differentiating inter-ictal,pre-ictal and ictal regions, a more detailed view of the spectral compo-nents in such regions is shown inFig. 4, using the same case asFig. 3, regarding the analysis of the F7-T7 channel along with the untreated EEGsignal of the four channels selected for analysis.By analyzingFig. 4, it can be seen that the untreated EEG signals forthe ictal and inter-ictal regions are very similar, only visually distinctictal signals presented wide amplitude variations between the channels.However the spectral components have more distinct patterns for eachregion, having the pre-ictal regions time-varying spectral components,which are somewhat similar to the components of the ictal regions.
Table 1Random grouping of patients for unbiased training. The groups enumerate pa-tients with different epileptic events density in a same time span, evincingpossible differences in cerebral activities patterns.
Group Patient selection criteria Patients Number of ﬁles withepileptic events1 All from the group with highernumber of events chb15 14chb12 13chb24 12 2 Biggest number of events fromeach group chb15 14chb13 8chb05 5 3 Complete randomization chb14 7 chb17 3chb19 3 4 Randomized block chb15 14 chb16 6chb08 5L. Bongiorni, A. Balbinot Array 8 (2020) 100038
3Analyzing the EEG signals shape, it ’s possible to notice that there are many sparse peaks over time, with these peaks correlating with speci ﬁc cognitive activities as well as with epileptic events, as analyzed byRef. [15]. Given the characteristic of constant variation in amplitude andpresence of peaks, in the present work is taken into consideration tem-poral characteristics such as Root Mean Square (RMS), standard devia-tion, and the number of peaks observed above a certain threshold.The threshold used for peak counting was 80% of the maximum signalamplitude for each EEG channel used, considering the entire patient re-cord being analyzed. This threshold was obtained in preliminary tests byvarying the threshold from 50 to 90%, looking for a value that couldbetter represent visually distinctive peaks, but minimizing the detectionof local maxima. All observations in a time frame of 1 s were summed,then this sum was replicated for all samples in the second in question,being 256 samples due to the sample rate of 256 Hz.Especially in EEG signals of epileptic individuals, low-frequencysignal peaks, such as alpha and theta waves, are observed in bothinter-ictal and pre-ictal periods; however, in the occurrence of anepileptic event, a sudden change of frequencies and the emergence ofpolymorphic waves of prolonged duration is observed, with somedecrease in frequency, but with an increase in amplitude [ 1,16]. Given the nature of this type of biosignal, the spectral characteristic Fast FourierTransform (FFT) was extracted, then followed by Power Spectral Density(PSD) extraction, obtaining, this way, power information about thespectral feature. The PSD indicates the energy density veri ﬁed in the spectral components, showing how signiﬁcant a spectral component is for a given segment of data.To obtain spectral features, the Short Time Fourier Transform wasapplied, as shown in Equation(3), by using a Hanning Window in the w½n/C0m/C138term, 512 samples, 256 Hz sample rate and 50% overlappingbetween the windows. The choice of sample and sample rate values is aproduct of the best adjustment between time and frequency resolutionobtained after several preliminary tests, in which either temporal orspectral resolutions signiﬁcantly decreased in detriment of one another,reiterating Heisenberg’s Uncertainty Principle [17], which says that frequency resolution is directly proportional to the window size applied,while time resolution is inversely proportional.In addition to contributing with a fair balance between time andfrequency resolutions, the length of 512 samples for STFT processing, incombination with the other described parameters, results in a matrixwith temporal dimension equals to the input length, allowing it to beused as a feature column without further dimension adjustments. With50% overlapping, all EEG inputs are evaluated at least once to create thespectral feature.
Fig. 2.Pre-processing steps.
Fig. 3.STFT of an EEG signal along with marking of recorded epileptic events occurrence. Illustration of temporal and spectral characteristic variations o f epileptic events.L. Bongiorni, A. Balbinot Array 8 (2020) 100038
4STFT/C8x/C2N seg/C3/C9¼Xðm;ωÞ¼X∞n¼/C0∞x½n/C138w½n/C0m/C138e/C0jωn(3)Although overlapping proportion improves the FFT consideration ofeach data point, it also increases overlapping correlation, which is un-desired due to data redundancy associated. Considering this, the value of50% was chosen since this is the lowest value for which Hanning Windowamplitudeﬂatness is 1, that is, the sum of all weights applied to each datapoint sums to one [18].By obtaining the spectral characteristics, it is possible to select certainfrequencies for analysis. It was chosen to use one frequency in each ofdelta, theta, alpha and beta brainwaves, since, as analyzed by manyworks [2,19–22], these brainwaves hold a relation with seizures.Therefore the frequencies 4 Hz, 8 Hz, 13 Hz and 18 Hz were selected,representing each of the brainwaves mentioned.2.2.3. Data normalization and target categorizationThe features extracted, being EEG electrical ﬁelds or magnitude of spectral components, differ not only in nature but also in order ofmagnitude and eventually will interact in the training process and sub-sequent prediction of ANN, so it is recommended that they be normalizedto have similar bases of comparison, with equal lengths or numericallimits [23]. In the present work the method used for normalization wasMin-Max, as shown in Equation(4):MinMaxðx½n/C138Þ ¼
x½n/C138/C0minðxÞmaxðxÞ/C0minðxÞðmax/C0minÞþmin(4)This type of normalization preserves the relationship between theoriginal data [24], which is assumed in the present work as a relevantcriterion to be maintained. A scale with a minimum of /C01 and a maximum of 1 is used in order to preserve the original scale characteristic
Fig. 4.Spectral analysis of inter-ictal, pre-ictal and ictal regions of the F7-T7 channel using STFT. Graphical display of EEG reading of the four channels s elected for this work.L. Bongiorni, A. Balbinot Array 8 (2020) 100038
5and to include negative and positive values.The normalization process is done by analyzing the values of arandomﬁle among the current patient records, minimizing any selectionbias, and then applying to all records.After the data normalization, the targets are encoded in such a waythat the ANN can easily process the data. This is done by categorizingvalues that are originally zeros and ones into an array, by using the one-hot encoding process. The outcome of the encoding process is that eachset of data entry have a target represented by a two columns array,specifying if an epileptic is occurring or not in that sample.After the manipulations described, the data is resized in batches, asseen inFig. 5. A set of N inputs is divided in B batches, having each batchT observations or inputs, being B the rate between the total number oninputs N of the data set and the number of observations T, which can alsobe seen as time steps. Finally, the target A is divided in Ta time steps inthe same fashion as N inputs to T time steps.The main purpose of batch division is to reduce the computationalcost, which is generated due to the large data size. When long data se-quences are used in a single training simultaneously, it demandscomputational loads that sometimes are not well ﬁtted for computers without dedicated setups for such task.In this work it was chosen to use 1-s batches, that is, 256 observationsper batch, since the EEG acquisition rate is 256 Hz, totaling 3600 batchesper EEGﬁle. Lower batches of 0.5 and 0.25 s, as well as bigger batches as2–5 s, were tested; the outcome showed that batch size presents a trade-off between computational load and generalization error, in such a waythat higher batches signiﬁcantly increased the computational load withsome improvement in accuracy. The value of 1 s showed a reasonablememory consumption while achieving good results in comparison withlarger batches.2.2.4. Input data superposition and target values changeIn an attempt to increase the antecedence in prediction of epilepticevent occurrences, two preprocessing techniques are used, acting only onthe training values, so that ANN is trained with this preprocessed data tolater generate early predictions when exposed to data that has not un-dergone such processes.One approach to try to anticipate predictions of epileptic events is tooverlay the data by replicating it with the segmentation technique namedsliding windows. The technique registers a window of data W, then moveit forward by S steps/inputs and adds this new data window to the ﬁrst one, and so on. It is noted in theFig. 6the superposed signal (lower half) from three windows applied in the original signal (upper half), in whichthe windows height, just as the vertical displacement of the signals, arealtered for better visualization.It is empirically deﬁned in the present work the use of 1 s windows(256 entries) and 0.5 s steps (128 inputs), i.e. 50 % overlap, expandingthe training set to double of its original extension. Thus it is intended thatthe ANN be exposed more than once to various data. A consequence ofthe sliding windows application is that there is a possibility that ANN canbetter comprise data sequences preceding epileptic events, especially ininput data segments where targets correspond to epileptic events, asoverlap creates sequences with data repetition, and consequently ex-pands (through temporal repetition) the excerpts referring to epilepticevents.In conjunction with data overlapping, it is applied an approach wherethe target values are anticipated, based on [ 25], which applies to a partial data set the target veriﬁed at the end of the set. The anticipation is madeby shifting the target values to earlier positions in time in such a way tomove the positive targets (which indicate the incidence of an epilepticevent) to the pre-ictal sections. The target offset can be seen in Fig. 7, whereFig. 7a shows the original signal andFig. 7b shows the result of the offset.It is used in the present work the displacement of the targets in 5 s,based on preliminary tests. Thus, it is intended that ANN attempts toclassify pre-ictal events by directly indicating the targets of those seg-ments with the category 1 value, and partially indicating the ictal seg-ments with category 0 targets.2.3. Recurrent LSTM networkThe goal of the proposed network is to classify data sequences be-tween pre-ictal and inter-ictal, indicating the high or low probability ofbeing each class. This is done by modeling the ANN to accept temporalsequences and retain relevant information - a task for which the LSTMtopology is especially efﬁ
cient.The LSTM network was modeled to compute batches of data, in such away to generate, at the end of each batch, an output. It was chosen to usebatches due to the high size of the data set being processed (severalGigabytes of data for each patient after data processing).The developed network processes such input data using several LSTMcell layers. In the present work, the conﬁguration developed has three LSTM network layers and one output layer. The ﬁrst two LSTM layers have 30 cells, returning one output at each input, con ﬁguring an archi- tecture of multiple inputs to multiple outputs. In addition, these ﬁrst two layers pass to each subsequent batch the internal states computed in thelast batch. The third layer has 4 cells, being this is a random value chosenby the error minimization criterion. This layer returns an output onlyafter analyzing all observations in a batch, having a structure of multipleinputs to one output, and maintains the procedure of passing internalstates to subsequent batches.Finally, there is a layer with 2 neurons and the Softmax activationfunction, which actually calculates the probability that the processedsequence belongs to each of the present classes. The diagram of thedeveloped LSTM network can be seen in Fig. 8a, where the data stream of a batch is represented. Because ANN performs the classi ﬁcation of which class should belong to the analyzed sequence, the loss function used isCategorical Cross Entropy.
Fig. 5.Division of data sets in batches and observations.L. Bongiorni, A. Balbinot Array 8 (2020) 100038
6The diagram shown inFig. 8a corresponds to the general architectureused when there is no data overlap. However, when using an overlay, theinput format of theﬁrst LSTM layer is changed to receive any number ofbatches so that the data length is longer in training and of normal size intests. For this, the second layer of 30 neurons that received sequences ofdeﬁned size was removed, because the matrix sequence has a variablesize, as seen inFig. 8b. In addition, the internal states computed in thelast batch are no longer passed to each subsequent batch due to the samechange in network architecture to accept any number of batches.It was used 30 epochs for the network training, a value for which thedecrease of training error and increase of the accuracy have very smallvariations when increasing the number of epochs (according to theanalysis presented in the Results chapter). In addition, the data setpartition was selected between 80% for training and 20% for testing, thuspreventing performance evaluation from inducing results that apply onlyto the training set, so evaluation also tests ANN ’s generalizability when analyzing performance in the test set.Once the ANN is trained, it is necessary to evaluate the resultsgenerated by it against new data. ANN ’s performance evaluation metric is based on detecting signals such as pulses or detection windows be-tween 5 and 60 s before an epileptic event occurs, being these values arearbitrated as a near period to the epileptic event but with certain ante-cedence, so that it is possible to take the necessary actions by epilepticpatients or related individuals. Other detection time values are alsoevaluated in a summarized manner (as per analysis presented in theResults chapter).For evaluating the ANN performance, sensitivity and sensibilitymetrics are used. In the eventuality of failure in early prediction ofepileptic events, the analysis is changed in a way to verify the ability ofthe ANN to act as a classiﬁer of ictal events, that is, the ability to generatepredictions with zero anticipation time.3. ResultsIn order to evaluate the techniques employed, the performanceevaluation of the developed ANN is separated into three tests withvariation in the use of the techniques, the variations being: basic struc-ture without data superposition and target anticipation, use of data su-perposition, andﬁnally the use of superposition in conjunction withtarget anticipation. For each combination, it is evaluated the early clas-siﬁcation performance of epileptic events in the test set with each of thetraining groups shown inTable 1.By applying all the techniques described above, no predictions wereobtained as intended, but the ANN LSTM was able to classify epilepticevents into processing time during testing. Therefore, the correct pre-diction is evaluated every second during the occurrence of epileptic eventwindows at each prediction, that is, it is evaluated at every second (whena whole lot is evaluated and an output is generated) if the prediction of anepileptic seizure matches the prediction target of the given test lot.3.1. Performance evaluation and neural network predictionsThe LSTM network used in this work has many variable parameters,being the epochs number among them. It was observed that the net-work’s performance is directly affected by the number of epochs. Byusing the training group 1, it was generated the data relating the ANN ’s
Fig. 6.Input data overlay (upper signal) achieved by applying sliding windows of size W and step S, obtaining an overlapped signal (lower signal). Different dashes indicate different windows. The procedure is used in training sets to anticipate predictions of epileptic events.
Fig. 7.Target displacement applied to anticipate epileptic seizure predictions: (a) original targets and (b) displaced targets.L. Bongiorni, A. Balbinot Array 8 (2020) 100038
7performance and it’s loss (prediction error) given the number of epochs.It is summarized in theTable 2.Considering the results ofTable 2, it can be seen that the performancehas a direct relation with the accuracy and even a more strong relationwith the loss, but it is not linear. The accuracy only varies by the leastsigniﬁcant digit, while the loss has a signiﬁcant decay, specially between 15 and 30 epochs, when it gets 50% better. Considering that the trainingtime is directly proportional to the number of epochs, it was chosen to use30 epochs, given its good balance between accuracy, loss and trainingtime.Once the network performance is evaluated, the results of epilepticevents detection are evaluated. The results obtained with the developedANN LSTM did not present in any of the tests the detection of anticipatedepileptic events with consistent patterns between ﬁles, or without the presence of several other similar detections preceding the supposed earlydetection, even when using several different anticipation periods. It wasconsidered for this analysis the detection metric established within 5 –60 s prior to an epileptic event, that is, the period considered pre-ictal.In order to brieﬂy analyze the application of different metrics,expanding the analysis window of anticipated epileptic events to evenlonger periods,Table 3shows a comparison of the percentage of earlyepileptic events detected with all previously proposed techniques byvarying the window time for analysis of epileptic event detection,ranging from 60 s from the original metric to 240 s in 60 s steps.The best individual result, being this the group 1 with upper limitdetection windows ranging from 120 to 240 s, reached a maximum of9.37% of expected detections. Therefore, it can be concluded that theanalysis of ANN’s ability to detect epileptic events in an early stage is not
Fig. 8.Diagram of the ANN LSTM developed for categorical classi ﬁcation of EEG temporal signals between inter-ictal and pre-ictal. Datastream representation for a single batch. The number in each layer indicates the number of cells or neurons: (a) general architecture diagram and (b) architecture diagram for dat a superposition.
Table 2ANN performance according to the number of training seasons used. Tests donewith ANN basic structure and training group 1.
Number of epochs Accuracy (%) Loss10 99.5 0.0415 99.5 0.0430 99.6 0.0260 99.6 0.02L. Bongiorni, A. Balbinot Array 8 (2020) 100038
8being strongly affected by the established detection metric.Although early detection of epileptic events did not achieve signi ﬁ- cant results through the tests, the predictions obtained demonstrated thatthe LSTM structure acted as a classiﬁer, analyzing data sequences and predicting for a set of tests the precise periods of occurrence of epilepticevents. Examples of unanticipated prediction can be seen in Fig. 9. InFig. 9a, from group 1 of patients, the correct prediction is observedin practically every window of occurrence of the epileptic event to theright of theﬁgure. Earlier in the sameﬁgure one can also observe erro- neous predictions.Fig. 9b shows that the same result is observed in othertraining and testing groups, which is an example of group 3. In bothﬁgures, the ANN’s accuracy in classifying epileptic events is evident,even if there are small sections within the event window where the ratingﬂuctuates.The results demonstrate that the techniques discussed in the presentstudy were not sufﬁcient to anticipate predictions, considering the pre-ictal period between 5 and 60 s, but in fact generated correctpredictions, allowing the network to assimilate temporal patterns of EEGand classify the occurrence of epileptic seizures in the presence of suchpatterns.It is important to consider, for comparison purposes, that an extensivedatabase and combinations of data from different patients were used inthe present development, with the intention of maximizing the general-ization of the possible scenarios to be observed. Ideally, this combinationof factors would make ANN learn the generalization of pre-ictal segmentsregardless of possible physiological or psychic factors unrelated toepileptic events, but what possibly occurred was the dif ﬁculty in training so many scenarios and for so many patients with distinct EEG patterns.Given the discussion about the absence of anticipated predictions, inorder to explore the results obtained by ANN LSTM with the differenttypes of structures proposed in the present work, only the performance ofthe network for classiﬁcation of ictal regions is evaluated next, that is, theunanticipated prediction of epileptic events.Table 3Percentage of early detection of epileptic events considering all proposed techniques and varying the size of the pre-ictal period. Results obtaine d for each group of patients and for the whole set of groups.
Period pre-ictal(s)Anticipated detectionsGroup 1 (%) Anticipated detectionsGroup 2 (%) Anticipated detectionsGroup 3 (%) Anticipated detectionsGroup 4 (%) Anticipated detections of epileptic eventsTotal for the period (%)5–60 3.12 0.00 8.33 5.00 3.335–120 9.37 0.00 8.33 5.00 5.005–180 9.37 0.00 8.33 5.00 5.005–240 9.37 0.00 8.33 7.5 5.83
Fig. 9.Examples of unanticipated predictions, both ﬁles analyzed present epileptic events at the end. Although predictions weren ’t classiﬁed in advance, they correctly indicate the occurrence of epileptic events. Presence of false-positives: (a) at the beginning of the ﬁle belonging to group 1 and (b) at the end of the ﬁle belonging to group 3, immediately after the epileptic event.L. Bongiorni, A. Balbinot Array 8 (2020) 100038
93.2. Basic structure trainingUsing the ANN shown inFig. 8, using the basic structure, the confu-sion matrices shown inFig. 10were obtained, relating the sensitivitiesand speciﬁcities in the classiﬁcation of epileptic events for each of thefour training groups, that is, determination of ictal periods.The results show that the classiﬁcation of ictal periods did not presenta good rate of true-positives, resulting in an average sensitivity of 14.3%for the 1494 ictal segments for all four groups, and a maximum sensitivityof 45.5% for group 3. There are partial detections of the periods for halfof the groups, except for groups 2 and 4 that did not present any correctanswers. However, it should be considered that there were detectionswithin peak event windows in the form of spikes or smaller windows. Anexample of the detections can be seen in Fig. 11, which shows an example of detection for group 1.By evaluating the accuracy, it is possible to verify that it does notnecessarily match the speciﬁcity and sensitivity veriﬁed in the test set. This may be because part of the training is done with data from more thanone patient and the test involves patients who have had partial partici-pation in the training because onlyﬁles where epileptic events were checked.By analyzingTable 1and the results ofFig. 11it can be stated that there are indications that the proposed structures present results that arepatient-dependent or dependent of distinct EEG patterns, and that ANNperformance is negatively affected for patients with more discrepantseizure incidence rates.Groups 2 and 4 show extreme scenarios where there are no true-positive detections. These groups show the most discrepancy in num-ber of epileptic events per patient, ranging from 5 to 14 in both groups,while group 1 ranges from 12 to 14 events and group 3 ranges from 3 to 7cases, although this last group has two patients with the same number ofepileptic events (chb 17 and chb 19). This could lead to an indication that
Fig. 10.Confounding matrices of ictal period determination for all training groups using basic training structure.
Fig. 11.Detection peaks within a window of occurrence of an epileptic event.Undetected sections reﬂect network sensitivity.L. Bongiorni, A. Balbinot Array 8 (2020) 100038
10the frequency, or severity of epilepsy clinical presentation, have a strongrelation to the internal group of EEG signals patterns present in differentepilepsy patterns among patients. This behavior is seen for all approachesin this work.3.3. Data superpositionBy overlapping the data, as shown in the example in Fig. 6, the results arranged inTable 4were obtained.Analyzing the results shown inTable 4, it can be seen that the sensitivity of ANN increased with the use of data superposition techniquewhen compared to the basic structure, resulting in an average sensitivityof 19.9% for the total of 1494 ictal segments for all four groups, and amaximum of 61.3% for group 3. This shows that this technique attenu-ates the occurrence of false-negatives. However, the false-positive rateincreases too, as seen inFig. 12, which shows the results for groups 1 and3.InFig. 12a there is an epileptic event between 3000 and 3500 s,overlapped by several detection peaks, in which it can be seen that ANNcorrectly identiﬁes this segment, resulting in a higher sensitivitycompared to the basic training structure. Fig. 12b shows a similar result for group 1, with a high concentration of detection peaks during theepileptic event.In addition to the test performed with the previously describedmethodology, a brief test was also performed to compare with a differentoverlapping window and step value from those originally proposed.Instead of 1-s overlap windows with half-second steps, the parametersused for data overlap were halved then doubled, that is, a 0.5-s windowwith 0.25-s steps and 2-s windows with 1-s steps. Using training group 1only, the results shown inTable 5were obtained.The results show that the data superposition parameters have anoptimal value, instead of improvement trends directly proportional to thesize of these parameters. Therefore it can be stated that the parametersused for data superposition in the present methodology are correctlyadjusted.It was seen that for [22] there were methodologies for improvingsensitivity with the disadvantage of worsening the number offalse-positives, highlighting the possibility that certain techniques couldnot improve the classiﬁcation of temporal signal regions without signif-icantly increasing the amount of erroneous classi ﬁcation in other regions. Therefore, if an RNN LSTM application designed for EEG signals wishesto improve sensitivity and can tolerate worsening false-positive rates,overlapping training data may prove to be an effective technique.3.4. Target data anticipationThe usage of target data anticipation resulted in the accuracy, sensi-tivities and speciﬁcities summarized inTable 6: Although training targets were anticipated by 5 s before an epilepticevent, with a value of 1 being set for targets, sensitivity improved by1.60% for group 1 and worsened by 5.30% for group 3, that is, there wasno consistent improvement in results. Other than that, ANN ’s hit rate and speciﬁcity worsened for virtually all training groups. This result dem-onstrates that for the ANN structure and con ﬁgurations proposed in the present work the anticipation of targets tends to show a slight worseningof results, or at best a small increase in sensitivity.In order to brieﬂy explore the results obtained for the other targetanticipation values, it is shown in the Table 7the sensitivity and speci- ﬁcity values obtained for the patient group 1 when varying the targetanticipation time between several values going from 1 to 40 s.The results show that there is no consistent variation trend in pre-diction performance as the anticipation time varies, as, for example, thebest sensitivity result was obtained for 2-s target anticipation, whereasthe worst result was for the 7-s anticipation; however, the second-bestresult is for the 9-s anticipation.It is interesting to note that the training target anticipation timearbitrarily chosen in the present methodology was not optimal and thatthis value does not appear to have a local maximum either. Using asimilar target anticipation technique [
25], was able to anticipate facial movement predictions, obtained by monitoring with a camera. However,although the present ANN architecture differs from the architectureproposed by Ref. [25], the principle of data anticipation training is thesame.Combining the aspect that random results were observed by varyingthe anticipation time of targets, with the inability to anticipate predictionfor the present methodology, it is suggested that the difference in resultsmay be related to the nature of the data, that is, there is a possibility thatthere is an inherent characteristic of EEG signal patterns that renderstarget anticipation ineffective in the goal of anticipating predictions.3.5. Target data anticipation and data superpositionThe last proposed technique applies superposition to the training setinput and target data and anticipates targets of the same training set. Thiscombination of techniques resulted in the accuracy, sensitivity andspeciﬁcity summarized inTable 8.As with target anticipation techniques without overlapping data,there was no consistent increase in sensitivity. Despite the improvementof sensitivity of 16.9% for group 1, there was a worsening of 16.3% forgroup 3, characterizing a strong dependence on performance with thepatient analyzed.Although data overlap resulted in higher sensitivity for groups 1 and3, remembering that for the other groups the sensitivity was null, theresults followed the pattern observed in the anticipation of targets.Compared to the basic structure, sensitivities are better for group 1 andworse for group 3. This shows that for the ANN structure and techniquesproposed in this paper, the use of target anticipation is not good.Consistent results for prediction sensitivity also show the same behaviorswhen used in conjunction with other techniques.3.6. Comparison with similar worksThis work reached a maximum percentage of 8.33% and 61.3% ofanticipated seizures onset detection and epileptic events classi ﬁcation, respectively. It is important to consider for this comparison that thepresent development used an extensive database and a combination ofdata from several patients, to generalize all scenarios present in thedatabase as much as possible. Ideally, this combination of factors wouldmake the ANN apprehend the generalization of pre-ictal segments;however, results show a model difﬁculty in learning the variety of EEGpatterns for so many patients.When comparing the results with works such as [ 19], which showed sensitivity around 98% in the classiﬁcation of ictal regions, inter-ictal and pre-ictal with SVM classiﬁer, it can be noticed that the result ob-tained with the present ANN LSTM is less satisfactory as it reaches amaximum of 61.3% sensitivity (using the data superposition). However,it must be considered that, as cited by Refs. [ 19], the database of such previous work was relatively small, being about 30 times smaller in timeof recordings in comparison to the database used in this work, with 3.28h of data versus 101 h of theﬁles used in the present work. Whenanalyzing a shorter data set, there is less probability of facing speci ﬁc seizure scenarios with particular patterns that differ from others. Evenwith the present considerations, it is interesting to notice the use ofTable 4Results obtained with sliding window data superposition technique.
Training group ANN accuracy (%) Sensitivity (%) Speci ﬁcity (%)1 99.5 47.0 99.72 93.2 0.00 1003 98.1 61.3 97.34 100 0.00 98.2L. Bongiorni, A. Balbinot Array 8 (2020) 100038
11Autoregressive Moving Average (ARMA) to get autocorrelation withmoving averages and identify trends.The work of [20] adopted the same database as in this development,aiming to classify epileptic events by using the Extreme Learning tech-nique. The temporal and spectral characteristics have similarities,although theﬁnal results differ widely, with the work cited reaching 95%of correct classiﬁcations. The authors used only one EEG channel fromthe 3 patients selected, contrasting with the present research, which used4 EEG channels from 10 different patients, resulting in 5 times more data.Therefore, it is again considered that the referred work may have been
Fig. 12.Example of data overlapping results forgroups 1 and 3. There is an epileptic event occurringat the end of eachﬁle, where there are many detectionpeaks. Sensitivity has good results over speci ﬁcity, a result evinced by many false-positives. Epilepticevents are marked by arrows for better identi ﬁcation. (a) group 3ﬁle, with the epileptic event between3000 and 3500 s, covered by several detection peaks.(b) group 1ﬁle, with a clear classiﬁcation of the ictal period between 2500 and 3000 s.
Table 5Comparison of results obtained from varying window size and overlapping stepsapplied to training data. The test was performed with group 1.
Window size (s) Step size (s) Sensitivity (%) Speci ﬁcity (%)0.50 0.25 32.6 99.91.00 0.50 47.0 99.72.00 1.00 34.8 99.9
Table 6Results obtained with target data anticipation technique in the training set.
Training set Accuracy (%) Sensitivity(%)Speciﬁcity(%)1 99.5 33.9 99.72 92.9 0.00 1003 97.6 40.2 99.14 100 0.00 99.8Table 7Results obtained by varying the anticipation time of training targets for patientgroup 1.
Anticipation time (s) Sensitivity(%)Speciﬁcity(%)1 39.9 99.82 50.2 99.83 36.4 99.94 39.3 99.95 33.9 99.76 42.5 99.87 13.1 99.98 36.7 99.99 47.3 99.710 36.1 99.820 44.7 99.730 29.4 99.940 38.0 99.8
Table 8Results obtained with data superposition and target anticipation technique in thetraining set.
Training set ANN ’s Accuracy (%)Sensitivity(%)Speciﬁcity(%)1 99.6 49.2 99.22 93.1 0.00 1003 96.9 29.3 99.64 100 0.00 100L. Bongiorni, A. Balbinot Array 8 (2020) 100038
12exposed to a limited number of scenarios, reducing the number of pat-terns to be learned, or there is still the possibility that the ELM techniquewas more appropriate for this scenario.In [26], the authors used the same database as this work to implementseizure prediction using LSTM with patient-speci ﬁc analysis; the work achieved over 99% sensitivity and speciﬁcity, and 0.11 false positives per hour when evaluating pre-ictal segments of 15 min before seizures. Somesigniﬁcant differences between the present work and [ 26] remain in the signal segmentation, class imbalance approach and time window used toasses the performance of anticipated predictions.The authors in Ref. [26] divided the data into segments of 5 s each,instead of 1 s, resulting in less segmentation and possibly leading tobetter feature extraction at the cost of higher computational load. Theclass imbalance was solved by extracting random inter-ictal results withthe same size of pre-ictal segments, creating balanced segments. Themain difference remains in the pre-ictal window size used for metrics.The current work evaluated early predictions from 5 to 60 to 5 –240 s, while [27] windows ranged from 15 to 120 min, a window eight timeslarger. This larger window drastically changes the results; therefore, astrict direct performance comparison is not possible. The authorscompared their work with other studies that used windows of at least 5min, being all windows at least two times wider than the ones used in thiswork.4. ConclusionsBy analyzing the results obtained, it is possible to state that with theadopted methodology it is not possible to determine pre-ictal periods inEEG signals with LSTM networks. Early determination of epileptic eventsmay require more characteristics, different combinations of these ordifferent techniques for manipulating training data.It was possible to verify a strong dependence on the proposed tech-nique with the patient and their EEG patterns, suggesting that it may benot possible to obtain EEG patterns generalization for several patients ina single ANN model. This strong dependency was especially visible insensitivity results. Considering this, it is suggested that such models beﬁrst trained and tested with only one patient, then generalized with thecombination of other patients. It was possible to verify a strong depen-dence on the proposed technique with the patient and their EEG patterns,suggesting that it may be not possible to obtain EEG patterns general-ization for several patients in a single ANN model. This strong de-pendency was especially visible in sensitivity results. Considering this, itis suggested that such models beﬁrst trained and tested with only onepatient, then generalized with the combination of other patients.The high accuracy found in all tests was consistent only with thedetection of ictal regions - and not for pre-ictal - showing that the pre-processing techniques or conﬁgurations of the ANN LSTM topology werenot sufﬁciently adjusted to categorize the desired pre-ictal temporalsequences.While detection of epileptic events did not occur early, the ANN wasable to learn temporal patterns for categorical prediction of ictal regions,generating peaks or detection windows during the occurrence of epilepticevents. This demonstrates that the RNN LSTM topology presents learningand memory capacity, just as data correlation for long time sequences,speciﬁcally in today’s application for EEG signals.Although the abundance of data increases the chances for the networkto learn the desired patterns, it was also veri ﬁed that the excess of records of periods without epileptic events (inter-ictal periods), con ﬁguring a data imbalance, favored the tendency for a better classi ﬁcation of inter- ictal periods in detriment of ictal and pre-ictal periods. This was evincedin the evolution of accumulated training error when encountering datawith various epileptic events, signiﬁcantly increasing the error atﬁrst contact but signiﬁcantly decreasing with the execution of more epochs.Considering that target data anticipation did not present good resultsand caused an overall decrease in performance, even when used inconjunction with another technique, it is suggested to avoid using thistechnique when performing seizure prediction using RNN LSTM and EEGdata, or at least modify the RNN structure to attempt a differentcomputation of this modiﬁed data before providing it to the RNN. It wasalso veriﬁed that there is no clear value or pattern for which the antici-pation performs better, reinforcing the attention and further analysisrequired when using this technique.When evaluating data processing techniques, reducing channels toless than 25% of selected channels demonstrated positive results intemporal sequence classiﬁcation, although extensive tests with differentcombinations of the 18 initially selected channels could better evaluatethe correlation between channel composition and classi ﬁcation of ictal and pre-ictal regions. Therefore, it is encouraged to consider channelreduction techniques in similar situations, for improvement of trainingperformance and reduction of related computational and equipmentcosts.The directions of future research would be to experiment with thecombination of other features, using Multivariate Discriminant Analysistoﬁnd resulting features that have a greater correlation with pre-ictalperiods. The combination of different features can result in dimension-ality reduction and eventual elimination of redundant features fortraining. Experimentation with larger databases and Deep Learningstructures, using only raw EEG data, could result in a model with a lownumber of EEG channels, in case signiﬁcant features are successfully extracted by the deep learning model. It is also suggested to test similarEEG databases, compare results, and further analyze the ANNgeneralization.Credit author statementLuciano Bongiorni: performed the signal processing and wrote andrevised the paper. Alexandre Balbinot: coordinated the Project, wroteand revised the paper.Declaration of competing interestI declare that I have no signiﬁcant competingﬁnancial, professional or personal interests that might have inﬂuenced the performance or presentation of the work described in this manuscript.References
[1]Siuly S, Li Y, Zhang Y. EEG signal analysis and classi ﬁcation: techniques and applications. Melbourne: Springer International Publishing AG; 2016. p. 2016 . [2]Shorvon SD, Guerrini R, Cook M, Lhatoo SD. Oxford textbook of epilepsy andepileptic seizures. Oxford: Oxford University Press; 2013. p. 2013 . [3]Vandecasteele K, De Cooman T, Gu Y, Cleeren E, Claes K, Paesschen W, Huffel S,Hunyadi B. Automated epileptic seizure detection based on wearable ECG and PPGin a hospital environment. Sensors 2017;17(10):2338 (Oct 2017) . [4]Jory C, Shankar R, Coker D, McLean B, Hanna J, Newman C. Safe and sound? asystematic literature review of seizure detection methods for personal use. Seizure2016;36:4–15 (Nov. 2016). [5]Bengio Y, Simard P, Frasconi P. Learning long-term dependencies with gradientdescent is difﬁcult. IEEE Trans Neural Network 1994;5(2):157 –66 (Mar. 1994). [6]Hochreiter S, Schmidhuber J. Long short-term memory. Neural Comput 1997;9(8):1735–80 (Nov. 1997).[7]Gers F, Schmidhuber J. Recurrent nets that time and count. Como, Italy: IEEE; 2000.p. 189–94 (2000).[8]Klonowski W. From conformons to human brains: an informal overview ofnonlinear dynamics and its applications in biomedicine. Nonlinear Biomed Phys2007;1(5):5 (Jul. 2007).[9] Physionet. Chb-mit scalp eeg database. available at: https://www.physionet.org/pn 6/chbmit/. [Accessed 1 June 2018].[10]Goldberger AL, Amaral L, Glass L, Hausdorff J, Ivanov P, Mark R, Mietus J,Moody G, Peng C-K, Stanley H. Physiobank, physiotoolkit, and physionet:components of a new research resource for complex physiologic signals. Circulation2000;101(23):215–20 (Jun. 2000). [11]Alotaiby T, El-Samie FEA, Alshebeili SA, Ahmad I. A review of channel selectionalgorithms for eeg signal processing. EURASIP Journal on Advances in SignalProcessing 2015 2015;1:66 (Aug. 2015) . [12]Greene B, Boylan G, Marnane W, Lightbody G, Connolly S. Automated singlechannel seizure detection in the neonate, no. 30. Vancouver: Canada; 2008.p. 915–8 (Feb. 2008).L. Bongiorni, A. Balbinot Array 8 (2020) 100038
13[13]Birjandtalab J, baran pouyan M, Cogan D, Nourani M, Harvey J. Automated seizuredetection using limited-channel eeg and non-linear dimension reduction. ComputBiol Med 2017;82(1):49 –58 (Jan. 2017). [14]Chang N, Chen T, Chiang C, Chen L. Channel selection for epilepsy seizureprediction method based on machine learning. San Diego, USA: IEEE; 2012.p. 5162–5 (2012).[15]Nunez PL, Srinivasan R. Electricﬁelds of the brain: the neurophysics of EEG. second ed. New York: Oxford University Press; 2006. p. 2006 . [16]Tzallas AT, Tsipouras MG, Tsalikakis DG, Karvounis EC, Astrakas L, Konitsiotis S,Tzaphlidou M. Automated epileptic seizure detection methods : a review study. In:Stevanovic D, editor. Epilepsy - histological, electroencephalographic andpsychological aspects.ﬁrst ed. InTech, [S.l.]; 2012. p. 75 –98. Ch. 4 (2012). [17]Busch P, Heinonen T, Lahti P. Heisenberg ’s uncertainty principle. Phys Rep 2007; (452):155–76 (Oct. 2007). [18]Heinzel G, Rüdiger A, Schilling R. Spectrum and spectral density estimation by thediscrete fourier transform (DFT), including a comprehensive list of windowfunctions and some newﬂat-top windows. Max Plank Inst 2002;(12):18 –9 (Feb. 2002).[19]Gupta A, Singh P, Karlekar M. A novel signal modeling approach for classi ﬁcation of seizure and seizure-free eeg signals. IEEE Trans Neural Syst Rehabil Eng 2018. 1 –1 (Mar. 2018).[20]Ammar S, Senouci M. Seizure detection with single-channel eeg using extremelearning machine. Sousse, Tunisia: IEEE; 2016. p. 776 –9 (2016). [21]Larmuseau M, Dambre J. Epileptic seizure prediction using deep learning. 2016 . [22]Dadgar-Kiani E, Alkan C, Shameli A. Applying machine learning for human seizureprediction. Stanford, California: Tech. rep.; 2016 . [23]Guyon I, Gunn S, Nikravesh M, Zadeh LA. Feature extraction: foundations andapplications. New York: Springer-Verlag New York Inc; 2006. p. 2006 . [24]Ogasawara E, Martinez LC, de Oliveira D, Zimbr ~A£o G, Pappa GL, Mattoso M. Adaptive normalization: a novel data normalization approach for non-stationarytime series, no. 21. Barcelona; 2010. p. 1 –8 (Jul. 2010). [25]Jain A, Singh A, Koppula HS, Soh S, Saxena A. Recurrent neural networks for driveractivity anticipation via sensory-fusion architecture. CoRR 2015;1:1 –8 (Sep. 2015). [26]TsiourisΚМ, Pezoulas VC, Zervakis M, Konitsiotis S, Koutsouris DD, Fotiadis DI.A long short-term memory deep learning network for the prediction of epilepticseizures using eeg signals. Comput Biol Med 2018;99(1):24 –37 (May 2018).L. Bongiorni, A. BalbinotArray 8 (2020) 100038
14