Examining the interplay between artiﬁcial intelligence and theagri-food industry
Abderahman Rejeba,⁎,K a r i mR e j e bb, Suhaiza Zailanic,J o h nG .K e o g hd,A n d r e aA p p o l l o n ia
aDepartment of Management and Law, Faculty of Economics, University of Rome Tor Vergata, Via Columbia, 2, Rome 00133, Italy
bFaculty of Sciences of Bizerte, University of Carthage, Tunis, Tunisia
cDepartment of Management, Faculty of Business and Economics, University Malaya, Kuala Lumpur, 50203, Malaysia
dHenley Business School, University of Reading, Greenlands, Henley-on-Thames RG9 3AU, UK
abstract article info
Article history:Received 11 September 2021Received in revised form 18 August 2022Accepted 20 August 2022Available online 24 August 2022Artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) has advanced at an astounding rate and transformed numerous economic sectors.Nevertheless, a comprehensive understanding of how AI can improve the agri-food industry is lacking. Inaddition, there is a notable dearth of research on AI that investigates the in ﬂuence of AI on agri-food resources and educates practitioners on the signi ﬁcance of knowledge-based and smart agriculture. We utilised bibliomet- ric analysis to investigate the present state of the art and emerging trends in the relationship between AI and theagri-food industry. The research identi ﬁed three distinct growth phases and the most prevalent AI strategies in the industry. In addition, we analysed key trends and offered researchers and practitioners insightful recommen-dations for future research. Using resource-based view (RBV) as the theoretical lens, this study established aframework emphasising the long-term effects of AI on various agri-food resources and proposed several researchpropositions. In addition, AI-related obstacles have been identi ﬁed and categorised into four major categories. Lastly, the originality of the article lies in its numerous research suggestions and recommendations for advancingthe AIﬁeld in the agri-food industry.© 2022 The Authors. Publishing servic es by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of KeAi Communications Co., Ltd. This is an openaccess article under the CC BY-NC-ND license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ ).
Keywords:Artiﬁcial intelligenceAgricultureFarmingMachine learningDeep learningBibliometric analysisResource-based view
Contents1 . I n t r o d u c t i o n ............................................................... 1 1 22 . B i b l i o m e t r i c m e t h o d ........................................................... 1 1 33 . R e s u l t s f r o m t h e b i b l i o m e t r i c a n a l y s i s................................................... 1 1 33 . 1 . A n n u a l d i s t r i b u t i o n o f p u b l i c a t i o n s ................................................. 1 1 33 . 2 . T o p 2 0 m o s t r e l e v a n t j o u r n a l s................................................... 1 1 43 . 3 . T o p 2 0 m o s t c i t e d n a t i o n s..................................................... 1 1 43 . 4 . T o p 2 0 m o s t c i t e d p u b l i c a t i o n s ................................................... 1 1 43 . 5 . K e y w o r d s a n a l y s i s : A u t h o r s v e r s u s k e y w o r d s p l u s.......................................... 1 1 53 . 5 . 1 . T r e e m a p b a s e d o n a b s t r a c t s................................................ 1 1 53 . 6 . T r e n d t o p i c s........................................................... 1 1 63 . 7 . C l u s t e r a n a l y s i s .......................................................... 1 1 64 . D i s c u s s i o n ................................................................ 1 1 84 . 1 . T h e o r e t i c a l c o n t r i b u t i o n s ...................................................... 1 1 84 . 1 . 1 . W h a t a r e t h e r e s e a r c h d y n a m i c s o n t h e i n t e r p l a y b e t w e e n A I a n d t h e A g r i - f o o d s e c t o r ? ..................... 1 1 84 . 1 . 2 . H o w i s A I b e i n g u s e d i n t h e A g r i - f o o d s e c t o r ? ........................................ 1 1 94 . 1 . 3 . W h a t a r e t h e t r e n d t o p i c s p e r t a i n i n g t o A I a n d t h e A g r i - f o o d s e c t o r ? .............................. 1 1 94 . 1 . 4 . W h a t a r e t h e m a i n c h a l l e n g e s o f A I i n t h e A g r i - f o o d s e c t o r ? .................................. 1 1 94 . 2 . T h e o r e t i c a l i m p l i c a t i o n s ...................................................... 1 2 0Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 6 (2022) 111 –128
⁎Corresponding author.E-mail addresses:rjbbrh01@uniroma2.it(A. Rejeb),karim.rejeb@fsb.ucar.tn(K. Rejeb),shmz@um.edu.my(S. Zailani),john@shantalla.org(J.G. Keogh),andrea.appolloni@uniroma2.it (A. Appolloni).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aiia.2022.08.0022589-7217/© 2022 The Authors. Publishing services by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of KeAi Communications Co., Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http:// creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ ).
Contents lists available atScienceDirect
Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture
journal homepage:http://www.keaipublishing.com/en/journals/artificial-intelligence-in-agriculture/4 . 2 . 1 . F r o m f r a m e w o r k t o r e s e a r c h p r o p o s i t i o n s .......................................... 1 2 04 . 2 . 2 . A g e n d a f o r f u t u r e r e s e a r c h ................................................. 1 2 24 . 3 . P r a c t i c a l i m p l i c a t i o n ........................................................ 1 2 44 . 4 . S t u d y l i m i t a t i o n s......................................................... 1 2 45 . C o n c l u s i o n............................................................... 1 2 4R e f e r e n c e s .................................................................. 1 2 4
1. IntroductionThe agri-food industry constitutes one of the key contributors to anynation's economy and is vital for the well-being of nations' citizens(Abdollahi et al., 2021;Mithun Ali et al., 2019;Rejeb et al., 2022a). Moreover, the agri-food sector is of growing importance to developingand developed countries due to its role in supporting more sustainableproduction and consumption patterns, environmental protection, busi-ness competitiveness, social welfare, and economic growth ( Del Borghi et al., 2014). Despite its importance, this sector faces several challengesdriven by climate change, unprecedented technological innovation, andincreased calls for sustainability, traceability, and transparency ( Fait et al., 2019;Goodarzian et al., 2021). The notion of sustainability is be-coming critically important in the agri-food industry due to increasingneeds for food quality and safety, the effective utilisation and consump-tion of natural resources, and the balanced economic, ecological andsocietal performance of agri-food businesses ( Mangla et al., 2018). Agri-food businesses must eliminate supply chain inef ﬁciencies and develop a more sustainable ecosystem ( Rejeb et al., 2021a). One way to revolutionise the agri-food sector and increase sustainability is to lever-age artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) applications. According to Holt (1978),A I is the science of programming computers to mimic the tasks of humanbehaviour that necessitate intelligence, judgement, and experience.Coupled with high-performance computing and big data technologies,AI techniques like deep learning, machine learning, and arti ﬁcial neural networks present signiﬁcant potential for data-intensive science in agri-culture (Kamilaris and Prenafeta-Boldú, 2018;Liakos et al., 2018a;R o h i t Sharma et al., 2020). For example,Patrício and Rieder (2018)investigate the combination of computer vision solutions and AI algorithms in pre-cision agriculture and highlight several bene ﬁts of these technologies, including task automation, proﬁtability, and increased food qualityand safety.Khoshnevisan et al. (2015)note that AI can assist greenhouse oper-ators concerned with ecological performance in predicting the environ-mental effects of their cultivation systems and justifying claims abouttheir products. Similarly,Pantazi et al. (2016)posit that AI can be ap- plied to understand yield response to soil variables, identify the factorsresponsible for yield and quality variation, and determine target yields.AI pushes the conventional agricultural practices and methods towardsmart farming, a sustainable approach that helps to reduce the wasteof resources (e.g., fertilisers, pesticides) and achieves sustainable devel-opment (Fan et al., 2018).Pydipati et al. (2006)highlight that combin- ing AI and machine vision helps achieve smart farming. Thesetechnologies facilitate the early detection of plant diseases, properplant control, and minimise losses. Several AI models can process datagenerated from agriculture internet of things (IoT) and sensors to pro-vide accurate and precise farming for soil fertility, diseases, irrigation,and pest regulations (Lin et al., 2019). AI also makes robots well equipped to optimise productivity (Brogårdh, 2007), improve work ef- ﬁciency, and enhance the quality of fresh produce ( Bechar and Vigneault, 2016). The use of data can enhance farming practices and op-erations as agri-food businesses can create value from it, relying on the
ability of AI to manage data sharing and access control ( Spanaki et al., 2021). Therefore, AI can address the knowledge needs of farming busi-nesses and increase their ability to identify diseases, monitor irrigation,reduce human efforts, and maximise yield production.Many academics have extensively studied the use of AI in agricul-tural activities in recent years. Research content involves various as-pects, such as the state-of-the-art of AI, its applications, and promisesfor agri-food businesses. For example, Kollia et al. (2021)review AI-enabled food supply chains. Theyﬁnd that AI methodologies predict plant growth and yield, optimise energy consumption across an exten-sive network of food refrigeration systems, and automate the inspectionof retail packaged food.Liakos et al. (2018a)thoroughly review the pos- sibilities of machine learning and reveal that this AI technique supportscrop management and the reliable analysis of data generated from IoTsensors. According to the authors, machine learning has been employedmainly in some crops and animals, including maise, wheat, cattle, andsheep. Moreover,Saleem et al. (2019)summarise the literature sur- rounding the use of automation in agriculture through machine anddeep learning tools and argue that these technologies bring human-level precision in diverse agriculture applications such as plant recogni-tion, fruit counting, plant disease detection and classi ﬁcation, land cover classiﬁcation, and weed/crop discrimination. Shine and Murphy (2022) conduct a mapping study to aggregate and evaluate journal articles andconference papers, which employ machine learning algorithms infarming-related issues to detect patterns in the geographical sourcesof data, algorithms, features, assessment metrics, and methodologiesapplied.Hassoun et al. (2022)review the most critical food Industry4.0 technologies, including AI, the IoT, big data analytics, and blockchain.Chen and Yu (2021)summarise the recent developments in reliable,precise, and cost-effective remote tools in the food industry, such asAI-based techniques, image processing systems, and sensors for qualityevaluation. According to the authors, image processing systems and AIcan be utilized for different objectives such as product classi ﬁcation based on shape and size, detection of product defects and microbes,and food quality grading.Qazi et al. (2022)review the literature pertaining to the applications, challenges, and future trends of IoT tech-nologies and AI techniques in smart agriculture. Finally, Tripodi et al. (2022)study the contributions of AI and machine learning to data anal-ysis and their use in next-generation breeding.While these studies provide valuable insights into AI applications inthe agri-food sector, a bibliometric analysis is still needed to analyse theinterplay between AI and the agri-food sector and consolidate the liter-ature. In general, when a researchﬁeld observes a signiﬁcant rise in the number of published works, as in AI research (Ruchika Sharma et al., 2022;Singh et al., 2021), there is a need for organised and systematic re-views that employ quantitative methodologies to study the knowledgelandscape and structure of the AIﬁeld in the agri-food industry (Rejeb et al., 2020;Rejeb et al., 2022b). Although traditional reviews mainlyaim to summarise the current literature based on authors' opinionsand judgments, which may be prone to numerous forms of biases(A. A.Qazi and Appolloni, 2022), bibliometric analyses add rigourthanks to their quantitative and structured literature investigations.Indeed, this rigour can be viewed as the fundamental contribution ofthe technique (Piwowar-Sulej et al., 2021). Moreover, the main advan- tage of bibliometrics, compared to conventional traditional reviewmethodologies, is that it facilitates the construction of objective, reliable,detailed, and comprehensive knowledge visualisations ( Rejeb et al., 2022d,e). Such visualisations constitute analytical representations
of linkages between scientiﬁc entities (L.Zhang et al., 2019). The merits of scientiﬁc mapping also include studying large datasets andA. Rejeb, K. Rejeb, S. Zailani et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 6 (2022) 111 –128
112generating memorable, rich, and interpretable visuals. Consequently,applying bibliometrics provides timely, unbiased, and visual techniquesto trace the growth of scholarly activities and evaluate the intellectualstructure of a particular researchﬁeld (Rejeb et al., 2022e). It enables understanding of the historical development of a discipline and allowsidentifying research trends and hotspots from micro and macro per-spectives (Rejeb et al., 2021b).Therefore, we argue that the increasing body of knowledge relatedto AI requires a bibliometric approach to comprehend the knowledgestructure of thisﬁeld. Since AI research matures and becomes increas-ingly complex, it is crucial to provide a retrospective evaluation of thepublications accumulated to reveal new contributions, capture researchtrends, and identify prospective areas for future investigation. Overall,the aims of the study are driven by the four research questions below:•What are the research trends on the nexus of AI and the agri-foodsector?•How is AI being utilised in the agri-food sector?•What are the important research hotspots in AI and the agri-foodsector?•What are the key challenges to AI application in the agri-food sector?Theﬁndings of the bibliometric analysis show a signi ﬁcant rise in the scholarly works examining the potential of AI for the agri-food industry.Several bibliometric indicators, including the most relevant journals, themost cited countries, and the most publications, are also identi ﬁed. The keyword analysis demonstrates the prevalence of some AI techniques inthe agri-food context, including deep learning, convolutional neuralnetwork, and artiﬁcial neural networks. Furthermore, the trend topicsanalysis shows an earlier focus on using AI-powered robots in agricul-ture and an emerging tendency toward different technologies and AItechniques, including big data, the IoT, deep learning, machine learning,and fuzzy logic. The keyword co-occurrence network analysis aids inunravelling the research hotspots of AI, suggesting that AI techniquescontribute to food safety and the development of smart farming prac-tices (e.g., smart crop, soil, water, and livestock management). However,AI's beneﬁts cannot be realised unless the technology's social, technical,ethical, and organisational issues are addressed. The overall ﬁndings of the review have been integrated into a uni ﬁed and sound theoretical framework to underscore the long-term impact of AI on various agri-food resources and advance future studies on the technology. In termsof contributions, no prior bibliometric analysis of AI research in theagri-food context is as extensive, systematic, and timely as ours. Bydoing a bibliometric study of this subject, we offer in-depth understand-ing and enrich the knowledgeﬁeld by highlighting key AI applicationsemployed in the agri-food industry and the potential and constraintsof AI for agri-food businesses. Moreover, intriguing research possibilitiesare offered for researchers, professionals, and policymakers wishing tounderstand AI and its role in attaining sustainability in the agri-food in-dustry. Furthermore, this study's novelty resides in the useful concep-tual framework for practitioners and researchers who want to graspAI's inﬂuence on agri-food resources. Further, various research proposi-tions developed from the framework may be experimentally con ﬁrmed by academics in the future.After the introduction, we describe the bibliometric technique andresearch procedure employed. Next, we analyse the main results, in-cluding the yearly distribution of publications, the most productivejournals and nations, the most inﬂuential publications, and the researchhotspots. InSection 4, we discuss theﬁndings and highlight research contributions, research agenda, and shortcomings. In Section 5, the studyﬁnishes with short reﬂ
ections and conclusions.2. Bibliometric methodMultiple indicators can be utilised in a bibliometric study to analyseas p e c iﬁc academic subject (Kapoor et al., 2018;Mishra et al., 2017;Rejeb et al., 2020;Rejeb et al., 2021a). We utilised best practices and rec-ommendations to conduct a dependable and insightful bibliometricanalysis (Beydoun et al., 2019;Fahimnia et al., 2015;Mostafa, 2020)o f the interplay between AI and the agri-food sector. As a ﬁrst step, we consulted one of the leading and trustworthy scienti ﬁc databases, Web of Science (WoS) (Caulﬁeld et al., 2012;da Silva et al., 2017; Treiblmaier et al., 2020). While a few scholars have utilised Scopus toconduct similar analyses (Faruk et al., 2021;Herrera-Franco et al., 2020;Mishra et al., 2021), recent works have identiﬁed that the bulk of bibliometric studies use the WoS databases ( Alnajem et al., 2021; Escamilla-Fajardo et al., 2020;González-Serrano et al., 2019;B .Wang et al., 2014).Bartol and Mackiewicz-Talarczyk (2015) argue that, unlike other scientiﬁc databases, the records extracted from the WoS databaseare more standardised and consistent. WoS enables the straightforwardretrieval of publications, author names, sources, and cited references.Moreover, WoS represents the most renowned database and has beeninternationally utilised to assess academic performances (L. Zhang et al., 2019). The search strategy applied to extract the data on AI re-search in the agri-food context is as follows. Following Fosso Wamba and Queiroz (2021),“artiﬁcial intelligence”OR“machine learning”OR “deep learning”OR“robot”were used and combined with “food”OR “agriculture*”OR“agri-food”OR“agro-food”in the title, abstract, and keywordsﬁelds to extract the publications (see Fig. 1). WoS Core Collection, including Science Citation Index Expanded (Sci-Expanded),Social Sciences Citation Index (SSCI), Arts & Humanities Citation Index(A&HCI), and Emerging Sources Citation Index (ESCI), was used toconduct the research. Even though there were no restrictions onthe time span, theﬁrst two papers selected were published in 1992.Non-English language publications and publications with incompletebibliographic data (e.g., keywords) were excluded. The initial searchquery returned 4869 documents. The returned publications were evalu-ated against the inclusion criteria, assuring publications were English-language speaking, with complete bibliographic data, and relevant tothe research topic. Moreover, two reviewers were involved in the care-ful reading of the titles and abstracts of the returned documents to min-imise bias and guarantee the validity and reliability of the ﬁndings (Thomé et al., 2016). The application of theseﬁlters and the manual screening of the documents led to the exclusion of 708 documents, ei-ther non-English documents with incomplete bibliographic data or ir-relevant. To analyse theﬁndings, we used the visualisation toolVOSviewer (Rejeb et al., 2022c;van Eck and Waltman, 2011, 2014) and the statistical software package Biblioshiny ( Shonhe, 2020). These software tools are specialised in data mining and quantitative analysis.Finally, the publications were coded according to the publication year,most productive journals, most cited countries, and in ﬂuential publica- tions. Keywords analysis, abstract analysis, trend topic analysis, andkeyword co-occurrence analysis were also conducted to depict thedynamics, trends, and avenues for future research opportunities in theAIﬁeld.3. Results from the bibliometric analysisOur analysis did not restrict the time period and noted that the ﬁrst two extracted publications appeared in 1992 (see Table 1). 589 of the 4750 papers retrieved contain insufﬁcient data for bibliometric analysis.Consequently, we evaluated 4161 papers written by 14,779 authors.A single author wrote only 4.49% (187 out of 4161 total papers).Moreover, the authors employed a large number (12375) of keywords.3.1. Annual distribution of publicationsFig. 2depicts the evolution of AI research in the context of the agri-food industry based on the annual distribution of a sample of papers.There are three distinct growth stages visible. In the ﬁrst phase, from 1992 to 2000, the maximum number of papers published per yearwasﬁfteen (in 1997); in the second phase, from 2001 to 2010, theA. Rejeb, K. Rejeb, S. Zailani et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 6 (2022) 111 –128
113maximum was thirty. We can observe slow and inconsistent growth,surpassing thirty published documents in 2010. The last three yearshave witnessed unprecedented growth in the third phase (2011 to2020). During this period, AI applications in the agri-food industry re-ceived great attention, as evidenced by the sharp increase in publica-tions. In 2020, scholarly output more than doubled from 2019,surpassing 1700 documents, suggesting that the proliferation and prev-alence of various AI approaches and applications in the agri-food indus-try can explain this dramatic increase.3.2. Top 20 most relevant journalsRegarding the most relevant journals based on the number of arti-cles published,Table 2lists the top 20 and reveals that Computers andElectronics in Agriculture is the only outlet to surpass 300 publications.In addition, we can see that information technology and environmentalscience journals dominate the list. Surprisingly, no business, manage-ment, or operations research journals were ranked among the top 20.This suggests that the dominant journals focus on the technical aspectsof AI research in the agri-food sector, necessitating knowledge from var-ious disciplines and sources.3.3. Top 20 most cited nationsTable 3lists the top 20 countries by total citations regarding themost cited nations. Only the United States and China received overnine thousand citations. Followed by Spain (3219), the UnitedKingdom (3010), and Australia (2771). Consequently, the average num-ber of citations per article in China was lower than in all countries listed.This result may suggest that Chinese researchers need to improve thecalibre of their published work. In addition, most cited articles origi-nated from developed nations, reﬂecting the technological advance-ments made in the AIﬁeld and the availability of advanced researchlabs. Although the United States dominated the list, Europe, Asia(China, India, Japan, and Korea), and Oceania (Australia) are well repre-sented. Latin American and African nations did not appear in the rank-ing, except Brazil. Switzerland rankedﬁrst (44.92 average citations per article), followed by Ireland (39.85), Greece (34.52), Sweden (31.14),and the Netherlands (24.79).3.4. Top 20 most cited publicationsTable 4includes the authors, titles, sources, citations, and citationsper year for the most cited publications. We can see that two of thetop 20 papers were published in 2012. The most cited articles incorpo-rate AI techniques into the agri-food industry. Algorithms (regression)and deep learning are the most frequently used AI techniques in thetopﬁve AI-related publications. Overall, regression, deep learning, ma-chine learning, and optimisation applications in the agri-food industryreceived considerable attention. Recent articles by Kamilaris and Prenafeta-Boldú (2018),Bioucas-Dias et al. (2012), andWolfert et al. (2017)were the three most cited according to the total citations peryear (TCY). The authors of the most-cited paper examined applicationsof deep learning in agriculture and received a signi ﬁcant number of cita- tions per year (153.75). In the second most-cited paper, AI algorithmswere useful for supporting hyperspectral cameras and facilitating sev-eral agri-food activities, including remote sensing of farms and foodsafety. The third most-cited paper examined big data applications insmart agriculture and how their deployment can provide new opportu-nities for data-intensive science in the agri-food industry. Other cited
Table 1Main information regarding data collection.Description ResultsMain information about dataTimespan 1992:2021Sources (e.g., Journals, Books) 1264Documents 4161Average years from publication 3.54Average citations per document 14.99Average citations per year per doc 3.31Document contentsKeywords plus (ID) 7150Author's keywords (DE) 12,375AuthorsAuthors 14,779Author appearances 18,988Authors of single-authored documents 187Authors of multi-authored documents 14,592Author's collaborationSingle-authored documents 207Documents per Author 0.282Authors per Document 3.55Co-Authors per Documents 4.56Collaboration index 3.69
Fig. 1.The review protocol.A. Rejeb, K. Rejeb, S. Zailani et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 6 (2022) 111 –128
114publications from 2018 emphasise the signi ﬁcance of AI techniques for agriculture and farming. Lastly, we observe that Huaizhi Wang is theprimary author of two papers and that computer science journals arethe leaders in AI research in the agri-food industry Table 4.3.5. Keywords analysis: Authors versus keywords plusWe extracted both the authors and keywords plus from WoS to ex-amine keywords dynamics (seeTable 5). The former set of keywords is provided by the authors themselves, while the second is generated re-gardless of the title or author keywords, re ﬂecting the paper's contents with profound depth and variety (Garﬁeld, 1990;Rejeb et al., 2022d). The analysis of author keywords and keywords plus could overcome lim-itations like the uncomplete meaning and the small number of authorkeywords. Since the keywords used in the search query were “artiﬁcial intelligence”,“machine learning”,“deep learning”,“food”,a n d“agricul- ture*”, it is evident that they appeared in theﬁrst ranks on the authors' keywords' side. Nevertheless, it should be mentioned that the keyword“machine learning”exceeded four times the occurrences of “artiﬁcial in- telligence”. Moreover, we can see the high frequency of other AI tech-niques such as deep learning, convolutional neural networks, andartiﬁcial neural networks. Other keywords also held a high position,such as“remote sensing”,“computer vision”,“image processing”,“big data”,a n d“internet of things”. These technologies constitute enablersfor precision agriculture strategies. They can optimise crop production,reduce the environmental impacts of agricultural activities, and ensurereliable sensing of different variables (e.g., soil properties, water manage-ment, weather, topography) for large crop ﬁelds. As per the keywords plus, terms such as“classiﬁ
cation”,“system”,“model”,“prediction”,a n d “identiﬁcation”appeared in the top 10, thus informing the keywords sup-plied by the authors. In addition, some other essential topics emerge fromthe keywords plus list, including “regression”,“optimisation”,a n d“seg- mentation”. In this vein, this collection of keywords has an important as-sociation with AI approaches since they re ﬂect some AI capabilities in agri-food management, among other things, prediction and optimisationof crop yield, plant segmentation, and forecasting of environmental vari-ables. Therefore, keywords plus advocate the potential of AI for the real-isation of increased value within the agri-food sector.3.5.1. Treemap based on abstractsTo supplement the analysis of the keyword's dynamics, we ex-tracted the most frequent terms from abstracts. In Fig. 3, the rectangle size reﬂects the occurrence of the term. On the left side, we can seethat the popular terms are“data”,“learning”,“machine”,“model”, “system”, "food“, and“accuracy“. Besides, there is a clear appearanceof main AI tasks such as“classiﬁcation”,“analysis”,“prediction”,a n d “detection”. As a result, this bolsters the argument that AI is a game-changing technology that can contribute to the sustainability of theagri-food sector by enhancing current agricultural systems and foodvalue chains.
Table 2Top 20 most relevant journals.Rank Sources Articles1 Computers and Electronics in Agriculture 3332 Remote Sensing 1993 Sensors 1374 IEEE Access 1295 Biosystems Engineering 666 Applied Sciences 577 Science of the Total Environment 468 Frontiers in Plant Science 419 Remote Sensing of Environment 4110 Sustainability 4011 Agronomy 3912 Journal of Dairy Science 3713 Energies 3614 The International Journal of Robotics Research and Application 2815 IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters 2516 International Journal of Agricultural and Biological Engineering 2317 International Journal of Advanced Computer Science andApplications 2218 Journal of Field Robotics 2219 Precision Agriculture 2220 Geoderma 21Table 3Top 20 most cited countries.Country Total citations Average article citationsUSA 12,864 19.49China 9193 12.39Spain 3219 19.51United Kingdom 3010 16.72Australia 2771 17.76Germany 2075 14.12Canada 1942 19.62Iran 1899 14.61Netherlands 1810 24.79France 1698 20.71Italy 1674 14.56Greece 1657 34.52India 1624 7.77Brazil 1345 9.89Japan 1268 10.06Israel 1201 23.55Korea 1190 9.67Switzerland 1123 44.92Ireland 1076 39.85Sweden 872 31.14Fig. 2.The annual distribution of publications.A. Rejeb, K. Rejeb, S. Zailani et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 6 (2022) 111 –128
1153.6. Trend topicsTo identify emerging topics at the intersection of AI and the agri-food industry, we generatedFig. 4, which depicts research hotspotsand log-frequency-based research trends. Accordingly, the organisationof AI topics reveals that robots, algorithms (i.e., the Kalmar ﬁlter),automation, and expert systems were popularised and revitalised inthe early years of theﬁeld (2002–2006). The dominant themes between2007 and 2016 were the integration of AI-powered robots and agricul-tural mechanisation. Emerging topics such as “mobile robot,”“autono- mous vehicle,”“agriculture vehicles,”and“parallel robot”could be supported by AI capabilities to automate human tasks, optimise opera-tional efﬁciency, and increase output. Commonly, these robots employAI to enhance their situational awareness and sensing capabilities dur-ing agricultural tasks. Since 2017, the focus has been on various technol-ogies and AI techniques, including big data, the IoT, convolutional neuralnetworks, deep learning, machine learning, and fuzzy logic. Combiningthese innovations is essential for the transition to precision agriculture,which provides agri-food companies with options to optimise their pro-duction, reduce resource consumption, and improve the quality of agri-cultural products. In conclusion, the results indicate that, at the time thisanalysis was conducted, precision agriculture and AI techniques werekey concepts and current trends.3.7. Cluster analysisTo better understand the research hotspots, we conducted akeyword co-occurrence network to identify topics with commonfeatures (Kapoor et al., 2018;Rejeb et al., 2020). As a result, we set the parameters mentioned inTable 6.A c c o r d i n gt oFig. 5, four clusters were generated for the keywords supplied during the study period(1992–2020). Theﬁrst cluster (red) is the most signiﬁcant, consisting of terms like“Machine Learning”,“Random Forest”,“Support Vector Machine”,“Remote Sensing”,a n d“Classiﬁcation”. Besides, the keyword “Food Security”belongs to this cluster, and it represents a critical driverfor AI implementation and further technological innovations. As aTable 4Most globally cited articles.Rank AU TI SO TC TCY1(Bioucas-Dias et al., 2012) Hyperspectral Unmixing Overview: Geometrical, Statistical, and SparseRegression-Based Approaches IEEE JOURNAL OF SELECTED TOPICS INAPPLIED EARTH OBSERVATIONS ANDREMOTE SENSING1536 153.62(Foley et al., 2012) Current methods and advances in forecasting of wind power generation RENEWABLE ENERGY 630 633(Kamilaris andPrenafeta-Boldú, 2018)Deep learning in agriculture: A survey COMPUTERS AND ELECTRONICS IN AGRICULTURE 615 153.754(Mohanty et al., 2016) Using Deep Learning for Image-Based Plant Disease Detection FRONTIERS IN PLANT SCIENCE 512 85.33335(Wolfert et al., 2017) Big Data in Smart Farming - A review AGRICULTURAL SYSTEMS 497 99.46(Duro et al., 2012) A comparison of pixel-based and object-based image analysis with selectedmachine learning algorithms for the classi ﬁcation of agricultural landscapes using SPOT-5 HRG imageryREMOTE SENSING OF ENVIRONMENT 490 497(Kussul et al., 2017) Deep Learning Classiﬁcation of Land Cover and Crop Types Using RemoteSensing Data IEEE GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSINGLETTERS 443 88.68(Mitchell et al., 2004) Learning to decode cognitive states from brain images MACHINE LEARNING 432 249(Slaughter et al., 2008) Autonomous robotic weed control systems: A review COMPUTERS AND ELECTRONICS IN AGRICULTURE 358 25.571410 (Bell and McMullen, 2004) Ant colony optimisation techniques for the vehicle routing problem ADVANCED ENGINEERING INFORMATICS 357 19.8333 11 (Sideratos andHatziargyriou, 2007)An advanced statistical method for wind power forecasting IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON POWER SYSTEMS 329 21.933312 (Ma et al., 2017) A review of supervised object-based land-cover image classi ﬁcation ISPRS JOURNAL OF PHOTOGRAMMETRYAND REMOTE SENSING 309 61.813 (Scott et al., 2006) Data analysis for electronic nose systems MICROCHIMICA ACTA 299 18.687514 (Zhong et al., 2018) Spectral-Spatial Residual Network for Hyperspectral Image Classi ﬁcation: A 3-D Deep Learning Framework IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCEAND REMOTE SENSING 285 71.2515 (Liakos et al., 2018b) Machine Learning in Agriculture: A Review SENSORS 272 6816 (Antcheva et al., 2009) ROOT - A C++ framework for petabyte data storage, statistical analysis, andvisualisation COMPUTER PHYSICS COMMUNICATIONS 264 20.307717 (H.Wang et al., 2017) Deep learning-based ensemble approach for probabilistic wind powerforecasting APPLIED ENERGY 261 52.218 (H. Z.Wang et al., 2016) Deep belief network based deterministic and probabilistic wind speedforecasting approach APPLIED ENERGY 225 37.519 (Du and Sun, 2006
) Learning techniques used in computer vision for food quality evaluation: areview JOURNAL OF FOOD ENGINEERING 223 13.937520 (Liu et al., 2018) A New Deep Learning-Based Food Recognition System for Dietary Assessmenton An Edge Computing Service Infrastructure IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SERVICESCOMPUTING 222 55.5Note: AU = Authors; T = Title; SO = Source; TC = Total of citations; TCY = Total of citations per year.
Table 5Top 20 most frequent keywords (authors keywords vs. keywords plus).Rank Authors keywords Occurrences Keywords plus Occurrences1 machine learning 1025 classi ﬁcation 406 2 deep learning 514 system 2963 artiﬁcial intelligence 287 model 2564 convolutional neuralnetwork 198 prediction 2505 precision agriculture 197 identi ﬁcation 1576 random forest 182 neuralnetworks1457 agriculture 181 performance 1348 remote sensing 142 regression 1339 artiﬁcial neural network 126 agriculture 12410 classiﬁcation 122 algorithm 12411 computer vision 101 management 12412 image processing 89 design 12213 support vector machine 78 systems 11914 big data 68 neural network 10515 robotics 68 models 10216 prediction 61 yield 9417 internet of things 59 quality 9118 machine vision 58 food 8519 feature extraction 47 optimization 8520 transfer learning 47 segmentation 82A. Rejeb, K. Rejeb, S. Zailani et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 6 (2022) 111 –128
116solution for food security issues, AI techniques help create smart farm-ing, promote sustainable agriculture, and transform subsistence farminginto competitive and proﬁtable agri-food businesses. In the second clus-ter (green), other AI techniques were highlighted, such as “DeepLearning”,“Convolutional Neural Networks ”,“Image Classiﬁcation”, and“Recurrent Neural Network”. Another keyword that received in-creasing attention is“UAV”(unmanned aerial vehicles), which impliesthat this technology also supports the rise of digitalisation in agriculture
Fig. 3.Treemap based on abstracts.
Fig. 4.Trend topics.A. Rejeb, K. Rejeb, S. Zailani et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 6 (2022) 111 –128
117due to its ability in spraying, crop monitoring, ﬁeld surveying, identi- ﬁcation of drought spots and harmful weeds, and surveillance. Thenext cluster (blue) was predominated by keywords like “Agriculture”, “Agricultural Robot”,“Internet of Things”,a n d“Robotics”. Combined with AI, these technologies can inform more intelligent agri-fooddecisions by controlling crop behaviour, monitoring livestock, cropgrowth, and supporting the efﬁcient use of manpower. Therefore,these technological advancements play a critical role in developing amore data-driven and knowledge-intensive agri-food sector. In thelast cluster (yellow), we see the predominance of “Artiﬁcial intelli- gence”,“Artiﬁcial Neural Networks”,“Modelling”,“Genetic Algorithm”, and“Optimisation”- all are innovative and reliable solutions for currentagri-food challenges.In general, theﬁndings from the keyword co-occurrence clusteringsuggest that AI techniques such as machine learning, deep learning,and artiﬁcial neural networks were the most common approaches inagri-food systems and thus, accelerated the sector's digitalisation. Addi-tionally, robots, the IoT, wireless sensor networks, and UAVs are populartechnologies integrated with AI to modernise farming practices. Never-theless, other adjacent technologies like blockchain, 3D printing, aug-mented reality, and virtual reality did not appear in the visualisation.Thisﬁnding suggests a lack of studies examining the fusion of theseemerging technologies and AI to support precision agriculture, increasethe integrity of the agri-food value chain, and achieve sustainability.4. DiscussionIn this paper, we analysed the relationship between AI and the agri-food industry and AI's role in accelerating the shift to precision and cog-nitive agriculture. In contrast to previous reviews on AI and agri-foodsystems (e.g.,Jha et al., 2019; Patrício and Rieder, 2018 ), ourﬁndings are novel and insightful because this is one of the few investigationsto use a comprehensive sample of research papers that were publishedover nearly three decades. Consequently, the following sections providean in-depth examination of AI and agri-food industry developments(Liakos et al., 2018b;Sharma et al., 2020).4.1. Theoretical contributions4.1.1. What are the research dynamics on the interplay between AI and theAgri-food sector?By addressing theﬁrst research question, our bibliometric reviewanalyses the key productivity measures of the ﬁeld. According to the sam-
ple we analysed, the earliest publications were published in 1992. In ad-dition, the analysis depicted the dynamics of scholarly productionthroughout three major stages. The initial period of publication ran from1992 to 2000, and during this period, only a few publications were pro-duced annually. In the second stage, between 2001 and 2010, the ﬁeld grew steadily, reaching 40 publications for the ﬁrst time in 2010. This was due to the unprecedented advances in computer science duringthis period. In the third stage, between 2011 and 2020, AI techniquesTable 6Keyword clustering parameters.Type of analysis Keyword co-occurrenceUnit of analysis Author keywordsCounting method Full countingMinimum number of a keyword 20Threshold 88Number of clusters 4
Fig. 5.Keyword co-occurrence network.A. Rejeb, K. Rejeb, S. Zailani et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 6 (2022) 111 –128
118exhibited phenomenal performance due to their large data storagecapacity and high computational power. The number of publications hasreached its peak, surpassing 1700 papers for the ﬁrst time in 2020. In addition, our research identiﬁed the most pertinent sources. Com-puters and Electronics in Agriculture, a leading journal, dominate the AIliterature in the agri-food industry in this regard. On the one hand, com-puter science and engineering journals were the most proli ﬁca n d ranked highly. In contrast, this ranking did not include business, man-agement, operations research, and decision science-focused publica-tions. According to the number of citations received, the United Statesdominated the list, while European and Asian countries occupied signif-icant positions. In the top 20 most inﬂuential nations, no contributions from Latin America and Africa were relevant. This suggests that the sci-entiﬁc outcome on a global scale was more concentrated and predomi-nantly represented by developed nations.The current academic literature describes the role of AI in the mod-ernisation of agriculture and the transition from unsustainable farmingpractices to more data-driven precision agriculture. Several thought-provoking issues arise in this vein. For instance, almost all the literatureon integrating AI techniques in the agri-food industry was publishedwithin the lastﬁve years (2015–2020). This expansion coincides withthe transition to agriculture 4.0, in which precision agriculture is sup-ported by AI techniques, the IoT, robots, and smart food systems. In in-formation technology-related journals, applications of AI in the agri-food industry dominated the discussion. It is expected that the ﬂagship journals of AI research will accommodate the evolving nature of the AIﬁeld by incorporating this crucial topic into their editorial strategies.Finally, it is suggested that academic institutions from underdevelopedregions of the world engage in AI research by forming partnershipswith research labs, universities, and governments in developed nations..4.1.2. How is AI being used in the Agri-food sector?Based on the results, our study can draw several important conclu-sions about how agri-food systems use AI to facilitate agricultural oper-ations (Liakos et al., 2018b;Mohanty et al., 2016;Pantazi et al., 2016). From this perspective, we identiﬁed the publications with the highestglobal citations (seeTable 4). According to these publications, AI algo-rithms, deep learning, and machine learning are advancing the creationof a sustainable agri-food industry and promoting precision agriculture.AI techniques attracted a great deal of interest. They gained momentumdue to their capacity to enhance farmers' awareness of potentially haz-ardous weather conditions, crop health conditions, and resourceutilisation, which would otherwise be difﬁcult to detect. Utilising robots to automateﬁeld operations, increase agricultural productivity, im-prove food safety and quality, reduce fuel consumption, and promotesustainability is another intriguing strategy ( Bechar and Vigneault, 2016;Wolfert et al., 2017;X .Zhang et al., 2020;Zhao et al., 2016). As a result, these technologies provide solutions that reduce the relianceon human labour, increase the global competitiveness of agri-food busi-nesses, and increase their overall proﬁtability (Lenain et al., 2006; Slaughter et al., 2008;Valente et al., 2011;Wolfert et al., 2017;Xiong et al., 2017
).Moreover, by analysing the keyword dynamics, our study revealedthat“machine learning”and“deep learning”are among the most inves- tigated AI techniques in agriculture. Artiﬁcial and convolutional neural networks are crucial enablers for precision agriculture due to their ca-pacity to analyse produce images and determine its condition (damagedor healthy), support decision making, and predict climate ( Deo and Şahin, 2015). Big data, robots, and the IoT are key drivers of developingsmarter and more autonomous agri-food value chain practices, whichare advantageous to farmers and consumers. In addition to “remote sensing,”“classiﬁcation,”“image processing,”and“transfer learning,” there are several other noteworthy topics. According to the keywordsprovided in the abstracts, the most popular research topics are “data”, “learning”,“models”,“classiﬁcation”,“robot”,“prediction”,“detection”, and“neural”.I na d d i t i o nt or eﬂecting the breadth and velocity of digitaltransformations, these topics demonstrate that the agri-food industry isincreasingly seeking AI implementations. Despite the abundance of re-search on AI, it is essential to emphasise the paucity of research examin-ing the combination of AI and other emerging technologies, such as 5Gtelecommunications, 3D printing, blockchain, and bioinformatics, in thedevelopment of sustainable agri-food supply chains. Integrating thesetechnologies enables farmers to work more creatively and effectively;however, the real question lies in comprehending the adverse side ef-fects of AI-assisted agriculture. Consequently, our ﬁndings emphasise the urgent need for more research on how responsible AI can rede ﬁne farming practices and achieve holistic sustainability in the agri-foodsector (Abdella et al., 2020;Camaréna, 2020).4.1.3. What are the trend topics pertaining to AI and the Agri-food sector?We can observe that machine learning, deep learning, arti ﬁcial neu- ral networks, fuzzy logic, genetic algorithms, and expert systems are themost popular AI approaches supporting the agri-food industry in majortrend topics. Moreover, emerging technologies such as AI-assisted ro-bots, the IoT, and big data are linked to the digitalisation of agricultureand precision farming, which is expected to become one of the mostprominent trends in the agri-food industry ( Kamilaris and Prenafeta- Boldú, 2018;Wolfert et al., 2017).By examining the activities that AI techniques can facilitate, it be-comes clear that they can be applied to various ﬁelds, including crop performance analysis, livestock monitoring, disease detection, yieldprediction, and production optimisation, among others. In addition, AIaffords additional opportunities in other agri-food activities, such as au-tomatic recognition, remote sensing, plant classi ﬁcation, smart irriga- tion, soil management, cultivation, phenotyping, yield mapping, ﬁeld scouting, and weed management.4.1.4. What are the main challenges of AI in the Agri-food sector?To respond to this question, four categories of obstacles were high-lighted. First, AI in the agri-food industry exacerbates social concerns,such as replacing human labour with automation and machines(Lezoche et al., 2020). Despite requiring expensive specialised equip-ment and labour,Bechar and Vigneault (2016)note that investments in robotics and automation can be proﬁtable because the required workforce typically decreases enough to offset the high investmentcosts. As a result, minimising human intervention will pose a majorproblem for employment standards. The second class relates to thetechnological constraints of AI, such as connectivity, power supply,bandwidth, security, data validation and integrity, network latency, re-sponse time,ﬂexibility, and the need for big data in training AI models(Eli-Chukwu, 2019; Guillén et al., 2021 ;Wolfert et al., 2017). The third class relates to privacy and ethical issues, such as the absence of privacynorms in AI-based agri-food systems, liability for decisions made by AI,and regulations regarding data processing and analysis ( Beydoun et al., 2019;Camaréna, 2020;Udendhran and Balamurugan, 2021; Villa-Henriksen et al., 2020). Ethical considerations, fairness, accessibility,and transparency are a few trade-offs and repercussions raised by AIthat require urgent discussion (Camaréna, 2020). The fourth category relates to organisational barriers to AI adoption, such as reluctance toadopt new technologies (Fountas et al., 2020), cultural and bureaucratic issues (Chatterjee and Hussain, 2021), upgrade of organisational pro- cesses, skill and knowledge requirements ( Balducci et al., 2018; Lezoche et al., 2020), investment cost (Wolfert et al., 2017), and organisational uncertainty. Therefore, these ﬁndings suggest that agri- food companies should work diligently to overcome the obstacles toAI integration and employee adaptability to the new AI-based businessmodel (Bar et al., 2016). Businesses in the agri-food industry shoulddevelop the organisational capabilities required to recon ﬁgure and integrate existing resources and adapt to the changing conditions ofAI-enabled agri-food processes.A. Rejeb, K. Rejeb, S. Zailani et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 6 (2022) 111 –128
1194.2. Theoretical implicationsFig. 6presents a categorisation framework comprising four main el-ements considering the signiﬁcantﬁndings regarding AI applications inthe agri-food industry. AI techniques and related technologies, applica-tion areas, AI beneﬁts, and adoption barriers are discussed.Machine learning, deep learning, and arti ﬁcial neural networks are the most studied approaches to AI techniques and other technologies(Balducci et al., 2018;Kamilaris and Prenafeta-Boldú, 2018). Various ag- ricultural activities, such as crop cultivation, livestock farming, diseasediagnosis, crop image classiﬁcation, plant identiﬁcation and segmenta- tion, and resource (e.g., soil, water) management, could employ theseAI techniques. In addition, we discovered that crop yield prediction, irri-gation, consumer behaviour analysis, disaster (e.g., drought, ﬂood) pre- diction, and food traceability are the most prevalent AI applications inthe agri-food industry. The beneﬁts of automation of farming practices,increased accuracy and rapidity of plant diagnosis ( Sharma et al., 2020; Shendryk et al., 2021), cost savings, efﬁcient energy consumption, and improved product quality are the results of utilising AI technologies(Smetana et al., 2021). In addition, AI techniques can enhance agricul-tural production, reduce greenhouse gas emissions, ensure animal wel-fare, improveﬁeld navigation, and boost the performance of agriculturalrobots (Afonso et al., 2020; Hemming et al., 2020 ;Kamilaris and Prenafeta-Boldú, 2018;Sharma et al., 2020). To achieve more beneﬁcial and responsible AI implementations inthe agri-food sector, it is necessary to overcome several obstacles. Forexample, the literature acknowledges social issues of AI, such as robotsreplacing humans in the workforce and unemployment ( Ampatzidis et al., 2017;Rose and Chilvers, 2018). AI is hampered by lack of connec-tivity, security attacks, limited computation resources, and low networkbandwidth (Liu et al., 2018). Therefore, effective AI algorithms andsystems must be designed and developed to improve their task perfor-mance (Liu et al., 2018). Other concerns include data privacy and ethics;as a result, agri-food businesses are required to implement and enforcestringent measures and policies to safeguard their data and comply withthe applicable regulations. In addition, organisational barriers, such asresistance to change, the need for new skills and capabilities, andprohibitive investment costs, create uncertainty about the value of AIin the agri-food industry.4.2.1. From framework to research propositionsConsidering the proposed categorisation framework, a set of re-search propositions are derived using the Resource-Based View (RBV)to provide a foundation for future research on AI applications in theagri-food industry. RBV is based on the idea that a company's competi-tive position is determined by its unique resources and capabilities andtheir interrelationships (Barney, 1991; Farooq and O’Brien, 2015). In this context, the interaction between AI and the agri-food industrymust be rooted in resources, including raw materials, water, soil,energy, human resources, technology, and relationships (see Fig. 7). For each resource, we provide several insightful and recommendedresearch propositions.
Fig. 7.RBV-based framework for the interplay between AI and agri-food resources.
Fig. 6.The framework of the studyﬁndings.A. Rejeb, K. Rejeb, S. Zailani et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 6 (2022) 111 –128
1204.2.1.1. Raw materials.In the agri-food sector, raw materials are vital forproduct quality and safety. They include seeds, nutrients, fertilisers, andchemicals. By deploying AI techniques, farmers could understandseveral agricultural-related issues such as seed identi ﬁcation, herbicide use, classiﬁcation, and identiﬁcation of raw materials quality (Kamilaris and Prenafeta-Boldú, 2018). Furthermore, AI technologies enablefarmers to understand their crops at a micro-scale, enabling the earlydetection of diseases in seeds (Patrício and Rieder, 2018) and maintain- ing precise fertigation (Bechar and Vigneault, 2016). Therefore, the fol- lowing research propositions emerge:•RP1–1: AI enables agri-food businesses to improve their productionprocesses and deliver high-quality products because of its ability tocontrol the quality of raw materials used.•RP1–2: AI aids in protecting seed and crop damage from herbicides,viruses, and insects.•RP1–3: AI aids agricultural raw materials tolerance to environmentalstresses likeﬂoods and drought and plays a role in improved tasteand nutrition beneﬁts.4.2.1.2. Water.Since water represents the vital resource consumed byagri-food businesses, there is aneed to reduce the pressure on thisresource and reinforce water stewardship in the agri-food sector.A Ic a ns a v et h ee x c e s su s eo fw a ter and support the developmentof adequate water and agricultural policies ( Sánchez et al., 2020). The big data generated by smart farming sensors can be processedusing machine learning to improve the management of smart farm-ing, gain crop insights, elevate productivity, and optimise water re-sources (Freeman et al., 2019;Navarro et al., 2020). Based on this, we suggest that:•RP2–1: AI facilitates the use and processing of large datasets to controlcrop status and optimise sustainable water use.•RP2–2: AI aids in reducing water consumption in agriculture whilemaintaining product quality and yield.4.2.1.3. Soil.Soil is an essential non-renewable resource in the agri-foodindustry, and its preservation is crucial. Because destruction and erosionpose a threat to soil, there is an opportunity to unlock the value of AI andensure the preservation of this precious resource. For example, machinelearning can help predict and identify soil properties such as drying,temperature, and moisture content (Liakos et al., 2018b). AI tools auto- mate the acquisition of knowledge and the analysis of large data setsconcerning soil health, condition, and hydrology ( Benke et al., 2020; Kuzmanovski et al., 2015). Consequently, we derive the following re-search propositions:•RP3–1: AI provides more insights into soil properties, temperature,and moisture, increasing farmers' understanding of ecosystem dy-namics and impingements in the agri-food sector.•RP3–2: AI aids the selection of the most optimal soil characteristicsutilised in crop yield prediction.•RP3–3: AI positively impacts soil fertility and productivity.
4.2.1.4. Energy.Arguably, an enormous amount of energy is imperativefor the production, storage, and distribution of food products(Paulikienėet al., 2020). To ensure more efﬁcient energy use, farmers could leverage AI to reduce energy consumption and cost through pre-dictive process parameter optimisation ( Smetana et al., 2021). Further- more, machine learning could develop models for the effectivemanagement of energy systems in the agri-food sector ( Cubric, 2020). Therefore, AI supports energy conservation and ultimately reduces en-ergy waste thanks to its ability to forecast energy demand based on op-erational usage, historical demands, or current weather ( Bokade et al., 2021). In light of this, we propose that:•RP4–1: AI aids in optimising energy consumption during planting,irrigation, harvesting, processing, packaging, transportation, anddistribution of food products.•RP4–2: AI aids the use of renewable energies to power agriculturaloperations.•RP4–3: AI facilitates the recycling of food waste and the developmentof more sustainable energy options such as bio-re ﬁnery products (e.g., biofuels).4.2.1.5. Human resources.Innovation in human resources represents aprimary source of improved sustainable performance in the agri-foodsector (Brofman Epelbaum and Garcia Martinez, 2014 ). Human re- sources are vital for agri-food businesses, requiring signi ﬁcant attention due to their impact on production,ﬁnancial, marketing, and manage- ment decisions (Alreshidi, 2019). To optimise their utilisation, agri-food businesses can integrate AI to develop more skilful and ﬂexible workers. With the support of AI-assisted robots, agricultural workerswould no longer need to perform manual tasks (e.g., hand weeding oforganic crops), thus avoiding several health risks such as musculoskele-tal disorders and chronic diseases (Pérez-Ruíz et al., 2014). The synergy between AI and human workers can improve the applicability of severalagricultural activities such as harvesting ( Zhao et al., 2016) and create a safer and less stressful working environment. However, agri-food busi-nesses must reskill and upskill their human resources to be a source ofdifferentiation and better adapt to changing industrial requirements.The scarcity of human resources with analytical skills may negatively in-ﬂuence the adoption of AI techniques. Therefore, organisations areincentivised to develop skill-building programs for farmers and otheractors in the agri-food supply chain ( Sharma et al., 2020). Therefore, we present the following research propositions:•RP5–1: AI augments the analytical capabilities of human resources inthe agri-food sector.•RP5–2: AI aids the safety and convenience of the working environ-ment in the agri-food sector.•RP5–3: AI increases theﬂexibility, agility, adaptability, responsive-ness, and resilience of farmers.•RP5.4: How human resources are managed in AI-assisted agricultureimpacts agri-food businesses' performance.4.2.1.6. Technology.Technological progress contributes to the automa-tion of agri-food activities, agricultural productivity, ef ﬁciency, reliabil- ity, and precision (Bechar and Vigneault, 2016). The smart reform of agri-food systems necessitates the implementation of innovative prac-tices and technology-driven processes. This calls for agri-food organisa-tions to adopt AI to fortify their technological infrastructure. As such, thecombination of AI and other technologies like the IoT, edge computing,blockchain, and augmented reality is considered a promising solutionfor pest identiﬁcation, safety traceability of agricultural products, andenvironmental pollution caused by the use of fertilisers and pesticides(Zhang et al., 2020). Furthermore, AI augments the utility of data analyt-ics to improve crop production and assist farmers in selecting the bestbreed according to their location and climate ( Lova Raju and Vijayaraghavan, 2020), monitoring livestock in real-time (Taneja et al., 2020), and predicting frost events (Diedrichs et al., 2018). Therefore, the following research propositions can be investigated:•RP6–1: The fusion of AI techniques and other technologies (e.g., theIoT, computing technologies, blockchain, big data analytics, robotics,virtual/augmented reality) ushers in an interconnected digital ecosys-tem that turns existing farming practices into knowledge-basedagriculture and maximises production levels and product quality.•RP6–2: The integration of AI and other advanced technologiesbrings signiﬁcant economic, environmental, and social bene ﬁts to the agri-food sector.A. Rejeb, K. Rejeb, S. Zailani et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 6 (2022) 111 –128
121•RP6–3: Through AI and data analytics, agri-food ﬁrms would be able to develop sustainable and responsible business models and buildsynergies and collaboration with other agri-food ecosystems.•RP6–4: AI techniques, in combination with other technologies, canhelp improve agri-food product packaging, handling optimisation,customisation, and to mitigate the risk of food fraud and otheropportunistic behaviour.4.2.1.7. Relationships.Closer strategic relationships with customers andsuppliers are crucial for business learning and adaptation ( Lezoche et al., 2020). AI provides a cooperative mechanism that improves collab-orative activities and value co-creation with the agri-food sector stake-holders to empower relationships. For example, machine learningalgorithms can ensure the optimal use of resources through the agri-food supply chain and create a novel dimension of symbiosis in this sec-tor (Sharma et al., 2020). AI techniques can aid farmers in identifyingthe most demanded food products, shortage and supply, and most suit-able suppliers. AI can turn customer data into actionable insights and in-sightful knowledge that can be leveraged to strengthen customerrelationship management and gain a signi ﬁcant business value (Fiore et al., 2017). The use of AI can lead to more precise prediction of futuredemand and accurate targeting of potential customers, therebymaximising the proﬁtability of agri-food businesses. However, a majorissue of AI applications and related technologies is that they necessitatecollaboration between multiple stakeholders playing different rolesin the agri-food value chain (Wolfert et al., 2017). As a result, new organisational connections and modes of collaboration need to bedeveloped in the supply chain to accelerate the transition towardAI-assisted agriculture and farming. Therefore, AI can create morerobust and closer linkages with suppliers and customers, achievinghigher levels of trust and loyalty. Based on the prior discussion, thefollowing research propositions are suggested:•RP7–1: The use of AI stimulates collaboration, coordination, and valueco-creation among the agri-food sector stakeholders.•RP7–2: The impact of AI-enabled collaborative relationships on theperformance of agri-food businesses.•RP7–3: AI helps to coordinate the pace of information sharing, preventexcess inventory, and reduce inefﬁciencies.4.2.2. Agenda for future researchAs a critical resource for the growth of plants ( Zakir et al., 2021), soil can signiﬁcantly beneﬁt from AI implementations. As such, AI andmachine learning applications can assist farmers in understanding soilconditions, including PH level, nitrogen, nutrients, and moisture con-tent. Farmers can leverage AI techniques to predict soil water contentand select the most suitable crops to maximise yields ( Yu et al., 2021). As a result, the real-time prediction of soil parameters can contributeto more sustained land resource management and irrigation practices.Future research can investigate the utility and performance of differentAI techniques to ensure accurate estimations of soil conditions ( Ge et al., 2018). Since the modelling of soil water content is a challenging taskdue to plant growth dynamics, climate changes, and soil content varia-tions, there is a need for efﬁcient, reliable, and accurate AI algorithms tofacilitate the processing and analysis of soil water data. This is crucial asit helps design an adequate watering schedule and lessening the effectof drought situations (Adeyemi et al., 2018). The agri-food industry represents the major consumer of water on aworldwide scale since crops largely depend on water availability. Con-
sidering the signiﬁcant depletion rate of water resources, there is aneed for effective water management to conserve this resource and es-tablish sustainable agricultural production. The effective use of watercan be conducive to signiﬁcant improvements in water quality and a de-crease in health issues and pollution ( Neupane and Guo, 2019). In this vein, recent research on AI demonstrates the technology's ability toimprove water management by monitoring water levels, schedulingwater runs, and regulating water amounts needed by individual crops.Even though AI offers several tangible advantages to water manage-ment,Kamarudin et al. (2021)state that AI applications in plant waterassessments are still under-studied. Future research should examinehow AI techniques can increase water productivity and enhance watermanagement practices in low water productivity areas ( Virnodkar et al., 2020). Other opportunities for future studies include exploringAI's role in water erosion assessment ( Kamilaris and Prenafeta-Boldú, 2018) and supporting precision agriculture systems to ensure water re-sources' stability (Ganeshkumar et al., 2021). The deployment of AI in farming activities can improve energy man-agement (Cubric, 2020). AI allows for the modelling of energy needed infarming activities, thus contributing to energy saving and the delivery ofgreen and clean agricultural products ( Bolandnazar et al., 2020). The adoption of AI and the shift to smart agriculture can motivate morefarmers to utilise green energy sources ( Ragazou et al., 2022). AI plays a critical role in mitigating the carbon footprints caused by agriculture,farming, and food production. The agri-food industry can capitalise onAI to optimise energy consumption and produce more with fewer en-ergy resources (Mor et al., 2021). Related to this theme, future researchshould attempt to develop efﬁcient AI models to predict the optimalamount of energy necessary for agricultural activities ( Nabavi- Pelesaraei et al., 2018). In addition, researchers are recommended to as-sess the energy efﬁciency achieved by AI use at different levels of theagri-food supply chain. Another topic of interest is examining the sup-port of AI to agricultural activities, which are based on sustainable ener-gies such as wind energy, solar energy, biomass, and geothermal energy(Escamilla-García et al., 2020). The development of new AI-enabledsystems to minimise the energy use of greenhouses is also an intriguingresearch direction that needs further attention since AI can offerautomated, data-driven, and actionable insights to reshape greenhousecrop farming.Increasing agricultural production at least costs while protecting theenvironment represents one of the main objectives of the agri-food in-dustry. Timely detection and control of issues related to crop manage-ment can help boost production and pro ﬁts. In recent years, AI is utilised to increase crop output and productivity from effective agricul-tural resource utilisation based on remote sensing of ﬁeld-based infor- mation (Zhou et al., 2021). Farmers can connect with applications andrespond to fast change requests for processes and raw materials suchas inputs, seed stock, soil moisture, temperature and light for crops,and crop growth components. As a result, plants can easily be controlledto meet requirements (Manogaran et al., 2021). In this regard, Chlingaryan et al. (2018)argue that machine learning techniques havehelped achieve precise yield predictions for different crops, quantify ni-trogen status, and model expert knowledge for crop management. AIcan establish in-season crop management systems that make real-time decisions regarding the amount, location, and timing to applyoptimal inputs and optimise proﬁtability in agriculture production(Weiss et al., 2020). Other beneﬁcial AI applications in agriculture alsoinclude rapid plant disease detection, plant phenotyping, ef ﬁcient use of agrochemicals, and support for workers with location-relevant agro-nomic advice (Tzachor et al., 2022). Like crop management, AI offers ac-curate and reliable estimation and prediction of farming parameters tomaximise the production of livestock systems and achieve substantialeconomic beneﬁts (Liakos et al., 2018a). For example, weight forecast- ing systems can anticipate the future weights of cattle before slaughter,enabling farmers to change feeds and livestock conditions accordingly.Similarly, AI techniques and models can be used to estimate the growthof animals, forecast their yield, assess their water needs, and preventdiseases from occurring based on past observations ( Kamilaris and Prenafeta-Boldú, 2018). Overall, future crop and livestock managementstudies may involve questions about how AI can support farmers inpredicting crop varieties and their performance in different environ-ments, thereby increasing food safety ( Kugler, 2022). Of additionalA. Rejeb, K. Rejeb, S. Zailani et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 6 (2022) 111 –128
122interest is an exploration of the role of AI in identifying crop yield objec-tives to be reached according to resources available and climate condi-tions (Le Bars and Attonaty, 2001). The development of AI-poweredspray systems to analyse plants' colour, shape, and size and deliver ac-curate amounts of herbicides is recommended to facilitate precisiontargeting, prevent collateral damage to plants, and support precision ag-riculture. To advance the understanding of AI applications in livestockmanagement, future studies are required to examine how AI can con-tribute to reducing greenhouse emissions caused by livestock farming.Research may also provide further insights into AI's role in genomicsand how this can support farmers' understanding of animals' metabo-lisms and facilitate selective breeding ( Eastwood et al., 2021). Finally, AI applications like facial recognition for animals and image classi ﬁca- tion should be investigated in detail to allow the individual monitoringof animals and their behaviour (Jung et al., 2021;Xu et al., 2021). With the support of AI, farmers can reduce manual labour and in-crease task accuracy and performance. Bechar and Vigneault (2016) state that the problems associated with workforce shortage can be mit-igated with the incorporation of AI since the technology helps increaseagricultural productivity and compensate for the higher investmentcost due to the signiﬁcant decline in the required workforce. Moreover,AI-powered robots can perform risky tasks and farming operationsunder harsh conditions (Bechar and Vigneault, 2016), thus contributing to workers' safety and job satisfaction. This can also allow farmworkersto save time and energy for more strategic farming activities requiringhuman intelligence. Nevertheless, the convenience brought by AI canyield the substitution of farmworkers with robots, resulting in joblosses. Therefore, future studies need to examine how AI in ﬂuences rural and farming communities. In addition, researchers must lookinto the positive and negative impacts of AI on human resourcesmanagement from the perspective of ethics, social sustainability, andequality (Wolfert et al., 2017). Related to sustainable business relation-ships, it is expected that AI will provide suppliers and customers withthe information required to make more informed decisions aboutagricultural products and foods. By integrating AI into agricultural activ-ities, farmers can meet consumers' needs for sustainable agriculturalproducts since AI allows compliance with increasing pesticide useregulations (Slaughter et al., 2008). Accordingly, a contribution oppor-tunity from future research would be to examine how AI can help agri-cultural producers establish new markets and effectively satisfy thedesires of their existing customers. Despite the abundance of AI applica-tions, there is still a paucity of studies examining AI's potential for sup-plier selection in the agri-food industry ( Zavala-Alcívar et al., 2020). Collaborative approaches between the agri-food industry stakeholders(e.g., farmers, suppliers, buyers, and regulators) using AI are anotherpromising research area that should be explored in the future.Since consumers are increasingly becoming aware of sustainability,food authenticity, production methods, and labour exploitation, thereis a need to achieve greater traceability of agricultural products alongthe agri-food supply chain (Lillford and Hermansson, 2021). In the era
Table 7Agenda for future research on AI applications in the agri-food sector.Main topics Directions for future research Related literatureAI for sustainable soilmanagement•Exploration of AI techniques to improve soil fertility, salinity, texture, moisture,and productivity•Investigation of AI techniques for soil segmentation from remotely sensed data (Dong et al., 2019;Heggemann et al., 2017;Ünal, 2020)AI for sustainable watermanagement•Examination of the role of AI in countering the challenges caused by waterscarcity and extreme climatic conditions•Use of AI techniques in irrigation scheduling and waste management•The importance of AI in achieving water self-suf ﬁciency and resilience in harsh environments(Cavazza et al., 2020;Jimenez et al., 2020;Xavier et al., 2020)
AI for sustainable energymanagement•Exploration of the role of AI in reducing the negative impacts of energyconsumption on the environment and ensuring food security•Identiﬁcation of the beneﬁts and limitations of AI in supporting the use ofrenewable energy sources in the agri-food sector(Benites-Lazaro et al., 2018;Díaz et al., 2020;Khoshnevisan et al., 2015;Syed Ahmed Kabir et al., 2020 )AI for sustainable cropmanagement•Exploring how AI can facilitate precision crop management•Utilisation of AI in robotics to account for crop requirements•Investigation of AI capabilities to protect crops and predict pest's behaviour(Balducci et al., 2018;Kamilaris and Prenafeta-Boldú, 2018 ; Kollia et al., 2021;Lezoche et al., 2020; RohitSharma et al., 2020)AI for sustainablelivestock management•The contribution of AI to animal welfare•Investigation of AI to reduce the carbon footprint of livestock management•Potential of AI techniques for improving the farming conditions of livestockand facilitating the interaction of farmers with the animals(García et al., 2020;Kamilaris and Prenafeta-Boldú, 2018 ; Kling-Eveillard et al., 2020;Marvin et al., 2020)AI for sustainable humanresourcesmanagement•Investigation of the main ergonomics need for users of AI in the agri-food sector•
The role of AI in developing a safe and ethical workforce for agriculture andfarming•Exploration of AI in supporting several human resources activities in theagri-food sector, including recruiting, training, and job performance evaluation(Bar et al., 2016;Kling-Eveillard et al., 2020;Pérez-Ruíz et al., 2014;Sharma et al., 2020;Slaughter et al., 2008)
AI for sustainablebusiness relationships•The impact of AI on customer satisfaction•The role of AI in supplier selection, supplier development, and supplierintegration•Examination of the potential of AI for agri-food supply chain coordination,customer and supplier involvement, and reduction of transaction costs in thesector(Abdella et al., 2020;Lezoche et al., 2020;Saggi and Jain, 2018; Sharma et al., 2020)
AI for sustainabletraceability•Investigation of AI techniques' ability to ensure end-to-end supply chaintraceability•The role of AI to prevent food fraud, product recalls and provide effectiveenhancements for traceability performance in food processing(Alﬁan et al., 2020;Milan et al., 2019;Qian et al., 2020;Yingjie et al., 2018;X .Zhang et al., 2020)AI for sustainable wastemanagement•Exploration of how AI techniques support behavioural changes in food waste•Role of AI to foster eco-efﬁciency, reduce food waste and food miles •The opportunities of AI to manage waste in circular agri-food supply chains (Barrett and Rose, 2020;Camaréna, 2020;Navarro et al., 2020)
AI for sustainablebusiness models•The role of AI to develop more sustainable and socially responsible businessmodels in the agri-food sector•Investigation of AI-enabled business models to achieve optimal consumptionand production levels in farming and agriculture•The use of AI in the formation of innovative bio-based business models andsocial innovation(Govindan and Al-Ansari, 2019 ;Rose and Chilvers, 2018; Sharma et al., 2020;Tsolakis et al., 2019)A. Rejeb, K. Rejeb, S. Zailani et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 6 (2022) 111 –128
123of traceability and precision agriculture, future research must scrutinisehow AI techniques for agricultural production can offer practical solu-tions in developing end-to-end agri-food supply chain traceability. Inte-grating AI with other emerging technologies such as the IoT, blockchain,and augmented reality should be explored to ﬁnd out how AI can bring increased visibility and transparency to all stages of the agri-food supplychain and prevent social non-compliances. Additionally, future studiesshould investigate the role of AI techniques to integrate all the agri-food stakeholders and reinforce commitments for traceable and sustain-able food products. As AI can provide access to sophisticated analyticaltools, farmers must improve farming operations and minimise wastein food production while reducing the negative impacts on the environ-ment. Future studies need to explore how AI can be leveraged in landsuitability analyses to reduce fertiliser and water consumption ( Xiong et al., 2017). Furthermore, AI applications for transforming organic ma-terials and wastes and biomass energy generation are another promis-ing avenue for future research (Senocak and Guner Goren, 2022). By restoring to AI-based machines, there is an increased interest in exam-ining the potential of AI to increase environmental sustainability, reducecarbon footprint, and achieve systematic waste management(Wiangkham et al., 2022). Finally, the investigation of how AI toolscan introduce novel disruptive business models in the agri-food indus-try is encouraged in future studies. The automated information process-ing and extraction through AI are expected to promote smart businessmodels. Given the paucity of agriculture research on business models,it is recommended to study the impacts of AI-enabled agricultural sys-tems on sustainability's economic, environmental, and social dimen-sions. The shift from current agricultural practices to AI-enabledagriculture is far from easy; hence, the implementation of AI and the re-lated technologies and routines are expected to bring more complexityand other challenges, which need to be explored in future research.Overall,Table 7presents the proposed agenda to guide and advanceAI research in the agri-food sector.4.3. Practical implicationThe bibliometric analysis in this study resulted in several conclu-sions. We identiﬁed the most prevalent AI techniques and related tech-nologies (e.g., robots, the IoT, big data, UAVs) and their applications inthe agri-food industry. This may assist practitioners in determiningwhich AI-supporting methodologies to employ. Second, utilising RBVtheory, we developed a framework to assist practitioners in deter-mining which AI deployments may impact agri-food resources. Whenapplying AI to agri-food activities, the seven resource categories (rawmaterials, water, soil, energy, human resources, technology, andrelationships) must be evaluated. In addition, practitioners should care-fully consider the economic and technical viability of incorporatingAI while emphasising the technology's ethical and socially responsibledimensions.4.4. Study limitationsOur study has limitations. This review began by performing a key-word search against a single database, Web of Science-WoS. Conse-quently, relevant publications may be omitted, especially those notindexed in the WoS database. The authors' keywords may also intro-duce bias into the analysis. To circumvent these issues, future studiesmay utilise multiple databases (e.g., Scopus, Google Scholar), includeadditional keywords, and employ additional analysis methods(e.g., meta-analysis, main path analysis).5. ConclusionThis paper conducted a bibliometric analysis to examine the rela-tionship between AI and the agri-food industry. We evaluated thepapers by addressing four research issues: the dynamics underlyingthe relationship between AI and agri-food systems, how farmers useAI techniques to modernise agriculture, the major trends in AI integra-tion in agri-food businesses, and the challenges and concerns associatedwith leveraging AI in the digitalisation of agriculture and farming activ-ities. AI has the potential to be an indispensable tool at every level of theintricate agri-food supply ecosystem. In addition to physical productecosystems, its role can extend from primary production to processing,distribution, and retail, encompassing agricultural assurance andlogistics service ecosystems.In terms of scholarly output, we identiﬁed three distinct phases of AI in the agriculture and food industry. We observed that exponentialgrowth began in 2015 due to advances in computational sciences andthe emergence of innovative technologies. Unsurprisingly, AI researchis published in computer science journals. The United States, China,and Spain were the top three most inﬂuential nations in terms of citations per country. Latin American and African nations contributenegligibly to AI research in the agri-food industry. In addition, robotics,the IoT, and unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) were identi ﬁed as signif- icant technologies that could beneﬁt from AI techniques such as ma-chine learning, deep learning, artiﬁcial neural networks, convolutionalneural networks, and fuzzy logic. In addition, we identi
ﬁed machine learning and deep learning as recent trending topics. On the otherhand, integrating AI with blockchain technology, virtual and augmentedreality, 3D printing, and bioinformatics have received little attention.Therefore, future research should concentrate on how AI can enhancethese technologies' capacity to manage soil, water, energy, crops, andlivestock. In addition, the barriers to AI adoption were analysed andcategorised into four broad groups: social concerns, technical concerns,privacy and ethical concerns, and organisational concerns.Our research contributes to the expanding body of knowledge re-garding AI applications in the agri-food industry. The primary ﬁndings, along with the RBV-based framework and research propositions, are in-structive for scholars and practitioners interested in the AI potential ofthe agri-food industry. AI will be useful for forecasting weather andother agricultural conditions, and accurate forecasting will alleviatethe concerns of many farmers. The future of agriculture depends on cre-ating a resilient and sustainable farming system. Consequently, the rec-ommendations for future research may motivate scholars to pursueadditional AI research projects and contribute to the consolidation ofthis body of knowledge. Most propositions are valid and empiricallytestable. In addition, the research agenda outlined in this paper contrib-utes to the current body of knowledge regarding AI applications in sev-eral agri-food industry domains. In conclusion, the key takeaways fromthis research suggest that practitioners and actors in the agri-food in-dustry should closely monitor the effect of AI on their performance.Practitioners can use the proposed framework, which provides a com-prehensive perspective for assessing the impact of AI on agri-food sus-tainability, as a point of reference. However, AI's potential can only berealised if practitioners work to overcome the obstacles preventing itsintegration into the industry. We identi ﬁed several obstacles that must be addressed when integrating AI into the agri-food industry, in-cluding unemployment, ethics, and privacy. Lastly, our research aimedto bridge the gap between theory and practice regarding AI applicationsin the agri-food industry.Declaration of Competing InterestThe authors declare that they have no known competing ﬁnancial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to in ﬂu- ence the work reported in this paper.References
Abdella, G.M., Kucukvar, M., Onat, N.C., Al-Yafay, H.M., Bulak, M.E., 2020. Sustainability as-sessment and modeling based on supervised machine learning techniques: the casefor food consumption. J. Clean. Prod. 251, 119661. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro. 2019.119661.A. Rejeb, K. Rejeb, S. Zailani et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 6 (2022) 111 –128
124Abdollahi, A., Rejeb, K., Rejeb, A., Mostafa, M.M., Zailani, S., 2021. Wireless sensor net-works in agriculture: insights from Bibliometric analysis. Sustainability 13 (21),12011.https://doi.org/10.3390/su132112011 . Adeyemi, O., Grove, I., Peets, S., Domun, Y., Norton, T., 2018. Dynamic neural networkmodelling of soil moisture content for predictive irrigation scheduling. Sensors 18(10), 3408.https://doi.org/10.3390/s18103408 . Afonso, M., Fonteijn, H., Fiorentin, F.S., Lensink, D., Mooij, M., Faber, N., Polder, G.,Wehrens, R., 2020.Tomato Fruit Detection and Counting in Greenhouses UsingDeep Learning. Front. Plant Sci. 11.Alﬁan, G., Syafrudin, M., Farooq, U., Ma ’arif, M.R., Syaekhoni, M.A., Fitriyani, N.L., et al., 2020. Improving efﬁciency of RFID-based traceability system for perishable food byutilizing IoT sensors and machine learning model. Food Control 110, 107016.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodcont.2019.107016 . Alnajem, M., Mostafa, M.M., ElMelegy, A.R., 2021. Mapping the ﬁrst decade of circular economy research: a bibliometric network analysis. J. Ind. Prod. Eng. 38 (1), 29 –50. https://doi.org/10.1080/21681015.2020.1838632 . Alreshidi, E., 2019.Smart sustainable agriculture (SSA) solution underpinned by internetof things (IoT) and artiﬁcial intelligence (AI). arXiv e-prints, arXiv:1906.03106.Ampatzidis, Y., De Bellis, L., Luvisi, A., 2017. iPathology: Robotic Applications and Manage-ment of Plants and Plant Diseases. Sustainability 9, 1010. https://doi.org/10.3390/ su9061010.Antcheva, I., Ballintijn, M., Bellenot, B., Biskup, M., Brun, R., Buncic, N., et al., 2009. ROOT — A C++ framework for petabyte data storage, statistical analysis and visualization.Comput. Phys. Commun. 180 (12), 2499 –2512.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cpc.2009. 08.005.Balducci, F., Impedovo, D., Pirlo, G., 2018. Machine learning applications on agriculturaldatasets for smart farm enhancement. Machines 6 (3), 38. https://doi.org/10.3390/ machines6030038.Bar, E., Mathiassen, J.R., Eilertsen, A., Mugaas, T., Misimi, E., Linnerud, Å.S., et al., 2016. To-wards robotic post-trimming of salmon ﬁllets. Industr. Rob. Int. J. 43 (4), 421 –428. https://doi.org/10.1108/IR-11-2015-0205 . Barney, J., 1991. Firm Resources and Sustained Competitive Advantage. J. Manag. 17,99–120.https://doi.org/10.1177/014920639101700108 . Barrett, H., Rose, D.C., 2020. Perceptions of the Fourth Agricultural Revolution: What ’si n , What’s out, and What Consequences are Anticipated? Sociologia Ruralis. https://doi. org/10.1111/soru.12324.Bartol, T., Mackiewicz-Talarczyk, M., 2015. Bibliometric analysis of publishing trends inFiber crops in Google scholar, Scopus, and web of science. J. Nat. Fibers 12 (6),531–541.https://doi.org/10.1080/15440478.2014.972000 . Bechar, A., Vigneault, C., 2016. Agricultural robots for ﬁeld operations: concepts and com- ponents. Biosyst. Eng. 149, 94 –111.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biosystemseng.2016.06. 014.Bell, J.E., McMullen, P.R., 2004. Ant colony optimization techniques for the vehicle routingproblem. Adv. Eng. Inform. 18 (1), 41 –48.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aei.2004.07.001 .
Benites-Lazaro, L.L., Giatti, L., Giarolla, A., 2018. Topic modeling method for analyzing so-cial actor discourses on climate change, energy and food security. Energy Res. Soc. Sci.45, 318–330.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.erss.2018.07.031 . Benke, K.K., Norng, S., Robinson, N.J., Chia, K., Rees, D.B., Hopley, J., 2020. Development ofpedotransfer functions by machine learning for prediction of soil electrical conductiv-ity and organic carbon content. Geoderma 366, 114210. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. geoderma.2020.114210.Beydoun, G., Abedin, B., Merigó, J.M., Vera, M., 2019. Twenty years of information systemsFrontiers. Inf. Syst. Front. 21 (2), 485 –494.https://doi.org/10.1007/s10796-019- 09925-x.Bioucas-Dias, J.M., Plaza, A., Dobigeon, N., Parente, M., Du, Q., Gader, P., Chanussot, J., 2012.Hyperspectral Unmixing overview: geometrical, statistical, and sparse regression-based approaches. IEEE J. Select. Top. Appl. Earth Observ. Remote Sens. 5 (2),354–379.https://doi.org/10.1109/JSTARS.2012.2194696 . Bokade, R., Navato, A., Ouyang, R., Jin, X., Chou, C.-A., Ostadabbas, S., Mueller, A.V., 2021. Across-disciplinary comparison of multimodal data fusion approaches and applica-tions: accelerating learning through trans-disciplinary information sharing. ExpertSyst. Appl. 165, 113885.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2020.113885 . Bolandnazar, E., Rohani, A., Taki, M., 2020. Energy consumption forecasting in agricultureby artiﬁcial intelligence and mathematical models. Energy Sourc. Part A Recov. Utiliz.Environ. Effects 42 (13), 1618 –1632.https://doi.org/10.1080/15567036.2019. 1604872.Brofman Epelbaum, F.M., Garcia Martinez, M., 2014. The technological evolution of foodtraceability systems and their impact on ﬁrm sustainable performance: A RBV ap- proach. Int. J. Prod. Econ. 150, 215 –224.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpe.2014.01.007 . Brogårdh, T., 2007. Present and future robot control development —an industrial perspec- tive. Annu. Rev. Control. 31 (1), 69 –79.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.arcontrol.2007. 01.002.Camaréna, S., 2020. Artiﬁcial intelligence in the design of the transitions to sustainablefood systems. J. Clean. Prod. 271, 122574. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2020. 122574.Caulﬁeld, T., Rachul, C., Zarzeczny, A., 2012. The evolution of policy issues in stem cell re-search: an international survey. Stem Cell Rev. Rep. 8 (4), 1037 –1042.https://doi.org/ 10.1007/s12015-012-9404-5. Cavazza, F., Galioto, F., Raggi, M., Viaggi, D., 2020. Digital irrigated agriculture: towards aframework for comprehensive analysis of decision processes under uncertainty.Future Intern. 12 (11), 181.https://doi.org/10.3390/ﬁ12110181. Chatterjee, S., N.S., S., Hussain, Z., 2021. Evolution of arti ﬁcial intelligence and its impact on human rights: from sociolegal perspective. Int. J. Law Manag. 64, 184 –205. https://doi.org/10.1108/IJLMA-06-2021-0156Chen, T.-C., Yu, S.-Y., 2021. The review of food safety inspection system based on arti ﬁcial intelligence, image processing, and robotic. Food Sci. Technol. 42. https://doi.org/10. 1590/fst.35421.Chlingaryan, A., Sukkarieh, S., Whelan, B., 2018. Machine learning approaches for cropyield prediction and nitrogen status estimation in precision agriculture: A review.Comput. Electron. Agric. 151, 61–69.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compag.2018.05.012 . Cubric, M., 2020. Drivers, barriers and social considerations for AI adoption in businessand management: A tertiary study. Technol. Soc. 62, 101257. https://doi.org/10. 1016/j.techsoc.2020.101257. da Silva, S.V., Antonio, N., de Carvalho, J.C., 2017. Analysis of the service dominant logicnetwork, authors, and articles. Serv. Ind. J. 37 (2), 125 –152.https://doi.org/10.1080/ 02642069.2017.1297801.Del Borghi, A., Gallo, M., Strazza, C., Del Borghi, M., 2014. An evaluation of environmentalsustainability in the food industry through life cycle assessment: the case study of to-mato products supply chain. J. Clean. Prod. 78, 121 –130.https://doi.org/10.1016/j. jclepro.2014.04.083.Deo, R.C.,Şahin, M., 2015. Application of the extreme learning machine algorithm for theprediction of monthly Effective Drought Index in eastern Australia. Atmospheric Res153, 512–525.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.atmosres.2014.10.016 . Díaz, S., Carta, J.A., Castañeda, A., 2020. In ﬂuence of the variation of meteorological and operational parameters on estimation of the power output of a wind farm with activepower control. Renew. Energy 159, 812 –826.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.renene.2020. 05.187.Diedrichs, A.L., Bromberg, F., Dujovne, D., Brun-Laguna, K., Watteyne, T., 2018. Predictionof frost events using machine learning and IoT sensing devices. IEEE Internet Things J.5 (6), 4589–4597.https://doi.org/10.1109/JIOT.2018.2867333 . Dong, W., Wu, T., Luo, J., Sun, Y., Xia, L., 2019. Land parcel-based digital soil mapping ofsoil nutrient properties in an alluvial-diluvia plain agricultural area in China.Geoderma 340, 234–248.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.geoderma.2019.01.018 . Du, C.-J., Sun, D.-W., 2006. Learning techniques used in computer vision for food qualityevaluation: a review. J. Food Eng. 72 (1), 39 –55.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfoodeng. 2004.11.017.Duro, D.C., Franklin, S.E., Dubé, M.G., 2012. A comparison of pixel-based and object-basedimage analysis with selected machine learning algorithms for the classi ﬁcation of ag- ricultural landscapes using SPOT-5 HRG imagery. Remote Sens. Environ. 118,259–272.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rse.2011.11.020 . Eastwood, C.R., Edwards, J.P., Turner, J.A., 2021. Review: anticipating alternative trajecto-ries for responsible agriculture 4.0 innovation in livestock systems. Animal 15,100296.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.animal.2021.100296 . Eli-Chukwu, N.C., 2019. Applications of Arti ﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture: A Review. Eng. Technol. Appl. Sci. Res. 9, 4377 –4383.https://doi.org/10.48084/etasr.2756 . Escamilla-Fajardo, P., Núñez-Pomar, J.M., Ratten, V., Crespo, J., 2020. Entrepreneurshipand innovation in soccer: web of science Bibliometric analysis. Sustainability 12(11), 4499.https://doi.org/10.3390/su12114499 . Escamilla-García, A., Soto-Zarazúa, G.M., Toledano-Ayala, M., Rivas-Araiza, E., Gastélum-Barrios, A., 2020. Applications of arti ﬁcial neural networks in greenhouse technology and overview for smart agriculture development. Appl. Sci. 10 (11), 3835. https://doi. org/10.3390/app10113835. Fahimnia, B., Sarkis, J., Davarzani, H., 2015. Green supply chain management: A reviewand bibliometric analysis. Int. J. Prod. Econ. 162, 101
–114.https://doi.org/10.1016/j. ijpe.2015.01.003.Fait, M., Scorrano, P., Mastroleo, G., Cillo, V., Scuotto, V., 2019. A novel view on knowledgesharing in the Agri-food sector. J. Knowl. Manag. 23 (5), 953 –974.https://doi.org/10. 1108/JKM-09-2018-0572.Fan, Y.V., Varbanov, P.S., Kleme š, J.J., Nemet, A., 2018. Process efﬁciency optimisation and integration for cleaner production. J. Clean. Prod. 174, 177 –183.https://doi.org/10. 1016/j.jclepro.2017.10.325. Farooq, S., O’Brien, C., 2015. An action research methodology for manufacturing technol-ogy selection: a supply chain perspective. Prod. Plan. Control 26, 467 –488.https:// doi.org/10.1080/09537287.2014.924599 . Faruk, M., Rahman, M., Hasan, S., 2021. How digital marketing evolved over time: A bib-liometric analysis on scopus database. Heliyon 7 (12), e08603. https://doi.org/10. 1016/j.heliyon.2021.e08603. Fiore, M., Gallo, C., Tsoukatos, E., La Sala, P., 2017. Predicting consumer healthy choices re-garding type 1 wheatﬂour. Br. Food J. 119 (11), 2388 –2405.https://doi.org/10.1108/ BFJ-04-2017-0200.Foley, A.M., Leahy, P.G., Marvuglia, A., McKeogh, E.J., 2012. Current methods and advancesin forecasting of wind power generation. Renew. Energy 37 (1), 1 –8.https://doi.org/ 10.1016/j.renene.2011.05.033. Fosso Wamba, S., Queiroz, M.M., 2021. Responsible arti ﬁcial intelligence as a secret ingre- dient for digital health: Bibliometric analysis, insights, and research directions. Inf.Syst. Front. 1–16.https://doi.org/10.1007/s10796-021-10142-8 . Fountas, S., Mylonas, N., Malounas, I., Rodias, E., Hellmann Santos, C., Pekkeriet, E., 2020.Agricultural Robotics for Field Operations. Sensors 20, E2672. https://doi.org/ 10.3390/s20092672.Freeman, D., Gupta, S., Smith, D.H., Maja, J.M., Robbins, J., Owen, J.S., et al., 2019. Watsonon the farm: using cloud-based arti ﬁcial intelligence to identify early indicators of water stress. Remote Sens. 11 (22), 2645. https://doi.org/10.3390/rs11222645 . Ganeshkumar, C., Jena, S.K., Sivakumar, A., Nambirajan, T., 2021. Arti ﬁcial intelligence in agricultural value chain: review and future directions. J. Agribusin. Dev. Emerg.Econ.https://doi.org/10.1108/JADEE-07-2020-0140 ahead-of-print(ahead-of-print). García, R., Aguilar, J., Toro, M., Pinto, A., Rodríguez, P., 2020. A systematic literature reviewon the use of machine learning in precision livestock farming. Comput. Electron.Agric. 179, 105826.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compag.2020.105826 . Garﬁeld, E., 1990.KeyWords plus-ISI’s breakthrough retrieval method. 1. Expanding your searching power on current-contents on diskette. Curr. Cont. 32, 5 –9.A. Rejeb, K. Rejeb, S. Zailani et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 6 (2022) 111 –128
125Ge, L., Hang, R., Liu, Y., Liu, Q., 2018. Comparing the performance of neural network anddeep convolutional neural network in estimating soil moisture from satellite obser-vations. Remote Sens. 10 (9), 1327. https://doi.org/10.3390/rs10091327 . González-Serrano, M.H., Jones, P., Llanos-Contrera, O., 2019. An overview of sport entre-preneurshipﬁeld: a bibliometric analysis of the articles published in the web of sci-ence. Sport Soc.https://doi.org/10.1080/17430437.2019.1607307 Accessed 8 May 2022.Goodarzian, F., Shishebori, D., Bahrami, F., Abraham, A., & Appolloni, A. (2021). Hybridmeta-heuristic algorithms for optimising a sustainable agricultural supply chain net-work considering CO2 emissions and water consumption. Int. J. Syst. Sci. Operat.Logist., 0(0), 1–30. doi:https://doi.org/10.1080/23302674.2021.2009932 . Govindan, R., Al-Ansari, T., 2019. Computational decision framework for enhancing resil-ience of the energy, water and food nexus in risky environments. Renew. Sust. Energ.Rev. 112, 653–668.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2019.06.015 . Guillén, M.A., Llanes, A., Imbernón, B., Martínez-España, R., Bueno-Crespo, A., Cano, J.-C.,Cecilia, J.M., 2021. Performance evaluation of edge-computing platforms for the pre-diction of low temperatures in agriculture using deep learning. J. Supercomput. 77,818–840.https://doi.org/10.1007/s11227-020-03288-w . Hassoun, A., Aït-Kaddour, A., Abu-Mahfouz, A.M., Rathod, N.B., Bader, F., Barba, F.J., et al.,2022. The fourth industrial revolution in the food industry —Part I: Industry 4.0 tech- nologies. Crit. Rev. Food Sci. Nutr., 1 –17.https://doi.org/10.1080/10408398.2022. 2034735.Heggemann, T., Welp, G., Amelung, W., Angst, G., Franz, S.O., Koszinski, S., et al., 2017.Proximal gamma-ray spectrometry for site-independent in situ prediction of soil tex-ture on ten heterogeneousﬁelds in Germany using support vector machines. Soil Till-age Res. 168, 99–109.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.still.2016.10.008 . Hemming, S., Righini, I., de Zwart, F., Elings, A., 2020. Remote control of greenhouse cu-cumber production with artiﬁcial intelligence–results from theﬁrst international autonomous greenhouse challenge. Acta Hortic, 987 –996.https://doi.org/10.17660/ ActaHortic.2020.1296.125. Herrera-Franco, G., Montalván-Burbano, N., Carrión-Mero, P., Apolo-Masache, B.,Jaya-Montalvo, M., 2020. Research trends in Geotourism: A bibliometric analysisusing the Scopus database. Geosciences 10 (10), 379. https://doi.org/10.3390/ geosciences10100379.Holt, D., 1978. Potentials for Arti ﬁcial Intelligence and Supercomputers in Soil Science. Future Developments in Soil Science Research. John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, pp. 459 –468 https://doi.org/10.2136/1987.futuredevelopmentssoil.c49 . Jha, K., Doshi, A., Patel, P., Shah, M., 2019. A comprehensive review on automation inagriculture using artiﬁcial intelligence. Artif. Intell. Agric. 2, 1 –12.https://doi.org/ 10.1016/j.aiia.2019.05.004. Jimenez, A.-F., Cardenas, P.-F., Jimenez, F., Ruiz-Canales, A., López, A., 2020. A cyber-physical intelligent agent for irrigation scheduling in horticultural crops. Comput.Electron. Agric. 178, 105777.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compag.2020.105777 . Jung, D.-H., Kim, N.Y., Moon, S.H., Jhin, C., Kim, H.-J., Yang, J.-S., et al., 2021. Deep learning-based cattle vocal classiﬁcation model and real-time livestock monitoring systemwith noise
ﬁltering. Animals 11 (2), 357.https://doi.org/10.3390/ani11020357 . Kamarudin, M.H., Ismail, Z.H., Saidi, N.B., 2021. Deep learning sensor fusion in plant waterstress assessment: A comprehensive review. Appl. Sci. 11 (4), 1403. https://doi.org/ 10.3390/app11041403.Kamilaris, A., Prenafeta-Boldú, F.X., 2018. Deep learning in agriculture: A survey. Comput.Electron. Agric. 147, 70–90.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compag.2018.02.016 . Kapoor, K.K., Tamilmani, K., Rana, N.P., Patil, P., Dwivedi, Y.K., Nerur, S., 2018. Advances insocial media research: past, present and future. Inf. Syst. Front. 20 (3), 531 –558. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10796-017-9810-y . Khoshnevisan, B., Raﬁee, S., Omid, M., Mousazadeh, H., Shamshirband, S., Hamid, S.H.A.,2015. Developing a fuzzy clustering model for better energy use in farm managementsystems. Renew. Sust. Energ. Rev. 48, 27 –34.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2015.03. 029.Kling-Eveillard, F., Allain, C., Boivin, X., Courboulay, V., Créach, P., Philibert, A., et al., 2020.Farmers’representations of the effects of precision livestock farming on human-animal relationships. Livest. Sci. 238, 104057. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.livsci.2020. 104057.Kollia, I., Stevenson, J., Kollias, S., 2021. AI-enabled ef ﬁcient and safe food supply chain. Electronics 10 (11), 1223.https://doi.org/10.3390/electronics10111223 . Kugler, L., 2022.Artiﬁcial intelligence, machine learning, and the ﬁght against world hun- ger. Commun. ACM 65 (2), 17 –19. Kussul, N., Lavreniuk, M., Skakun, S., Shelestov, A., 2017. Deep learning classi ﬁcation of land cover and crop types using remote sensing data. IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens.Lett. 14 (5), 778–782.https://doi.org/10.1109/LGRS.2017.2681128 . Kuzmanovski, V., Trajanov, A., Leprince, F., D žeroski, S., Debeljak, M., 2015. Modeling water outﬂow from tile-drained agricultural ﬁelds. Sci. Total Environ. 505, 390 –401. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2014.10.009 . Le Bars, M., Attonaty, J.M., 2001. A multi-agent system to the common management of arenewable resource: application to water sharing. Proceedings 13th IEEE Interna-tional Conference on Tools with Arti ﬁcial Intelligence. ICTAI 2001 , pp. 42 –49 Pre- sented at the Proceedings 13th IEEE International Conference on Tools withArtiﬁcial Intelligence. ICTAI 2001.https://doi.org/10.1109/ICTAI.2001.974447 . Lenain, R., Thuilot, B., Cariou, C., Martinet, P., 2006. High accuracy path tracking for vehi-cles in presence of sliding: Application to farm vehicle automatic guidance for agri-cultural tasks. Auton. Robots 21, 79 –97.https://doi.org/10.1007/s10514-006-7806-4 . Lezoche, M., Hernandez, J.E., del Alemany Díaz, M.M.E., Panetto, H., Kacprzyk, J., 2020.Agri-food 4.0: A survey of the supply chains and technologies for the future agricul-ture. Comput. Ind. 117, 103187. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compind.2020.103187 . Liakos, K.G., Busato, P., Moshou, D., Pearson, S., Bochtis, D., 2018a. Machine learning inagriculture: a review. Sensors 18 (8), 2674. https://doi.org/10.3390/s18082674 .Liakos, K.G., Busato, P., Moshou, D., Pearson, S., Bochtis, D., 2018b. Machine learning in ag-riculture: a review. Sensors 18 (8), 2674. https://doi.org/10.3390/s18082674 . Lillford, P., Hermansson, A.-M., 2021. Global missions and the critical needs of food sci-ence and technology. Trends Food Sci. Technol. 111, 800 –811.https://doi.org/10. 1016/j.tifs.2020.04.009.Lin, Y.-B., Lin, Y.-W., Lin, J.-Y., Hung, H.-N., 2019. SensorTalk: an IoT device failure detec-tion and calibration mechanism for smart farming. Sensors 19 (21), 4788. https:// doi.org/10.3390/s19214788. Liu, C., Cao, Y., Luo, Y., Chen, G., Vokkarane, V., Yunsheng, M., et al., 2018. A new deeplearning-based food recognition system for dietary assessment on an edge computingservice infrastructure. IEEE Trans. Serv. Comput. 11 (2), 249 –261.https://doi.org/10. 1109/TSC.2017.2662008.Lova Raju, K., Vijayaraghavan, V., 2020. IoT technologies in agricultural environment: asurvey. Wirel. Pers. Commun. 113 (4), 2415 –2446.https://doi.org/10.1007/s11277- 020-07334-x.Ma, L., Li, M., Ma, X., Cheng, L., Du, P., Liu, Y., 2017. A review of supervised object-basedland-cover image classiﬁcation. ISPRS J. Photogramm. Remote Sens. 130, 277 –293. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.isprsjprs.2017.06.001 . Mangla, S.K., Luthra, S., Rich, N., Kumar, D., Rana, N.P., Dwivedi, Y.K., 2018. Enablers to im-plement sustainable initiatives in Agri-food supply chains. Int. J. Prod. Econ. 203,379–393.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpe.2018.07.012 . Manogaran, G., Alazab, M., Muhammad, K., de Albuquerque, V.H.C., 2021. Smart sensingbased functional control for reducing uncertainties in agricultural farm data analysis.IEEE Sensors Journal, 21(16), 17469 –17478. Presented at the IEEE Sensors Journal https://doi.org/10.1109/JSEN.2021.3054561 . Marvin, H.J.P., van Asselt, E., Kleter, G., Meijer, N., Lorentzen, G., Johansen, L.-H., et al.,2020. Expert-driven methodology to assess and predict the effects of drivers ofchange on vulnerabilities in a food supply chain: aquaculture of Atlantic salmon inNorway as a showcase. Trends Food Sci. Technol. 103, 49 –56.https://doi.org/10. 1016/j.tifs.2020.06.022.Milan, M., Maroso, F., Dalla Rovere, G., Carraro, L., Ferraresso, S., Patarnello, T., et al., 2019.Tracing seafood at high spatial resolution using NGS-generated data and machinelearning: comparing microbiome versus SNPs. Food Chem. 286, 413 –420.https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.foodchem.2019.02.037 . Mishra, D., Luo, Z., Jiang, S., Papadopoulos, T., Dubey, R., 2017. A bibliographic study on bigdata: concepts, trends and challenges. Bus. Process. Manag. J. 23 (3), 555 –573. https://doi.org/10.1108/BPMJ-10-2015-0149 . Mishra, M., Sudarsan, D., Santos, C.A.G., Mishra, S.K., Kar, D., Baral, K., Pattnaik, N., 2021. Anoverview of research on natural resources and indigenous communities: a bibliomet-ric analysis based on Scopus database (1979 –2020). Environ. Monit. Assess. 193 (2), 59.https://doi.org/10.1007/s10661-020-08793-2 . Mitchell, T.M., Hutchinson, R., Niculescu, R.S., Pereira, F., Wang, X., Just, M., Newman, S.,2004. Learning to decode cognitive states from brain images. Mach. Learn. 57 (1),145–175.https://doi.org/10.1023/B:MACH.0000035475.85309.1b . Mithun Ali, S., Moktadir, Md.A., Kabir, G., Chakma, J., Rumi, Md.J.U., Islam, Md.T., 2019.Framework for evaluating risks in food supply chain: implications in food wastage re-duction. J. Clean. Prod. 228, 786 –800.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2019.04.322 . Mohanty, S.P., Hughes, D.P., Salathé, M., 2016. Using deep learning for image-based plantdisease detection. Front. Plant Sci. 7. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpls.2016.01419 .
Mor, S., Madan, S., Prasad, K.D., 2021. Arti ﬁcial intelligence and carbon footprints: roadmap for Indian agriculture. Strateg. Chang. 30 (3), 269 –280.https://doi.org/10. 1002/jsc.2409.Mostafa, M.M., 2020. A knowledge domain visualization review of thirty years of halalfood research: themes, trends and knowledge structure. Trends Food Sci. Technol.99, 660–677.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tifs.2020.03.022 . Nabavi-Pelesaraei, A., Raﬁee, S., Mohtasebi, S.S., Hosseinzadeh-Bandbafha, H., Chau, K.,2018. Integration of artiﬁcial intelligence methods and life cycle assessment to pre-dict energy output and environmental impacts of paddy production. Sci. Total Envi-ron. 631–632, 1279–1294.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2018.03.088 . Navarro, E., Costa, N., Pereira, A., 2020. A systematic review of IoT solutions for smartfarming. Sensors 20 (15), 4231. https://doi.org/10.3390/s20154231 . Neupane, J., Guo, W., 2019. Agronomic basis and strategies for precision water manage-ment: a review. Agronomy 9 (2), 87. https://doi.org/10.3390/agronomy9020087 . Pantazi, X.E., Moshou, D., Alexandridis, T., Whetton, R.L., Mouazen, A.M., 2016. Wheatyield prediction using machine learning and advanced sensing techniques. Comput.Electron. Agric. C(121), 57 –65.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compag.2015.11.018 . Patrício, D.I., Rieder, R., 2018. Computer vision and arti ﬁcial intelligence in precision agri- culture for grain crops: a systematic review. Comput. Electron. Agric. 153, 69 –81. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compag.2018.08.001 . Paulikienė, S., Venslauskas, K., Raila, A., Žvirdauskienė, R., Naujokienė,V . ,2 0 2 0 .T h ei nﬂu- ence of ozone technology on reduction of carrot loss and environmental IMPACT.J. Clean. Prod. 244, 118734.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2019.118734 . Pérez-Ruíz, M., Slaughter, D.C., Fathallah, F.A., Gliever, C.J., Miller, B.J., 2014. Co-roboticintra-row weed control system. Biosyst. Eng. 126, 45 –55.https://doi.org/10.1016/j. biosystemseng.2014.07.009. Piwowar-Sulej, K., Krzywonos, M., Kwil, I., 2021. Environmental entrepreneurship –Bib- liometric and content analysis of the subject literature based on H-Core. J. Clean.Prod. 295, 126277.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2021.126277 . Pydipati, R., Burks, T.F., Lee, W.S., 2006. Identi ﬁcation of citrus disease using color texture features and discriminant analysis. Comput. Electron. Agric. 52 (1), 49 –59.https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.compag.2006.01.004 . Qazi, A.A., Appolloni, A., 2022. A systematic review on barriers and enablers toward circu-lar procurement management. Sustain. Product. Consumpt. 33, 343 –359.https://doi. org/10.1016/j.spc.2022.07.013 . Qazi, S., Khawaja, B.A., Farooq, Q.U., 2022. IoT-equipped and AI-enabled next generationsmart agriculture: a critical review, current challenges and future trends. IEEE Access,A. Rejeb, K. Rejeb, S. Zailani et al.Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 6 (2022) 111 –128
12610, 21219–21235. Presented at the IEEE Access. https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS. 2022.3152544.Qian, J., Dai, B., Wang, B., Zha, Y., Song, Q., 2020. Traceability in food processing: problems,methods, and performance evaluations —a review. Crit. Rev. Food Sci. Nutr., 1 –14 https://doi.org/10.1080/10408398.2020.1825925 . Ragazou, K., Garefalakis, A., Zafeiriou, E., Passas, I., 2022. Agriculture 5.0: a new strategicmanagement mode for a cut cost and an energy ef ﬁcient agriculture sector. Energies 15 (9), 3113.https://doi.org/10.3390/en15093113 . Rejeb, A., Simske, S., Rejeb, K., Treiblmaier, H., Zailani, S., 2020. Internet of things researchin supply chain management and logistics: a Bibliometric analysis. Intern. Things 12(2020), 100318.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.iot.2020.100318 . Rejeb, A., Rejeb, K., Zailani, S., Treiblmaier, H., Hand, K.J., 2021a. Integrating the internet ofthings in the halal food supply chain: a systematic literature review and researchagenda. Intern. Things 13, 100361. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.iot.2021.100361 . Rejeb, A., Treiblmaier, H., Rejeb, K., Zailani, S., 2021b. Blockchain research in healthcare: abibliometric review and current research trends. J. Data Inform. Manag. https://doi. org/10.1007/s42488-021-00046-2 . Rejeb, A., Abdollahi, A., Rejeb, K., Treiblmaier, H., 2022a. Drones in agriculture: a reviewand bibliometric analysis. Comput. Electron. Agric. 198, 107017. https://doi.org/10. 1016/j.compag.2022.107017. Rejeb, A., Keogh, J.G., Rejeb, K., 2022b. Big data in the food supply chain: a literature re-view. J. Data Inform. Manag. 4 (1), 33 –47.https://doi.org/10.1007/s42488-021- 00064-0.Rejeb, A., Rejeb, K., Abdollahi, A., Al-Turjman, F., Treiblmaier, H., 2022c. The interplay be-tween the internet of things and agriculture: a bibliometric analysis and researchagenda. Intern. Things 19, 100580. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.iot.2022.100580 . Rejeb, A., Rejeb, K., Abdollahi, A., Treiblmaier, H., 2022d. The big picture on Instagram re-search: insights from a bibliometric analysis. Telematics Inform. 73, 101876. https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.tele.2022.101876 . Rejeb, A., Rejeb, K., Simske, S., Treiblmaier, H., Zailani, S., 2022e. The big picture on the in-ternet of things and the smart city: a review of what we know and what we need toknow. Intern. Things 19, 100565. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.iot.2022.100565 . Rose, D.C., Chilvers, J., 2018. Agriculture 4.0: broadening responsible innovation in an eraof smart farming. Front. Sustain. Food Syst. 2. https://doi.org/10.3389/fsufs.2018. 00087.Saggi, M.K., Jain, S., 2018. A survey towards an integration of big data analytics to big in-sights for value-creation. Inf. Process. Manag. 54 (5), 758 –790.https://doi.org/10. 1016/j.ipm.2018.01.010.Saleem, M.H., Potgieter, J., Arif, K.M., 2019. Plant disease detection and classi ﬁcation by deep learning. Plants 8 (11), 468. https://doi.org/10.3390/plants8110468 . Sánchez, J.M., Rodríguez, J.P., Espitia, H.E., 2020. Review of arti ﬁcial intelligence applied in decision-making processes in agricultural public policy. Processes 8 (11), 1374.https://doi.org/10.3390/pr8111374 . Scott, S.M., James, D., Ali, Z., 2006. Data analysis for electronic nose systems. Microchim.Acta 156 (3), 183–207.https://doi.org/10.1007/s00604-006-0623-9 . Senocak, A.A., Guner Goren, H., 2022. Forecasting the biomass-based energy potentialusing artiﬁcial intelligence and geographic information systems: a case study. Eng.Sci. Technol. Intern. J. 26, 100992. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jestch.2021.04.011 . Sharma, Rohit, Kamble, S.S., Gunasekaran, A., Kumar, V., Kumar, A., 2020. A systematic lit-
erature review on machine learning applications for sustainable agriculture supplychain performance. Comput. Oper. Res. 119, 104926. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cor. 2020.104926.Sharma, Ruchika, Kumar, N., Sharma, B.B., 2022. Applications of arti ﬁcial intelligence in smart agriculture: a review. In: Singh, P.K., Singh, Y., Kolekar, M.H., Kar, A.K.,Gonçalves, P.J.S. (Eds.), Recent Innovations in Computing. Springer, Singapore,pp. 135–142.https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-16-8248-3_11 . Shendryk, Y., Davy, R., Thorburn, P., 2021. Integrating satellite imagery and environmentaldata to predictﬁeld-level cane and sugar yields in Australia using machine learning.Field Crops Res 260, 107984.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fcr.2020.107984 . Shine, P., Murphy, M.D., 2022. Over 20 years of machine learning applications on dairyfarms: a comprehensive mapping study. Sensors 22 (1), 52. https://doi.org/10. 3390/s22010052.Shonhe, L., 2020. Continuous professional development (CPD) of librarians: a bibliometricanalysis of research productivity viewed through WoS. J. Acad. Librariansh. 46 (2),102106.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.acalib.2019.102106 . Sideratos, G., Hatziargyriou, N.D., 2007. An advanced statistical method for wind powerforecasting. IEEE Trans. Power Syst. 22 (1), 258 –265.https://doi.org/10.1109/ TPWRS.2006.889078.Singh, R., Gehlot, A., Prajapat, M.K., Singh, B., 2021. Arti ﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture. CRC Press, London.https://doi.org/10.1201/9781003245759 . Slaughter, D.C., Giles, D.K., Downey, D., 2008. Autonomous robotic weed control systems:a review. Comput. Electron. Agric. 61 (1), 63 –78.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compag. 2007.05.008.Smetana, S., Aganovic, K., Heinz, V., 2021. Food supply chains as cyber-physical systems: apath for more sustainable personalized nutrition. Food Eng. Rev. 13 (1), 92 –103. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12393-020-09243-y . Spanaki, K., Karaﬁli, E., Despoudi, S., 2021. AI applications of data sharing in agriculture4.0: a framework for role-based data access control. Int. J. Inf. Manag. 59, 102350.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2021.102350 . Syed Ahmed Kabir, I.F., Saﬁyullah, F., Ng, E.Y.K., Tam, V.W.Y., 2020. New analytical wakemodels based on artiﬁcial intelligence and rivalling the benchmark full-rotor CFDpredictions under both uniform and ABL in ﬂows. Energy 193, 116761.https://doi. org/10.1016/j.energy.2019.116761 . Taneja, M., Byabazaire, J., Jalodia, N., Davy, A., Olariu, C., Malone, P., 2020. Machine learn-ing based fog computing assisted data-driven approach for early lameness detectionin dairy cattle. Comput. Electron. Agric. 171, 105286. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. compag.2020.105286.Thomé, A.M.T., Scavarda, L.F., Scavarda, A.J., 2016. Conducting systematic literature reviewin operations management. Prod. Plan. Control 27 (5), 408 –420.https://doi.org/10. 1080/09537287.2015.1129464 . Treiblmaier, H., Rejeb, A., Strebinger, A., 2020. Blockchain as a driver for Smart City devel-opment: applicationﬁelds and a comprehensive research agenda. Smart Cities 3 (3),853–872.https://doi.org/10.3390/smartcities3030044 . Tripodi, P., Nicastro, N., Pane, C., Cammarano, D., Tripodi, P., Nicastro, N., et al., 2022. Dig-ital applications and artiﬁcial intelligence in agriculture toward next-generation plantphenotyping. Crop Past. Sci.https://doi.org/10.1071/CP21387 . Tsolakis, N., Bechtsis, D., Bochtis, D., 2019. AgROS: a robot operating system based emula-tion tool for agricultural robotics. Agronomy 9 (7), 403. https://doi.org/10.3390/ agronomy9070403.Tzachor, A., Devare, M., King, B., Avin, S., Ó hÉigeartaigh, S., 2022. Responsible arti ﬁcial in- telligence in agriculture requires systemic understanding of risks and externalities.Nat. Mach. Intellig. 4 (2), 104 –109.https://doi.org/10.1038/s42256-022-00440-4 . Udendhran, R., Balamurugan, M., 2021. Towards secure deep learning architecture forsmart farming-based applications. Complex Intell. Syst. 7, 659 –666.https://doi.org/ 10.1007/s40747-020-00225-5 . Ünal, Z., 2020. Smart farming becomes even smarter with deep learning —A bibliograph- ical analysis. IEEE Access 8, 105587 –105609.https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2020. 3000175.Valente, J., Sanz Muñoz, D., Cerro Giner, J. del, Rossi, C., Garzón Oviedo, M.A., HernándezVega, J.D., Barrientos Cruz, A., 2011. Techniques for Area Discretization and Coveragein Aerial Photography for Precision Agriculture employing mini quad-rotors, in:Proceedings of RHEA-2011 | RHEA-2011 | 09/09/2011 - 09/09/2011 | Montpellier,France. Presented at the RHEA-2011, E.T.S.I. Industriales (UPM), Montpellier,France, pp. 85–97.van Eck, N.J., Waltman, L., 2011. Text mining and visualization using VOSviewer. arXive-prints, 1109, arXiv:1109.2058.van Eck, N.J., Waltman, L., 2014. Visualizing bibliometric networks. In: Ding, Y., Rousseau,R., Wolfram, D. (Eds.), Measuring Scholarly Impact: Methods and Practice. SpringerInternational Publishing, Cham, pp. 285 –320.https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319- 10377-8_13.Villa-Henriksen, A., Edwards, G.T.C., Pesonen, L.A., Green, O., Sørensen, C.A.G., 2020. Inter-net of Things in arable farming: Implementation, applications, challenges and poten-tial. Biosyst. Eng. 191, 60 –84.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biosystemseng.2019.12.013 . Virnodkar, S.S., Pachghare, V.K., Patil, V.C., Jha, S.K., 2020. Remote sensing and machinelearning for crop water stress determination in various crops: a critical review. Precis.Agric. 21 (5), 1121–1155.https://doi.org/10.1007/s11119-020-09711-9 . Wang, B., Pan, S.-Y., Ke, R.-Y., Wang, K., Wei, Y.-M., 2014. An overview of climate changevulnerability: a bibliometric analysis based on web of science database. Nat. Hazards74 (3), 1649–1666.https://doi.org/10.1007/s11069-014-1260-y . Wang, H.Z., Wang, G.B., Li, G.Q., Peng, J.C., Liu, Y.T., 2016. Deep belief network based deter-ministic and probabilistic wind speed forecasting approach. Appl. Energy 182, 80 –93. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2016.08.108 . Wang, H., Li, G., Wang, G., Peng, J., Jiang, H., Liu, Y., 2017. Deep learning based ensembleapproach for probabilistic wind power forecasting. Appl. Energy 188, 56 –70. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2016.11.111 . Weiss, M., Jacob, F., Duveiller, G., 2020. Remote sensing for agricultural applications:a meta-review. Remote S Environ. 236, 111402. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rse. 2019.111402.Wiangkham, A., Ariyarit, A., Aengchuan, P., 2022. Prediction of the in ﬂuence of loading rate and sugarcane leaves concentration on fracture toughness of sugarcane leavesand epoxy composite using arti ﬁcial intelligence. Theor. Appl. Fract. Mech. 117, 103188.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tafmec.2021.103188 . Wolfert, S., Ge, L., Verdouw, C., Bogaardt, M.-J., 2017. Big data in smart farming
–ar e v i e w . Agric. Syst. 153, 69–80.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.agsy.2017.01.023 . Xavier, L.C.P., da Silva, S.M.O., Carvalho, T.M.N., Pontes Filho, J.D., de Souza Filho, F.A., 2020.Use of machine learning in evaluation of drought perception in irrigated agriculture:the case of an irrigated perimeter in Brazil. Water 12 (6), 1546. https://doi.org/10. 3390/w12061546.Xiong, J., Thenkabail, P.S., Gumma, M.K., Teluguntla, P., Poehnelt, J., Congalton, R.G., et al.,2017. Automated cropland mapping of continental Africa using Google Earth enginecloud computing. ISPRS J. Photogramm. Remote Sens. 126, 225 –244.https://doi.org/ 10.1016/j.isprsjprs.2017.01.019 . Xu, B., Wang, W., Guo, L., Chen, G., Wang, Y., Zhang, W., Li, Y., 2021. Evaluation of deeplearning for automatic multi-view face detection in cattle. Agriculture 11 (11),1062.https://doi.org/10.3390/agriculture11111062 . Yingjie, S., Cuicui, L., Junxian, L., 2018. Quality and safety traceability system of agriculturalproducts based on multi-agent. J. Intell. Fuzzy Syst. 35 (3), 2731 –2740.https://doi. org/10.3233/JIFS-169625.Yu, J., Zhang, X., Xu, L., Dong, J., Zhangzhong, L., 2021. A hybrid CNN-GRU model forpredicting soil moisture in maize root zone. Agric. Water Manag. 245, 106649.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.agwat.2020.106649 . Zakir, A.Q., Singhal, A., Singh, G., Pandey, P., Sankaranarayanan, S., 2021. Soil utilisation prediction for farmers using machine learning. Int. J. Sustain. Agric. Manag. Inform.7 (1), 67–75.Zavala-Alcívar, A., Verdecho, M.-J., Alfaro-Saiz, J.-J., 2020. Assessing and selecting sustain-able and resilient suppliers in agri-food supply chains using arti ﬁcial intelligence: a short review. In: Camarinha-Matos, L.M., Afsarmanesh, H., Ortiz, A. (Eds.), BoostingCollaborative Networks 4.0. Springer International Publishing, Cham, pp. 501 –510 https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-62412-5_41 . Zhang, L., Zhong, Y., Geng, Y., 2019. A bibliometric and visual study on urban mining.J. Clean. Prod. 239, 118067.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2019.118067 .A. Rejeb, K. Rejeb, S. Zailani et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 6 (2022) 111 –128
127Zhang, X., Cao, Z., Dong, W., 2020. Overview of edge computing in the agricultural inter-net of things: key technologies, applications, challenges. IEEE Access 8,141748–141761.https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2020.3013005 . Zhao, Y., Gong, L., Huang, Y., Liu, C., 2016. A review of key techniques of vision-based con-trol for harvesting robot. Comput. Electron. Agric. 127, 311 –323.https://doi.org/10. 1016/j.compag.2016.06.022. Zhong, Z., Li, J., Luo, Z., Chapman, M., 2018. Spectral –spatial residual network for hyperspectral image classi ﬁcation: a 3-D deep learning framework. IEEETrans. Geosci. Remote Sens. 56 (2), 847 –858.https://doi.org/10.1109/TGRS. 2017.2755542.Z h o u ,Y . ,X i a ,Q . ,Z h a n g ,Z . ,Q u a n ,M . ,L i ,H . ,2 0 2 1 .A r t i ﬁcial intelligence and machine learning for the green development of agriculture in the emerging manufactur-ing industry in the IoT platform. Acta Agriculturae Scandinavica, Section B — Soil & Plant Sciencehttps://doi.org/10.1080/09064710.2021.2008482 Accessed 8 May 2022.A. Rejeb, K. Rejeb, S. Zailani et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 6 (2022) 111 –128
128