 AASRI Procedia   3  ( 2012 )  101 – 106 
2212-6716 © 2012 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. Selection and/or peer review under responsibility of American Applied Science Research Institutedoi: 10.1016/j.aasri.2012.11.018 
 
2012 AASRI Conference on Modelling, Identification and Control 
Exploration and Reflection of the Design Models of Computerized Testing 
Chanjuan Liu1, a*, Jiaxia Li2,b 
Department of Basic Courses, Shandong University of Science and Technology, Taian, China 271019  
Abstract 
With the development and popularization of the internet technology, Computerized or Computer-Based Testing CBT  which help to improve the efficiency of evaluation and then to assess objectively and accurately
 will gradually replace the traditional paper-based exam in many ways.  This article focuses on four basic design factors
test format 
presentation of test items  the ability estimation and performance report. In practical applications, design of the examination is to optimize the design of these four basic components, to maximize the advantages of the computer and to meet requirements of tests. 
 © 2012 Published by Elsevier B.V. Selection and/or peer review under responsibility of American Applied Science Research Institute  
Keywords Computerized Testing. Test library. Adaptive testing .Design patterns 
 
 
* Chanjuan Liu, Jiaxia Li Tel 0086+538 3076263  Fax0086+538 3076263  echochanjuan@sina.com,lijiaxia@126.com 
 
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
© 2012 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. Selection and/or peer review under responsibility of American Applied Science Research Institute Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.102   Chanjuan Liu and Jiaxia Li  /  AASRI Procedia   3  ( 2012 )  101 – 106 
1. Introduction 1.1. The development 
advantages and characteristics of Computer-Based Testing Hambleton (2004), the test methods and computer technology  develop so fast that it is not easy to predict the future development of educational and psychological testing. But there is no doubt that in the next 20 years, more examinations will be carried out by comp uters. Application of computer technology has prompted the changes of examination in many ways, for exampl e: Test design develops from the linearity (all candidates take the same tests) to the nonlinearity (the  level of the test item adaptive to candidate's ability); from the traditional multiple  choice questions to th e constructive type ; Because the automatic scoring technology for subjective questions are  in rapid developm ent ,cognitive ability as the core of the examination achieve a higher level; Evaluation of the examination introduced procedural parameters, such as: time in response, the answer sequence and modificatio n time with more flexible organization.  Computer-Based Testing research began in the 1970s , matured and then was really applied to the examination practice in the 1990s. Several universities in Europe in 1996 jointly developed European diagnostic language evaluation system-DIALANG which covers 14 European languages, being free of charge and open to Chinese learners. TOEFL_CBT 1998 developed into the TOEFL 
  IBT in2005 .GMAT and GRE in 1998 and 1999 began to implement a computerized exam. In 2004, Guangdong province launched the computerized English test for College Entrance Examination. In 2009, CET Band -4 and Band -6 were taken in some colleges and universities, as well as English listening and speaking test reform occurred in Guangdong Province. In 2011, an annual exam of more than 60 national higher education adults to apply for graduate examination were given on line. 2. The review and present situation of CBT technology Four advantages of CBT are: Use of innovative test items, adaptive testing process, ability estimation and diagnostic information of test performance. It is necessar y to re-recognize and give full play to the advantages and features of the CBT to solve the possible problems of the conventional paper and pencil tests, such as: improving the reliability and validity to reduce the risk  of examinations, and increasing the organizational efficiency 2.1. Application of innovative test items One of the advantages of the CBT is that it can improve the reliability and validity of the exam through the application of innovative test items, which encompass many innovations from five dimensions:  1) Item format, refer to the type of test reaction obtained from the candidate. The two main formats are selected response and constructed response; The multiple-choice questions are one of the most common questions in the exam format .Multiple-choice questions require candidates to select the best answer from of 2-5 ones in pen and paper exams. Questions in this  format in the computerized exam can increase the alternatives or to provide a more direct test method to redu ce the degree of speculation, such as the candidates click to read sentence in a short passage or part of co mplex graphics. Another example is in the test of writing skills, candidates are required to face one article co ntaining some of the syntax errors but mislabeled. Candidates consider where necessary to modify and point to wrong location with a mobile key point, then the computer display the options to choose from or to give  up. There are other multiple-choice formats which are used in the traditional pen and paper exam and easily tr ansplanted to the computer. Candidates are allowed to repeatedly select to answer and final score is based on total number of selections if timely feedback is correct. 2) Response action refers to the means of candidate s to provide answers. The most common reaction is that candidates use a pencil in the corresponding position to make the selection or coat with an oval in the 103  Chanjuan Liu and Jiaxia Li  /  AASRI Procedia   3  ( 2012 )  101 – 106 
computerized exam. It mainly includes the keyboard and mouse click. The examinee can use the mouse to click on a position in the text or graphic article; Highlight text or graphics
Drag text digital or graph to the specified location or order, etc. In addition to the ke yboard and mouse, there are other input devices such as touch screen, fluorescence pen, track ball and joystick microphone such as using the microphone to collect oral response etc. 3) The introduction of media, refers to the non-text  components  added to the test, including images, motion pictures ,audio and video; The most important be nefits to introduce media for measuring  is perhaps extending the coverage of test content and cognitive skills ; increasing the non-text media  and improving the situation of task and validity of examination  to reduce the dependency on reading skills       4) Interactivity level: It means to what extent do test items respond to to input of the examinees .Most of the computerized examination papers are non-interactive , such as candidates clicking on the mouse to make the selection to complete the problem solving process. But there are also some of the limited interactions applied to computerized examination papers with relat ively small highly interactive tests. There is an interactive combination of two or more steps of bran ch functions, e.g. a workshop is in conflict, the candidate's task is to resolve it. First step in this application is display of video images of the workshop conflict, and then the multiple-choice questions are relate d to how to resolve conflicts. Once candidates have selected an option, the second video scene related is on display .This assessment used a two-stage interactive branch level, which can be applied in computerized speaking test. 5) Scoring methods are how to quantify the examinees' responses. There have been some ready automatic scoring software like PEG, Erater intelligent engineer , assessor ,inquizit, standards of which are quite different from each other. some consider simply th e shallow characteristics while others apply theory of advanced computational linguistics and methods. They  are all similar to people and can act the role as markers and examiners These five dimensions are independent. However, in  most circumstances, the innovation test can only reflect one or two dimensions. 2.2. Other advantages include: 1 More flexible time. 2 The implementation of standardized organizational process. 3 Automatic rating processes. 4 Immediate feedbacks on exam results. 5 A more detailed feed back. 6 Diagnostic analyses provided for test behavior of the candidates. 7 First-hand research data collected for the research. 8 Cost-saving. 9 A more humanized environment. CBT provide special technical support for people with disabilities, for example: to provide large-print or hearing aid, and provide other input devices for the visually-impaired candidates with writing difficulties.  From the above discussion, we have seen many poten tial advantages of computerized exams, but design and organization of computerized test which can truly reflect these will encounter challenges from many aspects.  Like paper and pencil tests, the most important factor to consider in the design concerns reliability and validity issues. The following are unique factors affe cting the reliability and validity of computerized examinations. 104   Chanjuan Liu and Jiaxia Li  /  AASRI Procedia   3  ( 2012 )  101 – 106 
3. Design Issues of the CBT  3.1. The basic constitutes of test mode. From paper and pencil exam to a CBT, the first co nsideration is the TEST model. Any computer based testing includes item bank ,answer, ability estimate, judgment, and score reporting  In addition, the design must in accordance with the following purposes:1)How  to select questions from the bank?2)How students answer questions?3)How the computer assess students
 answers?4)How many of the questions students need to answer before computerized exam end?5)How to  report results after the examination is over? The development of the computerized exam basicall y revolves around these six integral parts and the theoretical basis of the computerized exam is mainly de rived from measurement theory. Classical True Score Model, CTS) (Item Response Theory, IRT) are the two more popular me asurement theories,  3.2. The examination type  Different  types of computerized exams can have various forms of organization and implementation ,the commonly used  include computerized fixed tests (CFT), automate test of assembly,(ATA),computerized adaptive  Test, (CAT)and computerized classification Test ,(CCT) The following  is focused on one of them. 3.2.1 Computerized adaptive test Computerized fixed tests and automatic spell volumes test described above can not meet the individual needs of those examinations. However, computerized adaptive testing (referred to as CAT) select the appropriate questions for different candidates. The selection of the 
response, which is the way CAT operates. Namely, when each candidates answer a question, the computer re-estimate its ability, as well as choose the one suitable for it until the measurement accuracy reach a predefined level. In computerized test, the number of test items, te st order may be different due to different candidates and, but each assessment are based on the item response theory   to estimate potential in the same scale. There are several common design patterns of compu terized adaptive testing: The two stage test, Error - controlled tests, variable 
branching tests and step ladder tests. Chart 1summarized the similarities and differences of the six modes.   CAT model contrast                                                              
Modes Start-up project  Project selection rules  Ability estimation methods   Rules to terminate 
The two stage test      Ability estimate of every candidate in the established practice testing model Maximum test information function Average difficulty scoring method   Test information function 
Step ladder tests  Random item in the middle area   To move up and down According to the item response in each area   Maximum likelihood value calculation Right number of item a certain of domain   
Variable 
branching tests Item of Medium difficulty   Impairment According to the constants --- Fixed quantity 105  Chanjuan Liu and Jiaxia Li  /  AASRI Procedia   3  ( 2012 )  101 – 106 
Error   -controlled tests1  --- The difficulty of the item matching the examinees ability --- Standard error of the measurement   
 The implementation of two-step tests is in two stages Firstly, all candidates participate in routine test and then secondly the optimizing test .To begin with ,optimizing test estimates of the ability of the candidates in the first stage and computer select the most optimized test items for each candidate, rules of which are  to provide maximum test information with the least items. The maximum amount of information is also used as the termination principle; the average difficulty score method is the way to estimate ability (Weiss, 1974). Degree of difficulty show s each candidate's ability to answer all of the questions correctly .In the error control test mode, due to the transformation of the in itial project and the project selection in the actual operation of this model, there are three variations of which basic steps are exactly the same. Variable branching start from a moderately difficult project selec tion, the general principle is that candidates answered all the items if the answer is correct, otherwise go from  the easier to the more difficult projects. Maximum likelihood estimation methods are used to estimate stud ents' abilities. .The above-described are four basic model of machine variants, using different methods to accomplish essential parts in the CAT. 4. Conclusion 4.1. Errors and misconception  It is important to have a correct understanding  that computerized testing is a trend, which is to achieve the individualization and (diagnostic), provide the adaptive ex amination of intelligence, to meet the learners life- long education demand in recent years, many examinations began to demonstrate feasibility However, in this process, many misconception exist . 1 Computerized exam is taken for paper and pencil exams computerized.  2 Computer Technology determines the development of the computerized exam. 3 Taking test set as test bank. 4 The computerized exam can simplify the work of the Examination. The test problem In the design of the computerized exam, we must fully consider what factors may influence test behavior, especially the fairness of the examination, for examp le, whether every candidate are given equal opportunities for training and the same learning resources. Other problems include emotional attitude, proficiency in computer operating user interface software design, rest rictions of the examination task, and the psychological state of the candidates in the exam. 4.2.1Organization is one of the important concerns in the development of computerized examination. The following may some of the major encountered problems in the examination: 1Examination venues: choice of the examination venues include: number of seats and computers, security, test data storage and transmission. Some exam may also be limited by the software which can be used the examination process. For the same exam, all examina tion venues must be consistent in soft, hardware. 2The candidates must be able to know relevant information of the examination room in advance. 3Security of test items and examination process, such as  examination fraud, hacker attacks. Input costs, the candidates are required to bear the cost. 4The examination time of each test and frequency of test organized. Annual frequency   of computerized exam depends on (1)The number of candidates (2) Number of computers 106   Chanjuan Liu and Jiaxia Li  /  AASRI Procedia   3  ( 2012 )  101 – 106 
(3)Time use and other issues also need to be seriously considered.  (4)Choice of examiners requires a rigorous process; Difference between them and the organization of the traditional pen and paper exam must be able to manage, or even be able to solve emergency problems. References [1] Hamston,R.K. Theory methods and practices in the testing for the 21st century. [J], 2004,16(4):696-701 [2] Folk VG. Smith RL Models for Delivery of CBTs 2002 [3] Luecht, RM and Clauser, BE. Test models for complex computer based testing. [A] In C.N. Mils M.T. Potenza, J.J. Framer and W.C. Ward, Computer-based Testing: Building the foundation for future assessments [C]. Hillsdale, N.J: Lawrence Erlbaum Assicates, 2002 [4] Weiss DJ and Kingsbury, G.G. Application of computer ized adaptive testing to educational problems. [J] Journal of Educational Measurements, 1984, 4; 361-375 [5] ZENGYONG- qiang,Some Basic Considerations  into the Computer -based Testing
[J]Computer Assisted Foreign language Education 2010(1) 
in Chinese) [6] ZENGYONG- qiang,Design Models of Computer Adaptive Test [J] Foreign Language Teaching and Research 1992
2 19-22 in Chinese). 
 
 