 AASRI Procedia   4  ( 2013 )  190 – 195 
2212-6716 © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
Selection and/or peer review under responsibility of American Applied Science Research Institute
doi: 10.1016/j.aasri.2013.10.029 ScienceDirect
2013 AASRI Conference on Intelligent Systems and Control 
Formulation Process of Knowledge for an Expert Healthcare 
System Unit 
Kenedy Greysona*, Mathew Mburumaa, Nsatusile Nzowaa, Frank Mbanoa, Georgia 
Rugumiraa, Jumanne Allya, Athman Mfinangaa, Promota Haulea, Romwald 
Lihakangaa, Eunice Abayoa 
aIntelligent Systems Research Unit, Department of Electronics and Telecommunications Engineering, Dar es Salaam Institute of 
Technology, P. O. Box 2958, Dar es Salaam, Tanzania 
 
Abstract 
The successful adaptation of a technology in health system will enhance in achievement of better standard of living. In 
order to improve health care and support services in developing countries, expertise in health sector is required in all 
levels of health system starting from low level of village health centres up to the top level of referral hospitals. Due to 
shortage of human resources such as medical doctors this applie d research intends to implemen t an expert healthcare unit 
to support in health services in low level of health systems. Equipped with knowledge, the system concludes and acts 
according to the condition of a patient. As for any other expe rt system, learning process distinguish one system from 
another. Better performance is based on knowledge acquainted within the system. This research express the method used 
to formulate knowledge in an expert healthcare system unit.   
 
© 2013. Published by Elsevier B.V. 
Selection and/or peer review under responsibility of American Applied S cience Research Institute 
 
Keywords : expert systems, formulation, health, knowledge. 
 
 
* Corresponding author. Tel.: +255 686-222-123; fax: +255-222-152-504. 
E-mail address:  kenedyaliila@yahoo.com. 
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
© 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
Selection and/or peer review under responsibility of American Applied Science Research InstituteOpen access under CC BY -NC-ND  license.
Open access under CC BY -NC-ND  license.191  Kenedy Greyson et al.  /  AASRI Procedia   4  ( 2013 )  190 – 195 
1. Introduction It should be noted that the definition of a ‘system’  in engineering perceptive might differ from health policy makers or any other field. In a policy makers and possibly economic perceptive, for example, heath system is defined as a set of relationships in whic h the structural components and their interactions are associated and connected to the goals the system desires to achieve (Hsiao and Li, 2003). In Collins English Dictionary, a system itself is defined as an ordered and comprehensive assemblage of facts, principles, doctrines, or the like in a particular field of knowle dge or thought. Engineers define a system as an assemblage or combination of things or parts form ing a complex or unitary whole (Collins English Dictionary). This report defines system in engineering perceptive. Immerging computer technologies is among the key-drives for this project motivation. In this research, we intend to design a system that gives support to the health services in the rural areas of developing countries (remote centers), Tanzania as a case study. The goal is to improve and address challenges of health services provision in communities as stipulated in national health policy (NHP, URT, 2003). By using physiological sensors, patients’ reco rds are collected, and if the need be, are analyzed or forwarded to the higher level Health centre as shown in national structure of health services: referral hospitals (the highest level) – regional hospitals – district hospitals – health centre services (approximately fifty thousand people) – dispensaries (approximately six to ten thousand people) – village health centre (the lowest level) as shown in Figure 1.  2. Statement of the problem In expert system, inference engine uses the knowledge  (rules and facts) to learn the environment and act accordingly. The knowledge equipped in a system defines its ability to act properly. If the knowledge is not adequate, the wrong reaction to the environment might ha ppen. The process of developing knowledge tank in an expert system is challenging. This research eluc idates the technique used in knowledge formulation. 3. Expert healthcare system unit It is very common to find in various literatures th at, the term expert- and intelligent systems are used interchangeably. Negnevitsky is making a line between th e two be defining an expert system as a computer program that performs at a human expert level (Negnevitsky, 2005). The engine or brain of the expert systems depends on the rules extracted from the set of rules as shown in Figure 2.  3.1. System development setup As for many expert systems, expert healthcare system unit is composed of inference engine, knowledge and logic tank (rules and facts), database, and the co mmunication network as shown in Figure 2. Generally, components can be grouped in their categories as inpu t unit (s), control unit and output unit as shown in Figure 3. The principle framework of experts systems remain the same although they may differ in design strategies. The input unit informs the main unit about the domain, in this case human body and environmental situation. These are basically physiological sensors which are linked with the main unit. There are various physiological sensors. For instance, the goal of electrodiagnostic studies is to determine whether there is a problem along the peripheral nervous system path way and if so, where the problem is (Weiss, et al., 2004, Khandpur, 2005).  192   Kenedy Greyson et al.  /  AASRI Procedia   4  ( 2013 )  190 – 195 
 
Fig. 1. Structure of national health services 
 
 
Fig. 2. Arrangement of parts of an expert healthcare system unit 
Electrocardiogram (ECG or EKG) sensors are cardiologic used to check the electrical waves of the activities of the contractions of heart which is transl ated in line tracing papers (Khan, 2008). The blood volume pulse (BVP) sensor also called photoplethysmogra phy. In principle, the BVP sensor shines infrared light through the finger and measures the amount of light reflected by the skin which varies during each heartbeat. The sensor converts the reflected light into electrical signal which is then sent processed accordingly (Combatalade, 2010). Other sensor include: respiration sensor used to monitor abdominal or thoraxial breathing. Actually, BVP and respiration sensor  are used in heart rate variability monitoring. Another class of sensors mentioned earlier is a central nervous system sensors which include: electroencephalogram (EEG), used to measure and record the electrical activity of the brain. This will help to analyse abnormalities in brain electrical waves based on wave frequency count. It can show a brain dead or deep coma status of a human.  Electroocculogram (EOG) on the other hand is used to measure the resting potential of the eye (retina in particular) for diagnosis of physiology and diseases of the eye. All these are coupled with the main unit, using communication networ k or direct link, which process the information and provide the response.  The main unit is comprised of system database, knowledge tank, system engine, and communication network for external data transportation. System database is integrated in the system so as to manage data collected by the input sensors discussed earlier. The EEG table, EMG table, ECG table, BVP table, and other table according to the input data are to be constructed. The Memo data type to store lengthy data is also included for comments from the person in charge. Likewise, a comment from a doctor or medical officer in charge must have a room to be stored in the system database.   Communication network 
Remote Centres 
District hospitals Regional hospitals Referral hospitals 
Database
Rules and facts Inference Engine Remote centres 
Village Health centre   Dispensary Health centre services District hos
pitalRegional hos
pitalReferral hos
pital 193  Kenedy Greyson et al.  /  AASRI Procedia   4  ( 2013 )  190 – 195 
 
Fig. 3. The main components of an expert health system 
4. Knowledge tank: condition-action rule Inference engine learn the domain environment so as to act according to the rules and facts.  The database and knowledge tank containing rules and fact provide in formation to the inference engine for analysis and decision making. In order to conclude and perform action, inference engine must be acquainted with a specific intended task or goal which is the goal of the system.  To attain the intended goal is the main function of the expert system. Expert healthcare system unit home heal th system description can be broadly stated as to support in provision of health services: monitor the patient’ physiological changes and report to the health person in charge. The goals can be extracted from this description as; to check physiological changes against normal situation, and to communicate the patients’ status to the health person in charge. These two goals then are refined to a one or more specific goals or sub-goals based on the simple technique of asking ‘how this goal can be achieved’ as proposed by (Padgham and Winikoff, 2004). To check physiological changes can be achieved by having biomedical instrumentations to perceive the domain status, to know the expected physiological conditions of the normal situation, and to compare the recorded measurements and that of the normal condition.  The development of goal-based process of the expert healthcare unit system is shown in Figure 4. The two main entities are broken into simple to the specific goals. In case of system modification or addition of another obj ective, the new entity is added together with its specific objectives without affecting the previous entities’ performance. 4.1. Entity functionalities The entity goal(s) stated earlier as specific goals ar e closely related to the entity functionalities. The functionality is a mechanism used by the entity to achieve its goal or responsibility. The identification of entities, the domain, and processes define the system functionality. This main function which basically perceives the domain status and identifies the action is a combination of entity functions.  Each entity function achieves its goal as depicted in Figure 4. In adap ting the presentation method in (Padgham and Winikoff, 2004), rectangles represent functionalities, ovals repres ent goals, and a rectangles extended with triangles pointing to the right present actions as shown in Figure 5. The entity functionalities of the smart home health system are generalized as follows:  
1
2
k Database, inference engine, and knowledge tank Audio,  Visual, or  Combination of audio and visual Actuators  Others 
Input unit (e.g. Sensors) Main unit (processing unit
)Output unit (e.g. screen, speakers, actuators, etc)194   Kenedy Greyson et al.  /  AASRI Procedia   4  ( 2013 )  190 – 195 
 
Fig. 4. Goals for the expert health system 
 Data collection (Functionality): get patients’ physiological status (goal), collect and store data in database (action).  
 Communicate the information (Functionality): consulting doctor (goal), relay patients’ status to the doctor (goal), provide request response to and from the doctor ( goal), send and receive physiological data, requests and responses (action) 4.2. Knowledge planning Knowledge representation for the smart home health system, our scenario, can be formulated in the form if <antecedent
>…then <consequent >. Because of the fact that the system has a number of inputs representing various symptoms, some of these rules will tend to have more than one antecedent depending on the knowledge to be conveyed. These will be in the form: if <antecedent
 1> and <antecedent  2> …, and <antecedent
 n>then <consequent >. Also the combination can take the form if <antecedent  1> or <antecedent
 2> …, or <antecedent  n> then <consequent >. The condition-conclusion-action is represented as: if (condition
) then (conclusion ) if (conclusion ) then (action ).  5. Conclusion The method used in this research is for a basic expe rt healthcare system unit. The new function, such as adding treatment or control of another disease, can be easily added in the expert system simply by defining the new function entity and its goal(s). Thereafter set of rules and facts are incorporated accordingly without affecting other goals or functions.   Activate an action Select biomedical instrumentation 
Knowledge tank (normal conditions) Database s
ystemConstruct comm. network
Manage machine language Authenticate usersInformation Processin
g Initiate the communication
End the communicationCheck physiological changes against normal situation Communicate the patients’ status to the health person in charge 195  Kenedy Greyson et al.  /  AASRI Procedia   4  ( 2013 )  190 – 195 
 
Fig. 5. Functionalities for the basic expert health system 
References [1] MNH. Muhimbili National Hospital. http://mnh.co.tz.  Accessed: October 12, 2012.  [2] Negnevitsky M. Artificial Intelligence: A Guide to Intelligent Systems. Second Edition, Addison Wesley; 2005. [3] Hsiao WC, Li KT. What is a Health System? Why Sh ould We Care? Harvard School of Public Health; 2003. [4] System. Dictionary.com. Collins English Dictionary - Complete and Unabridged. 10
th  Edition. Harper Collins Publishers. http://dictionary.reference.com/browse/system. Accessed: January 30, 2013. [5] NHP, URT. National Health Policy. United Re public of Tanzania. Ministry of Health; 2003.  [6] Weiss L, Silver JK, Weiss J. Easy EMG. Butterworth-Heinemann; 2004. [7] Khan MG. Rapid ECG Interpretation. Third Edition, Humana Press; 2008.  [8] Combatalade DC. Basics of Heart Rate Variability  Applied to Psychophysiology, Thought Technology Ltd. http://www.emfandhealth.com/HRVThoughtTechnology.pdf. Accessed: January 31, 2013. [9] Khandpur RS. Biomedical Instrumentation Technology and Applications, McGraw-Hill; 2005. [10] Nikos Vlassis (2007). A Concise Introduction to Multiagent Systems and Distributed Artificial Intelligence. Morgan & Claypool Publishers series; 2007. [11] Padgham L, Winikoff M. Developing Intelligent Agent Systems: A practical guide, John Wiley & Sons Ltd; 2004. [12] Bellifemine F, Caire G, Greenwood D. Devel oping Multi-Agent Systems with JADE. John Wiley & Sons Ltd.; 2007. [13] JADE. JADE Agent Development Framework. http://jade.tilab.com. Accessed: December 21, 2012. [14] Hindriks KV. Programming Rational Agents in GOAL. EEMCS, Delft University of Technology, Mekelweg 4, Delft; 2011.  [15] 2APL(a). 2APL A Practical Agent Programming Language: User Guide. http://tenet.dl.sourceforge.net/project/apapl/UserGuide/manual.pdf. Accessed: May 11, 2011. [16] 2APL(b). Download Latest 2apl (Beta). http://apapl.sourceforge.net/. Accessed: February 13, 2012.  [17] Negnevitsky M. Artificial Intelligence: A Guide to Intelligent Systems. Second Edition, Pearson Education Limited; 2005. Data collection
Get patients’ 
physiological status
Collect/store data in databaseCommunicate 
the information
Relay patients’ status to the doctor Consulting 
doctorSend and receive physiological data 