Fruit ripeness classiﬁcation: A survey
Matteo Rizzoa,⁎,M a t t e oM a r c u z z oa,1, Alessandro Zangaria,1,A n d r e aG a s p a r e t t ob, Andrea Albarellia
aCa’Foscari Department of Environmental Sciences, Informatics and Statistics, Via Torino 155, Mestre (VE) 30172, Italy
bCa’Foscari Department of Management, Cannaregio 873, Fondamenta San Giobbe, Venice 30121, Italy
abstract article info
Article history:Received 15 November 2022Received in revised form 23 February 2023Accepted 24 February 2023Available online 3 March 2023Fruit is a key crop in worldwide agriculture feeding millions of people. The standard supply chain of fruit productsinvolves quality checks to guarantee freshness, taste, and, most of all, safety. An important factor that determinesfruit quality is its stage of ripening. This is usually manually classi ﬁed byﬁeld experts, making it a labor-intensive and error-prone process. Thus, there is an arising need for automation in fruit ripeness classi ﬁcation. Many auto- matic methods have been proposed that employ a variety of feature descriptors for the food item to be graded.Machine learning and deep learning techniques dominate the top-performing methods. Furthermore, deeplearning can operate on raw data and thus relieve the users from having to compute complex engineered fea-tures, which are often crop-speciﬁc. In this survey, we review the latest methods proposed in the literature to au-tomatize fruit ripeness classiﬁcation, highlighting the most common feature descriptors they operate on.© 2023 The Authors. Publishing servic es by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of KeAi Communications Co., Ltd. This is an openaccess article under the CC BY-NC-ND license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ ).
Keywords:Fruit ripeness classiﬁcationMachine learningDeep learning
1. IntroductionFruit constitutes a commercially important and nutritionally indis-pensable food commodity. It has a fundamental role as a part of a bal-anced diet by supplying necessary growth-regulating factors that areessential for ensuring good health (Prasanna, 2007). To meet nutritional and market quality standards, it is crucial for fruit to be delivered at aproper ripeness stage. Moreover, grading fruit crops based on ripeness en-ables harvest optimization and all the subsequent links in the food supplychain. However, the classiﬁcation of fresh fruit according to its ripeness istypically a subjective and tedious task. This is traditionally based onhuman effort, which makes it sub-optimal. Consequently, there is a grow-ing interest in developing techniques to automate the fruit grading pro-cess. Machine Learning (ML) methods such as Support Vector Machines(SVMs), decision trees, and K-Nearest Neighbour (KNN) algorithmshave been successfully applied to classiﬁcation problems in the literature, particularly for fruit classiﬁcation. More recently, Deep Learning (DL)methods such as Artiﬁcial Neural Networks (ANNs) and one of their der-ivations, Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs), have also been appliedto the fruit classiﬁcation class showing very promising results.1.1. Challenges of the taskThe particularities of each ripeness classi ﬁcation problem make it difﬁcult, if not impossible, to select a general technique that applies toall types of fruit. In fact, there is an incredibly wide range of fruit varie-ties in nature, and this gives birth to a complex taxonomy. Each varietyof fruit may differ from the others in shape, color, texture, and manyother features. Sometimes this difference is apparent ( e.g., strawberries vspineapple), while sometimes distinguishing two fruit classes is non-trivial even for experts (e.g., applesvsAsian pears). Moreover, each fruit type may embed highly variable features. This is the case, for exam-ple, of apples, where a Fuji apple has a completely different color andtexture with respect to a Granny Smith apple (despite sharing a similarshape). Thus, the upstream task of fruit recognition and the down-stream task of ripeness classiﬁcation are both challenging. On theother hand, it is essential to enable automation within the supplychain of fruit crops to keep up with the worldwide demand for high-quality, safe food. The following sections depict the challenges and op-portunities of fruit ripeness classiﬁcation, paving the way to the state-ment of the contributions of this survey.Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 7 (2023) 44 –57
⁎Corresponding author.E-mail addresses:matteo.rizzo@unive.it(M. Rizzo),matteo.marcuzzo@unive.it(M. Marcuzzo),alessandro.zangari@unive.it(A. Zangari),andrea.gasparetto@unive.it(A. Gasparetto), albarelli@unive.it(A. Albarelli).
1Authors contributed equally to this work.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aiia.2023.02.0042589-7217/© 2023 The Authors. Publishing services by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of KeAi Communications Co., Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http:// creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ ).
Contents lists available atScienceDirect
Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture
journal homepage:http://www.keaipublishing.com/en/journals/artificial-intelligence-in-agriculture/1.2. Ripeness standardsAs mentioned, on top of mere discrimination between types of fruit,it is of utmost importance to ensure food quality. This is both for safetyreasons and because of the practical fact that high-quality food is moreappealing to the market. One core factor that in ﬂuences the economic value of fruit is the relatively short ripening period and reduced post-harvest life. Large amounts of fruit are kept for a notably long time instorage for transportation and during this period it continues to mature.Thus, ripeness is a crucial property of fruit along the supply chain. Fruitripening is a highly coordinated, genetically programmed, and irrevers-ible phenomenon involving a series of physiological, biochemical, andorganoleptic changes, that ultimately lead to the development of soft,edible, and ripe fruit with desirable quality attributes ( Prasanna, 2007). On the producers' side, excessive textural softening during ripen-ing may lead to problematic effects upon storage, including dents andpoor shaping. On the consumers' side, the appearance of the productis one of the most worrying issues for producers, as it has a strong in ﬂu- ence on product quality and consumers' preferences. However, up tothis day, optimal harvest dates and prediction of storage life are stillmainly based on subjective interpretation and practical experience(Mendoza and Aguilera, 2004). Accordingly, an objective and accurateripeness assessment of crops is important in ensuring the optimumyield of quality products. The quality of the fruit (as measured byaroma,ﬂavor, color, and textural characteristics) constantly changesduring fruit development from pre-harvest through post-harvest stagesas the fruit grows and ripens, as well as during maintenance in storage.1.3. Economical impact of fruit ripeness classi ﬁcationIt is imperative to improve the status of global food quality and secu-rity to meet the needs of the ever-enlarging world's population. In-creased fruit production through adding to the area cropped is notsustainable as land is a limited resource, thus productivity per unit ofa land area must be increased. At the same time, there is a need to pre-vent waste. For fruit production, the timing of harvest is crucial to ensur-ing that the yield meets the commercial ripeness speci ﬁcations. Over- or under-ripe fruit has a lower or even no retail value and represents sig-niﬁcant income loss and a waste of resources. For the consumer,harvesting too early reduces the taste and quality of fruit whilst a lateharvest can lead to reduced shelf life, poor appearance, and undesiredﬂavors and odors.1.4. Predicting fruit ripenessMany computational methods are known to be effective inpredicting fruit ripeness. Some of these require feature engineering(i.e., statistical and traditional ML algorithms) while others processraw data (i.e., DL algorithms). Each method is based on a speci ﬁcf e a t u r e representation of the fruit item to be graded. To collect discriminatoryfeatures, some methods require cheap and simple sensors ( e.g., a con- sumer camera), and some methods require special (and usually expen-sive) sensors (e.g., an acoustic vibration detector). Similarly, somemethods are item-destructive while others are non-destructive. Inother words, the former type destroys the fruit item while assessingripeness while the latter can still assess ripeness without any waste. Infact, the efﬁciency of destructive methods is limited, as they waste apart of the crop. Non-destructive on-plant assessment of fruit ripenessis generally preferable and has received increasing interest as it providesseveral advantages as compared to traditional destructive methods.The phenotypic changes during fruit ripening are complex. In mostcases, a green, hard, and immature fruit becomes more colorful, softer,sweeter, and aromatic. Numerous physical and chemical attributes canbe quantiﬁed during ripening. These include size, shape, texture, ﬁrm- ness, external color, internal color, the concentration of chlorophyll, Sol-uble Solids Content (SSC), starch, sugars, acids, oils, and internalethylene concentration (Prasanna, 2007). These features can be used to build non-destructive and efﬁcient fruit ripeness classiﬁers. Although
it is not realistic to simultaneously assess all the quality attributes in theﬁeld with non-destructive methods, destructive laboratory measure-ments are time-consuming due to the large number of samples neededto account for the within-ﬁeld variability (Li et al., 2018). Simple repre- sentative non-destructive measurements are thus required to assess theripeness of fruit. A variety of non-destructive techniques and tools forfeatures collection has been developed, mainly colorimeters, Visibleand Near InfraRed (VNIR) spectroscopy ( Walsh et al., 2020), hyperspectral imaging (Su et al., 2021), visible imaging (Bulanon et al., 2011), multispectral imaging (Shiddiq et al., 2022),ﬂuorescence imag- ing (Matveyeva et al., 2022), and electronic noses (Baietto and Wilson, 2015).In terms of methods used for coping with the ripeness classi ﬁcation task, seminal studies employed statistical techniques for sets ofengineered features (e.g.,Mendoza and Aguilera (2004);Jaradat and Zaid (2004);Mangas et al. (1998);Nagata et al. (2004)). More recently, ML techniques pushed the state-of-the-art. Simple baseline algorithmssuch as SVMs were applied to some of the above-mentioned featuresets and paved the way for a data-driven automatic classi ﬁcation of ripeness. Even more recently, DL algorithms have been explored for re-placing traditional ML techniques and proved to be highly ef ﬁcient and effective when very large datasets were available. The shift to a DL par-adigm allows not to compute or collect engineered features, which isusually a time-consuming and error-prone task. Fig. 1summarizes the workﬂow from the data collection to the ripeness degree classi ﬁcation of some featurized representation of the raw input.1.5. Contributions and structure of the articleThis survey offers a high-level overview of the fruit ripeness classi ﬁ- cation task and of the methods that have been applied so far to reach ex-cellent performance, with a major focus on the most novel DLtechniques. We found two other surveys that have been dealing withfruit ripeness classiﬁcation in the past. The work byRandhawa et al.
Fig. 1.Example of workﬂow from the collection of raw data to the classi ﬁcation of ripeness grade for bananas.M. Rizzo, M. Marcuzzo, A. Zangari et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 7 (2023) 44 –57
45(2014)was published in 2014, thus it does not incorporate the most ad-vanced DL methods. On the other hand, Wankhade and Hore (2021) focus mostly on image processing while our survey investigates notonly state-of-the-art image processing techniques but also multiple fea-ture descriptors for ripeness classiﬁcation.The rest of the text is organized as follows: §2 provides a formalstatement of the fruit ripeness classiﬁcation problem together with basic biology notions on the subject of fruit ripening. §3 focuses on thedifferent feature representations that can be used (and possibly com-bined) to generate a feature description of a fruit item. §4 brie ﬂy out- lines the data preprocessing needed to apply classi ﬁers to fruit ripening. §5 describes the collection of scienti ﬁc literature that gathers the technical and theoretical effort to tackle the problem of fruit ripe-ness classiﬁcation. §6 embarks in the uncharted land of going over thespeciﬁc problem (i.e., fruit ripeness classiﬁcation) to the more general one (i.e., optimal harvest time estimation); §7 seizes the gaps in theabove-mentioned literature and offers ideas on new research topics inthe area; §8 concludes our work by synthesizing the contributions andthemes treated in this paper.2. PreliminariesThis section introduces the formal statement of the fruit ripeness stageclassiﬁcation problem. Furthermore, basic biological notions enablingfruit ripening are discussed. These allow for a full understanding ofsome of the features and the representations used to grade fruit ripeness.2.1. Problem statementGiven some datasetXcontaining∣X∣fruit appearance descriptorsx (e.g., color, shape) for one variety of fruit, the ripeness classi ﬁcation problem requires learning a function Fthat maps each itemx∈Xto apredicted classbc, which is an approximation of the proper ripenessclassc∈C. It is desirable thatbc¼cholds. In other words, the learnedfunction must map each input fruit description to its the chosen repre-sentation of its ground truth ripeness. The distance between the pre-dicted classbcand the ground truthcis based on some notion of error (e.g., mean square error).Ground truth ripeness is generally assessed visually by a human op-erator led by some guidelines that describe the ripening stages ( e.g., comparing the color of the peel of the fruit to standardized color charts).Human visual inspection is a highly subjective, tedious, time-consuming, and labor-intensive process. Tools-based techniques such
as colorimeters or spectrometers, on the other hand, allow for accurateand reproducible measurements of the corresponding features withminimum inﬂuence by the observer or their surroundings ( Anzalone et al., 2013;Das et al., 2016).The fruit ripeness classiﬁcation problem is wide-ranged, meaning itcan differ dramatically based on the type of fruit being considered.First,∣C∣can be arbitrarily large (although discrete) and vary based ont h et y p eo ff r u i t .F o ri n s t a n c e ,t h er i p e n e s so fb a n a n a sc a nb ec a t e g o r i z e dinto four stages of ripening by visual inspection, which relates to pigmentchanges in the peel of the banana ( i.e., Stage 1: Ripe, Stage 2: Partially ripe, Stage 3: Ripen and Stage 4: Over-ripe ( Mazen and Nashat, 2019)). This is exempliﬁed inFig. 2. Similarly, the ripeness of dates can be cate-gorized intoﬁve stages: Hanabauk, Kimri, Khalal, Rutab, and Tamer(seeFig. 3). Second, the variance between features within a single classcan be very high, meaning thatXcan be largely heterogeneous.2.2. Biology of fruit ripeningThe development of fruit is characterized by a short period of cell di-vision followed by a longer period of cell elongation by water uptake.Theﬁnal fruit size mainly depends on the initial number of cells rather
Fig. 2.Example stages of ripeness of bananas.
Fig. 3.Example stages of ripeness of dates.M. Rizzo, M. Marcuzzo, A. Zangari et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 7 (2023) 44 –57
46than the cell size (Prasanna, 2007). The process of ripening, on the otherhand, is characterized by the development of peculiar color, ﬂavor, tex- ture, and aroma.2 . 2 . 1 .T h er o l eo fe t h y l e n eIndisputable evidence indicates that ethylene plays a crucial rolein the induction of ripening in fruit ( Prasanna, 2007). Therefore, a main concern of the commercial post-harvest horticultural industryis to control the exposure of harvested fruit to ethylene. An aspectof fruit ripening that attracts molecular biologists is the prospectthat ethylene induces a mature, non-growing tissue to rapidly differ-entiate into a new state, that is to switch from non-ripening to ripen-ing. Because the tissue is already mature and the form and structureof cells decided, it is thought that the molecular steps involved whenthe switch in maturity is thrown may be relatively few. The ripeningsystem, therefore, is studied for the subtle interactions between thesignaling chemical ethylene and the fruit genome ( Prasanna, 2007).2.2.2. Climacteric vs non-climacteric fruitFruit can either be harvested at complete maturity or way before,especially when it is exported with long storage times. Each item isself-sufﬁcient with its catalytic machinery to maintain an indepen-dent life, even when detached from the parent plant. Based on theirrespiratory pattern and ethylene biosynthesis during ripening, har-vested fruit can be classiﬁed into two groups: (i)climactericand (ii)non-climacteric.Climactericfruit is harvested at full maturityand is capable of maintaining the ripening process even when de-tached from the plant. The respiration rate and ethylene formationin this kind of fruit, though minimal at maturity, rise dramaticallyto a climacteric peak (i.e., the peak of edible ripeness), at the onsetof ripening, after which it declines ( Speirs et al., 1990). On the other hand,non-climactericfruit is not capable of continuing its rip-ening process once it is detached from the parent plant. Also, thistype of fruit produces a very small quantity of endogenous ethyleneand does not respond to external ethylene treatment.2.2.3. Texture and softnessFruit ripening is associated with textural alterations. Textural changeis the major event in fruit softening and an integral part of ripeningGowda and Huddar (2001). This process appears dramatically in climac-teric fruits. Similarly, the softening process is an integral part of the rip-ening of almost all fruit. It has immense commercial importancebecause the post-harvest life of the fruit is to a large extent limited byincreasing softness, which brings with it an increase in physical damageduring handling and an increase in disease susceptibility.2.2.4. Fruit ripening in the literatureFruit ripening has been reviewed numerous times in the literature.In 1984,Yang and Hoffman (1984)discussed several aspects of thephysiology and biochemistry of ripening, including the in ﬂuence of ex- position to ethylene. Some years later, in the study by Speirs et al. (1990), some evidence seemed to show that protein and perhaps RNAsynthesis played a role in the induction of ripening. The techniques ofmodern molecular biologists have enabled this theory to be examinedin a precise way, and evidence for the direct genomics control of the rip-ening of climacteric fruits is now accumulating rapidly. Nonetheless,there is evidence that cellular compartments are modi ﬁed through rip- ening, and recent proof suggests that lipid oxidation and/or phasechanges within membranes contribute to changing metabolite distribu-tion within cells as ripening proceeds. How novel transcriptional and/ortranslational events and changes in metabolite partitioning interact andcontribute interdependently or independently to ripening is still a mat-ter of conjecture. It may well be that both theories are more or less cor-rect and both mechanisms are involved but to different extents indifferent types of fruit. Regardless, fruit ripening appears to be a well-regulated, genetically determined event. Coming as it does at the endof the development of an organism in an energy-rich tissue that is des-tined for spreading, it would be surprising if its mechanisms of controlwere the same for all fruit types.3. Fruit feature representationsWhen feeding data to a model (be it statistical, ML- or DL-based) aproper representation of the data involved is needed. More speci
ﬁcally, a set of features is collected to build a description of each data item. Themore these features are representative and diversi ﬁed among different classes, the more effective the classiﬁcation. The next sections introducethe main types of features that are used in the literature to address thefruit ripeness classiﬁcation problem.3.1. ColorColor is one of theﬁrst elements taken into consideration by pro-ducers and consumers when performing a qualitative assessment of afruit's quality (Opara et al., 2007). This criterion is related to physicaland chemical changes occurring during fruit ripening ( Speirs et al., 1990). In many types of fruit, color changes during ripening occur dueto chlorophyll degradation and the increase in the concentration of pig-ments such as carotenoids or polyphenols ( Choo, 2019). Several fruit varieties have been studied for the relationship between maturity andcolor. These include: tomatoes (Shewfelt et al., 1988), oranges (Olmo et al., 2000), guavas (Mercado-Silva et al., 1998) and many more. To measure the changes in fruit color, the two major methods involve theusage ofuse of colorimetersandimage capture and analysis.3.1.1. ColorimetersColorimetersare traditional non-destructive instruments used exten-sively in the fruit industry to measure fruit color ( Hobson et al., 1983). They are more precise than human visual assessment and are able to ad-here to common standards utilizing, for instance, the CIELAB colorspace. Portable colorimeters are now available commercially ( Jha et al., 2007) and can be carried to theﬁeld forin situdata collection. Data obtained with colorimeters have been successfully correlatedwith fruit ripeness by using multivariate analysis ( e.g.,Jha et al. (2007)). However, the per-item measurement performed by colorime-ters limits the application of this tool for representing the ripeness offruit in a whole crop. Moreover, the main disadvantage of colorimetersis that the surface color of the processed fruit item must be relativelyuniform for the measurement to be meaningful. Otherwise, manyspots on the sample must be measured to obtain a representativecolor proﬁle, which becomes a labor-intensive job for the producer.3.1.2. Color-imagingUltimately, for some applications, colorimeters are simply not ableto obtain representative color values due to the limited sampling areacompared to the size of the fruit (Yam and Papadakis, 2004). This limi- tation can be overcome by utilizing bi-dimensional color imaging, which converts photons reﬂected from fruit skin to electrical signals, which arethen received by a camera with a charge-coupled device or complemen-tary metal oxide semiconductor sensors. Compared with a colorimeter,this type of color information can not only be obtained rapidly but alsocover a larger area. Moreover, the equipment is ﬂexible enough to be easily attached to moving platforms ( e.g., tractors, robots, drones) for a rapid collection of multiple data measurements. However, even bi-dimensional imaging poses some challenges. First, it is dif ﬁcult to seg- ment fruit in an image from its background. Second, the collected RGBvalues are device-dependent. Normally, the sensor receives the lightand
ﬁlters it to three channels (Red, Green, Blue) and their intensityvalues are determined by fruit samples based on the current illumina-tion and the internal characteristics of the camera ( Yam and Papadakis, 2004). Third, accurate imaging needs homogeneousM. Rizzo, M. Marcuzzo, A. Zangari et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 7 (2023) 44 –57
47illumination in theﬁeld, which can be a very hard requirement to meetdepending on the geographic location and weather conditions.3.2. VolatilesFruit types vary widely in aroma characteristics due to differences inthe composition of the aromatic volatiles present in fruit aromas, whichare ultimately determined by plant genetics ( Prasanna, 2007). Fruit pro- duces a wide range of volatile organic compounds that impact theircharacteristically distinct aromas and contribute to unique ﬂavor char- acteristics. Fruit aroma andﬂavor characteristics are of key importancein determining consumer acceptance in commercial fruit marketsbased on individual preference. Previously, professional human gradershave been used to judge fruit quality based on visual and aroma charac-teristics for selecting and evaluating fruit for ripeness at harvest andsaleability in commercial fruit markets. The advent of electronic-nose(e-nose) devices has offered new alternative tools for grading fruit forripeness. These instruments are very effective in discriminating com-plex mixtures of fruit volatiles, and thus are new promising ef ﬁcient, and effective tools for classifying fruit based on its peculiar odor.3.3. Visible and infrared spectroscopyWhen light hits the surface of the fruit, it can be absorbed, scattered,or re-emitted in a quantiﬁable manner. The amount of each of thesequantities is determined by the physical properties and chemical con-stituents of fruit, and thus by its ripeness. Visible and Near InfraRed(VNIR) reﬂectance spectroscopy measures the reﬂected light in the range between 380 nm and 2500 nm. The light re ﬂectance in this range is largely dependent on the light absorption by fruit samples.VNIR spectroscopy has been widely applied as a non-destructive andfast measurement method for multiple quality attributes of food ripen-ing (Wang et al., 2015). More importantly, portable devices have beendeveloped and used in theﬁeld for collecting spectral data (Makky and Soni, 2014).3.3.1. Spectral indicesEither visible or infrared spectra can be analyzed and related to dif-ferent ripeness stages by using spectral indices. The whole wavelengthscan, or values at key selected wavelengths, are used in regressionmodels to correlate with speciﬁc attributes of a fruit item that are asso-ciated with ripeness. Using only one wavelength as an index for in- ﬁeld assessment at a time is difﬁcult because the values can be highly af-fected by the sensor, the environmental illumination, and the particlesize (Huang et al., 2021). Spectral indices embed a degree of variety ofthe spectrum into a compact representation. They normally combinethe surface reﬂectance at two or more wavelengths in order to indicatethe relative abundance of a feature of interest. A number of key spectralindices have been calculated to describe the progressive change of peelpigment concentration during ripening. For example, the index of ab-sorption (IAD) introduced byZiosi et al. (2008)is a robust spectral index obtained by calculating the difference between the absorptionat two wavelengths around the peak (670 nm and 720 nm). The IADrange was found to be similar across different growing seasons andshowed a good correlation with ripeness for peaches ( Lurie et al., 2013), apricots (Costa et al., 2010) and nectarines (Bonora et al., 2015). Selecting signiﬁcant spectral indices is non-trivial. In a naivemethod, additional wavelengths are added, one by one, in order tostrengthen the correlation with the principal component scores untilnone of the remaining wavelengths is signi ﬁcant. Another ef
ﬁcient au- tomated method for identifying key wavelengths involves using a ge-netic algorithm, which employs natural selection and randommutations based on prediction accuracy.3.3.2. Full vs selected wavelengthsThe full wavelength or selected spectral indices can describe thechange of peel pigment concentration during the ripening process andprovide comparable values with the colorimetric method ( Ferrer et al., 2005). However, peel color is not always the only criterion for ripeningassessment. The correlation between internal quality attributes relatedto ripening, such asﬁrmness, was investigated with full or selectedwavelengths from the VNIR spectra ( Wang et al., 2015). For the full wavelengths, a common regression model is the Principal ComponentRegression (PCR), which uses Multiple Linear Regression (MLR) to corre-late with the principal components scores extracted from the predictors(Mahesh et al., 2015b). This found practical application in some studies for fruit quality assessment (e.g.,Mahesh et al. (2015b);Rinnan et al. (2009);Gomez et al. (2006)). Nevertheless, the variability of physicalsample properties and the performance of the hardware can generateundesired results (e.g., light scattering, and random noise generated inthe extracted spectra). These factors reduce the accuracy and robustnessof the prediction models based on VNIR features Mollazade et al. (2012).3.3.3. Spectroscopic methodsSpectroscopic methods utilize longer wavelengths than colorimeterand visible imaging. However, similar to colorimeters, they are notlikely to be applied as high-throughput ripening assessment tools dueto their low spatial resolution. Spectroscopy has been used in assessingthe ripeness of a large variety of fruit, and portable commercial spec-trometers are available on the market for in-situdata collection (e.g., Saranwong et al. (2003);Camps and Christen (2009);Makky and Soni (2014)). Nevertheless, most of the studies have focused on the indoor,post-harvest assessment of fruit maturity. Inconsistent performanceswere observed for the models developed by spectra taken indoors andin the crop. Consequently, for outdoor ripeness assessment, it is neces-sary to build the prediction model with spectra taken in- ﬁeld and understand the effect of environmental factors on the quality of spectra.3.4. FluorescenceFruit degreening (i.e., the loss of chlorophyll) is an effective indicatorof fruit ripening. The measure of chlorophyll content of a fruit item canbe detected using aﬂuorimetric sensor and proved to be correlated to itsripeness (Bodria et al., 2004). One chlorophyllﬂuorimetric method measures the photochemical and non-photochemical processes withthe illumination of actinic light (Royer, 1995). At the time being,ﬂuo- rometers based on Pulse-Amplitude-Modulation (PAM) are commer-cially available. These use visible blue light to generate a ﬂuorescence excitation and measure the minimum ( F0) and maximum (F m) emittedﬂuorescence. The maximum quantum yield is calculated as(F
m−F 0)/Fm. This parameter was found to be negatively correlatedwith the ripening stage of,e.g.,a p p l e s(Song et al., 1997). This chlorophyllﬂuorimetric method is popular within laboratories, butdifﬁcult to apply in-ﬁeld as the samples need to be dark-adapted. Inthe study byBodria et al. (2004), they designed aﬂuorescence imaging system that measured the light emission at 690 –740 nm with the exci- tation light in UV-blue and red regions. The performance of the systemshows a good correlation between ripeness and ﬂuorescence values, even though the hue of the skin color showed little change. The fruitsamples used for measurement by thisﬂuorescence imaging system were not dark-adapted, but the equipment has only been designed forlaboratory use. A problem related to using ﬂuorescence is thus the con- tamination by environmental factors, which limits the in-situapplica- tion. In order to reduce the inﬂuence of environmental factors on theabsoluteﬂuorescence intensity at a single band, more studies were fo-cused on understanding theﬂuorescence ratios using various lightsources of deﬁned wavelengths. This research led to the developmentof a handheld, multi-parametricﬂuorescence sensor: Multiplex®(Force-A, Orsay, France), which employs four LED light sources andthree synchronizedﬂuorescence detectors (Ghozlen et al., 2010).M. Rizzo, M. Marcuzzo, A. Zangari et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 7 (2023) 44 –57
48Nevertheless, current studies ofﬂuorescence sensors are focused onlyon the analysis of speciﬁc parts of a fruit, which again limits their poten-tial use for high throughput measurements in the ﬁeld.3.5. Spectral imagingSpectral imaging consists in a type of imaging that uses multiplebands across the electromagnetic spectrum. Spectral data is collectedusing dedicated commercially available tools called spectrometers.However, several factors contributed to the limited use of spectrome-ters in theﬁeld and the lack of consumer applications. Although sizeand cost are the more obvious factors, others like stray light and reliabil-ity have contributed to making the challenge even more dif ﬁcult.Das et al. (2016)demonstrate a smartphone-based spectrometer designthat is standalone and supported on a wireless platform. This device ad-dresses the issues of size and cost of in-situdata collection. The device can be used for rapid sorting in storage facilities for different varietiesof fruit and to assess ripening. The portable nature of the device alongwith simpliﬁed data collection methods can have a huge advantage ingathering large sets of data that may be useful in building ML-basedmodels. Smartphone-based fruit testing can be bene ﬁcial for several end-users. Currently, much of the testing of ripeness in apples and sev-eral other fruits is carried out in a destructive manner using mechanicaltests. Optical tests are non-destructive and can assist farmers indetermining optimum harvest times. All essential components of thesmartphone-based spectrometer, like the light source, ﬁlters, micro- controller, and wireless circuits, have been assembled in a housing ofreduced dimensions (i.e., 88 mm × 37 mm × 22 mm), and the entiredevice weighs 48 g. The resolution of the spectrometer is 15 nm, deliv-ering accurate and repeatable measurements. The device has a dedi-cated app interface on smartphones to communicate, receive, plot,and analyze spectral data. The performance of the smartphone spec-trometer is comparable to existing top spectrometers in terms of stabil-ity and wavelength resolution.3.5.1. Hyperspectral imagingA well-studied form of spectral imaging is HyperSpectral Imaging(HSI), which generates a three-dimensional imaging cube with imagesat a range of continuous wavelengths. A single spectrum can be ex-tracted from each individual pixel representing the absorption proper-ties and textural information of fruit samples, which are correlatedwith their ripeness (ElMasry and Nakauchi, 2016). Similarly to tradi- tional visible imaging and spectroscopic methods, HSI is non-destructive and requires little sample preparation, but it has the addedadvantage that it can record both spatial and spectral information si-multaneously (Mahesh et al., 2015a). For the assessment of fruit ripe-ness, a common type of wavelength dispersion device is normallyused, coupled with an imaging sensor for the HSI image acquisition.This is calledline scanning. A line scanning device has the imaging spec-trograph dispersing the incident light into different wavelengths instan-taneously between the visible and the near-infrared wavelength range(380–1700 nm). Line scanning HSI cameras scan the samples continu-ously in one direction, so they can be attached to moving platforms. Ex-periments have been made using tractors ( Bauriegel et al., 2011), robots (Zhao et al., 2016) and Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAV) ( Honkavaara et al., 2012). Overall, HSI is a promising technique for fruit ripeness as-sessment. Nevertheless, the in-ﬁeld application of this technique willneed to overcome the challenges of handling the large data outputand the calibration of variable light levels whilst in the crop.3.5.2. Multispectral imagingMultiSpectral Imaging (MSI) is a form of HSI that collects data at spe-ciﬁc wavelengths instead of scanning the whole wavelength range. Thiscan be accomplished using a frame scanning imaging system with Liq-uid Crystal Tunable Filter (LCTF) coupled with a CCD or CMOS sensor.InLu and Peng (2006)
the authors useﬁve wavelengths, based onprevious studies, to correlate their scattering pro ﬁles with the ripeness of apples using an ANN. Another lower-cost MSI system uses a rotatingﬁlter wheel containing a few bandpassﬁlters instead of LCTF. However, the tuning speed is lower than LCTF. This device has been used to pre-dict the ripeness of peaches. With the best combination of four wave-lengths, high correlation coefﬁcients were achieved (Muhua et al., 2007). Similarly,Liu et al. (2015)used MSI with 19 wavelengths to pre-dict the ripeness of strawberries. PLS, SVM, and ANN were comparedwith the best correlation coefﬁcient of 0.94. Among the techniques de-scribed above, MSI is the most promising for in- ﬁeld measurement as it can record high-resolution images at selected key wavelengths forthe prediction of speciﬁc quality attributes. Compared with HSI, MSIhas a lower cost and is easier to convert into portable devices. A portableMSI device with four narrow-band light sources and four re ﬂectance sensors of different wavelengths at 570, 670, 750, and 870 nm hasbeen developed commercially (Lurie et al., 2013). This device was used to classify palm oil into different stages of ripeness using quadraticdiscriminant analysis and discriminant analysis with Mahalanobis dis-tance classiﬁers, achieving a correct classiﬁcation rate of >85%.4. Data preprocessingIn order to improve data analysis for the fruit classi ﬁcation task, a number of studies have applied different data preprocessing techniquesto the spectra obtained before modeling ( Rinnan et al., 2009). As a pre- processing tool, Savitzky–Golay (SG) is the most frequently used digitaldata smoothingﬁlter (Olarewaju et al., 2016b;Jha et al., 2006;McGlone et al., 2003). This applies the Linear Least Squares method to ﬁt low- degree polynomial data. However, SG has contrasting effects on the per-formance of multivariate statistical models. For example, Jha et al. (2007)compared multiple preprocessing techniques and found thatsmoothing did not produce any improvement in comparison withother methods for the assessment of the ripeness in mangoes. Thus,they warn researchers and developers against the use of this technique.Standard Normal Variate (SNV) (Sanchez et al., 2012)a n dM u l t i p l e Scattering Correction (MSC) (Olarewaju et al., 2016a) are the two of the most frequently used techniques for photon scattering correction.MSC is used to eliminate the nonlinear scattering due to the non-uniform travel distance of light by linearising each spectrum to a refer-ence spectrum (usually, the mean). Previous research has shown thesimilarity between SNV and MSC. For instance, it has been con ﬁrmed that the correlation coefﬁcients were the same when assessing thesugar content of peaches using PLS models with SNV and MSC(Uwadaira et al., 2018). SNV can, however, be applied to an individualspectrum without requiring a reference ( Sanchez et al., 2012). In somestudies, SNV was performed with de-trending, which was used to cor-rect the baseline shift of spectra (Sanchez et al., 2012). Generating deriv- atives of spectra is a useful pre-processing technique to enhance subtledifferences and reduce the effect of mirror re ﬂection (Ragni et al., 2012).5. Approaches to classiﬁcationThe task of fruit ripeness stage classiﬁcation has been studied for de- cades. This has given birth to a vast literature on the topic. Our review isbased on peer-reviewed papers published between 2014 and 2022. Wedeem this range of years appropriate for allowing a good trade-off be-tween the depth and breadth of the survey. Among this corpus of liter-ature, we identify three main groups of methods, that are: statistical,ML-based, and DL-based (regardless of the fruit type involved). Muchof the seminal literature regarding fruit ripeness classi ﬁcation employs statistical models to address the task. At the same time, ML provides atoolbox of powerful algorithms that allow accurate classi ﬁcation perfor- mance. Some of these methods have been applied to the fruit ripenessclassiﬁcation task. However, in recent years, DL methods have takenover traditional techniques and helped to push state-of-the-art accuracywithout the need to compute complex engineered features.M. Rizzo, M. Marcuzzo, A. Zangari et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 7 (2023) 44 –57
49Investigations were conducted exploring multiple different attributes ofthe fruit items (e.g., color, texture, smell). The next sections contrast sta-tistical and ML-based methods with those employing DL strategies.Among the former group, we describe in detail what has beenexperimented on based on categories of feature representation (as pre-viously introduced in §3).Fig. 4depicts a standard workﬂow for a fruit ripening classiﬁcation method, from the raw input to the output gradeprediction. This highlights the core difference between DL-based classi-ﬁers, operating on raw data, and other types of classi ﬁers, operating on rich feature representations.5.1. Statistical- and machine-learning-based5.1.1. ColorO n ec o r ea t t r i b u t ef o rf r u i tr i p e n e s sc l a s s iﬁcation is color. A common standardized color space is the CIELAB color space, also referred to asL*a*b*. In a seminal work in thisﬁeld,Mendoza and Aguilera (2004)em- ploy the CIELAB color space to enable the discrimination among sevendifferent grades of banana ripeness previously labeled by experts in theﬁeld. They declare three objectives: (i) implement a standardized com-puter vision system to characterize quantitatively color changes duringthe ripening of bananas using the CIELAB color space, (ii) identify fea-tures of interest that can be related to ripening stages ( e.g.,d e v e l o p m e n t of brown spots and textural features of the images), and (iii) analyze thefeatures extracted from images for their discriminatory power. They col-lected two proprietary datasets. Theﬁrst was constituted of six hands ofbananas at the ripening stage 1 (green) with thirteen or ﬁfteenﬁngers per hand, stored at standard room temperature and humidity untilused. Bananas were taken randomly from each hand. Their color changesand development of brown spots were measured daily over twelve days.The second dataset counts forty-nine bananas from a single batch, storedsimilarly, and visually selected by qualiﬁed banana industry workers ac- cording to seven ripening stages, seven samples per stage. In this case,the color, brown spots, and textural features were extracted from the ba-nana images and employed for prediction. The background of pictures ofbananas was removed at the preprocessing stage of the images using athreshold of 50 in the grey scale combined with an edge detection tech-nique based on the Laplacian-of-Gauss (LoG) operator. The developmentof brown spots on the peel of bananas was evaluated from binarised im- ages and quantiﬁed by two indexes: brown spots as a percentage of thetotal area (%BSA) and the number of brown spots per cm
2of surface (NBS/cm
2). Four textural features (homogeneity, contrast, correlation,and entropy) were extracted from images. Image texture was analyzedby studying the spatial dependence of pixel values represented by a co-occurrence matrixP
dwith entryP d(i,j) being the relative frequency or distance for two pixels d-pixels apart in direction to have values i and j,respectively. The methods applied were simple regression, analysis ofvariance, and discriminant analysis with a 95% con ﬁdence level. In spite of the inherent variability of banana samples, the proposed com-puter vision technique showed great potential to differentiate amongripening stages of bananas using simple features (L*, a*, b* bands, %BSA, and contrast) extracted from the appearance of the peel. Using abasic discriminant analysis technique as the classi ﬁcation criterion, it was possible to identify forty-nine bananas in seven ripening stageswith an accuracy of 98%. Thus, the work by Mendoza and Aguilera (2004)paves the ground for much further research in the ﬁeld. Other classiﬁcation methods were explored in the CIELAB color space. For ex-ample,Olarewaju et al. (2016b)compared Multiple Linear Regression(MLR), Partial Least Squares (PLS), and Principal Component Regression(PCR) to predict the maturity stage of avocados. The former methodproved to be the top performing on a self-collected proprietary dataset.The analysis of features performed byMendoza and Aguilera (2004) has helped develop statistical and ML models using a minimal set of se-lected features. However, note that in the same work images of bananaswere processed including their background. On the contrary, more re-cent methods (e.g.,Ni et al. (2020);Septiarini et al. (2019)) use seman- tic segmentation to isolate the fruit items from their background. Thisdesign choice can have crucial repercussions as it relieves the risk thatthe classiﬁer learns to discriminate based on the features of the context(i.e., the background) rather than the target item's features.Further research was conducted on different color spaces. Moving onto the RGB color space, inGoel and Sehgal (2015)they used the differ- ence between R and B values to enhance the classi ﬁcation of the differ- ent tomato ripeness stages, reaching 94.3% accuracy on a proprietarydataset of 250 images. Other statistical methods investigated includeunsupervised classiﬁcation, such as the K-means and Gustafson-Kesselalgorithms. These have also successfully been applied to automaticallyseparate bananas of different ripeness stages based on RGB values(Pardede et al., 2019). In later research, rather than only using the aver-age RGB values, the histogram of each channel was used to ﬁnd matches with predeﬁned reference histograms for each ripeness group ( Satpute and Jagdale, 2016).The values of other color spaces such as Hue Saturation and Intensity(HSI) and Hue Saturation and Value (HSV), can be derived from RGBvalues and better represent human visual perception ( Bakar et al., 2013). The Hue is deﬁned as the degree of similarity to some colors (usu-ally, red, green, blue, and yellow) (Hartmann et al., 2011) whilst satura- tion is used to describe how colorful a stimulus is relative to its ownbrightness (Sural et al., 2003). Fuzzy logic was successfully applied togroup pineapples into three ripeness stages using values derived fromHSI (Bakar et al., 2013). Similarly,Ukirade (2014)used HSV values as the input of an ANN model to classifytomatoes into four ripeness groups.
El-Bendary et al. (2015)proposed a more sophisticated method for to-mato ripeness classiﬁcation. This employed the color histogram in theHSV space and the color moments ( i.e., mean, standard deviation, and skewness), which measure the color distribution in an image as colorfeatures. Principal Component Analysis (PCA) was applied to extractthe features for both Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA) and SVMmodels with more than an 80% correct classi ﬁcation rate forﬁve ripening stages. Note that rather than only using one color space, color compo-nents from two color spaces can be combined, such as in the study byLi et al. (2014). They used the RBH color space from outdoor color images
Fig. 4.Example workﬂow for fruit ripeness classiﬁers.M. Rizzo, M. Marcuzzo, A. Zangari et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 7 (2023) 44 –57
50of blueberries in combination with a KNN classi ﬁer.El-Bendary et al. (2015)propose a similar approach to classifying tomatoes in ﬁve ripe- ness stages utilizing color features. It consists of three phases: (i) pre-processing, (ii) feature extraction, and (iii) classi ﬁcation. During the pre-preprocessing phase, images are resized to 250 × 250 pixels, inorder to reduce their color index, and the background of each image is re-moved using a background subtraction technique. Also, each image isconverted from the RGB to the HSV color space. For the feature extractionphase, PCA was applied in order to generate a feature vector for eachimage in the dataset. Finally, for the classi ﬁcation phase, the proposed approach applied SVMs and LDA algorithms for the classi ﬁcation of ripe- ness stages. In particular, they use PCA in addition to SVMs and LDA algo-rithms for feature extraction and classiﬁcation, respectively. Experiments have been conducted on a dataset of a total of 250 images. They showed aripeness classiﬁcation accuracy of 90.80%, using the one-against-onemulti-class SVM algorithm with a linear kernel function, a ripeness clas-siﬁcation accuracy of 84.80% using a one-against-all multi-class SVMs al-gorithm with a linear kernel function, and a ripeness classi ﬁcation accuracy of 84% using LDA algorithm. Along the same lines, Nambi et al. (2015)describe the study carried out to classify the ripeningstage of mangoes into different stages. They collected a proprietarydataset based on the physicochemical properties, external and internalcolor values, and textural characteristics that were measured throughoutthe ripening period of two Indian mango varieties. Experts identi ﬁedﬁve stages of ripeness for mangoes (i.e., unripe, early ripe, partially ripe, ripe,and over-ripe). They achieved promising results performing mango ripe-ness classiﬁcation using PCA along with hierarchical clustering.For a more comprehensive understanding of the problem, Castro et al. (2019)evaluate the combinations of four ML techniques andthree color spaces (RGB, HSV, and L*a*b*) with regard to their abilityto classify cape gooseberry fruit. To this end, 925 samples were col-lected, and each fruit was manually classiﬁed into one of seven different classes according to its grade of ripeness. The classi ﬁcation of ripeness of cape gooseberry fruit was sensitive to both the color space and the clas-siﬁcation technique used. The models based on the L*a*b* color spaceand the SVM classiﬁer showed the highest f-measure regardless of thecolor space, and the PCA combination of color spaces improved theperformance of the models at the expense of increased complexity.5.1.2. VolatilesThe aroma of a given category of fruit is ultimately determined byplant genetics and serves as a major discriminant for its classi ﬁcation (Prasanna, 2007). Before the advent of electronic noses, human gradershad used to judge fruit ripeness in a rather qualitative manner. E-nose devices have offered new alternative tools for grading fruit for ripeness.These instruments are very effective in discriminating complex mix-tures of fruit volatiles, as new effective tools for more ef ﬁcient fruit aroma analyses. The work byBaietto and Wilson (2015)explores the current and potential utilization of electronic-nose devices (with spe-cialized sensor arrays) in the fruit ripeness classi ﬁcation domain. E-
noses contain a sensor array that evaluates all of the chemical constitu-ents present in an aroma mixture (as a whole sample). Then, it convertsthe electronic output signals (viaa transducer) from all of the sensors inthe array and collectively assembles them to form a distinct digital pat-tern, sometimes referred to as an Electronic Aroma Signature Pattern(EASP). This is highly unique and speciﬁc to the particular gas mixtures being analyzed (Prasanna, 2007). In this way, the instrument outputgenerates an aroma signature or smell print that can be used to identifythe particular type and variety of fruit being analyzed. Even though dif-ferent types of fruit share some aromatic characteristics, each fruit has adistinctive aroma. In a seminal work,Llobet et al. (1999)determined the state of ripeness of bananas by sensing the aromatic volatiles emitted bythe fruit. For this purpose, they used an electronic arti ﬁcial nose system in combination with a pattern-recognition engine. They found that theirsystem led to a promising performance, providing 90% accuracy in theclassiﬁcation of fresh bananas. Similarly,Aghilinategh et al. (2020)usefruit odor to classify samples of berries into ﬁve classes. For classiﬁca- tion, they employed ANN, PCA, and LDA analysis. The ANN achieved aprecision of 100% and 88.3% for blackberry and white berries, respec-tively. Also, PCA analysis characterized 97% and 93% variance in theblackberry and white berry, respectively. The least correct classi ﬁcation for white berries was observed in the LDA method.5.1.3. FluorescenceAs mentioned, a peculiarity of each ripeness stage for many varietiesof fruit is the amount of chlorophyll present in an item. Initial work by Li et al. (1997)developed an optical chlorophyll-sensing system to detectthe chlorophyll content of bananas as the fruit ripens, showing a highcorrelation with other methods to assess the color of the peel ( e.g.,s p e c - tral analysis, instrumental analysis, and visual color matching). Com-mon informative indices utilizeﬂuorescence from anthocyanins(ANTH),ﬂavonols (FLAV), and chlorophyll (CHL) to indicate fruit ripe-ness. In the study byLi et al. (1997), CHL showed a positive correlationwith the ripeness of apples. The in-ﬁeld assessment of CHL was also suc-cessfully applied to grapes, and the combination of CHL and ANTH canbe used as a robust decision tool to predict ripeness as well ( Li et al., 2018). For tomatoes, all the indices were found to correlate well withthe time shift in the tomato ripening process ( Abdelhamid et al., 2021). The blue-to-redﬂuorescence ratio (BUV/RF UV) was measured as an effective parameter for the assessment of the ripeness of palm oilwith rough skin, and when combined with the classi ﬁcation and regression tree method resulted in an overall correct classi ﬁcation rate of 90% for three different ripeness stages ( Hazir et al., 2012). Finally, in Das et al. (2016)Ultra-Violet (UV)ﬂuorescence from Chlorophyll pres-ent in the skin was measured across various apple varieties during theripening process and correlated with destructive ﬁrmness tests. A satis- factory agreement was observed between ripeness and ﬂuorescence signals. This demonstration is a step toward the possible consumer,bio-sensing, and diagnostic applications that can be carried out in arapid manner.5.1.4. Spectral imagingHyperspectral imaging is a data representation for fruit ripenessclassiﬁcation that proved to be valuable in a number of contexts. Thiscan be handled in two different ways: (i) light scattering analysis and(ii) spectral analysis. Modiﬁed Lorentzian distribution, which correlatesthe data obtained with a predeﬁned distribution curve by using a distri-bution function, can be used to describe the scattering pro ﬁle and the ﬁtting parameters that were used as the variables for a step-wise MLRmodel (Peng and Lu, 2008). The results of the study byQin et al. (2009)suggest that spectral scattering from all wavelengths or selectedwavelengths can provide more accurate predictions of apple ripenessthan using secondary properties such as spectral absorption. Similarmethods were also employed for the prediction of peach ripeness ( Lu and Peng, 2006). However, with MLR models different results were ob-tained when using two different cultivars ( i.e., types of plants that peo- ple have bred for desired traits).Mendoza et al. (2011)combined both the spectral and image analysis techniques on scattering images, includ-ing discrete and continuous wavelet transformation decomposition,ﬁrst-order statistics, Fourier analysis, co-occurrence matrix, andvariogram analysis, but little improvements in the prediction of ripenessof apples were found. On the other hand, Wang et al. (2012)used two different feature selection methods: uninformative variable elimination(Centner et al., 1996) and supervised afﬁnity propagation (Zhu et al., 2013). The output of two PLS models with two feature selectionmethods was combined as the input to an ANN model that gave a corre-lation coefﬁcient of 0.83 with fruit ripeness.The average spectra of the region of interest have also been modeledfor the assessment of fruit ripeness. Key wavelengths have been se-lected, with different feature selection techniques. This operation wasperformed before modeling in order to reduce the redundancy of thewhole spectral dataset. One of the widely used feature selection criteriaM. Rizzo, M. Marcuzzo, A. Zangari et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 7 (2023) 44 –57
51is based on beta coefﬁcients derived from PLS models. The PLS modelsmeasure how great an effect an independent variable has on the depen-dent variable. A comparison of the performance of different MLR modelswith wavelength selection based on beta coef ﬁcients and PLS models with full spectra as input showed that the ﬁnal outcomes were similar for the ripeness grading of strawberries ( ElMasry et al., 2007). The same feature selection methods were also used by Rajkumar et al. (2012)to predict the ripeness of bananas by MLR model and achieveda good correlation for ripeness. Another key wavelength selectionmethod that can solve the collinearity problem is the successive projec-tion algorithm, which iteratively adds wavelengths one by one until aspeciﬁc number of wavelengths is achieved with a minimum redundantinformation content. This method has been used to select the featurewavelengths for input to the PLS model and a high correlation wasfound for predicting persimmon ripeness ( Wei et al., 2014). Near-Infrared Spectroscopy (NIRS) is another feature descriptionmethod for fruit that was applied successfully to the prediction of theripeness of many varieties of fruit. For instance, Munawar et al. (2019) evaluate the level of maturity of mangos using NIRS. The classi ﬁcation of mango ripeness was successfully achieved using second derivativepretreated spectra with an accuracy of more than 80%. With a differentapproach,Silalahi et al. (2016)employed a genetic algorithm neuralnetwork for multi-class prediction of the ripeness grades of oil palmfresh fruit using NIRS spectral data. This data provided suf ﬁcient infor- mation about the compound structure of samples from the near-infrared light that passes through. The variables used in the GANNmodeling process were the new variables obtained as a result of dimen-sional reduction from original NIRS spectral data using PCA. Three statis-tical measures (i.e., mean absolute error, root mean squared error, andthe percentage of right classiﬁcations) were used to assess the adequacyof the model. This was precise enough to be used for the model calibra-tion for fruit ripeness classiﬁcation.5.2. Deep-learning-based5.2.1. CNN and pretrained modelsIn recent days, DL-based image processing is considered the state-of-the-art computer vision technique for image classi ﬁcation tasks. The in- troduction of CNNs made the feature engineering task way simpler assuch networks are able to extract semantic features automaticallythrough convolutions. Still, the visual classi ﬁcation of various stages of maturity of fruit is a challenging task as it may be hard to differentiatethe visual features at different maturity stages. A recent study proposedto classify four different ripeness stages of bananas using a novel CNNarchitecture, which is compared with the state-of-the-art CNN modelusing transfer learning (i.e., VGG16 and ResNet50) (Saranya et al., 2022). The proposed model performed comparably to the state-of-the-art but it is lightweight enough to be deployed on low-tier hard-ware. Further experiments were conducted involving transfer learningtechniques using the VGG16 model. The proposed architecture usesVGG16 without the top layer. This was replaced by adding a MultilayerPerceptron (MLP) block for feature reduction and ﬁnal classiﬁcation. The MLP block contains aﬂattening layer, a dense layer, andregularizers. The output of the MLP block uses the softmax activationfunction. There are three regularizers that are considered in the MLPblock, namely dropout, batch normalization, and regularizers kernels.The selected regularizers are intended to reduce over ﬁtting. Based on the experimental results, the pretrained model seems to perform best.At the same time, the determination of the type of regularizers is veryin
ﬂuential on system performance. The best performance was obtainedon the MLP block that has a Dropout of 0.5 with increased accuracyreaching 18.42%. The Batch Normalization and the regularizer kernelsperformance increased the accuracy by 10.52% and 2.63%, respectively.Ultimately, this study shows that the performance of DL strategiesusing transfer learning is always better than using ML with traditionalfeature extraction to determine fruit ripeness.Another discriminant characteristic of fruit that must be accountedfor when grading their ripeness is whether the fruit is climacteric.Wismadi et al. (2019)focus on a non-climacteric fruit, that is the dragonfruit. This requires particular attention as it has to be harvested after it isripened and cannot be ripened after harvesting using the hastening rip-ening process such as ethylene, carbide, CO2, etc.T h e yp u tf o r t ha na p - plication to identify the ripeness of the dragon fruit and the optimalharvest time using the RESNET 152 CNN-based model. The systemthey developed was trained using pictures of dragon fruit at differentstages of maturity. The results they achieved were promising andmore accurate compared to the VGG16/19.5.2.2. Detection-based approachesIt is common knowledge that DL algorithms work as well as the sizeand variety of their training set. A collection of relevant datasets for thetask is summarized inTable 1.T h ew o r ko fGe et al. (2016)introduced the DeepFruits, a huge dataset for the task for fruit detection task, anda novel DL approach serving the same purpose. First, they exploredthe use of the FasterRCNN framework ( Ren et al., 2015) for fruit detec- tion and achieved impressive results. Furthermore, they demonstratedthat such an approach could be rapidly trained and deployed with asmall amount of training data (as few as 25 images). However, an aspectthey did not explore was the potential for the system to perform notonly fruit detection but also ripeness estimation. Inspired by DeepFruits,the work byHalstead et al. (2018)presents a robotic vision system thatcan accurately estimate the ripeness (as well as the quantity) of sweetpepper, a key horticultural crop. This system consists of three parts:(i) detection, (ii) ripeness estimation, and (iii) tracking. Similarly tothe approach byGe et al. (2016),e fﬁcient detection is achieved usingthe FasterRCNN framework (Ren et al., 2015). Ripeness is then esti- mated in the same framework by learning a parallel layer which exper-imentally shows superior performance than treating ripeness stages asextra classes in the traditional FRCNN framework. The evaluation ofthese two techniques outlines the slightly improved performance ofthe parallel layer: they achieve an F1 score of 77.3 using the paralleltechnique and 72.5 for the other best-scoring multi-class classi ﬁer. To track the crop, they present a vision-only tracking viadetection ap- proach, which uses the FRCNN with parallel layers as input. Being avision-only solution, this approach is cheap to implement as it onlyrequires a (possibly consumer) camera.Building a more complex system, the goal of the study proposed byNi et al. (2020)is to develop a data processing pipeline to count berries,measure their maturity, and evaluate the compactness (cluster tight-ness) automatically. Their strategy employs a DL-based image segmen-tation method to extract an individual or groups of berries from thebackground. The target consists of four southern high-bush blueberrycultivars (i.e., Emerald, Farthing, Meadowlark, and Star). A Mask R-CNN (He et al., 2017) model was trained and tested to detect and seg-ment individual blueberries with respect to their maturity stage. Themean average precision was 71.6% and the corresponding mask accu-racy was 90.4%. The analysis of the traits collected from the four culti-vars highlighted useful information for the producers. For example, itTable 1Public datasets used within fruit-related applications.Name Task SourcesFruit 360 ClassiﬁcationMureşan and Oltean (2018) Fruit recognition Recognition Hussain et al. (2019, 2018) ACFR Orchard Fruit Detection Bargoti and Underwood (2017, 2016) VegFruit ClassiﬁcationHou et al. (2017) MinneApple Detection Häni et al. (2019) Lemon Quality assurance Adamiak (2020) Grocery Store ClassiﬁcationKlasson et al. (2019) AppleScab FDs / LDs Quality assurance Kodors et al. (2021a, b, c) Pistachio Detection Ozkan et al. (2021, 2022) Date fruit Detection Koklu et al. (2021a, b)M. Rizzo, M. Marcuzzo, A. Zangari et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 7 (2023) 44 –57
52indicated that the‘Star’variety had the fewest berries per cluster, ‘Far- thing’had the least mature fruit in mid-April and the most compactclusters, while‘Meadowlark’had the loosest clusters. Thus, there isproof that the DL image segmentation technique developed in thisstudy is efﬁcient for detecting and segmenting blueberry fruit,extracting traits of interest related to machine harvestability, and mon-itoring blueberry fruit development.5.2.3. Combination of neural models and engineered featuresThe above-mentioned techniques were tested against a variety offruit types at the same time. One particularly relevant crop worldwideis represented by bananas. The effectiveness and fast classi ﬁcation of the maturity stage of bananas are the most decisive factors in determin-ing their quality. This is one of the reasons that motivate the necessity todesign and implement image processing tools for the correct ripeningstage classiﬁcation of the different incoming banana bunches. InMazen and Nashat (2019)an automatic computer vision system is pro-posed to identify the ripening stages of bananas. First, a four-classhomemade database is prepared. Second, an ANN-based frameworkthat uses color, the development of brown spots, and Tamura statisticaltexture features (Tamura et al., 1978) are employed to grade the ripen-ing stages of bananas. The performance of the proposed system is com-pared with various other traditional ML methods ( e.g., SVM, naive Bayes, KNN, decision trees, and discriminant analysis). The results re-veal that the proposed ANN-based system has the highest overall classi-ﬁcation rate (97.75%) among the considered techniques.Similarly to the research byMazen and Nashat (2019), other works specialized in grading one particular type of fruit. For instance, Miraei Ashtiani et al. (2021)analyze, evaluate and classify mulberry fruit ac-cording to their stage of ripeness. Three stages were considered: unripe,ripe, and overripe. To collect their proprietary dataset, a total of 577mulberries were graded by an expert and the corresponding imageswere captured by an imaging system. Then, individual mulberrieswere segmented and the geometrical properties, color, and texturecharacteristics of each item were extracted using two feature reductionmethods. One feature reduction method is the Correlation-based Fea-ture Selection subset (CFS) and the other is the Consistency subset(CONS). Finally, an ANN and SVM were applied to classify the mulberryfruit. The ANN classiﬁcation paired with the CFS subset feature extrac-tion method resulted in an accuracy of 100%, 100%, and 99.1% over thethree classes, respectively. Also, the same couple led to the least meansquare error values. The ANN structure with the CONS subset feature ex-traction method still resulted in an acceptable model with a correspond-ing accuracy of 100%, 98.9%, and 98.3%. In general, the machine visionsystem combined with the ANN and SVM algorithms successfully classi-ﬁed mulberries based on maturity.Again using CNNs,Liming and Yanchao (2010)discuss an automatic vision-based system for sorting and analyzing strawberries. They pro-posed an automated system to predict the ripeness level of strawberryfruit, using a very simple CNN architecture. For the success of classi ﬁca- tion, appropriate features must be extracted. Surface color, size, andshape are necessary features for classiﬁcation. The surface color of strawberry fruit determines its ripeness level. The CNN proved to ex-tract color, size, and shape features from strawberry surfaces andachieves as high as 91.6% accuracy.On a different note,Gao et al. (2020)estimate the ripeness of straw- berries using the HSI system, both in the ﬁeld and in laboratory condi- tions. HSI data was collected for strawberries at early ripe and ripestages, covering wavelength ranges from 370 to 1015 nm. Spectral fea-ture wavelengths were selected using the sequential feature selectionalgorithm. Two wavelengths were selected for the ﬁ
eld (530 and 604 nm) and laboratory (528 and 715 nm) samples, respectively.Then, the reliability of such spectral features was validated based onan SVM classiﬁer. The performance of the SVM classiﬁcation models showed good results based on the receiver operating characteristicvalues for samples under bothﬁeld and laboratory conditions (higherthan 0.95). Additionally, a CNN was used to extract spatial featuresfrom the spectral wavelength and theﬁrst together with the three prin- cipal components for laboratory samples. A pretrained AlexNet CNNwas used to classify the early ripe and ripe strawberry samples, whichobtained an accuracy of 98.6% for the test dataset.Adding to the discussion on classiﬁcation based on color features, Rivero Mesa and Chiang (2021)propose a non-invasive automated sys-tem for export-quality banana ripeness tiers. This system combines nu-merous features, including RGB values and hyperspectral imaging, puttogether by DL techniques. The multi-input model achieved an excellentoverall accuracy of 98.45% using only a minimal number of samplescompared to other methods in the literature. Moreover, the modelwas able to incorporate both the external and internal properties ofthe fruit. The size of the bananas was used as a feature for ripenessgrade classiﬁcation as well as other morphological features using RGBimaging. Reﬂectance values of the fruit were also used and obtainedthrough hyperspectral imaging. These proved to offer valuable informa-tion and have shown a high correlation with the internal features. Thisstudy highlighted the combined strengths of RGB and hyperspectral im-aging in grading bananas, which may serve as a paradigm for gradingother horticultural crops.A similar system was developed byGarillos-Manliguez and Chiang (2021)to estimate six maturity stages of papaya fruit whilst suggestinga novel nondestructive and multi-modal classi ﬁcation method using deep CNNs. The models they designed estimated fruit maturity by fea-ture concatenation of data acquired from two imaging modes: visible-light and hyperspectral imaging systems. Morphological changes inthe sample fruit can be measured with RGB images. At the same time,the spectral signatures, which provide high sensitivity and correlationwith the internal properties of the fruit, can be extracted fromhyperspectral images with a wavelength range between 400 nm and900 nm. In the study, some of the most popular pretrained CNN archi-tectures (i.e., AlexNet, VGG16, VGG19, ResNet50, ResNeXt50,MobileNet, and MobileNetV2) were investigated to utilize multi-modal data cubes composed of RGB and hyperspectral data for sensitiv-ity analyses. Such multi-modal variants could achieve up to 0.90 F1scores for the six-way classiﬁcation. These results conﬁrm the above- mentionedﬁndings indicating that multi-modal DL architectures andmulti-modal imaging have great potential for real-time in- ﬁeld fruit ripeness estimation.5.2.4. Classiﬁcation in orchard environmentSpecializing in yet another fruit crop, Altaheri et al. (2019)ﬁll the gap in research in the area of machine vision for date fruits in an orchardenvironment. In their work, they propose an ef ﬁcient machine vision framework for date fruit harvesting robots. The framework consists ofthree classiﬁcation models used to classify date fruit images in real-time according to their type, maturity, and harvesting decision. In theclassiﬁcation models, deep CNNs are utilized with transfer learningandﬁne-tuning on pre-trained models. To build a robust vision system,they create a rich image dataset of date fruit bunches in an orchard thatconsists of more than eight-thousand images of ﬁve date types in differ-ent pre-maturity and maturity stages. The dataset has a large degree ofvariations that reﬂects the challenges in the date orchard environmentincluding variations in angles, scales, illumination conditions, and datebunches covered by bags. The proposed date fruit classi ﬁcation models achieve accuracy scores as high as 99.01%, 97.25%, and 98.59% for thecorresponding ripeness classes. Furthermore, they report times of20.6, 20.7, and 35.9 milliseconds for the type, maturity, and harvestingdecision classiﬁcation tasks, respectively. Such values make the pro-posed system viable for real-time use.5.2.5. Real-time assessment of ripenessThe research bySuharjito et al. (2021)addresses the problem of oil palm ripeness classiﬁcation. Though many techniques have been ex-plored in the literature, most of the methods require devices withM. Rizzo, M. Marcuzzo, A. Zangari et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 7 (2023) 44 –57
53high computational resources that could not be implemented in mobileapplications. To overcome this problem, the authors focus on creating amobile application to classify the ripeness levels of oil palm using alightweight CNN. They implemented ImageNet transfer learningon four lightweight CNN models with a novel data augmentationmethod named“9-angle crop”, which can be further optimized usingpost-training quantization. Transfer learning with three unfrozenconvolutional blocks and 9 angle crops successfully increased the classi-ﬁcation accuracy on MobileNetV1. However, Ef ﬁcientNetB0 performed best with an accuracy of 0.89. Float16 quantization also proved to bethe most suitable post-training quantization method for this model,halving the size of EfﬁcientNetB0 with the least increase in image clas-siﬁcation time and an accuracy drop of only 0.005.5.2.6. Attention-based approachesA recent breakthrough in DL has been the introduction of attentionmodels (Bahdanau et al., 2015), which found application, among others,in fruit ripeness classiﬁcation. Attention allows learning a weighted sumof embeddings of the input tokens that can then be manipulated invarious ways (e.g., for input classiﬁcation). The study byHerman et al. (2020)led to the development of a model for oil palm ripenessprediction using a residual-based attention mechanism ANN(ResAttDenseNet) that could recognize the small detail differences be-tween images. The proprietary dataset used for conducting their exper-iments consists of four-hundred images including seven levels ofripeness. As a result, they showed that the proposed model could im-prove the F1 Score by 1.1% compared to the highest F1 score fromother basic DL and traditional ML models compared in the study.6. Prediction of optimal harvest timeGlobal food security for the increasing world population not only re-quires increased sustainable production of food but also process optimi-zation. This means that a signiﬁcant reduction in pre and post-harvestwaste is imperative. The timing of when some fruit is harvested is crit-ical for reducing waste along the supply chain and increasing fruit qual-ity for consumers. The early in-ﬁeld assessment of fruit ripeness andprediction of the harvest date and yield by non-destructive technologieshave the potential to revolutionize farming practices and enable theconsumer to eat the tastiest and freshest fruit possible. As discussedabove, a variety of non-destructive techniques have been applied to es-timate the ripeness or maturity but not all of them are applicable for in situ(ﬁeld or glasshouse) assessment. Non-destructive methods are verypromising for in-ﬁeld ripeness assessment, but the most critical ques-tion is how to link such assessment to predict yield and the optimal har-vest date. This is highly challenging and made complicated by ripenessvariability within and between plants.Environmental factors such as temperature, light levels, humidity,etc.signiﬁcantly inﬂuence the development of crops as well, and it is es-sential to incorporate the predictions of these important environmentalfactors in the determination of the optimal harvest date ( Teng et al., 2012). Several crop models have been developed since the 1960sbased on the work inLoomis and Williams (1963)with the input of en- vironmental factors both for in-ﬁeld and greenhouse prediction. Suchmodels are difﬁcult to use due to the number of input variables ( e.g., (Qiu et al., 2016)). In the research byQiu et al. (2016), they investigated
the dominant environmental factors in greenhouses for tomato growthand it was found that temperature, humidity, and photosynthesis activeradiation interact according to a positive or negative correlation to cropgrowth. The inﬂuence of temperature has also been reported in a num-ber of studies such as for tomatoes (Teng et al., 2012), grapes (Tomana et al., 1979), apple (Yamada et al., 1994), mangoes (Medlicott et al., 1986), and more. The overall color change of the crop at different con-stant temperatures was studied, but the variation of the temperaturewithin each day was not considered ( Shewfelt et al., 1988).Munoz et al. (2012)developed a time series regression model for the predictionof the harvest date of blueberries. The minimum and maximum dailytemperatures from the weather forecast for two weeks ahead wereused as input for the model. This method was closer to a real applicationand potentially could be paired with non-destructive techniques to de-termine the current ripening stage of the crop.Interestingly, it was found that environmental temperature affectsnot only fruit growth but also the near-infrared re ﬂectance spectrum in a non-linear way (Ma et al., 2007).Kawano et al. (1995)compensated for the surface temperature effect by developing a combined MLRmodel, which covered a variety of temperatures ranging between 21and 31C. On the other hand,Peirs et al. (2003)compared a global cali- bration model that covers a wide temperature range and calibrationmodels for each temperature range. Both methods performed well forthe ripeness prediction of apples, but for practical purposes, the globalcalibration model was preferred.Finally,Yang (2011)recorded the HSI spectra of tomatoes at differ-ent growing stages, and the PLS model was applied to predict the grow-ing stage of a target crop with the best correlation coef ﬁcient being 0.89. It was also observed that the key wavelengths were in the visible and in-frared regions (400–2100 nm) (Yang, 2011). A similar method was em- ployed to predict the number of days until the commercial harvest ofapple (Peirs et al., 2001). The calibration model was built with eight cul-tivars and a good correlation (R2 = 0.93) was found for the spectralrange between 380 nm and 2000 nm.7. PerspectivesDespite the CNN models proving to work particularly effectively andefﬁciently for fruit ripeness classiﬁcation, there is still room for improve-ment. First, the accuracy of the task might be boosted by using newstate-of-the-art models such as Transformers ( Vaswani et al., 2017). These were initially devised for neural machine translation in the ﬁeld of Natural Language Processing (NLP) but showed outstanding resultsin many other text-related tasks ( e.g.,(Khandelwal et al., 2019;Sun et al., 2019)). More recently, Transformer-based architectures were em-ployed with little tuning to visual tasks, both image- ( Han et al., 2023) and video-based (Neimark et al., 2021). Investigating the use of Trans- formers in the domain of fruit ripeness classi ﬁcation from a visual per- spective could improve the accuracy and yield more robust models.Furthermore, the visual Transformer could be mixed with CNNs in dif-ferent ways, the simplest interaction being late averaging of the output.On the other hand, insisting on the CNNs path would require re ﬁning their optimization,i.e.,ﬁnding the optimal number of layers andﬁlters for the speciﬁc problem to be solved, as well as determining the param-eters and hyperparameters of the model. This remains a relevant prob-lem commonly solved by trial and error until the best con ﬁguration is achieved, which is especially time-consuming for very deep models.Also, we warn against a gap in the literature on fruit ripeness classi ﬁca- tion when it comes to measuring inference time. Low inference time is ahard requirement for developing real-time applications, which arerequired to performin situinference.An obvious limitation to both the CNN- and Transformer-based ap-proaches is the size of the available datasets. To solve a task using DLmethods the dataset must be sufﬁciently large and well-labeled to ad-dress underﬁtting and overﬁtting problems. Therefore, the process ofpreparing the dataset is one of the activities that require more timeand effort. Although there is a wide variety of publicly available datasets,not all researchers release their data. For this reason, the reproducibilityof some studies is not entirely guaranteed. In addition, the datasets areoften collected with a very speciﬁc task in mind, which limits the infer-ence potential of the trained model. It is imperative that further studiesrelease their code and datasets so that new models can be tested againsta larger number of benchmarks to get a better overview of the chal-lenges and achievements of the task.On another note, developing AI-based models for food quality as-sessment applications means working in a high stake decision-makingM. Rizzo, M. Marcuzzo, A. Zangari et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 7 (2023) 44 –57
54environment. Thus, one may want to investigate and compare the inter-pretability of the models used for fruit image processing (be they tradi-tional ML models, CNNs, or Transformers) to provide explanations forboth model developers and end users. In the ﬁrst stage, one could aim for data debugging. This means analyzing the distribution of the datapoints and their features and searching for discrepancies. For example,a trivial check would require assessing whether the dataset is balancedor not. In the latter case, several methods can be used to make it bal-anced (e.g.,(Chawla et al., 2002)). Second, one could statistically analyzethe output distribution of the models, looking, for instance, for outliers.The output of this analysis itself could tell much about what the modelhas been learning and whether this is correct. On the other hand, itmight be hard to make strong inferences based on it ( e.g., justify the presence of outliers). Finally, sophisticated interpretability techniquesexist for off-the-shelf usage (seeCarvalho et al. (2019)for a survey). Albeit with different levels of reliability, these may provide interestinginformation about black-box models.8. ConclusionsThis review offers a wide panoramic of the fruit ripeness classi ﬁca- tion task. More speciﬁcally, we offer a formal statement of the problemand a summary of the biological processes involved in fruit ripening.Then, we discuss the different types of descriptors that can be used torepresent a fruit item: color, light spectrum, ﬂuorescence, and spectral imaging. The featurized items can thus be processed by either statistical,ML, or DL models. When using former types it is important to select andpossibly generate the right features, i.e., the most discriminative. On the other hand, DL models do not require feature engineering, which is alabor-intensive and error-prone process. Yet, they still achieve state-of-the-art accuracy for a variety of fruit ripeness classi ﬁcation tasks. Thus, it seems that DL models, especially pretrained and then ﬁne- tuned models, are the most promising approach to fruit ripeness classi-ﬁcation. However, we warn against their inner opacity: it is hard forhumans to understand how a DL model made a speci ﬁc prediction. Con- sidering that ripeness is bound to food quality and safety, it is of the ut-most importance to consider a trade-off between accuracy andinterpretability. Hence, future research directions may want to investi-gate models that are more transparent. In particular, Transformermodels for images are an emergingﬁeld that promises higher accuracyand higher interpretability by allowing researchers to examine the at-tention heads that compose the model. Even if some work debunkedthe use of attention for producing explanations ( Jain and Wallace, 2019;Wiegreffe and Pinter, 2019;Serrano and Smith, 2019), whether it carries some intelligible information is still an open question in theeXplainable AI (XAI) community.Declaration of Competing InterestThe authors declare the followingﬁnancial interests/personal rela- tionships which may be considered as potential competing interests:Matteo Rizzo reportsﬁnancial support was provided by Veneto Agricul-ture. Matteo Rizzo reports a relationship with Veneto Agriculture thatincludes: funding grants.AcknowledgmentsThis paper was funded by Veneto Agricoltura within the scope of theproject“Guaranteeing the continuity of the agri-food chain: the digitiza-tion of wholesale markets”.References
Abdelhamid, M.A., Sudnik, Y., Alshinayyin, H.J., Shaaban, F., 2021. Nondestructive method for monitoring tomato ripening based on chlorophyll ﬂuorescence induction. J. Agric. Eng. Res. 52.Adamiak, M., . Lemons Quality Control Dataset. URL https://github.com/softwaremill/ lemon-dataset.Aghilinategh, N., Dalvand, M.J., Anvar, A., 2020. Detection of ripeness grades of berriesusing an electronic nose. Food Sci. Nutri. 8, 4919 –4928 URL:https://doi.org/ 10.1002/fsn3.1788.Altaheri, H., Alsulaiman, M., Muhammad, G., 2019. Date fruit classi ﬁcation for robotic har- vesting in a natural environment using deep learning. IEEE Access 7,117115–117133..https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2936536 . conference Name: IEEE Access.Anzalone, G.C., Glover, A.G., Pearce, J.M., 2013. Open-source colorimeter. Sensors 13, 5338–5346.Bahdanau, D., Cho, K., Bengio, Y., 2015. Neural machine translation by jointly learning to align and translate. 3rd International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR2015 Place: San Diego, CA, USA.Baietto, M., Wilson, A.D., 2015. Electronic-nose applications for fruit identi ﬁcation, ripe- ness and quality grading. Sensors 15, 899 –931. Bakar, B., Ishak, A., Shamsudin, R., Hasan, W.W., 2013. Ripeness level classiﬁcation for pineapple using rgb and hsi color map. J. Theor. Appl. Inf. Technol. 57, 587 –593. Bargoti, S., Underwood, J., 2017. Deep fruit detection in orchards. 2017 IEEE InternationalConference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA). IEEE Press , pp. 3626 –3633 URL: https://doi.org/10.1109/ICRA.2017.7989417 . Bauriegel, E., Giebel, A., Geyer, M., Schmidt, U., Herppich, W.B., 2011. Early detection of fu- sarium infection in wheat using hyper-spectral imaging. Comput. Electron. Agric. 75,304–312 Publisher: Elsevier BV.Bodria, L., Fiala, M., Guidetti, R., Oberti, R., 2004. Optical techniques to estimate the ripe- ness of red-pigmented fruits. Trans. ASAE 47, 815 –820. Bonora, E., Vidoni, S., Noferini, M., Costa, G., Lopresti, J., Stefanelli, D., 2015. The combined use of the index of absorbance difference and the reconstruction model planttoon Â®to characterize peach and nectarine training systems. Acta Hortic. 1084, 361 –366. Bulanon, D., Burks, T., Alchanatis, V., 2011. Visible and Thermal Images for Fruit Detection. pp. 944–954.Camps, C., Christen, D., 2009.Non-destructive assessment of apricot fruit quality by por-table visible-near infrared spectroscopy. LWT Food Sci. Technol. 42, 1125 –1131. Carvalho, D.V., Pereira, E.M., Cardoso, J.S., 2019. Machine learning interpretability: A sur- vey on methods and metrics. Electronics (Basel) 8, 832 Publisher: MDPI AG.Castro, W., Oblitas, J., De-La-Torre, M., Cotrina, C., Bazan, K., Avila-George, H., 2019. Clas-siﬁcation of cape gooseberry fruit according to its level of ripeness using machinelearning techniques and different color spaces. IEEE ACCESS 7, 27389 –27400. https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2898223 publisher: Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE).Centner, V., Massart, D.L., Noord, O.E., Jong, S., Vandeginste, B.M., Sterna, C., 1996. Elimina- tion of uninformative variables for multivariate calibration. Anal. Chem. 68,3851–3858.Chawla, N.V., Bowyer, K.W., Hall, L.O., Kegelmeyer, W.P., 2002. SMOTE: synthetic minority over-sampling technique. jair 16, 321 –357. Choo, W.S., 2019. Fruit pigment changes during ripening. In: Melton, L., Shahidi, F.,Varelis, P. (Eds.), Encyclopedia of Food Chemistry. Academic Press, Oxford,pp. 117–123https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-08-100596-5.21656-9 . Costa, G., Noferini, M., Fiori, G., Ziosi, V., Berthod, N., Rossier, J., 2010. Establishment of the optimal harvest time in apricot ( ‘orangered’and‘bergarouge’) by means of a new index based on vis spectroscopy. Acta Hortic. 533 –539. Das, A.J., Wahi, A., Kothari, I., Raskar, R., 2016. Ultra-portable, wireless smartphone spec- trometer for rapid, non-destructive testing of fruit ripeness. Sci. Rep. 6, 32504.El-Bendary, N., El Hariri, E., Hassanien, A.E., Badr, A., 2015. Using machine learning tech-niques for evaluating tomato ripeness. Expert Syst. Appl. 42, 1892 –1905.https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2014.09.057 . ElMasry, G.M., Nakauchi, S., 2016. Image analysis operations applied to hyperspectral im-ages for non-invasive sensing of food quality –a comprehensive review. Biosyst. Eng. 142, 53–82.ElMasry, G., Wang, N., ElSayed, A., Ngadi, M., 2007. Hyperspectral imaging for nondestruc- tive determination of some quality attributes for strawberry. J. Food Eng. 81, 98 –107 Publisher: Elsevier BV.Ferrer, A., Remon, S., Negueruela, A.I., Oria, R., 2005. Changes during the ripening of the very late season spanish peach cultivar calanda: feasibility of using cielab coordinatesas maturity indices. Sci. Hortic. 105, 435 –446. Gao, Z., Shao, Y., Xuan, G., Wang, Y., Liu, Y., Han, X., 2020. Real-time hyperspectral imaging for the in-ﬁeld estimation of strawberry ripeness with deep learning. Artif. Intell.Agric. 4, 31–38 Publisher: Elsevier BV.Garillos-Manliguez, C.A., Chiang, J.Y., 2021. Multimodal deep learning and visible-light and hyperspectral imaging for fruit maturity estimation. Sensors 21.Ghozlen, N.B., Cerovic, Z.G., Germain, C., Toutain, S., Latouche, G., 2010. Non-destructive optical monitoring of grape maturation by proximal sensing. Sensors 10,10040–10068.Goel, N., Sehgal, P., 2015.Fuzzy classiﬁcation of pre-harvest tomatoes for ripeness estima- tion–an approach based on automatic rule learning using decision tree. Appl. SoftComput. 36, 45–56 Publisher: Elsevier BV.Gomez, A.H., He, Y., Pereira, A.G., 2006. Non-destructive measurement of acidity, soluble solids andﬁrmness of satsuma mandarin using vis/nirspectroscopy techniques.J. Food Eng. 77, 313–319 Publisher: Progress on Bioproducts Processing and FoodSafety.Gowda, I., Huddar, A., 2001.Studies on ripening changes in mango (Mangifera indica L.)fruits. J. Food Sci. Technol. Mysore 38, 135 –137. Halstead, M., McCool, C., Denman, S., Perez, T., Fookes, C., 2018. Fruit quantity and ripe-ness estimation using a robotic vision system. IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett. 3,2995–3002.
https://doi.org/10.1109/LRA.2018.2849514 conference Name: IEEE Ro- botics and Automation Letters.M. Rizzo, M. Marcuzzo, A. Zangari et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 7 (2023) 44 –57
55Han, K., Wang, Y., Chen, H., Chen, X., Guo, J., Liu, Z., Tang, Y., Xiao, A., Xu, C., Xu, Y., Yang, Z.,Zhang, Y., Tao, D., 2023. A survey on vision transformer. IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal.Mach. Intell. 45, 87–110.https://doi.org/10.1109/TPAMI.2022.3152247 conference Name: IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence.Häni, N., Roy, P., Isler, V., 2019. Minneapple: a benchmark dataset for apple detection andsegmentation. CoRR abs/1909.06441. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1909.06441 .arXiv: 1909.06441.Hartmann, A., Czauderna, T., Hoffmann, R., Stein, N., Schreiber, F., 2011. HTPheno: an image analysis pipeline for high-throughput plant phenotyping. BMC Bioinform. 12,148.Hazir, M.H.M., Shariff, A.R.M., Amiruddin, M.D., Ramli, A.R., Saripan, M.I., 2012. Oil palm bunch ripeness classiﬁcation usingﬂuorescence technique. J. Food Eng. 113, 534 –540. He, K., Gkioxari, G., Dollar, P., Girshick, R., 2017. Mask R-CNN. 2017 IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), IEEE, pp. 2980 –2988 Event-place: Venice. Herman, H., Susanto, A., Cenggoro, T.W., Suharjito, S., Pardamean, B., 2020. Oil palm fruit image ripeness classiﬁcation with computer vision using deep learning and visual at-tention. J. Telecommun. Electron. Comput. Eng. (JTEC) 12, 21 –27. Hobson, G.E., Adams, P., Dixon, T.J., 1983. Assessing the colour of tomato fruit during rip-ening. J. Sci. Food Agric. 34, 286 –292 URL:https://doi.org/10.1002/jsfa.2740340312 publisher: Wiley.Honkavaara, E., Kaivosoja, J., Makynen, J., Pellikka, I., Pesonen, L., Saari, H., Salo, H., Hakala,T., Marklelin, L., Rosnell, T., 2012. Hyperspectral reﬂectance signatures and point clouds for precision agriculture by light weight uav imaging system. ISPRS Annalsof the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences. I-7,pp. 353–358.Hou, S., Feng, Y., Wang, Z., 2017. Vegfru: a domain-speci ﬁc dataset forﬁne-grained visual categorization. 2017 IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV),pp. 541–549https://doi.org/10.1109/ICCV.2017.66 . Huang, C.H., He, J., Austin, E., Seto, E., Novosselov, I., 2021. Assessing the value of complexrefractive index and particle density for calibration of low-cost particle matter sensorfor size-resolved particle count and PM2.5 measurements. PLoS One 16. https://doi. org/10.1371/journal.pone.0259745 e0259745. publisher: Public Library of Science. Hussain, I., Wu, W.L., Hua, H.Q., Hussain, N., 2019. Intra-class recognition of fruits usingdcnn for commercial trace back-system. Proceedings of the 2019 4th InternationalConference on Multimedia Systems and Signal Processing, Association for ComputingMachinery, New York, NY, USA, pp. 194 –199https://doi.org/10.1145/3330393. 3330401.Jain, S., Wallace, B.C., 2019. Attention is not explanation. Proceedings of the 2019 Confer-ence of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics:Human Language Technologies, Association for Computational Linguistics, Minneap-olis, Minnesota , pp. 3543 –3556 URL:https://aclanthology.org/N19-1357 .10.18653/ v1/N19-1357.Jaradat, A.A., Zaid, A., 2004.Quality traits of date palm fruits in a center of origin and cen-ter of diversity. Int. J. Food Agric. Environ. 2, 208 –217. Jha, S.N., Kingsly, A.R.P., Chopra, S., 2006. Non-destructive determination of ﬁ
rmness and yellowness of mango during growth and storage using visual spectroscopy. Biosyst.Eng. 94, 397–402 Publisher: Elsevier BV.Jha, S.N., Chopra, S., Kingsly, A.R.P., 2007. Modeling of color values for nondestructive eval- uation of maturity of mango. J. Food Eng. 78, 22 –26 Publisher: Elsevier BV. Kawano, S., Abe, H., Iwamoto, M., 1995. Development of a calibration equation with tem-perature compensation for determining the brix value in intact peaches. J. Near Infra-red Spectrosc. 3, 211–218 URL:https://opg.optica.org/jnirs/abstract.cfm?uri=jnirs-3- 4-211publisher: SAGE Publishing.Khandelwal, U., Clark, K., Jurafsky, D., Kaiser, L., 2019. Sample Efﬁcient Text Summariza- tion Using a Single Pre-Trained Transformer.Klasson, M., Zhang, C., Kjellström, H., 2019. A hierarchical grocery store image datasetwith visual and semantic labels. 2019 IEEE Winter Conference on Applications ofComputer Vision (WACV), pp. 491 –500https://doi.org/10.1109/WACV.2019.00058 . Kodors, S., Lacis, G., Sokolova, O., Zhukov, V., Apeinans, I., Bartulsons, T., 2021a. Apple scabdetection using cnn and transfer learning. Agron. Res. 19, 507 –519.https://doi.org/ 10.15159/AR.21.045.Kodors, S., Lacis, G., Sokolova, O., Zhukov, V., Apeinans, I., Bartulsons, T., 2021b. Apples in-fected by scab dataset. URL:kaggle.com/datasets/projectlzp201910094/applescabfds . Kodors, S., Lacis, G., Sokolova, O., Zhukov, V., Apeinans, I., Bartulsons, T., 2021c. Leaves ofapples infected by scab dataset. URL: kaggle.com/datasets/projectlzp201910094/ applescablds.Koklu, M., Kursun, R., Taspinar, Y.S., Cinar, I., 2021a. Classi ﬁcation of date fruits into ge- netic varieties using image analysis. Math. Probl. Eng. 2021, 4793293 URL: https:// doi.org/10.1155/2021/4793293 . Koklu, M., Kursun, R., Taspinar, Y.S., Cinar, I., 2021b. Date Image Dataset. URL https:// www.muratkoklu.com/datasets/ . Li, M., Slaughter, D.C., Thompson, J.F., 1997. Optical chlorophyll sensing system for banana ripening. Postharvest Biol. Technol. 12, 273 –283. Li, H., Lee, W.S., Wang, K., 2014. Identifying blueberry fruit of different growth stagesusing natural outdoor color images. Comput. Electron. Agric. 106, 91 –101 Publisher: Elsevier BV.Li, B., Lecourt, J., Bishop, G., 2018. Advances in non-destructive early assessment of fruitripeness towards deﬁning optimal time of harvest and yield prediction —a review. Plants 7, 3 URL:https://www.mdpi.com/2223-7747/7/1/3 .https://doi.org/10.3390/ plants7010003number: 1 Publisher: Multidisciplinary Digital Publishing Institute.Liming, X., Yanchao, Z., 2010. Automated strawberry grading system based on image pro-cessing. Comput. Electron. Agric. 71, S32 –S39.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compag. 2009.09.013.Liu, C., Liu, W., Chen, W., Yang, J., Zheng, L., 2015. Feasibility in multispectral imaging forpredicting the content of bioactive compounds in intact tomato fruit. Food Chem.173, 482–488.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodchem.2014.10.052 .Llobet, E., Hines, E.L., Gardner, J.W., Franco, S., 1999. Non-destructive banana ripeness de- termination using a neural network-based electronic nose. Meas. Sci. Technol. 10,538.Loomis, R.S., Williams, W.A., 1963. Maximum crop productivity: An extimate 1. Crop Sci. 3, 67–72 Publisher: Wiley.Lu, R., Peng, Y., 2006.Hyperspectral scattering for assessing Peach Fruit Firmness. Biosyst.Eng. 93, 161–171 Publisher: Elsevier BV.Lurie, S., Friedman, H., Weksler, A., Dagar, A., Zerbini, P.E., 2013. Maturity assessment at harvest and prediction of softening in an early and late season melting peach. Post-harvest Biol. Technol. 76, 10 –16. Ma, G., Fu, X.P., Zhou, Y., Ying, Y.B., Xu, H.R., Xie, L.J., Lin, T., 2007. Nondestructive sugar content determination of peaches by using near infrared spectroscopy technique.Guang Pu Xue Yu Guang Pu Fen Xi 27, 907 –910. Mahesh, S., Jayas, D.S., Paliwal, J., White, N.D.G., 2015a. Comparison of partial least squaresregression (PLSR) and principal components regression (PCR) methods for proteinand hardness predictions using the near-infrared (NIR) hyperspectral images ofbulk samples of Canadian wheat. Food Bioprocess Technol. 8, 31 –40.https://doi. org/10.1007/s11947-014-1381-z . Mahesh, S., Jayas, D.S., Paliwal, J., White, N.D.G., 2015b. Hyperspectral imaging to classify and monitor quality of agricultural materials. J. Stored Prod. Res. 61, 17 –26 Publisher: Elsevier BV.Makky, M., Soni, P., 2014.In situ quality assessment of intact oil palm fresh fruit bunchesusing rapid portable non-contact and non-destructive approach. J. Food Eng. 120,248–259 Publisher: Elsevier BV.Mangas, J.J., Moreno, J., Picinelli, A., Blanco, D., 1998. Characterization of cider apple fruitsaccording to their degree of ripening. A chemometric approach. J. Agric. Food Chem.46, 4174–4178.https://doi.org/10.1021/jf980078n publisher: American Chemical So- ciety.Matveyeva, T.A., Sarimov, R.M., Simakin, A.V., Astashev, M.E., Burmistrov, D.E., Lednev,V.N., Sdvizhenskii, P.A., Grishin, M.Y., Pershin, S.M., Chilingaryan, N.O., Semenova,N.A., Dorokhov, A.S., Gudkov, S.V., 2022. Using ﬂuorescence spectroscopy to detect rot in fruit and vegetable crops. Appl. Sci. 12, 3391 URL: https://www.mdpi.com/ 2076-3417/12/7/3391.https://doi.org/10.3390/app12073391 number: 7 Publisher: Multidisciplinary Digital Publishing Institute.Mazen, F.M.A., Nashat, A.A., 2019. Ripeness classiﬁcation of bananas using an artiﬁcial neural network. Arab. J. Sci. Eng. 44, 6901 –6910 Publisher: Springer Science and Busi- ness Media LLC.McGlone, V.A., Fraser, D.G., Jordan, R.B., Künnemeyer, R., 2003. Internal quality assessment of mandarin fruit by vis/NIR spectroscopy. J. Near Infrared Spectrosc. 11, 323 –332 Publisher: SAGE Publications.Medlicott, A.P., Reynolds, S.B., Thompson, A.K., 1986. Effects of temperature on the ripen- ing of mango fruit (mangifera indica l. var. tommy atkins). J. Sci. Food Agric. 37,469–474.Mendoza, F., Aguilera, J., 2004. Application of image analysis for classi ﬁcation of ripening bananas. J. Food Sci. 69, E471 –E477.https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2621.2004. tb09932.x_eprint:https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1111/j.1365-2621.2004.tb09932.x.Mendoza, F., Lu, R., Ariana, D., Cen, H., Bailey, B., 2011. Integrated spectral and image anal- ysis of hyperspectral scattering data for prediction of apple fruit ﬁrmness and soluble solids content. Postharvest Biol. Technol. 62, 149 –160.
Mercado-Silva, E., Benito-Bautista, P., de los Angeles Garc ı’a-Velasco, M., 1998. Fruit devel- opment, harvest index and ripening changes of guavas produced in Central Mexico.Postharvest Biol. Technol. 13, 143 –150.https://doi.org/10.1016/S0925-5214(98) 00003-9.Miraei Ashtiani, S.H., Javanmardi, S., Jahanbanifard, M., Martynenko, A., Verbeek, F.J., 2021.Detection of mulberry ripeness stages using deep learning models. IEEE Access 9,100380–100394.https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2021.3096550 conference Name: IEEE Access.Mollazade, K., Omid, M., Tab, F.A., Mohtasebi, S.S., 2012. Principles and applications of light backscattering imaging in quality evaluation of agro-food products: a review.Food Bioprocess Technol. 5, 1465 –1485 Publisher: Springer Science and Business Media LLC.Muhua, L., Peng, F., Renfa, C., 2007. Non-destructive estimation peach ssc and ﬁrmness by mutispectral reﬂectance imaging. N. Z. J. Agric. Res. 50, 601 –608. Munawar, A.A., Kusumiyati, Wahyuni, D., 2019. Near infrared spectroscopic data for rapid and simultaneous prediction of quality attributes in intact mango fruits. Data Brief 27,104789.Munoz, C., Avila, J., Salvo, S., Huircan, J.I., 2012. Prediction of harvest start date in highbush blueberry using time series regression models with correlated errors. Sci. Hortic Rev.138, 165–170.Mureşan, H., Oltean, M., 2018. Fruit recognition from images using deep learning. ActaUniversitatis Sapientiae Informatica 10, 26 –42.https://doi.org/10.2478/ausi-2018- 0002.Nagata, M., Tallada, J., Ishino, F., Gejima, Y., Kai, S., 2004. Estimation of tomato ripening stages using three color models. Bull. Faculty Agric. Miyazaki Univ. 50, 65 –72. Nambi, E., Kulandasamy, T., Jesudas, M., 2015. Scientiﬁcc l a s s iﬁcation of ripening period and development of colourgrade chart for indian mangoes (mangifera indica l.)usingmultivariate cluster analysis, Scientia Horticulturae.Neimark, D., Bar, O., Zohar, M., Asselmann, D., 2021. Video transformer network. arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.00719.Ni, X., Li, C., Jiang, H., Takeda, F., 2020. Deep learning image segmentation and extractionof blueberry fruit traits associated with harvestability and yield. Hortic Res. 7, 110.https://doi.org/10.1038/s41438-020-0323-3 . Olarewaju, O.O., Bertling, I., Magwaza, L.S., 2016a. Non-destructive evaluation of avocado fruit maturity using near infrared spectroscopy and PLS regression models. Sci. Hortic.199, 229–236 Publisher: Elsevier BV.M. Rizzo, M. Marcuzzo, A. Zangari et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 7 (2023) 44 –57
56Olarewaju, O.O., Bertling, I., Magwaza, L.S., 2016b. Non-destructive evaluation of avocado fruit maturity using near infrared spectroscopy and PLS regression models. Sci. HorticRev. 199, 229–236.Olmo, M., Nadas, A., Garcia, J.M., 2000. Nondestructive methods to evaluate maturity level of oranges. J. Food Sci. 65, 365 –369 Publisher: Wiley. Opara, L.U., Al-Said, F.A., Al-Abri, A., 2007. Assessment of what the consumer values in fresh fruit quality: case study of Oman. N. Z. J. Crop. Hortic. Sci. 35, 235 –243 Pub- lisher: Informa UK Limited.Ozkan, I.A., Koklu, M., Saraço ğlu, R., 2021. Classiﬁcation of pistachio species using im- proved k-nn classiﬁer. Prog. Nutr. 23, e2021044.https://doi.org/10.23751/pn.v23i2. 9686.Ozkan, I.A., Koklu, M., Saraço ğlu, R., 2022. Pistachio Image Dataset. URL https://www. muratkoklu.com/datasets/. Pardede, J., Husada, M.G., Hermana, A.N., Rumapea, S.A., 2019. Fruit ripeness based onRGB, HSV, HSL, L*a*b* color feature using SVM. 2019 International Conference ofComputer Science and Information Technology (ICoSNIKOM). 1 –5. IEEE.https://doi. org/10.1109/ICoSNIKOM48755.2019.9111486 . Peirs, A., Lammertyn, J., Ooms, K., NicolaÄ, B.M., 2001. Prediction of the optimal picking date of different apple cultivars by means of VIS/NIR-spectroscopy. Postharvest Biol.Technol. 21, 189–199.Peirs, A., Scheerlinck, N., Nicola ı, B.M., 2003.Temperature compensation for near infrared reﬂectance measurement of apple fruit soluble solids contents. Postharvest Biol.Technol. 30, 233–248.Peng, Y., Lu, R., 2008. Analysis of spatially resolved hyperspectral scattering images forassessing apple fruitﬁrmness and soluble solids content. Postharvest Biol. Technol.48, 52–62..https://doi.org/10.1016/j.postharvbio.2007.09.019 . publisher: Elsevier BV. Prasanna, V., 2007.Fruit ripening phenomena –an overview. Crit. Rev. Food Sci. Nutr. 47, 1–19.Qin, J., Lu, R., Peng, Y., 2009.Prediction of apple internal quality using spectral absorptionand scattering properties. Trans. ASABE 52 499 –486. Qiu, Q., Shi, K., Qiao, X.J., Jiang, K., 2016. Determining the dominant environmental param-eters for greenhouse tomato seedling growth modeling using canonical correlationanalysis. IFAC-PapersOnLine 49, 387 –391.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ifacol.2016.10. 071.Ragni, L., Cevoli, C., Berardinelli, A., Silaghi, F.A., 2012. Non-destructive internal quality as- sessment of“Hayward”kiwifruit by waveguide spectroscopy. J. Food Eng. 109, 32 –37. Rajkumar, P., Wang, N., EImasry, G., Raghavan, G.S.V., Gariepy, Y., 2012. Studies on banana fruit quality and maturity stages using hyperspectral imaging. J. Food Eng. 108,194–
200 Publisher: Elsevier BV.Randhawa, H.S., Sharma, S., Student, C.S.E., 2014. A survey of computer vision and soft computing techniques for ripeness grading of fruits. J. Adv. Comput. Commun.Technol. 2.Ren, S., He, K., Girshick, R., Sun, J., R-Cnn, F., 2015. Towards real-time object detection with region proposal networks. In: Cortes, C., Lawrence, N., Lee, D., Sugiyama, M., Garnett,R. (Eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. vol. 28. Curran Associ-ates, Inc. 14 6 14875 45 028 21 38046 –. Rinnan, A., van den Berg, F., Engelsen, S.B., 2009. Review of the most common pre- processing techniques for near-infrared spectra. Trends Anal. Chem. 28, 1201 –1222 Publisher: Elsevier BV.Rivero Mesa, A., Chiang, J., 2021. Non-invasive grading system for Banana tiers using RGBimaging and deep learning. 2021 7th International Conference on Computing and Ar-tiﬁcial Intelligence. Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA,pp. 113–118 Event-place: Tianjin, China.Royer, C.A., 1995.Fluorescence spectroscopy, methods. Mol. Biol. 40, 65 –89. Sa, I., Ge, Z., Dayoub, F., Upcroft, B., Perez, T., McCool, C., 2016. DeepFruits: a fruit detectionsystem using deep neural networks. Sensors 16, 1222. https://www.mdpi.com/1424- 8220/16/8/1222.https://doi.org/10.3390/s16081222 number: 8 Publisher: Multidis- ciplinary Digital Publishing Institute.Sanchez, M.T., Haba, M.J., Ben ıtez-Lopez, M., Fernandez-Novales, J., Garrido-Varo, A.,Perez-Marın, D., 2012.Non-destructive characterization and quality control of intactstrawberries based on nir spectral data. J. Food Eng. 110, 102 –108. Saranwong, I., Sornsrivichai, J., Kawano, S., 2003. On-tree evaluation of harvesting quality of mango fruit using a hand-held NIR instrument. J. Near Infrared Spectrosc. 11,283–293 Publisher: SAGE Publications.Saranya, N., Srinivasan, K., Kumar, S.K.P., 2022. Banana ripeness stage identi ﬁcation: a deep learning approach. J. Ambient. Intell. Humaniz. Comput. 13, 4033 –4039. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12652-021-03267-w publisher: Springer Science and Busi- ness Media LLC.Satpute, M.R., Jagdale, S.M., 2016. Color, size, volume, shape and texture feature extractiontechniques for fruits: a review. Int. Res. J. Eng. Technol 3, 703 –708. Septiarini, A., Hamdani, H., Hatta, H.R., Anwar, K., 2019. Automatic image segmentation ofoil palm fruits by applying the contour-based approach. Sci. Hortic. 261, 108939.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scienta.2019.108939. publisher: Elsevier BV . Serrano, S., Smith, N.A., 2019.Is attention interpretable? Proceedings of the 57th AnnualMeeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics. Association for Computa-tional Linguistics, Stroudsburg, PA, USA, pp. 2931 –2951 Event-place: Florence, Italy Shewfelt, R.L., Thai, C.N., Davis, J.W., 1988. Prediction of changes in color of tomatoes dur- ing ripening at different constant temperatures. J. Food Sci. 53, 1433 –1437 Publisher: Wiley.Shiddiq, M., Herman, H., Arief, D.S., Fitra, E., Husein, I.R., Ningsih, S.A., 2022. Wavelengthselection of multispectral imaging for oil palm fresh fruit ripeness classi ﬁcation. Appl. Opt. 61, 5289–5298 URL:https://opg.optica.org/ao/abstract.cfm?uri=ao-61- 17-5289.https://doi.org/10.1364/AO.450384 publisher: Optica Publishing Group. Silalahi, D.D., Reano, C.E., Lansigan, F.P., Panopio, R.G., Bantayan, N.C., 2016. Using genetic algorithm neural network on near infrared spectral data for ripeness grading of oilpalm (elaeis guineensis jacq.) fresh fruit. Inf. Process. Agric. 3, 252
–261.Song, J., Deng, W., Beaudry, R.M., Armstrong, P.R., 1997. Changes in chlorophyll ﬂuores- cence of apple fruit during maturation, ripening, and senescence. HortScience 32,891–896.https://doi.org/10.21273/HORTSCI.32.5.891 publisher: American Society for Horticultural Science.Speirs, J., Lee, E., Brady, C.J., Robertson, J., McGlasson, W.B., 1990. Endopolygalacturonase:messenger RNA, enzyme and softening in the ripening fruit of a range of tomato ge-notypes. J. Plant Physiol. 135, 576 –582.https://doi.org/10.1016/S0176-1617(11) 80639-5.Su, Z., Zhang, C., Yan, T., Zhu, J., Zeng, Y., Lu, X., Gao, P., Feng, L., He, L., Fan, L., 2021. Appli-cation of hyperspectral imaging for maturity and soluble solids content determina-tion of strawberry with deep learning approaches. Front. Plant Sci. 12. https://doi. org/10.3389/fpls.2021.736334. Suharjito, Elwirehardja, G.N., Prayoga, J.S., 2021. Oil palm fresh fruit bunch ripeness clas- siﬁcation on mobile devices using deep learning approaches. Comput. Electron. Agric.188, 106359 Publisher: Elsevier BV.Sun, C., Qiu, X., Xu, Y., Huang, X., 2019. How toﬁne-tune BERT for text classiﬁcation? In: Sun, M., Huang, X., Ji, H., Liu, Z., Liu, Y. (Eds.), Chinese Computational Linguistics.Springer International Publishing, Cham, pp. 194 –206 Sural, S., Qian, G., Pramanik, S., 2003. Segmentation and histogram generation using the HSV color space for image retrieval. Proceedings. International Conference onImage Processing, IEEE Event-place: Rochester, NY, USA.Tamura, H., Mori, S., Yamawaki, T., 1978. Textural features corresponding to visual per- ception. IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cybern 8, 460 –473 Publisher: Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE).Teng, L., Cheng, Z., Chen, X., Lai, L., 2012. Study on simulation models of tomato fruit qual- ity related to cultivation environmental factors. Acta Ecol. Sin. 32, 111 –116. Tomana, T., Utsunomiya, N., Kataoka, I., 1979. The effect of environmental temperatures on fruit ripening on the tree. J. Japan. Soc. Hotic. Sci. 48, 261 –266. Ukirade, N.S., 2014.Color grading system for evaluating tomato maturity. Int. J. Res.Manag. Sci. Technol. 2, 41 –45. Uwadaira, Y., Sekiyama, Y., Ikehata, A., 2018. An examination of the principle of non-destructiveﬂeshﬁrmness measurement of peach fruit by using VIS-NIR spectroscopy.Heliyon 4, e00531.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.heliyon.2018.e00531 . Vaswani, A., Shazeer, N., Parmar, N., Uszkoreit, J., Jones, L., Gomez, A.N., Kaiser, L.,Polosukhin, I., 2017.Attention is all you need. Proceedings of the 31st InternationalConference on Neural Information Processing Systems. Curran Associates Inc., RedHook, NY, USA, pp. 6000 –6010.Walsh, K.B., Blasco, J., Zude-Sasse, M., Sun, X., 2020. Visible-NIR‘point’spectroscopy in postharvest fruit and vegetable assessment: the science behind three decades ofcommercial use. Postharvest Biol. Technol. 168, 111246.Wang, S., Huang, M., Zhu, Q., 2012. Model fusion for prediction of apple ﬁrmness using hyperspectral scattering image. Comput. Electron. Agric. 80, 1 –7 Publisher: Elsevier BV.Wang, H., Peng, J., Xie, C., Bao, Y., He, Y., 2015. Fruit quality evaluation using spectroscopytechnology: a review. Sensors 15, 11889 –11927. Wankhade, M., Hore, U.W., 2021. A survey on fruit ripeness classi ﬁcation based on image processing with machine learning. Int. J. Adv. Res. Sci. Commun. Technol., 73 –78 URL: http://ijarsct.co.in/may1.html.10.48175/IJARSCT-1097. Wei, X., Liu, F., Qiu, Z., Shao, Y., He, Y., 2014. Ripeness classiﬁcation of astringent persim- mon using hyperspectral imaging technique. Food Bioprocess Technol. 7, 1371 –1380 Publisher: Springer Science and Business Media LLC.Wiegreffe, S., Pinter, Y., 2019. Attention is not not explanation. Proceedings of the 2019Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th Inter-national Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), Associa-tion for Computational Linguistics, Hong Kong, China, pp. 11 –20.https:// aclanthology.org/D19-1002.10.18653/v1/D19-1002event-place: Hong Kong, China. Wismadi, I., Khrisne, D., Suyadnya, I., 2019. Detecting the Ripeness of Harvest-ReadyDragon Fruit using Smaller VGGNet-Like Network. J. Elec. Electron. Informa. 3 (2),35–38.https://doi.org/10.24843/JEEI.2019.v03.i02.p01 . Yam, K.L., Papadakis, S.E., 2004. A simple digital imaging method for measuring and ana-lyzing color of food surfaces. J. Food Eng. 61, 137 –142.https://doi.org/10.1016/S0260- 8774(03)00195-X.Yamada, H., Ohmura, H., Arai, C., Terui, M., 1994. Effect of preharvest fruit temperature onripening, sugars, and Watercore occurrence in apples. J. Am. Soc. Hortic. Sci. 119,1208–1214.https://doi.org/10.21273/JASHS.119.6.1208 publisher: American Society for Horticultural Science Section: Journal of the American Society for HorticulturalScience.Yang, H., 2011.Remote sensing technique for predicting harvest time of tomatoes.Procedia Environ. Sci. 10, 666 –671 Publisher: Elsevier BV. Yang, S.F., Hoffman, N.E., 1984. Ethylene biosynthesis and its regulation in higher plants.Annu. Rev. Plant Physiol. 35, 155 –189. Zhao, Y., Gong, L., Huang, Y., Liu, C., 2016. Robust tomato recognition for robotic harvest- ing using feature images fusion. Sensors 16, 173.Zhu, Q., Huang, M., Zhao, X., Wang, S., 2013. Wavelength selection of hyperspectral scat-tering image using new semi-supervised af ﬁnity propagation for prediction of ﬁrm- ness and soluble solid content in apples. Food Anal. Methods 6, 334 –342.https:// doi.org/10.1007/s12161-012-9442-2 . Ziosi, V., Noferini, M., Fiori, G., Tadiello, A., Trainotti, L., Casadoro, G., Costa, G., 2008. A newindex based on Vis spectroscopy to characterize the progression of ripening in peachfruit. Postharvest Biol. Technol. 49, 319 –329.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.postharvbio. 2008.01.017publisher: Elsevier BV.M. Rizzo, M. Marcuzzo, A. Zangari et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 7 (2023) 44 –57
57