Identifying associations between epidemiological entities in news datafor animal disease surveillance
Sarah Valentina,b,c,R e n a u dL a n c e l o ta,b, Mathieu Rochea,c,⁎
aCIRAD, UMR ASTRE, UMR TETIS, F-34398 Montpellier, France
bASTRE, Univ Montpellier, CIRAD, INRAE, Montpellier, France
cTETIS, Univ Montpellier, AgroParisTech, CIRAD, CNRS, INRAE, Montpellier, France
abstract article info
Article history:Received 21 March 2021Received in revised form 6 June 2021Accepted 29 July 2021Available online 31 July 2021Event-based surveillance systems are at the crossroads of human and animal (and plant and ecosystem) health,epidemiology, statistics, and informatics. Thus, their deployment faces many challenges speci ﬁc to each domain and their intersections, such as relations among automation, arti ﬁcial intelligence, and expertise. In this context, our work pertins to the extraction of epidemiological events in textual data (i.e. news) by unsupervised methods.We deﬁne the event extraction task as detecting pairs of epidemiological entities (e.g. a disease name and loca-tion). The quality of the ranked lists of pairs was evaluated using speci ﬁc ranking evaluation metrics. We used a publicly available annotated corpus of 438 documents (i.e. news articles) related to animal disease events. Thestatistical approach was able to detect event-related pairs of epidemiological features with a good trade-off be-tween precision and recall. Our results showed that using a window of words outperformed document-basedand sentence-based approaches, while reducing the probability of detecting false pairs. Our results indicatedthat Mutual Information was less adapted than the Dice coef ﬁcient for ranking pairs of features in the event ex- traction framework. We believe that Mutual Information would be more relevant for rare pair detection (i.e.weak signals), but requires higher manual curation to avoid false positive extraction pairs. Moreover, generalisingthe country-level spatial features enabled better discrimination (i.e. ranking) of relevant disease-location pairsfor event extraction.© 2021 The Authors. Publishing servic es by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of KeAi Communications Co., Ltd. This is an openaccess article under the CC BY-NC-ND license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ ).
Keywords:Animal disease surveillanceText miningEvent extraction
1. IntroductionIncreases in the emergence or re-emergence of animal and humaninfectious diseases have been evident in many parts of the world forseveral years. Beyond the well-known role of human and animal mobil-ity in the spread of pathogens, climate change and biodiversity loss arelikely to exacerbate the global disease burden ( Keesing et al., 2010; Ostfeld, 2009). National and international institutions are currentlyexperimenting with a global paradox —reconciling trade extension with the control of the risk to public and animal health.The growing availability of digital data represents an unprecedentedsource of real-time disease information ( Paolotti et al., 2014). Online news, social media and electronic health records are among the so-called informal sources that have proven to be valuable sources ofdisease information (Soto et al., 2008;Wilson and Brownstein, 2009). Through the epidemic intelligence (EI) concept, their mainstreaminginto surveillance systems has been a paradigm shift for disease surveil-lance and control. Driven by the International Health Regulations (IHR)(WHO, 2005), EI integrates two components in a single surveillance sys-tem: indicator-based surveillance (collection of structured data throughtraditional surveillance systems) and event-based surveillance (collec-tion of unstructured data from informal sources) ( Paquet et al., 2006). Combining these two components has proven to enhance surveillancesystems' performance by increasing outbreak detection timeliness andnumber (Arsevska et al., 2018;Bahk et al., 2015;Dion et al., 2015; Barboza et al., 2013).Informal sources cover a diverse spectrum, but they all share theinformation in textual format. Peculiarities of textual data includelinguistic ambiguities, redundant and noisy information, a lack ofnormalisation, etc. Besides, daily amounts of such information can rap-idly overwhelm surveillance systems, including moderation steps per-formed by experts. Event-based surveillance (EBS) systems thusArtiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 5 (2021) 163 –174
⁎Corresponding author at: CIRAD, UMR TETIS, F-34398 Montpellier, France.E-mail address:mathieu.roche@cirad.fr(M. Roche).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aiia.2021.07.0032589-7217/© 2021 The Authors. Publishing services by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of KeAi Communications Co., Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http:// creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ ).
Contents lists available atScienceDirect
Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture
journal homepage:http://www.keaipublishing.com/en/journals/artificial-intelligence-in-agriculture/increasingly marshal text-mining and NLP (Natural Language Process-ing) methods to alleviate the amount of manual curation of the contin-uousﬂow of free text (Hartley et al., 2010;Drury and Roche, 2019). In this setting, the Platform for Automated extraction of Animal Dis-ease from the Web (PADI-web
1) is an open-access EBS system dedi-cated to the detection of new and emerging animal infectious diseaseevents (Arsevska et al., 2018). It was developed to meet the needs ofthe French Epidemic Intelligence System (FEIS, or Veille sanitaire internationalein French) via online news monitoring. FEIS has been in-volved in activities of the French Platform for Animal Health Surveil-lance (ESA Platform) since 2013. FEIS aims to identify, monitor andanalyse reports of animal health hazards (including zoonotic diseases)threatening France as a whole by monitoring of ﬁcial and unofﬁcial in- formation sources. PADI-web monitors Google News in real-time andautomatically retrieves animal disease related news articles, classi ﬁes them and extracts epidemiological entities ( Valentin et al., 2020b). The classiﬁcation module of PADI-web is based on a supervised machinelearning approach (e.g. Random Forest, Support Vector Machine, andMultilayer Perceptron) toﬁlter relevant news with an overall accuracyof 0.94 (Valentin et al., 2020a).This paper tackles issues related to knowledge-based systems in ag-riculture (i.e. livestock farming and epidemiological surveillance) usingan unsupervised machine learning approach. Many applications basedon unsupervised approaches exist, e.g. clustering, anomaly detection,association extraction. Our work focuses on association mining. Thistask consists of identifying sets of items that often occur together indatasets (e.g. databases, textual data, etc.). We propose an unsupervisedmethod for pattern recognition (i.e. co-occurrence of epidemiologicalfeatures) applied to animal disease surveillance (i.e. PADI-web data)to extract events in news.The motivation of this work is to use simple and effective statisticalmeasures to extract epidemiological events that are easy to analyse byexperts. The measures studied and extended in this paper use weakknowledge based on the number of examples in textual data withoutthe need to determine counter-examples. The main objective is to de-termine which parameters that we need to integrate. We focus on 2main parameters associated with our statistical methods and unsuper-vised approaches: (i) what textual context to use (i.e. document, sen-tence, and word) for extracting pairs of elements to de ﬁne an epidemiological event for animal disease surveillance and (ii) whichpairs of entities and generalisation to apply for event extraction. Thistype of results could be relevant insights for integration in embeddingapproach architectures.Section 2presents the related work on event-based surveillance sys-tems, entity extraction, entity normalisation and linking and event ex-traction applied to animal disease surveillance. Section 3presents our global process in order to extract relevant events. Sections 4 and 5dis- cuss the results obtained with different strategies.2. Related work2.1. Event-based surveillance systemsThe development of EBS systems aims at meeting the challengesposed by the integration of unstructured data in the formalised EI pro-cess. Below we present the EBS systems that encompass the animalhealth threat in their scope.EBS systems were pioneered in 1994 by the International Society forInfectious Diseases (ISID), through the Program for Monitoring Emerg-ing Diseases (ProMED). ProMED is a human-curated system that relieson an extensive network of experts worldwide who detect and share re-ports on disease outbreaks using a common platform ( Carrion and Madoff, 2017). Moderators validate the information.BioCaster and the Platform for Automated extraction of animal Dis-ease Information from the web (PADI-web) rely on fully automatedpipelines. BioCaster was a public health surveillance system supportedby the University of Tokyo from 2006, with a priority focus on theAsia-Paciﬁcr e g i o n(Kawazoe et al., 2008). BioCaster is no longer opera- tional, but it is included in our review because it relied on a unique andwell-documented ontology-based approach. PADI-web was created in2016 to monitor online animal health-related news for the French Epi-demic Intelligence System (FEIS) (Arsevska et al., 2018;Valentin et al., 2020b).Between these two extremes of pure automation and pure manualdata collection and analysis, other prominent systems combine auto-
mated text-mining based steps and a dedicated team of curators to as-sess and verify the outputs. Semi-automated systems includeHealthMap, founded by the Boston Children's Hospital in 2006, the Ca-nadian Public Health Agency Global Public Health Intelligence Network(GPHIN), the European Union MediSys, Argus and AquaticHealth.net.2.2. Entity extraction2.2.1. Entity extraction approachesInformation extraction (IE) in EBS systems aims at locating speci ﬁc pieces of data in natural-language documents, thereby extracting struc-tured information from unstructured text ( Mooney and Bunescu, 2005). Entity extraction, also called named entity recognition (NER), is an IEsubtask that seeks to locate and classify textual elements intopredeﬁned categories, such as locations (e.g. ’Lagos',’China’), temporal expressions (e.g.‘last month’,‘July 28, 1990′), organisations (e.g.‘Minis- try of Health’), person names, quantities (e.g. ‘2′), etc. Regarding geographical entities in online news, it is important to dis-tinguish: (i) geographic entity extraction and resolution from (ii) iden-tiﬁcation of the event-related location. Geographic entity extraction andresolution aim at correctly extracting and identifying all locations from atext.The dictionary-based approach involves matching terms from a doc-ument with a list of words to extract entities from texts. Geographicaldictionaries are usually called gazetteers. Some dictionaries can havean ontological structure rather than a simple list of terms. Ontologiesaim at modeling the relations between entities ( Guarino et al., 2009). For instance, in the GeoNames ontology (i.e. gazetteer), spatial entitiesare structured into different hierarchical classes identi ﬁed by a letter, with each of the letters corresponding to a speci ﬁcc a t e g o r y( e . g .f o ra d - ministrative borders). In the health domain, an ontology can representthe causality relationships between a disease and a pathogen(Chanlekha et al., 2010).To overcome the rigidity of the dictionary-based approach, anotherapproach consists of considering NER as a classi ﬁcation task, where the type of entity is the label to assign. Extraction rules can be generatedby hand or automatically. The method of the latter case relies on ma-chine learning trained on manually annotated data. Conditional randomﬁelds (CRF) is among the most prominent classi ﬁer used for NER (Lafferty et al., 2001), at the core of well-established pre-trained NERtools, including StanfordNER (Manning et al., 2014) and NLTK (Bird and Loper, 2004). This approach is designed for sequential data: CRFspredict the probability of the output sequence according to a giveninput sequence (Song et al., 2019).The classiﬁcation approach is particularly suitable for misspelt loca-tions or texts short in length, such as tweets. The gazetteer lookup suf-fers from low precision due to irrelevant matches ( Inkpen et al., 2017
). While classiﬁer-based approaches achieve good results, theyare limited to the predeﬁned categories upon which they are trained,i.e. nonspeciﬁc domain entities (dates, locations, etc.). Recently, neuralnetwork training algorithms have shown great success in several NLPtasks, including named entity recognition. These models have achievedstate-of-the-art results while alleviating the burden of the amount offeature pre-processing (Chiu and Nichols, 2016). The RNN-based
1https://padi-web.cirad.fr/en/S. Valentin, R. Lancelot and M. Roche Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 5 (2021) 163 –174
164algorithm from spacy package allows users to add new types of entitiesto NER algorithms by training its model on annotated datasets(Honnibal and Montani, 2018).2.2.2. Domain non-speciﬁce n t i t i e sHealthMap extracts locations using a dictionary of 2300 location-place patterns. The extraction is consolidated with heuristics to inferpeople's job titles and full names as well as to decipher the acronymsof organisations. Redundant locations are further ﬁltered out based on container relationships by retaining the highest granular level of infor-mation. For instance, if’Boston’and‘Massachusetts' are identiﬁed as lo- cations,‘Massachusetts' is eliminated (Freifeld et al., 2008). PADI-web extracts locations by matching the text with GeoNames ( Ahlers, 2013), and identiﬁes dates using the HeidelTime rule-based system(Strotgen and Gertz, 2010). GPHIN extracts several domain-unspeci ﬁc entities (e.g. person names, organisations and locations) with theclassiﬁer-based Stanford CoreNLP NER. AquaticHealth only extracts lo-cations using the Alchemy Location Extraction application program-ming interface (API) developed by IBM. Users can further manuallyadd or reﬁne locations from a report (Lyon et al., 2013).2.2.3. Thematic entitiesIn all EBS systems, thematic entity extraction is dictionary based. Thelists used are either external knowledge resources (GPHIN) or manuallybuilt by domain experts (AquaticHealth.net, PADI-web, HealthMap, MedISys, BioCaster). GPHIN extracts medical entities (i.e. syndromesand disease vectors) by combining UMLS and expert heuristics. Ahand-curated list of frequent false positive terms is applied to ﬁlter out irrelevant terms. All EBS systems extract at least the disease name.GPHIN, MedISys, BioCaster and PADI-web extract symptoms. PADI-web also detects the host species and the number of cases using regularexpressions. Both MedISys and BioCaster use their own ontologies toextract both thematic and domain-nonspeci ﬁc entities (Collier et al., 2007;Ralf et al., 2008). The multilingual BioCaster ontology (BCO) con-tains 18 classes encompassing both epidemiological concepts (e.g. virus,symptom) and generic concepts (e.g. locations) ( Kawazoe et al., 2008; Kawazoe et al., 2006). Ontologies dedicated to the agriculture domaincan be used (Drury et al., 2019).2.3. Entity normalisation and linking2.3.1. Domain non-speciﬁce n t i t i e sMapping locations to an external gazetteer has several advantages,as it allows: (i) geocoding to map the detected location via latitude-longitude coordinates, (ii) inferring parent-child relationships betweendifferent granularity levels to group synonymous mentions or to syn-thesise local information from a global perspective (e.g. at the countrylevel), (iii) geotagging a document to improve information retrievalfrom EBS databases. Both PADI-web and GPHIN detect geographical en-tities with the GeoNames gazetteer. In PADI-web, location mapping ismerged with the entity extraction step described above, while thesetwo phases are separate in GPHIN. Using a classi ﬁcation-based approach before matching with an external knowledge resource reduces geo-graphical and non-geographical ambiguities when a noun is the same
as an existing location name. For instance, the term ’More’may errone- ously match the city of More in England in the PADI-web pipeline. How-ever, in both cases, a place name has multiple gazetteer entries, thuscreating geographical-geographical ambiguities. In GPHIN, such issuesare resolved through heuristic rules that take where an article was pub-lished into account, but further details on the procedure are not avail-able. PADI-web does not address this problem, and all entries areretained. InAquaticHealth.net, locations are geocoded using the GoogleMaps API so that reports can be presented on a Google Map on the sys-tem's website.2.3.2. Thematic entitiesThematic entities are usually normalized to their canonical form (e.g.disease acronyms are converted into the full disease name). GPHIN pro-vides a link between the detected entities and UMLS terminology anddeﬁnitions. BioCaster Ontology provides access to term de ﬁnitions, syn- onyms and translations in eight languages, along with a link to medicalontologies (including ICD-10, MedDRA, MeSH and SNOMED-CT)(Collier et al., 2008).2.4. Event extractionEvent extraction methods have been extensively studied in manydomains such as business andﬁnancial (Du et al., 2016), biomedical (Zhu and Zheng, 2020), and outbreak-event detection (Piskorski et al., 2011)d o m a i n s .(Xiang and Wang, 2019) propose a comprehensive and synthetic survey of event extraction methods. Brie ﬂy, they include pattern-based methods, machine learning methods (supervised orsemi-supervised), deep learning methods, and unsupervised methods.In the studied EBS systems, HealthMap, PADI-web, BioCaster andMedISys include an event extraction step, all of which rely on a differentapproach.2.4.1. Unsupervised approachHealthMap event extraction is unsupervised, i.e. it does not train anyevent extraction models. Typically, in the unsupervised approach, thedetection of triggers and arguments is based on word distributional rep-resentations. In HealthMap, the event mention and trigger detectionsteps are ignored. Instead, the approach relies on the document struc-ture, based on the hypothesis that the most relevant information (i.e.event attributes) appears at the beginning of a news report. Diseasesand locations areﬁrst searched in the title, then in the document head-lines, andﬁnally in the full content. If the algorithm cannot extract rel-evant elements from these three levels, the name of the online newssource is used instead. This last step relies on the assumption thatnews articles that do not contain any speci ﬁc location refer to a place near the publication source. Erroneous extractions are further correctedby analysts when necessary (Brownstein et al., 2008). This approach de- creases the risk of false-positive extraction (i.e. extraction of locationsthat are not true event attribute). Two shortcomings should be noted:the spatial granularity is reduced since the attribute extraction stopsat theﬁrst entity detected, and also, this approach cannot addresscases of news articles containing several events.2.4.2. Pattern-based approachBoth MediSys and BioCaster rely on pattern-based methods, whichwere the earliest approaches proposed for event extraction. They con-sist of matching text with speciﬁc event templates. Patterns are con-structed manually or automatically. Manual event constructiontypically relies on domain expert proposals, thereby achieving high ac-curacy. However, manual construction is time-consuming, and expertbias can lead to a lack of recall. A weakly-supervised method orbootstrapping can automatically generate patterns from a pre-classiﬁed training corpus or seed patterns. In MediSys, event extractionis performed by the Pattern-based Understanding and Learning System(PULS) developed at the University of Helsinki. PULS relies on a cascadeof patterns applied to each news article's sentence structure to extractthe event attributes. For instance, the pattern in Fig. 1 uses both syntac- tical and semantic information of the sentence.This pattern matches a noun phrase (NP) of semantic type (i.e. ‘dis- ease’) with a verb phrase (VP) headed by the verb ‘kill’(or its synonyms in the ontology) and has the adverbial phrase ‘so far’, etc. The square brackets indicate an optional match. If the location is omitted in the sen-tence, it is inferred from the surrounding context. Verb phrases are notrigid and allow the presence of modiﬁer elements, such as an auxiliary verb (e.g.‘has') or adverb (e.g.‘so far’)(Steinberger et al., 2008). PULS implements weakly-supervised learning to reduce the amount ofS. Valentin, R. Lancelot and M. Roche Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 5 (2021) 163 –174
165manual labour as far as possible by automatically learning new patternsvia bootstrapping (Grishman et al., 2002). BioCaster event extraction uses a simple rule language (SRL), in-spired by the so-called declarative information analysis language(DIAL) (Feldman et al., 2001). SRL creates sophisticated matching pat-terns combining entity classes, string literals, regular expressions, entitytypes including verbs of infection, common victim expressions, occupa-tion names, etc.Severalmachine-learninganddeep learning-based methodshave been proposed for event extraction ( Margineantu et al., 2010). RNN- based pre-trained models, known as word embedding models, are capa-ble of capturing the meaning of terms depending of their context (i.e.their surrounding words) (Mikolov et al., 2013)o rG l o V e(Pennington et al., 2014). Such models can be integrated into event extraction pipe-lines, surpassing most existing methods ( Yang et al., 2019). Word em- bedding models have yet been applied to several linguistic tasks in thedisease surveillance domain, including disease taxonomy development(Ghosh et al., 2016), epidemiological feature extraction from WHO re-ports (Ghosh et al., 2017) and veterinary necropsy report classiﬁcation (Bollig et al. (2020)). To our knowledge they are not yet implementedin any operational EBS system for animal health surveillance.The PADI-web pipeline is based on four steps (i.e. data collection,data processing, data classiﬁcation, and information extraction) sum-marized inFig. 2. The extraction module aims at identifying disease,host and location which are the attributes of an event. The aim of thispaper is to identify relevant associations between elements using unsu-pervised approaches for highlighting relevant events.3. Event extraction approach based on an unsupervised approachIn this section, we deﬁne the event extraction task as detecting pairsof epidemiological entities from textual data (e.g. a disease name and lo-cation). Two entities form an event-related pair if they are attributes ofthe same event. Event-related pairs of attributes are hereafter referredto as”relevant pairs”.To address this issue, we propose association mining methods (i.e.unsupervised machine learning approaches) in order to extract entityco-occurrence in news articles. More precisely, our approach involvestwo steps: (i) the detection of pairs of entities based on their relative po-sition in the news article content, and (ii) their ranking based on twostate-of-the-art term association measures (pointwise mutual informa-tion and Dice coefﬁcient). Our contribution addresses the followingquestions:1. What are the best co-occurrence parameters to select relevant pairsof entities from a corpus of news articles?2. What is the impact of two association measures for the ranking of rel-evant pairs of entities?3. How can contextual aspects be integrated for the ranking measures?4. Does the generalisation of spatial entities improve the retrieval of rel-evant pairs?Below we outline the proposed statistical approach and further de-scribe the protocol and corpus used for the evaluation.3.1. Detection and ranking of pairs of entitiesThe computation of the associati o ns t r e n g t hb e t w e e nt w oo r more words (i.e. co-occurrence) is applied in several tasks, such asthe discovery of association rules ( Blanchard et al., 2005), feature extraction (Torkkola, 2003) and document summarization ( Aji, 2012). Our objective is to identify the best parameters regardingentity co-occurrence and spatial hierarchy to improve the retrievalof relevant pairs, using the Dice coef
ﬁcient and pointwise mutual information. In the following, pointwise mutual information willbe referred to as Mutual Information (MI) for reason of simpli ﬁca- tion. MI has been used to discover and cluster words speci ﬁct o events in a stream of tweets (Preotiuc-Pietro et al., 2016). Our ap- proach is based on the same rationale. Rather than taking all thewords into account, we compute the association measure only be-tween predeﬁned epidemiological entities (i.e. disease, host and lo-cation). Several other text-mining association metrics could beapplied to our task, such as Jaccard, Cubic MI ( Niwattanakul et al., 2013) or other measures such Bayes Factor, as applied in the datamining domain (Lallich et al., 2007). However, we opted to focus on Dice and MI due to their simplicity, interpretability, and highlydifferent behaviour regarding co-occurrence counts ( Roche and Prince, 2010).Mutual Information(MI - Eq.(1)) measures the relative differencebetween observed word co-occurrences, and their expected co-occurrence assuming independence ( Church and Hanks, 1989). MI is deﬁned as the probability that two words co-occur in the same context(the context concept is discussed below), divided by the product of theprobabilities of each word occurrence in a corpus.MI¼log
2/C2Pxy
Px/C2P yð1ÞwhereP
xis the probability of occurrence of x,P yis the probability of occurrence ofy, andP
xyis the probability of co-occurrence of xandy (joint probability).Mutual Informationis sensitive to rare and speciﬁc co-occurrences (Roche et al., 2004).Fig. 1.Pattern associated with an event.
Fig. 2.PADI-Web pipeline.S. Valentin, R. Lancelot and M. Roche Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 5 (2021) 163 –174
166Dice coefﬁcient (Eq.(2)) is also based on the joint probability, di-vided by the sum of the individual occurrence probabilities. Dice isless sensitive to low-count co-occurrences ( Smadja et al., 1996).Dice¼2/C2
Pxy
PxþP yð2ÞIn both Eqs.(1) and (2),P
x¼Nx
N,Py¼Ny
NandP xy¼Nxy
N,w h e r eN xis the number of occurrences ofx,N
yis the number of occurrences ofyandN xy
is the number of co-occurrences of xandy. Moreover, as both metrics are used in a ranking purpose while the logfunction is a strictly increas- ing function, we can simplify Eqs.(1) and (2)as:MI¼
Nxy
Nx/C2N yð3ÞDice¼
Nxy
NxþN yð4ÞThe results of both metrics heavily depend on the context chosen tocompute the co-occurrence between two words. In our approach, thiscontext controls the detection of pairs of features. In this paper, we pro-pose three deﬁnitions of co-occurrence contexts, hereafter referred toas”levels”:1. At the document-level:N
xyis the number of documents in which x andyco-occur;2. At the sentence-level:N
xyis the number of sentences in which xand yco-occur;3. At the word-level:N
xyis the number of times thatxandyco-occur in awword window.Word and sentence levels rely on two parameters, i.e. the windowsize and the window side. The window size corresponds to the numberof words (or sentences) separating two entities. The window side can bepositive (yappears afterx), negative (yappears beforex)o rb i - directional (yappears before or afterx). For both disease-location and disease-host pairs, disease entities are considered as ”pivot”. Thus, a positive (resp. negative) window of wwords corresponds to searching for another entity within thewwords on the right (resp. on the left)of the disease feature. A bilateral window consists of searching for anentity on the right or left of a disease feature in a sliding window of w words.We illustrate the inﬂuence of the window parameters on pair detec-tion with an example extracted from a news article.
2Location features are in bold while disease features are in italic ( Fig. 3). When setting the word window size at 15 words and the sentencewindow size at 1 sentence,
3the disease-location pairs are: –At the document level: {African swine fever,Więckowice}, {African swine fever,Poznań}, {African swine fever, Poland}, {African swine fever,Germany};–At a word level, right side, window of 15 words: { African swine fever, Więckowice}, {African swine fever,Poznań}; –At a word level, left side, window of 15 words: no co-occurence;–At a word level, both sides, window of 15 words: { African swine fever, Więckowice}, {African swine fever,Poznań}; –At the sentence level: {African swine fever,Więckowice}, {African swine fever, Poznań}, {African swine fever,Poland}, {African swine fever,Germany}.3.2. Spatial generalisationAs illustrated in the previous example, spatial information can beprovided at different granularity levels (e.g. city and administrativelevel). These levels generate different pairs of entities while repre-senting the same location. Thus, we evaluated the impact of generalisingthe spatial entities on different granularity levels. More precisely, basedon the GeoNames hierarchy, we converted the location entities intolower granular levels (e.g. converting ”Allier”into”France”), hereafter referred to as”generalisation”. We evaluated three generalisationlevels:–Level 0: No generalisation. This level corresponds to raw locationvalues without applying any generalisation. It includes spatial enti-ties with heterogeneous granularity levels (e.g. cities, villages, coun-tries, etc.)–Level 1: Administrative generalisation. This level corresponds to theconversion of spatial features into their ﬁrst administrative level. This conversion is applied if the initial spatial granularity is higherthan theﬁrst administrative level. This level thus still includes het-erogeneous granularity levels, such as administrative regions andcountries.–Level 2: Country generalisation. This level corresponds to the con-version of spatial features into their country. This last level only con-tains countries and supranational entities (e.g. Asia and theEuropean Union).We illustrate the impact of generalisation on co-occurrence weightswith the previous example (Fig. 4):At level 1, all locations with a lower granularity than the ﬁrst admin- istrative level (i.e.WięckowiceandPoznań) are converted into their administrative level (Greater Poland). At level 2, all locations are con- verted into their country level, which increases the joint probability ofthe pair {African swine fever,Poland}: –Level 0: {African swine fever,Więckowice}:N
xy=1 ,{African swine fever,Poznań}:N
xy=1 ,{African swine fever,Poland}:N xy=1 , {African swine fever,Germany}:N
xy=1 ; –Level 1: {African swine fever,Greater Poland}:N
xy=2 ,{African swine fever,Poland}:N
xy=1 ,{African swine fever,Germany}: N
xy=1 ;–Level 2: {African swine fever,Poland}:N
xy=3 ,{African swine fever,Germany}:N
xy=1 .The combination of association measures (Eqs. (3, 4)), co- occurrence contexts and spatial generalisation provides a mixed mea-sure to evaluate both the detection quality and the ranking of relevantpairs:–The window parameters control pair detection;–The association measure (MI or Dice) controls the ranking of the de-tected pairs;–For disease-location pairs, the spatial generalisation level jointlycontributes to the detection of a pair and its ranking.In the following section, we describe the evaluation protocol and thecorpus used for the experiments.4. ExperimentsTo evaluate the proposed approach, weﬁrst annotated a corpus of news articles with events (Section 4.1). We further used the list of anno- tated events as a gold-standard to automatically determine the rele-vance of the retrieved pairs of entities ( Section 4.2). The quality of the
2https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2020/apr/08/african-swine-fever-outbreak-reported-in-western-poland
3These parameters were chosen as an example, but a range of values are evaluated inSection 4.3.S. Valentin, R. Lancelot and M. Roche Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 5 (2021) 163 –174
167ranked lists of pairs was evaluated using speci ﬁc ranking evaluation metrics (Section 4.3).4.1. Event corpusWe used a publicly available annotated corpus of 438 documents(i.e. news articles) related to animal disease events (either describinga recent outbreak or providing complementary insight regarding con-trol measures, economic impacts, etc.) ( Rabatel et al., 2019). This corpus was initially designed for training and evaluating the PADI-web infor-mation extraction module. The corpus contains information about thenews article itself (publication date, title, content, URL, etc.), as well asepidemiological features (locations, diseases, hosts, dates and symp-toms), which wereﬁrst automatically identiﬁed by data mining and rule-based approaches. A veterinary epidemiologist and a computer sci-entist subsequently labelled each candidate as correct or incorrect. Foreach document and type of feature (i.e. disease, host, date and location),only candidates manually labelled as correct in the corpus wereretained for analysis (including the geographical-geographical disam-biguation of locations).An epidemiologist read each of the 438 documents to detect all dis-ease events contained within them. To ensure consistent and reproduc-ible annotation, events found in the documents were compared to agold-standard database, i.e. the Emergency Prevention System for Prior-ity Animal and Plant Pests and Disease (EMPRES-i) database. EMPRES-iis a publicly available animal disease information system created by theFood and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) ( Martin et al., 2007). Among other sources, EMPRES-i stores the of ﬁcial notiﬁca- tions from the World Animal Health Organization (OIE). Each detectedevent was labelled using the unique EMPRES-i identi ﬁer. When the ep- idemiologist could not link an event to an of ﬁcial one, she created a new event identiﬁer and manually recorded the epidemiological features(location, date, disease and host). Theﬁnal corpus annotated with the event identiﬁers is hereafter referred to as theevent corpus. The number of news articles containing at least one event repre-sented 53% of the corpus (n= 229/438). Among them, 52% (n=1 2 7 / 229) reported several events, with a median number of 3 events(Table 1). One news article contained a maximum number of 208 eventsdue to the reporting of 200 avian inﬂuenza outbreaks in Taiwan on 28 January 2015.Overall, 771 events were detected in the corpus. Among them, 70%(n= 541/771) were reported in a single news article. The events pres-ent in several news articles were reported in up to 11 news articles (me-dian number of 3 news articles).In the following experiments, we selected only news articles con-taining at least one event (a corpus of 229 documents). Even if still mod-est in size, our corpus is highly specialized regarding both its domain(i.e. animal health) and its nature (i.e. online news articles).4.2. Relevant pairsFrom the annotated event corpus, we can map each publication datedate
iwith the set of its corresponding events (i.e. the events annotatedin the news articles published ondate
i). Sets including the publication dates and their epidemiological attributes are used as gold-standardlists to evaluate the relevance of extracted pairs of features. We createda gold-standard list speciﬁc to each type of pairs, as follows:1. We aggregated news articles from the event corpus by publicationdate;2. For each distinct datedate
i, we extracted all eventsevent ilabelled in the set of news articles published on date
i(gold-standard list); 3. For each eventevent
j, we retrieved its disease (disease j), host (host j) and country (country
j);4. The gold-standard lists include all of the formed date
i,disease j, country
janddate i,disease jandhost jsets.Identifying the extracted events for each publication date was re-quired to avoid false positive matches between retrieved pairs and thegold-standard lists. As the event corpus covers a 2-year period, a pairof features extracted atdate
jcould erroneously correspond to a paircorresponding to a different event.The disease-location and disease-host gold-standard lists contained248 and 228 sets, respectively. Each retrieved pair extracted from a setof articles at datedate
iwas relevant if it matched at least one pairfrom the gold-standard list corresponding to date date
i(Fig. 5). To match the gold-standard terms (disease names, species names andFig. 3.A news article content extract (The Guardian, 8 April 2020).
Fig. 4.Generalisation levels of spatial entities. The level of each location (based on the GeoNames hierarchy) is shown.Table 1Descriptive statistics of the number of articles ( N
article) per event and number of events (N
event) per articles in the event corpus.Min Median Mean Maxn
eventper article:Articles withN
event> = 1 (n = 229) 1 2.0 5.1 208Articles withN
event> = 2 (n = 127) 2 3.0 8.4 208N
article per event:Events withN
article >=1(n= 771) 1 1.0 1.5 11Events withN
article >=2(n= 230) 2 3 2.8 11S. Valentin, R. Lancelot and M. Roche Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 5 (2021) 163 –174
168country codes from the EMPRES-i database), diseases and hosts werenormalized to their canonical form using a manually built dictionary,and locations were normalized to their country code.Note that the normalisation of locations differs from the spatial gen-eralisation described inSection 3.2. Normalisation aims at matching apair with the gold-standard list features. Locations from the same coun-try are not aggregated and are considered as two distinct values in thepair extraction step. In the example from Fig. 5,”Henan”and”China” are considered as two distinct values, even though they are normalizedto the same country code.4.3. Evaluation4.3.1. Pair extraction and rankingWe extracted all the disease-host and disease-location pairs usingthe co-occurrence parameters described in Section 3.1. The word win- dow size ranged from 1 to 200 words on each side (left, right, andboth). This window was chosen by (Piskorski et al., 2011) for an event extraction task, assuming that most relevant information would bepresent in theﬁrst 200 words. The sentence window size ranged from0 to 20 sentences per side. We ranked the retrieved pairs in decreasingorder based on theirMutual Informationor Dice values. We evaluated the quality of the ranked list according to the parameters and associa-tion measures' ability to assign a better rank to relevant pairs than to ir-relevant ones. The ranking was evaluated in terms of normalizedprecision (P
norm), normalized recall (R norm) and F-measure (F norm). R
normandP normare based on the difference between the sum of ranksof R relevant pairs obtained by a ranking function, and the sum ofranks of an ideal list, where all relevant pairs are retrieved before allthe irrelevant pairs (Kishida, 2005;Salton and Lesk, 1968):Rnorm¼1−1R∗N−RðÞ/C2∑Ri¼1ri−∑Ri¼1ið5ÞP
norm¼1−1log C N,RðÞðÞ/C2∑Ri¼1log r iðÞ−∑Ri¼1log iðÞ ð6ÞwhereNis the total number of pairs,r
iis the rank of theithrelevant pair in the ordered list, andC(N,R)=
N!R!/C2N−RðÞ!.Graphically,R
normcorresponds to the area under curve (AUC) of thereceiver operating characteristics (ROC) curve, or AUC. Fig. 6provides an example of how ROC curves work regarding ranking evaluation.LetR
1andR 2being the two ranked lists of pairs P i: •R
1=P 2,P1,P4,P6,P5,P3
•R2=P 3,P4,P6,P5,P1,P2
For each relevant pair (in bold), the curve increases one unit in the Y-axis direction. For each irrelevant pair, the curve increases one unit inthe X-axis direction. Consequently, the AUC of the best ranking function(here,R
1) is greater than that of a function giving a poorer ranking(here,R
2).The normalized F-measureF
normis the harmonic mean ofR normand P
norm(Eq.(7)).F
norm¼2/C2Rnorm/C2P norm
RnormþP normð7ÞWe also evaluated the quality of the 5ﬁrst pairs retrieved by calcu- lating the precision at k (P@k), recall at k (R@k), and the F-measure (F@k), withk=5. We chose this threshold because it provides the
Fig. 5.Steps to evaluate the relevance of the disease-location pairs extracted from a news article. After extraction (1), disease and location features are normalized (2). A pair present in the gold-standard list is considered relevant (3).S. Valentin, R. Lancelot and M. Roche Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 5 (2021) 163 –174
169local ranking quality, and 95% of the sets of relevant pairs had 1 to 5 el-ements (pairs).4.4. Results4.4.1. Disease - host pairsTable 2summarises the best results obtained among all the windowparameters evaluated and the document-level performance. The word-level window outperformed document-level and sentence-level win-dows in terms of normalized precision and recall. The highest precisionand recall values were obtained with Diceusing a window of 26 words on the right side (R
norm=0.90,P norm=0.92). The performance obtainedwithDicevalues exceeded that with theMIvalues. The maximum recall at 5 (R@5) ranged from 0.89 to 0.92, while theprecision at 5 (P@ 5) reached a maximum value of 0.88 ( Table 3). The word-level obtained the best recall-precision balance ( F@ 5 = 0.88). Fig. 7shows the normalized F-measure ( F
norm) among the word window sizes and sides. The horizontal lines correspond to the F
norm
values obtained at the document level. At a given window size andside,Dicesystematically outperformedMI. For both metrics, we achieved betterF
normvalues using a right or bilateral window, clearlyoutperforming the left-side windows. For all curves, the slope rapidlyincreased when the word distances increased from 1 to 100. The MIperformance decreased with window sizes of more than 100 words.Diceexhibited a different behaviour, where the performance remainedstable among all the window sizes when the values peaked (100 to200 words).In contrast to the global ranking, Dice and MI obtained similar per-formance in retrieving theﬁrstﬁve pairs (Fig. 8). The F-measure behav- iour was identical to the global ranking, with right and bilateral sidesobtaining the best results while remaining stable among the windowsizes.4.4.2. Disease-location pairsThe maximal normalized F-measure values for disease-host pairsranged from 0.62 (document-level, MI) to 0.88 (word-level, Dice)(Table 4). At the document level, the generalisation at the administra-tive level (level 1) slightly improved performance. The second level(country level) improved theDiceranking's recall and precision at theword level (improving the F-measure from 0.81 to 0.88). However, itdecreased the MI ranking performance (at the word level, the F-measure decreased by 0.11).Fig. 9highlights the different behaviours of DiceandMIregarding the generalisation level. Without generalisation (level 0), the best F-measures were obtained for both metrics with a window of 25 words
Fig. 6.ROC curves obtained by two different rankings, R 1andR 2. The pairs in bold correspond to the relevant pairs, and the blue areas correspond to the AUC.
Table 2Performance of MI and Dice to retrieve and rank relevant disease-host pairs at documentlevel, based onP
norm,RnormandF norm.Mutual information DiceR
norm Pnorm Fnorm Rnorm Pnorm Fnorm
Document level 0.79 0.80 0.80 0.83 0.85 0.84Sentence level 0.78 0.81 0.80 0.84 0.88 0.86Word level 0.82 0.85 0.87 0.90 0.92 0.91For sentence-level and word-level windows, the performance corresponds to the bestvalues among the range of window sizes and sides.
Table 3Performance of MI and Dice to retrieve and rank relevant disease-host pairs, based on P@ 5,R@ 5 andF@5 .Mutual information DiceR@5P@5F@5R@5P@5F@5Document level 0.91 0.81 0.86 0.920.81 0.86 Sentence level 0.89 0.85 0.87 0.90 0.850.87 Word level 0.90 0.84 0.87 0.91 0.84 0.88For sentence-level and word-level windows, the performance corresponds to the bestvalues among the range of window sizes and sides.
Fig. 7.Performance of MI and Dice to retrieve and rank relevant disease-host pairs in termsofF
norm, depending on the window parameters used for the co-occurence count.For the left side, distances were converted into their positive values. Horizontal linescorrespond to theF
normvalues obtained at the document-level for MI (orange line) andDice (blue line).S. Valentin, R. Lancelot and M. Roche Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 5 (2021) 163 –174
170(on both sides), and the scores slightly decreased with the largest win-dow sizes. At the country level, the MI F-measure remained below 0.70while that ofDiceranged from 0.80 to 0.88. The Dice ranking reachedmaximum values between 100 and 125 words (both sides) andremained increased for all window sizes.The ranking quality at 5 was sensitive to the word windows regard-ing both the level and generalisation ( Fig. 10,Table 5), with the best F- measures reached within a 50-word window.5. Discussion5.1. Behaviour of statistical measuresThe statistical approaches used in this paper (i.e. DiceandMI) de- tected event-related pairs of epidemiological features with a goodtrade-off between precision and recall. Our results showed that usinga window of words outperformed document-based and sentence-based methods while reducing the probability of detecting false pairs.Our results indicated that Mutual Information was less adapted thantheDicecoefﬁcient for ranking pairs of features in the event extractionframework. This was especially true when generalising spatial featuresand increased occurrence counts. Besides, Dice ranking was foundmore resistant to larger word windows, in line with the ﬁndings of(Bouma, 2009), who proposed to add a normalisation factor to the MI formula to address low-count issues. We believe that MIwould be more relevant for rare pair detection (i.e. weak signals) but requireshigher manual curation to avoid false-positive extraction pairs.MItends to extract rare and speciﬁc co-occurrences that is highlighted in several studies (Thanopoulos et al., 2002)(Agnihotri et al., 2016). Some variants have been proposed, they consist in intro-ducing factors to the numerator to empirically correct the bias of MI that extracts low frequency events (Roche and Prince, 2010;Role and Nadif, 2011).Dicecoefﬁcient does not favor numerator as these variantsofMIdo but denominator value is less important for computing the sumof both elements.5.2. Speciﬁcities of the corpusThe use of the BERT (Bidirectional Encoder Representations fromTransformers) model for event extraction could represent an attractivefuture work as discussed inSection 6. But the use of pre-trained lan- guage models has some limitations with respect to the speci ﬁcd o m a i n addressed in this paper. For example, we studied the use of embeddingmethods like the Word2vec model that consists in a 2-layer neural net-work. We used a pretrained corpus (i.e. Google News corpus with 3
Fig. 8.Performance of MI and Dice to retrieve and rank relevant disease-host pairs in termsofF@ 5, depending on the window parameters used for the co-occurence count.For the left side, distances were converted into their positive values. Horizontal linescorrespond to the P@5 values obtained at the document level for MI (orange line) andDice (blue line).
Table 4Performance of MI and Dice based on P
norm,RnormandF normto retrieve and rank relevant disease-location pairs at the document level according to the spatial generalisation level.Mutual information DiceGeneralisation R
norm Pnorm Fnorm Rnorm Pnorm Fnorm
Document-level Level 0 0.73 0.73 0.73 0.75 0.76 0.76Level 1 0.76 0.76 0.76 0.77 0.80 0.78Level 2 0.64 0.60 0.62 0.81 0.82 0.81Sentence-level Level 0 0.73 0.74 0.74 0.75 0.75 0.75Level 1 0.73 0.74 0.74 0.75 0.76 0.75Level 2 0.63 0.66 0.64 0.62 0.66 0.64Word-level Level 0 0.72 0.78 0.75 0.78 0.84 0.81Level 1 0.71 0.74 0.73 0.77 0.82 0.80Level 2 0.68 0.73 0.71 0.88 0.88 0.88Level 0: no generalisation, level 1: ﬁrst generalisation level, level 2: second generalisation level.
Fig. 9.Performance of MI and Dice to retrieve and rank relevant disease-location pairs interms ofF
normdepending on the window parameters used for the co-occurrence countand two spatial generalisation levels.For left side, distances are converted to their positive value. Horizontal lines correspond tothe normalized F-measure values at document-level. Level 0: no generalisation, level 2:generalisation at the country level.S. Valentin, R. Lancelot and M. Roche Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 5 (2021) 163 –174
171billion words) for a classiﬁcation task (e.g. classiﬁcation of sentences based on 6 classes: Descriptive epidemiology, Protection and controlmeasures, Concern and risk factors, Transmission pathway, Economicand political consequences and Distribution) using supervised machinelearning techniques. The pre-trained Word2vec models (CBOW) did notimprove the results with the best classiﬁcation algorithm (i.e. multilayer perceptron): the accuracy was 0.69 with pretrained models and 0.74using a specialized corpus (i.e. PADI-web data with 33 million words)for the learning step. Some details of the experiments conducted aregiven in (Valentin, 2020). These results highlight the limitation of trans-fer learning approaches. Even with this limitation we plan to investigateother methods that consists in generating labelled data by using the in-formation about the role (Yang et al., 2019).5.3. Disease-location detection and retrievalThe results obtained for retrieving disease-location pairs withoutany generalisation suggested that relevant spatial features tended tooccur within a small window around the disease feature (25 words, bi-lateral window). Beyond this window range, the global ranking perfor-mance decreased. However, global ranking with the Dicecoefﬁcient after country-level generalisation exhibited a different behaviour, i.e. re-maining stable and close to its maximum value throughout the windowsize range. Event-related spatial features are provided at different gran-ularity levels. Spatial generalisation allowed us to aggregate related lo-cations in single features, thus increasing event-related pairs' weights.Moreover, spatial generalisation overcomes possible location extractionand disambiguation errors. For instance, news articles often refer towhere the sample analyses are performed, thus citing a laboratory loca-tion. If the laboratory-based city is extracted as an event-related candi-date, using the city feature itself would generate a false alarm. This issuemay be overcome by converting the location value into its country,which would lead to lower spatial precision. In the epidemic intelli-gence framework, the country-level is acceptable for signal analysis,but this approach may not relevant ifﬁne-grained location extraction is needed.Several gold-standard disease-location pairs were not detected dueto a linkage between GeoNames and the Global Administrative UnitLayers (GAUL) used by the EMPRES-i database. In the latter, Taiwanand Hong Kong are considered distinct countries. On the contrary, theGeoNames hierarchy considers them as administrative units of China.(Claes et al., 2014) used a manual procedure to link both databases.Manual analysis of irrelevant retrieved pairs showed that most ofthem were due to multiple events, which no statistical approachsucceeded in separating.5.4. Disease-host detection and retrievalThe detection and ranking of disease-host pairs achieved better re-sults than the retrieval of disease-location pairs. The variation in theword window had less impact than for the disease-location pairs. Thisﬁnding indicates that the precision also remained high when thehighest recall value was achieved. This result was expected because the-matic features are much less prone to ambiguity than spatial or tempo-ral features. When additional events were present in a news article, theywere often summarized in a few sentences containing only the diseaseand location, thereby reducing the probability of creating falsedisease-host pairs. Several pairs were detected because irrelevant hostterms were extracted from two disease variants, i.e. “small ruminant plague”and“cattle plague”. As these two expressions were not in thedictionary, they were not recognised as diseases, which led to erroneousextraction of”small ruminant”and”cattle”as hosts. Both cases were corrected by adding the new variants to the dictionary and recon-ducting the experiments. Animal disease expressions are often com-posed of several terms containing epidemiological entities such ashosts and symptoms, so the information extraction performance (and,in this particular case, the coverage of dictionary-based methods) is crit-ical for event extraction. We observed that we did not achieve a recall of1 when using the broader co-occurrence detection level (i.e. documentlevel). After manual investigation, we discovered that 5 news articlesdid not contain any reference to a host. Four out of 5 news articles
Fig. 10.Performance of MI and Dice to retrieve and rank relevant disease-location pairs interms ofF@5 depending on the window parameters used for the co-occurrence count andtwo spatial generalisation levels.For the left side, distances are converted into their positive value. Horizontal linesrepresent theF@ 5 values at the document level. Level 0: no generalisation, level 2:generalisation at the country level.
Table 5Performance of MI and Dice based on P@5 ,R@ 5 andF@ 5 to retrieve and rank relevant disease-location pairs at the document level according to the level of spatialgeneralisation.Mutual information DiceGeneralisationR@5P@5F@5R@5P@5F@5Document-level Level 0 0.89 0.78 0.83 0.95 0.77 0.85Level 1 0.90 0.77 0.83 0.95 0.77 0.85Level 2 0.95 0.67 0.79 0.980.68 0.80 Sentence-level Level 0 0.90 0.85 0.87 0.89 0.86 0.87Level 1 0.90 0.85 0.880.90 0.850.88 Level 2 0.93 0.76 0.84 0.93 0.76 0.84Word-level Level 0 0.91 0.85 0.88 0.91 0.85 0.88 Level 1 0.91 0.80 0.84 0.92 0.80 0.85Level 2 0.840.870.85 0.85 0.86 0.86Level 0: no generalisation, level 1: ﬁrst generalisation level, level 2: second generalisation level.S. Valentin, R. Lancelot and M. Roche Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 5 (2021) 163 –174
172were about the foot-and-mouth disease in endemic areas, and the lastarticle referred to a suspected case of African swine fever. Such caseswere rare in the studied corpus. Still, it should be noted that the host at-tribute is not necessarily communicated in news content, either becausethe disease is yet well known (e.g. endemic disease in an area) or be-cause the event is only a suspicion. The host is thus implied becausethis information is secondarily compared to spatial features. This behav-iour may bias models that determine news articles' relevance based onthe presence or absence of a host's name.6. Conclusion and future workThis paper highlights that the detection of relevant epidemiologicalentity association based on unsupervised approaches depends on thetextual context, i.e. the window used to retrieve the features in thenews. Restraining the context to aﬁxed window of words achieved bet-ter results than retrieving all pairs occurring in a document. Associationmeasures, such as Dice and Mutual Information, could also compute theco-occurrence strength in a simple and interpretable way. Besides,generalising the country-level spatial features enabled better discrimi-nation (i.e. ranking) of relevant disease-location pairs.A comprehensive comparison of the state-of-the-art associationmetrics could provide an extensive overview of their performance asfurther work.Before applying extraction methods, expansion of text content couldbe proposed using word embedding architectures like the BERT model.BERT produces word representations that are dynamically informed bythe words around them (i.e. context dependent). This model achievednew state-of-the-art results for several NLP tasks ( Piskorski et al., 2020;Torregrossa et al., 2021;Trieu et al., 2020). Moreover, we would like to identify weak signals (i.e. weak pairs ofepidemiological information). This concept should be precisely de ﬁned in event-based surveillance to formalise speci ﬁc research questions and assess adapted methods. Rare occurrences of event attributes, such asdisease-location pairs, are potential weak signals. They can also signalan event that has not yet been conﬁrmed at the national or internationallevel. In this context, a weak signal could be de ﬁned as a temporal anomaly of the frequency of a term or an association of terms comparedto a baseline. Detection of weak signals by event-based systems couldconsist of implementing alerts based on terms-weighted metricswhich take the temporal dimension into account.Declaration of Competing InterestThe authors declare that they have no known competing ﬁnancial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to in ﬂu- ence the work reported in this paper.AcknowledgementsThis work was partially funded by the French General Directorate forFood (DGAL), the French Agricultural Research Centre for InternationalDevelopment (CIRAD) and the SONGES Project (FEDER and Occitanie).This work was also supported by the French National Research Agencyunder the Investments for the Future Program, referred to as ANR-16-CONV-0004.This study was partially funded by EU grant 874850 MOOD and iscatalogued as MOOD010. The contents of this publication are the soleresponsibility of the authors and do not necessarily re ﬂect the views of the European Commission.References
Agnihotri, D., Verma, K., Tripathi, P., 2016. Computing symmetrical strength of n-grams: a two passﬁltering approach in automatic classi ﬁcation of text documents. SpringerPlus 5.Ahlers, D., 2013.Assessment of the Accuracy of GeoNames Gazetteer Data., in: Proceed-ings of the 7th Workshop on Geographic Information Retrieval. ACM, New York,NY, USA, pp. 74–81.Aji, S., 2012. Document summarization using positive pointwise mutual information. Int.J. Comp. Sci. Inform. Technol. 4, 47 –55.https://doi.org/10.5121/ijcsit.2012.4204 . Arsevska, E., Valentin, S., Rabatel, J., de Goër de Hervé, J., Falala, S., Lancelot, R., Roche, M.,2018. Web monitoring of emerging animal infectious diseases integrated in theFrench animal health epidemic intelligence system. PLoS One 13, e0199960.https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0199960 . Bahk, C.Y., Scales, D.A., Mekaru, S.R., Brownstein, J.S., Freifeld, C.C., 2015. Comparing time-liness, content, and disease severity of formal and informal source outbreakreporting. BMC Infect. Dis. 15. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12879-015-0885-0 . Barboza, P., Vaillant, L., Mawudeku, A., Nelson, N.P., Hartley, D.M., Madoff, L.C., Linge, J.P.,Collier, N., Brownstein, J.S., Yangarber, R., Astagneau, P., on behalf of the EarlyAlerting, Reporting Project of the Global Health Security Initiative, 2013. Evaluationof epidemic intelligence systems integrated in the early alerting and reporting projectfor the detection of a/H5N1 inﬂuenza events. PLoS One 8, e57252. https://doi.org/10. 1371/journal.pone.0057252. Bird, S., Loper, E., 2004.NLTK: The natural language toolkit. Proceedings of the ACL Inter-active Poster and Demonstration Sessions, Association for Computational Linguistics,Barcelona, Spain, pp. 214 –217. Blanchard, J., Guillet, F., Gras, R., Briand, H., 2005. Using Information-Theoretic Measuresto Assess Association Rule Interestingness, in: 5th IEEE International Conference onData Mining ICDM’05. IEEE Computer Society, United States, pp. 66 –73https://doi. org/10.1109/ICDM.2005.149. Bollig, N., Clarke, L., Elsmo, E., Craven, M., 2020. Machine learning for syndromic surveil-lance using veterinary necropsy reports. PLoS One 15, e0228105. https://doi.org/10. 1371/journal.pone.0228105publisher: Public Library of Science. Bouma, G., 2009.Normalized (Pointwise) mutual information in collocation extraction.Proceedings of German Society for Computational Linguistics & Language TechnologyConference, pp. 31–40.Brownstein, J.S., Freifeld, C.C., Reis, B.Y., Mandl, K.D., 2008. Surveillance sans Frontieres: internet-based emerging infectious disease intelligence and the HealthMap project.PLoS Med. 5, e151.Carrion, M., Madoff, L.C., 2017. ProMED-mail: 22 years of digital surveillance of emerginginfectious diseases. Int. Health 9, 177 –183.https://doi.org/10.1093/inthealth/ihx014 . Chanlekha, H., Kawazoe, A., Collier, N., 2010. A framework for enhancing spatial and tem- poral granularity in report-based health surveillance systems. BMC Med. Inform. De-cision Making 10, 1.Chiu, J.P., Nichols, E., 2016. Named entity recognition with bidirectional LSTM-CNNs.Trans. Assoc. Comput. Linguistics 4, 357 –370.https://doi.org/10.1162/tacl_a_00104 . Church, K.W., Hanks, P., 1989. Word association norms, mutual information, and lexicog-raphy. Proceedings of the 27th Annual Meeting on Association for Computational Lin-guistics -, Association for Computational Linguistics, Vancouver, British Columbia,Canada, pp. 76–83https://doi.org/10.3115/981623.981633 . Claes, F., Kuznetsov, D., Liechti, R., Von Dobschuetz, S., Dinh Truong, B., Gleizes, A.,Conversa, D., Colonna, A., Demaio, E., Ramazzotto, S., Larfaoui, F., Pinto, J., LeMercier, P., Xenarios, I., Dauphin, G., 2014. The EMPRES-i genetic module: a noveltool linking epidemiological outbreak information and genetic characteristics of in-ﬂuenza viruses. Database 2014. https://doi.org/10.1093/database/bau008 bau008– bau008.Collier, N., Kawazoe, A., Jin, L., Shigematsu, M., Dien, D., Barrero, R.A., Takeuchi, K.,Kawtrakul, A., 2007.A multilingual ontology for infectious disease surveillance: ratio-nale, design and challenges. Lang. Resour. Eval. 40, 405.Collier, N., Doan, S., Kawazoe, A., Goodwin, R.M., Conway, M., Tateno, Y., Ngo, Q.H., Dien,D., Kawtrakul, A., Takeuchi, K., Shigematsu, M., Taniguchi, K., 2008. BioCaster: detect-ing public health rumors with a web-based text mining system. Bioinformatics 24,2940–2941.https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btn534 . Dion, M., AbdelMalik, P., Mawudeku, A., 2015. Big data and the global public health intel- ligence network (GPHIN). Can. Commun. Dis. Rep. 41, 209 –214. Drury, B., Roche, M., 2019. A survey of the applications of text mining for agriculture.Comput. Electron. Agric. 163, 104864. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compag.2019. 104864.Drury, B., Fernandes, R., Moura, M.F., de Andrade Lopes, A., 2019. A survey of semanticweb technology for agriculture. Inform. Proc. Agric. 6, 487 –501.https://doi.org/10. 1016/j.inpa.2019.02.001.Du, M., Pivovarova, L., Yangarber, R., 2016. PULS: natural language processing for business intelligence. Proceedings of the 2016 Workshop on Human Language Technology andIntelligent Applications, New York, United States.Feldman, R., Aumann, Y., Liberzon, Y., Ankori, K., Schler, J., Rosenfeld, B., 2001. A domainindependent environment for creating information extraction modules. Proceedingsof the Tenth International Conference on Information and Knowledge Management,Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, pp. 586 –588https://doi. org/10.1145/502585.502699. Freifeld, C.C., Mandl, K.D., Reis, B.Y., Brownstein, J.S., 2008. HealthMap: global infectiousdisease monitoring through automated classi ﬁcation and visualization of internet media reports. J. Am. Med. Inform. Assoc. 15, 150 –157.https://doi.org/10.1197/ jamia.M2544.Ghosh, S., Chakraborty, P., Cohn, E., Brownstein, J.S., Ramakrishnan, N., 2016. Characteriz- ing Diseases from Unstructured Text: A Vocabulary Driven Word2vec ApproacharXiv:1603.00106 [cs, stat].Ghosh, S., Chakraborty, P., Lewis, B.L., Majumder, M.S., Cohn, E., Brownstein, J.S., Marathe,M.V., Ramakrishnan, N., 2017. Guided Deep List: Automating the Generation of Epide- miological Line Lists from Open Sources arXiv:1702.06663 [cs].S. Valentin, R. Lancelot and M. Roche Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 5 (2021) 163 –174
173Grishman, R., Huttunen, S., Yangarber, R., 2002. Information extraction for enhanced ac-cess to disease outbreak reports. J. Biomed. Inform. 35, 236 –246.https://doi.org/10. 1016/S1532-0464(03)00013-3 . Guarino, N., Oberle, D., Staab, S., 2009. What is an ontology? In: Staab, S., Studer, R. (Eds.),Handbook on Ontologies. International Handbooks on Information Systems, Springer,Berlin, Heidelberg, pp. 1 –17https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-92673-3_0 Hartley, D., Nelson, N., Walters, R., Arthur, R., Yangarber, R., Madoff, L., Linge, J.,Mawudeku, A., Collier, N., Brownstein, J., Thinus, G., Lightfoot, N., 2010. The landscapeof international event-based biosurveillance. Emerging Health Threats J. 3. https:// doi.org/10.3402/ehtj.v3i0.7096 . Honnibal, M., Montani, I., 2018. spaCy 2: natural language understanding with Bloom em-beddings, convolutional neural networks and incremental parsing. To appear.Inkpen, D., Liu, J., Farzindar, A., Kazemi, F., Ghazi, D., 2017. Location detection and disam-biguation from twitter messages. J. Intell. Inf. Syst. 49, 237 –253.https://doi.org/10. 1007/s10844-017-0458-3. Kawazoe, A., Jin, L., Shigematsu, M., Barrero, R., Taniguchi, K., Collier, N., 2006. The devel- opment of a schema for the annotation of terms in the Biocaster disease detecting/tracking system. KR-MED.Kawazoe, A., Chanlekha, H., Shigematsu, M., Collier, N., 2008. Structuring an event ontol-ogy for disease outbreak detection. BMC Bioinform. 9, S8. https://doi.org/10.1186/ 1471-2105-9-S3-S8.Keesing, F., Belden, L.K., Daszak, P., Dobson, A., Harvell, C.D., Holt, R.D., Hudson, P., Jolles,A., Jones, K.E., Mitchell, C.E., Myers, S.S., Bogich, T., Ostfeld, R.S., 2010. Impacts of bio-diversity on the emergence and transmission of infectious diseases. Nature 468,647–652.https://doi.org/10.1038/nature09575 number: 7324 Publisher: Nature Pub- lishing Group.Kishida, K., 2005.Property of average precision and its generalization: an examination ofevaluation indicator for information retrieval experiments. NII Techn. Rep. 2005,1–19.Lafferty, J., McCallum, A., Pereira, F.C.N., 2001. Conditional randomﬁelds: probabilistic models for segmenting and labeling sequence data. Proc. 18th International Conf.on Machine Learning, pp. 282 –289. Lallich, S., Teytaud, O., Prudhomme, E., 2007. Association rule interestingness: measureand statistical validation, in: Kacprzyk, J., Guillet, F.J., Hamilton, H.J. (Eds.), QualityMeasures in Data Mining. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg. volume43, pp. 251–275. doi:https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-44918-8_11 . series Title: Studies in Computational Intelligence.Lyon, A., Grossel, G., Burgman, M., Nunn, M., 2013. Using internet intelligence to manage biosecurity risks: a case study for aquatic animal health. Divers. Distrib. 19, 640 –650. Manning, C.D., Surdeanu, M., Bauer, J., Finkel, J., Bethard, S.J., McClosky, D., 2014. The stanford CoreNLP natural language processing toolkit. Association for ComputationalLinguistics (ACL) System Demonstrations, pp. 55 –60. Margineantu, D., Wong, W.K., Dash, D., 2010. Machine learning algorithms for event de-tection: a special issue of machine learning. Mach. Learn. 79, 257 –259.https://doi. org/10.1007/s10994-010-5184-9 . Martin, V., Von Dobschuetz, S., Lemenach, A., Rass, N., Schoustra, W., DeSimone, L., 2007.Early warning, database, and information systems for avian in ﬂuenza surveillance. J. Wildl. Dis. 43, S71.Mikolov, T., Sutskever, I., Chen, K., Corrado, G., Dean, J., 2013. Distributed Representations of Words and Phrases and their Compositionality, in: Proceedings of the 26th Inter-national Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems - Volume 2. CurranAssociates Inc., USA, pp. 3111 –3119. Mooney, R.J., Bunescu, R., 2005. Mining knowledge from text using information extrac-tion. ACM SIGKDD 7, 3
–10.https://doi.org/10.1145/1089815.1089817 . Niwattanakul, S., Singthongchai, J., Naenudorn, E., Wanapu, S., 2013. Using of Jaccard co- efﬁcient for keywords similarity. Hong Kong 5.Ostfeld, R.S., 2009. Biodiversity loss and the rise of zoonotic pathogens. Clin. Microbiol. In-fect. 15, 40–43.https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1469-0691.2008.02691.x . Paolotti, D., Carnahan, A., Colizza, V., Eames, K., Edmunds, J., Gomes, G., Koppeschaar, C.,Rehn, M., Smallenburg, R., Turbelin, C., Van Noort, S., Vespignani, A., 2014. Web-based participatory surveillance of infectious diseases: the In ﬂuenzanet participatory surveillance experience. Clin. Microbiol. Infect. 20, 17 –21.https://doi.org/10.1111/ 1469-0691.12477.Paquet, C., Coulombier, D., Kaiser, R., Ciotti, M., 2006. Epidemic intelligence: a new frame-work for strengthening disease surveillance in Europe. Eurosurveillance 11, 5 –6. https://doi.org/10.2807/esm.11.12.00665-en . Pennington, J., Socher, R., Manning, C., 2014. Glove: global vectors for word representa-tion. Proceedings of the 2014 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural LanguageProcessing (EMNLP), Association for Computational Linguistics, Doha, Qatar,pp. 1532–1543https://doi.org/10.3115/v1/D14-1162 . Piskorski, J., Tanev, H., Atkinson, M., van der Goot, E., Zavarella, V., 2011. Online newsevent extraction for global crisis surveillance. In: Nguyen, N.T. (Ed.), Transactionson Computational Collective Intelligence V. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidel-berg. 6910, pp. 182–212.https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-24016-4_10 . Piskorski, J., Haneczok, J., Jacquet, G., 2020. New benchmark corpus and models for ﬁne- grained event classiﬁcation: To BERT or not to BERT? Proceedings of the 28th Inter-national Conference on Computational Linguistics, International Committee onComputational Linguistics, Barcelona, Spain (Online), pp. 6663 –6678https://doi. org/10.18653/v1/2020.coling-main.584Preotiuc-Pietro, D., Srijith, P.K., Hepple, M., Cohn, T., 2016. Studying the temporal dynam-ics of word co-occurrences: an application to event detection. Proceedings of theTenth International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC ’16), European Language Resources Association (ELRA), Portoroz, Slovenia ,pp. 4380–4387 URL.https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/L16-1694 . Rabatel, J., Arsevska, E., Roche, M., 2019. PADI-web corpus: Labeled textual data in animalhealth domain. Data in Brief 22, 643 –646.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dib.2018.12.063 . Ralf, S., Flavio, F., Erik, V.D.G., Clive, B., Peter, V.E., Roman, Y., 2008. Text Mining from theWeb for Medical Intelligence. NATO Science for Peace and Security Series, D: Informa-tion and Communication Security. , pp. 295 –310https://doi.org/10.3233/978-1- 58603-898-4-295.Roche, M., Prince, V., 2010. A web-mining approach to disambiguate biomedical acronymexpansions. Informatica 34, 12. http://www.informatica.si/index.php/informatica/ar- ticle/view/296.Roche, M., Azé, J., Kodratoff, Y., Sebag, M., 2004. Learning interestingness measures in ter- minology extraction. A ROC-based approach. ROCAI, pp. 81 –88. Role, F., Nadif, M., 2011.Handling the impact of low frequency events on co-occurrencebased measures of word similarity - a case study of pointwise mutual information.Proceedings of the International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Informa-tion Retrieval (KDIR-2011), pp. 218 –223. Salton, G., Lesk, M.E., 1968.Computer evaluation of indexing and text processing. J. Assoc.Comput. Mach. 15, 8–36.Smadja, F., Hatzivassiloglou, V., McKeown, K.R., 1996. Translating collocations for bilinguallexicons: a statistical approach. Comput. Linguistics 2 URL. http://aclweb.org/anthol- ogy/J/J96/J96-1001.Song, S., Zhang, N., Huang, H., 2019. Named entity recognition based on conditional ran-domﬁelds. Clust. Comput. 22, 1 –12.https://doi.org/10.1007/s10586-017-1146-3 . Soto, G., Araujo-Castillo, R.V., Neyra, J., Fernandez, M., Leturia, C., Mundaca, C.C., Blazes,D.L., 2008.Challenges in the implementation of an electronic surveillance system ina resource-limited setting: Alerta, in Peru. BMC Proceedings, BioMed Central, p. S4.Steinberger, R., Fuart, F., Goot, E., Best, C., Etter, P., Yangarber, R., 2008. Text mining fromthe web for medical intelligence. Mining Massive Data Sets for Security. IOS PressURL.https://www.researchgate.net/pro ﬁle/Erik_Van_der_Goot/publication/ 252032768_Text_Mining_from_the_Web_for_Medical_Intelligence/links/54e46a9d0cf2dbf6069671a0.pdf . Strotgen, J., Gertz, M., 2010.HeidelTime: high quality rule-based extraction and normali-zation of temporal expressions. Proceedings of the 5th International Workshop onSemantic Evaluation, pp. 321 –324. Thanopoulos, A., Fakotakis, N., Kokkinakis, G., 2002. Comparative evaluation of collocation extraction metrics. Proceedings of the Third International Conference on LanguageResources and Evaluation LREC, pp. 620 –625. Torkkola, K., 2003.Feature extraction by non parametric mutual information maximiza-tion. J. Mach. Learn. Res. 3, 1415 –1438 Publisher: JMLR.org. Torregrossa, F., Allesiardo, R., Claveau, V., Kooli, N., Gravier, G., 2021. A survey on trainingand evaluation of word embeddings. Int. J. Data Sci. Analytics, 1 –19https://doi.org/ 10.1007/s41060-021-00242-8 . Trieu, H.L., Tran, T.T., Duong, K.N.A., Nguyen, A., Miwa, M., Ananiadou, S., 2020.DeepEventMine: end-to-end neural nested event extraction from biomedical texts.Bioinformatics 36, 4910 –4917.https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btaa540 . Valentin, S., 2020.Extraction and Combination of Epidemiological Information from Infor-mal Sources for Animal Infectious Diseases Surveillance. Ph.D. thesis. University ofMontpellier, France.Valentin, S., Arsevska, E., Mercier, A., Falala, S., Rabatel, J., Lancelot, R., Roche, M., 2020a.PADI-web: an event-based surveillance system for detecting, classifying and process-ing online news. Post-Proceedings of 8th Language & Technology Conference, LTC2017, November 17-19, 2017. Springer, LNCS, Pozna ń,P o l a n d . Valentin, S., Lancelot, R., Roche, M., 2020b. Automated processing of multilingual onlinenews for the monitoring of animal infectious diseases. Proceedings of the LREC2020 Workshop on Multilingual Biomedical Text Processing (MultilingualBIO2020), European Language Resources Association, Marseille, France , pp. 33 –36 URL.https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/2020.multilingualbio-1.6 . WHO (Ed.), 2005.International Health Regulation (2005), 3rd ed. WHO Press, Geneva.Wilson, K., Brownstein, J.S., 2009. Early detection of disease outbreaks using the internet.Can. Med. Assoc. J. 180, 829 –831.https://doi.org/10.1503/cmaj.090215 . Xiang, W., Wang, B., 2019. A survey of event extraction from text. IEEE Access 7,173111–173137.https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2956831 . Yang, S., Feng, D., Qiao, L., Kan, Z., Li, D., 2019. Exploring pre-trained language models forevent extraction and generation. Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the As-sociation for Computational Linguistics, Association for Computational Linguistics,Florence, Italy, pp. 5284 –5294https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/P19-1522
. Zhu, L., Zheng, H., 2020. Biomedical event extraction with a novel combination strategybased on hybrid deep neural networks. BMC Bioinform. 21, 47. https://doi.org/10. 1186/s12859-020-3376-2.S. Valentin, R. Lancelot and M. Roche Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 5 (2021) 163 –174
174