Image processing based real-time variable-rate chemical sprayingsystem for disease control in paddy crop
V.K. Tewaria,C . M .P a r e e ka,⁎, Gurdeep Lala,L . K .D h r u wa, Naseeb Singhb
aAgricultural and Food Engineering Department, Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, West Bengal 721302, India
bDivision of Agricultural Engineering, ICAR Research Complex for NEH Region, Umiam, Meghalaya 793103, India
abstract article info
Article history:Received 17 November 2019Received in revised form 23 January 2020Accepted 23 January 2020Available online 16 March 2020
Keywords:Variable-rate chemical applicationSprayingImage processingMicrocontrollerPlant disease severityThe agrochemical application with conventional sprayers results in wastage of applied chemicals, which not onlyincreases the economic losses but also pollutes the environment. In order to overcome these drawbacks, animage processing based real-time variable-rate chemical spraying system was developed for the precise applica-tion of agrochemicals in diseased paddy crop based on crop disease severity information. The developed systemcomprised of web cameras for image acquisition, laptop for image processing, microcontroller for controlling thesystem functioning, and solenoid valve assisted spraying nozzles. The chromatic aberration (CA) based imagesegmentation method was used to detect the diseased region of paddy plants. The system further calculatedthe disease severity level of paddy plants, based on which the solenoid valves remained on for a speci ﬁct i m ed u - ration so that the required amount of agrochemical could be sprayed on the diseased paddy plants. Field perfor-mance of developed sprayer prototype was evaluated in the variable-rate application (VRA) and constant-rateapplication (CRA) modes. Theﬁeld testing results showed a minimum 33.88% reduction in applied chemicalwhile operating in the VRA mode as compared with the CRA mode. Hence, the developed system appears prom-ising and could be used extensively to reduce the cost of pest management as well as to control environmentalpollution due to such agrochemicals.© 2020 The Authors. Publishing services by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of KeAi Communications Co. Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ ).
1. IntroductionPest management is an essential part of the crop cultivation cycle forbetter crop yield. The conventional sprayers apply the agrochemicals ata uniform rate, which leads to excessive, injudicious, and less effectiveutilization of applied chemicals. This uniform spraying results in wast-age of applied chemicals andﬁnally increases the cost of disease control.The extended amount of applied chemicals pollutes the environmentand adversely affects the health of agricultural workers and food con-sumers. Besides, it also results in the development of heritable resis-tance in pests against pesticides (Park et al., 2007). The intervention of advanced technologies such as sensors, microcontrollers, and softwaretools in agriculture, allow the precise use of the applied chemical by reg-ulating the application rate according to the site-speci ﬁcr e q u i r e m e n t . This method is called the variable-rate application (VRA), and it can sig-niﬁcantly reduce the amount of applied chemicals and the cost of dis-ease control.In a variable-rate application system, the application rate of inputchemical could be varied using either the map-based approach orsensor-based approach. In the map-based approach, a preset site-speciﬁc map of desired properties is used to control the applicationrate. While, in the case of a sensor-based approach, the information ofdesired properties is collected on-the-go using sensors, and the applica-tion rate is regulated according to the processed information. However,the suitability of these approaches mainly depends on the nature andobjectives of a particular site-speciﬁc farming task. In general, the map-based approach is preferred for the properties that almost remainthe same for an extended period or change quite slowly, such as organicmatter and soil texture. On the other hand, the sensor-based approach ispreferred for the quickly changing soil properties and crop characteris-tics (Ess et al., 2001).In the case of variable-rate chemical spraying for plant disease con-trol, the map-based approach is not practically appropriate, as the dis-eases spread across the wholeﬁeld very rapidly. Hence, the accuracyof sample data and the derived disease maps are time-sensitive, whichmeans that the disease distribution may have changed by the time themap is prepared. These maps are also not readily available to maketimely decisions on disease control, mainly due to the laborious andtime consuming conventional visual plant disease estimation methods(Dammer et al., 2008). Moreover, the operational performance of themap-based variable-rate spraying system is affected by the accuracy ofpositioning devices, which is not the case with the sensor-based ap-proach. In the sensor-based approach, no additional costs for laborArtiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 4 (2020) 21 –30
⁎Corresponding author.E-mail address:chaitanyapareek@gmail.com(C.M. Pareek).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aiia.2020.01.0022589-7217/© 2020 The Authors. Publishing services by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of KeAi Communications Co. Ltd. This is an open access article under the C C BY-NC-ND license (http:// creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ ).
Contents lists available atScienceDirect
Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture
journal homepage:http://www.keaipublishing.com/en/journals/artificial-intelligence-in-agriculture/and data management are required.Tackenberg et al. (2018)also em- phasized that the detection of crop disease and spraying should be per-formed in one single real-time working cycle, due to the fast-propagating nature of the pathogens. Therefore, the sensor-basedvariable-rate chemical application is preferred for disease control tasks.So far, very few studies related to the variable-rate chemical applica-tion for plant disease control have been reported. Dammer and Ehlert (2006)developed and tested a real-time variable-rate fungicidesspraying system for disease control in cereal crops. They used CROP-Meter (Ehlert et al., 2003) as a target detection sensor. This sensor signalwas linearly correlated with the leaf area index; hence, the input chem-ical application rate was adjusted according to the leaf area indexvalues. However, in the decision making for variable-rate chemical ap-plication, the heterogeneous distribution of plant diseases within theﬁeld was not taken into consideration, and the applied chemical appli-cation rate was varied according to the leaf area index instead of the dis-ease distribution. Moreover, the Crop-Meter sensor always remained incontact with the crop while spraying, which could be more dif ﬁcult to operate as compared to the non-contact type on-the-go target detectionsensors.The image processing technique with the real-time machine visionsystem is one of the most commonly used on-the-go target detectionmethods for variable-rate spraying. Its high precision, quick response,and low input cost are made it more popular and widely acceptable inthe area of agricultural automation. In the past, this target detectionmethod was extensively used in various real-time variable-ratespraying systems for site-speciﬁc pest management, but most studieswere focused on the herbicide application for weed control ( Tian, 2002;Gerhards and Christensen, 2003;Gerhards and Oebel, 2006; Tangwongkit et al., 2006;Bossu et al., 2008;Tewari et al., 2014; Dammer, 2016;Chandel et al., 2018;Xu et al., 2018;Özlüoymak et al., 2019;Partel et al., 2019;Rehman et al., 2019). The image processing technique was also well-applied in several crop disease detection stud-ies (Tucker and Chakraborty, 1997;Sena Jr et al., 2003;Dammer et al., 2011;Patil and Bodhe, 2011;Barbedo, 2014;Barbedo et al., 2016; Singh and Misra, 2017;Schor et al., 2017), but most of these studies were conducted in laboratory conditions.In recent years, some studies related to the image processing basedprecision spraying system for crop disease management have been re-ported.Esau et al. (2014)developed a machine vision-based variable-rate sprayer for spot-application of fungicide in wild blueberry ﬁelds. The developed system differentiated the bare spots from foliage (wildblueberry plants and weeds) in real-time using the image processingtechnique, and the chemical was sprayed only over the foliage portion.Oberti et al. (2016)tested an agricultural robot equipped withprecision-spraying end-effector and machine vision-based disease-sensing system for spot spraying over the diseased grapevine canopyarea. The testing results showed the reduction in pesticide use from
65% to 85% as compared to conventional homogeneous spraying of thecanopy.Tackenberg et al. (2016)developed a camera sensor-basedvariable-rate fungicide spraying system for the wheat crop. In thisstudy, the disease variability across theﬁeld was not taken into consid- eration for variable-rate fungicide spraying; instead, the chemical appli-cation rate was varied according to the sensor measured green coveragelevel.Berenstein and Edan (2017)designed a human-robot collabora-tive sprayer for site-speciﬁc spraying of grape cluster targets. They de-veloped a target detection algorithm based on simple colorthresholding and implemented that algorithm using Matlab softwarefor detecting the artiﬁcial custom targets for spraying. The test resultsrevealed that the developed spraying system reduced the quantity ofsprayed material by 50%.Samseemoung et al. (2017)developed and tested an image processing based variable-rate chemical sprayerassisted with a remote monitoring system for disease and pest-infested coconut plantations. They developed an image processing algo-rithm to estimate disease density, and the corresponding requiredamount of chemical was applied to the target area.The above literature reviews show that the image processing tech-nique with necessary electronic hardware and spraying system couldbe successfully employed for variable-rate spraying of agrochemicalsin diseased crops. Therefore, the goal of this study was to develop animage processing technique based real-time variable-rate chemicalspraying system for ensuring the precise use of input chemical basedon the plant disease severity level. In order to achieve this goal, the pres-ent study was carried out under the following speci ﬁco b j e c t i v e s( 1 )T o develop an image processing algorithm for real-time estimation of plantdisease severity level. (2) To develop a variable-rate spraying system forthe precise application of agrochemicals based on plant disease severity.(3) To evaluate the performance of the developed variable-rate chemi-cal spraying system inﬁeld conditions.2. Materials and methods2.1. Variable-rate chemical sprayer prototypeThe variable-rate chemical sprayer prototype was designed and de-veloped for agrochemical application in two crop rows simultaneously.The prototype comprised of two web cameras (Logitech Pro 9000) forimage acquisition in each row, a Laptop (4GB RAM, Intel Core i5 CPU,and Windows 8 operating system) for image processing; a 5 L plastictank for chemical storage purpose; a pump; two 12 VDC normallyclosed solenoid valves; two spray nozzles; two relay switches; a prox-imity sensor; an Arduino Uno microcontroller board; and a battery. Allof these components were assembled on a manually operated cart forpesticide application in paddyﬁelds. The developed variable-rate chem-ical sprayer prototype is shown inFig. 1.In this prototype, cameras were mounted on the telescopic arrange-ment to adjust their position according to the height of target plants andconnected to the laptop through 1.5 m long USB 2.0 cables. The sprayerprototype was equipped with two hollow cone nozzles, one for eachrow. The cameras were positioned 0.25 m in front of the spray nozzlesto compensate the time lag between the image acquisition and thereal-time spraying of agrochemicals. A 12 VDC ﬁxed displacement pump was provided to maintain theﬂow of liquid inside supply tubes. The solenoid valves were placed upstream side of the individual spraynozzle to control the applied amount of input chemical by remainingopen for a speciﬁc time duration when needed. An Arduino Uno micro-controller board was used to control all sensors and actuators. One 12VDC relay switch was provided to ON/OFF each solenoid valve accordingto the control signal received through the microcontroller. A 12 VDC op-erated inductive type proximity sensor was installed on the groundwheel of the developed prototype to sense the traveled distance andtriggers the image acquisition units to capture the new images. Powersupply to the entire system was provided with the help of a 12 VDCSealed Lead Acid (SLA) battery.2.2. Estimation of paddy plant disease severity using image processingtechniqueIn the present study, the white-tip disease ( Aphelenchoides besseyi Christie), which is one of the most common diseases ofpaddy with visually distinct foliar symptoms, was taken into consid-eration. The characteristic symptoms of white tip disease appearafter tillering, and leaf tips become chlorotic or whitened for a lengthof up to 5 cm (Elazegui and Islam, 2003). The web cameras, provided in each row, captured the RGB images of paddy plants with the imageresolution of 640 × 480 pixels. In order to protect the image scenesagainst direct sunlight and minimize the chromatic color changesduring the image acquisition in the
ﬁe l d ,b o t ht h ei m a g es c e n ea n d the image acquisition device were provided with the covering ofgreen cloth. In the past, several researchers applied the similar ap-proach to minimize the effect of varying natural illumination condi-tions in theﬁeld during image capturing (Aggelopoulou et al., 2011;22 V.K. Tewari et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 4 (2020) 21 –30Ahmed et al., 2012;Haug et al., 2014;Mahmud et al., 2019). The green color background also avoids false detection and minimizesthe noises in the image capturing area and allows an accurate seg-mentation of the region of interest. All the images of paddy plantsused for algorithm development were captured between 7.30 AMto 10.00 AM on 9th March 2018 in pa ddy research farm at the agri- cultural and food engineering department, IIT Kharagpur, India. Thelight illumination values inside the covered area were recordedusing a digital lux meter (Metravi 1334, Metravi Instruments Pvt.Ltd., India), which were varied from 270 lx to 400 lx. The capturedpaddy crop images were subjected to a series of image processingsteps for plant disease detection and real-time estimation of plantdisease severity level. The Image Processing Toolbox of MATLABR2014b software was utilized for real-time image processing.2.2.1. Plant diseased area segmentation based on chromatic aberration(CA) methodIn the present study, a chromatic aberration (CA) based color imagesegmentation algorithm was developed for detecting the diseased re-gion in paddy crop. The proposed image segmentation algorithmconsisted of three steps, i.e., color component extraction and analysis,selection of characteristic operator, and thresholding segmentation(Hu et al., 2009).Color component extraction and analysis: Initially, the red (R),green (G), and blue (B) components of the lesion region, healthy re-gion, and background were extracted from the original captured RGBimage and plotted in the form of box-plot, as shown in Fig. 2.F r o m thisﬁgure, it can be observed that the R and G pixel values of thelesion region are signiﬁcantly different from that of the healthy re-gion and background. Hence, the RGB color space model can beused for differentiating the diseased region from the healthy regionand background.Selection of characteristic operator: Based on the above information,the various combinations of R, G, and B components were tested toidentify the white tip disease of the paddy plants. Finally, a CA equation(Eq.(1)) was found most suitable for differentiating the lesion regionfrom the healthy region and background.CA¼R−
G2/C18/C19− B2/C18/C19 ð1Þwhere CA is chromatic aberration value; R denotes red component inRGB color space; G denotes green component in RGB color space; andB denotes blue component in RGB color space.The CA values of the lesion region, healthy region, and background,which were calculated using Eq.(1),a r es h o w ni nFig. 3. From thisﬁg- ure, an apparent deviation of CA values of the lesion region can be ob-served from that of the healthy region and background. Hence, thelesion region could be successfully segmented from the healthy regionand background based on its CA values.Thresholding segmentation: In this step, the captured RGB imagewas converted into a binary image using the color threshold methodby selecting a suitable threshold value (T) of the CA. In order to seg-ment the lesion region from the healthy region and the background,an appropriate threshold value of the CA, i.e., T=0 ,w a sc h o s e nf r o m Fig. 3, as the overlapping of CA values of lesion region and healthy
Fig. 1.Variable-rate chemical sprayer prototype.23 V.K. Tewari et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 4 (2020) 21 –30region of paddy leaves was minimum for CA N0. The threshold oper- ation based segmentation function is de ﬁned as follows:fx;yðÞ ¼1if CA≥T0if CAbT8<: ð2Þwhere, T is the threshold value of chromatic aberration, and f(x,y)i st h e value of the pixel (x,y) in theﬁnal binary image obtained after implemen-tation of the color thresholding technique. In the binary image, the whitecolor portion (the pixel value is 1) represents the lesion region, and theblack color portion (the pixel value is 0) represents the healthy regionand background.2.2.2. Plant disease severity estimationIn order to determine the required amount of input chemical and formaking the spraying decisions, the disease severity of the paddy plantsneeds to be observed. The disease severity is de ﬁned as the disease in- fected area of a sampling unit (leaf or plant surface) and expressed as apercentage or proportion of the total area ( Nutter Jr et al., 1991). Thus, by utilizing the image processing approach, the disease severity ofpaddy leaves was given by the ratio of total pixels of the diseased regionto the total pixels of leaves region and computed using Eq. (3) (Weizheng et al., 2008).S%ðÞ ¼
Ad
Al/C2100¼PXx;yðÞ∈R d1PX
x;yðÞ∈R l1/C2100¼X
x;yðÞ∈R d1X
x;yðÞ∈R l1/C2100ð3Þ
Fig. 2.Distribution of color components of lesion region, healthy region and background in RGB color model.
Fig. 3.Distribution of chromatic aberration values of lesion region, healthy region and background.24 V.K. Tewari et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 4 (2020) 21 –30where S is disease severity, %, S∈[0,100%] ; A ddenotes diseased leaves area; A
lrepresents total plant leaves area; P denotes unit pixel expressedarea; R
dis diseased region, and R lis leaf region.Theﬂowchart of the developed image processing algorithm for theestimation of plant disease severity is shown in Fig. 4. A sample RGB paddy crop image and corresponding obtained binary image aftercolor thresholding are shown inFig. 5(a) and (b), respectively. The whole leaf area was determined by altering the contrast value of theRGB image and then segmenting the region of interest, as shown inFig. 5(c) and (d).2.3. Decision-making algorithm for variable-rate chemical applicationIn common pest management practices, the agrochemicals aresprayed uniformly throughout theﬁeld at the recommended dos- ages (L/ha), mentioned on the product label, for crop disease control.These recommended dosages usually have a high ef ﬁcacy even if the weather conditions are favorable for disease spread, and the samedegree of disease control could be achieved with a lower dosage incase of low crop disease pressure present at the time of spraying(Dammer and Ehlert, 2006). In the decision-making algorithm ap-plied in this study, the required chemical application rate was de-cided on-the-go according to the measured plant disease severitylevel. For this purpose, the plant disease severity was classi ﬁed into three categories, i.e., low, medium, and high, and a reduction coef ﬁ- cient of the recommended application rate was assigned for each cat-egory to determine the reduced application rates of agrochemical forvariable-rate spraying. The plant disease severity categorizationthreshold limits and the corresponding reduction coef ﬁcient values are given inTable 1. These values can be reprogrammed by theuser for any speciﬁc plant disease. In this study (Table 1), 33% of the recommended application rate was selected as the base ratea n da s s i g n e df o rt h el o w( 0–5%) plant disease severity level. Theother two chemical dosages, i.e., 67% and 100% of the recommendedapplication rate, were assigned for the medium (5.1 –20%) and high (20.1–100%) plant disease severity levels, respectively.In variable-rate spraying operation, the required amount ofchemical per hill and the opening time duration of the solenoid
Fig. 4.Flowchart of the image processing algorithm for plant disease severity estimation.25 V.K. Tewari et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 4 (2020) 21 –30valve to supply that amount were calculated using Eqs. (4) and (5).a¼
C/C2Ad/C210 ð4Þt
s¼aQ
sð5Þwhereadenotes the required amount of agrochemical per hill, mLper hill;Cis the reduction coefﬁcient of the recommended applica-tion rate;Arepresents the recommended application rate of agro-chemicals, L/ha;ddenotes hill density per square meter area of theﬁeld, hills/m
2;tsrepresents the opening time duration of solenoidvalve, s;Q
sindicates theﬂow rate of liquid through solenoid valve,mL/s.2.4. Variable-rate chemical spraying system operation cycleA Graphical User Interface (GUI) was developed in MATLAB environ-ment for easy monitoring of the developed spraying system by the op-erator, as shown inFig. 6. This GUI displays the original image as wellas the processed image with plant disease severity values and the re-quired amount of input chemical for both rows in real-time. Theoperator can modify the recommended application rate, row to rowspacing, and hill to hill spacing, and he also has an option to adjust thethreshold limits for the plant disease severity categorization ( Fig. 7). The functional block diagram of the developed variable-rate chemi-cal spraying system is shown inFig. 8.During the variable-rate chemical spraying operation, initially, theweb camera captures the paddy plant image and stores it in the laptop,where the lesion region of plant leaves is identi ﬁed. The processed out- put in terms of disease severity is determined using the developedimage processing algorithm. The category of plant disease severity is de-cided according to threshold limits, and this information is then sent tothe Arduino microcontroller. The microcontroller assigns the reductioncoefﬁcient of the recommended application rate according to the cate-gory of disease severity. Further, it computes the required amount ofchemical to be sprayed and the opening time duration for each solenoidvalve to supply that amount using Eqs. (4) and (5). After this, the micro- controller then sends a 5 VDC signal to the respective relay switch,which further actuates the associated 12 VDC solenoid valve, and the re-quired amount of input chemical is sprayed on the diseased paddyplants. As the developed prototype moves forward and covers a dis-tance of 200 mm, the proximity switch mounted on the ground wheelsends the signal to the microcontroller, which further triggers the cam-era to capture a new image, and the cycle is repeated.2.5. Performance evaluation of developed systemThe operational performance of developed sprayer was evaluatedin terms of percentage reduction in applied chemical per unit areaduring the variable-rate application (VRA) mode as compared withthe constant-rate application (CRA) mode. For this purpose, the de-veloped sprayer was operated in both the operational modes, and
Fig. 5.RGB and binary images of paddy crop.
Table 1Plant disease severity categorization and corresponding reduction coef ﬁcient values.Category Plant disease severity (S) Reduction coef ﬁcient (C)I0–5% (low) 0.33II 5.1–20% (medium) 0.67III 20.1–100% (high) 1.0026 V.K. Tewari et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 4 (2020) 21 –30the corresponding chemical application rates were measured. Theagrochemical used in this study was monocrotophos 36 SL. Thespray solution was prepared by mixing 60 mL of agrochemical in30 L of water. The spraying of chemical solution was carried out atthe recommended application rate, i.e., 1000 mL/ha ( Kumar and Sivakumar, 1998). The experimentalﬁeld had planting geometry of 20 cm × 20 cm (row to row × hill to hill) and the total area of300 m
2.T h ew h o l eﬁeld area was subdivided intoﬁve subplots of 3 m × 20 m each, and the spraying operation was carried out in allof the subplots. Initially, during the CRA mode, the developedprototype was operated without activation of cameras and othercontrol functions, and both spraying nozzles remained openthroughout the spraying operation. Then, the sprayer was operatedin the VRA mode by activation of cameras and other control func-tions. In this case, the nozzles were not kept open all the time; in-stead, their opening or closing was controlled by the actuation ofrespective solenoid valves, and the opening time duration was de-pendent on the plant disease severity level. Before each test, the stor-age tank wasﬁlled with spray solution up to a speciﬁcm a r k ,a n dt h e amount of used chemical was measured by re ﬁlling the storage tank
Fig. 6.Main GUI window of variable-rate chemical spraying system.
Fig. 7.User input parameters window of variable-rate chemical spraying system.27 V.K. Tewari et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 4 (2020) 21 –30up to that particular mark again. The amount of chemical consump-tion was recorded for allﬁve subplots in both the operational modes.The distance between image capturing point and spraying nozzleswas 250 mm, and the total time lag between the image acquisitionand the spraying was found to be about 800 ms. Hence, the maximumspeed of operation was limited to 0.9 km/h. Therefore, the speed of op-eration in both the operational modes was maintained at about 0.9 km/h. The reduction in applied chemical per unit area in the VRA mode ascompared with the CRA mode was calculated using Eq. (6).Reduction in applied chemical%ðÞ ¼1−
Av
Ac/C18/C19/C18/C19/C2100ð6ÞwhereA
cdenotes the chemical application rate in CRA mode, L/ha; andA
vdenotes the chemical application rate in VRA mode, L/ha.3. Results and discussionTheﬁeld tests of the developed prototype were carried out in boththe VRA and CRA modes (Fig. 9). Initially, the developed prototypewas operated in the CRA mode, during which the average chemical ap-plication rate was observed as 504.17 L/ha with a relative standard de-viation of 1.75%. The developed prototype was then operated in the VRAmode by activation of cameras, during which the chemical applicationrate was varied from 296.67 L/ha to 338.33 L/ha. The average chemicalapplication rate during the VRA mode was found to be 319.5 L/hawith a relative standard deviation of 5.11%. The percent reduction in ap-plied chemical per unit area was varied from 33.88% to 40.47% dur-ing VRA mode as compared with the CRA mode, as given in Table 2. Hence, the developed system showed a minimum 33.88% chemical sav-ing as compared with the conventional uniform spraying. The chemical
Fig. 8.Functional block diagram of variable-rate chemical spraying system.
Fig. 9.Performance evaluation of variable-rate chemical sprayer prototype.28 V.K. Tewari et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 4 (2020) 21 –30saving achieved with the developed prototype could be stochastic andprimarily depends on the existing variability in plant disease severitywithin theﬁeld. If the degree of disease severity is high throughouttheﬁeld, then the chemical saving will be low.The spraying operation results obtained in VRA mode were alsocompared with that in the CRA mode using a statistical term, relativedeviation (RD), which is deﬁned as follows (Kumar et al., 2017):RD¼
1NX
i¼0NAc−A v
Ac/C18/C19/C2100 ð7ÞwhereA
cis the chemical application rate in CRA mode, L/ha; A vis the chemical application rate in VRA mode, L/ha; and N is the number ofobservations.The relative deviation of the amount of chemical used per unit areabetween VRA and CRA modes was found to be 36.65%, which showeda signiﬁcant deviation in the amount of chemical applied during boththe operational modes. The two-sample t-test was also performed for comparing the means of chemical application rates in both the opera-tional modes. The t-test result indicated that the spraying operation inVRA mode was resulted in signiﬁcantly less amount of chemical con-sumption as compared with that in the CRA mode ( p≤0.05). Thus, the developed variable-rate chemical spraying system showed promis-ing results in terms of chemical saving as compared with the conven-tional uniform spraying.Although, theﬁeld testing results indicated that a signiﬁcant reduc- tion in applied chemicals could be achieved with the developedvariable-rate chemical spraying system. However, with the existing po-sition sensing method to trigger the camera for capturing the newimage, the plant spacing deviations could lead to errors in spraying op-erations. The developed prototype can be further improved by modify-ing the camera trigger unit using some object detection sensors like theultrasonic sensor or infrared sensor, which can minimize the errors dueto plant spacing deviations. In this study, the performance evaluation ofthe developed sprayer was primarily concentrated on the percentagereduction in applied chemical during VRA mode as compared with theCRA mode. However, for a detailed analysis of the developed sprayer'sperformance, the spray deposition tests need to be carried out in futurestudies. Further research and experimentation are required to analyzethe effect of variable-rate chemical spraying on crop yield and diseaseoccurrence.4. ConclusionsA manually operated real-time variable-rate chemical sprayer wasdeveloped to apply the chemical dosages corresponding to the plantdisease severity level. The variable-rate chemical sprayer prototypecomprised of pump, solenoid valves, spray nozzles, relay switches,web cameras, microcontroller board, Laptop, and 12 VDC battery. Theimage processing technique was used to identify the diseased regionof the paddy plants and also determine their disease severity level.Theﬁeld performance of developed sprayer prototype was evaluatedin terms of percentage reduction in applied agrochemical during theVRA mode as compared with the CRA mode. The ﬁeld testing resultsshowed a minimum 33.88% chemical saving while operating in VRAmode as compared with the CRA mode. Hence, the developed systemprovides a potential solution to the farmers to avoid wastage of inputchemicals, which couldﬁnally increase their proﬁtability as well as re- duce environmental pollution.CRediT authorship contribution statementV.K. Tewari:Supervision, Conceptualization, Writing - review &editing.C.M. Pareek:Writing - original draft, Software, Resources.Gurdeep Lal:Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis. L.K. Dhruw:Software, Investigation.Naseeb Singh:Software, Methodology.ReferencesAggelopoulou, A.D., Bochtis, D., Fountas, S., Swain, K.C., Gemtos, T.A., Nanos, G.D., 2011.Yield prediction in apple orchards based on image processing. Precis. Agric. 12 (3),448–456.Ahmed, F., Al-Mamun, H.A., Bari, A.H., Hossain, E., Kwan, P., 2012. Classiﬁcation of crops and weeds from digital images: a support vector machine approach. Crop Prot. 40,98–104.Barbedo, J.G.A., 2014.An automatic method to detect and measure leaf disease symptomsusing digital image processing. Plant Dis. 98 (12), 1709 –1716. Barbedo, J.G.A., Koenigkan, L.V., Santos, T.T., 2016. Identifying multiple plant diseases using digital image processing. Biosyst. Eng. 147, 104 –116. Berenstein, R., Edan, Y., 2017.Human-robot collaborative site-speci ﬁc sprayer. J. Field Ro- botics. 34 (8), 1519–1530.Bossu, J., Gee, C., Truchetet, F., 2008. Development of a machine vision system for a real- time precision sprayer. Electron. Lett. Comput. Vis. Image Anal. 7 (3), 54 –66. Chandel, A.K., Tewari, V.K., Kumar, S.P., Nare, B., Agarwal, A., 2018. On-the-go position sensing and controller predicated contact-type weed eradicator. Curr. Sci. 114 (7),1485–1494.Dammer, K.H., 2016.Real-time variable-rate herbicide application for weed control incarrots. Weed Res. 56 (3), 237 –246. Dammer, K.H., Ehlert, D., 2006. Variable-rate fungicide spraying in cereals using a plantcover sensor. Precis. Agric. 7 (2), 137 –148. Dammer, K.H., Wollny, J., Giebel, A., 2008. Estimation of the Leaf Area Index in cereal crops for variable rate fungicide spraying. Eur. J. Agron. 28 (3), 351 –360. Dammer, K.H., Möller, B., Rodemann, B., Heppner, D., 2011. Detection of head blight (Fu- sarium ssp.) in winter wheat by color and multispectral image analyses. Crop Prot. 30(4), 420–428.Ehlert, D., Hammen, V., Adamek, R., 2003. On-line sensor pendulum-meter for determina-tion of plant mass. Precis. Agric. 4 (2), 139 –148.https://doi.org/10.1023/A: 1024553104963.Elazegui, F., Islam, Z., 2003. Diagnosis of Common Diseases of Rice. International Rice Re-search Institute, Philippineshttp://www.knowledgebank.irri.org/images/docs/diag-nostic-of-common-diseases-of-rice.pdf . Esau, T.J., Zaman, Q.U., Chang, Y.K., Schumann, A.W., Percival, D.C., Farooque, A.A., 2014.Spot-application of fungicide for wild blueberry using an automated prototype vari-able rate sprayer. Precis. Agric. 15 (2), 147 –161. Ess, D.R., Morgan, M.T., Parson, S.D., 2001. Implementing site-speci ﬁc management: map- versus sensor-based variable rate application. Pub. No. SSM-2-W, Site-Speci ﬁcM a n - agement Center, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN. https://www.extension. purdue.edu/extmedia/AE/SSM-2-W.pdf . Gerhards, R., Christensen, S., 2003. Real-time weed detection, decision making and patch spraying in maize, sugarbeet, winter wheat and winter barley. Weed Res. 43 (6),385–392.Gerhards, R., Oebel, H., 2006. Practical experiences with a system for site-speci ﬁcw e e d control in arable crops using real-time image analysis and GPS-controlled patchspraying. Weed Res. 46 (3), 185 –
193. Haug, S., Biber, P., Michaels, A., Ostermann, J., 2014. Plant stem detection and position es- timation using machine vision. In Workshop Proc. of Conf. on Intelligent AutonomousSystems. 483–490.Hu, M., Zhu, S., Chen, K., 2009. An effective method for trafﬁc signs segmentation. 2009 International Conference on Intelligent Human-Machine Systems and Cybernetics.2. IEEE, pp. 180–184.Kumar, S., Sivakumar, C.V., 1998. Management of rice white tip nematode. Aphelenchoides besseyi. Indian J. Nematol. 28, 85 –87. Kumar, A.A., Tewari, V.K., Gupta, C., Pareek, C.M., 2017. A device to measure wheel slip to improve the fuel efﬁciency of off road vehicles. J. Terrramech. 70, 1 –11. Mahmud, M.S., Zaman, Q.U., Esau, T.J., Price, G.W., Prithiviraj, B., 2019. Development of an artiﬁcial cloud lighting condition system using machine vision for strawberry pow-dery mildew disease detection. Comput. Electron. Agr. 158, 219 –225. Nutter Jr, F.W., Teng, P.S., Shokes, F.M., 1991. Disease assessment terms and concepts. Plant Dis. 75, 1187–1188.Oberti, R., Marchi, M., Tirelli, P., Calcante, A., Iriti, M., Tona, E., Ho čevar, M., Baur, J., Pfaff, J., Schütz, C., Ulbrich, H., 2016.Selective spraying of grapevines for disease control usinga modular agricultural robot. Biosyst. Eng. 146, 203 –215. Özlüoymak, Ö.B., Bolat, A., Bayat, A., Güzel, E., 2019. Design, development, and evaluation of a target oriented weed control system using machine vision. Turk. J. Agric. For. 43(2), 164–173.Table 2Performance comparison of variable-rate chemical sprayer prototype in VRA and CRAmodes.S. no. Agrochemical application rate (L/ha) Reduction inapplied chemical(%) VRA mode CRA mode1 330.00 513.33 35.712 296.67 498.33 40.473 310.83 492.5 36.894 338.33 511.67 33.885 321.67 505.00 36.3029 V.K. Tewari et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 4 (2020) 21 –30Park, Y.L., Krell, R.K., Carroll, M., 2007. Theory, technology, and practice of site-speci ﬁci n - sect pest management. J. Asia Pac. Entomol. 10 (2), 89 –101. Partel, V., Kakarla, S.C., Ampatzidis, Y., 2019. Development and evaluation of a low-cost and smart technology for precision weed management utilizing arti ﬁcial intelligence. Comput. Electron. Agr. 157, 339 –350. Patil, S.B., Bodhe, S.K., 2011.Leaf disease severity measurement using image processing.Int. J. Eng. Technol. 3 (5), 297 –301. Rehman, T.U., Zaman, Q.U., Chang, Y.K., Schumann, A.W., Corscadden, K.W., 2019. Devel- opment andﬁeld evaluation of a machine vision based in-season weed detection sys-tem for wild blueberry. Comput. Electron. Agr. 162, 1 –13. Samseemoung, G., Soni, P., Suwan, P., 2017. Development of a variable rate chemical sprayer for monitoring diseases and pests infestation in coconut plantations. Agricul-ture 7 (10), 89.Schor, N., Berman, S., Dombrovsky, A., Elad, Y., Ignat, T., Bechar, A., 2017. Development of a robotic detection system for greenhouse pepper plant diseases. Precis. Agric. 18 (3),394–409.Sena Jr, D.G., Pinto, F.A.C., Queiroz, D.M., Viana, P.A., 2003. Fall armyworm damaged maize plant identiﬁcation using digital images. Biosyst. Eng. 85 (4), 449 –454. Singh, V., Misra, A.K., 2017.Detection of plant leaf diseases using image segmentation andsoft computing techniques. Inf. Process. Agric. 4 (1), 41 –49. Tackenberg, M., Volkmar, C., Dammer, K.H., 2016. Sensor-based variable-rate fungicide application in winter wheat. Pest Manag. Sci. 72 (10), 1888 –1896.Tackenberg, M., Volkmar, C., Schirrmann, M., Giebel, A., Dammer, K.H., 2018. Impact of sensor-controlled variable-rate fungicide application on yield, senescence and dis-ease occurrence in winter wheat ﬁelds. Pest Manag. Sci. 74 (6), 1251 –1258. Tangwongkit, R., Salokhe, V.M., Jayasuriya, H.W., 2006. Development of a real-time, vari- able rate herbicide applicator using machine vision for between-row weeding of sug-arcaneﬁelds. CIGR e-journal. 8, 1–12. Tewari, V.K., Kumar, A.A., Nare, B., Prakash, S., Tyagi, A., 2014. Microcontroller based roller contact type herbicide applicator for weed control under row crops. Comput. Elec-tron. Agric. 104, 40–45.Tian, L., 2002.Development of a sensor-based precision herbicide application system.Comput. Electron. Agr. 36 (2 –3), 133–149. Tucker, C.C., Chakraborty, S., 1997. Quantitative assessment of lesion characteristics and disease severity using digital image processing. J. Phytopathol. 145 (7), 273 –278. Weizheng, S., Yachun, W., Zhanliang, C., Hongda, W., 2008. Grading method of leaf spot disease basedon image processing. 2008 International Conference on Computer Sci-ence and Software Engineering. 6. IEEE, pp. 491 –494. Xu, Y., Gao, Z., Khot, L., Meng, X., Zhang, Q., 2018. A real-time weed mapping and precision herbicide spraying system for row crops. Sensors. 18 (12), 4245.30 V.K. Tewari et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 4 (2020) 21–30