Inaugural Editorial
Welcome to the ﬁrst issue of Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture (AIIA)
theﬁrst fully Open Access journal of its kind. We are very pleased to be
able to present these outstanding contributions from diverse re-
searchers. As such this is sue well represents AIIA ’sg o a lt os e r v ea sap l a t -
form for high quality work describing science, technologies and practical
applications of arti ﬁcial intelligence (AI) in all branches of agriculture. As
a truly international and fully Open Access journal, AIIA will be publish-
ing original research, reviews, and perspectives on the theory and prac-
tice of AI in agriculture, food, bio-system engineering, and related areas.
AI, sometimes called machine intelligence, is a branch of computer
science that aims to create intelligent machines that work and react
like humans and other animals. Traditional aspects of AI research in-
clude planning, learning, natural language processing and perception,
to name a few. AI techniques are also being studied by the practicing en-
gineer who is looking to solve a whole range of hitherto intractable
problems in the ﬁeld of computer science, education, healthcare, agri-
culture, transportation, and more.
In the area of agriculture, AI is playing an irreplaceable role in agri-
cultural optimization management, smart agriculture, agricultural ro-
botics, agricultural automation, decision support systems, agricultural
expert systems, and other agricultural knowledge-based systems. In re-
cent decades, AI advancements show improvements in gaining yield
and to optimize the production and operation processes of growing
crops. The launch of AIIA responds to the need to effectively address
critical, often complex tasks in agriculture. The journal also serves as a
medium for discussion of such strategically vital scienti ﬁct o p i c s .
To achieve these aims of the journal, AIIA will publish rigorously
peer reviewed scienti ﬁc studies and technical ﬁndings within the fol-
lowing research areas:
(1)Al-based decision support systems which collect, sort out and
provide various data related to agricultural decision-making
problems, store various models related to decision-making prob-
lems and generate intelligent solutions, combined with AI ’s
knowledge reasoning technology.
(2)Al-based precision agriculture using bp-level data, deep learn-
ing algorithms that help to gain insight into (or make) planting
time, irrigation, fertilization, and pastural-related decisions that
ultimately increase the productivity of land, equipment, and peo-
ple in agriculture.
(3)Smart sensors and Internet of Things: sensors are the founda-
tion of the agricultural Internet of Things (IoT). In the process
of agricultural production sensors collect parameters including
soil temperature, humidity, air temperature and humidity, etc.
and in combination with arti ﬁcial intelligence technology im-
prove the utilization rate of data.
(4)Agricultural robotics and automation equipment: an agricul-
tural robot is a kind of automatic or semi-automatic equipment
that can be programmed repeatedly, which takes agriculturalproducts as the operating object, combines partial human infor-
mation perception and limb movement ability.
(5)Agricultural knowledge-based systems adopt modular design
ideas and hierarchical structure systems. A large number of
databases such as agricultural knowledge Q&A and agricul-
tural experts have been constructed and duplicate checking
algorithms have been designed to reduce redundancy.
(6)Computational intelligence i n agriculture, food and bio-
systems increasingly rely on computer-based systems;
modern agricultural business has superior performance in
most cases.
(7)AI in agricultural optimization management: with the rapid
development of AI and the compr ehensive popularization of
the agricultural ﬁeld, a speci ﬁc mode is developed to ﬁnd an
optimal combination of control techniques and to optimize
the production and operation processes.
(8)Intelligent interfaces and human-machine interactions
working and reacting like humans can help to solve agricul-
tural problems including planning, learning, natural language
processing, perception, and so on.
(9)Machine vision and image/signal processing have sought
their task in serving agricultural engineering by providing in-
telligent solutions.
(10) Machine learning and pattern recognition with modern
communication, sensing, and actuator technologies, machine
learning and pattern recognition are increasingly applied in
agriculture, putting the vision of a sustainable agriculture for
anyone within reach.
(11) Neural networks, fuzzy systems, neuro-fuzzy systems moti-
vated by their great potential for knowledge expression, allow
for the application of arti ﬁcial neural networks to solve a vari-
ety of serious problems in agriculture.
(12) Systems modeling and analysis express the internal laws and
external relations of various agricultural processes to help
achieve higher ef ﬁciency in agriculture, higher quality of agri-
cultural products and protect the agricultural environment
more effectively.
(13) Intelligent systems for animal feeding cover technological
means like sensor detection, data processing and remote
monitoring to control the feeding quantity accurately and
monitor the feed intake in real time.
(14) Expert systems in agriculture effectively leverage manage-
ment ’s input into agricultural production systems by allowing
for the assimilation of all available knowledge pertinent to the
task at hand. Its applications include Crop Management Advi-
sors, Livestock Management Advisors, Planning Systems, Pest
Management Systems, Diagnostic Systems.
(15) Crop Phenotyping and analysis is the most direct way in the
research of crop breeding by studying the relationshipArtiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 1 (2019) A1 –A2
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture
journal homepage: http://www.keaipublishing.com/en/journals/artificial-
intelligence-in-agriculture/
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aiia.2019.05.003
2589-7217/© 2019 The Author. Publishing services by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of KeAi Communications Co. Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license ( http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ ).between phenotypes and genes and the environment. It in-
cludes high-throughput data acquisition, data management,
data interpretation, modeling, integration and applications.
(16) Remote sensing in agriculture is very important for resource
feature space analysis, providi ng positioning qualitative and
quantitative data. It is currently used in estimating the yield
of crops, crop growth monitoring, land survey, agricultural
ecological environment monitoring and natural disasters and
pest monitoring.
(17) AI technology in aquaculture optimizes commercial aqua-
culture facilities ef ﬁciency by reducing labor and utility
costs. Anticipated bene ﬁts for aquaculture process control
and arti ﬁcial intelligence systems are increased process ef ﬁ-
ciency, reduced energy and water losses, reduced labor
costs, reduced stress and disea se, improved accounting and
improved understanding of the process.
(18) AI in food engineering gives a sense of the many possible ap-
plications in the food industry, from sorting products and
packages to food safety compliance and from improved clean-
liness to product development and marketing.
(19) Big Data and Cloud Computing is a new computing model
based on distributed computing and service computing.
Transferring modern agriculture to cloud computing plat-
forms will greatly improve the storage and processing
modes of agricultural data.
(20) Automatic navigation and self-driving technology in agri-
culture are the automated future of - for example - China ’s
mammoth agricultural sector. A utomatic navigation is a part
of the automobile control used to ﬁnd direction in an automo-
bile. It typically uses a satellite navigation device to get its po-
sition data which is then correlated to a position on a road. In
China, autonomous vehicles are also trialed in rice ﬁelds.
(21) Precision agricultural aviation is a farming management
concept based on observing, measuring and responding tointer and intra- ﬁeld variability in crops. Growers demand air-
craft that have comparable precision application capabilities
to that as a ground rig. Applications must be made with ex-
actly the right amount of material in the right location and
have all the data logging capabilities to feed into a grower ’s
crop management system.
Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture is a trans-disciplinary domain
encompassing computer science, machine learning, information sci-
ence, crops breeding, biology, genetics, statistics, physics, chemical,
and other related disciplines. The journal aims to bring together experts,
industrialists and students to share ideas, problems, and suggestions re-
lated to AI and its applications with its convergence strategies, and to
disseminate innovative research. The journal welcomes original re-
search articles, review articles, perspective papers and short communi-
cations from a wide variety of perspectives concerning the theory and
practical application of AI methods.
A dedicated, diverse and highly quali ﬁed Editorial Board and the en-
thusiastic publishing team at KeAi will devote themselves to the ambi-
tions of the journal. We will work closely together to make AIIA the
journal of choice for the relevant communities. We believe that in
close collaboration with these communities of researchers, scientists,
engineers and practitioners AIIA has the potential to rapidly grow into
an internationally impactful journal which provides multiple values to
the bene ﬁt of the research communities and society at large.
Finally, all the members of the complete AIIA team cordially thank all
the authors for their continuous contributions and cooperation to the
prospective growth and success of the journal.
Chunjiang Zhao
Editor-in-ChiefA2