Interdependencies and reliability in the combined ICT and powersystem: An overview of current research
Inger Anne Tøndela, Jørn Forosb, Stine Skaufel Kilskarc, Per Hokstadc, Martin Gilje Jaatuna,⇑
aSINTEF Digital, Strindveien 4, Trondheim, Norway
bSINTEF Energy Research, Norway
cSINTEF Technology and Society, Norway
article info
Article history:Received 18 October 2016Revised 18 January 2017Accepted 20 January 2017Available online 3 February 2017Keywords:InterdependenciesSmart gridPower systemICTReliabilityCyber-securityabstract
The smart grid vision implies extensive use of ICT in the power system, enabling increased ﬂexibility andfunctionality and thereby meeting future demands and strategic goals. Consequently, power system reli-ability will increasingly depend on ICT components and systems. While adding functionality, ICT systemsalso contribute to failures, such as hidden failures in protection systems, as has been exempliﬁed byrecent power outages. It also brings new threats, such as that of cyber-attacks. To ensure effective powersystem reliability, the interdependencies between power and ICT systems need to be properly under-stood. This paper provides an overview of main interdependency categories, as well as methods thatcan be used to identify and study interdependencies. Based on a study of recent papers in major archivaljournals, we conclude that appropriate methods for identiﬁcation of interdependencies between powerand ICT systems seem to be lacking. In addition, current methods seem unable to both cover the powersystem at large, and at the same time take into account the full array of intentional and accidental threats.Based on these ﬁndings, we make recommendations for future research in this ﬁeld./C2112017 The Authors. Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of King Saud University. This is anopen access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ ).Contents1. Introduction . . ........................................................................................................ 1 82. Power and ICT interdependencies . . . . . .................................................................................... 1 8 2.1. Overview of the combined power and ICT system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ....................................................... 1 8 2.2. Interdependency categories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .......................................................................... 2 0 3. Available methods for identifying and analysing interdependencies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .............................................. 2 0 3.1. Hazard identification methods . . . . . . . . . . . . .......................................................................... 2 1 3.2. Causal analysis methods . .......................................................................................... 2 1 3.3. Consequence analysis methods . . . . . . . . . . . .......................................................................... 2 1 3.4. Topological analysis methods. . . . . . . . . . . . . .......................................................................... 2 2 3.5. Dynamic analysis methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .......................................................................... 2 2 4. Literature review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .................................................................................... 2 2 4.1. Method. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .......................................................................................... 2 2 4.2. Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .......................................................................................... 2 3 5. Discussion and recommendations for further research . . . . . . . ................................................................. 2 6
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.aci.2017.01.0012210-8327//C2112017 The Authors. Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of King Saud University.This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ ).Peer review under responsibility of King Saud University.
Production and hosting by Elsevier
⇑Corresponding author.E-mail address:martin.g.jaatun@sintef.no(M.G. Jaatun).Applied Computing and Informatics 14 (2018) 17–27
Contents lists available atScienceDirect
Applied Computing and Informatics
journal homepage: www.sciencedirect.com
6. Conclusion ........................................................................................................... 2 7Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . .......................................................................................... 2 7 References ........................................................................................................... 2 7
1. IntroductionInformation and communication technology (ICT) systems arean increasingly important part of power systems. Traditionally, itis primarily the ofﬁce systems that have been regarded as ICT sys-tems, but there are an increasing number of systems for automa-tion, control and protection that utilize ICT and are tightlyintegrated with the power system. Power systems with extensiveICT and smart components are often termed smart grids. Smartgrids promise increased ﬂexibility and functionality, both in nor-mal operation and for handling of failures and unwanted incidentsin the grid, and are expected to be the future power system ofchoice, enabling both future demands and national and interna-tional strategic goals to be met[1].While adding functionality, ICT systems also contribute to fail-ures, such as hidden failures in protection systems, as has beenexempliﬁed by recent power outages [2–4]. The increased com- plexity and use of ICT in smart grids can affect the reliability ofpower supply negatively in ways that are not presently fullyknown or understood. Technical and organizational interdepen-dencies between the power and ICT systems cause new potentialvulnerabilities, as well as common cause failures and other inter-dependent failures, and supply interruptions. The interdependen-cies also imply that power systems are more susceptible tocyber-attacks, also when such attacks do not target the power sys-tems directly. Cyber threats are constantly advancing in sophistica-tion, and there is a variety of measures one may take to make theICT system more robust and to prepare in case an attack should besuccessful. Many of the measures available are, however, best sui-ted for more traditional ICT systems, such as those used in ofﬁceenvironments, and may be more difﬁcult to apply to ICT compo-nents closely connected to the power network. Thus, it is impor-tant to identify and analyse the nature of the interdependenciesbetween the power and ICT systems, in order to ensure system reli-ability and facilitate incident handling in case of failures andattacks.Assessment of reliability of supply in traditional power systemshas long been a topic of study (see, e.g., Allan et al. [5]). Likewise, for ICT systems, the knowledge on traditional security subjectssuch as information security, network security and network resili-ence is vast (see, e.g., Bishop[6]). There are also recent advances inreliability assessment of speciﬁc ICT systems used in power sys-tems[7,8]. Most of these studies deal with the power and ICT sys-tems more or less separately, without much focus oninterdependencies between them and the causal relationshipbetween failures in the power and ICT systems. With the evolutionof smart grids, more studies of interdependencies have howeverstarted to emerge[9–11].Within the wider subject of critical infrastructures, to whichpower and ICT systems belong, the literature on interdependenciesis vast. There are a number of papers that review and classify mod-elling approaches for quantitative analysis of risk and interdepen-dencies in critical infrastructures[3,12–18]. Ouyang[15]also lists several other references to modelling approaches. We have how-ever not been able to ﬁnd any review of advances in the study ofinterdependencies and reliability in the combined power and ICTsystem.This paper contributes to the body of knowledge of interdepen-dencies and reliability speciﬁcally in the combined power and ICTsystem. This is done by presenting an overview of papers address-ing interdependencies and their effects on reliability in this system,based on a literature search in selected major archival journalsduring the last ﬁve years (see Section 4.1for details on the litera- ture search). We categorize the papers in terms of the type of inter-dependencies that they consider, and the methods they employ toanalyse these interdependencies. By limiting the overview to thelast ﬁve years we emphasize the current focus of the researchcommunity.There are several suggested deﬁnitions of reliability, security,risk and related terms in the literature, and the deﬁnitions varywith the ﬁeld of study. For power systems, suggested deﬁnitionsof reliability and security have been provided by, e.g., the NorthAmerican Electric Reliability Council (NERC) [19]:‘‘Reliability, in a bulk power electric system, is the degree to which the performanceof the elements of that system results in power being delivered to con-sumers within accepted standards and in the amount desired ”. Secu- rity is‘‘the ability of the power system to withstand suddendisturbances such as electric short circuits or non-anticipated loss ofsystem components”. Furthermore, reliability is understood to be
the aggregate of security and adequacy, where the latter is linkedto long-term supply capacity and deﬁned as ‘‘the ability of the power system to supply the aggregate electric power and energyrequirements of the customer at all times, taking into account sched-uled and unscheduled outages of system components ”. The terms security and reliability are used differently in the ICT community.To illustrate, the use of the term security in the context of ICTimplies the protection of the system from adversaries that mayperform various types of attacks in order to harm the system.The terms have yet other alternative deﬁnitions in more generalrisk research, see e.g. Rausand[20]. In this paper, we use the powersystem deﬁnitions of the terms security and reliability.The paper is organized as follows. Section 2gives an introduc- tion to the combined power and ICT system and deﬁnes interde-pendency categories in terms of failure types. Section 3discusses and classiﬁes methods that are judged as useful for identifyingand analysing interdependencies, based on methods for risk analy-sis and methods that have previously been applied to model criti-cal infrastructures. Section4describes the literature study, andclassiﬁes the papers in terms of the interdependency and methodcategories that have been introduced. Section 5summarizes the paper in terms of our recommendations, before the conclusion ispresented in Section6.2. Power and ICT interdependencies2.1. Overview of the combined power and ICT systemThe basic constituents of a power system are generation units,transformers, transmission and distribution lines, and consumers.As produced and consumed power must balance at all times, super-vision and operation of power systems is an essential and compli-cated task. A simpliﬁed sketch of a national power system and itscontrol and protection functions is shown in Fig. 1. The ﬁgure, which is based on the Norwegian power system, shows from left to rightthe generation, transmission and distribution parts of the powersystem. Solid lines represent power lines and equipment whiledashed lines represent communication lines and equipment formonitoring, control, protection and management (ICT components).18 I.A. Tøndel et al. / Applied Computing and Informatics 14 (2018) 17–27The ﬁgure includes generation and transmission/distribution fromextra high voltages (EHV, >300 kV) via high voltages (HV, 36–300 kV) to medium voltages (MV, 1–36 kV). For simplicity, onlyone generator and single EHV-, HV- and MV-lines are shown. Lowvoltage (LV, <1 kV) distribution lines have been excluded, as has dis-tributed generation that may be connected directly to e.g. HV powerlines.Supervision and operation of the system and its components arecarried out from control centres using supervisory control and dataacquisition systems (SCADA). The national transmission systemoperator (TSO) has the overall responsibility for the power system,and generation companies and distribution system operators(DSO) have control centres responsible for their parts of the sys-tem. For clarity, only one generation company (control centre)and one DSO (control centre) are included in the ﬁgure, and regio-nal TSO control centres are omitted.In general, power systems include automatic as well as manualfunctions used for both system operation and system protection incase of failures. Generation companies utilise e.g. automatic volt-age and frequency regulators to control generator power output,and their SCADA systems enable supervision and manual interven-tion if necessary. This may include automatic input from the TSOSCADA system for maintaining a stable transmission system fre-quency (load frequency control). The TSO and the DSOs utilize con-trol and protection functions located in substations to e.g. regulatetransformers and operate circuit breakers in case of overload orshort circuits. These functions are typically automatically carriedout by intelligent electronic devices (IED). Connection by commu-nication lines directly to the control centre or via remote terminalunits (RTU) enables supervision and manual intervention asneeded. Additional advanced monitoring, control and protectionmethods are becoming more common, such as synchronised pha-sor measurements, adjustment of load ﬂow through ﬂexible ACtransmission (FACTS) devices, and numerical and communicationbased protective gear. Phasor measurement units (PMU) are con-nected to the control centre via phasor data concentrators (PDC)that collect the data. Such data networks are often called wide areameasurement systems (WAMS). Future power systems will eveninclude monitoring and control functions down to the consumerlevel, such as smart meters and load control.Automatic component control functions as described abovehandle system regulations on a short time scale, i.e. within secondsor minutes. At a higher level, the market for buying and sellingpower is instrumental for the regulation of the power system onlonger time scales (i.e. hours or days). In the control centres, avail-able information from monitoring and component control func-tions, as well as market information, is used for short and long-term management using, e.g., power system state estimation (SE)and energy management systems (EMS).Communication between voltage/frequency regulators, IEDsand RTUs and the control centres, and communication from theTSO to generation companies for load frequency control, are typi-cally over dedicated private communication networks. Communi-cation between generation companies, the TSO and the DSOs,and between these companies and third parties, such as servicecompanies and other power market participants, may take placeover public networks. The ICT components directly connected tothe power system, such as the SCADA, RTUs and IEDs, havetraditionally been special purpose components with proprietarysoftware and protocols. They have also been completelyFig. 1.Sketch of integrated power/ICT system.I.A. Tøndel et al. / Applied Computing and Informatics 14 (2018) 17–27 19disconnected from more general-purpose systems and networks,as used in the administrative ICT systems of the power companies.At the same time, as the amount of ICT is increasing in the powersystem, the nature of ICT is also changing with the use of morestandard software components and general-purpose protocols.Increasingly, the ICT components of the power system are con-nected to other ICT systems, either for administrative purposesor for vendor support.From the above, it is clear that ICT is integrated with modernpower systems and that ICT in the future will increase in use andbecome more deeply integrated with the power system on multi-ple levels. In this article, we use the deﬁnition of ICT by Tornqvistet al.[21]:‘‘The technology involved in acquiring, storing, processingand distributing information by electronics means (including radio,television, telephone, and computers). ” With this in mind, and with respect toFig. 1, we deﬁne the ICT part of the power system asthe SCADA and WAMS systems including voltage/frequency regu-lators, IEDs, RTUs, PMUs, PDCs, control centres, and private andpublic communication networks, but excluding the primary powercomponents for voltage and power ﬂow control, such as transform-ers and FACTS (power electronics) devices.2.2. Interdependency categoriesThe power system is clearly dependent on the ICT system, butthe ICT system is also dependent on the power system to operate,i.e. the systems are interdependent. In general, a power system isheavily affected by various dependencies that exist within the sys-tem itself, between the power system and ICT, and between thepower system and other critical infrastructures or its environment.The focus of this paper is on the power/ICT interdependencies.From Rinaldi et al.[22], interdependency may be deﬁned as ‘‘abidirectional relationship between two infrastructures throughwhich the state of each infrastructure inﬂuences or is correlatedto the state of the other”. Interdependencies can be classiﬁed invarious ways. Ouyang[15]gives an overview of different classiﬁca-tions proposed in the literature. Rinaldi et al. [22]propose an elab- orate classiﬁcation scheme in which interdependencies aredescribed by six dimensions, i.e. infrastructure characteristics,state of operation, types of interdependencies, environment, cou-pling and response behaviour, and type of failure. A simpler classi-ﬁcation scheme is used by Hokstad et al. [12], in which interdependencies are classiﬁed into geographical, functional andimpact interdependencies. These are linked to the interdepen-dency failure types proposed by Rinaldi et al. [22]; that is, they cor- respond to common cause, cascading, and escalating failures,respectively. A common cause failure is simultaneous failures intwo systems due to a single common cause. Cascading failure is afailure in one system that causes a failure in another system. Esca-lating failure is a failure in one system that is worsened by theoccurrence of a failure in another system, or by a failure thatalready has occurred in the other system. Interdependencies caus-ing cascading and escalating failures are also named direct andindirect interdependencies, respectively, by some scholars [23]. In this paper we build on the classiﬁcation schemes of Rinaldiet al.[22]and Hokstad et al.[12]and adapt them to classify powerand ICT system interdependencies. The interdependency cate-gories used can be found inTable 1. These categories emphasize the paper’s focus on reliability, as they are deﬁned in terms of fail-ure type. A failure can be deﬁned as ‘‘the termination of the abilityto perform a required function”[20]. Note that although the inter- dependency categories are deﬁned in terms of failure, we includemalicious attacks as a possible cause of failure. This is reﬂectedin some of the examples given in the table. The examples illustratedeterministic interdependencies, but the interdependencies mayalso be stochastic in nature.3. Available methods for identifying and analysinginterdependenciesGeneral methods for identifying and analysing interdependen-cies in the combined power and ICT system are described and clas-siﬁed in the following. As we focus on the effect ofinterdependencies on reliability, we emphasize generally acceptedmethods used in reliability and risk analysis, but also includemethods that have been used to model and simulate critical infras-tructures. Most of the methods are not speciﬁcally designed foridentifying or analysing interdependencies, but are capable ofand useful for this.We divide available methods into the following general cate-
gories, based on the key purposes of the methods (see Table 2): Hazard identiﬁcation methods, causal analysis methods, conse-quence analysis methods, topological analysis methods, anddynamic analysis methods. The ﬁrst three categories contain tradi-tional methods for reliability and risk analysis, the fourth categorycontains methods that have been used to model complex systemssuch as critical infrastructures, and the last category includesmethods from both of these areas of research. The categories arenot mutually exclusive; some categories overlap partially, andsome methods have properties that could place them in more thanone category. Also, hybrid models that combine two or more meth-ods are commonly used, as will be seen in Section 4(seeTable 6). It is not possible to include all methods that can be used foridentifying and analysing interdependencies. Some methods that
Table 1Interdependency categories.
Nr. Interdependency category Explanation/exampleI1 Common cause/geographical Components within both systems fail due to a common cause. The reason could be that the systems are geographically close. Example: Power and communication lines located at the same place, both damaged in a storm I2 Cascading/functional Commonly referred to as ‘‘domino effect” failures, as they occur when a failure in one system causes a failure in the other system. A cascading failure typically occurs when the function of one system (e.g. the power system) dependson the functioning of the other system (e.g. ICT system) a Power failure causes ICT failure Example: Lack of power for ICT componentsb ICT failure causes power failure Example: An attacker gets access to the control system, and can send unauthorized commands to interrupt powerI3 Escalating/impact Characterized by an existing failure in one system exacerbating an independent failure in the other system. The failure that has already occurred can e.g. increase the severity of the second failure or the time for recovery orrestoration of the second failure a Power failure exacerbates anindependent ICT failure Example: Repair time of ICT component increases due to blackoutb ICT failure exacerbates andindependent power failure Examples: Monitoring not available at a time when a power failure occurs (reduces situational awareness). Or, afailure occurs in the power system and its protection system fails to operate. In this case, the backup protection willclear the failure, but the result is worsened consequences in the power system20 I.A. Tøndel et al. / Applied Computing and Informatics 14 (2018) 17–27have been omitted inTable 2are input-output models (see, e.g.,Ouyang[15]), high level architecture (see, e.g., Kröger and Zio[13]), and human reliability analysis (see, e.g., Kröger and Zio [13]).3.1. Hazard identiﬁcation methodsThere are a number of general methods for identiﬁcation ofthreats, hazards and hazardous events, which can be used alsofor identifying hazardous interdependencies. Most of these arebased on brainstorming or checklists, and require a group ofexperts on the system at hand to meet and discuss. Well-knownexamples are HAZID (‘‘Hazard identiﬁcation”), HAZOP (‘‘Hazardand operability study”)[24]and SWIFT (‘‘Structured What-If Tech-nique”) (see, e.g., Rausand[20]). HAZID is used for a multitude ofinstallations and operations, whereas HAZOP is commonly usedfor risk assessment of process plants. SWIFT utilizes a set ofwhat-if questions, and can be used as a simpliﬁed HAZOP.There are also hazard identiﬁcation methods that are based onanalysis of system components or functions rather than brain-storming and checklists. A prime example is FMECA (‘‘Failuremode, effect and criticality analysis”) (see, e.g., Rausand [20]). Whereas HAZOP looks for the impact of anomalies on a system,FMECA is commonly used to systematically assess failures of sys-tem components as part of system reliability analyses. FMECA isan extension of the Failure Mode and Effects Analysis (FMEA) stan-dard[25].3.2. Causal analysis methodsCausal analysis methods identify and describe causes of systemfailures, including relations and dependencies between causes.These methods can therefore be used for both identifying andexamining system interdependencies, such as failures in one sys-tem due to underlying causes in another system.Causal analysis is a basic part of risk analysis, and there are sev-eral methods available, as listed in Table 2. The analyses can be performed at a varying level of detail, ranging from simple qualita-tive methods to more comprehensive quantitative methods. TheIshikawa cause and effect diagram is an example of a qualitativemethod. This is a structured graphical way to identify, sort anddescribe causes of failures or hazardous events. Risk inﬂuence dia-grams and fault tree analysis may be used for both qualitative andquantitative analyses. The risk inﬂuence diagram describes fac-tors/conditions that may inﬂuence the occurrence of failures orhazardous events, but do not directly cause them. The mostcommon method for causal analysis is fault tree analysis, whichillustrates the combinations of ‘‘basic events” (failures) that cancause a system failure. A fault tree can be converted to a reliabilityblock diagram, which instead of illustrating a system failure illus-trates combinations of components needed to perform a systemfunction. Fault trees have also been used as a basis for attack trees[26]that are capable of describing possible attack strategies inorder to achieve an attacker goal (e.g. some kind of system failure).Bayesian networks and probabilistic relational models areexamples of more complex and comprehensive models that canbe used for causal analysis. The Bayesian network is a directedacyclic graph that includes nodes describing system states, condi-tions or events, and directed arcs describing relations or dependen-cies between them, together with a set of probability tables. Theprobabilistic relational model is used, e.g., by König et al. [27], and combines a Bayesian network with a model of the systemarchitecture.There are also several approaches and models that are used toanalyse failure events and their causes through the utilization ofempirical information. Two examples are the STEP (sequentiallytimed events plotting) diagram and the why-because graph. Theseare both designed to investigate a particular accident or incident,and thus also reveal possible system interdependencies. The STEPdiagram[28]is a frequently applied graphical presentation of theﬂow of events as a function of time; it will include actors (i.e., per-sons and objects/systems involved), and the focus is on the interac-tion and interdependencies between these actors. The mainobjective of the why-because graph, is to identify all contributingcauses to an actual accident/event.An introduction to most of the above mentioned methods canbe found in Rausand[20]. The methods are generally not well sui-ted for analysing dynamic effects (the STEP method being a possi-ble exception). Methods suitable for treating time-dependenteffects are described in Section3.5.3.3. Consequence analysis methodsConsequence analysis methods assess consequences of system
failures, e.g., in terms of power interruptions, loss of communica-tion, loss of other critical societal functions, or hazards to person-nel due to e.g. ﬁre or explosions. These methods can therefore beused for revealing or analysing interdependencies such as failurecascade and escalation within or between systems.Consequence analysis is a basic part of risk analysis, togetherwith hazard identiﬁcation and causal analysis. The most commonmethod for consequence analysis is event tree analysis, whichillustrates possible hazardous events (contingencies) that mayTable 2Methods for identiﬁcation and analysis of interdependencies.
Category Description Example methodsM1: Hazard identiﬁcation methods Methods for identifying threats, hazards and hazardous events, which can be used also for identifyinginterdependenciesHAZID, HAZOP, SWIFT, FMECAM2: Causal analysis methods Methods for identifying or analysing failure causes, with the possibility of including or exploringinterdependenciesIshikawa cause and effect diagram, risk inﬂuencediagram, fault tree analysis, reliability block diagram,attack tree, Bayesian network, probabilistic relationalmodel, STEP diagram, why-because graph M3: Consequence analysis methods Methods for assessing failure consequences, including revealing or analysing interdependencies such ascascade and escalationEvent tree, power ﬂow simulation methods,communication network simulation, cascade diagramM4: Topological analysis methods Methods for describing or modelling system topology, including interactions and interdependencies betweencomponents and systemsNetwork theory/graph theoryM5: Dynamic analysis methods Methods for analysing dynamic (time-dependent) aspects or effects, with the possibility of including orexploring interdependenciesMarkov process, Petri net, agent-based methods, systemdynamics, dynamic control system theoryI.A. Tøndel et al. / Applied Computing and Informatics 14 (2018) 17–27 21follow a failure, and may be used for both qualitative and quanti-tative analyses (see e.g.[20]). Additionally, power ﬂow and com-munication network simulations are commonly used forcalculating the resulting power and ICT system state following afailure[29].There are also consequence models speciﬁcally made for ana-lysing interdependencies. An example is cascade diagrams [12], which provide a graphical overview of cascading of failures andresulting loss of critical societal functions in critical infrastructures.In quantitative calculations, these diagrams allow inclusion ofescalating failures in addition to cascading failures.3.4. Topological analysis methodsMany critical infrastructures exhibit properties that are charac-teristic of complex systems, and there are a number of methodsthat have been used to understand the behaviour of such systems.Some of these describe and model the system topology. Thesemethods are suitable for analysing interdependencies, as physicalinteractions and interdependencies within or between systemsare explicitly included. Prime examples of such methods are net-work theory and graph theory. As network theory is based ongraph theory, and these are similar methods, we do not distinguishbetween them here. Network/graphs consist of nodes and links,where the nodes represent the physical system components andthe links represent their connections or interactions.There are a number of papers that review these and other mod-elling approaches for risk and interdependencies in critical infras-tructures, such as Kröger et al.[13], Landegren et al.[14], and Ouyang[15].3.5. Dynamic analysis methodsDynamic analysis methods can be used for identifying and ana-lysing interdependencies that emerge in time dependentprocesses.There are several methods available for analysis of dynamicaspects or effects. Within risk analysis, examples of common meth-ods are Markov processes and Petri nets. Within critical infrastruc-ture modelling, examples of methods are agent-based methods,system dynamics, and dynamic control system theory. A Markovprocess is a stochastic process with discrete states and continuoustime, suitable for analysing systems with redundancy, interdepen-dencies and dynamic properties. Petri nets are based on graph the-ory, and include two types of nodes describing system states andtransitions, and directed arcs describing relations or dependenciesbetween the nodes. Agent-based methods utilize dynamicallyinteracting and interdependent agents that act based on speciﬁcrules; agents may represent physical components as well ashuman operators. System dynamics utilizes the three conceptsfeedback, stock, and ﬂow to dynamically analyse complex systemswith interdependencies and emergent and adaptive behaviour.Dynamic control system theory applies traditional control systemtheory and transfers functions to dynamic analysis of criticalinfrastructures with interdependencies.An introduction to Markov processes and Petri nets can befound in Rausand[20]. There are a number of papers that reviewagent-based methods, system dynamics, dynamic control systemtheory, and/or other modelling approaches for risk and interdepen-dencies in critical infrastructures, such as Kröger et al. [13], Lande- gren et al.[14], Ouyang[15], Pederson et al.[16], Rinaldi[17]and Eusgeld et al.[18].4. Literature reviewIn order to study the current state of research on power and ICTinterdependencies and their impact on power system reliability,we performed a literature review. This review aimed to provideanswers to the following research questions:/C15What types of power and ICT system interdependencies thatmay impact power system reliability are covered in existingwork?/C15What types of methods are used to identify and/or analyse theinterdependencies and their impact on power systemreliability?In this section we present the method used in identifying andanalysing relevant research papers, as well as the main resultsfrom the review.4.1. MethodDue to resource constraints, a full systematic review could notbe performed. Instead we selected three major archival journals
and went through all materials published in 2010 or later. Theselected journals were the International Journal of Critical Infras-tructure Protection, IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid and IEEETransactions on Power Systems. By studying recent papers inmajor journals we identify a signiﬁcant portion of high-qualityresearch in this domain, and also emphasise current focus in theresearch community. The three journals were selected to includeone journal targeted towards smart grid research, one journal thatconsiders power system research without particular focus on thesmart grid aspects, and one more general critical infrastructurejournal. We acknowledge that by restricting our search to onlythree journals we cannot claim to be comprehensive, but we main-tain that this selection still gives a good overview of the focus ofcurrent research.An overview of the process for selecting papers for inclusion inthe study can be found inTable 3. The selection of papers was per-formed according to the following selection criteria:/C15The papers should address both power and ICT components,and their relation or interdependencies./C15The papers should consider power system reliability impacts ofinterdependencies.In mid-October 2014, one researcher went through the relevantissues of the three journals, and selected papers based on title and
Table 3Overview of the paper selection process.
Stage Description Number of papers included for further analysisStage 1: Initial selection of papers, mid-October One researcher went through the selected journals, and included papers based on title and abstract 48Stage 2: Initial reading, October/November Each paper read by one researcher 26Stage 3: Second reading, December Each paper read by one additional researcher. Borderline-papers, as well as all papers that were excluded at this stage werediscussed in the full group of researchers.1422 I.A. Tøndel et al. / Applied Computing and Informatics 14 (2018) 17–27abstract. In total 48 papers were selected for more detailed analy-sis: six from the International Journal of Critical Infrastructure Pro-tection, thirty from the IEEE Transactions of Smart Grid and twelvefrom the IEEE Transactions on Power Systems. In this ﬁrst stage,papers concerned with the relation between ICT and power sys-tems were included, also when interdependencies were not partic-ularly mentioned in the title or abstract. However, papers clearlyconcerning the development of new or improved ICT technologyfor use in power systems were excluded, unless its impact onpower system reliability was also considered. When in doubt, thepaper was included.In stage 2, each of the papers selected based on title andabstract was read by at least one researcher. Four researcherscooperated on reading the papers. Papers clearly not meeting theselection criteria were excluded, but when in doubt the paperswere read by one additional researcher in stage 3. A total of 22papers were excluded in stage 2, leaving 26 papers for stage 3. Fiveresearchers took part in this stage. Each paper was read by at leastone additional researcher. Papers that were considered borderlinepapers, and papers that were considered not to meet the selectioncriteria, were discussed in the full group before a decision onwhether or not to include or exclude the paper was made. In theend, 14 papers were included in the study.In the ﬁrst reading of the papers (stage 2), the researcher read-ing the paper made a written summary of the scope of the paper,the method used to identify or analyse interdependencies, as wellas any interdependencies identiﬁed in the paper. In the secondreading of the papers (stage 3), the reader of the paper made a cat-egorization of the paper according to the interdependency cate-gories inTable 1as well as the method categories in Table 2.I n both stages, the reader of the papers could provide additional com-ments if necessary.4.2. ResultsAn overview of the included papers can be found in Table 4, with two papers from the International Journal of Critical Infras-tructure Protection (IJCIP), ten papers from IEEE Transactions onSmart Grid and two papers from the IEEE Transactions on PowerSystems. There are three to four papers from each year, exceptfrom 2010 where none are included. The papers can be broadlydivided into the following subjects:/C15General approaches that include both ICT and power aspects(1 paper):Chen et al.[30]propose strategies for hierarchicalconstruction of petri net models by different experts for variousparts of the system. The combined petri net models attacks inthe smart grid and may include multiple coordinated attackersas well as a combination of physical and cyber-attacks./C15General approaches in order to combine ICT and power models(1 paper):Lin et al.[31]present a simulation framework thatallows power and ICT simulations to be synchronized./C15Studying ways the power system may be attacked via the ICT system(2 papers):Zonouz et al.[32]propose a framework for evaluatingpotential contingencies due to remote cyber-attacks, as acomplement to traditional power system contingency analysisthat analyses accidental failures. Srivastava et al. [33]provide ways of estimating how an attacker may determine which relaysto attack in an Aurora like attack, taking into account attackfeasibility as well as power system consequences./C15Studying power system reliability impact of failures of speciﬁc ICTfunctions or components (5 papers): Both Aminafar et al.[34] and Panteli et al.[35]study impact of situational awarenesson power system reliability, though with varying methods andscope. Aminafar et al.[34]study the impact of wide-area mea-surement system (WAMS) malfunction, while Panteli et al. [35]emphasize the human aspect of situational awareness, whereICT systems inﬂuence the human operator’s perception of thecurrent system state. Both König et al. [27]and Lei et al.[36] address reliability of substation automation and protection sys-tems, and Lei et al.[36]also propose how the result of such areliability analysis can be used as input to broader reliabilityanalysis of the overall power system. Jiang and Singh
[37]pro- pose ways to include protection system failure and repair ratesas input to power system reliability evaluations./C15Studying power system reliability impact of ICT failures at a generallevel (4 papers):Falahati et al.[23]and Falahati and Fu[38]pro- vide quantitative calculations of power system reliabilityindices such as ‘‘loss of load probability” and ‘‘expected energynot served” due to failures in the ICT system. Chiaradonna et al.[39]model the combined power and ICT system using thestochastic activity network (SAN) formalism, which is basedon Petri nets. The usefulness of the approach is demonstratedthrough modelling and analysing cases where the communica-tion network performance is reduced at the same time as a fail-ure has happened in the power network. Beccuti et al. [40] extend the work of Chiaradonna et al. [39], using the SAN for- malism primarily to model the power grid, while stochasticwell-formed nets (SWN) are used to model a denial of service(DoS) attack in the communication network./C15Combining power and ICT aspects in order to better identify criticalcomponents of the combined ICT and power system (1 paper):Nguyen et al.[41]present an approach to detect critical nodesin the power network, taking into account also the communica-tion network and ways in which failures may cascade from onenetwork to the other.As illustrated inFig. 2, most papers put effort into includingboth ICT and power aspects in the modelling. As examples, Beccutiet al.[40](P2) create one model of the ICT part of the system, andanother for the power part, and then combine these in the analysis,whereas Lin et al.[31](P7) present a framework for co-simulationof a power system and an ICT network. In some cases, both ICT andpower aspects are included, but there is a slight emphasis on one ofthe aspects. Zonouz et al.[32](P14), one the one hand, put moreemphasis on the ICT part in the paper, as malicious attacks throughthe ICT part of the system are the new addition to the contingencyanalysis; Chiaradonna et al.[39](P4), on the other, put a slightemphasis on power aspects in their model, something that is putforward as a motivation for the work of Becutti et al. [40](P2). Some of the papers are, however, mainly concerned with eitherthe ICT or the power part of the system, and treat the other partmore superﬁcially. Either the main emphasis is on the power sys-tem, but the failure rates of ICT components such as protection sys-tems (P8) or PMUs (P1) are taken into account, or the mainemphasis is on the ICT part of the system, but the failure rates ofpower components (P9), or the consequences for the power system(P10, P13), are taken into account. For the more focused papers, itvaries to what extent they suggest ways in which the results fromthe targeted models or analysis they suggest can be used in addi-tional analysis that covers a larger part of the system.No papers aim to cover all relevant threats or failures. Themajority of the papers only consider accidental failures, and afew exclusively consider attacks, as illustrated in Fig. 3. There are only two papers (P2 and P4) that clearly cover both, but then ina limited fashion – considering communication network perfor-mance problems either due to failures or attacks,
1as well as the loss of a line in the power grid either due to an accidental failure
1And of these two papers, one (P2) primarily focuses on Denial of Service (DoS)attacks.I.A. Tøndel et al. / Applied Computing and Informatics 14 (2018) 17–27 23Power system ICT systemP7
#9 
P2 P4 P1P3P5
P8P6
P9 P10P11 P12
P13
Fig. 2.Included papers differ in their emphasis of power or ICT aspects.Table 4Overview of included papers, alphabetically ordered based on author name.
Nr. Author and title Journal, Year Paper topicP1[34]Aminifar et al.: Impact of WAMS Malfunctionon Power System Reliability Assessment IEEE smart grid, 2012 Understand the impact of situational awareness and controllability on power system reliability assessments P2[40]Beccuti et al.: Quantiﬁcation of dependenciesbetween electrical and informationinfrastructuresIJCIP, 2012 Investigate the consequences of a denial of service (DoS) attack on the communication network when the grid has just experienced afailure. Build upon paper P4 P3[30]Chen et al.: Petri Net Modelling of Cyber-Physical Attacks on Smart Grid IEEE smart grid, 2011 Use of Petri-net to model attacks on Smart Grid, focusing on multiple attacks (timing dependent attacks) P4[39]Chiaradonna et al.: Deﬁnition, implementationand application of a model-based frameworkfor analysing interdependencies in electricpower systemsIJCIP, 2011 Propose a model-based framework for quantitatively analysing propagation and impact of malfunctions in the combined powerand ICT system, with an emphasis on the impact ofcommunication network performance problems when the gridexperiences a failure P5[23]Falahati et al.: Reliability Assessment of SmartGrids Considering direct Cyber-PowerInterdependenciesIEEE smart grid, 2012 Provides quantitative calculation of reliability indices such as ‘‘loss of load probability” and ‘‘expected energy not served” due tocyber failures cascading to the power system. Only considercascading failures (directinterdependencies) P6[38]Falahati and Fu: Reliability Assessment ofSmart Grids Considering Indirect Cyber-PowerInterdependenciesIEEE smart grid, 2014 Provides quantitative calculation of reliability indices such as ‘‘loss of load probability” and ‘‘expected energy not served” due tocyber failures cascading to the power system. Only considerescalating failures (indirectinterdependencies) P7[31]Lin et al.: GECO: Global Event-Driven Co-Simulation Framework for InterconnectedPower System and Communication NetworkIEEE smart grid, 2012 Presents a framework for co-simulation of a power system and an ICT network, including control functions. The performance/speedof relay protection is evaluated for two failures as an example P8[37]Jiang et al.: New Models and Concepts forPower System Reliability Evaluation IncludingProtection System FailuresIEEE power systems, 2011 Presents a Markov model for incorporating protection system failures into overall power system reliability calculations,including both spurious trips in the protection system andescalating power failures due to protection system failure ondemand P9[27]König et al.: Reliability Analysis of SubstationAutomation System Functions Using PRMs IEEE smart grid, 2013 Present and test the application of a probabilistic framework for reliability analysis of substation automation systems P10[36]Lei et al.: Reliability Modelling and Analysis ofIEC 61850 Based Substation Protection Systems IEEE smart grid, 2014 Present a reliability modelling and analysis methodology for modern substation protection systems, as well as a cyber-physicalinterface matrix that ease further reliability analysis of large-scalesystems P11[41]Nguyen et al.: Detecting Critical Nodes inInterdependent Power Networks forVulnerability AssessmentIEEE smart grid, 2013 Identifying critical nodes in an interdependent power network. These are the nodes whose removals maximally destroy thepower network’s functions, due to malfunction of these nodes andcascading failures of its interdependent communication network P12[35]Panteli et al.: Assessing the Impact ofInsufﬁcient Situation Awareness on PowerSystem OperationIEEE power systems, 2013 Presents a general multi-state model based on Markov modelling for analysing escalating power failures due to lack of situationalawareness, including lack of situational awareness due to ICTfailures P13[33]Srivastava et al.: Modelling Cyber-PhysicalVulnerability of the Smart Grid WithIncomplete InformationIEEE smart grid, 2013 Model how an attacker can determine (based on incomplete information) which generators to attack in an Aurora-like event inorder to cause maximum adverse impact to the grid P14[32]Zonouz et al.: SOCCA: A Security-OrientedCyber-Physical Contingency Analysis in PowerInfrastructuresIEEE smart grid, 2014 Introduce a cyber-physical contingency analysis framework for analysing the physical impacts resulting from compromise in thecyber network. Analysis is performed based on measurementsalready present in modern control centres24 I.A. Tøndel et al. / Applied Computing and Informatics 14 (2018) 17–27or an attack. One paper (P11) mentions both failures and attacks, butseems to focus only on accidental failures.
In Section2.2, a set of interdependency categories was deﬁned.Table 5provides an overview of the main interdependency typesthat are considered in the included papers. As can be seen fromthe table, the majority of the papers covers escalating interdepen-dencies, where the consequences of a power failure are madeworse due to a failure or attack in the ICT system at the same time(interdependency category I3b). This is due to the role ICT systemsplay in achieving situational awareness and sending commands(P1, P2, P4, P6, P10, P12), as well as in performing automaticactions to limit power consequences of a failure (e.g. protectionsystems) (P7, P8). Several of the papers consider cascading failures,where ICT systems cause failures in the power systems (interde-pendency category I2b). This can be due to attacks (P13, P14) ordue to failures, where power components rely on ICT componentsto function (P5, P11). Lack of situational awareness may result inoperator actions that endanger power system stability (P12). Pro-tection system malfunctions may also cause power failures, in caseof undesired tripping (P7, P8). A few of the papers consider cas-cades from the power system to the ICT system, through includingpower component failures when considering reliability of ICT sys-tems (P9), or by taking into account that ICT components of thepower system may rely on power components to function (P11).None of the papers speciﬁcally address escalating interdependen-cies where a failure in the power system may increase the conse-quences of an ICT failure (interdependency category I3a),although Chiaradonna et al. (P4) discuss the possibility that repairrates of control system components may increase due to a largeblackout. None of the papers address common cause interdepen-dencies. One paper (P3) does not emphasize any of the interdepen-dency categories, but rather aims at including all types of attacks inthe model.The methods used in the included papers vary greatly. Nearlyhalf of the papers (P1, P5, P6, P10, P11, P13) present tailor mademethods to model or analyse particular aspects of the combinedpower and ICT system. One paper (P3) uses Petri Nets, and twomore (P2, P4) use models that are based on the Petri Net formal-ism. Markov models are used in three of the papers (P8, P12, andP14). One of these (P12) uses fault trees to estimate probabilitiesthat are needed as input to the Markov model. One paper (P9) usesProbabilistic Relational Models (PRM), and one paper (P7) uses thesimulation frameworks Network Simulator 2 (NS2) and PositiveSequence Load Flow (PSLF) to simulate the communication andpower network respectively. An overview of the main methodsused in the papers is given inTable 6, in terms of the method cat- egories deﬁned in Section3.As can be seen fromTable 6, dynamic methods are used in halfof the papers included. These are able to deal with time dependen-cies, but at the cost of complexity. Consequence methods are alsoused in half of the papers, in some cases in combination with cau-sal methods. Topological analysis methods are used in three of thepapers.From the table it can be seen that none of the papers use hazardidentiﬁcation methods that in Section 3was discussed as a possible mean for identifying interdependencies. This may be due to the lim-itations of such simple models when applied to complex systems. Inthe papers it is either unclear how interdependencies are identiﬁed,or it seems to be assumed that the interdependencies are alreadyknown. In one of the papers (P14), identiﬁcation seems to be donerather automatically, based on information available in the sys-tems. In many of the papers, the interdependencies are oftenrelated to the topology. Power and ICT components are connectedto each other, and this leads to interdependencies. These interde-pendencies are however represented in various ways. Some paperscreate matrices that capture important aspects of the interdepen-dencies (such as changes in availability (P5, P6) or failure probabil-ities (P10)). Failure and repair rates are inﬂuenced by theinterdependencies in several of the papers (e.g. P4, P8, P12). In somepapers the interdependencies are included through inclusion ofpower and ICT aspects in the same model (e.g. P3), or are taken intoaccount in the formulas used (P4, P1). In the paper on co-simulationAccidental failure Malicious a/g425ack
P7
P14 P2
P4P1
P3P5
P8P6
P9
P10P11P12P13
Fig. 3.Coverage of accidental failures and malicious attacks in the included papers.
Table 5Main interdependency categories covered by the papers.
Interdependency category P1 P2 P3 P4 P5 P6 P7 P8 P9 P10 P11 P12 P13 P14I1 (common cause) (x)I2a (cascading P?ICT) (x) x xI2b (cascading ICT?P ) ( x ) x x x xxxxI3a (escalate ICT consequences) (x)I3b (escalate P consequences) x x (x) x x x x x x
Table 6Main method categories used in the papers.
Method P1 P2 P3 P4 P5 P6 P7 P8 P9 P10 P11 P12 P13 P14M1 (hazard identiﬁcation)M2 (causal) x x x xM3 (consequence) x x x x x x xM4 (topological) xx x M5 (dynamic) x x x x x x xI.A. Tøndel et al. / Applied Computing and Informatics 14 (2018) 17–27 25of power and ICT networks (P7), the interdependencies are dealtwith by a common event queue.All papers present results from evaluations of the suggestedapproach, by using a test case (in some cases a very small examplesystem) to demonstrate the feasibility of the approach.5. Discussion and recommendations for further researchIn this paper, we have studied how recent research results pub-lished in three major archival journals identify and analyse inter-dependencies between the power and ICT systems. As we did notaim to cover all research in this ﬁeld, but limited the study to threejournals, there are relevant research results that are not covered byour literature review. However, as we took a systematic approachto studying the literature, we claim that the results are able to saysomething about the state of the research ﬁeld, as well as the mainresearch focus.As shown in Section4.2, the included papers vary in scope andmethods used. As such, it seems that the current research on powerand ICT interdependencies is at a relatively early stage where alarge number of approaches are suggested. The suggestedapproaches are evaluated using test cases, but none of them isevaluated in a real-life setting.Identiﬁcation of interdependencies between power networksand ICT is a research area that is given close to no attention in thejournals that we have studied. In the included papers, it seems tobe assumed that these interdependencies are already known bythe analyst. However, both the power network and the ICT systemare highly complex systems. In smaller test cases, it is likely thatsuch interdependencies can be identiﬁed relatively easily, and thatthe analyst is able to have a sufﬁcient overview of the combined sys-tem. In real cases, this is however likely to be much harder toachieve. In Section3.1, we identiﬁed a few methods that we consideruseful for identifying interdependencies at a high level. There is aneed for research on how adequate these methods are in addressingpower and ICT interdependencies and in providing input to analysisof interdependencies. New or adapted methods may be needed.When addressing interdependencies between power networksand ICT, there is a need for competence on both the power systemand the ICT system, as well as on methods for identifying and ana-lysing interdependencies. To ease interdisciplinary collaboration, itseems wise to use models that are as simple as possible. Tradi-tional risk analysis methods, such as fault trees, reliability blockdiagrams and event tree analysis, have gained much of their suc-cess from their ease of use and understanding. In contrast, manyof the approaches suggested in the papers are quite complex tounderstand and use, and may thus be a poor choice as a basis forinterdisciplinary communication.As both the power and ICT systems are complex, simple modelsare however unlikely to cover all system aspects at a level of detailnecessary to understand the reliability impact of the interdepen-dencies. This is likely to be difﬁcult also for complex models. Noneof the papers presents models that are able to fully include thecombined power and ICT system and a wide array of threats. Thus,there is a need to understand how models can be used together,and in particular how simple models can be used together withcomplex models in order to achieve both interdisciplinary under-standing and the necessary detail. In some of the papers it isexplained how the work can be used as input to other analysis.One example is the cyber-physical system interface matrix sug-gested by Lei et al.[36]that makes it possible to include ICT fail-ures in more traditional power analyses.In the papers, it is not clearly stated who are considered poten-tial users of the suggested approaches, and what the user require-ments are. The needs of TSOs and DSOs for identifying andunderstanding the interdependencies in their systems should beunderstood. This aspect is currently lacking in the journal papersstudied.Also related to the needs of the DSOs and TSOs are considera-tions of what type of input is required in the models. A few ofthe papers mention the difﬁculties of obtaining reliable data onICT components. In particular, König et al. [27]discuss the difﬁ- culty of obtaining failure rates for control and protection systems.Most papers are however mainly concerned with presenting mod-els that can be used for analysis, and less concerned with address-ing whether or not relevant data are available. Zonouz et al. [32] are however concerned with the ease of building the model, andpresent an approach that builds a model automatically. A modelof the ICT system is generated by utilizing data that are alreadymeasured and present in modern control centres. This model isthen connected to a state-based model of the power network, inan online manner.The papers mainly cover cascading and escalating interdepen-dencies, in particular in terms of incidents in the ICT system thatcauses or escalates failures in the power systems. Of the interde-pendency categories inTable 1, these are the most important onesin order to understand how the integration of more ICT in thepower network inﬂuences power system reliability. However, ofthe included papers, the majority is concerned only with accidentalfailures, and only a few papers take intentional attacks intoaccount. With the use of more ICT in the power network, andincreased connectivity among ICT components, the maliciousthreat from remote attackers is becoming more and more real.There is a need to understand the implications of the risks associ-ated with cyber-attacks for power system reliability. The tradi-
tional models for power system reliability analysis are howeverconcerned with accidental failures. Extending or complementingthese to deal with ICT component failures is thus easier than toaim for also dealing with attacks. If including attacks in the models,the concept of failure rates will be different since the models needto take into account an intelligent adversary rather than accidentalfailures. In addition, there are limited data available related toprobabilities, consequences and propagation of cyber-attacks inpower systems; thus, the problem of obtaining the necessary inputdata for the models is even more difﬁcult when including cyber-attacks in the analysis.None of the papers we have studied use empirical data to iden-tify or analyse interdependencies, although there have been rele-vant incidents that could be used as a basis for analysis. Thismay be due to conﬁdentiality issues. However, failures, and alsonear misses, are an important source for learning and are likelyto be useful in understanding how the power and ICT systemsdepend on and inﬂuence each other.In summary, we recommend that future research addresses thefollowing research topics:/C15Methods for identiﬁcation of interdependencies between powernetworks and ICT systems./C15Methods targeted towards easing interdisciplinary communica-tion among power and ICT experts, in particular the feasibilityof more easy-to-understand methods when analysing powerand ICT interdependencies./C15Approaches to using simple and more complex methods incombination, to achieve ease of understanding as well as thenecessary detail./C15Understanding DSO and TSO needs when it comes to identifyingand understanding interdependencies in their systems./C15Evaluate and suggest approaches to ease modelling and obtainnecessary input data to the model./C15Understand the risk associated with cyber-attacks for the powergrid.26 I.A. Tøndel et al. / Applied Computing and Informatics 14 (2018) 17–27/C15Use information from historical failures and near-misses toimprove understanding of interdependencies, and the roleinterdependencies may play in case of failures.6. ConclusionInterdependencies between the power and ICT systems alreadyhave an impact on the reliability of the power system. With theongoing transition towards a smarter grid, this will increase inthe future. In this paper, we have presented the results of a litera-ture review of the current state of research on power and ICT inter-dependencies and their impact on power system reliability. Inparticular, we have reviewed which interdependency types thatare covered in existing work, as well as which methods that areused to identify and analyse interdependencies. We found thatresearch on interdependencies in the combined power and ICT sys-tem is at an early stage. Cascading and escalating interdependen-cies are covered, in particular in terms of incidents in the ICTsystem that causes or escalates failures in the power systems.The methods presented in the papers are however not yet able toprovide an overview of interdependencies in the power system atlarge, and at the same time take into account a wide array of bothintentional and accidental threats. Methods for identiﬁcation ofinterdependencies seem to be lacking. We recommend that futureresearch addresses these limitations of the current methods, andputs more attention on identifying the needs of TSOs and DSOsfor identifying interdependencies and understanding theirimpacts.AcknowledgementsThis research has been performed as part of the AFTER projectfunded by the European Commission (grant nr. 267188), and theFlexnett project funded by the Norwegian Research Council (pro-ject nr. 245412). The authors would like to thank Gerd Kjølle foruseful comments and suggestions when preparing this paper.References
[1] European Technology Platform Smartgrids, SmartGrids SRA 2025, StrategicResearch Agenda, Update of the SmartGrids SRA 2007 for the needs by the year2035, 2012.[2]
S.V. Buldyrev, R. Parshani, G. Paul, H.E. Stanley, S. Havlin, Catastrophic cascadeof failures in interdependent networks, Nature 464 (2010) 1025–1028
. [3]
M. Vaiman, K. Bell, Y. Chen, B. Chowdhury, I. Dobson, P. Hines, M. Papic, S.Miller, P. Zhang, Risk assessment of cascading outages: methodologies andchallenges, IEEE Trans. Power Syst. 27 (2012) 631–641
. [4] R. Zimmerman, Decision-making and the vulnerability of interdependentcritical infrastructure. In: IEEE International Conference on Systems, Man andCybernetics, IEEE, 2004, pp. 4059–4063.[5]
R. Allan, R. Billinton, Probabilistic assessment of power systems, Proc. IEEE 88(2000) 140–162
.[6]
M. Bishop, Computer Security: Art and Science, Addison-Wesley, 2012 . [7]
R.J. Albuquerque, V.L. Paucar, Evaluation of the PMUs measurement channelsavailability for observability analysis, IEEE Trans. Power Syst. 28 (2013) 2536–2544
.[8]
S. Zhang, V. Vittal, Wide-area control resiliency using redundantcommunication paths, IEEE Trans. Power Syst. 29 (2014) 2189–2199
. [9] J.-C. Laprie, K. Kanoun, M. Kaâniche, Modelling interdependencies between theelectricity and information infrastructures, in: Computer Safety, Reliability,and Security, Springer, 2007, pp. 54–67.[10]
V. Rosato, L. Issacharoff, F. Tiriticco, S. Meloni, S. Porcellinis, R. Setola,Modelling interdependent infrastructures using interacting dynamicalmodels, Int. J. Crit. Infrastruct. 4 (2008) 63–79
. [11]
D. Kirschen, F. Bouffard, Keeping the lights on and the information ﬂowing,IEEE Power Energy Mag. 7 (2009) 50–60
.[12]P. Hokstad, I.B. Utne, J. Vatn, Risk and Interdependencies in CriticalInfrastructures: A Guideline for Analysis, Springer, 2012
. [13]
W. Kröger, E. Zio, Vulnerable Systems, Springer, 2011 . [14] F. Landegren, J. Johansson, O. Samuelsson, Review of computer based methodsfor modeling and simulating critical infrastructures as socio-technicalsystems, in: European Safety and Reliability Association Conference(ESREL2013).[15]
M. Ouyang, Review on modeling and simulation of interdependent criticalinfrastructure systems, Reliability Eng. Syst. Saf. 121 (2014) 43–60
. [16]
P. Pederson, D. Dudenhoeffer, S. Hartley, M. Permann, Critical infrastructureinterdependency modeling: a survey of US and international research, IdahoNatl. Lab. 1–20 (2006)
.[17] S.M. Rinaldi, Modeling and simulating critical infrastructures and theirinterdependencies, in: Proceedings of the 37th Annual Hawaii InternationalConference on System Sciences, IEEE, 2004, p. 8.[18]
I. Eusgeld, C. Nan, S. Dietz, ‘‘System-of-systems” approach for interdependentcritical infrastructures, Reliability Eng. Syst. Saf. 96 (2011) 679–686
. [19]
P. Kundur, J. Paserba, V. Ajjarapu, G. Andersson, A. Bose, C. Canizares, N.Hatziargyriou, D. Hill, A. Stankovic, C. Taylor, Deﬁnition and classiﬁcation ofpower system stability IEEE/CIGRE joint task force on stability terms anddeﬁnitions, IEEE Trans. Power Syst. 19 (2004) 1387–1401
. [20]
M. Rausand, Risk Assessment: Theory, Methods, and Applications, John Wiley& Sons, 2013
.[21] B. Tornqvist, M. Fontela, P. Mellstrand, R. Gustavsson, C. Andrieu, Overview ofICT components and its application in electric power systems, DistributedIntelligence for Distributed Energy Resources: Selected Publications from theCRISP Project, 2005.[22]
S.M. Rinaldi, J.P. Peerenboom, T.K. Kelly, Identifying, understanding, andanalyzing critical infrastructure interdependencies, IEEE Control Syst. 21(2001) 11–25
.[23]
B. Falahati, Y. Fu, L. Wu, Reliability assessment of smart grid considering directcyber-power interdependencies, IEEE Trans. Smart Grid 3 (2012) 1515–1524
. [24] IEC, Hazard and operability studies (HAZOP studies) - Application guide, IEC61882:2016, 2016.[25] IEC, Analysis techniques for system reliability - Procedure for failure mode andeffects analysis (FMEA), IEC 60812:2006, 2006.[26]
B. Schneier, Attack trees, Dr. Dobb’s J. 24 (1999) 21–29 . [27]
J. Konig, L. Nordstrom, M. Osterlind, Reliability analysis of substationautomation system functions using PRMs, IEEE Trans. Smart Grid 4 (2013)206–213
.[28]
K. Hendrick, L. Benner, Investigating Accidents with STEP, CRC Press, 1986 . [29] E. Ciapessoni, D. Cirio, A. Pitto, G. Kjolle, M. Sforna, An integrated frameworkfor power and ICT system risk-based security assessment, in: PowerTech(POWERTECH) IEEE Grenoble, IEEE, 2013, pp. 1–6.[30]
T.M. Chen, J.C. Sanchez-Aarnoutse, J. Buford, Petri net modeling of cyber-physical attacks on smart grid, IEEE Trans. Smart Grid 2 (2011) 741–749
. [31]
H. Lin, S.S. Veda, S.S. Shukla, L. Mili, J. Thorp, GECO: global event-driven co-simulation framework for interconnected power system and communicationnetwork, IEEE Trans. Smart Grid 3 (2012) 1444–1456
. [32] S. Zonouz, C.M. Davis, K.R. Davis, R. Berthier, R.B. Bobba, W.H. Sanders, SOCCA:A Security-Oriented Cyber-Physical Contingency Analysis in PowerInfrastructures, 2014.[33]
A. Srivastava, T.H. Morris, T. Ernster, C. Vellaithurai, S. Pan, U. Adhikari,Modeling cyber-physical vulnerability of the smart grid with incompleteinformation, IEEE Trans. Smart Grid 4 (2013) 235–244
. [34]
F. Aminifar, M. Fotuhi-Firuzabad, M. Shahidehpour, A. Safdarian, Impact ofWAMS malfunction on power system reliability assessment, IEEE Trans. SmartGrid 3 (2012) 1302–1309
. [35]
M. Panteli, P.A. Crossley, D.S. Kirschen, D.J. Sobajic, Assessing the impact ofinsufﬁcient situation awareness on power system operation, IEEE Trans. PowerSyst. 28 (2013) 2967–2977
. [36] H. Lei, C. Singh, A. Sprintson, Reliability Modeling and Analysis of IEC 61850Based Substation Protection Systems, 2014.[37]
K. Jiang, C. Singh, New models and concepts for power system reliabilityevaluation including protection system failures, IEEE Trans. Power Syst. 26(2011) 1845–1855
.[38]
B. Falahati, Y. Fu, Reliability assessment of smart grids considering indirectcyber-power interdependencies, IEEE Trans. Smart Grid 5 (2014) 1677–1685
. [39]
S. Chiaradonna, F.D. Giandomenico, P. Lollini, Deﬁnition, implementation andapplication of a model-based framework for analyzing interdependencies inelectric power systems, Int. J. Crit. Infrastruct. Prot. 4 (2011) 24–40
. [40]
M. Beccuti, S. Chiaradonna, F. Di Giandomenico, S. Donatelli, G. Dondossola, G.Franceschinis, Quantiﬁcation of dependencies between electrical andinformation infrastructures, Int. J. Crit. Infrastruct. Prot. 5 (2012) 14–27
. [41]
D.T. Nguyen, Y. Shen, M.T. Thai, Detecting critical nodes in interdependentpower networks for vulnerability assessment, IEEE Trans. Smart Grid 4 (2013)151–159
.I.A. Tøndel et al. / Applied Computing and Informatics 14 (2018) 17–27 27