Original Article
Integrating educational theories into a feasible digital environment
Zois Koukopoulos⇑, Dimitrios Koukopoulos
Dept. of Cultural Heritage Management & New Technologies, University of Patras, Agrinio, Greece
article info
Article history:Received 8 May 2017Revised 28 June 2017Accepted 16 September 2017Available online 19 September 2017Keywords:Cultural heritage teachingLearning objectsMobile learningCollaborative learningContent crowd-sourcingabstract
Nowadays there is a tremendous effort to enhance educational procedure with the incorporation of newtechnologies aiming at the better understanding of educational material from students. In this directionmany theories have been developed, some of which have been implemented into digital systems. A chal-lenge here is to develop a system that integrates more than one of such theories in a harmonic way for thebeneﬁt of student community. In this work we attempt to give an answer to this challenge proposing anovel system that integrates the main characteristics of three well-known educational theories: learningobjects, collaborative learning and mobile learning in the context of cultural heritage teaching and learn-ing. Evaluation results suggest that such an attempt is technically feasible, the integrated characteristicsof the educational theories remain visible to educators of cultural heritage courses, while cultural her-itage educators positively accept the potential incorporation of the platform in the educationalprocedure./C2112017 The Authors. Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of King Saud University. This is anopen access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ ).
1. IntroductionEducation is a ﬁeld where Information Technology (IT) hasmade signiﬁcant impact in the last 20 years [1,5,10–12,18,20]. School curricula all over the world include IT courses that intro-duce modern technology to students helping them to developnew skills, necessary for their later life. In addition, teachers andprofessors of traditional courses like history, mathematics or geog-raphy try to use computers, mobile devices and educational soft-ware to connect with their students more efﬁciently andprofoundly and enhance the quality of educational procedure[6,20,21,25–27]. Cultural heritage related courses could not ignorethis new reality. Computers and educational software invadedteaching and learning of cultural heritage related courses addingvalue to cultural heritage pedagogy, education and learning [33]. Such courses bare their own unique combination of characteristicslike the capability to be conducted outside the classroom on a cul-tural heritage site or monument and the high level of interactivityamong the teacher and her/his students [7]. As authors in[33]indi- cate ‘‘The possibility of examining the context and the landscapewhere a Cultural Heritage artifact was/is located has importantconsequences on the study of the artifact itself and on its analysisand evaluation”. Moreover, cultural heritage courses attempt todisseminate large amounts of knowledge. Thus, teachers of suchcourses tend to ask from their students to form collaborative teamsand explore cultural heritage content together in order to come incontact with as much knowledge as possible through their ownstudying or the discoveries of their classmates [7]. Furthermore, cultural heritage courses share common knowledge regardless ofthe time and place of the educational process. Cultural heritagecontent has a universal scope and can be used by teachers and stu-dents all over the world[33].The integration of the above characteristics to a uniﬁed educa-tional digital environment for cultural heritage courses would nothave a solid background without the guidance of approved educa-tional theories. Collaborative learning theory promotes studentcollaboration and active participation, mobile learning theoryexplains how to effectively use mobile technology for teachingand learning inside and outside the classroom and learning objectstheory guides the creation of re-usable, aggregation-ready, inde-pendent and meta-data enrichable educational content. Morespeciﬁcally, collaborative learning theory [5]guides the formation of small teams in which students work together to reach a com-mon educational goal. Every student participates actively andshe/he is responsible to fulﬁl her/his assigned task in order to helpthe team. Mobile learning[12,24]provides unique characteristics
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aci.2017.09.0042210-8327//C2112017 The Authors. Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of King Saud University.This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ ).⇑Corresponding author at: Dept. of Cultural Heritage Management & NewTechnologies, University of Patras, 2 G. Seferi, 30100 Agrinio, Greece.E-mail addresses:zkoukopu@upatras.gr(Z. Koukopoulos),dkoukopoulos@ upatras.gr(D. Koukopoulos).Peer review under responsibility of King Saud University.
Production and hosting by ElsevierApplied Computing and Informatics 15 (2019) 19–26
Contents lists available atScienceDirect
Applied Computing and Informatics
journal homepage: www.sciencedirect.com
like portability, user mobility, pervasiveness, ubiquity and imme-diate interaction with the external environment making learningexperience more engaging and interesting for young students.Learning objects theory[10]uses small, independent, reusable,aggregation-ready educational units as the main element of educa-tional procedure. Such units can be designed and implementedeasily with the help of digital means and can become available tostudents during learning process regardless of the digital environ-ment or tools they use. Those educational theories can be easilyimplemented in IT applications, since they have guided the imple-mentation of numerous educational software applications[1,6,7,23,31,32].In this context some fundamental questions arise. Could a dig-ital educational environment for cultural heritage efﬁciently inte-grate the main characteristics of learning objects, collaborativeand mobile learning theories into a feasible uniﬁed framework intechnical terms? How can the basic characteristics of those educa-tional theories remain visible to educators and students when theyare incorporated in a single educational platform? Will culturalheritage management educators accept such an environment?The above IT-ready educational theories have guided the designand implementation of an educational platform for cultural her-itage courses. The platform provides a fully personalized learningenvironment, implements various services that promote collabora-tion among students and uses mobile applications to disengage theeducational process from the classroom transferring it to the ﬁeldand thus providing an immersive and pervasive learning experi-ence. Moreover, the system organizes information in learningobjects that can be used independently or in collections and it alsogives users the opportunity to provide personalized tagging andmetadata to each learning object. The platform supports a user-friendly and interactive environment that collects and presentscultural heritage information spanning in various cultural disci-plines. Registered users are able to contribute primitive or existingcultural content and create their personal learning units, workingalone or in teams. Teachers can monitor student interaction withthe system in real-time guiding students to construct collectiveknowledge through collaboration and co-dependent tasking andchecking students’ contributions for validity and soundness. Inorder to measure the acceptability of the proposed platform, weperformed a qualitative evaluation with the help of undergraduateuniversity students who have the potential to become educators ofcultural heritage courses in the near future at primary or secondaryschools. Evaluation results suggest that the integration of the maincharacteristics of certain educational theories has been success-fully performed.2. State of the artThe integration and adaptation of characteristics from collabo-rative learning theory or mobile learning theory or learning objectstheory to the implementation of educational software applicationshave been proven feasible in numerous cases [1,6,11,16,19,23]. Wang[1]introduces the design of a collaborative learning environ-ment that focuses on making collaboration friendlier among stu-dents. Chen and Choi[6]present the design of an onlinecollaborative location-aware platform for history learning. Dorcaet al.[23]present an efﬁcient approach for personalization of theteaching process using learning objects. A thorough discussionabout various technical aspects of mobile learning includingusability, user experience and accessibility is provided in [11]. Various platforms have been introduced in the ﬁeld of culturalheritage education[2,3,17,22]. WebQuests[2]is an educational environment that promotes inquiry-oriented educational activitiesbased on online resources providing numerous cultural heritagelessons. MedcGame[3]is a collaborative cultural heritage interac-tive software that attempts to engage students in an active learn-ing process. The MusEd Platform[17]offers an online learning repository of reusable cultural heritage content, organized in learn-ing objects. Castle Route[22]urges students to reﬂect, investigate,disseminate and share cultural heritage and historical content cre-ating a collaborative environment.Some platforms achieved in implementing characteristics fromtwo of the above theories[7,31,32]. The aCME system is a general-purpose mobile infrastructure that aims at enhancing mobileseamless learning and promotes collaboration among teachersand students[32]. Students and teachers engage in online discus-
sions included in predeﬁned courses. The system is platform-independent as it can be accessed through any device and fromany location and tailorable as it supports the integration of newfunctionalities in order to meet personalized user needs. WhileaCME is tailor-made for usage inside an educational environment,the proposed platform is a participatory cultural environmentwhich can be used as an educational tool for seamless learningoffering more features comparing to aCME. aCME uses conversa-tion as a basic educational tool. Teachers initiate discussions offer-ing related information and students participate in theconversation through their mobile devices. In the proposed plat-form a teacher can invite her/his students to participate in a courseproviding their own material. This material can be captured fromthe students through the Collector application. The teacher canauthor the student-contributed material proposing the necessarymodiﬁcations and checking students throughout the procedure.In the proposed platform all the contributed material can be visu-alized through an interactive cultural map service. Students canincorporate material contributed by other users (colleagues ornot) in their coursework. A discussion forum feature is also pro-vided as a complementary tool for the conduct of conversationsamong teachers and students.The COLLAGE platform[31]implements the characteristics ofvarious IT-ready educational theories like mobile learning, game-based learning and collaborative learning. The COLLAGE platformand the proposed platform resemble in various features. Both sys-tems allow students to create their own content and share, reuse,evaluate and comment educational material. Both systems offerrich multimedia content and support mobile educational activitiesoutside the classroom. Students in both platforms can collaboratein a project. Both platforms are intended for use by both studentsand teachers. However the two platforms have some fundamentaldifferences. The presented platform promotes learning through themanagement of cultural heritage content, while COLLAGE useseducational interactive games. The proposed platform organizescontent following the principles and standards of Learning Objectstheory. Even though COLLAGE supports content reuse and meta-data enrichment, it does not obviously follow a speciﬁc establishedLearning Objects standard. The presented platform’s design wasguided by the acceptable IEEE 1484.12.1-2002 standard for Learn-ing Object Metadata version 1.3 (LOM Standard) [28]. Furthermore, the COLLAGE platform supports mainly mobile users and outdoorlearning. On the other hand, the presented platform works equallywell for indoor and outdoor classroom activities. The proposedplatform allows public content contribution, while in the COLLAGEplatform contributions are made by students and teachers. Lastly,the COLLAGE platform is intended for use by secondary schoolstudents and teachers, while our platform targets students of allgrades from elementary school to academic students andprofessors.The LAMP/Pulu platform[7]is a mobile digital guiding andlearning platform that implements characteristics from mobilelearning and collaborative learning. LAMP/Pulu urges students toengage in the learning procedure by exploring a cultural heritage20 Z. Koukopoulos, D. Koukopoulos / Applied Computing and Informatics 15 (2019) 19–26site in real-time using mobile devices. The platform allows stu-dents and teachers to contribute personal content based on theirexperiences or take part in educational discussions. In LAMP/Puluplatform, students learn and construct personal experiencesthrough group work, collaboration and interaction in small groups.The LAMP/Pulu platform makes a primitive step towards the orga-nization of educational information in units. Those units are re-usable within the context of the project, but they are neither plat-form independent as they can be only used within the LAMP plat-form, nor aggregation-ready or metadata enrichable as a typicallearning object should be.Many researchers attempted to measure or evaluate the accep-tance of educational systems[15,18,20]. Gan et al.[15]examine the positive effect of interactive digital media on collaborativelearning in higher education for both instructors and students.Domingo and Gargante[20]investigate the impact of using mobilelearning applications in primary education from teachers’ percep-tion. Sung et al. found that the application of mobile devices toeducation has a moderate mean effect size extracting beneﬁtsand drawbacks of mobile learning[18].3. Proposed educational platformThe proposed system is an educational participatory digitalplatform for gathering and disseminating cultural heritage content,which can be used during the educational procedure. The platformhas been designed to integrate the main characteristics of threedifferent educational theories: learning objects, collaborativelearning and mobile learning, while also offering features foundin other educational theories like constructivism and multimedialearning.3.1. Educational contentGuided by learning objects theory, the system has beendesigned to organize educational content in units. Each unit retainsthe main characteristics of a learning object as they have beendeclared by learning objects theory [10]. More speciﬁcally, each unit contains a small amount of information and it can be usedby one or more individuals simultaneously. Each unit is semanti-cally independent from other ones and it can be used on its ownor be aggregated in a collection with other units, which share acommon semantical feature. A unit can be reused as many timesas desired without losing its value and it can be enriched by addi-tional information in a personalized manner.In order to achieve those design goals we relied on the widelyacceptable LOM Standard[28]. In this speciﬁcation, educationalmetadata are divided into nine top level categories: general, lifecycle, meta-metadata, technical, educational, rights, relation, anno-tation, and classiﬁcation. Each one of those categories is reﬁned invarious ﬁelds giving semantics to each learning object. We imple-mented the above speciﬁcations by adding the appropriate ﬁelds tothe database table that stores system educational content. Eachunit appears as a table record with a signiﬁcant number of ﬁeldsreﬂecting the various top level categories of the standard. Meta-data information appears in the xml ﬁle which is exported by thedatabase table and contains system’s educational content. Thexml ﬁle can be reused in other educational platforms. Moreover,since xml is a platform-independent scripting language, system’seducational content can be exploited by various applicationsachieving a high level of interoperability like IMS Editor Vimse[29]and LOM-Editor[30].Learning objects are aggregated in collections based on generaland educational elements as they are described in their metadata.More speciﬁcally, educational units can be aggregated in collec-tions per cultural discipline, keyword, interactivity type and level,context, age range, difﬁculty, learning time and semantic density. Ifa teacher wants to create a speciﬁc collection, she/he can downloadthe corresponding xml ﬁle with ﬁltered content based on her/hisneeds.All content is provided by platform users, which retain owner-ship over their contributions and they are allowed to manage theirown content (edit or delete it). Users can contribute contentthrough a user-friendly screen (Fig. 1) or via platform’s dedicated mobile application (Fig. 2) in a single unit each time. Each unit con-sists of information in the form of text, audio, images, video andmultimedia like notes, descriptions, historical background infor-mation, theatrical plays and scripts, literary works or reviewsand references, drawings, pictures, notes, sketches, animations,narrations, storytelling, interviews and vocal guides. Multimediaﬁles can be a full demo package with all kinds of data types. Espe-cially multimedia content has been proven that improves studentunderstanding[13]. The teacher is responsible to insert additionalinformation required by the LOM Standard, when she/he authorscontributed content by her/his students.
Fig. 1.Platform screen for content contributions.Z. Koukopoulos, D. Koukopoulos / Applied Computing and Informatics 15 (2019) 19–26 21Students are able to interact with the system searching andviewing educational content as many times as they desire concur-rently with other students. Also students can review a unit. Stu-dent contributions lead in constructing new personal knowledgeand sharing it with other students, which is a key feature in educa-tional theories like constructivism[9].3.2. Educational servicesThe features of mobile and collaborative learning theoriesguided the design and implementation of platform’s educationalservices. The presented platform classiﬁes the offered educationalservices in three categories: generic, student collaborative learningand mobile learning services. More speciﬁcally:3.2.1. Generic services/C15Search educational content:The platform offers severaluser-friendly and interactive ways to search content like searchbars and interactive options on geographical maps that are locatedin various sections around the platform ( Fig. 3). Users can search for educational content by providing the appropriate search termsin the form of keywords or phrases in the search bars or byselecting the available ﬁltering options on the geographical map./C15View educational content:In order to be as user-friendly, easy-to-use, attractive and interactive as possible the platform pro-vides two different ways to present educational units. The ﬁrstway is an interactive geographical map where all educationalunits appear in the form of pins (Fig. 4). When a user desires to view the information a pin hosts, she/he can click on the pin toread item’s title and a brief description or she/he can navigateto the item’s dedicated web page for more information and mul-timedia content. The second way is the presentation of educa-tional units in lists per cultural discipline ( Fig. 5). Each unit is represented as a list item that redirects user to a dedicated webpage./C15Content contribution:The platform allows registered users toeasily upload primitive or existing educational content. Bothstudents and teachers can contribute content related to a speci-ﬁc course or general educational cultural content./C15Content authoring:Teachers can ask from platform modera-tors to allow them to check their students’ contributions beforethey are published to the broad public. If a permission isgranted, teachers check student contributions and inform themwhether something needs change. During this procedure teach-ers enrich content with the appropriate metadata informationrequired by the LOM Standard.
Fig. 2.Dedicated mobile application for collecting educational content.
Fig. 3.Interactive choosing of cultural discipline on geographical map.22 Z. Koukopoulos, D. Koukopoulos / Applied Computing and Informatics 15 (2019) 19–263.2.2. Student collaborative learning services/C15Student group formation:A teacher can request from platformmoderators the creation of a private user group in which she/hewill be the leader. Group members can share private educa-tional content that is only visible within the group./C15Collaborative projects:Teachers can create a speciﬁc educa-tional project, set a ﬁnal goal and intermediate tasks, providehints and solutions for each task and assign the project to aspeciﬁc student group. Students collaborate with their team-mates to complete project tasks. After completing each task,the system unlocks the next task until the ﬁnal goal is reached.The system organizes potential projects in four distinct cate-gories following an extended Contextual Model of Learning(CML)[34]. Teachers can create projects and tasks of personal,physical and socio-cultural context as dictated by the CML butalso, other projects and tasks based on teacher’s personal expe-rience. Projects and tasks of personal context are designed toadapt on the students’ interests, motivations, preferences, priorknowledge and experience. Teachers can ﬁnd in the platformready-to-use examples of personal context projects and tasks.Moreover, the system provides guidelines and links to helpteachers create such projects on-the-ﬂy. Projects and tasks ofphysical context are designed to help students link educationalconcepts with objects and experiences from the real world. Pro-jects and tasks of socio-cultural context are designed to helpstudents create knowledge by adjusting an educational conceptto the external social and cultural environment with which the
Fig. 4.Educational geographical map with content represented as pins.
Fig. 5.Viewing content in list per cultural discipline.Z. Koukopoulos, D. Koukopoulos / Applied Computing and Informatics 15 (2019) 19–26 23concept interacts. Teachers can allow the system to presenttheir own projects and tasks to other teachers for usage. Projectand task creation is supported through user-friendly screens.Teachers can use the pre-made project samples provided bythe platform, which have been created by other teachers./C15Content commenting:Students and teachers collaborate tocheck educational units contributed by users. All users areallowed to comment on an educational unit in the form of apublic review.3.2.3. Mobile learning servicesAlong with the main modules of the platform, we have imple-mented two dedicated mobile applications that offer differentlearning services.Collectoris a dedicated mobile application thatusers can utilize to capture an image, audio or video ﬁle, add a per-sonal annotation and send it to the system. Guideis a dedicated mobile application that presents information concerning educationunits in real-time on-demand and offers guiding services. The onlyrequirement to useCollectorandGuideis to download, install and enable it in each user’s android device./C15Mobile lesson service:Teachers can transfer the lesson outsideclassroom with the use ofGuide. If a teacher wants to revitalizea lesson, then she/he can guide students outside and presentthroughGuidevarious cultural points of interest. The teachercan start conversations with the students and urge them tomake reviews or start searching more information about anycultural point./C15Real-time contributions service: Students and teachers can create personal educational content by capturing audiovisualcontent in real-time and storing it directly to the platformthroughCollector.3.3. System users and permitted operationsThe proposed platform adapts an extended role based accesscontrol model for authorization purposes concerning contentaccess. The implemented access control model supports three usertypes/roles with different scopes and permission levels. Users areseparated in registered users that have created an account andthey are able to use the full potential of the platform and non-registered users that do not have an active account on the systemand they can use only a part of the offered educational services./C15Teachers:Registered users that can search public content, viewboth public and private content, create and assign tasks andprojects. Teachers can formulate private groups and includestudents in them. Also teachers check content contributed bystudents and make their own contributions./C15Students:Registered users that can search public content, viewboth public and private content and contribute content. Stu-dents can participate in private groups, comment on public con-tributions and share public content on their social media./C15Guests:Nomadic users who view and search public content.Depending on their role, users have various capabilities andthey can perform operations like adding, deleting, editing, search-ing, viewing, commenting content and managing projects andtasks./C15Add:Registered users can contribute educational units overwhich they have complete ownership and responsibility./C15Edit/Delete:Registered users can modify or delete their ownunits./C15Search:There are multiple searching levels for all users: (i) Sim-ple searching: Users can search for educational content provid-ing keywords corresponding to thematic attributes (like title,description or discipline). (ii) Map searching: A user searcheseducational content interacting with pins on a geographicalmap. (iii) Location-based searching: Guidedetects user’s geo- graphical position and proposes nearby cultural points in a userspeciﬁed range./C15View:There are multiple viewing levels for all users: (i) Culturalmap viewing: A user views cultural content as pins on a geo-
graphical map. (ii) List viewing: A user views cultural contentin a list of descriptive thumbnails. (iii) Private content viewing:Users that are members of a private group can view privatecontent./C15Comment:Registered users can make comments about anypublic contribution./C15Create/Modify/Delete Project:Teachers can create a new pro-ject and modify or delete an existing one, if they have createdit. They, also, assign students on the project explicitly./C15Create/Assign/Check Task:Teachers create intermediate taskson speciﬁc projects and provide hints and solutions. A taskcan be assigned to one or more students. Student answers toeach task are checked by the teacher./C15Answer Task:Students provide answers to their assigned tasks.4. EvaluationIn order to evaluate the educational strength of the proposedplatform we performed an evaluation with the use of appropriatelydesigned questionnaires. We attempted to measure how usersresponded to speciﬁc services and whether the main requirementsof the utilized educational theories have been successfully met.4.1. Research methodologyFor the assessment process we designed a questionnaire anddistributed it to undergraduate students of the Department of cul-tural heritage management and new technologies of the Universityof Patras. 12 students where used in the experiment, 5 men and 7women between the ages of 20 and 25. Our methodology guided usto ﬁrst give a thorough explanation of system scope, features andservices and afterwards we urged students to use the systemthrough a speciﬁc educational usage scenario. More speciﬁcally,we classiﬁed students in 6 teams consisting of two users and askedthem to collaborate within their team in order to search and con-tribute information about Greek poets to the platform. Each stu-dent was obligated to contribute content through her/hispersonal account on the platform in order to actively participatein the procedure. Every contribution concerned speciﬁc informa-tion about the life and work of a certain Greek poet. When allteams fulﬁlled their task, they collaborated to create a collectionof information about the history of poetry in Greece. Each studenthad the opportunity to make a comment on a colleague’s contribu-tion. The procedure was monitored by course’s professor, whostarted a conversation about Greek poetry using information fromstudent contributions. The conversation was recorded through Col- lectorand uploaded to the platform as a part of the collection. Inthe end, users were asked to repeat the same procedure usingEuropeana[8], a well-known platform that organizes and dissem-inates cultural heritage information (without using mobile servicesfor conversation recording). Finally, we distributed the appropriatequestionnaire and gave students enough time to answer the ques-tions according to their experience.As an assessment tool we chose to work with questionnairesbased on the Likert scale[4]. We used the typical ﬁve-level Likertscale consisting of ﬁve available answers in each question: StronglyAgree (5), Agree (4), Neither Agree nor Disagree (3), Disagree (2),Strongly Disagree (1). For the last question concerning the24 Z. Koukopoulos, D. Koukopoulos / Applied Computing and Informatics 15 (2019) 19–26comparison between the proposed system and Europeana weasked the students to simply choose one of the two systems. Forthe data analysis, we followed the methodology of assessing ques-tionnaire data proposed in[14]and calculated the mean and pop-ulation standard deviation of the answers to each questiondrawing conclusions.4.2. Results and discussionTable 1displays the results from the analysis of studentanswers to the distributed questionnaires. The calculated Cron-bach’s alpha measure concerning the reliability of the question-naire produced an acceptable value of 0,75.Evaluation results reveal that the integration of features fromlearning objects theory to the proposed platform was successful.Students comprehended the independent, reusable and improv-able nature of educational content while they remained positivelysceptical about items’ ability to be aggregated in collections withcommon semantic content. Students’ answers about the integra-tion of mobile devices are moderately positive. The platformappears to achieve the goals of collaborative learning and activestudent participation. The notable dispersion of answers suggeststhat even though the majority of students comprehended studentcollaboration services well, a small percentage of students remainsskeptical and aspires for more efﬁcient collaboration services.Finally, students evaluated platform’s use as an educational toolvery positively without many variations and they would like touse platform services during a course’s educational procedure.Attempting a rough comparison of the proposed platform withEuropeana, we asked students which of the two platforms theywould prefer to use as an educational tool. Our purpose was toget an indication of the acceptance that the proposed platformhad as an educational tool in comparison to an established culturalheritage platform like Europeana that collects and disseminatesEuropean originated cultural heritage content. Europeana has aclear educational role offering students the capability to view cul-tural collections and search for speciﬁc tangible or intangible cul-tural content. Furthermore, Europeana periodically asks from thepublic to contribute cultural heritage information in speciﬁc ﬁelds.Comparison results between the proposed system and Europeana(Table 2) revealed that students evaluate both systems almostequally with respect to their educational usage, but favor the pro-posed system slightly better with 7 students preferring it instead ofEuropeana. Even if this comparison is not an analytical one, it givesa ﬁrst glimpse of the successful integration of educational servicesto the proposed platform.Overall, the platform seems to accomplish its design goalswhich included the integration of characteristics from speciﬁc edu-cational theories. Students found platform content, services andmodules rather compliant with the main characteristics of learningobjects, mobile learning and collaborative learning theories. Lastbut not least, students would be eager to use the proposed plat-form as a main part of the educational procedure and stronglycomprehended its educational strength.5. ConclusionsIn this work we designed and implemented a uniﬁed educa-tional platform, which manages to incorporate the main character-istics of learning objects, collaborative learning and mobile learningtheories beneﬁting both teachers and students. Teachers can usethe platform to present relevant information, upload content, cre-ate projects, urge students to complete learning tasks individuallyor in small teams and perform teaching sessions outside the class-room. Students can use platform’s interactive services to contributeprimitive or existing cultural content and collaborate in teams withother students to complete educational tasks. Platform can be thestarting point for students searching information about a speciﬁctopic. The platform supports seamless learning providing a mobileapplication that allows students to capture and annotate culturalheritage educational content in real-time outside the classroomand engage in discussions about it with their teacher. Also, teachersand students can create reusable, independent, aggregation-readyand meta-data enrichable cultural heritage educational content.Such content, organized in learning objects based on the LOM Stan-dard, can become available to the broad educational community.The presented evaluation results provide a ﬁrst insight towardsthe acceptance of the proposed platform from the cultural heritageeducational community. As future work we plan to further evaluatethe proposed system acceptability and satisﬁability from studentsin primary and secondary schools. Moreover, we plan to conducta thorough comparison between the proposed platform and Euro-peana addressing the issues of user-friendliness, user satisfactionand personalization in more depth.References
[1]Q. Wang, Design and evaluation of a collaborative learning environment,Comput. Educ. 53 (2009) 1138–1146
. [2] WebQuests. Available at < http://webquest.org/index.php> (Accessed at 26/06/ 2017).[3] Medcgame. Available at < https://www.cnr.it/en/focus/102-18/medcgame-un-gioco-in-rete-per-supportare-attivita-di-classi-gemellate-di-diversi-paesi > (Accessed at 26/06/2017).[4]
R. Likert, A technique for the measurement of attitudes, Arch. Psychol. 140(1932) 1–55
.[5] J. Laister, A. Koubek, 3rd Generation learning platforms requirements andmotivation for collaborative learning, Eur. J. Open, Distance E-Learning, 2001.Available at <http://www.eurodl.org/materials/contrib/2001/icl01/laister.pdf>(Accessed at 04/05/2017).Table 1Qualitative evaluation results.
Question Min Max Mean Std. deviationQ1. Can you use cultural information provided by the proposed platform independently? 3 5 4 0.55 Q2. Can you use cultural information provided by the proposed platform over and over again? 3 5 4.083 0.64 Q3. Can you use cultural information provided by the proposed platform in collections with common semantic content? 2 4 3.25 0.56 Q4. Does the proposed platform allow users to improve each item’s content quality? 2 5 4.083 0.95 Q5. Does the proposed platform integrate effectively mobile technology in educational procedure? 1 5 3.33 1.03 Q6. Do you believe that the proposed platform promotes collaborative learning? 1 5 3.42 0.95 Q7. Do you believe that the proposed platform promotes students’ active participation to the educational procedure? 2 5 3.83 0.99 Q8. How could you evaluate the proposed platform as an educational tool? 3 5 4 0.71 Q9. Would you positively see the integration of platform’s services into a course’s educational procedure? 3 5 4 0.58
Table 2Rough comparison of the proposed platform and Europeana.
Question Proposed platformEuropeanaQ1. Do you prefer the use of the proposed platform orEuropeana during educational procedure? 75Z. Koukopoulos, D. Koukopoulos / Applied Computing and Informatics 15 (2019) 19–26 25[6]X. Chen, J. Choi, Designing collaborative location-aware platform for historylearning, J. Educ. Technol. Develop. Exchange 3 (2010) 13–26
. [7] K. Uotila, I. Huvila, J.-P. Paalassalo, Learning, access and moBility in culturalheritage education: developments, lessons and ﬁndings from the project, in:38th Conference on Computer Applications and Quantitative Methods inArchaeology Granada, Spain, 2010, pp. 423–426.[8]
J. Purday, Think culture: Europeana.eu from concept to construction, Electron.Libr. 27 (2009) 919–937
.[9]
M. Gail Jones, L. Brader-Araje, The impact of constructivism on education:language, Discour., Mean., Am. Commun. J. 5 (2002) 1–10
. [10]
R. McGreal, Online education using learning objects, Routledge, New York NY,2004
.[11] A. Kukulska-Hulme, J. Traxler, Mobile Learning: A Handbook for Educators andTrainers, Routledge London and New York, 2005.[12]
Y. Park, A pedagogical framework for mobile learning: categorizingeducational applications of mobile technologies into four types, Int. Rev. Res.Open Distrib. Learn. 12 (2011) 78–102
. [13]
R. Mayer, R. Moreno, Aids to computer-based multimedia learning, Learn.Instruct. 12 (2002) 107–119
. [14]
S. Gorard, Revisiting a 90-year-old debate: the advantages of the meandeviation, Brit. J. Educ. Stud. 53 (2005) 417–430
. [15]
B. Gan, T. Menkhoff, R. Smith, Enhancing students’ learning process throughinteractive digital media: New opportunities for collaborative learning,Comput. Hum. Behav. 51 (2015) 652–663
. [16]
M.R. Gruber, The role of e-learning in arts and cultural heritage education, in:V. Hornung-Prähauser, M. Luckmann (Eds.), Creativity and InnovationCompetencies in the Web, EduMedia Fachtagung, 2009, pp. 343–350
. [17] V. Ferrara, A. Macchia, S. Sapia, F. Lella, Sharing and reuse of museum objects inlearning environments, in: N. Proctor, R. Cherry, Museums and the Web 2013,2014, MD, Silver Spring[18]
Y.-T. Sung, K.-E. Chang, T.-C. Liu, The effects of integrating mobile devices withteaching and learning on students’ learning performance: a meta-analysis andresearch synthesis, Comput. Educ. 94 (2016) 252–275
. [19]
M. Sarrab, M. Elbasir, S. Alnaeli, Towards a quality model of technical aspectsfor mobile learning services: an empirical investigation, Comput. Hum. Behav.55 (2016) 100–112
.[20]
M.G. Domingo, A.B. Garganté, Exploring the use of educational technology inprimary education: teachers’ perception of mobile technology learningimpacts and applications’ use in the classroom, Comput. Hum. Behav. 56(2016) 21–28
.[21]C. Crisan, S. Lerman, P. Winbourne, Mathematics and ICT: a framework forconceptualizing secondary school mathematics teachers’ classroom practices,Technol., Pedag. Educ. 16 (2007) 21–39
. [22] G. Magro, J. Ramos de Carvalho, M. J. Marcelino, Improving history learningthrough cultural heritage, local history and technology, in: 10th InternationalConference on Mobile Learning, Madrid, Spain, 2014, pp. 34–40.[23]
F.A. Dorca, R.D. Araujo, V.C. de Carvalho, D.T. Resende, R.G. Cattelan, Anautomatic and dynamic approach for personalized recommendation oflearning objects considering students learning styles: an experimentalanalysis, Inform. Educ. 15 (2016) 45–62
. [24]
Z.L. Berge, L.Y. Muilenburg, Handbook of Mobile Learning, Routledge, NewYork, 2013
.[25]
A. Goldberg, Computer-assisted instruction: the application of theorem-proving to adaptive response analysis, ACM SIGCUE Outlook 7 (1973)
. [26]
H. Tüzün, M. Yılmaz-Soylu, T. Karakus /C223,Y . _Inalb, G. Kızılkay, Comput. Educ. 52 (2009) 68–77
.[27]
R. Sutherland, V. Armstrong, S. Barnes, R. Brawn, N. Breeze, M. Gall, S.Matthewman, F. Olivero, A. Taylor, P. Triggs, J. Wishart, P. John, Transformingteaching and learning: embedding ICT into everyday classroom practices, J.Comput. Assist. Learn. 20 (2004) 413–425
. [28] IMS Global Learning Consortium, IMS meta-data best practice guide for IEEE1484.12.1-2002 standard for learning object metadata version 1.3 ﬁnalspeciﬁcation. Available at: < https://www.imsglobal.org/metadata/mdv1p3/ imsmd_bestv1p3.html>. [29] M. Nilsson, M. Palmér, ImseVimse: The IMS Editor Vimse, 2002. RetrievedAugust 14, 2004 from <http://kmr.nada.kth.se/imsevimse> . [30] KOM, LOM-Editor Version 1.0, Technische Universität Darmstadt, 2001.Retrieved August 20, 2004 from < http://www.multibook.de/lom/en/index. html>.[31]
E. Chryssaﬁdou, S. Sotiriou, P. Koulouris, M. Stratakis, A. Miliarakis, M. Barajas,M. Milrad, D. Spikol, Developing tools that support effective mobile and gamebased learning: the COLLAGE platform, in: S. Caballe, F. Xhafa, T. Daradoumis,A. Juan (Eds.), Architectures for Distributed and Complex M-Learning Systems:Applying Intelligent Technologies, IGI Global, 2010, pp. 1–34
. [32]
D. Malandrino, I. Manno, G. Palmieri, V. Scarano, A tailorable infrastructure toenhance mobile seamless learning, IEEE Trans. Learn. Technol. 8 (2015) 18–30
. [33]
M. Ott, F. Pozzi, Towards a new era for Cultural Heritage Education: Discussingthe role of ICT, Comput. Hum. Behav. 27 (2011) 1365–1371
. [34]
J. Falk, L. Dierking, Learning From Museums: Visitor Experiences and theMaking of Meaning, Altamira, Walnut Creek, CA, 2000
.26 Z. Koukopoulos, D. Koukopoulos / Applied Computing and Informatics 15 (2019) 19–26