ORIGINAL ARTICLE
Knowledge representation for an eﬃcient re-useof project memory
Smain Bekhtia,*, Nada Mattab,1, Chaker Djaizc,2
aCollege of Computer Science and Information Systems, Imam University, Riyadh 11681,P.O. Box 84880, Saudi Arabia
bTech-CICO, Universite´de Technologie de Troyes, 12 rue Marie Curie, BP 2060, 10010 Troyes Cedex, France
cCadesisCorp., 142-176 Avenue de Stalingrad, Parc Technologique des fosse ´s Jean, Bat 5, 92700 Colombes, FranceReceived 21 October 2010; accepted 18 January 2011
Available online 27 May 2011
KEYWORDSProject memory;Knowledge re-use;Knowledge manage-ment;Knowledge represen-tation;Conceptual graphs;CoreseAbstractKnowledge sharing in general and contextual access to knowledge inparticular, still represent a key challenge in knowledge management framework.Researchers on semantic web and human machine interface study techniques toenhance this access. For instance, in semantic web, information retrieval is basedon domain ontology. In human machine interface, keeping track of user’s activ-ity provides some elements of the context that can guide the access to informa-tion. We suggest an approach based on these two key guidelines, while avoidingsome of their weaknesses. The approach permits a representation of both thecontext and the design rationale of a project for an efﬁcient access to knowledge.In fact, the method consists of an information retrieval environment that, in theone hand, can infer knowledge, modeled as a semantic network, and on the otherhand, is based on the context and the objectives of a speciﬁc activity (the design).The environment we deﬁned can also be used to gather similar project elements
2210-8327ª2011 King Saud University. Productionand hosting by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.Peer review under responsibility of King SaudUniversity.doi:10.1016/j.aci.2011.05.004
Production and hosting by Elsevier*Corresponding author. Tel.: +966 55 9104761; fax: +966 1 2591616.E-mail addresses:sbekhti@imamu.edu.sa(S. Bekhti),Nada.Matta@utt.fr(N. Matta),cdjaiz@cadesis.com (C. Djaiz).
1Tel.: +33 3 25 71 58 65.
2Tel.: +33 1 56 83 70 00.Applied Computing and Informatics (2011) 9, 119–135
King Saud University
Applied Computing and Informatics
www.ksu.edu.sawww.sciencedirect.com
in order to build classiﬁcations of tasks, problems, arguments, etc. produced in acompany. These classiﬁcations can show the evolution of design strategies in thecompany.
ª2011 King Saud University. Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
1. IntroductionKnowledge sharing is still a main problem to deal with in organizations.Although, studies in semantic web and human machine interface provide tech-niques to enable a better access to information, these techniques are not sufﬁcientin terms of allowing a contextual access according to user needs. In fact, in thesemantic web framework (Berners-Lee et al., 2001), the information access isguided by the ontology of the user domain. However this type of ontology is builtas a consensual concept deﬁnition of the domain. Therefore, it can be consideredas a reference of the concepts used in a given domain while any user generally hasher/his own representation of the domain, which is more or less close to domainontology. Moreover, the structure of the domain ontology is usually providedby a knowledge engineer who introduces her/his own representation to build thisontology.In the context of knowledge management within companies, there are numerouschallenges in developing effective corporate memories, including problems in assetcapture, representation, retrieval, and reuse (Hilbert et al., 2006). Besides, user activity evolves over the time and, subsequently, her/his information requirementchanges according to the context of her/his activity. Several works on humanmachine interface (Jing et al., 2002) study the way to keep track of user activityin order to offer a personalized information retrieval. Studies in ergonomics provethat information about the objectives and the environment of an activity are essen-tial for a better understanding and an accurate representation of that activity.In our approach, the above important aspects are taken into account. We focuson the designer activity, in which, tasks and activities can provide relevant infor-mation about the objectives of the designer activity. We deﬁned methods andstructures for a construction of a memory of design projects focusing, particularly,on the two parts that we consider as essential in such category of projects: the pro-ject context and the design rationale (Bekhti and Matta, 2003). The produced pro- ject memory can be considered as a referential resource in an organization. Thisresource is structured not only as a domain ontology, providing links to relevantdocuments, but also as a semantic network accurately linking up concepts consti-tuting the project context and the design rationale. The information retrieval pro-cedure is based on semantic relations between these concepts and can, hence, offera contextual information access. We used conceptual graphs to represent conceptsin a design project as a semantic network structure. We used ‘‘Corese’’ ( Corby and Faron-Zucker, 2002) as an information retrieval tool as a semantic search engine.120 S. Bekhti et al.This tool uses conceptual graphs along with RDF and XML formalisms in orderto offer a deep and semantic information retrieval.The rest of this paper describes, in its second and third sections, the designedstructures of project memory and a suggested approach that enables the captureand representation of knowledge used and produced during design project. Section4 argues the need of contextual information retrieval in design. Section 5 describeshow a project memory has been represented using conceptual graphs and RDFformalisms. Information retrieval as carried out with Corese (Section 6) isbased on the relation between the constructed conceptual graph and its RDFrepresentation.2. Project memoryInDieng-Kuntz-Kuntz et al. (2001)deﬁnes knowledge management cycle as beingcomposed of the following stages: clariﬁcation, broadcasting and reuse. Manyinvestigations have presented the corporate memory as a signiﬁcant support forknowledge management. A corporate memory is an ‘‘explicit representation ofpertinent knowledge of an organization’’ (VanHeijst et al., 1997). This memory,elucidating the organizational knowledge (also called collective knowledge), maybe considered as a knowledge asset of the organization. Such knowledge assetcan be speciﬁc to a project and so be called project memory. A project memorycan be deﬁned as ‘‘a representation of the experience acquired during projects real-ization’’ (Matta et al., 2000). This experience includes knowledge used and pro-duced during the project realization. Beside this, representing project contextcan be crucial in terms of understanding the circumstances of decision makingand problems solving.Therefore, we consider the structure of project memory as being constituted ofthe following parts (Fig. 1):/C15The project organization: teams, members, tasks, roles, competencies, etc./C15Resources and constraints: rules, methods, directives, time, budget, etc./C15Project realization: problem solving (problem deﬁnition, suggestions, and deci-sion), solution evaluation (arguments, criteria), etc./C15Project goals and objectives.Relations between the above elements must also be represented. These relationshave different sorts of inﬂuence on the decision making process and may be ofgreat importance for the design rationale understanding.3. Knowledge acquisition and representation in project memoryWe deﬁned an approach that permits the capture and the representation of usedand produced knowledge during project realization. This approach consists, onKnowledge representation for an efﬁcient re-use of project memory 121the one hand, of two main steps: direct transcription and content structuring and,on the other hand, of project context extraction from the tools and the environ-ment of projects (process, organization, etc.).3.1. Direct transcriptionThe ﬁrst stage of our approach consists of a form-based transcription. Theseforms help to record and classify basic elements of a design problem discussion.That is, elements like problems, argumentation and decision. These forms canbe used to record, in a structured and prompt way, all the information elementsthat can be collected during a design problem solving discussion. The goal is toenable a real time structured transcription of the discussion during design meet-ings. The structure of these forms (Fig. 2) permits to distinguish the key elementsof the discussed problem and to classify participants’ arguments along with theirpossible suggestions.3.2. Content structuringThe principal objective of the content structuring is to enable an intelligent accessto knowledge represented in the project memory. Our idea is to make possible aﬂexible access to the project memory according to several viewpoints. This formof access is described in the information retrieval section of this paper. The secondstage of our approach consists of a structuring based on a cognitive analysis of theProblem/DecisionEvolve
ArgumentSupport/Oppose
Suggestion
GenerateDecisionLead toSupport/ Oppose Lead toDiscussHave as solution 
CriterionRelate toRelate to
Project MemberProvideProvideTask GenerateGenerate
Role Constraint Consider 
ConsiderBelong to 
Have
Resource Competency/SkillPossess Need 
Possess
DivisionBelong to
Figure 1Project memory structure (Bekhti and Matta, 2003).122 S. Bekhti et al.forms ﬁlled out during the direct transcription. We were inspired by the ap-proaches of design rationale representation (Karsenty, 1996; Buckingham, 1997;Klein,1993) to deﬁne a structure of representation, putting ahead elements ofinﬂuence in a negotiation/discussion, such as arguments, criteria of justiﬁcationand suggestions (Fig. 3).Notes are initially grouped by participants (members) who, during the meeting,are identiﬁed either by their names or by their visual aspects. In fact, the directtranscription that we propose follows, on the one hand, the traditional methodsof notes taking during meetings and permits, on the other hand, a model-basedinformation structuring. This transcription can easily be realized by a meetingssecretary. No deep analysis is required in this type of transcription. Note also thata chronological recording of the design rationale is supported by this method oftranscription.The selection of criteria is guided by a classiﬁcation of common design argu-ments types (Fig. 4). The method we propose can be compared to meetings report-ing where the direct transcription is similar to notes taking and the structuring tosummary reporting.However, in our case, the transcription is guided by model-based forms. Theresult is richer and reﬂects a more comprehensive knowledge-oriented memoryof the design rationale and the decision-making process.One of our key suggested ideas is to integrate the traceability procedure in theprocess of projects realization itself. This implicates a slight change in projectstructures and organization and permits the capture of knowledge during the pro-ject realization and not afterwards. This aspect is very important as the knowledgethat emerges during any project realization is volatile and can hardly be reconsti-tuted after the project is over.In order to guarantee an accurate representation of knowledge essentially impli-cated in the design rationale, a validation meeting must be held with some projectkey members who have got a global vision of the project (for example, the projectPart of the discussed Problem/Decision 
Project member
-Argument(s) -Suggestion(s) 
Decision
- Hold - Modification - Elimination -C r e a t i o nNew version of the 
solution
Lead to a Decision AdvocateTrigger
Figure 2Structure of the form used for the direct transcription of design discussion.Knowledge representation for an efﬁcient re-use of project memory 123manager). This kind of meeting can be held after a number of project phases andat the end of the project realization. This makes possible to reformulate the argu-ments, the suggestions and the criteria and to re-examine their classiﬁcation. Thestructure of the memory encourages the project members to explicitly express theirknowledge, enriching by that the contents of the memory.SuggestionArgument
Criterion: Required Resources List competences that the company must have in order to perform the evaluation (Member3)
Contextualization of the principles according to each company. (Member6)
Allowing the possibility of having recourse to an external treatment.  (Member1)Control ERP: Companies must remain Masters of the decisions to take to control the risk after the evaluation. (Member1)
Nominating an ERP guarantor in the company.  (Member1) Hold 
 Modification of “Autonomyprinciple”  
 Elimination 
 Creation of “Adaptability Principle” DecisionDiscussed Problem/Decision ERP and “Autonomy principle” 
Version 3.0
Figure 3An example of a form used for the design rationale structuring during a project memory deﬁnition.
Figure 4Criteria tree representing a typology of design problems ( Matta, 2000).124 S. Bekhti et al.3.3. Logic of the structuring formThe structure represents the logic of discussion. Participants (project members)discuss each part of the problem by expressing their opinions supported by argu-ments. The participants can also provide suggestions concerning the design prob-lem. The collection of arguments and suggestions allows the team to take adecision concerning a part of a problem. Thus, the part of the problem is eithertotally solved or will be discussed again in the same manner and will go throughthe same cycle. This enables to see the evolution of this element during the prob-lem solving process until its ﬁnal version.In the structure, the arguments are classiﬁed according to their types or natures.Each argument or suggestion is related to the member who emitted it. The factthat the competencies and the role of each member are indicated permits to seethe relation that may exist between the contributions (arguments and suggestions)of the participants and their competencies and skills. This is essential for a prob-lem solving context comprehension.3.3.1. Elements of the structure3.3.1.1. Problem/decision.The global problem discussed during design meetings issplit into sub-problems or elements of problem. This permits to represent these ele-ments of discussion through the different phases, connect them and elucidate theevolution of each of them during the project completion.3.3.1.2. Arguments.One of the most signiﬁcant elements of any negotiation is theargumentation. In our approach the argumentation is an essential element of therepresentative structure since it is the origin and the cause of the evolution of thediscussion of the problem and consequently of the decision-taking.3.3.1.3. Suggestions.The arguments advanced by the speakers during meetingsoften lead them to present their own suggestions concerning a given part of thediscussed problem; we envisaged in the model a space for suggestions of projectmembers (participants). The suggestions are linked to the arguments and the par-ticipants who emitted them.3.3.1.4. Project members/participants.The representation of the participants in thestructure is important; it permits to bind the arguments and suggestions to theiremitters. Each participant is characterized, primarily, by his competencies/skillsand his role in the project (see context). This permits to clearly understand the lo-gic and the reasoning of the members and the motives of their opinions.3.3.1.5. Criteria.Arguments and suggestions are classiﬁed according to some de-ﬁned criteria. Theses criteria have been gathered from several previous studiesKnowledge representation for an efﬁcient re-use of project memory 125of classiﬁcation of common types of design arguments ( Matta, 2000; Brown and Berker,2000).4. Knowledge re-use and designers needsDesigners need to learn from previous experiences in order to ﬁnd out how to dealwith new problems in their activities. They generally are in a situation of handlingdesigns of new products and need information about similar design situations.Their needs are essentially focused on different elements of past design projects(types of problems, decisions, constraints, arguments, criteria, etc.). The structuredeﬁned inFig. 1can help in this special form of information retrieval. The infor-mation retrieval process can be guided not only by classiﬁcations of problems,projects, etc. but by similarity between project descriptions. Relations betweenproject elements must play an important role in this information retrieval process.For instance, designers may need to know why a given suggestion has not beenconsidered (rejected), who decided that, under which constraints, having which re-sources, competencies, which other suggestion has been approved instead, etc.For that precise reason, we propose to represent project memory as a semanticnetwork and to use semantic inference engine to conduct the information retrievalprocess. The resulting memory is not a simple list of documents or parts of doc-uments but a network presenting on the one hand, the relations between projectelements and on the other hand, pointing the relevant documents. Designers cantherefore have a contextual information retrieval that can be very useful in theirdesign activity.5. Information retrieval based on semantic relationsIndexing documents can either be simple using metadata and keywords (currentlyrecommended in HTML documents) or complex using semantic networks andontology (defended by semantic web) (Martin, 1995). Semantic Networks have shown a great ability in terms of information structuring and information retrie-val. (Steyvers and Tenenbaum, 2005) demonstrated that developing search and re-trieval algorithms that exploit the large-scale structures of semantic networks islikely to be a project of great promise, for both cognitive science research andinformation retrieval applications.We choose conceptual graphs to represent our semantic network. Conceptualgraphs are a formalism that offers a highest structure of the semantic relations be-tween concepts (Chein and Mugnier, 1992). In this formalism, there are a numberof inference functions (Sowa, 1984) that helps in information retrieval. We partic-ularly note projection, joint, generalization and specialization functions. This for-malism has been used and validated in numerous applications and its effectivenessis now commonly approved.126 S. Bekhti et al.Moreover, the structure of conceptual graphs (especially support and graphs) isclose to RDF (Resource Framework Description) and RDFs (Resource Frame-work Description Schema). Thus, it can easily be translated to RDF and XMLrespecting semantic web recommendations (RDFS, 2004). This connection be- tween conceptual graphs, RDF and XML can provide a number of speciﬁc func-tions that give more power for information retrieval. The Corese search enginedeveloped at INRIA (Corby et al., 2000) is based on this principle.5.1. Corese: a semantic search engineThe Corese search engine (Corby and Faron-Zucker, 2002) is dedicated to the que- rying of corporate semantic webs in which documents are described through RDFannotations. Corese interprets RDF metadata in the conceptual graphs model inorder to exploit the inference capabilities of this formalism. The RDFS ( RDFS, 2004) and conceptual graphs models share many common features and a mappingcan easily be established between RDFS and a large subset of the conceptualgraphs model. The information retrieval in Corese is based on this mapping. Infact, the Corese query language is RDF with addition of some extra conventionsintroducing variables and operators. An RDF query statement is interpreted as aconceptual graph query and is processed by a conceptual projection of the queryon the annotation graphs. Therefore, Corese enables to process information
Figure 5DyPKM interface.Knowledge representation for an efﬁcient re-use of project memory 127retrieval queries on the data (content) as well as on the schema (the structure of theproject memory).5.2. Representation of project memoryKnowledge captured from design projects is structured in XML ﬁles. In fact, as weexplained in the knowledge acquisition method above, a project secretary, cankeep track of the knowledge from the context and the decision meetings of a de-sign project. She/he uses a tool (DyPKM) (Bekhti and Matta, 2003) that generates an XML ﬁle. The tool, the secretary uses, helps to classify concepts like sugges-tions, arguments, problems, participants, etc. and to establish semantic relationsbetween these concepts. DyPKM interfaces are designed to clearly display classi-ﬁcation trees of design problems. That is, identifying from project members ex-changes: suggestions and arguments concerning a given design problem, relatedcriteria but also grouping arguments, suggestions, tasks, etc. by design decisions(Fig. 5).Structures and content are transformed to an XML document ( Fig. 6). An XSL ﬁle is deﬁned in order to generate a related RDF ﬁle ( Fig. 7). These two ﬁles are then integrated in the knowledge base of Corese in order to assure an efﬁcientsearch process.
Figure 6The generated XML ﬁle.128 S. Bekhti et al.6. Knowledge re-use: project information retrieval using CoreseThe structure of the project memory (Fig. 1) is implemented using RDF schema(Fig. 8). Corese inference engine explores this schema in order to retrieve informa-tion from RDF ﬁles. These RDF ﬁles form a knowledge base of the representeddesign project. We illustrate in the following two examples the way informationretrieval within a project memory is performed.The ﬁrst example shows how Corese engine can perform an exploration searchand return all the requested concepts. The second example shows how the infer-ence engine can be used to do a deep search and retrieve concepts that are not di-rectly linked.6.1. Example of an exploration-like information retrievalWhen a designer deals with a problem, he/she needs to know, for instance, if thisproblem has been solved in any previous similar projects and how. His request can
Figure 7The translated RDF ﬁle.Knowledge representation for an efﬁcient re-use of project memory 129be formulated as follows: ‘‘Which suggestions supported by which arguments wereprovided to solve a given design problem? And what were the criteria that thesearguments and suggestions related to?’’To start, this query is translated to an RDF request ( Fig. 9) according to our RDFS representation. Then, it is projected on a conceptual graph:RDFﬁCGﬁRDF (Fig. 10). This RDF query is then interpreted by the Coreseengine as a conceptual graph query. The result is obtained using conceptual graphgeneralizations functions and exploiting RDF ﬁles. Display of the RDF results ismade more user-friendly using an XSLT formatting data sheet ( Fig. 11).
Figure 8The structure of project memory presented as a RDF schema.130 S. Bekhti et al.This exploration search can highlight connected concepts according to certainconceptual relations.According to the RDF ﬁle, the result is:PB2: ERP focusCriteria 123:TerminologyArgument 342: Evaluation perimeter is not clear.Argument 10: Evaluation perimeter in paragraph 3 is not in correlation with thetext.Suggestion 11: Use ‘‘intervention ﬁeld’’ instead of ‘‘evaluation perimeter’’.Criteria 13:Exhaustiveness.Argument 32: The company chief has to inform employees about the state ofthe evaluation.
Figure 9The RDF query.
Figure 10The request in the conceptual graph formalism.Knowledge representation for an efﬁcient re-use of project memory 131Suggestion 11: Emphasis the role of the company chief in the evaluationprocess.
Figure 11The query result for an exploration search.
Figure 13The query result of a deep information retrieval.Proble m/Decision
Argument
ProjectMember Suggestion
Criterion Competency/SkillEvolve
Support/Oppose
GenerateProvide
ProvideHave asSolutionDiscuss
Relate toRelate to Possess
Figure 12Part of the project memory structure used in the second query example.132 S. Bekhti et al.6.2. Example of a deeply Information retrievalA designer may also need to know what are the skills or competencies that contrib-uted to solve a design problem in a previous design project and which argumenta-tion criteria were considered? The particularity of this query is that these concepts(design problems and competencies), are not directly linked in the project memorystructure (Fig. 1). In fact, there is a direct relation between a design problem andthe related suggestions and arguments. Arguments and suggestions have directlinks to corresponding criteria. There is also a link between arguments, suggestionsand participants who emitted them. Concepts like skills or competencies of eachproject member are represented in the structure and linked to the related member(Fig. 12).Corese engine performs an approximate projection that is based on a joint rela-tion in order to build a meta-relation between the given concepts. Accordingly,Corese engine infers unlinked documents or linked by transitivity documents.The given results are always an RDF ﬁle (Fig. 13).The obtained result is:PB2: ERP focusCriteria 123:TerminologyCompetency 13:Consulting7. ConclusionDesigners need to learn from past design projects in order to deal with new designproblems. They want to know, for instance, how similar problems were solved inthe past, with which resources, using which solutions and under which conditions.A structured project memory representing inﬂuence relations between problems,suggestions, arguments, criteria, project members and their competencies, tasks,etc. provides a useful traceability of knowledge used and produced during the real-ization of design project. These structures also show the relations between the con-text of the project (organizations and environment) and the element of the designrationale. Information retrieval process can use these relations in order to providea contextual search for required information. This paper shows how this type ofconceptual relations can be useful for information retrieval. In fact, we explainedhow a semantic network (represented as a conceptual graph) can provide a contex-tual and efﬁcient information retrieval. Corese, a semantic search engine tool, hasbeen used to perform the information retrieval process. Corese creates a mappingbetween RDF and conceptual graphs to offer a deep information retrieval. Thesearch process is based not only on a specialization (as commonly used in ontol-ogy) but also on knowledge representation inference through relations betweenconcepts. The results help designer to understand design problems and in previousKnowledge representation for an efﬁcient re-use of project memory 133projects and how they have been solved. This makes project memory very useful interms of learning from previous experiences.Examples presented in this paper are extracted from a design project of profes-sional safety evaluation rules (Bekhti and Matta, 2003). DyPKM and Corese have to be validated on other design projects. We also plan to deﬁne a graphical inter-face to display results as graphs or trees, clearly illustrating the relations betweenthe elements of design project.Finally, the environment we deﬁned can also be used to gather elements of sim-ilar design projects in order to build a global classiﬁcation of tasks, problems,arguments, etc. produced in a company. These classiﬁcations can show the evolu-tion of design strategies in the company.References
Bekhti, S., Matta, N., 2003. Project memory: an approach of modelling and reusing the context and the de designrationale. In: Proceedings of IJCAI’03 (International Joint of Conferences of Artiﬁcial Intelligence),Workshop on Knowledge Management and Organisational Memory, Accapulco.Berners-Lee, T., Hendler, J., Lassila, O., 2001. The semantic web. Scientiﬁc American.Brickley Dan, Guha, R.V. (Eds.), 2004. RDF Vocabulary Description Language 1.0: RDF Schema W3CRecommendation.Brown, D.C., Berker, I., 2000. Modeling Conﬂicts Between Agents in A Design Context, ComputationalConﬂicts, Conﬂicts Modeling for Distributed Intelligent System. Springer, pp. 144–164.Buckingham, S., 1997. Representing hard-to-formalise, contextualised, multidisciplinary, organisational knowl-edge. In: Proceedings of AAI Spring Symposium on Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Knowledge Management, pp. 9–16.Chein, M., Mugnier, M.L., 1992. Specialization: Where do the difﬁculties occur? In: Proceeding of the SeventhAnnual Workshop on Conceptual Structures, Las cruces, New Mexico.Corby, O., Faron-Zucker, C., 2002. Corese: a corporate semantic web engine. In: Workshop on Real World RDFand Semantic Web Applications 11th International World Wide Web Conference, Hawaii.Corby, O., Dieng, R., Faron-Zucker, C., 2000. Querying the Semantic Web with Corese Search Engine,Prestigious Applications of Intelligent Systems PAIS. ECAI, Valencia.Dieng-Kuntz-Kuntz, R., Corby, O., Gandon, F., Giboin, A., Golebiowska, J., Matta, N., Ribie `re, M., 2001. Me´thodes et outils pour la gestion des connaissances, 2eme ed. Dunod e ´diteur. Hilbert, D., Billsus, D., Denoue, L., 2006. Seamless capture and discovery for corporate memory .In: The 15th International World Wide Web Conference (WWW2006).Jing, Y., Taylor, N., Brown, K., 2002. An intelligent inference approach to user interaction modelling in a genericagent based interface system. In: Proceedings of ECAI2002 (European Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence),July, Lyon.Karsenty, L., 1996. An empirical evaluation of design rationale documents. In: Proceedings of the Conference onHuman Factors in Computing Systems. Vancouver.Klein, M., 1993. Capturing design rationale in concurrent engineering teams. IEEE, Computer Support forConcurrent Engineering.Martin, M., 1995. Links between electronic documents and a knowledge base of conceptual graphs. In:Proceedings of the International Conference on Conceptual Structures of ICCS.Matta, N., 2000. Conﬂict management in concurrent engineering: modelling guides. In: Computational Conﬂicts:Conﬂict Modeling for Distributed Intelligent Systems, with Contributions by Numerous Experts. Springer.Matta, N., Ribie`re, M., Corby, O., Lewkowicz, M., Zacklad, M., 2000. Project memory in design. In: RajkumarRoy, (Ed.), Industrial Knowledge Management – A Micro Level Approach, Springer-Verlag.Sowa, L., 1984. Conceptual Structures: Information Processing in Mind and Machine. Addison-Wesley, Reading,MA.Steyvers, M., Tenenbaum, J., 2005. The large-scale structure of semantic networks: statistical analyses and amodel of semantic growth. Cognitive Science 29, 41–78.134 S. Bekhti et al.Van Heijst, G., Schreiber, A., Wielinga, B., 1997. Using explicit ontologies in KBS development. InternationalJournal of Human Computer Studies 46.Knowledge representation for an efﬁcient re-use of project memory 135