Learning Interpersonal Stance in Voice
Daniel Formoloa,*, Tibor Bosseb
aVrije Universiteit, Amsterdam, the Netherlands
bRadboud University Nijmegen, Nijmegen, the Netherlands
ARTICLE INFO
Keywords:Interpersonal stancesTrainingSerious gamesClassiﬁcation algorithmABSTRACT
This work presents a simulation-based training application to enhance people ’s ability to express interpersonal stance using their voice. The results show that the application helps people to learn the principles of Leary ’s interpersonal stance theory, and distinguish between the eight basic stances. Nevertheless, it remains dif ﬁcult for people to express them without mixing the categories. Although the increase was small, the training applicationimproved the users performance in expressing interpersonal stance in their voices after three days of training. Theresults also indicate that one of the main barriers of the learning process is that people need time to incorporate orreﬁne interpersonal stances.
1. IntroductionWe live in an interconnected world where people are in constantcontact with each other. Consequently, the communication style we as-sume in front of others is relevant to build positive bonds and betterrelations. How we show ourselves to others is commonly known asinterpersonal stance. Moreover, the style adopted in each situation has animpact on the behaviour and stances of others [ 7]. There are many def- initions of interpersonal stance. According to Ref. [ 2], most of them refer to social components, self-interest and emotional aspects.It is not totally clear how people react to others attitudes. Neverthe-less, an inﬂuential theory that was initially proposed by Timothy Learydeﬁnes eight basic stances that can be performed by humans as well asthe interpersonal dynamics associated with those eight basic stances [ 8]. Knowing how we react to each basic stance is useful to improve our re-lations in our social life and at work.An example applied to work is related to employee-client in-teractions. Typically, the behaviour of staff members can have a bigpositive or negative impact on others. Hence, the outcome of such in-teractions depends on how well the employees master interpersonalcommunication [6]. Another example is described in Ref. [ 10], where Leary’s theory about interpersonal stances is used to train policemen tointerrogate suspects better.Using computers to teach people to gain a better understanding of andperform interpersonal stances is a valuable tool to enhance human re-lations. It can also improve the effectiveness of staff ’s intervention in safety-critical circumstances, for example in law enforcement, as done inRef. [10]o r[9]. Training soft skills in this way can be useful to teachersin classrooms, speakers in interviews or presentations, sellers in negoti-ations, and even to managers in companies to manage teams, avoidingconﬂicts and motivating employees.This work presents a simulation-based training application that aimsto improve people’s awareness of how to communicate interpersonalstances through voice signals. It measures the knowledge gain of peoplein better expressing interpersonal stances and their understanding aboutLeary’s theory after three days of training. It measures the knowledgegain of people in better express interpersonal stances and the under-standing about Leary’s theory. Section2introduces the basic concepts of Leary’s theory and presents other works related to training and inferenceof interpersonal stances. Section3presents the system. In Section4the experiment is described, while Section 5presents the results and Section 6discusses the results and future works.2. Literature reviewAlthough it is a theory, Leary ’s interpersonal stances [8] theory is widely accepted and used in training processes. The theory states that thebehaviour of humans during interpersonal communication can be rep-resented according to a two-dimensional circumplex, as shown in theright side ofFig. 1. The circumplex is deﬁned by the dimensions afﬁlia- tion (positive versus hostile or together versus opposed) and control(dominant versus submissive or above versus below). It can be dividedinto discrete categories in several ways: into two halves (above-below oropposed-together), four quadrants or eight octants (Cooperative,
* Corresponding author.E-mail addresses:d.formolo@vu.nl(D. Formolo),t.bosse@ru.nl(T. Bosse).
Contents lists available atScienceDirect
Array
journal homepage:www.elsevier.com/journals/array/2590-0056/open-access-journal
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.array.2020.100032Received 18 December 2019; Received in revised form 11 May 2020; Accepted 15 May 2020Available online 27 May 20202590-0056/©2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. This is an open access article under the CC BY license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ ).Array 7 (2020) 100032Dependent, Withdrawn, Deﬁant, Aggressive, Competitive, Leading,Helping).When interacting with another person, a person ’s behaviour is assumed to be represented by a point in the circumplex. For instance,above behaviour is typically associated with a dominant attitude inwhich the individual takes the initiative. Moreover, the theory states thatthe stance taken by someone inﬂuences the stance taken by the inter-locutor. For instance, if a person shows above behaviour, the other per-son tends to adopt a submissive stance (and vice versa). Conversely, thestance taken according to the horizontal axis triggers the same stance:together behaviour triggers together behaviour, and opposed behaviourtriggers opposed behaviour [16]. A similar trend occurs in the eight basiccategories, for example, if a person shows a Leading stance, the partnertends to take a Dependent stance. Since the creation of Leary ’s Inter- personal Stances theory, it has been reﬁned [16] and applied to several modalities, such as spoken and written content and non-verbal commu-nication such as facial expressions, body gestures and voice signals. Forall modalities, the categories and their relations are the same.Due to its importance in improving human relations in families and atwork, a number of authors have developed systems to automaticallyrecognise the interpersonal stance (often operationalised via the Inter-personal Circumplex). Chollet et al. [ 3] developed a multi-layer frame- work that combines various multi-modal signals such as gaze, headorientation, facial expression, dialogue sequences and a computationalmodel, to infer interpersonal stance. Although the system covers manymodalities, voice is only addressed in a limited sense (i.e. the system usesthe moment in which the user is speaking rather than speci ﬁc features of the voice).In [1], certain nonverbal signals, in particular, body posture, gesturesand facial expressions, are inputs to measure interpersonal stances, withthe aim of using this in the context of a police interrogation traininggame. The results show that professional actors are better at acting thedifferent stances than non-actors. Furthermore, the authors found that, ingeneral, it is very difﬁcult to act a stance and that observers oftendisagree about which stance is acted. In linguistics, researchers haveexplored interpersonal stances in written and spoken interactions.Ranganath et al. [11] developed a system to detect interpersonalstances in prosody using four classes:ﬂirtatious, friendly, awkward, and assertive. They used prosodic, lexical and dialogue features of non-actedprosody fragments. Several analyses were applied, including genderperformance, comparison of lexical and prosodic features and acombination of them. Support vector machines (SVM) and logisticregression were used to classify the samples into categories. The systemachieved up to 59% accuracy when classifying the stance of new speakers(where the baseline was 48%). Similar to Ranganath et al. s work, weused SVM to classify stances on voice signals. In Ref. [ 4], the algorithm successfully classiﬁed samples into two categories (above-below). InRef. [5], we extended this to eight categories. The results of a generalmodel were not good enough for practical applications; however, indi-vidual models achieved an average accuracy of 81%.Based on the resultsof [4,5], a game to enhance interpersonal skills of elderly was created,with the speciﬁc goal of training them how to prevent doorstep scams. Ituses the same approach of classifying the user ’s voice into Dominant and Submissive attitudes (above-below stances) in combination with seriousgames mechanisms that include several storylines, user feedback andmultiple choice menus [14].The deLearyous project uses natural language processing to classifyfragments of text into the various parts of Leary ’
s Rose [12]. The highest accuracy the authors obtained using four quadrants was 48.1% (by usingan SVM with error-correcting output coding), while for eight octants anaccuracy of 31.3% was obtained (using an SVM multiclass algorithm). Ina more recent work, using unconstrained text, they achieved an accuracyof 55% and 42.6% respectively, despite low F-Scores of 38% and 18.5%[13]. In Ref. [10], the authors analysed turn-taking in conversationsamong policemen and suspects to understand the relation betweenturn-taking and interpersonal stances and then built models of systemsand serious games that include interpersonal stances on turn-taking inconversations.Other works focused on developing systems for training people toimprove their skills in interpersonal stances. In Ref. [ 13], the authors built a simulator-training game to teach interpersonal stances by usingtext inputs. Unfortunately, the accuracy of the system is low, which limitsthe training effect of the game.Linssen et al. [9] developed a serious game to improve socialawareness related to Leary’s theory of interpersonal stances. The gameprovides feedback to the users about how the virtual agents interpret theuser’s stance and what reaction the user sparks in the virtual agent. Noclear improvement in the users interpersonal stance skills was found. Theauthors speculate that the reason for this is that the players were moreadapted to (unconsciously) translating such situations into knowledgewithout explicitly reﬂecting on it.The current work uses individual voice models to train people in
Fig. 1.Simulation-training software interface.D. Formolo, T. Bosse Array 7 (2020) 100032
2understanding Leary’s theory of interpersonal stances. It also focuses onpromoting awareness about the eight basic categories described in thetheory. In the next section, the training application is detailed.3. The systemThe simulation-based training game comprises two parts. The ﬁrst part is the software interface in which the users can record voice samples.The software guides the user to record sentences. It indicates whichsentences have to be spoken and gives some general hints on how toperform them.Based on the recorded samples, unique voice models of each user aregenerated and used in the software interface. The model is built on aserver through an automatic process that uses an SVM algorithm. SeeRef. [4,5] for more details about the backend server, the algorithm, andhow the model is generated.The second part of the software allows users to play a game in whichthey need to apply Leary’s theory, taking into account the voice stylesrecorded in theﬁrst part.Fig. 1shows the software and an example of thegame. The game represents an interaction between the user (blue dot)and a conversation partner (green dot), where the goal of the user is tomove the conversation partner to a target location by effectively usingLeary’s interpersonal stances theory.The software selects a random target stance for each new game. Itguarantees that after eight games, all stances will have been played. InFig. 1, the stance Deﬁant is the target. The blue dot represents the lastidentiﬁed stance performed by the user, while the green dot representsthe current status of the interlocutor, which in this case is simulated bythe computer. The green dot responds in consonance with Leary ’s interpersonal stances theory. It moves incrementally, according toEquation(1)./C26x¼cosðθÞ/C1r=2y¼sinðθÞ/C1r=2 (1)where:θ¼the angle between the x axis and c þ(cn/2) c¼the current coordinates of the blue dot on the circumplexcn¼coordinates in the circumplex of the accuracy of the newinstance played according to the Leary ’s theory r¼radius of the circumplexIn summary, with two precise attempts, one can reach the border ofthe circumplex and if it is the right category, one achieves the goal. Thegoal is positioning the computer status (green dot) into the big greencircle. The user has eight attempts to do that. If the user performs well, intwo attempts he/she achieves the goal. The left window shows someexamples of sentences to be spoken and general hints to guide users onhow to perform each stance.After the button (STEP 2- Training) is pressed, the software recordsthe users voice and sends the fragment to the server. The server is
responsible for classifying the voices stance based on the personal modelof that speciﬁc individual (which was recorded in part 1, and is identi ﬁed by an exclusive hash code). A SVM algorithm running in the serverclassiﬁes the submitted voice fragment and calculates a probability scorefor each category.Subsequently, the software computes the new status of the user, inblue, and of the computer, in green. The whole communication processbetween the software interface and the server lasts less than 5 s. For eachinteraction, the user receives feedback on his/her own stance and thereaction of the computer to it.4. MethodologyThe aim of the experiment is to evaluate whether users increase theirawareness of interpersonal stances and to evaluate whether they canimprove their knowledge of Leary ’s interpersonal stances theory byplaying the simulator-training game.To reach these objectives, this research follows the FEDS Frameworkfor Evaluation in Design Science Research [ 15]. Following the framework and considering the aim of the work, we decided to use a combination ofan Artiﬁcial and a Formative evaluation approach, moving from aFormative to a Summative approach in 3 phases. Arti ﬁcial evaluation refers to a situation when experiments are done in the laboratory, toisolate the system’si nﬂuence on the participants from other factors. Inthis case it was important to avoid other relevant factors that we presentin real world situations, as these might affect the results of the proposedsystem. Before running a broad experiment with a big group, the systemwas tested with 1 and 2 users, respectively. In each of these phases theinteraction with the system was tuned to make it pleasant, intuitive, anddifﬁcult enough to play the game. In Phase 2 the whole experiment wasexecuted as a pilot, toﬁx small unforeseen problems. For example, mis-understandings in the questionnaires and problems with collecting datadue to delay in the system interaction. After that, in phase 3 (Summative)the whole experiment was run with a bigger group of participantswithout further changes or updates.Only the results of phase 4 are reported in this paper. The sampleswere collected from 20 English speakers. Their average age was 28 yearswith a standard deviation of 8.69; 75% was male and 25% female. Fromthis population, 30% were recruited in the university and 70% via thecrowdsourcing platform Proliﬁc. Four of the participants had alreadyused the software several times before the experiment. These participantswill be called experienced participants. Sixteen participants did not haveany experience with the software before the experiment. These partici-pants will be called non-experienced participants.Participants were asked to follow the steps described on the websiteof the experiment and summarised in Fig. 2. First, they watched videos that explain the experiment and Leary ’s interpersonal stances theory. The videos also give general hints about what is expected in each category.Moreover, participants have access to examples of voice fragments foreach category. However, the hints and voice samples only guide them, asthey are free to perform according to their own style. In Phase I, theparticipants were asked to record 15 sentences per category. The soft-ware guided them in which sentences should be spoken and remindingthem about the general hints for each category. The task of recordingsentences is itself part of the training.Then, participants were questioned about their knowledge of Leary ’s
Fig. 2.Overview of the protocol. Tasks of the participants step-by-step.D. Formolo, T. Bosse Array 7 (2020) 100032
3interpersonal stances theory and the eight categories before (question-naire 1) and after the experiment in (questionnaire 2). Table 1shows the three main questions presented in questionnaires 1 and 2. All thesequestions require answers in aﬁve-point Likert scale. Other questions inquestionnaire 1 are related to habits, gender and age, while in ques-tionnaire 2 they focused on user experience with the game and the user ’s impression about the transfer-learning after the experiment. Both ques-tionnaires are accessible at the experiment web-page.
1
After that, a personal model of the users voice was built in the server.If the model did not achieve 70% accuracy, the participant was asked torecord again the categories that are not clear or mixed with others. Notethat the questionnaire 1 is answered only once. This process went on untilthe model achieved 70% accuracy or above. Usually, one extra round ofrecordings was sufﬁcient (30% of participants). In rare cases (10% ofparticipants), a second extra round was required.With the model created, Phase II started. The participants played forthree days with the game described in the previous section. Each day, theparticipants played each category once (in random order). For eachgame, the number of attempts to achieve the goal was intentionally ﬁxed between a minimum of two, to guarantee that at least the participantsreproduced the correct stance more than once, and a maximum of eight.The limit of eight is to guarantee a sufﬁcient number of attempts to reach the goal and at the same time, to not make the game too long, preventingdemotivation. On average, participants took around 2 min to performeight attempts. At the end of each game, a score of the participant ’s performance was shown to give feedback to the participant. The score isbased on the number of attempts to achieve the goal.After the three days of training, participants completed a secondquestionnaire that inquired about their current knowledge of interper-sonal stances and their awareness of the eight basic categories.The dependent variables in the study are related to the performanceof the participants in understanding Leary ’s interpersonal stances theory, selecting the proper stance according to the status of the game and clearlyreproducing it. We do not use the number of attempts to measure theperformance of the participants. Instead, the software measures thepercentage of hits per game (e.g. in a game completed in six attemptswith three hits and three misses, this results in a performance of 50%).The advantage of this approach is that it avoids false positives, when auser still wins a game by acting incorrect categories that are adjacent tothe target category and consequently still move the green dot to thetarget category. Another reason is that, because of characteristics of asoftware, if a user plays incorrectly in three out of eight times, it isdifﬁcult to win a game, even if the wrong stances are neighbour stances.In these situations, playing the nextﬁve attempts correctly does not guarantee a win. This undesirable characteristic can mask the real per-formance of a participant.Each user’s play and its performance are recorded during a game. Toanalyse the participants performance, the evolution over the days iscompared, as are the answers provided by the participants in the twoquestionnaires.5. ResultsThe results are divided into two parts. The ﬁrst part relates to the performance of the users in playing with the software, as described at theend of Section4, where the percentage of hits per game is used tomeasure the participant’s performance. The second part relates to qual-itative data collected from the participants in the two questionnaires.The heatmap ofFig. 3is built based on the Pearson Distance betweenthe categories, it shows the average of the cumulative results of all par-ticipants during the three days of training, i.e. when a certain categorywas the target (row), what was the performed category (column) by theusers. Pearson Distance is a weighted type of Euclidean distance. It is aclassical measurement to observe how different clusters or categories aredistant of each other. In this case, we opted to take the square of thecorrelation to provide only positive values between categories. The closerto zero the more correlated are the categories. It is expected that thedistances in the main diagonal will be small, and that the distance in-creases the further the coordinates are from the main diagonal.As an example, if we look at the Dependent x Dependent cell, we seethat the distance equals zero. The distances of the neighbour categoriesincrease a little but are also close to the Dependent category (columnsWithdrawn and Cooperative). The Distance continues to increase for thenext categories. It should also be noted that in the circumplex, the stanceCooperative is a neighbour of Helping even if in the correlation matrixthese categories are displayed far from each other. In this case, theconcept of far might be observed in terms of Leary ’s circumplex, as shown on the right inFig. 1.Although participants mix up stances from time to time, the data inFig. 3show that even when they played incorrectly, in most cases theyplayed close to the target stance. In particular, the cluster of stancesHelping, Leading, Dependent and Cooperative follows this trend, while
other stances have a different interrelation. Competitive and Aggressiveare also close to each other, showing a tendency to mix up these twostances. In other words, people tend to show ‘aggressive’components in their voice when trying to play competitive behaviour and vice-versa.This is explainable because fast and highly energetic speech are com-mon characteristics present in both stances. Leading also shows thesecharacteristics, but usually not simultaneously and in a lower frequencythan the Competitive and Aggressive stances. While most stances can beidentiﬁed well, the Deﬁant stance demonstrates to be very hard todistinguish from other categories (as shown by the relatively smallPearson distances). Although it is hard toﬁnd an explanation for this, we speculate that people have not a clear concept of De ﬁant in mind. Also,Table 1Main questions of questionnaires 1 and 2.
QuestionHow conﬁdent are you in performing each category?How clear is the meaning of each category to you?How familiar are you with Leary ’s interpersonal stances theory?
Fig. 3.Correlation matrix of the average results over three days of training forall participants.1Experiment Description:https://formolo.wixsite.com/is-experiment?wi x-vod-video-id¼3d044e8eac8d4e42a50c6845f84adf81&amp;wix-vod-comp-id ¼comp-jsm9np5d.D. Formolo, T. Bosse Array 7 (2020) 100032
4due to social rules, there may be several subtle ways to express theDeﬁant stance, combining characteristics present in all other stances. Incontrast, Withdrawn presented a rather unique vocal pattern, but stillshares some characteristics with Dependent, Cooperative and Helping,three stances on the right side of Leary ’s Circumplex.The graph ofFig. 4shows the average performance of all participantsover the three days in terms of the average number of attempts percategory.Whilst the correlation matrix inFig. 3shows trends close to the tar- gets, the results achieved by the participants shown in the graph of Fig. 4 look less promising. This can be explained by the fact that the scoringmechanism (with a maximum of 8 attempts) masked the participants realprogress (because, as mentioned earlier, it is very dif ﬁcult to still win the game after a bad start).These results probably also affected the perception of the participantsregarding their learning abilities of how to perform the different stances.The questionnaires applied before and after playing the game asked howconﬁdent the participants are in performing each individual category andhow clear the categories are to them (seeﬁrst two questions ofTable 1). The results show that for both questions, the perception of the partici-pants about their performance and the understanding of each separatecategory did not signiﬁcantly change.Nevertheless, when looking at our most important outcome variable,the participants hit rate, to see if the game improved the participants ’ ability to perform interpersonal stances with their voice, it turns out thatthey still made signiﬁcant improvements over the days. Considering thetwo groups separately, i.e., the non-experienced players (16 participantswho played only for three days) and the experienced players (four par-ticipants who played and recorded interpersonal stances already severaltimes before the experiment), the results are promising (see the graph ofFig. 5). For the non-experienced group, a paired t-test between days 1 and3 indicates a signiﬁcant improvement from 0.26 to 0.32 (P ¼.045). The graph inFig. 5shows the performance of both groups measuring the hitrate per day. It is clear that the experienced group did not make anyimprovement yet, but still achieved the best performance, while theperformance of the non-experienced group improved over the three days.Finally, the two questionnaires also asked about how familiar theparticipants were with Leary ’s interpersonal stances theory before andafter the training (see last question of Table 1). The knowledge of the participants about the dynamics of Leary ’s theory increased from 1.84 to 3.74 on the 5-point Likert scale. A paired t-test con ﬁrmed that this in- crease was signiﬁcant (P¼.002).6. DiscussionStarting with the second part of the research question as put forwardin Section4, it became clear from the answers to the questionnaires thatafter using the software, people feel they have become more familiar withthe dynamics of the Leary’s interpersonal stances theory.In accordance with previous works on inferring interpersonal stancesin voice [4,5,11]and text [12
,13], it is difﬁcult to build models that are able to accurately classify the eight basic stances, at least with the currentdatasets. It is even more difﬁcult to teach people using such models, asalso shown in Refs. [9].Our results suggest that people are able to understand the concept ofeach basic stance, but can vary the style of how they perform them, as noparticipant achieved an accuracy of 75% or above in their personalmodels. Even when using the same hardware in the same environmentalconditions and with good accuracy, they fail in many cases in copyingtheir own style to each stance. Other factors that probably in ﬂuenced the reduction in performance are the lack of motivation and the lack ofengagement in a real situation to really perform a stance. Consideringthis we can infer that a better interface and story-line can promote moreengagement and consequently better results.It is necessary to point out that the number of participants in theexperiment is small, especially when analysing results of 2 subgroups of20 people. This said, rather than providing a ﬁnal answer, we might consider that the results presented in this work provide us a trend thatcan be conﬁrmed only with an extension of the experiment, recruitingmore participants.Nevertheless, regarding theﬁrst part of the research question, theresults show interesting patterns regarding the learning curve of theparticipants. The system helped the participants to improve their skillsrelated to interpersonal stances in voice. According to the graph of Fig. 5, the non-experienced participants have made a clear improvement at theend of day 3. The increase in standard deviation over the three days canpossibly be explained by the fact that some of them were more motivatedto achieve the goal and put more effort in repeating the voice patternsused to build the models. The same patterns were not observed in theexperienced group, who did not make any improvements. These resultsdemonstrate that there could be an improvement among non-experienced participants if they were given training on more days. Atthe same time, there is a limit to the extent to which the system canimprove people’s skills. When asking participants to provide feedback onthe experiment, 50% of them reported frustration in not achieving thegoal. The results indicate that the game did not clearly show the realprogress of the participants during the training sessions well, which couldhave demotivated them over the three days. Moreover, the game could betuned for users to reach the goal more easily than in the current setup. It
Fig. 4.Average of the participants performance per day.
Fig. 5.Average of the participants performance per day.D. Formolo, T. Bosse Array 7 (2020) 100032
5is also not clear to what extent the participants improved their style as aresult of an increased awareness about the stances during the trainingprocess. Hence, there are no guarantees that the same styles would beperformed in real situations.Moreover, the results of the questionnaires completed before andafter the training show that people are more con ﬁdent about their own understanding of the stances than about performing them. Participantsspontaneously reported confusion in performing stances, for example,(Aggressive, Competitive and Leading), (Aggressive and Competitive) or(Helping and Cooperative), the game helped them to re ﬂect about the different categories, reﬁning their concepts about them.All those aspects of performing interpersonal stances should beconsidered in follow-up research to explore how people understand eachof the categories. In future work, we are planning to extend the experi-ment to more participants to conﬁrm the tendencies presented in thiswork and investigate the relation between the stances in more detail.More evidence needs to be found indicating that interpersonal stances invoice can be improved by using simulation-based training games and weneed to better understand how people perceive and use interpersonalstances in practice. It is also important to determine to what extentpeople really recognise them as separate categories when they areinteracting with others or whether they group them in clusters.Declaration of competing interestsThe authors declare that they have no known competing ﬁnancial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to in ﬂuence the work reported in this paper.CRediT authorship contribution statementDaniel Formolo:Conceptualization, Methodology, Software, Visu-alization, Formal analysis, Investigation, Data curation, Writing - originaldraft, Writing - review&editing.Tibor Bosse:Conceptualization, Methodology, Writing - original draft, Investigation, Validation, Writing -review&editing.AcknowledgmentsThis research was supported by the Brazilian scholarship programScience without Borders - CNPq reference: 233883/2014 –2.References
[1]Bruijnes M, op den Akker R, Spitters S, Sanders M, Fu Q. The recognition of actedinterpersonal stance in police interrogations and the in ﬂuence of actor proﬁciency. Journal on multimodal user interfaces 2015;9(4):353 –76. [2]Chindamo M, Allwood J, Ahlsen E. Some suggestions for the study of stance incommunication. In: 2012 international conference on privacy, security, risk andtrust and 2012 international confernece on social computing. IEEE; 2012.p. 617–22.[3]Chollet M, Ochs M, Pelachaud C. Interpersonal stance recognition using non-verbalsignals on several time windows. 2012 . [4]Formolo D, Bosse T. Human vs. computer performance in voice-based recognition ofinterpersonal stance. In: International conference on human-computer interaction.Springer; 2017. p. 672 –86. [5]Formolo D, Bosse T. Extracting interpersonal stance from vocal signals. In:Proceedings of the 4th international workshop on multimodal analyses enablingartiﬁcial agents in human-machine interaction. ACM; 2018. p. 19 –25. [6]Formolo D, Bosse T, van der Wal N. Studying the impact of trained staff onevacuation scenarios by agent-based simulation. In: International conference onsocial informatics. Springer; 2018. p. 85 –96. [7]Hogan K. Can’t get through: eight barriers to communication. Pelican Publishing;2003.[8]Leary T. Interpersonal diagnosis of personality: a functional theory andmethodology for personality evaluation. Wipf and Stock Publishers; 2004 . [9]Linssen J, Theune M, Bruijnes M, et al. Beyond simulations: serious games fortraining interpersonal skills in law enforcement. In: Social simulation conference;2014.[10]op den Akker R, Bruijnes M, Peters R, Krikke T. Interpersonal stance in policeinterviews: content analysis. Computational linguistics in the Netherlands journal2013;3:193–216.[11]Ranganath R, Jurafsky D, McFarland DA. Detecting friendly, ﬂirtatious, awkward, and assertive speech in speed-dates. Comput Speech Lang 2013;27(1):89 –115. [12]Vaassen F, Daelemans W. Automatic emotion classi ﬁcation for interpersonal communication. In: Proceedings of the 2nd workshop on computational approachesto subjectivity and sentiment analysis. Association for Computational Linguistics;2011. p. 104–10.[13]Vaassen F, Wauters J, Van Broeckhoven F, Van Overveldt M, Daelemans W,Eneman K. delearyous: training interpersonal communication skills usingunconstrained text input. Proc. of ECGBL 2012:505 –13. [14]van der Lubbe LM, Gerritsen C, Formolo D, Otte M, Bosse T. A serious game fortraining verbal resilience to doorstep scams. In: International conference on gamesand learning alliance. Springer; 2018. p. 110 –20. [15]Venable J, Pries-Heje J, Baskerville R. Feds: a framework for evaluation in design
science research. Eur J Inf Syst 2016;25(1):77 –89. [16]Wiggins JS. An informal history of the interpersonal circumplex tradition. J PersAssess 1996;66(2):217 –33.D. Formolo, T. Bosse Array 7 (2020) 100032
6