Machine learning based approach for shape memory polymerbehavioural characterization
Ritaban Duttaa,*, David Renshawb, Cherry Chenb, Daniel Liangb
aDATA 61, CSIRO, Hobart, Australia
bManufacturing, CSIRO, Clayton, Australia
ARTICLE INFO
Keywords:Shape memory polymerMachine learningData driven modellingData scienceABSTRACT
In this article we aim to combine video data analysis techniques, scalable machine learning, and Shape memorypolymers (SMPs) materials to develop a model-based architecture for the advancement of rapid characterizationof a novel material. Although artiﬁcially intelligent machines, e.g. soft robotics systems, with high ﬂexibility have conquered the production line and other controlled, predictable environments, their use in complex real-worldscenarios has to date remained limited. Newly discovered and experimented SMPs are increasingly being usedfor application solutions in automotive, aerospace, construction and commercial ﬁeld. But being a nascentﬁeld there is little knowledge on the shape recovery behaviour of laminates with a SMP ﬁlm and there are only methods reported in literature for quantifying the material behaviour. Through various experimental datagathering and predictive modelling it was established that proposed methodology can rapidly characterize novelmaterials. The proposed modelling work ﬂow showed accuracy of 90% with 92% sensitivity and 94% speci ﬁcity while predicting recovery behaviour of SMP body, showcasing high potential for data driven rapid characteri-sation of shape memory materials.
1. Problem spaceIn spite of recent advances inﬁeld robots, inspecting complex conﬁned spaces in natural, industrial or areas in natural disasters remainsa challenge. Additionally, current robots are limited in their ﬁeld per- formance by only being operational in a narrow spectrum of environ-mental conditions. To address these challenges, the CSIRO is developinghighlyﬂexible machines that can change their body shapes and proper-ties, to adapt to task requirements and environmental conditions. A keyscientiﬁc challenge in building such a robot is the design, development,and manufacturing of an integrated system that incorporates sensing,actuation, power storage and communication channels that do notrestrict, rather augment the mobility of the robot [ 1–10]. Soft structures are difﬁcult to model and control, so new methods arerequired to properly model. There are lots of ways to actuate a soft ma-terial but it’s very hard to model. Without modelling, movement of a softmaterial could not be optimised or controlled. A promising techniquethat has been proposed and developed in this study, combines computervision and predictive learning to characterize novel soft materials andsubsequent optimisation. Such complex interactions and correlations aredifﬁcult to capture using either analytical modeling or conventionalexperimental testing due to overlapping of multiple thermal, mechanical,and materials transformation mechanisms.In this study, a strategy of data-driven modelling, simulation andcontrol is implemented, including the generation of the experimentaldatabase on the laminate actuation under electrical stimulus, the explo-ration of supervised machine-learning based modelling, according to theexperimental data obtained. The establishment of the predictive modelfor describing dynamic behaviours of the SMA/SMP laminates and thedevelopment of controllers for the locomotion of the morphing roboticsystem [11–22] were also explored.Fig. 1presents a proposed data engineering work ﬂow for this prob- lem space. There are two parts of the data driven system, namely, for thepurpose of model of the material and model of the behavioural changes ofthe material. As in the conventional machine-learning paradigm, trainingand testing phases are essential for the scalable machine learning too,where rapid prototyping of an evolving model is essential to capturebehavioural changes of a novel material [ 20–28].
* Corresponding author.E-mail addresses:Ritaban.Dutta@data61.csiro.au(R. Dutta),David.Renshaw@csiro.au(D. Renshaw),ling.chen@csiro.au(C. Chen),Daniel.Liang@csiro.au (D. Liang).
Contents lists available atScienceDirect
Array
journal homepage:www.elsevier.com/journals/array/2590-0056/open-access-journal
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.array.2020.100036Received 18 December 2019; Received in revised form 5 May 2020; Accepted 23 June 2020Available online 8 August 20202590-0056/©2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. This is an open access article under the CC BY license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ ).Array 7 (2020) 1000362. Experimental data gatheringThrough various experimental data gathering and analysis, in ﬂuences of different variables that affect the recovery behaviour of thermoplasticshape memory polyurethanes-based laminates including ambient tem-perature, material modulus, and adhesive strength have been investi-gated to develop a physical model to formulate the recovery behaviour ofthe material.It has been identiﬁed that a fundamental optimisation problem thatneeds to be solved is to maximize theﬁnal angle recovery ratios and recovery rates of a material to increase the overall ef ﬁciency of a targeted SMP material.Fig. 2shows experimental set-up for capturing SMP ma-terial behavioural changes as ground truth data for predictive modelling.Camera angle didn’t vary during the data gathering as it was a ﬁxed test rig with a thermal camera was used. Quality of the captured video wasconsistent during all experimentation for this study with no tolerance oferror while collecting 200 videos of the moving SMP body. We aim tostandardize the experimental protocol so that a high level of data qualitycan be captured consistently with results being completely reproducible.3. SMP material selectionThe SMP based polyurethane provided was chosen in the study due toits large reversible change in the elastic modulus at a moderate glasstransformation (Tg) temperature of about 45/C14C. This characteristic of a large difference in elastic modulus at T
genables a larger degree and fast actuation under a given force, which is ideal for generating digitaldatabase. The moderate T
gdoes not require an extensive thermal stim-ulation to activate the SMP actuation. Consequently, the heat generatedby a thin layer of silver-based conductive paste applied on the SMPsurface is sufﬁcient to provide the thermal stimulus required for actu-ating the SMA laminate. In addition, a thin heating layer is essential tomain the large degree actuation, as it minimize the resistance to theactuation force.For this research study mainly focused to prove the utilization ofcomputer vision and machine learning techniques for advancedmanufacturing material modelling, we used “DiAPLEX”SMP manufac- tured by SMP Technologies Inc [24]. Rationale behind this selection wasalso guided by the fact that this material has narrow transition state anddrastic change of physical properties at transition state ( Fig. 3(a)). The elastic modulus changes largely at the T
g,where setting of T gcan be designed at a desired temperature between 40
/C14C–90/C14C. At a tempera- ture higher than the T
g,SMP can easily change form by applying lowstress. In the heating phase of the SMP foil, increasing the temperature offoil above T
geliminates the strain resulting in recovery of its originalshape (Fig. 3(b)).A SMP laminate was heated by a constant current of 5A through thebody of the foil structure to initiate bending of the SMP material. Asshown in theFig. 3, SMP foil structure changed its shape due to heatingwhile temperature increased from 23
/C14Ct o5 2/C14C at the connection. In terms of data gathering, a thermal camera and a normal digital camerawere used to capture the bending SMP foil as a video ﬁle to be analyzed in the modeling phase.Actual temperatures were also measured and logged as a time seriesby a separate temperature sensor during the experiments along with thethermal readings by a thermal camera [ 22–32]. Inputs to the proposed modelling paradigms were, namely, current (heating while temperatureincreased from 23
/C14Ct o5 2/C14C at the connection), thermodynamic natureof the SMP (by thermal camera readout). Expected outputs from the
Fig. 1.Proposed experimental set-up for capturing SMP material behavioural changes through heating of the material.
Fig. 2.Experimental set-up for capturing SMP material behavioural changesthrough heating of the material using current ﬂow.R. Dutta et al. Array 7 (2020) 100036
2predictive trained models were bending angles (angle to pivot and angleto tip) and polynomial to formulate a representation of the holisticstructural changes.4. Rapid vision based modelling of SMPSMPs are being unique and unknown as materials; property charac-terisation through conventional way was dif ﬁcult. Thermal imaging technology was used to capture visual recovery related footprint of thematerial’s recovery phenomenon as direct and rapid mechanism. Thismethod also helped to capture ground truth of the desired behaviouralaspects of the SMP of interests. To capture the movement of the SMP foiland quantiﬁcation of bending angles (deﬁned by two angles, e.g. angle to pivot and angle to tip), video-processing techniques were used to auto-matically extract key features from the captured video.A multi-scale unsupervised feature selection algorithmic frameworkhas been designed to extract multidimensional features from thecaptured 300,000 thermal video frames. Consistently 4000 key featureswere detected from each of the video frames. Based on the detectedfeatures, positions of the two key points along the length of the SMPbody, namely, tip and bending points were detected dynamically beforebending angles were derived against a horizontal line representing the original pre-heating shape of the SMP structure. In the Figs. 4 and 5, one example has been shown to describe the overall feature extraction
Fig. 3.(a): Snap-shots from the captured thermal video during the experimentation with SMP foil, depicting bending of the body while heating. Fig. 3. (b): Snap-shots from the captured thermal video during the experimentation with SMP foil, depicting two way bending of the body while heating and cooling. Heating pha se expanded the SMP foil from its original programmed shape and during the cooling phase SMP body recovered back to its original shape completing the both ways being mechanism of such a material.
Fig. 4.Multi-scale unsupervised feature selection algorithmic framework hasbeen designed to extract multidimensional features from thermal videos.R. Dutta et al. Array 7 (2020) 100036
3process and angle estimation dynamically. Derived angles were used tomodel the bending behavioural change of the SMP foil and its associatedpolymer material as depicted inFig. 5.Based on the detected feature points, a polynomial was dynamicallyﬁtted through the feature points on each video frame, to representtraining targets for the behavioural changes and bending of the SMPstructure. The blue dots in theFigs. 4and5were the features extracted from video frames.It has been identiﬁed that a fundamental optimisation problem thatneeds to be solved is to maximize theﬁnal angle recovery ratios and recovery rates of a material to increase the overall ef ﬁciency of a targeted SMP material [30–38]. Hence rapid characterization of a novel materialneeds to be bench-marked against bending angles for deciding effec-tiveness of the novel material for any suitable targeted application.5. Architecture for behaviour modellingA predictive model was developed to predict bending angle of theSMP foil while heated with a constant current ﬂow. Aim of this phase was to achieve a model to take current as input and predict a potentialbending angle to mimic the bending behaviour of the physically trainedSMP. In the training phase of the data driven experiment, recordedchanging proﬁle of the increasing temperature was used to formulate athermodynamic input to SMP foil structure, whereas measured anglesfrom the video were used as training targets. Fig. 6showcases the overall approach to this problem phase and its proposed solution.Similarly, for the thermal video, vision technique-based features wereused in the thermodynamic modelling of the SMP foil. Feature pointsbased multi-point temperature detection was applied to capture thethermodynamic nature of the SMP while heated by a constant current.Temperature readings based on position of the extracted feature pointsgave an overall distribution of thermodynamic changes along the SMPbody during heating. This was an unconventional approach to derive
Fig. 5.A polynomial was dynamicallyﬁtted through the feature points on each video frame, to represent training targets for the behavioural changes andbending of the SMP.
Fig. 6.Data driven predictive work-ﬂow for rapid thermodynamic proﬁling of shape memory material’s bending behaviour.R. Dutta et al. Array 7 (2020) 100036
4thermodynamics of such a material by using data driven approachesinstead of physical experiment and characterisation of a material. Therationale behind this approach was to make the modelling of SMP asgeneric as possible, henceﬂexibility and variation of material could beunlimited.6. Ensemble Learner NetworkAn ensemble is a supervised learning approach that use multiplemodels to improve the predictive performance than could be obtainedfrom any of the constituent models. Three different ensemble classi ﬁca- tion approaches, bagging, Random Subspace and AdaBoosting wereconsidered to improve the behavioural prediction performance of indi-vidual classiﬁers. Two different types of learners ‘Linear Discriminant’ and‘Tree’were used in the bagging and boosting ensembles of this study,whilst the‘k-Nearest Neighbour’learner was used with the RandomSubspace ensemble. Bootstrap aggregation, often referred to as bagging,brings a high level of model diversity, by training each model in theensemble using a randomly drawn subset of behaviour data. The resultsof each model in the ensemble are aggregated with each model providedwith equally. The minimal leaf size for the bagged trees are set to 0.9.Another important parameter is the number of predictors selected atrandom for every decision split. This random selection is made for everysplit, and every deep tree involves many splits. AdaBoost is a commonboosting-based ensemble approach for multi class binary classi ﬁcation. The algorithm trains learners sequentially. Instead of conventionalweighted classiﬁcation error in boosting, AdaBoosting uses weightedpseudo-loss for N observations and K classes. Random Subspace is anensemble method similar to bagging, however, it randomly samples fromthe set of features, in addition to training set instances, in order toconstruct member learners. This approach was superior in comparison toall other trained predictors that were tested.7. ResultsThe model validity is determined by comparing the model predictionof bending behaviour of the material to the actual measured bendingangle during experiments. The data sets were analyzed using ﬁve different types of supervised predictive learner, namely the BayesianRidge Regression (BRR), Random Forest Network (RFN), ProbabilisticNeural Network (PNN), Radial Basis Function Network (RBFN) andEnsemble Learner Network (ELN) paradigms. Training of the neuralnetworks was performed with 80% of the whole data set. The remaining20% of the whole data were used for testing the neural networks. Theprocess of selecting training and testing data set for development of amachine learning model was completely randomized. These percentageswere selected arbitrarily and were applied for all training-testing para-digms. This randomization was done to avoid training over ﬁtting. The aim of this comparative study was to identify the most appropriate ANNparadigm, which can be trained with the best accuracy to predictdifferent levels of bending angles and movement of the material. Table 1 summarizes the prediction results achieved from the neural networks,using same training and testing data sets with 10-fold validation. Asigniﬁcantly high number of supervised learning algorithms to validatethe generalisation of this type of application in prediction.In the next section, some discussion on the proposed ensemble ap-proaches have been summarized which provided best possible overallbehavioural prediction and material characterisation.8. Reasoning of prediction accuracyFromTable 1, we can conclude that there are two main reasons for thesuperior classiﬁcation performance of the ELN technique compared toBBR, PNN, RBFN, and RFN. These reasons are:/C15ELNs are able to adapt themselves to the distribution in polynomialfeature space. Thus, while ELN was able to classify most of the pat-terns corresponding to bending categories, BBR, PNN, RBFN, and RFNare less able to adapt to the distribution of video analysis based keyfeature samples./C15ELN and RFN are able to adjust their scale of generalization to matchthe morphological variability of the patterns. They were able toachieve a better performance than others in separating different statesof the bending movement of the novel material./C15
In the case of the ELN algorithm, when a relatively very good solutionhas been found, the situation can be further re ﬁned by modifying the boundaries where misclassiﬁcation occur, and also by conductingmore experiments with the same material to develop a behaviouralfeature space.9. Prediction of behaviourBased on the multiple point SURF feature points, dynamically apolynomial wasﬁtted through the feature points to represent behav-ioural changes and bending of the SMP foil (as shown in Figs. 6and7).Table 1Comparative accuracy analysis for bending behaviour prediction using 80%Training and 20% Testing paradigm.
Learner F1-Accuracy Sensitivity Speci ﬁcityBBR 77% 88% 80%PNN 82% 80% 85%RBFN 79% 90% 92%RFN 84% 85% 90%ELN 90% 92% 94%
Fig. 7.Dynamic Prediction of moving polynomials to mimic the bending of SMP structure.R. Dutta et al. Array 7 (2020) 100036
5On the other hand, temperature readings of those key feature points wereused as distributed thermodynamic proﬁle across the foil structure to be used for training a model. For this phase of modelling, a simple BRR wasused. Training input of this model was the multi-point temperatureproﬁle of the SMP foil, whereas training target was the set of polynomialsthat were captured during the video analysis.As shown in theFig. 7, ELN based model was able to predict a suitablepolynomial independently, purely based on thermodynamic variationacross the foil structure exposed to constant current ﬂow. The red line indicates the predicted polynomial from a trained model, which could beused as an independent predictor for a SMP foil ’s behavioural changes while used in conjunction with a controller. This work could be expandedfurther for reﬁnement of such a predictive model in regards to accuratecontrol of a SMP based foil structure for a Soft-Robotic movement.Predicted angles were benchmarked against the ground truth mea-surements of angles (to the pivot and to the tip) from thermal video.These angle measurements were done manually using a manufacturingtest rig in a laboratory set-up independent of the computer vision basedexperiments to develop a ground truth data set for machine learningtraining and testing. The bending angles were categorised into ﬁve classes (0–10, 10–20, 20–30, 30–40 and 40–50
/C14) to formulate a quanti- sation based classiﬁcation problem. InFig. 8shows the model prediction performance of such a model with very high accuracy of 90%predictability, 92% sensitivity and 94% speci ﬁcity. Prediction accuracies were not perfect (e.g. near 100%) but they were signi ﬁcantly higher in nature with higher sensitivity and speciﬁcity, all remained above 90% with an Ensemble Learner Network. Prediction accuracy was estimatedbased on the accuracies of the two-way recovery process of the SMP foil(during heating and cooling). Higher temperature towards the moderateglass transformation (Tg) temperature indeed produced higher bendingangle, hence quantisation of the prediction targets into ﬁve classes hel- ped the machine learning algorithm to learn better. Considering thenature of real world data, video capturing mechanism and the novel SMPmaterial (“DiAPLEX”), it was anticipated that a machine learning algo-rithm would not predict the bending angle continuously, however higherrate of accuracy was very encouraging for applying a machine learningtechnique for the future modelling of novel materials such as SMP.10. Model simulation and discussionAs the uptake of robotic technologies by industry increases, thecapability-based restrictions of robotic solutions become increasinglyexposed. The main challenge is one of embodiment. If robots are com-plex, they will break and require maintenance. If the robot ’s body cannot adapt to its environment, control will be more complex and will requirehuman intervention. If the materials reach their functional limits, the
Fig. 8.Actual prediction of bending angles shows performance accuracy of the proposed model.
Fig. 9.Simulation of the models to mimic the material and its associated behaviours.R. Dutta et al. Array 7 (2020) 100036
6robot will break. So development based on this type of data engineeringcan only be justiﬁed if a system can be realised in the real world. In lightof this vision, and based on the outcome of this project so far, a move-ment simulator was developed to encapsulate the data engineering-basedmodels to mimic the movement of the SMP structure or in other words,movement of a soft-robotic part (as in the Fig. 9). Based on the successful simulation of the SMP material behaviour,two scientiﬁc and system aspects were conﬁrmed. Firstly, a rapid mechanism to establish robust characterisation of a novel material usingdata science, and secondly, the SMP material could be used for soft-robotics body parts, where control of the parts could be driven by apredictive model extracted from the automated video analysis.Author statementRD, DR, CC and DL conceived the idea, did experimentation andmachine learning modelling. They also contributed to the writing of themanuscript. Research supported by DATA61 Business Unit of CSIRO,Australia and Active Integrated Matter, a Future Science Platform at theCSIRO, Australia, supported this work.Declaration of competing interestThe authors declare that they have no known competing ﬁnancial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to in ﬂuence the work reported in this paper.AcknowledgmentsResearch supported by DATA61 Business Unit of CSIRO, Australiaand Active Integrated Matter, a Future Science Platform at the CSIRO,Australia, supported this work.References
[1]Bauer S, et al. 25th anniversary article: a soft future: from robots and sensor skin toenergy harvesters. Adv Mater 2014;26(1):149 –62. [2]Pfeifer R, Lungarella M, Iida F. The challenges ahead for bio-inspired soft robotics.Commun ACM 2012;55(11):76 –87. [3]Khaldi A, et al. Smarter actuator design with complementary and synergeticfunctions. Adv Mater 2015;27(30):4418 –22. [4]Asada M, et al. Cognitive developmental robotics: a survey. IEEE Trans Aut MentDevel 2009;1(1):12–34.[5]Meyer J, Guillot A. Biologically inspired robots. In: Springer handbook of robotics.Springer Berlin Heidelberg; 2008. p. 1395 –422. [6]Fv Breugel W Regan, Lipson H. From insects to machines. IEEE Robot Autom Mag2008;15:4.[7]Ayers J, Witting J. Biomimetic approaches to the control of underwater walkingmachines. Phil Trans Roy Soc Lond: Math Phys Eng Sci 2007;365(1850):273 –95. [8]Kay ER, Leigh DA, Zerbetto F. Synthetic molecular motors and mechanicalmachines. Angew Chem Int Ed 2007;46(1-2):72 –191.[9]Liu C, Qin H, Mather PT. Review of progress in shape-memory polymers. J MaterChem 2007;17(16):1543–58. [10]Mayer G, Heckel A. Biologically active molecules with a light switch. Angew ChemInt Ed 2006;45(30):4900–21. [11]Brochu P, Pei Q. Advances in dielectric elastomers for actuators and arti ﬁcial muscles. Macromol Rapid Commun 2010;31(1):10 –36. [12]Mirfakhrai T, Madden JDW, Baughman RH. Polymer arti ﬁcial muscles. Mater Today 2007;10(4):30–8. [13]Lendlein A, et al. Light-induced shape-memory polymers. Nature 2005;434(7035):879–82.[14]Li MH, et al. Light-driven side-on nematic elastomer actuators. Adv Mater 2003;15(7-8):569–72.[15]Marshall JE, et al. Anisotropic colloidal micromuscles from liquid crystalelastomers. J Am Chem Soc 2013;136(1):474 –9. [16]Osada Y, Matsuda A. Shape memory in hydrogels. Nature 1995;376(6537):219 . [17]Lendlein A, Kelch S. Shape-memory polymers. Angew Chem Int Ed 2002;41(12):2034–57.[18]Kim BK, Sang YL, Xu M. Polyurethanes having shape memory effects. Polymer1996;37.26:5781–93.[19]Osada Y, Hidenori O, Hori H. A polymer gel with electrically driven motility. Nature1992;355(6357):242.[20]Br/C19edas JL, Chance RR, editors. Conjugated polymeric materials: opportunities inelectronics, optoelectronics, and molecular electronics. vol. 182. Springer Science & Business Media; 2012.[21]Bellan C, Bossis G. Field dependence of viscoelastic properties of MR elastomers. IntJ Mod Phys B 2002;16.17n18:2447 –53. [22]Razzaq MY, et al. Multifunctional hybrid nanocomposites with magneticallycontrolled reversible shape–memory effect. Adv Mater 2013;25(40):5730 –3. [23]Pei Q, et al. Electrochromic and highly stable poly (3, 4-ethylenedioxythiophene)switches between opaque blue-black and transparent sky blue. Polymer 1994;35(7):1347–51.[24]http://www.smptechno.com/index_en.html . [25]Nazeeruddin MK, et al. Conversion of light to electricity by charge-transfersensitizers on nanocrystalline TiO2 electrodes. J Am Chem Soc 1993;115:6382 –90. [26]Yu G, et al. Polymer photovoltiac cells: enhanced ef ﬁciencies via a network of internal donor-acceptor heterojunctions. Science 1995;270(5243):1789 . [27]Motornov M, et al. Stimuli-responsive nanoparticles, nanogels and capsules forintegrated multifunctional intelligent systems. Prog Polym Sci 2010;35(1):174 –211. [28]Torchilin VP. Multifunctional nanocarriers. Adv Drug Deliv Rev 2012;64:302 –15. [29]Khaldi A, et al. Smarter actuator design with complementary and synergeticfunctions. Adv Mater 2015;27(30):4418 –22. [30]Goujon LJ, et al. Flexible solid polymer electrolytes based on nitrile butadienerubber/poly (ethylene oxide) interpenetrating polymer networks containing eitherLiTFSI or EMITFSI. Macromolecules 2011;44(24):9683 –91. [31]Maziz A, et al. Demonstrating kHz frequency actuation for conducting polymermicroactuators. Adv Funct Mater 2014;24(30):4851 –9. [32]Billard A, et al. Robot programming by demonstration. In: Springer handbook ofrobotics. Springer Berlin Heidelberg; 2008. p. 1371 –94. [33]Conradt J, et al. A pencil balancing robot using a pair of AER dynamic visionsensors. Circuits and Systems. ISCAS 2009. IEEE International Symposium onCircuits and Systems; 2009. 2009 . [34]Cutkosky MR, Kim S. Design and fabrication of multi-material structures forbioinspired robots. Phil Trans Roy Soc Lond: Math Phys Eng Sci 2009;367(1894):1799–813.
[35]Dahiya RS, et al. Tactile sensing —from humans to humanoids. IEEE Trans Robot 2010;26(1):1–20.[36]Hoffmann M, et al. Body schema in robotics: a review. IEEE Trans Aut Ment Devel2010;2(4):304–24.[37]Hosoda K, et al. Pneumatic-driven jumping robot with anthropomorphic muscularskeleton structure. Aut Robots 2010;28(3):307 –16. [38]Iida F. Biologically inspired motor control for underactuated robots –trends and challenges. Robot motion and control. Springer London; 2009. p. 145 –54.R. Dutta et al. Array 7 (2020) 100036
7