ORIGINAL ARTICLE
Measurement of repeat eﬀects inChicago’s criminal social network
Paul Kumpa,*, David Haro Alonsoa, Yongyi Yanga, Joseph Candellab, Jonathan Lewin
b, Miles N. Wernicka
aMedical Imaging Research Center and Dept. of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Illinois Instituteof Technology, 3300 S. Federal St., Chicago, IL 60616, USA
bChicago Police Department, 3510 S. Michigan Ave., Chicago, IL 60653, USAReceived 1 November 2015; revised 11 January 2016; accepted 11 January 2016Available online 14 January 2016
KEYWORDSCrime analysis;Social network analysis;Violent crime;Predictive policingAbstractThe ‘‘near-repeat”effect is a well-known criminological phenomenon in which the occur-rence of a crime incident gives rise to a temporary elevation of crime risk within close physical prox-imity to an initial incident. Adopting a social network perspective, we instead deﬁne a near repeat interms of geodesic distance within a criminal social network, rather than spatial distance. Speciﬁ-cally, we report a statistical analysis of repeat effects in arrest data for Chicago during the years2003–2012. We divide the arrest data into two sets (violent crimes and other crimes) and, for eachset, we compare the distributions of time intervals between repeat incidents to theoretical distribu-tions in which repeat incidents occur only by chance. We ﬁrst consider the case of the same arresteeparticipating in repeat incidents (‘‘exact repeats ”) and then extend the analysis to evaluate repeat risks of those arrestees near one another in the social network. We observe repeat effects that dimin-ish as a function of geodesic distance and time interval, and we estimate typical time scales forrepeat crimes in Chicago.
/C2112016 The Authors. Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of King Saud University. This isan open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ ).
1. IntroductionCriminological studies have shown that crime is not uniformlydistributed among victims, arrestees and places, with repeatcrimes playing a fundamental role[5]. In fact, about half ofall crimes in the United States are committed by repeat arrest-ees[19]. Moreover, some reports[4]have suggested a highdegree of overlap between victim and arrestee populations,and research has already demonstrated that victims of per-sonal or property crimes and of gun violence experience ele-vated crime risks within months of an instigating incident[8,16]. Thus, it is reasonable to expect the same effect to exist*Corresponding author at: 1820 W. Fletcher, Apt. 2, Chicago, IL60657, USA. Tel.: +1 815 715 7174.E-mail addresses:pkump@iit.edu(P. Kump),dharoalo@hawk.iit.edu (D.H. Alonso),yangyo@iit.edu(Y. Yang),Joseph.Candella@ chicagopolice.org(J. Candella),jonathan.lewin@chicagopolice.org(J. Lewin),wernick@iit.edu(M.N. Wernick).Peer review under responsibility of King Saud University.
Production and hosting by ElsevierApplied Computing and Informatics (2016) 12, 154–160
Saudi Computer Society, King Saud University
Applied Computing and Informatics
(http://computer.org.sa)www.ksu.edu.sawww.sciencedirect.com
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.aci.2016.01.0022210-8327/C2112016 The Authors. Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of King Saud University.This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ ).among the arrestee population, which has implications for theprevention of crime[10,21].In the ﬁeld of criminology there is a well-known phe-nomenon known as thenear-repeat effect, which refers to atendency for crime risk to be temporarily increased withinthe near vicinity of recent crime incidents (i.e., incidents thathave taken place nearby in both space and time; e.g., [10,20]). In this paper, we hypothesize the existence of a differentkind of near-repeat effect, in which we modify the deﬁnitionof ‘‘near”to refer not to geographical relationships amongcrime incidents, but rather to crime-related interpersonal rela-tionships among the individuals involved in these incidents.We measure the notion of interpersonal distance by usingthe well-established concept of ‘‘degrees of separation, ”which is known technically asgeodesic distance. In this paper wedeﬁne geodesic distance in a criminal social network as follows:If Person A and Person B have been arrested previously in con-nection with the same crime incident (co-arrested), they are said to have one degree of separation. If, in turn, Person C has beenco-arrested with Person B, then Person C is said to be separatedfrom Person A by two degrees, and so on. Thus, we hypothesizethat a crime incident involving Person A, will temporarilyincrease the crime risk for individuals such as Persons B andC, who are near Person A in this speciﬁc sense that we havedeﬁned. Later we show that the hypothesized effect does indeedexist within crime data for the city of Chicago.The immediate motivation for our study is to inform an ongo-ing collaborative effort between the Chicago Police Departmentand our research team at the Illinois Institute of Technology.In this initiative, we have successfully developed and deployedprediction algorithms that estimate the risk of future violencefor persons with extensive criminal records. We anticipate thatour prediction algorithms will be enhanced by exploiting theprobabilistic relationship, if it exists, that would be implied bythe aforementioned interpersonal near-repeat effect. Thus, thepresent work not only informs our fundamental understandingof crime behavior, but is also expected to have practical implica-tions for the prediction of crime, which is a rapidly emerging ﬁeld[18]. We next review basic concepts of the near-repeat effect andsocial networks so as to place our work in context.Repeat crimes may occur for various reasons, includingevent dependence linked to the psyche, actions, and environ-ment of arrestees[10], with some facet of the arrestee’sprevious experience increasing the chances of participation ina subsequent incident, with the possibility of the effectspreading to others in the same environment and social groupsas the original arrestee[16]. With victims and arresteestending to belong to similar populations, event dependencesuggests the formation of crime patterns establishing positivefeedback, eventually escalating into situations involving anexcess of dangerous persons or groups, and areas of high crimedensity. Effective policing strategies would identify thesesituations as they are forming, thus ceasing the spread offurther crime.Repeat crimes can be characterized as either exact-repeator near-repeat, depending on whether consecutive incidents occurat the same location, or at a nearby location. [10]considered the spread of repeat effects to neighboring locations by usingMonte Carlo methods to determine the likelihood of theobserved patterns occurring if no correlation between spatialand temporal distributions exists. Similarly, Ratcliffe andRengert[20]investigated repeat effects in shootings inPhiladelphia, PA, using a modiﬁcation of a standard Knox test[12]. Short et al.[22]showed that repeat effects exist amongburglaries in Long Beach, CA, and further showed that theseeffects decrease with distance in space and time.Social networks have recently been used to investigate theinﬂuence that an individual has on his peers [16,17]. There are many reasons to suspect the spreading of repeat effectsin a criminal social network. First, many violent crimes are dri-ven by emotions created by social relationships and thus occurbetween persons who know one another[9]. Second, condi- tions favoring the participation in crime incidents are spreadthrough peer inﬂuence[7]. Third, physical objects such asdrugs or weapons are usually dispersed through interpersonalconnections, implying that the illegal selling and use of theseobjects also occur through these connections [6]. For the remainder of this paper, we will present repeat anal-yses on crimes that occurred in Chicago, IL, during the years2003–2012, by integrating statistical techniques with a socialnetwork perspective. Unlike previous repeat studies that havebeen concerned with spatial locations and geographical dis-tances of crime incidents, we will focus on arrestees and rela-tionships among arrestees. Each incident in our datasetincludes a unique identiﬁcation number for each arrestee tak-
ing part in a crime incident, the date of the incident and thetype of crime. Of particular interest to police is the behaviorof violent criminals[4], so we divide our data into two mutu-ally exclusive datasets – one containing only violent crimesand the other containing all other crimes – and we performanalyses on the two datasets separately. We refer to these data-sets as theviolentdataset and thenon-violentdataset, respec- tively. The former consists of 6630 arrestees, while the latterconsists of 941,029 arrestees.Through the construction and analysis of social networksand application of statistical techniques, this paper aims to dis-cover patterns by repeat arrestees in Chicago. In Section 1we use a Poisson model to describe the situation in which eventsare independent of one another and occur only by chance,referring to this as the null model. We describe and applyour counting technique to test our datasets against the nullmodel, and show that Chicago’s exact-repeat incidents arenot due to chance alone. We describe the social network inSection2, where we measure the spread of repeat effectsthrough the network by keeping track of the geodesic distancebetween incidents – that is, the network separation of the twoarrestees – and applying well-established spatiotemporaldescriptive statistics. We show that repeat effects in our datadiminish with time and geodesic distance. We conclude thepaper with a summary and discussion.2. Exact-repeat effectsIf there were no repeat effects, an individual’s participation ina crime incident would be statistically independent of partici-pation in other crime incidents. This model is contradictoryto the existence of repeat effects and will serve as our nullhypothesis. Moreover, an arrestee cannot participate in simul-taneous criminal incidents, as such incidents would simply bethought of as a single event. Independence of the incidentsimplies a Poisson process[21], as reviewed next.Chicago’s criminal social network 1552.1. The null hypothesisIn a homogeneous Poisson process the probability that kcrim- inal incidents occur within a time interval from ttoDtis P
kðDtÞ¼ðkDtÞke/C0kDt
k!;ð1Þ wherekis the rate parameter.It is easy to show that, for this distribution, the wait time s between incidents obeys an exponential probability law, i.e.,PðsÞ¼ke
/C0ks: ð2Þ Therefore, if the null hypothesis is correct, and crime incidentsare indeed statistically independent, then the time intervalsbetween incidents in which an arrestee participates should beexponentially distributed, with shorter times occurring morefrequently, in accordance with Eq.(2).2.2. Testing for event dependenceIn this section we describe the methodologies used to test forevent dependence. For our ﬁnite-length data, we employed amoving-window counting method[22]that produces a distri-bution of the observed wait times, which can be comparedto the null distribution in Eq.(2)to test for the presence ofevent dependence. We applied this method to our violentand non-violentdatasets separately.2.2.1. The moving-window counting methodIn the moving-window technique, a time window of width s
max
weeks is deﬁned, beginning at the time of the ﬁrst crime inci-dent in the dataset. If one or more arrestees in this initial inci-dent participate in a secondary incident within the timewindow, the time interval (wait time) sbetween the initialand secondary incidents is recorded. The time window thenshifts to the next crime incident in the dataset, and the waittime between that incident and the following one is againrecorded. This process continues until the entire data recordhas been analyzed. The wait time observations obtained atthe various time-window positions are assigned to bins to forma histogram of counts, and normalized to obtain a probabilitydistribution, which can be compared to the null distribution inEq.(2). Note that, in general, the number of observations isgreater than the number of repeat arrestees because not allarrestees will participate in a second incident. Hence, order-one arrestees (i.e., arrestees who are arrested only once in thestudy period) inﬂuence the probabilities not by contributingtime intervalss, but by increasing the count. Incidents occur-ring within the ﬁnals
maxweeks of the data record – the so-called ‘‘buffer period”– are not counted and do not contributeto the probability distribution, because any incident occurringduring that period will have its associated time window fallingbeyond the end of the data record and thus no data can beobserved for such incidents.The exact choice ofs
maxis not critical, but extreme choiceswill not allow sufﬁcient data for the opportunity to disprovethe null hypothesis. One extreme is to choose s
maxas the length of the study’s time frame. In this case, all of the data fall withinthe buffer period and are discarded. The other extreme,s
max¼0, only allows for measurements ofs¼0 nothing lar- ger. For our study, we chooses
max¼104 weeks (two years,or one-ﬁfth of the study’s time frame) corresponding to a buf-fer period of the years 2011–2012.The counting scheme withsmax¼104 weeks, applied to asingle arrestee, is illustrated by way of an example timelineinFig. 1, in Supplementary material. The ﬁrst incident occurs212 weeks into the study period, and an observation is con-ducted to determine whether a repeat incident occurs withinthe following 104 weeks. In this example, a repeat incidenthas indeed occurred, so the time interval s¼96 (308/C0212¼96) is recorded, and the analysis continuesthrough the timeline. The next incident to occur is the one fol-lowing 308 weeks; this was the repeat incident for the previousmeasurement and is now a potential instigating incident.Again, an observation is made, but this time a repeat incidentdoes not occur within the time window of s
max¼104 weeks. The analysis continues up to the incident occurring 413 weeksinto the study, and it is observed that two later incidents fallwithin the time window. Since we are counting inter-arrivaltimes of a possible Poisson process, we use the ﬁrst of thesetwo events, and the time intervals¼7 (420/C0413¼7) is added to the record. The buffer period begins after week416; any possible instigating incident during this period cannotbe checked for secondary incidents over the entire time win-dow, and so no further observations are made.The counting scheme in the preceding example is repeatedincident by incident for every arrestee in the dataset. Therecords ofsare combined into one master record, and thenumbers of observations are summed across all arrestees,yielding the total number of observations N
0. We applied this method to theviolentandnon-violentdatasets separately; agraph of the respective histograms is shown in Fig. 2, in Sup- plementary material. For theviolentdataset, we made a totalofN
0¼4975 observations, 398 of which were followed by arepeat incident in the following 104 weeks. N
0¼261;006 observations were made for thenon-violentdataset, and 130,503 observations were followed by a repeat incident withinthe 104-week time window. Both histograms exhibit moreshort time intervals than long ones.2.2.2. Observed data versus the null hypothesisFirst consider theviolentdataset and the upper histogram inFig. 2, containingN
0¼4975 observations. Normalizing thehistogram to obtain a probability distribution yields the solidblue line in the upper graph ofFig. 3, in Supplementary mate-rial. By summing the probabilities, we see that about 8 %of all violent crimes are followed by an exact repeat occurring within104 weeks of the instigating incident. Next, we determined theleast-squares ﬁt of Eq.(2)to the observed data to estimate therate parameter. For theviolentdataset, the least-squares esti-mate ofkwas found to be^k¼6:989/C210
/C04. The functionpðsÞ¼^ke
/C0^ks
is shown as the dashed red curve in the upper graph of Fig. 3. We applied the same procedure to thenon-violenthistogram withN
0¼261;006 observations. Its probability distributionis shown in the bottom ofFig. 3along with its best-ﬁt curve,determined to have^k¼6:400/C210
/C03. Again, summation ofthe probabilities reveals that 50%of non-violent crimes are fol-lowed by an exact-repeat incident occurring within 104 weeksof the instigating incident. As we will establish quantitatively156 P. Kump et al.in the next section, the null hypothesis distribution poorlydescribes the observed data for small values of s, indicating that event dependence is present in the data.2.2.3. The Kolmogorov–Smirnov testTo test the validity of the exponential distribution in Eq. (2)as a model of our Chicago repeat data, we use the well-knownKolmogorov–Smirnov (K–S) goodness-of-ﬁt test [14,11], the basic premise of which is to compare the observed cumulativedistribution function (CDF) with the CDF of the assumed nulldistribution. If the maximum discrepancy between theobserved and null CDFs is larger than a speciﬁc conﬁdencethreshold for a given sample size, the null distribution isdeemed an unacceptable model of the data. On the other hand,if the discrepancy is less than the threshold, the null distribu-tion cannot be rejected.LetFðsÞbe the CDF of the null distribution in Eq. (2), that isFðsÞ¼X
st¼0pðtÞ;and similarly letbFðsÞbe the CDF of the observed data. Thetest statistic of the K–S test is the maximum absolute differ-ence betweenFðsÞandbFðsÞ. Let this maximum difference bedenoted byD
N0¼max
sjbFðsÞ/C0FðsÞj:K–S test of sizeacomparesD
N0with the conﬁdence thresh-old valueD
aN
0deﬁned byPrðD
N06DaN
0Þ¼1/C0a;whereN
0is the number of degrees of freedom (histogram nor-malization factor).If the observed value ofD
N0is greater than the thresholdD
aN
0, the null hypothesis can be rejected at theð1/C0aÞ/C2100%conﬁdence level. In our study, we chosea¼0:05 corresponding to a 95%conﬁdence interval. Thedegrees of freedom for ourviolentandnon-violentdatasets wereN
0¼4975 andN 0¼261;006, respectively. Signiﬁcancethresholds fora¼0:05 and forN
0>50 are given in Angand Tang[1]asD
aN
0¼1:36ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃN 0p/C14, which yieldsDaN
0¼0:019 andD
aN
0¼0:003 for our two datasets.Fig. 4, found in Supplementary material, shows, for each dataset, the observed CDF,bFðsÞ, and the null CDF,FðsÞ, fors6104;as well as the maximum differenceD
N0between the two. Ourviolentdataset yielded a K–S test statistic of0.0251, which is greater than the conﬁdence threshold of0.019, and so we can reject the null hypothesis that violent inci-dents are statistically independent. We can draw a similar con-clusion with ournon-violentdataset, which produced a K–Stest statistic of 0.016, which is greater than the threshold of0.003. It should be noted that one cannot infer conclusionsabout the precise value ofsfor whichD
N0occurs (which may not even be unique); the test can only reject the nullhypothesis and does not provide insight as to the time frameof elevated repeat risk. However, ﬁnding a sfor which jbFðsÞ/C0FðsÞj>D
aN
0means, at the very least, that a sufﬁcientlylarge time windows
maxwas chosen.3. Social network repeat effectsSocial networks are graph structures composed of nodes (inour case, arrestees), and edges, which form links between thesenodes. Social networks can help explain observed local andglobal patterns within these structures, and identify nodesfrom which other nodes draw inﬂuence.In this study each arrestee in a dataset deﬁnes a node hav-ing a unique label within the social network. For purposes ofanonymization, we refer to each arrestee using a unique inter-nal record (IR) number. When two or more subjects arearrested as part of the same incident, their respective nodesbecome connected in the social network. The edge connectingthis pair of nodes forms on the day the incident occurred; thus,the social network is constantly evolving. The network is anundirected graph, as there is an inherent symmetry betweenco-arrestees: if IR1 is arrested with IR2, then IR2 is arrestedwith IR1. For simplicity in this initial investigation, the edgesare unweighted (two subjects are either connected or not, andno connection strength is assigned to the edge that connectsthem). Although our network is dynamic, unweighted, andundirected, the analysis to follow can readily be adapted toother types of networks.Although we will separately analyze the repeat behavior ofviolent and non-violent crimes, we use a single, common socialnetwork for all arrestees. We measure the separation betweentwo subjects in the social network using the geodesic distancebetween their nodes, i.e., the minimum number of edges thatmust be traversed to move between the nodes. It should benoted that the network contains isolated cliques, i.e., subsetsof nodes having edges that do not connect to any node outsidethe subset. Our network contains nearly three million nodesand 900,000 edges. The largest geodesic distance between anytwo connected nodes is 37, the largest isolated clique contains474 nodes, and the smallest isolated cliques consist of just onenode.3.1. Near-repeat counting methodOur process of measuring near-repeat time intervals is a com-plicated one that is best explained by way of an example.Fig. 5, found in Supplementary material, shows the incidenttimelines of two subjects, IR1 and IR2, who become immedi-ate neighbors in the network after becoming linked by a co-arrest 100 weeks into the time period studied. In our study,we used the ﬁrst four years (208 weeks) of data as an initialnetwork setup, or ‘‘burn-in”period, during which the networkevolves without taking measurements. This is to ensure thatthe measurements are taken from a network in steady state.In the example inFig. 5, after the burn-in period, IR1 isarrested in week 209, and his immediate neighbor in the net-work, IR2, is arrested in week 245. Thus we obtain a measure-ment of the wait time between arrests of s¼36 ð245/C0209¼36Þ, indicated inFig. 5with a blue line connect-ing the two incidents. The next arrest occurs in week 212, againinvolving IR1, after which the soonest arrest of IR2 is again inweek 245. Therefore the next measurement of wait time iss¼33 (245/C0212¼33). Now the arrest of IR2 in week 245becomes the instigating incident for the arrest of IR1 in week275, ands¼30 is recorded (275/C0245¼30). Both of the sub-jects are arrested in week 275, and in this scenario, we countChicago’s criminal social network 157each arrest as being the instigating incident for the other andhence,s¼0 is recorded twice. The counting procedure contin-ues in this manner.An absence of network data for IR1 and IR2 in week 275indicates that the two arrests are related to separate crime inci-dents (as is the case for the two arrests in week 201). This issigniﬁcant because we keep track of the elapsed time sincethe two were linked and allow the link to expire if this timeexceeds four years. By removing connections that become‘‘stale”after several years, we maintain a network with relevantrelationships. A link may be renewed should the subjects bearrested together again. In the present example, IR1 and IR2are linked in week 100 and the link is never renewed. Thus, theirlink expires in week 308, shown as a vertical dashed line in theﬁgure, and no measurements are taken beyond that time. Bychoosing an expiration time equal in duration to that of the net-work burn-in time, the network temporal window is held con-stant in duration; it is never longer or shorter than four years.This example illustrates the counting method for arresteesseparated by a geodesic distance ofn¼1 in the social network,but the method is similar for greater values of n.Algorithm 1 in Supplementary materialgives the pseudocode algorithm toobtain the wait time distribution for any nP1.In a near-repeat analysis (in contrast to our exact-repeatanalysis), we would not expect the time intervals to be expo-nentially distributed should the null hypothesis of event inde-pendence be true. This is because the arrests of two subjectsin a single incident violate the requirement of non-simultaneity. If independent events are allowed to occur simul-taneously, then the time intervals between events will not beexponentially distributed[21]. Nevertheless, statistical testingof our observed distributions can be done using Monte Carlosimulations to estimate a null distribution.3.2. Testing for elevated clustering in time and geodesic distanceThe goal of this section is to determine whether the observednear-repeat distributions for different geodesic distancesp
nðsÞexhibit elevated clustering when compared to the nullhypothesis of no event dependence across time and geodesicdistance. Originally developed to detect only spatial clustering,theO-ring statistic[13,23]and Ripley’sK[23]are spatial descriptive statistics, with roots in epidemiology, that can beextended to detect clustering in a spatiotemporal sense [2,15]. We calculated both statistics using our observed distributions,and in order to compare the statistics to those under the nullhypothesis, we performed Monte Carlo simulations in whichthe dates of the subject-date 2-tuples are randomly permuted.Reshufﬂing the date data is a common strategy in this situationwhen the null distribution is unknown. Originally applied inBesag and Diggle[3], this strategy was also implemented inRatcliffe and Rengert[20]to evaluate near-repeat shootingpatterns in the city of Philadelphia, PA.Lets
ijnbe the time interval between incidentsiandjgiven that the arrestees are separated by geodesic distance n. The O-ring statistic for distancenis given by the following:O
nðsÞ¼1~kNX
i–jIðsijn¼sÞ;ð3ÞwhereNis the total number of incidents,~kis the so-called ‘‘point density,”andIð/C1Þis the indicator functionIða¼bÞ¼1;a¼b;0;a–b:/C26In the traditional spatial case, the point density ~kis usually chosen as the average number of points per unit area. Doingso gives the researcher a meaningful and convenient way toquantify the spatial clustering relative to that expected by aPoisson process. However, as explained earlier, there is no rea-son to believe our data follow a Poisson process; however,analogous to the spatial case, we can still deﬁne ~kas a rate esti- mated asNdivided by the total number of subjects divided bythe total number of weeks in the study.In the context of near repeats, the summation in Eq. (3)is simply a count of the number of pairs of arrests occurringexactlysweeks apart involving subjects separated by geodesicdistancen. We have already performed this count; it isNn/C1pnðsÞ. Therefore, we can express theO-ring statistic in Eq.(3)asO
nðsÞ¼1~kNN
n/C1pnðsÞ:ð4ÞThe closely related Ripley’sKfunction is a cumulative countof time intervals and can be expressed similarly asK
nðsÞ¼1~kNX
i–jIðsijn6sÞ¼Xst¼0OnðtÞ:ð5ÞTheKandO-ring statistics, while similar, answer slightlydifferent questions. For example, if we hypothesize thatnear-repeat effects only last for a certain duration and then‘‘expire,”and the accumulating nature of theKstatistic should identify the time at which the effect expires. In this case, wewould expect elevatedKstatistics at short time intervals andmoderateKstatistics falling within conﬁdence intervals at lar-ger time intervals. TheO-ring is more of an instantaneous met-ric identifying speciﬁc times of heightened near-repeat risk. AnelevatedO-ring statistic at, say,s¼4 weeks would imply clus-tering of near-repeat incidents four weeks after instigating inci-dents and does not confound with theO-ring statistics at largervalues ofs.Both statistics are of interest to us; therefore weconsider both in our analysis.We ﬁrst consider ourviolentdataset, and plot the observedO-ring andKstatistics forn¼1;2;3 and 06s6208 inFig. 6, in Supplementary material. For comparison to the nullhypothesis, we randomly permute the dates of all arrests whileholding the subjects ﬁxed, and, with the new data, calculateand plot theO-ring andKstatistics. This process is repeatedfor 95 random permutations for the sake of constructing a95% conﬁdence envelope, also plotted in Fig. 6. Randomly permuting the dates has the effect of observing how O-ring andKstatistics would appear should there be no spatiotempo-ral relationships[20].We observe fromFig. 6elevatedO-ring andKstatistics within the ﬁrst 25 weeks for the cases of n¼1;2 neighbors, with the effect extending past 80 weeks for the Kstatistic. For then¼3 case, the ﬁgure shows that the statistics are com-
pletely within the envelope of what can be expected under thenull hypothesis and are therefore not statistically signiﬁcant atthe 95% conﬁdence level. Not shown are the statistics forn¼4 neighbors for which we also found no signiﬁcantdependence.158 P. Kump et al.Next we consider thenon-violentdataset for which we con-ducted the same analysis as for theviolentdataset. The resultsare shown inFig. 7, in Supplementary material. Forn¼1;2, the ﬁgure shows that theO-ring statistic falls outside of the95% conﬁdence envelope for small values of sduring which the statistic exceeds the upper limit of the conﬁdence interval.For largern, theO-ring statistic falls entirely within theconﬁdence envelope and is therefore not statistically signiﬁ-cant at those values ofn.The ﬁgure also shows an elevatedKstatistic forn¼1;2;3;4 and aKstatistic values that arenot signiﬁcant forn¼5. We repeated the analysis forn¼6 andn¼7 and found that neither theO-ring nor theK statistic showed signiﬁcant event-dependence effects in eithercase.3.3. DiscussionThe above pioneering approach of fusing the O-ring andK statistics with a social network analysis provides knowledgeof the temporary inﬂuence one has on his peers within the net-work. This inﬂuence may be described by the strength of theinﬂuence – that is, the maximum geodesic distance for whichthe inﬂuence is observed – and its persistence, i.e., for howlong, temporally, the inﬂuence is observed.Since theO-ring statistic is, as explained previously, a mea-sure of instantaneous effect, it provides insight concerning thetime scales of repeat incidents in our Chicago datasets. Forinstance, theO-ring statistic is elevated for ourviolentdataset during roughly the ﬁrst 25 weeks forn¼1, indicating (possiblyfor the reasons outlined in the introduction) an increasedchance of a violent repeat crime occurring within about sixmonths of an initial violent crime for subjects directly con-nected in the network. During this time, we observe 58% morerepeat incidents than expected by chance. The Kstatistic reaches a maximum separation from its conﬁdence envelopeduring this time period before it begins to approach and ﬁnallypenetrates the envelope at about 90 weeks. Thus the total num-ber of violent repeat crimes separated by less than 90 weeks ismore than what would be expected by chance alone.A similar argument can be made for the violent n¼2 case in which theO-ring statistic inFig. 6implies an elevated prob-ability of violent repeat crimes occurring within just twomonths of an initial violent crime. During this time, we observe70% more repeat incidents than expected by chance. The K
statistic demonstrates an elevation in the total number of vio-lent repeat crimes separated by less than 80 weeks. Finally, ourresults forn¼3 andn¼4(n¼4 not shown in the ﬁgure)demonstrate no statistically signiﬁcant violent near-repeateffects; thus the concept of ‘‘near”for violent crimes may belimited to arrested individuals within two degrees of networkseparation.For thenon-violentdataset, theO-ring statistic falls outsideof the conﬁdence envelope for neighbors of distances n¼1 andn¼2;and is entirely contained within the envelope forlargern. Forn¼1;the elevatedO-ring statistic ats¼0 and s¼1 demonstrates an increased risk during the ﬁrst and sec-ond weeks following an instigating incident. In fact, thereare 28% more near-repeat incidents in the ﬁrst two weeks inthe dataset than is predicted by the null hypothesis. Similarly,forn¼2 neighbors, the elevated statistic ats¼0 implies an increased risk during the ﬁrst week following an instigatingincident. There are 17% more near-repeat incidents in the ﬁrstweek than predicted by the null hypothesis.TheKstatistics inFig. 7show a near-repeat effect whichdecreases in both time and network space. For n¼1 neigh- bors, more near-repeat crimes are observed within 22 weeksof instigating incidents than would be expected by chance;however, this time frame decreases as subjects become furtherseparated. For example, there are more repeat crimes thanexpected only for the ﬁrst 20 weeks for n¼2, 10 weeks for n¼3, and 8 weeks forn¼4, and the number of crimes areas expected forn¼5 andn¼6(n¼6 not shown in the ﬁg-ure). During these time frames, we see 10.47% more crimesthan expected forn¼1, 4.91% forn¼2;3.06% forn¼3, and 2.96% forn¼4. TheKstatistics show repeat effects atn¼3 andn¼4 while theO-ring statistics do not. This isbecause the two statistics answer slightly different questions.TheKstatistic ﬁnds elevated crimes for then¼3 andn¼4 cases accumulated up to 10 weeks and 8 weeks, respectively;however, according to theO-ring statistic, there is no singleweek during these periods in which we should expect an ele-vated number of repeat crimes.4. ConclusionThis work is motivated by our interest in identifying factorsthat may be predictive of an individual’s involvement in futureviolence to enhance the predictive models we have developedas part of the Chicago Police Department’s predictive policingprogram. Speciﬁcally, we have developed a very successful pre-diction model that evaluates the crime risk of individuals withvery severe patterns of involvement in crime.This paper demonstrates conclusively that an individual’scrime risk increases for a period of roughly 25 weeks (about6 months) following a crime involving a person within twoor less degrees of separation from an individual involved inthat crime. To make practical use of this ﬁnding, we are cur-rently in the process of revising our prediction model byincluding new variables pertaining to ﬁrst- and second-degreeconnections, as well as a weighting function that gives greateremphasis to the effect of recent crime incidents, as opposed tothose in the more distant past. In addition to the practical sig-niﬁcance for our current project, the ﬁndings of this paper pro-vide us with fundamental insights about patterns of crime andits temporal and interpersonal behavior, for both violent andnon-violent crime types.In this work, to test for the presence of a social-networknear-repeat effect, we conducted statistical analyses of arrestdata to measure exact-repeat and near-repeat effects withinChicago’s criminal social network for both violent and non-violent crimes. For exact-repeats, we modeled the situationin which arrests are independent of one another as a Poissonprocess, and therefore inter-arrival times were compared toan exponential distribution. We selected the distribution’s rateparameter to minimize the residual sum of squares and quan-tify the goodness-of-ﬁt using the popular K–S test. The K–Stest rejects the null hypothesis of independence for both ofour datasets with 95% conﬁdence.We measured near-repeat effects by considering how theeffects spread through a social network. Each node in the net-work is a unique arrestee, and two nodes become connectedshould two subjects be arrested as part of the same unlawfulChicago’s criminal social network 159incident. With the network in place, we recorded the timeintervals between repeat incidents, this time keeping track of‘‘distances”, or the degree separation between graph nodes.By recording these geodesic distances, we allowed for the sep-arate examination of temporal and spatial effects using Rip-ley’sKandO-ring statistics. In order to compare thesestatistics to those of a null distribution of no dependenceamong incidents (across time and geodesic distance), we ran-domly permuted arrest dates and then recalculated the teststatistics. The results showed elevated repeat effects thatdecrease over time and geodesic distance within the network.For violent crimes in particular, we have observed that thenear-repeat effect extends to neighbors separated by a geodesicnetwork distance ofn¼2, with the effect most prominent forneighbors ofn¼1. Further, we have seen that this effectexpires at most 25 weeks after an instigating crime. Therefore,when considering the role one individual’s crime plays on therisk of a second individual, we must only concern ourselveswith crimes fromn¼1 andn¼2 neighbors, from at most25 weeks ago. As explained earlier, these ﬁndings will informfuture predictive models for identifying individuals at high riskfor future violence.AcknowledgmentsThis project was supported by Award No. 2011-IJ-CX-K014,awarded by the National Institute of Justice, Ofﬁce of JusticePrograms, U.S. Department of Justice. The opinions, ﬁndings,and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this publica-tion are those of the authors and do not necessarily reﬂectthose of the Department of Justice.Appendix A. Supplementary materialSupplementary data associated with this article can be found,in the online version, athttp://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.aci.2016.01.002.References
[1]A. Ang, W. Tang, Probability Concepts in Engineering:Emphasis on Application to Civil and EnvironmentalEngineering, Wiley, 2006
.[2]
M.-L. Benot, A.-K. Bittebiere, A. Ernoult, B. Clement, C.Mony, Fine-scale spatial patterns in grassland communitiesdepend on species clonal dispersal ability and interactions withneighbours, J. Ecol. 101 (2013) 626–636
. [3]
J. Besag, P.J. Diggle, Simple Monte Carlo tests for spatialpattern, Appl. Stat. 26 (1977) 327–333
.[4] A.A. Braga, Gun Violence Among Serious Young Offenders,Technical Report, U.S. Department of Justice, 2008.[5] M. Comeau, Repeat and Near-Repeat Burglary Victimization inRochester, NY, Technical Report, Center for Public SafetyInitiatives, 2014.[6]P.J. Cook, J. Ludwig, S.A. Venkatesh, A.A. Braga,Underground gun markets, Econ. J. 117 (2007) 558–588
. [7]
J. Fagan, D.L. Wilinson, Guns, youth violence, and socialidentify in inner cities, Crime Justice 24 (1998) 105–188
. [8]
G. Farrell, Preventing repeat victimization, Crime Justice (1995)469–534
.[9]
R.B. Felson, H.J. Steadman, Situational factors in disputesleading to criminal violence, Criminology 21 (1983) 59–74
. [10]
S.D. Johnson, Repeat burglary victimization: a tale of twotheories, J. Exp. Criminol. 4 (2008) 215–240
. [11]
A. Kolmogorov, Sulla determinazione empirica di una legge didistribuzione, Giornale Dell’ Instuto Italiano degli Attuari 4(1933) 83–91
.[12]
M. Kulldorff, The Knox method and other tests for space-timeinteractions, Biometrics 55 (1999) 544–552
. [13]
R. Law, J. Illian, D. Burslem, G. Gratzer, C.V.S. Gunatilleke, I.Gunatilleke, Ecological information from spatial patterns ofplants: insights from point process theory, J. Ecol. 97 (2009)616–628
.[14] S.C. Loftus, L.L. House, M.C. Hughey, J.B. Walke, M.H.Becker, L.K. Belden, Dimension Reduction for MultinomialModels Via a Kolmogorov-Smirnov Measure (KSM), TechnicalReport, No. 15-1, Virginia Tech, 2015.[15]
R.J.Q. McNally, J. Rankin, M.D.F. Shirley, S.P. Rushton, T.Pless-Mulloli, Space-time analysis of down syndrome: resultsconsistent with transient pre-disposing contagious agent, Int. J.Epidemiol. 37 (2008) 169–1179
.[16]
A.V. Papachristos, A.A. Braga, D.M. Hureau, Social networksand the risk of gunshot injury, J. Urban Health 89 (2012) 992–1003
.[17]
A.V. Papachristos, D.M. Hureau, A.A. Braga, The corner andthe crew: the inﬂuence of geography and social networks ongang violence, Am. Sociol. Rev. 78 (2013) 417–447
. [18]
W.L. Perry, B. McInnis, C.C. Price, S.C. Smith, J.S. Hollywood,Predictive Policing: The Role of Crime Forecasting in LawEnforcement Operations, RAND Corporation, 2013
. [19] Pew Center on the States, State of Recidivism: The RevolvingDoor of America’s Prisons, 2011.[20]
J.H. Ratcliffe, G.F. Rengert, Near-repeat patterns inPhiladelphia shootings, Secur. J. 21 (2008) 58–76
. [21]
Y.A. Rozanov, Probability Theory: A Concise Course, Dover,1977
.[22]
M.B. Short, M.R. D’Orsogna, P.J. Brantingham, G.E. Tita,Measuring and modeling repeat and near-repeat burglaryeffects, J. Quant. Criminol. 25 (2009) 325–339
. [23]
T. Wiegand, M. Andersson, P. Krieger, Spatial point patternanalysis of neurons using Ripley’sK-function in 3D, Front Neuroinform. 4 (2010)
.160 P. Kump et al.