Media bias detection and bias short term impact assessment
Swati Aggarwal*,1, Tushar Sinha1, Yash Kukreti1, Siddarth Shikhar1
Division of Computer Engineering, Netaji Subhas University of Technology, Azad Hind Fauj Marg, Sector-3, Dwarka, New Delhi, 110078, India
ARTICLE INFO
Index Terms:Media biasBiased opinionUser conditioningNews impactABSTRACT
Today, media outlets are known to report news in a biased way, potentially affecting the beliefs of news con-sumers and altering their behaviors. Therefore, tracking bias in everyday news and building a platform wherepeople can receive neutral and unequivocal news information is important.This research investigates media outlets for subjectivity versus objectivity by examining reported news eventsfrom their Twitter handles. The study subsequently proceeds to show how such subjective news articles programnews consumers and condition their opinions. Eventually, a system which aids the detection of alarming biases inmedia is proposed through a unique bias short-term impact score calculation mechanism.With reference to a real-world event, ‘Demonetization in India’, a signiﬁcant fraction of news tweets is found to be subjective in nature which are further observed as opinion conditioning agents for their consumers. Alarmingbiases are then detected in tweets in comparison with a neutral baseline.
1. IntroductionOpinions play a key role in decision-making processes. When acustomer chooses a product or service, he is in ﬂuenced by the views of others. Traditionally, people relied on the experiences of family membersand peers in order to make better decisions. In today ’s era of social media, individuals and groups not only exchange content and engage indiscussions, but also offer their points of view on different products,services or people. Websites such as Facebook and Twitter offer acontinuous stream of personal opinions on the most varied range oftopics. This helps people to learn about experiences of individuals allover the world.In the present day where social media has become a powerful meansfor expressing opinions, what is feared is how it is slowly programmingusers’behaviors. News, among all other means, has grown to become oneof the most inﬂuential carriers of motivated propaganda.The burgeoning of fake news is an evident side effect of this phe-nomenon. The US presidential election campaign in 2016, notably, is oneof the numerous incidents which have been plagued with this menace inrecent times. According to The Telegraph, fake news is now seen as one ofthe greatest threats to democracy, free debate and the Western order.News reporting, which functions on the ideals of objectivity, needs to berestored to its principled and lucid past.[1] Wikipedia deﬁnesmedia biasas“the perceived bias of journalists and news producers within mass media in the selection of events andstories that are reported, and how they are covered. ” Media has the power to inﬂuence opinions of masses which in turnconditions and inﬂuences their day-to-day activities. In recent years, a lotof controversy has risen over the credibility of media outlets in reportingnews. This calls for a need to detect bias in everyday news and to developa platform so that people can receive balanced and safe news.This research relies on Twitter (one of the most prominent socialnetworking medium present today) for its analysis. Tweets by mediaoutlets are indicative of the type of news they report. This study targetssome popular media outlets and journalists in India, and analyzes theirtweets. It analyzes how biased opinions are channeled and propagatedvia social media into a network of people following/consuming it. Theresearch and the proposed model can, however, be extended to othersocial media and be analyzed for a bigger social network.The study is performed in three stages. In stage one, subjectivityversus objectivity in news is investigated. Ideally, media outlets shouldreport neutral and objective news to its consumers. However, in-vestigations reveal that a large fraction of the them report subjectivenews to its consumers, thereby injecting opiniated information into thenetwork. This subjective news can be referred to as biased opinion.In stage two, the short term impact such subjective news reporting has
* Corresponding author.E-mail addresses:swati1178@gmail.com(S. Aggarwal),sinha.tushar94@gmail.com(T. Sinha),yashkukreti8117@gmail.com(Y. Kukreti),siddarthshikhar@gmail. com(S. Shikhar).
1Equal contribution.
Contents lists available atScienceDirect
Array
journal homepage:www.elsevier.com/journals/array/2590-0056/open-access-journal
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.array.2020.100025Received 29 September 2019; Received in revised form 3 April 2020; Accepted 8 April 2020Available online 18 April 20202590-0056/©2020 Published by Elsevier Inc. This is an open access article under the CC BY license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ ).Array 6 (2020) 100025on its consumers is studied. The proposed work aims to analyze howmedia outlets subtly condition news consumers in both positive andnegative overtones i.e. the news consumers may get conditioned to be inline with the media outlet’s view on a subject, or may get conditioned tohave a completely opposite view with respect to the media outlet ’s view. It is evident from the results obtained that large number of news con-sumers develop biases towards a particular issue, as guided and condi-tioned by media outlets.Finally, having justiﬁed the need for a platform to receive safe andhealthy objective news, a system is proposed to detect alarming mediabiases by measuring their short term impact on news consumers. Aunique‘bias short term impact score ’calculation method is proposed which leverages social media metrics as extracted from media outlets andtheir followers coupled with polarity scores as obtained from stage one.To detect alarming biases, a subsequent comparison of this score with aneutral baseline is performed and this forms the third stage of thisresearch.The paper presents a comprehensive description of these three tasksin sequential order.2. Literature surveyThe task of sentiment analysis is central to all the three stages of thiswork. It forms the basis to classify and quantify the polarity of tweets inthe dataset. Therefore, this task needs to be carried out in the mostefﬁcient manner.Traditional approaches to sentiment analysis rely either on lexicon-based approaches or implementations through machine learningalgorithms.Liu [2] along with Pang and Lee [3] provided a comprehensive review of the methods used in sentiment analysis. They discussed the usage ofunigram features like term frequency, POS tagging, syntax analysis,negation handling and domain considerations while using lexicon-basedmodels. They further discussed supervised approaches by feeding thesefeatures to Naïve Bayesian or SVM (Support Vector Machines) classi ﬁers. For unsupervised methods, PMI calculations, which measure the close-ness of two words, were also examined to determine the sentiment score.Following this, Hutto and Gilbert [ 4] constructed a gold-standard sentiment lexicon–VADER (Valence Aware Dictionary and sEntimentReasoner) which was speciﬁcally attuned to microblog-like contexts. Aspart of their work, they created a rule-based model to consider thegrammatical and syntactical conventions used by humans to emphasizesentiment intensity which could be implemented irrespective of the un-derlying lexicon/algorithmic implementation. VADER was trained on adataset consisting of tweets and outperformed human raters. It general-ized more favorably than any benchmark including other lexicons ormachine learning techniques.VADER, in its comparison to lexicons which provide a binary classi-ﬁcation of words like LIWC and GI, showed better performance in thesocial media domain due to better capturing of social media speci ﬁc lexical features and a tendency to account for the sentiment intensity ofwords rather than just their binary nature. It even outperformed lexiconsconsisting of a sentiment intensity value mapping like ANEW and Sen-tiWordNet, due to lexical feature capturing for the social media domain,and being less noisy due to its gold standard i.e. human curation.Its performance was comparable to machine learning approachesinvolving SVM’s and Naïve Bayes classiﬁers, however, it had an added advantage of not requiring a training dataset, not being overly reliant onthe training dataset validity for efﬁcient feature extraction and not requiring computationally expensive processes, something, which is ahuge positive while considering the real-time nature of social media.Due to all of the above reasons accompanied with its ease of usage,VADER was identiﬁed as an aptﬁt for the use case of this work. There-fore, this proposed work uses the VADER tool in all further tasks forcalculating the sentiment scores for tweets in the dataset.2.1. Investigating subjectivity vs objectivity for news
In the last decade, there has been substantial research analyzing therole of news coverage by media outlets.Garon [5] studied the functional subjectivity in media coverage,speciﬁcally focusing on The Gulf War case. Prime time news reports wereobtained from news channels like CNN, TV5, CBC and CBV for a period of28 days. This was followed by systematic content analysis on each newsstory with subjectivity assessment done by qualitative indices like thedegree of portrayal of censorship and presence/absence of actual sourcesto back up stories. Following probability statistics standards whichidentiﬁed subjectivity from closely related Chi-square values, the rela-tionship between subjectivity in television news reports and the media ’s inﬂuence strategies were determined.Similarly, White [6] investigated news subjectivity by referring to aSydney Morning Herald report on a violent attack after the Gulf War. Therhetoric potential of modern English language news items was studied byobserving that the presentation of news which seemed ‘objective’ac- cording to media’s ideals of‘neutrality’,‘balance’and‘reliability’, still conveyed social evaluations and interpretations based on the author ’s personal preferences. The media ’s claim for objectivity of text wassimultaneously addressed by analyzing different sections of the newsarticle and discussing the implications of an orbital model used forreporting‘hard news’.Lex and Jufﬁnger and Granitzer [7] assessed objectivity in online news media by analyzing articles from two British newspapers, ‘The Telegraph’and‘The Guardian’. Topic independent features were usedwith standard bag-of-word models to classify articles as objective orsubjective. It was observed that topic independent features resulted in again in accuracy for cross-domain experiments, however, forsingle-domain experiments, the standard bag-of-words model withoutstopword removal and stemming provided optimal performance.This proposed work uses a simple, computationally inexpensivemethod to identify subjectivity in news tweets. It is different from theaforementioned researches as it uses an unsupervised computingapproach. The computational efﬁciency of the proposed work is attrib-uted to the simplicity of unsupervised methods over the complex su-pervised approaches (which include annotating large datasets andcomputational expense of supervised algorithms). Also, since the analysisis to be performed on a single domain, topic independent features, likethe ones implemented by Lex [7]; are not required. The subjectivity ofnews is determined by checking whether the sentiment score (obtainedfrom VADER [4]) lies within pre-established limits.2.2. Impact of reporting on news consumersVarious researches have studied the impact of subjective newsreporting on its consumers.O
’Connell [8]; for instance, studied the reasons for fear among thecitizens of Ireland of a ‘law and order crisis’, as visible from surveys, despite low crime rates and related the cause of this misconception to thedistorted image of crime in media. Articles on crime were collected fromfour leading newspapers for a period of two months. Parameters likedate, newspaper, page number, headline, number of words, area ofarticle and the type of offence reported in the article were recorded.These parameters were used to account for the ways in which the mediainduces bias.DellaVigna and Kaplan [9] analyzed the entry of Fox News in cablemarkets and its impact on voting. Using a dataset consisting of votingdata and Fox News viewership metrics in local cable channels, its effecton the vote share in Presidential elections of 1996 and 2000 was calcu-lated. It was observed that Republicans gained 0.4 to 0.7% points in thetowns that broadcasted Fox News; concluding that Fox News convinced 3to 28% of its viewers to vote for Republicans. The vote share change wasattributed to the media slant induced by Fox News by mentioning resultsof 2 previous experiments which showed that ‘evaluators of informationS. Aggarwal et al. Array 6 (2020) 100025
2do not take sufﬁciently into account the (known) incentives of the ad-visors and are thus persuaded by their advice ’and‘small investors follow the recommendations of afﬁliated analysts, despite the conﬂict of interest of the analysts.’The proposed work in this paper banks on a similarexplanation to show conditioning among the public when they consumesubjective news tweet made by a prominent media outlet.Gerber and Karlan and Bergan [10] explored the effects on political views and behavior of media bias by conducting a natural ﬁeld experi- ment. Individuals were randomly assigned to either receive a free sub-scription to the Washington Post, Washington Times, or to a controlgroup which did not receive any newspaper. Door-to-door polling modelswere used followed by probabilistic analysis. A public opinion survey wasconducted after the 2005 Virginia gubernatorial election to ﬁnd that irrespective of the media slant, people who received newspapers had agreater tendency to vote Democrat. Also, a long-term increase in thevoter turnout was observed in the 2006 election, possibly, due tore-subscription of these newspapers. Finally, it was inferred that not onlymedia slant, but even media exposure, can cause an evocation in publicopinions.Chiang and Knight [11] also investigated the inﬂuence of media on voting in the context of newspaper endorsements by developing a sta-tistical econometric model in which voters chose candidates by resolvingtheir uncertainty over the quality of candidates by relying on endorse-ments from newspapers. The degree of in ﬂuence was found to be dependent on the credibility of the endorsement. This observation led toan interesting side-effect of the inﬂuence phenomenon where voters werefound to be sophisticated enough toﬁlter out evident biases in media, while still retaining some orientation with endorsements published incredible newspapers.This proposed work introduces an approach to determine if newsconsumers have been conditioned, by comparing the current sentimentvalue of the consumer with its previous average sentiment value. Thisdifference is then compared against a threshold to determine the extentand nature of conditioning. If considerable change is noted, the newsconsumer is said to have been conditioned, either positively ornegatively.2.3. System to detect alarming media bias and measure its impactMany theories have been proposed to measure and quantify in-clinations and biases of media outlets.Groseclose and Milyo [12] provided an objective measure of the slantof news and a comparative measure against other political actors.Americans for Democratic Action (ADA) scores, which categorize usersentiment in the range 0 (strongly conservative) to 100 (strongly liberal)were estimated for all major media outlets in the US by counting thenumber of times a media outlet cited various think tanks. These citationpatterns were compared with the number of times the Congress cited thesame think tanks in their speeches on theﬂoor of the House and Senate. The estimation was also dependent on the pre-existing adjusted ADAscores of the parliamentarians making these speeches. Finally, ADAscores were calculated for each media outlet on 2 granularity levels:sentence level, and citation level.Lin and Bagrow and Lazer [13] proposed measures to quantify theextent and dynamics of blog and mainstream media bias by focusing onstories about the 111th US Congress. A networked data model wascreated using different node sets for mainstream media, blog media andlegislators. The observed coverage of the Members of Congress was thencompared against a null model of unbiased coverage and biases withrespect to political parties, popular front runners, regions of the country,gender and ideology were investigated. Media slant was also observed inthe content of the coverage by examining links used in the text along withsentiment analysis on the textual content.An et al. [14] proposed a model to map the news media sources alonga one-dimensional political spectrum using Twitter co-subscriptions re-lationships between them. The relative position of each media source wasdetermined on a one-dimensional space by considering its distances to
other media sources. The distance was calculated by observing thecommon subscriber patterns. Theﬁnal co-ordinate was calculated as anADA score on the basis of its distance to some landmark media outlets,whose coordinates were already known with a high degree of con ﬁdence as calculated by Groseclose and Milyo [ 12]; which was then plotted on the one-dimensional space.Dunham [15] examined the political bias in six large daily newspa-pers. More than 25,000 references made to 12 think tanks over 18 yearsand 10 ideological frames (such as liberal, conservative or libertarian)were examined. The rate of attachment of these ideological frames tothink thanks by the means of news articles in the dataset was theninvestigated to calculate the biasness of the media source. The mediaexamined were found to be more likely to associate ideological labelswith organizations or think tanks with a conservative orientation, thanwith those having a liberal orientation, thereby, suggesting a liberal bias.This proposed work introduces a novel system to detect media biasesand measure their short term impact on news consumers. The systemforms an integral part of the platform for news consumers to receive safeand healthy objective news. Various parameters like in ﬂuence, reach and persistence of a tweet are used to calculate the Bias Short term ImpactScore (BSIS) (using a formula further explained in Section 5.3.3) which measures the‘bias-ness’of tweet. The parameters are calculated byquantifying standard Twitter actions like retweets, likes, replies andmentions.3. Subjectivity vs Objectivity in newsIt is the responsibility of media outlets to report day to day events inan unbiased and neutral manner. However, bias in selecting what toreport and concomitantly choosing a slant on a particular report plaguesthe current system. This study speciﬁcally focuses on Indian media out- lets, relying on Twitter datasets to represent biased reporting and pro-poses an approach to detect it.As mentioned earlier in Section1, the investigation can be extended to media other than Twitter as well. The domain speci ﬁcity to Twitter has been chosen for simplicity.Journalists with a large following tend to be quite in ﬂuential, with their opinions getting propagated to the masses. They can strongly affectpublic opinions with their inﬂuence having a strong correlation with thesubjectivity of their tweets. This may lead to a precarious situation wheremass opinion is dependent on the whims and personal orientations of fewjournalists and can therefore alter the political state of the country. It istherefore imperative to identify such journalists to restore the concept offree will in society.The studyﬁrst validates the assumption that media outlets providethe news consumers with opinionated news. Instead of providing fair,neutral - objective news, it is shown how various media outlets andjournalists provide subjective news. To do so, the tweets by popularmedia outlets and journalists are analyzed and checked for newssubjectivity versus objectivity. It is found that a large fraction of thetweets are subjective instead of the ideal objective nature.3.1. Data descriptionTwitter is a popular social networking and microblogging service thatallows users to post real time messages, called tweets. Tweets are shortmessages, restricted to 140 characters in length at the time of the study).With the rise of social media in India, there has been an increase inthe number of people using Twitter. Almost all media outlets and jour-nalists have veriﬁed Twitter handles, which they use periodically totweet information about various day to day happenings and events in thecountry.One such event was the Demonetization move by the Government ofIndia (GoI). On November 8, 2016, the GoI announced the Demoneti-zation of Rs. 500 and Rs. 1000 currency notes to curb the menace of blackS. Aggarwal et al. Array 6 (2020) 100025
3money. This provoked wide-ranging reactions from people, with someappreciating the move for its noble objectives, and some criticizing itciting the massive inconvenience that followed the announcement.The Twitter API [16] is used to fetch real time tweets from the veri-ﬁed handles of 10 media outlets and 10 journalists. A total of 4475 tweetsare collected for the subject of “Demonetization”and subsequent analysis is done. (Tweets were extracted for the period Nov 8, 2016 –Feb 16, 2017).Note:As part of this research, data was extracted for two other majorevents in the Indian context. These were:1. Odd-Even Rule in Delhi 2017 (Private vehicles could be on the roadonly on certain days, depending on their license plate number, fromJanuary 1, 2016. The scheme aimed to reduce pollution and smog inDelhi)2. Uttar Pradesh Assembly Elections-2017 (Election to the 17th UttarPradesh Legislative Assembly)Upon preliminary investigation following data pre-processing (asmentioned in Section3.1), these datasets were found to be unﬁt for evaluation. This was primarily because:1. Both of these events were not as signi ﬁcant on a national scale as compared to demonetization. Demonetization was a nation-wideevent which invoked wide-ranging reactions from media outlets aswell as citizens across the country.2. Due to the regional nature of the two events, it was found that thetweets were noisy due to presence of larger proportion of regionalmedia outlets as compared to the set of media outlets studied throughthe proposed work. Post cleaning, such tweets did not have enoughcontext for further research.3. The period over which these events invoked reactions led to a muchsmaller dataset as compared to the studied dataset. Both the eventsstudied did not have long-ranging life in the media.3.1.1. Pre-processingThe raw tweets fetched in Section3.1contain noise in form of lan- guage discrepancies, improper formatting, improper punctuation, use ofmedium (here Twitter) speciﬁc symbols and emoticons etc. This warrantssome pre-processing in order to clean the tweets and make them suitablefor further computation.The steps carried out for pre-processing are enlisted as:●All URLs are replaced with a tag “URL”●All targets (For e.g.“@narendramodi”) are replaced by the username and dropping the ‘@’at the start (e.g. gets changed to“narendramodi”).●All punctuation marks occurring in the text at the start or end of aword are separated from the word to enable easier tokenization andtherefore better performance (For e.g. said ’gets changed to said ‘).3.2. Polarity scoreSentiment scores for the tweets are determined by analyzing thetweets collected using VADER. NLTK- VADER is a popular tool forsentiment analysis of social media texts. It comprises of an underlyingimplementation of a rule-based model (Hutto and Gilbert, 2014). Writtenin Python, the library is one of the most commonly used tools fordetermining the polarity or sentiment score for given text in naturallanguage. The sentiment scores obtained by VADER are used for deter-mining the polarity of text.VADER provides a polarity score ( PS) ranging from/C01 (strongly negative) to
þ1 (strongly positive). This range is split into 3 regions,namely positive, negative and neutral. PSvalues ranging from/C01t o /C00.33 are classiﬁed as negativePSvalues whilePSvalues ranging from0.33 to 1 are classiﬁed as positivePSvalues.PSvalues lying between /C00.33 and 0.33 are referred to as neutral PSvalues. The visualization is shown in the number line plotted below in Fig. 1. The division of the polarity score space into three distinct sectionsensures that tweets which are signiﬁcantly polar are the only ones clas- siﬁed as positively or negatively biased. It is possible that genuine tweetson Demonetization, that are fairly neutral, have a non-zero PS value. A PSbetween/C00.33&0.33 is only slightly polar, and not necessarily biased.This reduces false positives while identifying biased tweets.The pseudocode for determining polarity of text is given as below inFig. 2.3.3. ObservationsContrary to the ideal objective news, a large fraction of tweets bymedia outlets/journalists are observed to be polar or subjective in nature.Table 1below shows the observations on the dataset. Fig. 3then shows these observations in graphical format.Thus, it is concluded that instead of providing neutral/objectivenews, the tweets by media outlets are largely subjective in nature.4. ConditioningAs shown by means of the aforementioned investigation, media out-lets and journalists present news consumers with polarized opinions. Thisguidance and conditioning through subjective news articles can beasserted as the cause for news consumers to become biased towards aparticular issue. This section of the study proves this assertion and ana-lyzes the conditioning of opinions by media outlets.4.1. TerminologyBefore describing the method to analyze conditioning of opinions, afew terms are introduced below.4.2. Data descriptionThe polar tweets, as extracted from the overall tweet dataset used inSection3, forms the basis for analyzing conditioning by media outlets.Along with the data as mentioned in Section 3.1, for each polar tweet, a list of user-ids of the users who ‘react’to the given tweet is also extracted. The behavior of ‘reactors’to polar tweets as obtained from Section 3is observed to study the conditioning of opinions by the media outlets.4.3. MethodologyThe conditioning of news consumers is analyzed by observing theiractivity prior to and post the event ( E). Of all the users who consume/ view the polar news/tweet, the study relies on the ‘reactors’of the given tweet as mentioned in Section4.1and their behavior is investigated asexplained before.Each user has prior opinions on the issues that are happening aroundhim.. The prior polarity (p), as deﬁned inTable 2, of a person is calculated by the exponential moving average ( EMA) of the polarity score (PS) of its previous tweets.Exponential Moving Average (EMA)for thePSseries is calculated recursively as:pðtÞ¼a*PSðtÞþ ð1/C0aÞ*pðt/C01Þ (1) The value ofais chosen as 0.3. This is done to provide fair weightageto both the last tweet and the series of previous tweets.However, a polar tweet/news report by a media outlet can affect theuser’s opinion on the issue. The polarity in the opinion of an user mightshow a massive swing (reversing one ’s opinion) or a minor one (a small strengthening of prior opinion). Various other external events/happen-ings can be a reason for this opinion change, but the time limit of ttoS. Aggarwal et al. Array 6 (2020) 100025
4tþ24 h is taken to ensure that the swing in opinion can be attributedlargely to the polar news consumed by the user.The post-event polarity (p’), as deﬁned inTable 2, is obtained by taking the arithmetic mean of the polarity scores of its tweets post theevent for a period of 24 h. It is assumed that the impact of conditioning isdiluted and can not be attributed with suf ﬁcient conﬁdence to twitter data after 24 h.An eventEis said to have conditioned a consumer Cif the value ofp andp’are signiﬁcantly different. The two opinionspandp’are assumed to be signiﬁcantly different if the difference of pandp’is 20% more (1.2 times) than the standard deviation in the PSsofCprior to eventE. The factor of 20% is taken to ensure that the change in polarity is signi ﬁcant, and not just an impulse in the reactor ’sPS. Only a change large enough with respect to the standard deviation is considered to be associated withthe journalist’s tweet and, therefore,ﬁt to be labelled as an act of ‘conditioning’.Note that an inﬂuence can be both positive and negative. An event E which causes a consumerCto be induced with a polarity change in linewith that of the tweet inEis said to have had a positive inﬂuence onC. Similarly, an eventEwhich causes the consumersCto be induced with a polarity change opposite to that of the tweet in Eis said to have had a negative inﬂuence onC.The pseudocode for this process is shown in Fig. 4below. The entire process can be summed up and represented using aﬂow chart as shown inFig. 5. It shows the various activities that are carriedout to examine the conditioning of news consumers by the media outlets/journalists.4.4. ObservationsThe tweets of‘reactors’are analyzed to study their behavior beforeand after the media outlets’polar tweet event. In the proposed study,tweets made by the Top 25 ‘Retweet-ers’and‘Favourit-ers’of a speciﬁc polar tweet by a media outlet/journalist are analyzed. These Top 25 re-actors are extracted with the help of the Twitter API [ 16] and web scraping techniques.Table 3below shows the statistics regarding thesetweets:The tweets of theseAR’s,a sd eﬁned inTable 2, are analyzed to investigate if and how they are conditioned. This act of conditioning canbe positive or negative as mentioned previously in Section 4.3. A polar tweet which ‘conditions’theARsuch that the direction of swing in polarity for its tweets in the next 24 h is in line with the polarityof the actual tweet, it is said to have positively conditioned the
Fig. 1.Range of negative, neutral and positive polarity sentiment scores.
Fig. 2.Pseudocode for determining polarity of text.
Table 1Polarity distribution of tweets.
Number of tweets 4475Number of polar positive tweets 873Number of polar negative tweets 931Percentage Of Polar Positive tweets 19.50%Percentage Of Polar Negative tweets 20.80%
Fig. 3.Graphical representation of the polarity of tweets in the dataset.Table 2Terminology used in the paper.
Term DeﬁnitionPolarity Score (PS)o fa tweetAs deﬁned in Section3.2, it denotes the sentiment value ofa tweet. The score ranges from a scale of /C01 (strongly negative) toþ1 (strongly positive). Event (E)A subjective tweet by a media outlet, i.e. a tweet havingpolarity score (PS) values between/C01 and/C00.33 depicting a polar negative tweet or between 0.33 and 1 depicting apolar positive tweet, is referred to as an event. The time atwhich the event occurs is denoted by t. Consumer (C)A tweet by a media outlet or a journalist is fed to allfollowers of its Twitter handle. These followers are referredto as the consumers or target audience of the tweet.Prior polarity (p)Each news consumer has a prior polarity indicating itsgeneral prior opinion on a particular person/topic.Post-event polarity(p’)The post-event polarity of a news consumer indicates itsopinion on the particular person/topic after an ‘event’ occurred. .ReactionA Reaction to a tweet is deﬁned as engagement in any ofthe following activities to the tweet: Like, Reply, Retweet.The detailed deﬁnition of these reactions and their impactis discussed in later section.ReactorA user who has ‘Reaction’to the tweet under consideration. Active Reactor (AR)An‘active reactor’is deﬁned as a‘reactor’who tweets within 24 h of the polar tweet to which it reacted.S. Aggarwal et al. Array 6 (2020) 100025
5ARðPCARÞand if the direction of swing in polarity for its tweets isopposite to the polarity of the actual tweet, it is said to have negativelyconditioned theARðNCARÞ.The results obtained in this task are shown in Table 4. 13.39% of the reactors analyzed are classi ﬁed as active reactors. Among the active reactors, 41.23% reactors are found to be conditioned.Incidentally, in this case study the number of positively and negativelyconditioned reactors turn out to be almost equal, occurring in a 52 –48 ratio.4.4.1. Sample PCAR observationAn example of how an active reactor is classi ﬁed as a positively conditioned active reactor is shown below:Example 1:Journalist’s Tweet after pre-processing: ‘Day 9: Demon- etization Death Toll Rises To 55 by DilliDurAst URL ’.Step 1:
Sentiment score of journalist’s tweet (as obtained from VADER(Hutto and Gilbert, 2014)):0.5994Step 2:
Reactor’s tweet after pre-processing: ‘The savage impact Modi’s haphazard demonetization is having on the economy ….’ Step 3:
Sentiment score of reactor’s tweet (as obtained from VADER):0.4588Step 4:
Previous average sentiment score of the reactor: 0.296 Step 5:
Difference between average sentiment and current sentiment:0.1628Step 6:
Previous Standard Deviation of sentiment for reactor: 0.05Since the difference is more than 1.2 times the standard deviation,and the change in polarity is in line with the polarity of the actual tweet,it is inferred that the reactor is positively conditioned.4.4.2. Sample NCAR observationAn example of how an active reactor is classi ﬁed as a negatively conditioned active reactor is shown as:Example 2:Journalist’s Tweet after pre-processing: ‘Our coverage and big focus on demonetization panic on streets continues: coming to you from
Fig. 4.Pseudocode for determining whether a consumer has been conditioned.
Fig. 5.Flow diagram for determining conditioning.S. Aggarwal et al. Array 6 (2020) 100025
6icici at sector 18 Noida:lines don’t end’.Step 1:
Sentiment score of journalist’s tweet (as obtained from VADER(Hutto and Gilbert, 2014)):0.5106Step 2:
Reactor’s tweet after pre-processing: ‘That is true. He’s also helped by poor opposition to #Demonetization . Regardless, he has awinner.’Step 3:
Sentiment score of reactor’s tweet (as obtained from VADER):0.5423Step 4:
Previous average sentiment score of the reactor : 0.8074Step 5:Difference between average sentiment and current sentiment:1.3497Step 6:
Previous Standard Deviation of sentiment for reactor: 0.122Since the difference is more than 1.2 times the standard deviation,and this change in polarity is opposite to the polarity of the actual tweet,it is inferred that the reactor is negatively conditioned.4.4.3. Graphical analysis/observationsThe analysis of some more test cases is shown in the form of thefollowing graphs inFig. 6.Fig. 6(a) shows the polarity score plot (red line) of a journalist withtime. The three points encircled in this plot correspond to the exampletweets for different types of conditioning. Fig. 6 (b), (c) and (d) zoom into the polarity score plot at these points, and show the details of condi-tioning due to the corresponding tweets. These include the 24-h averageof the polarity score (blue line), the exponential moving average ( EMA) of polarity score plot (green line), of a ‘reactor’who is conditioned/not conditioned by the journalist ’s tweet and the journalist’s polarity score plot (red line). The 24-h average is calculated as the average of the po-larity score of all tweets by the reactor in a 24-h period post a tweet. TheEMA is calculated using (1). The vertical line marks the tweet time in thegraph.If the difference between the 24-h average of the polarity score plot(blue line) and theEMAof polarity score plot (green line) at tweet time isgreater than threshold, we say that the reactor is conditioned. InTable 3Reactor sample Data Size.
Number of tweets analyzed from ‘reactors’ 116212 Number of‘reactors’analyzed 8350
Table 4Data summary of reactors and their tweets.
Number of‘active reactors’ 1118 Number of conditioned ‘active reactors’ 461 Number of positively conditioned ‘active reactors’ 240 Number of negatively conditioned ‘active reactors’ 221 Number of Positively conditioned tweets from ‘active reactors’370 Number of Negatively conditioned tweets from ‘active reactors’376
Fig. 6.(a) Journalist polarity score plot. 6(b)PCAR illustration. 6(c)NCAR illustration.6(d)UnconditionedARillustration.S. Aggarwal et al. Array 6 (2020) 100025
7Fig. 6(b), the graph drops by a value greater than the prescribed limitafter a negative polarity tweet by the journalist, hence the reactor is saidto be positively conditioned (PCAR). In Fig. 6(c), the reactor’s graph again drops below the calculated threshold, however, this ﬂuctuation occurs following a positive tweet by the journalist. Hence, this reactor issaid to be negatively conditioned (NCAR). Finally, in Fig. 6(d), the re- actor’s graph remains within limits on both sides of the average polarityscore plot. Therefore, this reactor is not conditioned by the journalist ’s tweet.5. Bias short term impact assessmentThe study conducted so far shows that a large fraction of tweets bymedia outlets are polar instead of the ideally expected neutral naturewhich, on further evaluation, is found to have the power to affect newsconsumers. Theseﬁndings justify the need for a system which can detectalarming biases arising from news articles in order to provide the base forfuture corrective action.Next, a model is proposed to detect and measure these biases. Thebias short term impact assessment tool discussed in this section is anintegral component needed to build a platform for safe and objectivenews. It implements a unique bias score calculation mechanism consid-ering a diverse set of factors followed by comparison with a neutralbaseline.5.1. Data descriptionThe overall tweet dataset used previously in Section 3.1is extended by using the tweet permalinks and user pro ﬁle pages to extract other useful information about each tweet. This information includes thenumber of followers of the user, the number of times the media outlet ismentioned on Twitter, the number of likes, replies, retweets of the tweet,the activity time of tweet, user-details of the users replying to the tweetand text-content of the tweet. Theseﬁelds are used for determining the short term impact of bias as described below.5.2. Polarity and subject identiﬁcationAlong with the polarity score, the subject or feature for which thesentiment is attributed is also determined. This task is carried out byusing feature identiﬁcation strategies as suggested by Pang and Lee
[4]. For experimentation, some major political subjects were identi ﬁed for the Indian context. This included the Bharatiya Janta Party (BJP) (Cur-rent Ruling Party at the Centre of the Indian Government), the IndianNational Congress (INC) (Leading Opposition Party at the Centre) and theAam Aadmi Party (AAP) (Current Ruling Party in the Delhi LegislativeAssembly) and their prominent leaders. The subjects/features were hand-annotated and grouped into discrete sets called target sets.Now for each tweet, along with the sentiment score, the target atwhich the sentiment is directed is also identi ﬁed. The target is one of the above-mentioned sets. Linguistic features like POS (Part of Speech) tags
Fig. 6.(continued).S. Aggarwal et al. Array 6 (2020) 100025
8and NER (Name Entity Recognition) tags are used for subject identi ﬁ- cation in the tweet text.This is followed by rudimentary checks to identify the subject for eachtweet. It is observed that most tweets belong to just one target set. Thisimplies that complex methods like dependency graph representations toidentify the subject and target sets can be safely avoided. Presence ofunique target sets allow simpler methods to be implemented.The polarity score of the tweet is assumed to be an opinion on thesubject identiﬁed.5.2.1. IllustrationExample 3:A tweet with the text“PM asks BJP MPs&MLAs to give details of bank accounts from Nov 8 (date of demonetization) to Dec 31st. Huge Bold move. Partyfundsnext?”has a VADER (Hutto and Gilbert, 2014) polarity score of 0.765 indicating high positive sentiment.‘BJP’is identiﬁed as the subject by the proposed model and thesentiment score obtained from VADER is attributed towards the target set‘BJP’.Example 4:Similarly, a tweet with the text“The man who should speak on Demonetization Dr Manmohan Singh hasn ’t said a word. Guess there is too much noise elsewhere these days!”has a VADER polarity score of/C00.21 indicating a negative sentiment.‘Manmohan Singh’is identiﬁed as the subject by the proposed modeland the sentiment score obtained from VADER is attributed towards thetarget set (‘Indian National Congress’in this case) to which ‘Manmohan Singh’, an Indian politician, belongs.5.3. Bias and its short term impactAny news with a polarity score outside the neutral limit ( /C00.33 to þ0.33) is assumed to be subjective or biased as mentioned in Section 3.2. However, not every subjective news will have the same impact. Theimpact of subjective news reporting, depends on various other parame-ters like the number of people who view the news, number of people wholike/favor it, and the time for which the news is active in the usernewsfeed. Depending on these parameters, the Bias Short term ImpactScore (BSIS) is determined for each news report (using a formulaexplained further in Section5.3.3).ABSIStimeline is then constructed for each media outlet to analyzethe biased reporting and its associated short term impact factor. A bias ofhigh impact score is recorded as an alarming bias, as explained later inSection5.3.3.5.3.1. Factors affecting BSISThe proposed work models the solution speci ﬁcally for the Twitter domain. However, the factors listed below have generalized analogues in
other media as well, and hence, the model can be extended for mediaother than Twitter easily. The various factors affecting the Bias Shortterm Impact Score (BSIS) are listed below:1.Direct Followers (F): The number of users who follow the mediaoutlet represents the number of news consumers. It is an approxi-mation for the audience that will view the tweet. It is extracted withhelp of the Twitter API [16].2.Mentions: The number of times a media outlet is mentioned in tweetsby other people in the ‘Twittersphere’(the entire microblogging Twitter world is referred to as a Twittersphere) is indicative of howactively others look up to it. It abstractly measures the popularity ofthe media outlet. The total number of mentions of a media outlet inthe period of observation are determined and used as a measure oftheir popularity. This is called the number of ‘overall mentions’.In contrast to overall mentions, the term ‘immediate mentions’is used to capture the number of mentions of a media outlet in the time span 24 hprior to and 24 h post the tweet. This interval measures how actively themedia outlet was mentioned prior to the tweet (In the time span betweent/C024 tot, wheretis the time of tweet in hours) and post the tweet (Inthe time span betweenttotþ24, wheretis the time of tweet in hours). Whilst theﬁrst term captures the popularity of the media outlet, therebydetermining the audience of the tweet, the latter determines the shortterm impact of the tweet by measuring the mentions (which in turncaptures the audience reaction) post the tweet.Both varieties of ‘mentions’are extracted by using web scrapingtechniques.3.Tweet Reactions: The news consumers may choose to react to aparticular tweet using standard Twitter reactions. They are referred toas‘reactors’in Section4.1. The impact factor of their actions can bedeﬁned in detail as–a)Like:A user’s liking/favoring a tweet indicates their appreciation/approval for the tweet sentiment. The Top 25 ‘Favourit-ers’are extracted for each tweet by using standard web scrapingtechniques.b)Retweet:A retweet/share indicates even higher level (ascompared to a‘Like’) of appreciation/approval as the user choosesto share the tweet from its own handle indicating a strong align-ment with the media outlets’view. The Top 25 ‘Retweet-ers’are extracted for each tweet by using the Twitter API [ 16]. c)Replies:User replies may either agree or disagree with the mediaoutlet. The agreement/disagreement is determined by sentimentscore comparison of the tweet and reply. The subject identi ﬁcation methodology, as suggested in Section 5.2, is also used as a parameter for this decision. An agreement is de ﬁned as the case when polarity of the tweet and reply are the same (for the sametarget subject). Similarly, a disagreement is classi ﬁed as the case when polar nature of the tweet and reply con ﬂict with each other.The replies to a tweet along with the Twitter handle of the usermaking the reply are extracted for each tweet by using web scrapingtechniques.4.Tweet Activity Time: The time interval for which a tweet is active isa measure of its short term impact. If a tweet by a media outlet re-mains active for a long duration, it implies that the tweet elicited agood response from the target audience and hence the impact of thenews bias was sizeable. The tweet activity time is measured by ﬁnding the time difference between the time of tweet and the last reply on thetweet. The Twitter API [16] is used to obtain the timestamp of atweet.5.Indirect/Induced Followers: Along with the direct followers, theaudience of a tweet also includes a number of people who indirectlyview the tweet as a result of someone whom they follow. For example,if a userAretweets a userB, then the tweet by userBautomatically gain the followers ofAas its audience. Similarly, other tweet re-actions (like and replies) induce indirect followers as they cause thetweet/post to appear on the user ’s newsfeed. It is calculated bysumming the number of followers of all user-id ’s who react to a tweet.5.3.2. TerminologyBefore describing the formulae for calculating BSIS, some terms are introduced below.Note:Due to lack of labelled datasets and highly subjective nature ofbiases, supervised approaches cannot be applied for this use case. Theseformulations use a statistical approach where the value of constants(parameter weights) and operators used in the formulations are based ontheoretical investigations. The formulae may be improved in the futureby taking various other factors which might not have been includedpresently into account.It should be noted that this research focuses more about the terms andthe meaning they represent, leaving the improvement of mathematicalformulations as a future to-do task.S. Aggarwal et al. Array 6 (2020) 100025
91.Polarity Score (PS) of a tweet:A sd eﬁned previously in Section3.2, it denotes the sentiment value of a tweet. The score ranges from ascale of/C01 (strongly negative) toþ1 (strongly positive). 2.Inﬂuence Factor (IF) of a media outlet:A measure of how inﬂu- ential a particular media outlet is. It is a function of the direct fol-lowers and number of mentions of the media outlet in theTwittersphere. LetFbe the number of followers andMbe the number of overall mentions of a media outlet. These two parameters togetherdetermine the popularity of the media outlet. The value of Fdirectly measures the audience viewing a tweet by the media outlet, and M measures how actively people engage the media outlet in their dis-cussions.IFis given by:IF¼M*F (2) Note that the operator * aggregates the values of MandFtogether and best captures the inﬂuence asIF.3.Reach (R) of a tweet:Measures the coverage or reach of a tweet as afunction of the following parameters:-(rt): Number of retweets (Refer 3(b), Section 5.3.1) -(fav): Number of favorites (Refer 3(a), Section 5.3.1) -(am): Number of users who replied in agreement with the tweet(Refer 3(c), Section5.3.1)-(dm): Number of users who replied with disagreement to the tweet(Refer 3(c), Section5.3.1)-(t): Tweet activity time (Refer 4, Section 5.3.1) Let r¼ðfavþ3*rtþ1:5
*amþ0:6*dmÞ*t(3) Choice of weights.1.fav: A parameter weight of 1 is assigned to fav. This weight acts as a baseline for all other weights in the equation.2.rt: A retweet clearly depicts the strongest level of agreement with themedia outlets’sentiment. Therefore, due to a stronger level ofinduced inﬂuence than a favorite, it is assigned a weight 3 ( >1). 3.am:The agreements on a tweet also depict a higher level of in ﬂuence than a favorite. However, they are less inﬂuential than the strongest level of agreement i.e. retweets. Therefore, they are assigned a weightof 1.5.4.dm: Disagreements do not promote the bias shown by the tweet.However, they still increase the reach of the tweet. They are thereforeinferred to show inﬂuence, but lesser than the baseline i.e. favleading to a weight assignment of 0.6.Note: The choice of these weights is made in a best effort manner dueto the algorithm originating from an unsupervised approach. Proposingan automated technique to obtain these constants is left as futureexercise.The operator * is used to weigh the calculated value with the tweetactivity time (t). The tweet with a longer activity duration implies thatthe tweet elicited a good response from the target audience, henceincreasing the short term impact of the news bias.Now letmbe the immediate mentions andfbe the number of induced followers. The operator used (*) best captures the reach. Therefore,R¼ðrþmÞ*ðfþFÞ (4)4.Persistence (P) of a media outlet:Denotes the resolute of the mediaoutlet. It captures how consistent a media outlet is about its opinion.The persistence of a media outlet is measured by observing its pre-vious tweets and their polarity scores in relation to the latest tweetreleased by the media outlet, i.e.Pis a function of the polarity of pasttweets and the latest tweet of the media outlet.To measure the prior polarity of a media outlet, the exponentialmoving average of past polarity scores is calculated. The EMAfor thePS series is obtained recursively using Equation (1), where the value ofais chosen as 0.3. Thus,pðtÞ¼0:3*PSðtÞþ0:7*pðt/C01Þ (5) Choice of weights.The value of a is chosen to be 0.3 to provide fair weightage to both thelast tweet and the series of previously made tweets. It was observed thatchoosing values ofa>0:3 masked the effect of the historical tweets andampliﬁed the effect of the latest one. Similarly, values of a<0:3 undermined the latest tweet’s contribution to persistence.Note: The choice of this weight is made in a best effort manner due tothe algorithm originating from an unsupervised approach. Proposing anautomated technique to obtain this constant is left as future exercise.The persistence of a media outlet is measured in terms of the simi-larity ofPSandp(the exponential moving average of past PSs). PðtÞ¼1/C0absðpðt/C01Þ/C0PSðtÞÞ=ð1þabsðpðt/C01ÞÞ(6) The above formulation calculates the 1-D distance between pðt/C01Þ i.e. the value of sentiment so far and PS, the current polarity of the media outlet.The denominatorð1
þabsðpðt/C01ÞÞis used to measure the range in which the distance between the points is calculated. This is captured bymeasuring the maximum possible distances to the left ( /C01) or to the right (1) thatpcould have moved. For example, if p¼1 andPS¼/C01, the absolute difference between the two is 2, but this difference is over therange/C01 to 1 i.e. 2, thus a persistence of 1-1¼0. Also, for another example, ifp¼/C00:5 andPS¼/C01, the absolute difference between thetwo is 0.5, but this difference is over the range max ( /C00.5 to 1 or -1 to /C00.5) i.e. 1.5, thus a persistence of 1-1/3¼0.66. The pseudocode for determining the persistence is shown in Fig. 7 below:5.3.3. Bias short term impact scoreThe Bias Short term Impact Score ( BSIS) of a media outlet is deﬁned as:BSIS¼R*PS*ð1þPÞ (7)where,Ris the reach of the tweet,Pis the persistence of the media outlet
Fig. 7.Pseudocode for calculating persistence of media outlet after each tweet.S. Aggarwal et al. Array 6 (2020) 100025
10andPSthe polarity score of the tweet. Note that the constant 1 is added toPin order to account for the value of P¼0 for zero persistence. A bias-short term impact timeline is constructed for each media outletby plotting the value of BIS for each tweet against time. Each mediaoutlets’BIS-time plot is plotted separately for its sentiment towardsdifferent subject sets like the Bhartiya Janta Party (BJP), the IndianNational Congress (INC) and the Aam Aadmi Party (AAP).A BIS timeline is also constructed for a neutral media outlet, whichserves as a null model. This study chooses DD-News to serve as theneutral outlet. DD-News is a government-funded media outlet with areputation of providing the most objective news to viewers. This justi ﬁes its selection as the null model to calculate the threshold value forchecking bias.The maximum value of the absolute BSISvalues on the BSIS-time plot of the media outlet (DD in our case) as obtained from the graph is notedas Neutral Limit (NL). The neutral outlet is said to tweet within the po-larity threshold ofNL. It is used as a parameter for calculating the polaritythreshold value for a media outlet from its BSIS plot.The threshold value (T) for a speciﬁc media outlet and its BSIS timeline is obtained by–T¼NL*IF
media/C0outlet =IF DD (8) Equation(8)given above is used to normalize the value of NeutralLimitNLby accounting for theIFvalues of the media outlet under studyand the neutral outlet (DD in our case). This, in turn, normalizes the valueofTwhich makes itﬁt for comparison with theBSISfor a media outlet. For example: If a media outlet has a higher value of BSISdue to larger values ofF,m, it will still be comparable against a larger value ofthresholdTgenerated by Equation(8). Equation(8)will generate a comparatively higher value ofTfor the media outlet as the ratio of IF
media/C0outlet =IFDDwill be higher for the speciﬁc media outlet (due to IF
media/C0outlet being high).The threshold value plotted on the BSIStimeline is used to check for alarming biases.Any tweet withBSISvalue aboveTis labelled as‘alarmingly’biased. This bias is‘worrying’or‘disturbing’and triggers a report event. The alarming bias is then said to be identiﬁed.5.3.4. IllustrationExample 5:Consider the tweet“Live | Delhi: Tea stall owner in RK Puram accepts online payments to help customers. #Demonetization ”by a media outlet.Step 1:
Calculation of various parametersF¼1619292.M¼5046rt¼12fav¼40am¼1dm¼0t¼1.4f¼73879226m¼100.PS¼0.4939.Step 2:
Calculation of Inﬂuence Factor (IFÞFrom (2).IF¼8154754512.Step 3:
Calculation of Reach (R)From (3),r¼108.5.From (4).R¼15741441003.0.Step 4:Calculation of Persistence (P)From (5) and (6).P¼0.448841795403.Step 5:
Calculation of Bias Short term Impact Score ( BSISÞFrom (7).BIS¼11264306990.9.Step 6:
Calculation of ThresholdðTÞIF (for DD-news)¼7212972261.Threshold value (for DD-News)¼7285358616.66.IF (for media outlet)¼8154754512.From (8).Threshold (for media outlet)¼8170947431.99.It is evident that the BIS score obtained as 11264306990.9is greater than the threshold for the media outlet which is 8170947431.99. Therefore, a report event is triggered and alarming bias is detected.The same is illustrated using theBSIS-timeline as shown inFig. 8. The red (Fig. 8(a)), blue (Fig. 8(b)) and green (Fig. 8(c))lines respectively are used to draw theBISplots for a media outlet for biases for/against theBJP, INC and AAP. The black line represents the threshold limit. Themedia outlet can be noticed to be ‘alarmingly’biased towards BJP at several instances (the red line crosses the threshold line several times).The plot also shows that the outlet has a slight negative ‘alarming’bias towards AAP (the green line in the plot crosses the threshold sometimes).The plot for INC (blue line) stays reasonably within the threshold limitand the media outlets’bias is not labelled as ‘alarming’in the given time interval.5.4. Extending the proposed modelJust like Twitter, sites like Facebook and Reddit offer a continuousstream of personal opinions on the most varied range of topics. Theproposed model can be extended for these platforms.The observations made also reveal that most media outlets are farmore biased on live TV than in print and social media. Bias detection inTelevision media could therefore be an important extension to the model.A naive solution is to convert Live TV stream to Natural Language in textand then apply a similar model to detect biases. Also, media biases interms of panel representation, think-tank citations and selective newscoverage should be dealt with.6. ConclusionAs seen by means of a series of experiments, journalists and mediaoutlets are responsible for an opinionated mechanism of news reportingwhich has a deleterious impact on its consumers. More than 40% of thetweets analyzed were found out to be polar. Also, a fraction of as high as41% of reactors were conditioned through such ‘biased’polar tweets. This shows that an alarming number of people get conditioned by polar,subjective and biased news every day, something, which goes past thenaked eye of humans around the world.In today’s world where digitization has made people ’s life extremely easy, care must be taken to avoid misuse of the dependence on thismedium. Consumers should not blindly trust media sources and use theirrationale before developing an opinion on an issue. This research aims tohelp users detect bias in news media by proposing a model for alarmingbias detection. The study also shows how media conditions the opinionsS. Aggarwal et al. Array 6 (2020) 100025
11Fig. 8.aBSISplots of a media outlet for political party: BJP. BSISplots of a media outlet for political party: INC. 8cBSISplots of a media outlet for political party: AAP. The above-mentioned process can be represented using the ﬂowchart given below inFig. 9.S. Aggarwal et al. Array 6 (2020) 100025
12of its news-consumers. This justiﬁes the need for a platform to providesafe and healthy balanced news to the news-consumers so that they arenot misguided and conditioned by biased media outlets.In parallel, work needs to be carried out to detect fake news outlets.Fake news is a biased report that is factually incorrect. It is a deliberateattempt to condition the news-consumers in making them believing afalsiﬁed report. Tech giants like Google and Facebook have recentlystarted working in this direction. This research aims to address a smallfragment of this larger problem of subjective news and its short termimpact on the society in large.ContributorsSwati Aggarwal designed and supervised the study. Siddharth Shi-khar was responsible for the collection of data and wrote the manuscript.Tushar Sinha pre-processed and organised the data as well as preparedthe graphs and tables used in the study. Yash Kukreti worked on theexperiments and Analysis of the study and developed the database. Allthe authors reviewed theﬁnal manuscript.DeclarationsAvailability of dataThe dataset, as mentioned previously, can be extracted for anygeneric use-case/topic using the Twitter API [ 16]. The speciﬁc dataset that supports theﬁndings of this study can be procured from the corre-sponding author upon reasonable request.Compliance with ethical standardsThe authors declare that they have no con ﬂict of interest.Declaration of competing interestThe authors declare that they have no known competing ﬁnancial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to in ﬂuence the work reported in this paper.References[1] Media Bias-Wikipedia. Accessed 10/06/17, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/M edia_bias.[2]Liu B. Sentiment analysis and subjectivity. In: Handbook of Natural Languageprocessing,. second ed. Chapman and Hall/CRC; 2010. p. 627 –66. [3]Pang B, Lee L. Opinion mining and sentiment analysis. Foundations and Trends ®in Information Retrieval 2008;2(1 –2):1–135. [4]Hutto CJ, Gilbert E. May). Vader: a parsimonious rule-based model for sentimentanalysis of social media text. In: Eighth international AAAI conference on weblogsand social media; 2014.[5]Garon L. A case study of functional subjectivity in media coverage: the Gulf War onTV. Can J Commun 1996;21(3) . [6]White PR. Media objectivity and the rhetoric of news story structure. Language inPerformance 2000:379–97. [7]Lex E, Jufﬁnger A, Granitzer M. June). Objectivity classi ﬁcation in online media. In: Proceedings of the 21st ACM conference on Hypertext and hypermedia. ACM; 2010.p. 293–4.[8]O’Connell M. Is Irish public opinion towards crime distorted by media bias ?Eur J Commun 1999;14(2):191 –212. [9]DellaVigna S, Kaplan E. The Fox News effect: media bias and voting. Q J Econ 2007;122(3):1187–234.[10]Gerber AS, Karlan D, Bergan D. Does the media matter? A ﬁeld experiment measuring the effect of newspapers on voting behavior and political opinions. AmEcon J Appl Econ 2009;1(2):35 –52. [11]Chiang CF, Knight B. Media bias and in ﬂuence: evidence from newspaper endorsements. Rev Econ Stud 2011:rdq037 . [12]Groseclose T, Milyo J. A measure of media bias. Q J Econ 2005;120(4):1191 –237. [13]Lin YR, Bagrow JP, Lazer D. More voices than ever? quantifying media bias innetworks. 2011. arXiv preprint arXiv:1111.1227 . [14]An J, Cha M, Gummadi KP, Crowcroft J, Quercia D. Visualizing media bias throughTwitter. In: Sixth international AAAI conference on weblogs and social media;2012, May.[15]Dunham WR. Framing the right suspects: measuring media bias. J Media Econ2013;26(3):122–47.[16] Twitter Api. Accessed 10/06/17, https://dev.twitter.com/rest/public .
Fig. 9.Flow diagram for checking bias.S. Aggarwal et al. Array 6 (2020) 100025
13