ORIGINAL ARTICLE
Multilevel classiﬁcation of security concerns incloud computing
Syed Asad Hussaina,*, Mehwish Fatimaa, Atif Saeedb, Imran Razaa, Raja Khurram Shahzad
c
aDepartment of Computer Science, COMSATS Institute of Information Technology Lahore, Pakistan
bSchool of Computing and Communications, Lancaster University, Lancaster, United Kingdom
cSchool of Computing, Blekinge Institute of Technology, SwedenReceived 11 May 2015; revised 11 March 2016; accepted 20 March 2016Available online 8 April 2016
KEYWORDSCloud computing;Security;Virtualization;SaaS;PaaS;IaaSAbstractThreats jeopardize some basic security requirements in a cloud. These threats generallyconstitute privacy breach, data leakage and unauthorized data access at different cloud layers. Thispaper presents a novel multilevel classiﬁcation model of different security attacks across differentcloud services at each layer. It also identiﬁes attack types and risk levels associated with differentcloud services at these layers. The risks are ranked as low, medium and high. The intensity of theserisk levels depends upon the position of cloud layers. The attacks get more severe for lower layerswhere infrastructure and platform are involved. The intensity of these risk levels is also associatedwith security requirements of data encryption, multi-tenancy, data privacy, authentication andauthorization for different cloud services. The multilevel classiﬁcation model leads to the provisionof dynamic security contract for each cloud layer that dynamically decides about security require-ments for cloud consumer and provider.
/C2112016 King Saud University. Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article underthe CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ ).
1. IntroductionCloud computing is a broad paradigm based on models forproviding services of storage and platform software. Cloudcomputing concept has emerged from distributed and gridcomputing domains that are already in use for mail servers,web storage and hosting services. Cloud computing, as deﬁnedby NIST, is referred to as: A model for enabling ubiquitous,convenient, on-demand network access to a shared pool ofconﬁgurable computing resources (e.g., networks, servers, stor-age, applications, and services) that can be rapidly provisionedand released with minimal management effort or service provi-der interaction[1].
*Corresponding author.E-mail addresses:asadhussain@ciitlahore.edu.pk(S.A. Hussain), mehwish.fatima@ciitlahore.edu.pk(M. Fatima),a.saeed2@lancs.ac. uk(A. Saeed),iraza@ciitlahore.edu.pk(I. Raza),khurram.shahzad@ bth.se(R.K. Shahzad).Peer review under responsibility of King Saud University.
Production and hosting by ElsevierApplied Computing and Informatics (2017) 13,5 7–65
Saudi Computer Society, King Saud University
Applied Computing and Informatics
(http://computer.org.sa)www.ksu.edu.sawww.sciencedirect.com
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.aci.2016.03.0012210-8327/C2112016 King Saud University. Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V.This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ ).In cloud computing, clouds can be described at differentlayers, i.e., SaaS (Software as a Service), PaaS (Platform as aService) and IaaS (Infrastructure as a Service). Although appli-cations for clouds are in development phase, however securityrequirements for the data and services on the clouds are gettingattention of researchers and it has become necessary to con-sider each layer of a cloud for possible attacks. It is worth not-ing that cloud computing systems have many advantages;however, large organizations are still hesitant to shift their set-ups on the cloud mainly due to security issues and risks. Thus,it is important to address the security issues and problems incloud systems, and to ﬁnd a solution for the widespread accep-tance of these solutions. However, being a new domain, theresearch on the requirements and issues regarding security ofclouds is still in its early stages.In the literature, there are different classiﬁcations of cloudsecurity attacks[2–7]targeting a speciﬁc cloud service or a par-ticular kind of the cloud system. Thus there is a need for amore comprehensive classiﬁcation of security attacks acrossversatile cloud services at each layer. This paper proposes amultilevel classiﬁcation of security attacks for different cloudservices and their associated risks at cloud layers. It also dis-cusses provision of dynamic security contract for each cloudlayer that dynamically decides about security requirementsfor cloud consumer and provider.The rest of paper is structured as follows: Section 2consists of related work. Section3presents the proposed multilevelclassiﬁcation of security concerns in cloud computing. Sec-tion4is based on the dynamic security contract concept. Sec-tion5concludes the paper.2. Related workThe application softwares at SaaS are provided with a speciﬁclicense based subscription, pay-as-go[8]. Platform as a Service(PaaS) caters services for operating system, network capacity,storage and multi-tenancy via the Internet. Infrastructure as aservice (IaaS) provides utility computing, automation ofadministrative tasks, dynamic scaling, desktop virtualization,policy-based services, and Internet connectivity. IaaS providesvirtual servers with unique IP address and storage pool asrequired by customers. The concept of infrastructure and hard-ware layer is mentioned by different researchers. Some authorshave suggested that the infrastructure layer offers system soft-ware services and hardware layer provides hardware-based ser-vices. Infrastructure and hardware layers may be combineddue to intrinsic relationship between hardware and software.In[9], security aspects of one of the popular cloud AmazonElastic Compute Cloud (EC2) have been discussed. It consistsof systematic analysis of various crucial vulnerabilities in pub-licly available Amazon Machine Images (AMIs) and mecha-nisms to eliminate them. The proposed tool referred to asAmazon Image Attacks (AmazonIA) uses only publicly avail-able interfaces regardless of the underlying cloud infrastruc-ture. As a result of exploiting vulnerabilities and successfulattacks, authors are able to extract sensitive informationincluding passwords, and credentials from AMIs. Theextracted information can be used to initiate botnets, or createback doors to launch impersonate attacks or access sourcecode of a web service available on AMI. The authors have dis-cussed effects of successful attacks and also the methods tomitigate those attacks. Some research groups have workedon the interfaces of both public and private clouds [10]. The public cloud under their consideration is Amazon, while theprivate cloud is Eucalyptus.Authors in[11]consider security as a service for cloud-based applications. The architecture considers the existing ser-vices at different levels. It considers user-centric security i.e.,users have control over their security permitting them to usesecurity solutions across different clouds. They can subscribeto any security solution provided by any cloud provider anduse that particular security solution for their cloud and mayalso have multiple security solutions for a particular servicedepending upon its criticality. The multiple security solutionscan also be used at different levels.Authors in[9]address the security and privacy aspects ofreal-life cloud deployments, while ignoring the malicious cloudproviders or customers. Here authors’ focus is Amazon ElasticCompute Cloud (EC2). They have analyzed the crucial vulner-abilities of Amazon Machine Images (AMIs) through an auto-mated tool and as a result of attack information regarding APIKeys, private keys and credentials of publishers were extracted[9]. Vulnerabilities were discovered in Secure Shell. Theextracted information can be further used to create multiplesecurity threats resulting in botnet instances, access of backendservices or code of the Web sites through back-doors content.In[12]authors suggest that security should be provided as aservice and propose a model for security as service. Security asa service implies that the security applications and services canbe provided by a cloud vendor, or cloud consumer or even by athird trust-worthy party. The security service can be in theform of a cloud-based infrastructure or software. The authorshave proposed a component based software model in whichauthorization components can be developed by any partyregardless of being a service provider. An eXtensible accesscontrol markup language (XACML) decision engine that iscomposed of a context handler, a policy decision point and apolicy administration point, can be furnished by reusable com-ponents to augment the security service. By XACML standardattributes of subjects, resources and environments and autho-rization rules can be deﬁned as Boolean expressions. Thus,these types of security services, which can be managed andaltered by cloud customers, are helpful to build trust of cloudcustomers on cloud systems.In[3]Cloud Computing Open Architecture (CCOA) conceptis discussed for clouds in virtual environments. The role andfunctions of the architecture are discussed according to different
infrastructures for IT and business systems. Different types ofarchitectures complicate security management for cloud sys-tems. This architecture provides a solution for different securityaspects regarding virtual environments. The authors suggestphysical and logical isolation of data instances for each customerto enhance the data privacy and expeditious replication andrecovery system. Authorized users based on the role-basedaccess control can access the sensitive data on platforms. To pre-vent intrusion attacks, cloud service provider blocks the mali-cious and un-trusted codes enabling digital forensic applications.Research in[14]suggests a trusted computing and attesta-tion system for virtual environments. In virtual environmentssystems are more prone to threats due to the poor computercommunication architectures and hidden network channels.These hidden channels can be a risk since many virtualized net-work channels can be easily observed and hacked.58 S.A. Hussain et al.3. A multilevel classiﬁcation of security concerns in cloudcomputingCloud systems have a layered architecture of different servicesand control levels for users.Fig. 1illustrates the classiﬁcationmodel of security problems at each layer of the cloud system.SaaS, PaaS and IaaS layers are considered for associated secu-rity risks and problems.3.1. Security concerns for Software as a Service (SaaS)SaaS is exposed by attacks on API’s, publishers, web portalsand interfaces. The attacks on the SaaS are categorized intotwo broad groups: attacks on development tools and attackson management tools. Most popular services on SaaS areweb services, web portals and APIs. Intruders’ attempt un-authorized access and gain of services by attacking web portalsand APIs. These attacks affect data privacy. Intruders try toextract the sensitive information of API Keys, private keys,and credentials of publishers via different kinds of attacksand automated tools. Another possibility of attack on thislayer is exposure of secure shell for extracting key credentials.3.1.1. Data protectionIn cloud computing applications are deployed in sharedresource environments; therefore, data privacy is an importantaspect. Data privacy has three major challenges: integrity,authorized access and availability (backup/ replication). Dataintegrity ensures that the data are not corrupted or tamperedduring communication. Authorized access prevents data fromintrusion attacks while backups and replicas allow data accessefﬁciently even in case of a technical fault or disaster at somecloud location. Data are shared and communicated at thecommon network backbone. Hence malicious attackers orintruders can deploy hidden proxy applications between thecloud provider and consumer to scavenge information of logincredentials and session details[4]. An intruder can also per-form packet snifﬁng or IP-spooﬁng as a middle-party andcan access and/or alter the restricted or sensitive information.One possible solution for the data privacy in cloud computingis Cisco Secure Data Center Framework that provides multi-layer security mechanism[4].3.1.2. Attacks on interfacesA successful attack on the cloud interfaces can result in a rootlevel access of a machine without initiating a direct attack onthe cloud infrastructure. Two different kinds of attacks arelaunched on authentication mechanism of clouds. The controlinterfaces are vulnerable to signature wrapping and advancedcross site scripting (XSS) techniques. First kind of attack isreferred to as signature wrapping attack or XML SignatureWrapping attacks. Single signed SOAP message or X.509 cer-tiﬁcate can be used to compromise security of customers?accounts through operations on virtual machines or resettingof passwords. Second type of attacks exploits the vulnerabilityin XSS. The particular vulnerability attack steals usernameand password pair information.3.1.3. Attacks on SSH (Secure Shell)Attacks on Secure Shell (SSH), the basic mechanism used toestablish trust and connection with cloud services, are the mostalarming threat that compromises control trust. According toPonemon 2014 SSH security Vulnerability Report [15], 74 per- cent organizations have no control to provision, rotate, trackand remove SSH keys. Cybercriminals take full advantage ofthese vulnerabilities and use cloud computing to launch differ-ent attacks. An organizations´cloud workload can be used hostbotnets if SSH access has been compromised. Attackers havehosted the Zeus botnet and control infrastructure on AmazonEC2 instances[16]. The different types of attack on SSH
Figure 1Classiﬁcation model of attacks at each layer of the cloud system.Security concerns in cloud computing 59include attacks on API keys, attacks on user credentials, andattacks on publisher credentials.3.2. Security concerns for Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS) andPlatform as a Service (PaaS)IaaS and PaaS layers are overlapped in the model due to theirinterdependency on each other. The attacks on these layers aregrouped into three types: attacks on cloud services, attacks onvirtualization, and attacks on utility computing. The securityconcerns for IaaS and PaaS are discussed below.3.2.1. Hardware virtualizationThe VMs interconnectivity is the biggest security concern inthe designing of cloud computing platform. VMs are linkedusing bridge and route virtual network conﬁguration modes.The bridge mode works as a virtual hub shared among allthe VMs, which may result in snifﬁng the virtual network bya compromised VM. In the route mode, where route worksas a virtual switch, each VM is connected using a dedicated vir-tual interface. Any network intruder in a LAN segment of anetwork can access virtual environments by address resolutionprotocol (ARP) spooﬁng and MAC spooﬁng. ARP spooﬁngalters the ARP tables and management interfaces and systems.On the other hand, an intruder can mimic another hostthrough MAC spooﬁng and also change address of host orguest Virtual Machine (VM) to gain access of restrictedresources[13]. The attacks and exploitation of virtual environ-ments are very diversiﬁed and they will increase in future sinceplatforms are growing in number and complexity. Therefore, amechanism for detecting attacks along with preventions isnecessary.3.2.2. Software virtualizationA software virtualization attack may examine the VM imagesto launch an attack or steal of information, especially targetingdevelopment images, which are accidentally released [21].I ti s also possible to provide a VM image having malware to cloudcomputing system resulting in theft and corruption of data.For example, cloud consumers are enticed to run taintedVM images contributed to image repository manipulatingthe registration process for ﬁrst page listing.3.2.3. Cloud softwaresMulti-tenancy in clouding computing requires multiplexing theexecution of VMs from different consumer on the same phys-ical server[17]. Softwares deployed on guest VM remain sus-ceptible to attack and compromise. A malicious code in VMmay interfere with the hypervisor or other VMs. Shortcomingsin programming interfaces and processing of instructions arethe main targets to uncover vulnerabilities [18]. This security concern also includes indirect attacks such as man-in-the-middle during a live VM migration; insertion VM based root-kit during memory modiﬁcation; a zero-day exploit inHyperVM; side-channel attack to gain information.3.2.4. Utility computingUtility computing is the concept that emerged from grid com-puting, and it combines computation, storage and bandwidthto provide services on the demand through payment by thecustomer. It also provides two basic advantages of cost reduc-tion and scalability. Security risk associated with utility com-puting is access by attackers who want to utilize resourceswithout paying[8]. Majority of hackers and crackers use thecomputing power or storage for the illegal use. The commonuse of public cloud includes e-commerce, web-applicationand Web site hosting making these services vulnerable to vari-ety of attacks on possession, authenticity, integrity and utility.A compromised client may perform a Fraudulent ResourceConsumption (FRC) attack by using the metered bandwidthof web-based service that results in a ﬁnancial burden on thecloud consumer[19].3.2.5. Service Level Agreement (SLA)SLA is an optimal way for ensuring security and trust. Theimplementation of SLA results in a well-designed contract ofresponsibilities between parties that can enhance security level.In cloud environment, SLA can be combined with the web ser-vice level agreement (WSLA) for mitigating security risks [8]. SLA deﬁnes the different levels of security and their complex-ity based on the services for the better understanding of thesecurity policies to a cloud consumer. The existing cloud stor-age systems do not provide security guarantees in their SLAseffecting the adaptation of cloud services. A cloud storage ser-vice may leak private data, return inconsistent data or modifythe data due to bugs, hacking, crashes, or misconﬁgurations.This security concerns require proper SLA guarantee modelssuch as CloudProof[20].Table 1shows multilevel classiﬁcation for the three cloudlayers in terms of cloud service, types of attack, cloud typeand risk levels. Cloud layers are considered as ﬁrst level fol-lowed by cloud services as second level and types of attacksfor these services as third. A risk is associated with each levelof this classiﬁcation. SaaS has low to medium risk level if itis under attack. However attacks on publisher service at thislayer may adversely affect the services. Services at PaaS andIaaS layers are associated with medium to high risks.The classiﬁcation identiﬁes the risk levels as low (less vulner-able), medium, and high (more vulnerable) depending on theexposure of cloud security requirements. Data encryption,multi-tenancy, data privacy, authentication, and authorizationare the security requirements for cloud services. The exposureof these security requirements constitutes different risk levels.For example exposure of multi-tenancy and data privacy forhardware virtualization represents high risk. These levels indi-cate control of a customer given by a service over the cloud sys-tem. The attacks on software layer are generally considered lesssevere and if the attack effects infrastructure or platform layersit has medium to high severity. However it is observed that cer-tain attacks such as attacks on SSH for publisher credentials onsoftware layer are highly adverse. A cloud service offered atPaaS or IaaS provides multiple ways for the exposure of cloudsystem. From this, it may be inferred that major attacks andthreats exist on the underlying layers of a cloud system.At second level available services on PaaS and IaaS consti-tute hardware virtualization, software virtualization, utilitycomputing and development services. Some attacks on theseservices may be severe up to the extent that even the real
machines can be affected. Most of intruders try to hack theselayers with the help of ARP spooﬁng, MAC spooﬁng or exe-cuting malicious codes on cloud platforms.60 S.A. Hussain et al.Web services and web portals are attacked to break encryp-tion or to get signatures and user credentials. Attacks on SSH(Secure SHell) extract API keys, user credentials and publishercredentials. Attacks for breaking encryption, extracting signa-tures, keys, and credentials are associated with low to mediumlevel risks. However attack on publisher credentials has high-level risk. Hardware virtualization is attacked through ARPspooﬁng and MAC spooﬁng. Risk level associated with hard-ware virtualization is medium to high. Software virtualizationis threatened by hacking with automated tools and has a highlevel of risk. Malicious codes and scripts can be executed withdevelopment services and these may adversely affect the wholecloud system, and hence risk associated with development ser-vices is high. Utility computing is associated with high risklevel and can be attacked by hacking or for SLA.Table 2presents a mapping of cloud services and cloudsecurity requirements. The mentioned security requirementsare mandatory to achieve the integrity and coherence in thecloud system. These security requirements are data encryption,multi-tenancy, data privacy, authentication, and authoriza-tion. Data encryption and hashing techniques are used to pro-tect the data over the distributed system. Thus, the dataprotection service depends on encryption techniques and pri-vacy policies. If data protection services or web services areattacked, the data encryption and data privacy will be compro-mised because intruder will try to break encryption and hash-ing policies. However physical data storage is not threatenedso risk factor associated is medium. On the other hand, ifAPI’s and web portals are intruded, authentication and autho-rization requirements will be violated. API’s and web portalsprovide a gateway to access cloud systems, thus by attackingthese gateways, attackers can easily expose cloud systems.However these credentials and signatures are expired afterthe session so risk factor associated with these services is lowto medium. Development services provide a way to createother cloud services by customers. By accessing this service,malicious scripts and codes can be executed. Attacks on devel-opment services can expose the data encryption, multi-tenancyand authentication. So this service has a high risk factor. Vir-tualization offers many advantages but these advantages areassociated with the possibility of some threats e.g., multiplenumbers of customers on a single resource can access data inan un-authorized manner. Intrusion on hardware virtualiza-tion may violate multi-tenancy requirement and data privacyand has a high risk factor. If software virtualization and utilitycomputing are attacked, multi-tenancy and authorization arethreatened. Attacks on multi-tenancy jeopardize the logicalseparation of multiple customers on a single resource, andhence risk factor is high.4. Dynamic security provisioningDynamic Security Contract (DSC) between a cloud consumerand a provider is implemented across the layers according toconsumer and provider requirements for services and security.Security gets more stringent for the services offered at cloudprovider layers (PaaS and IaaS). The risk levels associated withthese two layers are in the medium to high range since theattacks on the services of these layers may affect the wholecloud system. Hence level of security is determined dynami-Table 1A multi-level classiﬁcation of security and privacy risk in cloud computing.
Cloud layer Cloud service Security concerns Attack type Cloud type RiskSAAS Web service Data protection Privacy All clouds MediumWeb portal Attack on interfaces Attack on signature AMI/EC2 Low Attacks on credentials AMI/EC3 Medium API Attack on SSH Attack on API Keys AMI/EC4 Medium Attack on user credentials AMI/EC5 MediumAttack on publisher credentials AMI/EC6 High PAAS and IAAS Platform virtualization Hardware virtualization ARP Spooﬁng on virtual switching All High MAC spoogin on virtual switching All MediumSoftware virtualization Hacking on computations All Low Development services Cloud softwares Malicious code script All HighComputation services Utility computing Unpaid client attacks All LowSLA Hacking All High
Table 2A mapping of cloud service and security requirements.
Data encryption Multi-tenancy Data privacy Authentication AuthorizationSecurity requirementsData protection Yes No Yes No NoAPI’s No No No Yes YesWeb portals No No No Yes YesCloud software Yes No Yes No YesHardWare virtualization No Yes Yes No NoSoftware virtualization No Yes No No YesVirtualization No Yes No No YesUtility computing No Yes No No YesSecurity concerns in cloud computing 61cally for cloud consumer and cloud provider through DSC asshown inFig. 2.Fig. 2shows that the serviceX
1andX 2at SaaS layer has aspeciﬁc risksR, such as attacks on APIs, attacks on interfaces,attacks on publisher, and data protection, having severitylevels such as low, medium and high. DSC takes this informa-tion as input to prepare the security services at PaaS and IaaS.The service,X
1andX 2, requested by a cloud consumer in for-warded to PaaS to allocate platform servicePS
1along with the necessary security services is deﬁned by DSC. IaaS layer pro-vides suitable infrastructure serviceIS
1forPS 1along with the required security services.DSC deﬁnes the risk levels associated with each service. TheDSC is constituted byX,S,AwhereXis the service,Sis secu- rity expected/required, andAis the type of attack. In symbolicform DSA can be written asDSCðX;S;AÞ!Rð1Þ whereRis the risk level associated with a particular DSC.DSC is provisioned when a cloud service is requested by a con-sumer. The DSC for this request will identify security require-ments for this particular service and classify the risk levelsassociated with the service demanded by the consumer. Therisk levels change dynamically depending on the type of theservice and possible attacks associated with that service. Theoutcome of this dynamic security assessment is decisionregarding the level and type of security required for the risk.Eq.(1)for multiple services and different attack typesbecomes:DSC X;XS;XA/C16/C17!Rð2Þ Following example illustrates the concept behind Eqs. (1) and (2). The example shows subset of web portal services and hard-ware virtualization consisting of possibilities of attacks andsecurity services of authentication, authorization, multi-tenancy and data privacy. It is important to observe that risklevel changes to high as cloud service changes to hardware vir-tualization from web portal. Hence security service dynami-cally switches over to multi-tenancy and data privacy.Example:Possible Subset for Web PortalX= Web portal,S= Authentication,A= Attacks on Sig-natures,R= LowX= Web portal,S= Authentication,A= Attacks on cre-dentials,R= MediumX= Web portal,S
1= Authentication,S 2= Authoriza- tion,A= Attacks on credentials,R= MediumX= Web portal,S
1= Authentication,S 2= Authoriza- tion,A
1= Attacks on Signatures,A 2= Attacks on creden-tials,R= Medium
Figure 2Dynamic security provision across layers of the cloud system.62 S.A. Hussain et al.Possible Subset for Hardware VirtualizationX= Hardware Virtualization,S
1= Multi-tenancy,S 2= Data Privacy,A
1= ARP spooﬁng,R= High.X= Hardware Virtualization,S
1= Multi-tenancy,S 2= Data Privacy,A
1= MAC spooﬁng,R= High.X= Hardware Virtualization,S
1= Multi-tenancy,S 2= Data Privacy,A
1= ARP spooﬁng,A 2= MAC spooﬁng,R= High.4.1. Dynamic Security Contract (DSC) provisioning modelDSC is an approach for agreement between a consumer and aprovider regarding cross layer security provisioning methodscorresponding to the available services. Before establishingthe security model, it is necessary to understand the differentobjectives and outcomes of DSC from consumer as well asprovider perspective.Fig. 3shows the ﬂow of our proposed Dynamic SecurityContract (DSC) in which the consumer is offered a DSC afterinitial contact to the provider. The consumer can have threeavailable options, accept the DSC as it is, negotiate the param-eters as per his requirements or decline the DSC without givingany reason. The provider responds to either of the choices withits own viable set of corresponding options, i.e. Provision ofsecurity if accepted by consumer, alter the DSC keeping inview of its own parameters of cost and Return on investment(ROI) or decline any further contact. The consumer can noweither accept or decline the new offer as there is only one avail-able option for negotiation to simplify the model, and providerresponds with provisioning security or declining the consumerchoices. Consumer and provider have their own set of param-eters to decide the viability of the contract and are discussed infurther sections with the foremost discussion on measurementof security in a quantiﬁable manner.4.1.1. Security measurement metricsEach threatt2Tis associated with a set of vulnerabilities andto represent attack we extend the notation of [22]to establish a Cloud Attack Graph (CAG). Each CAG is a tuple CAG=(V, E)whereV¼N
c[N d[N randEis set of directed edgesbetween any members ofV. Each nodeSc2N cis deﬁned as a tuple (Service, Vulnerability). Each node belonging to N
dis the outcome of exploiting vulnerability in the correspondingservice. For each attack step nodeS
c2N cthe probability of vulnerability exploitation at any given time is denoted by Pr [e], which can be assigned according to the Base Score (BS) cal-culated from CVSS[23]. The value of BS ranges from 0 to 10andPr[e] can be derived asPr½e/C138¼BS
Sc
10/C18/C19;8Sc2N c ð3Þ In an attack graph the vulnerabilities are related to each otherthrough their dependency conditions[24], and thus the proba-bility of an exploit can be calculated according to its relationwith its predecessor and their risk probabilities. Given a setof predecessor nodesxas parents for nodeS
c2N c, the condi- tional risk probability can be given asPrðS
cjxÞ¼Pr½e/C138/C2Y
y2xPrðyjxÞð4Þonce the conditional probabilities are assigned, the cumulativerisk probability for effective mitigation and remediation planagainst each threat can be calculated asPrðS
cÞ¼PrðS cjxÞ/C2Y
y2xPrðyÞð5Þ4.1.2. DSC offeringThe cumulative risk calculated in the previous section is usedto effectively select the corresponding countermeasure fromthe set of mitigation plan pool. The mitigation plan is a setMP={mp
1;mp2;mp3;...;mpn} where eachmpis a tuplem p=(condition,effort,effectiveness,cost), where condition is theexploit that must hold a true value, effort is the strugglerequired to implement the mitigation plan, effectiveness isthe probabilistic measure of guarantee in case of applyingthe speciﬁc plan and cost is the expense incurred in its imple-mentation. The return on investment from provider perspec-tive can be given byROI½t;mp/C138¼
benefit½t;mp/C138mp:costþmp:effortð6Þ
Figure 3Dynamic security contract.Security concerns in cloud computing 63where beneﬁt is the change in the probability of exploitation ofthe given node after applying a mitigation plan, given bybenefit½t;mp/C138¼prðeÞ¼DprðeÞ/C2ðmp:effectivenessÞð7Þ Possible choices for mitigation plan and their respective costbeneﬁt analysis from the provider perspective are crucial inoffering dynamic security contracts and their negotiations.The objective of /Volumes/Macintosh HD 2/Research/Mul-tilevel security concerns cloud computing/LaTex/Multilevelsecurity classiﬁcation/Supplementary.texMAX (ROI), MAX (SLA)andMIN (penalties)for provider can be achieved oncethe maximum and minimum costs for countermeasure areknown for each threat. Effectiveness and Cost are two param-eters delivered to the consumer in the DSC. Optimal selectionof mitigation plan and countermeasure selection is related tothe information classiﬁcation and deﬁnition of acceptablesecurity at consumer end.4.1.3. DSC selectionA consumerc2Copts to use at least one servicex2Xfrom the providerPat any layer of cloud with no limit on maximumnumber. Thus there exists a many-to-many relation betweenconsumers and services. For simplicity, we will be consideringeach service independently in the context of a single consumer.Sufﬁcient security is said to be achieved when the consumerdata residing/ transiting cloud service is safe from threat orthe risk has been accepted as inevitable by the consumer. Weassume that the information is classiﬁed and the respectivesecurity level is translated into numeric values that scale from0 to 10 with 0 as least restricted requiring no security and 10 asthe most restricted information level requiring stringent secu-rity measures. Mapping of security requirements, effectivenessof countermeasure and cost leads to the decision of adopting,negotiating or declining a DSC. Given the information protec-tion level, the return on investment (ROI) for adopting a DSC,for a servicex2Xwith threat vector aA and offered securitys2Swith effectivenesseand costcmust be greater than orequal to 1 (seeTable 3).TOI½dsc;p/C138¼
p/C2s:effectivenesss:costð8ÞDSCðx;a;s;e;cÞ¼accept;ROI>1negotiate;ROI¼1decline;ROI<18><>:5. ConclusionA novel multilevel classiﬁcation of security concerns in cloudcomputing highlighting the effect of different security attackson each cloud layer is presented in this paper. This multilevelclassiﬁcation provides a new dimension to address securityconcerns on multiple levels and minimization of their effects.The level of severity of the attack is also assessed as low, med-ium and high across different security concerns. The securityrequirements for different cloud services are also outlined forthe secure cloud computing. These security requirementsinclude data encryption, multi-tenancy, data privacy, authenti-cation and authorization. These security requirements aremapped to different cloud services to achieve integrity andcoherence in the cloud system. The paper presents a novel con-cept of dynamic security contract to determine the risk leveland type of security required for each service at different cloudlayers for a cloud consumer and cloud provider.Appendix A. Supplementary materialSupplementary data associated with this article can be found,in the online version, athttp://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.aci.2016.03.001.References[1]P. Mell, T. Grance, The NIST deﬁnition of cloud computing, in:National Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg,MD 20899-8930, springer, 2011, pp. 1–7
. [2]
R. Bhadauria, S. Sanyal, Survey on security issues in cloudcomputing and associated mitigation techniques, Int. J.Comput. Appl. 47 (18) (2012) 47–66
. [3]
S.S. Yeo, J.H. Park, Security considerations in cloud computingvirtualization environment, Grid Pervasive Comput. LectureNotes Comput. Sci. 7861 (2013) 208–215
. [4]
H. Yu, N. Powell, D. Stembridge, X. Yuan, Cloud computingand security challenges, in: Proc of the 50th Annual SoutheastRegional Conference (ACM-SE12), ACM, New York, USA,2013, pp. 298–302
.[5] H. Jay, M. Nicolett, Assessing the security risks of cloudcomputinghttp://www.studymode.com/essays/Assessing-The-Security-Risks-Of-Cloud-1009499.html2008. [6]
W. Jansen, T. Grance, et al, Guidelines on security and privacyin public cloud computing, NIST Special Publ. 800 (2011) 144
. [7]
T. Mather, S. Kumaraswamy, S. Latif, Cloud Security andPrivacy: An Enterprise Perspective on Risks and Compliance,O’Reilly Media, Inc., 2009
.[8]
P. Arora, R.C. Wadhawan, E.S.P. Ahuja, Cloud computingsecurity issues in infrastructure as a service, Int. J. Adv. Res.Comput. Sci. Softw. Eng. 2 (1) (2012) 1–7
. [9]
S. Bugiel, S. Nurnberger, T. Poppelmann, A.R. Sadeghi, T.Schneider, AmazonIA: when elasticity snaps back, in: Proc ofthe 18th ACM Conference on Computer and CommunicationsSecurity (CCS11), ACM, 2011, pp. 389–400
. [10]
J. Somorovsky, M. Heiderich, M. Jensen, J. Schwenk, N.Gruschka, L.L. Iacono, All your clouds are belong to us:Table 3DSC from consumer/provider perspective.
Consumer Provider Security of data as per information requirements (i.e. sensitivity) with minimum cost andmaximum utilization– Demand sufﬁcient security– Min (Risk)– Min (Cost)– Max (Utilization)– Max (ROI)Provision of security at every layer of cloud– Risk assessment and countermeasureselection– Opt-able security choices– Meet dynamic SLAs– Avoid penalties– Max (ROI)64 S.A. Hussain et al.security analysis of cloud management interfaces, in: Proc. of the3rd ACM workshop on Cloud Computing Security Workshop(CCSW11), ACM, 2011, pp. 3–14
.[11]
M. Hussain, H. Abdulsalam, SECaaS: security as a service forcloud-based applications, in: Proc. of the Second KuwaitConference on e-Services and e-Systems (KCESS11), ACM,2011, pp. 1–4
.[12]
R. Laborde, F. Barre`re, A. Benzekri, Toward authorization as aservice: a study of the XACML standard, in: Proceedings of the16th Communications & Networking Symposium, Society forComputer Simulation International, 2013, pp. 1–7
. [13]
G. Pek, L. Buttyan, B. Bencsath, A survey of security issues inhardware virtualization, ACM Comput. Surveys 45 (3) (2013) 1–34. ACM
.[14]
M. Pearce, S. Zeadally, R. Hunt, Virtualization: issues, securitythreats, and solutions, ACM Comput. Surveys 45 (2) (2013) 1–39. ACM
.[15] L. Ponemon, Ponemon 2014 SSH security Vulnerability ReportRetrieved fromhttp://www.venaﬁ.com/collateral/wp/ponemon-2014-ssh-security-vulnerability-report2014. [16] Zeua, Zeus Botnet Controller Retrieved from http://aws. amazon.com/security/zeus-botnet-controller/ 2009. [17]
T. Ristenpart, E. Tromer, H. Shacham, S. Savage, Get off of mycloud: exploring information leakage in third-party computeclouds, in: ACM Conference on Computer and CommunicationsSecurity, ACM, 2009
.[18] Zeua, Attacks on Virtual Machine Emulators, White PaperSymantec Corporationhttp://www.symantec.com/avcenter/reference/Virtual_Machine_Threats.pdf 2007. [19]J. Idziorek, Exploiting Cloud Utility Models for Proﬁt and RuinGraduate Theses and Dissertations, Lowa State University,2012
.[20]
R.A. Popa, J.R. Lorch, D. Molnar, H.J. Wang, L. Zhuang,Enabling security in cloud storage SLAs with CloudProof, in:Proc. of the 2011 USENIX Conference on USENIX AnnualTechnical Conference, 2011, 31-31
. [21]
J. Wei, X. Zhang, G. Ammons, V. Bala, P. Ning, Managingsecurity of virtual machine images in a cloud environment, in:ACM Cloud Computing Security Workshop (CCSW?09),ACM, 2009
.[22]
X. Ou, S. Govindavajhala, A.W. Appel, gMulVAL: a logic-based network security analyzer, in: Proc. 14th USENIXSecurity Symp., 2005, pp. 113–128
. [23] P. Mell, K. Scarfone, S. Romanosky, gCommon VulnerabilityScoring System (CVSS)http://www.ﬁrst.org/cvss/cvss-guide.html2010, May.[24]
M. Frigault, L. Wang, gMeasuring network security usingbayesian network-based attack graphs, in: Proc. IEEE 32ndAnn. Intﬂ Conf. Computer Software and Applications(COMPSAC f08), 2008, pp. 698–703. Aug
.Security concerns in cloud computing 65