 AASRI Procedia   8  ( 2014 )  30 – 37 Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
2212-6716 © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B. V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/3.0/ ). Peer-review under responsibility of Scientific Committee of American Applied Science Research Institutedoi: 10.1016/j.aasri.2014.08.006 
ScienceDirect
2014 AASRI Conference on Sports Engineering and Computer Science (SECS 2014)
Online Multi-player Tracking in Monocular Soccer Videos
Michael Herrmanna,*, Martin Hoerniga, Bernd Radiga
aTechnische Universität München, Image Understanding and Knowle dge-Based Systems, Boltzmannstr. 3, D-85748 Garching, Germany
Abstract
The tracking of players in monocular soccer videos is a challenging task because of numerous difficulties that can occurespecially in TV broadcasts, such as camera motions, severe occlusion of players, or inhomogeneous lightning conditions.We propose a new robust method for multi-player tracking, which is based on finding local maxima on a confidence map.This map represents an ensemble of visual evidences, such as colors of the team outfits, responses of a HOG humandetector, and grass regions in images. This combination of features allows for a robust online tracking procedure that doesnot require any further information about the camera calibration or other user input. In the evaluation using fourrepresentative datasets, our algorithm shows remarkable accuracy and outperforms a state-of-the-art pedestrian tracker.
© 2014 Herrmann, Hoernig, Radig. Published by Elsevier B.V.Selection and/or peer review under responsibility of American Applied Science Research Institute
Keywords:computer vision, soccer analysis, player tracking
1. IntroductionWe aim to develop a system for an automatic analysis of soccer matches that extracts match statistics andperforms tactical analysis from monocular recordings, such as TV broadcasts, which usually exhibit numerousdifficulties. One important task of such a system is the 2D tracking of players in the video images. For thispurpose, we propose a new robust unsupervised online method that provides three main contributions:
*Corresponding author. Tel.: +49-89-289-17779; fax: +49-89-289-17757.E-mail address:michael.herrmann@tum.de
© 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B. V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/3.0/ ). Peer-review under responsibility of Scientific Committee of American Applied Science Research Institute31  Michael Herrmann et al.  /  AASRI Procedia   8  ( 2014 )  30 – 37 
An observation model that is based on a combination of soccer-specific features (grass color), match-specific features (colors of team outfits), and universal features (HOG detector) resulting in a robustconfidence map for player positions (see sections 2 and 3 and Figure 1).An efficient measurement model that finds optimal locations on a confidence map starting at predictedpositions of single-target Kalman filters [1] (see section 4).An efficient player detection, avoiding time-consuming tracking-by-detection (see section 4).In human tracking, the tracking-by-detection approach is widely used for multi-target tracking (see i.e. [2],[3]). Human detectors often show low accuracy and poor computational performance for small objects, whilein soccer videos, especially in low-resolution records and wide-angle scenes, player heights of 40 pixels andless are quite common. In contrast, kernel-based approaches, such as the mean-shift tracking [4], often requirean initialization of the templates and risk drifting away, due to object-specific template adaption.Zhang et al. [5] proposed an online method with a combination of tracking-by-detection and kernel-basedtracking and achieved state-of-the-art results using standard pedestrian tracking data sets.In principle, our approach is similar, but we use soccer-specific knowledge to automatically detect playerswithout an exhaustive sliding-window approach. Our observation model is partially based on the ideas ofASPOGAMO [6], but incorporates more universal features, such as the HOG detector, and does not need anyhuman-guided initialization. It is similar to the method proposed by [7], which is, however, a stand-aloneplayer detection and does not incorporate tracking information over time.2. PreliminariesPlayer positions.In our approach, the position of a player݌
௜i sm o d e l e dw i t h i na ni m a g e࢚ࡵat timeݐusing an axis-aligned bounding box࡮
࢏≔{(ݔ,ݕ)∈ℕଶ|(ݔ௜≤ݔ<ݔ௜+ݓ௜)∧(ݕ௜≤ݕ<ݕ௜+ℎ௜)},w h e r e(ݔ௜,ݕ௜) is the upper-left corner andݓ
௜andℎ௜are width and height, respectively. A bounding box describes the extentof a player in the image and in our method the aspect ratio is fixed toݓ
௜≔0.41ℎ௜(see [8]). Player segmentation.Our confidence map is based on segmented player regions in the image and we usea robust grass segmentation method following [9]. This procedure takes as input a RGB image ࡵ
࢚at timeݐand returns an image regionࡴ
࢚, describing the enclosing hull of the playing field, and a foreground region࢚ࡲ, which, under ideal circumstances, covers the image region of all players in the visible part of the playing fieldFigure 1: From left to right: original image, segmentation results, confidence map, and detection results (with confidence values).
32   Michael Herrmann et al.  /  AASRI Procedia   8  ( 2014 )  30 – 37 
(see Figure 1). Due to noise and movement artifacts usually not all players are segmented properly, whereasparts of other foreground objects, such as field lines, can be included.Unsupervised generation of color templates.According to the FIFA rules [10], the colors of the jerseys have to be chosen so that the players from different teams, the referees, and the goal keepers are all pairwisedistinguishable. We make use of this fact by initially determining color templates for each type of outfit,based on color histograms.Given the first frameࡵ
૙of a video sequence, our automatic detection procedure (see section 5) returnsplayer positions represented by a set of݊
଴bounding boxes࡮૙≔൛࡮૚૙,…,࢔࡮૙૙ൟ.W ee x t r a c tt h es e to fR G B color vectors ofࡵ
૙for the pixels within൫࡮૚૙∪…∪࢔࡮૙૙൯∩ࡲ૙and cluster this set by applying the k-means++ algorithm [11] using the Euclidean distance. The cluster centers are the݇
஼dominant color vectors that represent the݇
஼bins of our color histograms. A color vector is assigned to the bin that is represented by thenearest dominant color. We divide each bounding box࡮
࢏૙to its equal-sized top, mid, and bottom parts࢏࡮ࢀ૙,
࢏࡮ࡹ૙,a n d࢏࡮࡮૙and calculate three histograms with respect to࢏࡮ࢀ૙∩ࡲ૙,࢏࡮ࡹ૙∩ࡲ૙,a n d࢏࡮࡮૙∩ࡲ૙.T h i st a k e s into account that a player’s outfit changes from top to bottom, regarding jersey, shorts and socks. Stackingand normalizing result in a feature unit vector with3݇
஼entries for each bounding box. To calculate the distance of two normalized histogram vectorsࢎ
૚andࢎ૛, we use the Hellinger distance as proposed by [4] and define݀
ு(ࢎ૚,ࢎ૛)≔ඥ݀ுଶ(ࢎ૚,ࢎ૛)with݀ுଶ(ࢎ૚,ࢎ૛)∶=1−Σ௜ୀଵଷ௞಴ඥࢎ૚(݅)ࢎ૛(݅). We try to estimate the number of different outfits among the given bounding boxes by clustering the set ofhistogram vectors using k-means++ with݇=1 ,…,5(there are five different possible outfits: 2 x players, 2 x goalkeepers, 1 x referees) using the distance݀
ு. We choose݇௠௜௡as the smallest݇for which the result of the clustering fulfills our decision criterion: for a given set of݈histogram vectorsࢎ
૚,…,࢒ࢎand their݇cluster centers࢕
૚,…,࢑࢕, each vector࢏ࢎis assigned to its cluster center࢕(࢏ࢎ)a n dw ed e f i n et h em i n i m u md i s t a n c ea s݀
௠௜௡∶=m i n୧݀ு(࢏ࢎ,࢕(࢏ࢎ))and the maximum distance as݀௠௔௫∶=m a x୧݀ு(࢏ࢎ,࢕(࢏ࢎ)).W i t ht h et h r e s h o l d parametersݐ
௠௜௡andݐ௠௔௫, our decision criterion is(݀௠௜௡≤ݐ௠௜௡)∧(݀௠௔௫≤ݐ௠௔௫). During tracking each tracked bounding box is assigned to the outfit class with nearest distance݀
஻at the moment of detection. HOG-based human detection.We trained a human detector based on histograms of oriented gradients(HOG) according to [12] with some slight modifications to their default detector. We use a 64×128 pixelsdetection window with a human size of 41×100 pixels (see [8]). To allow for an efficient calculation, we donot apply a Gaussian spatial window during the accumulation of the histograms. To avoid soccer-specificoverfitting, the classifier is trained using the INRIA pedestrian data set [12].3. Confidence map for player positionsWe construct a function that describes a degree of quality of the image evidenceࡵ
࢚, given a set࢚࡮≔ ൛࡮
૚࢚,…,࢚࢚࢔࡮ൟof bounding boxes at timeݐ. We assign each bounding box࢚࢏࡮∈࢚࡮to the connected component of the foregroundࡲ
࢚with the greatest overlap. If࢚࢏࡮∩࢚ࡲ=∅, we assign࢚࢏࡮to an empty region. Hence, the result is a set of image regionsࡿ
࢚≔{ࡾ૚࢚,…,࢚࢚࢓ࡾ},w h e r ee a c h࢚࢐ࡾ∈࢚ࡿhas a set of assigned bounding boxes
௝࡮෩௧≔൛࡮࢐෩૚࢚,…,࡮࢐෩࢚ࡾ࢔ൟ. In the following, fractions are only calculated if the denominator is not zero.Otherwise, they are omitted. We perform all calculations for each regionࡾ
࢚࢐and its assigned bounding boxes33  Michael Herrmann et al.  /  AASRI Procedia   8  ( 2014 )  30 – 37 
independently. For the purpose of clearness we omit the index݆and set݊ோ≔݊(࢚࢐ࡾ)∈ℕ∖{0}.I nm o s tc a s e s݊
ோ=1. Cases with݊ோ>1occur for example if one player is partly occluded by another player in the image.Region-based evidence.Our region-based features are inspired by the compactness constraint and the sizeconstraint of [6] and are based on the assumption that an image region of one or more players should be fullycovered by bounding boxes. The coverage featureܿ
ଵdescribes the degree of coverage of the connected componentࡾ
࢚by the union of the bounding boxes and is defined asܿ
ଵ(࡮෩૚࢚,…,࡮෩࢚ࡾ࢔,࢚ࡾ)≔area൫(࡮෩૚࢚∪…∪࡮෩࢚ࡾ࢔)∩࢚ࡾ൯/area(࢚ࡾ). The over-coverage featureܿ
ଶpenalizes regions inside the bounding boxes that are not covered by theforeground region. To favor positions whereࡾ
࢚is evenly spread along the horizontal axis, each bounding box࡮෩
࢚࢏is divided to the upper half࡮࢛෩࢚࢏and the lower half࡮࢒෩࢚࢏and we defineܿ
ଶ(࡮෩૚࢚,…,࡮෩࢚ࡾ࢔,࢚ࡾ)≔1−max୧max୭∈{୳,୪}area(࡮࢕෩࢚࢏\࢚ࡾ/)area(࡮࢕෩࢚࢏). The overlap featureܿ
ଷtakes into account that in general the bounding boxes of two players do not fullyoverlap (except in the rare case of full occlusion). It is defined asܿ
ଷ(࡮෩૚࢚,…,࡮෩࢚ࡾ࢔,࢚ࡾ)≔1−max୧,୨area(࡮෩࢚࢏∩࡮෩࢚࢐/)area(࡮෩࢚࢏∪࡮෩࢚࢐). Color-based evidence.The color-based confidenceܿ
ସis based on the dominant colors and the outfit classes (see section 2). The normalized color histogram vectorࢎ(࡮෩
࢚࢏)∈ℝଷ௞಴is calculated with respect to࡮෩
࢚࢏∩࢚ࢉࡾ.W es e t࢚ࢉࡾ∶=࢚ࡾ,i farea(࢚ࡾ>)0.O t h e r w i s e ,࢚ࢉࡾis the largest axis-aligned inner ellipse of࡮෩࢚࢏.E a c h bounding box has an assigned outfit class with histogram vector࢕(࡮෩
࢚࢏)∈ℝଷ௞಴and we defineܿ
ସ(࡮෩૚࢚,…,࡮෩࢚ࡾ࢔,࢚ࡾ)≔1−ටߎ௜ୀଵ௡ೃ݀ு൫ࢎ(࡮෩࢚࢏,)࢕(࡮෩࢚࢏)൯೙ೃ
. HOG-based evidence.We use a human detector, trained as described in section 2. A resized sub-imagewith size of 64×128 pixels is generated for each bounding box࡮෩
࢚࢏, so that the height of the bounding box corresponds to 100 pixels in the sub-image, the sub-image has the same center point as the bounding box, andthe aspect ratio of the pixels remains unchanged. This sub-image is used to perform a classification of thehuman detector. The result of the classifier is a decision value݀
஽(࡮෩࢚࢏)∈ℝ, which is mapped using the parametersݑ
஽andݒ஽to݀஽ᇱ൫࡮෩࢚࢏|ݑ஽,ݒ஽൯≔(݀஽(࡮෩࢚࢏)−ݑ஽)/(ݒ஽−ݑ஽). The confidence is defined by the geometric meanܿ
ହ൫࡮෩૚࢚,…,࡮෩࢚ࡾ࢔,࢚ࡾหݑ஽,ݒ஽)≔ටߎ௜ୀଵ௡ೃmax(1,min(0,݀஽′൫࡮෩࢚࢏|ݑ஽,ݒ஽൯)೙ೃ
. Gating.During tracking we additionally incorporate a gating term, based on the distance to the predictedlocation of the tracker (if available). For each bounding box࡮෩
࢚࢏, we calculate the Euclidean distance of its center point to the center point of the corresponding predicted bounding boxࡼ෩
࢚࢏, normalized by the length of34   Michael Herrmann et al.  /  AASRI Procedia   8  ( 2014 )  30 – 37 
the diagonal ofࡼ෩࢚࢏and trimmed to a maximum value of1. The gating confidenceܿ଺is defined by one minus the mean distance of the bounding boxes࡮෩
૚࢚,…,࡮෩࢚ࡾ࢔and their corresponding predictions.Ensemble averaging.T h es i n g l ef e a t u r e sܿ
௜,݅∈{1,…6}are combined by weighted ensemble averaging using the weightsݓ
௜,݅∈{1,…6}, resulting in the overall confidence functionܿ(࡮෩૚࢚,…,࡮෩࢚ࡾ࢔,࢚ࡾ),w h i c hw e define as follows:ܿ(࡮෩
૚࢚,…,࡮෩࢚ࡾ࢔,࢚ࡾ)≔ݓߑ ௜ܿ௜(࡮෩૚࢚,…,࡮෩࢚ࡾ࢔,࢚ࡾ/)ݓߑ௜. Note thatܿ(࡮෩
૚࢚,…,࡮෩࢚ࡾ࢔,࢚ࡾ)∈[0;1]because∀݅:ܿ௜൫࡮෩૚࢚,…,࡮෩࢚ࡾ࢔,࢚ࡾ൯∈[0;1].F o r࢚ࡾ=∅,w es e tݓଵ≔0and ݓ
ଶ≔0and if there is only one object (݊ோ=1), we omit the overlap feature and setݓଷ≔0. Maximization of the confidence.For every new time step, we search for positions with a local maximumon the confidence map near the Kalman predictions. To keep the number of calculations low, we propose asimple greedy heuristic: we iteratively optimize the confidence with respect to the positions of the boundingboxes, while their sizes and the regionࡾ
࢚remain fixed, thus for݊௧bounding boxes, we have2݊௧variables. In each iteration of the maximization procedure, we evaluate the confidence map at2݊
௧+1positions near the current position and determine the position with the highest confidence value. If this value is higher than thevalue at the current position, the iteration continues, starting at the best position. Otherwise, the iteration stopswith the current position as the result. Usually, our efficient greedy approach stops after 2-3 iterations andshows, however, satisfactory results.The2݊
௧+1positions in the neighborhood arise as follows: first the gradient ofܿis approximated using a finite forward difference (with step sizeΔݔ ≔8), which results in2݊
௧evaluations of the confidence map (instead of4݊
௧using central difference). Then one step (likewise with step sizeΔݔ) in the direction of the gradient is taken for the remaining evaluation.Measurement of object size.Mainly due to perspective projection the size of a player in the imagedepends on the image position. To enforce consistency, we normalize the sizes of the predicted boundingboxes before the maximization step. For this purpose, we fit a linear model using a least-squares approach,where the heightℎis the dependent and the coordinateݕis the independent variable. Afterwards, the height of each bounding box is adapted according to this model and the width is determined byݓ≔0.41ℎ(see [8]). After the maximization step, for each bounding box࡮෩
࢚࢏we iterate several steps of scale with respect to the original size and take the size with the best confidence valueܿ
௕௘௦௧as a resulting measurement, which results in the final measurement qualityݍ൫࡮෩
࢚࢏൯≔ܿ௕௘௦௧.4. Player trackingWe perform multi-target tracking by applying a single-target Kalman filter [1] for each tracked boundingbox. A new measurement is generated by an optimization step with respect to the confidence map using theKalman prediction as the starting position. The detection of new and lost targets is performed with the help ofdeterministic heuristics, which are guided by the confidence map.State and measurement model.The state of player݌
௜is represented by a six-tuple݋
௜≔(ݔ௜ݕ௜ݔ̇௜ݕ̇௜ݓ௜ℎ௜)்,w h e r eݔ௜,ݕ௜,ݓ௜,a n dℎ௜are the parameters of the bounding box, andݔ̇௜andݕ̇௜are the velocity inݔandݕ, respectively. We apply a constant size and constant velocity model. Thus, the changes35  Michael Herrmann et al.  /  AASRI Procedia   8  ( 2014 )  30 – 37 
in size and the acceleration of the objects are implicitly modeled by the process noise. Measurements areperformed for the position and the size variables.Loss and detection of players during tracking. During tracking a tracked bounding box࡮
࢚࢏is removed if its measurement qualityݍ(࡮
࢚࢏)is below a thresholdݐ௟௢௦௦i nt w of r a m e si nar o wo ri fi th a sas i g n i f i c a n t o v e r l a pw i t ha n o t h e rt r a c k e db o u n d i n gb o x( w i t hh i g h e rm e a s u r e m e n tq u a l i t y )i nm o r et h a nf o u rf r a m e si narow.In return, connected components that fulfill some size constraints according to the linear size model areconsidered as single player candidates and for these positions the confidence map is evaluated andmaximized. Single player candidates that have a measurement qualityݍ(࡮
࢚࢏)greater than or equal to a thresholdݐ
ௗ௘௧௘௖௧ in two frames in a row are added to the tracked bounding boxes.Initial player detection.For the initial player detection, we select connected components of theforeground regionࡲ
૙with an appropriate orientation and aspect ratio as single player candidates. In theneighborhood of each candidate, we perform a sliding-window human detection with a scale space whichdepends on the size of the candidate region. The positive detections are used to fit our linear size model. Thehuman detection is repeated in the neighborhood of all connected components ofࡲ
૙with a restricted scale space depending on the position of the region in the image. Again, the positive detections are used to fit thesize model and to estimate the team histograms (see section 2). These detections are the starting point for thefirst maximization step resulting in the initial player positions.5. Implementation details and evaluation resultsIn our implementation we set the number of dominant colors݇
஼≔64as an estimated upper bound for five outfits with each three four-colored parts (jersey, short, socks). The other parameters are determinedempirically and set as follows:ݐ
௠௜௡≔0.1,ݐ௠௔௫≔0.25,ݑ஽≔−4,ݒ஽≔0.5,ݓଵ≔0.75,ݓଶ≔0.4, ݓ
ଷ≔0.05,ݓସ≔1.0,ݓହ≔0.5,ݓ଺≔0.05,ݐ௟௢௦௦≔0.35,a n dݐௗ௘௧௘௖௧∶=0 . 7. We evaluate our system with the help of MOTA and MOTP [13] and use manually annotated ground truth of the following videosequences:German – Holland, TV broadcast, SD, 37s, 925 frames ( GH)Bayern Munich – OSC Lille, TV broadcast, HD, 15s, 752 frames ( BL)ISSIA-CNR Camera 3, static camera, Full-HD, 120s, 3000 frames, online available [14] ( ISSIA) VS-PETS Camera 3 Test, static camera, 720×576, 100s, 2500 frames, online available [15] ( VS) Ground-truth and tracked bounding boxes are fixed to an aspect ratio 0.41:1 as proposed in [8]. Someannotated targets that are outside the field (like coaches and linesman), as well as ground-truth boundingboxes that are cropped by the image boundaries, are added to an ignore list, i.e. they don’t need to bematched, but it is not an error if they are matched.Our baseline is the publicly available tracker of Zhang et al. [5], which achieves state-of-the-art trackingresults on pedestrian tracking datasets. We used the standard parameter values which come with the sourcecode, except the HOG_DETECT_FRAME_RATIO, which we set to 2 for BL and ISSIA, and to 3 for GH andVS allowing to detect small players. As the detector of this tracking procedure generates a lot of false positivedetections in the audience area, we ignore all its tracked objects outside our field hullܪ
௧at timeݐ.36   Michael Herrmann et al.  /  AASRI Procedia   8  ( 2014 )  30 – 37 
Figure 2 shows the comparison of the MOTA / MOTP of our proposed tracking procedure and theprocedure of Zhang et al. depending on the overlap threshold for the assignment of the tracked boundingboxes to the ground truth. Our system achieves satisfactory MOTA scores for the standard overlap thresholdof 0.5. With increasing overlap threshold, the accuracy becomes remarkable (up to 0.9 and more). In all cases,our results outperform the results of the baseline. Our non-optimized implementation processes about 1-2frames per second on an Intel Core2 Quad Q9650. Because of its highly parallel structure, we believe that anear real-time performance could be possible. In contrast, the method of Zhang et al. processes 0.1 frames persecond.We provide a publicly available visualization of our tracking results for ISSIA and VS (see [16] and [17]).6. ConclusionWe proposed an unsupervised online 2D tracking procedure for players in monocular soccer videos thatapplies an efficient determination of local maxima in a confidence map. This map is based on a robustcombination of soccer-specific (grass color), match-specific (team outfit colors) and general (HOG detector)image features. Avoiding a time-consuming sliding-window approach our system allows for a fast playertracking that in addition does not require any further input, such as user input or camera parameters. Ourtracking results achieve high accuracy and outperform a state-of-the-art pedestrian tracker.AcknowledgementsThe funding for this research was provided by German Research Foundation (DFG) grant no. RA359/12-1.References[1] R. E. Kalman, “A New Approach to Linear Filtering and Prediction Problems.,” Transactions of the ASME - Journal of Basic Engineering, vol. 82, no. 1, pp. 35–45, Mar. 1960.Figure 2: MOTA (top row) and MOTP (bottom row) results (in dependence of the overlap threshold) of the proposed tracking procedurein comparison with the procedure of Zhang et al. [5]. Results are given for each data set (GH, BL, ISSIA, VS) from left to right.
37  Michael Herrmann et al.  /  AASRI Procedia   8  ( 2014 )  30 – 37 
[2] M. D. Breitenstein, F. Reichlin, B. Leibe, E. Koller-Meier, and L. Van Gool, “Online MultipersonTracking-by-Detection from a Single, Uncalibrated Camera,” IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, vol. 33, no. 9, pp. 1820–1833, Sep. 2011.[3] H. Izadinia, I. Saleemi, W. Li, and M. Shah, “(MP)2T: Multiple People Multiple Parts Tracker,” inComputer Vision – ECCV 2012, vol. 7577, Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer, 2012, pp. 100–114.[4] D. Comaniciu, V. Ramesh, and P. Meer, “Kernel-based Object Tracking,” IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, vol. 25, no. 5, pp. 564–577, May 2003.[5] J. Zhang, L. L. Presti, and S. Sclaroff, “Online Multi-person Tracking by Tracker Hierarchy,” in IEEE 9th International Conference on Advanced Video and Signal-Based Surveillance , 2012, pp. 379–385. [6] M. Beetz, S. Gedikli, J. Bandouch, B. Kirchlechner, N. von Hoyningen-Huene, and A. C. P. Perzylo,“Visually Tracking Football Games Based on TV Broadcasts,” in 20th International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2007, pp. 2066–2071.[ 7 ] S .G e r k e ,S .S i n g h ,A .L i n n e m a n n ,a n dP .N d j i k i - N y a ,“ U n s u p e r v i s e dC o l o rC l a s s i f i e rT r a i n i n gf o rSoccer Player Detection,” inVisual Communications and Image Processing, 2013, pp. 1–5. [8] P. Dollar, C. Wojek, B. Schiele, and P. Perona, “Pedestrian Detection: An Evaluation of the State of theArt,”IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence , vol. 34, no. 4, pp. 743–761, Apr. 2012.[9] M. Hoernig, M. Herrmann, and B. Radig, “Real Time Soccer Field Analysis from Monocular TV VideoData,” in11th International Conference on Pattern Recognition and Image Analysis (PRIA-11-2013) , Samara, 2013, vol. 2, pp. 567–570.[10] FIFA, “Laws of the Game,” 2014. [Online]. Available:http://www.fifa.com/aboutfifa/footballdevelopment/technicalsupport/refereeing/laws-of-the-game/.[Accessed: 30-Apr-2014].[11] D. Arthur and S. Vassilvitskii, “k-means++: the Advantages of Careful Seeding,” in 18th annual ACM- SIAM symposium on Discrete algorithms, Philadelphia, PA, USA, 2007, pp. 1027–1035.[12] N. Dalal and B. Triggs, “Histograms of Oriented Gradients for Human Detection,” in IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR 2005) , 2005, vol. 1, pp. 886–893. [13] K. Bernardin and R. Stiefelhagen, “Evaluating Multiple Object Tracking Performance: The CLEARMOT Metrics,”EURASIP Journal on Image and Video Processing , vol. 2008, pp. 1–10, May 2008. [14] T. D’Orazio, M. Leo, N. Mosca, P. Spagnolo, and P. L. Mazzeo, “A Semi-automatic System forGround Truth Generation of Soccer Video Sequences,” in 6th IEEE International Conference on Advanced Video and Signal Based Surveillance, 2009, pp. 559–564.[15] University of Reading, “VS-PETS Football Dataset,” Third IEEE International Workshop on Visual Surveillance and Performance Evaluation of Tracking and Surveillance ,2 0 0 2 .[ O n l i n e ] .A v a i l a b l e : http://www.cvg.reading.ac.uk/VSPETS/vspets-db.html. [A ccessed: 30-Apr-2014]. [16] M. Herrmann, M. Hoernig, and B. Radig, “Player Tracking Results ISSIA-CNR,” 2014. [Online].Available: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=L9t7ei6gAjk. [Accessed: 30-Apr-2014].[17] M. Herrmann, M. Hoernig, and B. Radig, “Player Tracking Results VS-PETS,” 2014. [Online].Available: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SL1LjRAbPgI. [Accessed: 30-Apr-2014].