ORIGINAL ARTICLE
Online integrity and authentication checking forQuran electronic versions
Izzat Alsmadia,*, Mohammad Zarourb
aComputer Information Systems Department, Yarmouk University, Jordan
bPrince Sultan University, Saudi ArabiaReceived 24 April 2015; revised 18 July 2015; accepted 10 August 2015Available online 14 August 2015
KEYWORDSInformation retrieval;Security;Search engines;Documents’ automatic eval-uation;Hashing algorithms;Information authenticationAbstractThe ability to control data and information through the Internet can be challenging. Pre-liminary analysis showed that some tampering and forgery may occur to some words of the Quranin the electronic versions that span the Internet. Such small modiﬁcations may not be noticed bypublic audience. The holy book of Quran includes a unique feature in that its worldwide copiesare all identical. The 114 chapters (Suras) and all their verses and words are preserved in the exactform. As such, we designed and evaluated a model and a tool to evaluate the integrity of the word-ing in the e-versions of the Quran through generating a Meta data related to all words in the Quranpreserving the counts and locations. Such Meta data can be used in the same way hash algorithmsare used in security to check the integrity of a disk and its data ﬁles where any small change in thedata will result in a different hash value. We conducted several experiments to evaluate the differentparameters and challenges that can impact the automatic authentication process of Quranic versesbased on information retrieval and hashing algorithms.
/C2112015 The Authors. Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of King Saud University. This isan open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ ).
1. IntroductionWith the huge amount of information uploaded by users allover the world, internet is the central library that all humansin the world are using to exchange information. However,one of the major problems with the current web is that thereis no control on the type, nature or details of informationuploaded to the web by any user. Accordingly, credibilityand accuracy are the foremost concerns when reading informa-tion from the web. Credibility can be linked to the website,hosting the information, author of uploaded data and the typeof data or information itself. For example, in social networksor even news websites the same story can be told in exactlyopposite versions given by two different websites or authors.Authenticity and integrity of online documents is increas-ingly getting crucial as many organizations put their docu-ments online. Providing facilities that allow both documents’owners and viewers to be able to ensure that their documentsare authentic and not tampered is extremely important.Currently two major techniques or approaches are used toauthenticate documents, or users online: Document control
*Corresponding author.E-mail addresses:ialsmadi@yu.edu.jo(I. Alsmadi),mzarour@psu. edu.sa(M. Zarour).Peer review under responsibility of King Saud University.
Production and hosting by ElsevierApplied Computing and Informatics (2017) 13,3 8–46
Saudi Computer Society, King Saud University
Applied Computing and Informatics
(http://computer.org.sa)www.ksu.edu.sawww.sciencedirect.com
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.aci.2015.08.0012210-8327/C2112015 The Authors. Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of King Saud University.This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ ).and digital signatures. Document control is related to permis-sions before and after publishing the document online. Docu-ment control then is needed to be dynamically applied in amanner that document can be tracked even after publishingit online. Integrity is about making sure that the document isnot altered by any unauthorized person and hence is authenti-cated. In digital signatures, signed documents should be veri-ﬁed by the people who signed it (i.e. non-repudiation).Nowadays, many multilingual copies of the holy Quran areavailable online. The holy Quran is originally written in Arabiclanguage. The exact wording and statements in Quran versesare identical for all Arabic versions of the Quran.
1However, one problem with translation is that it may change, intention-ally or unintentionally the meaning of some verses when trans-lated to another language. This is a general problem whendealing with translation. On the other hand, for the same lan-guage, it is possible that the same verse be written in differentwords due to intentional fraud or due to language translationissues.Due to the sensitivity and the nature of Quran verses thereis a vital need to continuously monitor Quran verses and chap-ters written through the Internet websites and pages to makesure that they are authenticated and not changed or fraud.Hashing algorithms or checksums are used to verify theintegrity of data in ﬁles, disks and databases. The hashingalgorithms or tools take ﬁle or data as inputs and generate aunique decimal or hexadecimal number in a way where anysmall change that may occur to the data in the ﬁle will causethe hashing algorithm to produce a new random number thatis different from the previous number that was generatedbefore the modiﬁcation. The Holy Quran is reserved and inte-grated in all its chapters and verses word by word and letter byletter. Hence using hashing algorithms to check automaticallyand frequently whether there is any possible modiﬁcation canbe an effective tool to authenticate Quran electronic versionseither for the whole Quran version or in parts: chapters orverses. Accordingly, Hashing can be generated for the wholeQuran as one unit, chapter by chapter or even verse by verse.Fig. 1below shows an example for hashing codes using theverse:Removing one letter from the verse may cause all hash val-ues to be changed to totally new values.As shown inFig. 1, different hashing algorithms generatedifferent hashing values for the same verse. Moreover, hashingalgorithms do not differentiate between small and large modi-ﬁcation. Any tiny modiﬁcation will change the hash codes justlike a large modiﬁcation.The identity and integrity of the data must be periodicallyand systematically veriﬁed through mechanisms such as SecureHash Standard (SHS) and Secure Hash Algorithm (SHA) [1]. Quran verses can be considered plagiarized or unauthenticatedeven for one letter change. Hence, hash algorithms are goodoption as such algorithms are very sensitive even for a verysmall change in data or documents.In this paper, an online integrity and authentication systemfor the Quran is proposed. The goal of such system is to con-tinuously traverse and search information and web pagesthroughout the Internet for any possible intentional and unin-tentional Quran verses fraud or change.It should be mentioned that in this research we are notfocusing on encryption but rather integrity checking. The prob-lem is that in our scenario for Quranic documents online, therelation between information providers and readers is not atypical e-commerce one-to-one relation in which typical hashor encryption algorithms can be sent to the known receiver orcustomer. Accordingly, private keys intended for a particularreceiver will not be applicable in our scenario where the toolis expected to check quickly through the Internet that Quranicdocuments are authentic and do not contain tampering.The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2dis- cusses the related work to this research ﬁeld followed by a dis-cussion of the adopted methodology in Section 3. Section4 discusses the developed authentication system, while the exper-iments are presented and discussed in Section 5. Section6pre- sents the conclusion and future work.1.1. Tashkeel, Harakat, or Diacritic marksA unique aspect in Arabic is the addition of Diacritic marks orTashkeel symbols (smallﻭ, smallﺃ, smallﻱ, Tanween:
, stress or shaddah). Those are added to letters to give differentmeanings or ways of spelling letters. They may cause problemsto indexing and querying of data in cases whether thoseDiacritics are added or ignored. We will present few of theproposed solutions to handle Tashkeel in Arabic.Papers that tried to detect Diacritics proposed morpholog-ical rules to do that. Known patterns and an initial training setare used to match subject word for one of the morphologicalrules. Hidden Markov Model (HMM) is used where the hid-den states are the possible diacritized selections of the words.In Arabic text, Diacritic marks can be challenging whetherthey exist or not in the Arabic text. If they exist, the challengewill be to read or parse them correctly especially as they needextra resources in addition to typical letters parsing in all otherlanguages. On the other hand, Diacritic marks are necessary toArabic words to clarify words and statements from ambiguity.
Figure 1A sample of Quran verses hashing.
1Although different readings have few literal changes, those canimpact the integrity checking process and hence we either use onereading or have different integrity datasets for the different readings.Experiments in this papers use ‘‘Hafs ”reading.Quran electronic versions 39Letters in Arabic have different forms based on their loca-tion, accordingly, indexer needs to understand that: (ﺇ,ﺃ,ﺁ) are all forms of the same letter.Fig. 2shows a sample of a Sphinxtable of Unicode character set that can be used as part of anindexer to guide the indexer for letters of different forms.The goal here is to acknowledge that many Arabic letters havedifferent forms and hence a Unicode character table needs tohave equivalent forms of similar letters. As mentioned earliersuch issues are solved technically once the right encodingscheme is used.2. Related workWhile the subject of data or information integrity is not new,few research papers are published in the area of web docu-ments integrity veriﬁcation. This is particularly true if we wantto exclude papers discussing encryption approaches.The removal of online documents’ replication is discussedin[2]. In many cases, the exact document is published in morethan one website. This may not be related to plagiarism but tocopies replication. This is actually quite common in the Inter-net world. The work presented in[2]used hashing comparisonto discover and remove possible replication in web documents.The aim was to improve indexer optimization where one copyof the document will be stored if many documents have theexact same hash value.The digital Quran veriﬁcation and authentication is veryrare; an algorithm to verify the fundamental text for Quranicquotes is presented in[3]. In order to generate a standard formof Quran verses, the algorithm is stemming some of the specialArabic characters[3]that may make the comparison processdifﬁcult. This includes Harakat or Tashkeel that can changethe letters’ spelling and the different shapes for some lettersas well. While removing such symbols can facilitate the infor-mation retrieval processes, they may cause false alarms wheresome plagiarism may only occur in those parts which will thenbe missed or not detected. The work in[3]did not specify anylimit or range to consider verses as not authenticated. It usedInformation retrieval and language processing methods withno utilization of security such as hashing methods.A system to verify the authenticity of Quranic verses basedon Unicode comparison is presented in[4]. The algorithm adopted in this system uses the Unicode representation ofthe characters to verify the fundamental text against the orig-inal Unicode text of the Quran in order to authenticate thefundamental text of the Quranic quotation, and then the posi-tion of diacritics and Tashkeel are veriﬁed. A similar study thatused unicode centric string matching approach is presented in[8].Sbbah and Selamat[9]have developed a framework forQuranic verses authenticity detection in online forum. Theyused a numerical approach to detect Quran quotes. Thenumerical approach calculates the diacritical ratio (DR) ofeach word in the text. Their authentication system dependson deﬁning the weights of Quranic letters and diacritics andcalculate the identiﬁers of distinctive Quranic words.Yusoff et al.[5]discussed authentication in Hadeeth andused the historical traditional methods used to authenticateHadeeths in current digital evidence authentication. Writersand collectors of Hadeeths used to follow the sequence orchain of Hadeeths authors and check their authenticity oneby one. A deﬁciency in one member of the chain may weakenthe whole chain and the Hadeeth itself.In order to protect the digital Quran from any distortion ortampering, the work presented in[6]used the meta-codiﬁcationwhere an ‘‘atomization structure”and Unicode codiﬁcation isused on the Quran in terms of the number of verses in eachchapter, the number of characters in each verse and so on.Other research works as in[7]discussed the usage of digitalsignatures to authenticate information or documents throughthe web. This can work in e-commerce applications and emailswhere the typical two ways of communication exists betweeneither sender and receiver or client–server. However, in ourcase, such architecture does exist and hence such methods can-not be used to check whether the information or the documentwas tampered or not. In Quran verses veriﬁcation system, anauthenticated copy of content is preserved and web contentis surveyed for possible – different copies. It is also importantto distinguish some changes related to Tashkeel, fonts, etc.that should not be classiﬁed as tampering. In particular wemean that some versions of the Quran include Tashkeel orDialects and others do not. Hence comparison should take thisinto consideration.In another but related domain, speech recognition tech-niques are used to verify Quran recitation as we started seeingmany recitation applications which require new techniques toverify the validity of the recitation, see for example [10–12]. In our case, the goal is to use information retrieval tech-niques to look for documents that include unauthenticated
Quranic verses. Authentication algorithms are then requiredto check whether these millions of documents online havethe same – literally authenticated versions of the Quran. Ofcourse such algorithms have two possibly contradictoryrequirements: performance and accuracy. Algorithms shouldbe able to search through the Internet for possible frauds witha high accuracy and quick speed. False alarms may also arisedue to issues such as different readings of the Quran wheresome speciﬁc letters or words are different from one readingto another.3. MethodologyThe aim of this research work is to build an authentication sys-tem that can verify any possible ‘‘change ”or ‘‘modiﬁcation”ofAuthen/g415ca/g415on System Development:Choose a hashing algorithmCode the authen/g415cated Quran copy (with Tashkeel and without Tashkeel versions) using the selected hashing algorithm Develop similarity check algorithm to retrieve verse that match the verse in ques/g415onDevelop a searching tool that surfs the web to iden/g415fy websites that are ci/g415ng authen/g415cated /unauthen/g415cated Quran verses.  Selec/g415on step:Iden/g415fy and select an authen/g415cated copy of 
Figure 2Research methodology.40 I. Alsmadi, M. ZarourQuran verses. Since Quran verses are literally identical, wedeveloped an authentication system that will index versesone by one in its indexer and will frequently search any possi-ble – mutation in the verses. The authentication system will beable to frequently search the Internet for web pages that mayinclude such fraud verses and index them for monitoring, alert,logging and veriﬁcation.Similar to the concept of kids safe search that some searchengines used to limit or focus kids search on kids related web-sites and eliminate websites that may present or contain harm-ful content to kids, our proposed system should be able toretrieve results for only authenticated versions of Quran verses.Our research methodology consists of three main steps (seeFig. 2):1. Selecting a hashing algorithm: MD5 hashing algorithm hasbeen chosen as it is a common and reliable one (see sectionexperiments and discussions).2. Developing of the authentication system: the authentica-tion system has been developed using C# programming lan-guage, ASP.NET. This can be classiﬁed as a customizedinformation retrieval or crawling system.The details of developing the authentication system are dis-cussed in more detail in Section4. The goal of this research isto design a search engine or authentication system that is ableto retrieve results based on a search query. A customizedQuran search engine or information retrieval system shouldfocus on parsing and indexing Quran verses from all overthe web. For proposed program search user interface andqueries will then represent verses or part of verses.The proposed Quranic search engine website allows thesearch through the whole internet and retrieves links wherethe searched verses are located. The focus in this paper is topropose and design a system that can search for and index cor-rect and incorrect versions of Quranic verses that may existthroughout the Internet.The algorithm to develop the authentication system isshown inFig. 3. The authentication system will start by check-ing whether the verse is written with Harakat and Tashkeel ornot to decide which version of the Quran to search. Then thealgorithm will look for the verses that are similar to the versein question; some verses or part of them can be replicated inthe Quran. The verses that have perfect match (similar-ity = 100%) or verses that are partially match (similar-ityP70%) are selected to authenticate the verse in question.Then, the hash code for the verse in question is generatedand compared to the selected verses. If the hash code of oneor more verses is identical to the hash code of the verse in ques-tion then the verse is authenticated, otherwise the verse istampered.4. Quran authentication system developmentWe have conducted an experiment to evaluate the top websitesthat are used to search for Quranic verses. This is based on thepopular search engine Google. We built a customized crawlerto search through Google for Quran verses one by one fromthe ﬁrst to the last verse. For each verse, we collected informa-tion related to the approximate number of index pages in Goo-gle for the verse. This represents the approximate number forweb or Internet links that include the queried verse. The devel-oped crawler uses Quran verses as search queries. Results areretrieved from embedded information in search web pages.Meta data related to the retrieved web pages are collectedand saved in a dataset. Google ranks retrieved results basedon its popularity page rank algorithm.Fig. 4shows a small sample of the collected data. We col-lected the ﬁrst 10 links that are retrieved from Google searchwhich indicate the most visited websites for the speciﬁc verse.The number of indexed pages in Google is approximate, seeFig. 5, where this can be a direct indicator of the verse popu-larity. Quranic digitally published verses can be indexed as partof the whole Quran in some websites that include the wholeQuran chapters and verses. In some other cases, some chaptersor verses of the Quran may be indexed or included in somepages as part of non-Quranic text.In order to deal with the verses having Harakat and Tash-keel, we have considered two versions of the Quran: one thatconsiders Harakat or Tashkeel and one that does not. Quranindexed in the web can be with or without Tashkeel. In manycases, search engines and their queries can be sensitive to thesesymbols that are unique in Arabic language; hence a search forverse that does not include Tashkeel in the query may notretrieve results for verses that include Tashkeel symbols.While there are some authentic websites such as www.is- lamweb.net,www.alro7.net,www.alhawali.com, many of the popular websites in the ﬁrst search page or the top 10 pagesare either from non-Islamic resources, or from some websitesthat do not represent the main stream of Islam and that mayinclude inaccurate information, content or interpretation ofthese verses. We consider that the Internet is now the mainsource for searching for Quran verses and their interpretationnot only for Muslims, but also for non-Muslims. Popularsocial network websites such as Facebook and YouTube arelisted frequently as sources for Quranic verses. It is not clearhowever why Google is presenting them in the top 10 retrievedresults. It is possibly that such high rank is not based on thepopularity of the speciﬁc Facebook personal page or the speci-ﬁc YouTube video, but rather based on the popularity of themother website (i.e. YouTube or Facebook).Fig. 5shows top 20 verses based on Google indexed pagesthat are popular. This is accomplished after indexing almostthe ﬁrst half of the Quran.Fig. 5shows that the number ofQuran indexed verses may vary from one verse to anotherand from one chapter to another. The ﬁrst most popular verseof the Quran is AlBasmalah (ﻢﺴﺑ
ﻢﻴﺣﺮﻟﺍﻦﻤﺣﺮﻟﺍﻪﻠﻟﺍ.) In fact this verse can be used in many contexts not necessary part of citingQuranic verses. People may use it to start a book, a chapter ora process. The verses in the ﬁrst chapter are also popular foralmost the same reasons. Some short verses can get a largenumber of indexed links as such short verse may be used innon-Quranic contexts (seeFig. 6).1. Read Quran Verse (QVsi) 2. QVsi has Tashkeel (Yes or No) 3. Similar verses to QVsi exist? (Yes or No) 4. Generate hash code; HiQVsi of QVsi. 5. Compare HiQVsi with original hash code HoQVsi. 6. If HiQVsi equals HiQVsi, authenticate QVsi.       • Else, the verse QVsi is unauthenticated 
Figure 3Quran verse authentication algorithm.Quran electronic versions 41For the Quran authentication system to work properly, webuilt an indexer that includes all Quran verses (based on theversion available on the Islamweb website) where each lineor row in the indexer includes one verse. Information abouteach verse should include its chapter, sequence number, con-tent and number of characters and MD5 hash value. MD5hash value is saved as the hash table value besides the verseas a key object, seeFig. 7.Total hash items are 6236 to represent total Quran verses.Fig. 8shows a small screenshot from Quran indexer includ-ing the attributes described earlier.5. Experiments and discussionsIn this section, several experiments are discussed, some of themhelped us in making decisions related to the hashing algorithmin developing the authentication system and at the end we haveconducted some experiments to test our authentication system.As mentioned earlier, there are several challenges that mayface the process of authenticating automatically electronicverses and chapters of the noble Quran. Such challenges arerelated to different languages, fonts, styles, and Quranic read-
Figure 4A small sample of Quran search crawler.
Figure 5A sample of Google retrieved results.42 I. Alsmadi, M. ZarourFigure 6Top 19 verses based on rank.
Figure 7Quran indexer content snapshot.
Figure 8A sample from Quran indexer.Quran electronic versions 43ings. Accordingly, we want ﬁrst to evaluate whether such dif-ferences can be handled by hashing algorithms or not.In the ﬁrst study, we have selected an experimental casestudy of several different verses, different fonts, colors, andoccurrences of small editing or changes and see their hashingvalues using different hashing algorithms.We want to see ﬁrst whether Tashkeels may impact hashingalgorithms.Fig. 9(a and b) shows different hash algorithm val-ues for the same small part of TashkeelBytes conversion gave the same value for the part of theverse with and without Tashkeel as Tashkeel values are notrecognized by the conversion. This byte value can be then usedfor veriﬁcation if Tashkeel is to be ignored. All the evaluatedhashing algorithms including the following: Alder32, CRC32,Haval, MD2, MD4, MD5, RipeMD128, RipeMD160, SHA-1, SHA-256, SHA-384, SHA-512, Tiger, and Whirlpool gavedifferent values for the verses with and without Tashkeels.We repeated the process several times and noticed that allhashing algorithms for all evaluated verses show different hashvalues comparing with and without Harakat or Tashkeel. Wenoticed however, that different implementations for the samehashing algorithm may give different hash values for the sametext. As such, the system should use the same algorithm imple-mentation for initial and consecutive authentications or veriﬁ-cations. This is what we have done in developing theauthentication system where we used the MD5 hashing algo-rithm for hashing purposes.We also tried some small changes related to using for exam-ple (ﻩ) instead of (ﺓ) and all hashing algorithms showeddifferent values.This simple experiment showed that if we want to checkcorrectness or authenticity of verses with Tashkeel and exactform, hashing algorithms can be used. However, if we wantto stem those parts, hashing algorithms will not be then effec-tive unless those additions are stemmed from all verses. In thesecond experiment and in order to check whether same hashfunctions can produce same hash codes, we tried differentimplementations for the same hashing algorithm and checkhash values for several verses. We believe that verse shouldbe the standard unit to measure with. Sizes of smaller or largerthan a verse can have several issues and challenges speciallyrelated to false alarms.In this experiment we have ﬁxed the source of Quran text toone website, in this case, (http://quran.com). First, we evalu- ated using MD5 hashing from three websites: http://www.ﬁle- format.inforeferred to (Hash1),http://www.hashemall.comreferred to (Hash2) andhttp://www.md5hashgenerator.comreferred to (Hash3).Table 1shows results of three samplesusing verses with Tashkeel.Results showed inconsistent ﬁndings where two algorithmsgave exact hash values (ignoring letter cases) unlike the thirdone.Table 2shows same verses and same implementations forthe verses but without Tashkeel. All values are different from
(a) (b) 
Figure 9(a) Evaluating hashing values using Tashkeel. (b) Hashing values without Tashkeel.
Table 1A sample hash of verses (including Tashkeel).
Verse Hash1 Hash2 Hash356:1 937dbc692b153fec-d3bcf890121a54ea 578D50BD96B68D5-A315491A333419D11 578d50bd96b68d5a3-15491a333419d113:3 3cc96e9210508e78b-3ecae50f5295f63 C64AC514F615D3E4-3DA500959AFACFED c64ac514f615d3e4-3da500959afacfed9:4 8709dce3dcf2d41c47-52f76faa1c542a 17126C6DFA2CDE5344-5F017D079A6378 17126c6dfa2cde5344-5f017d079a6378
Table 2Hash of verse (without Tashkeel).
Verse Hash1 Hash2 Hash356:1 a1612dca935376349712c736c71b94b3 3EBC3778DB0FE1E6E27BA6C638D2CB55 3ebc3778db0fe1e6e27-ba6c638d2cb553:3 1cc9e35f76da3988f50c50c13bfec3fc D2BFE01BFFD05BFFC3AF18139DDD4805 d2bfe01bﬀd05bﬀc3af18139ddd48059:4 16f463927f497032dd9b284ac9f20f0c 6BF0D7336E4203AE294E34CCE0DC5C14 6bf0d7336e4203ae294-e34cce0dc5c1444 I. Alsmadi, M. Zarourthose ofTable 1as Tashkeel changed hash values. On the otherhand, Hash 2 and 3 gave same values (ignoring letter cases).This experiment shows that not all hashing functions areidentical or should always produce same hash values for sametext. Nonetheless, this is not due to reliability issue with hash-ing algorithms. Rather, it has to do with the detail implemen-tation of the hashing algorithm. Hashing values for the samealgorithm implementation for the same text should always pro-duce same hash values.Table 3shows results of changing text size and font. Allthree MD5 implementations gave same results and were notimpacted with changing verse font type or size.As a summary of hashing experiments, we found that theauthentication systems including the indexer should be devel-oped using the same hash function. This is since values of dif-ferent hashing algorithms for the same exact verse may resultor display different hashing values.We decided to consider MD5 hashing algorithm due to itspopularity and reliability. As mentioned earlier, it was impor-tant to select only one hashing algorithm as each algorithmproduces different hashes in comparison with the others forthe same verses (seeTables 4 and 5).We have used our authentication system to check one of theonline copies of the Holy Quran available in one of the Arabicwebsites that index Arabic books and documents (The compre-hensive library:http://shamela.ws/), and we noticed that thereare records of some Quranic distortion in some verses. The riskis that such versions may be exposed to non-Muslims or Mus-lims who have little experience of the exact wording of Quranverses.One popular example of this is a popular program called(Qaloon). At least one version of this program is discoveredwith examples of incorrect verses’ wording. Following areexamples of the incorrect wording of some verses and theircorrect ones. We also included hashing values for both casesto simply show that an automatic hash based algorithm caneasily detect such distortion.Things to notice in the results:1. Hash can detect distortion even in dialects or Tashkeels.2. Hash values are randomly generated. Hence one differencemay result in a completely different hash. Hence the idea isnot to see how much the text is far from the actual text. Theidea is to come up with a Boolean decision: Version is iden-tical relative to the original authenticated copy or not.3. One of the serious issues through the Internet is that if wesearch using the incorrect versions that Qaloon programused, you will see thousands of websites indexing theseincorrect versions.Qaloon is not the only program that had such incident.Another program called ‘‘ﺚﺣﺎﺒﻟﺍ”included some incorrectverses. Results showed that both showed completely differenthashes.Table 3Hash of verse with different fonts and font sizes: verse 56:8: MD5 (without Tashkeel).
Font-size Hash1 Hash2 Hash31 c3bc805e0a302bdf11591cf180a5d083 F1A223ED0DEC063DB88A916EF20405AE f1a223ed0dec063db88a916ef20405ae2 c3bc805e0a302bdf11591cf180a5d083 F1A223ED0DEC063DB88A916EF20405AE f1a223ed0dec063db88a916ef20405ae3 c3bc805e0a302bdf11591cf180a5d083 F1A223ED0DEC063DB88A916EF20405AE f1a223ed0dec063db88a916ef20405ae
Table 4Comparison of the hash code for some of the Quran verses from Qaloon version using ourauthentication system.
Q-verse Hash MD5 Correct version Hash MD5ﺇِ ﻥٰ ﻟَ ﻜُ ﻢْ ﻓِ ﻪﻴِ ﻟَ ﻤَ ﻳﺎَﺘَﺨَ ﻴٰ ﺮُ ﻥﻭَ 71152220742238195106013213013411313059119ﺇِ ﻥٰ ﻟَ ﻜُ ﻢْ ﻓِ ﻪﻴِ ﻟَ ﻤَ ﺗﺎَﺨَ ﻴٰ ﺮُ ﻥﻭَ 692913921249171163872002462341353615774149ﻭَ ﻟَ ﻮْ ﻻَ ﺇِ ﺫْ ﺩَ ﺧَ ﻠْﺖَ ﺟَ ﻨٰ ﺘَﻚَ ﻗُ 
ﻠْﺖَ ﻣَ ﺷﺎَ ﻠﻟﺍﺀﺎٰ ﻪُ ﻻَ ﻗُ ﻮٰ ﺓَ ﺇِ ﻻٰ ﺑِﻠﻟﺎٰ ﻪِ ﺇِ ﺗﻥُﺮَ ﻥِ ﺃَ ﻧَﺃﺎَ ﻗَ ﻞٰ ﻣِ ﻚﻨَ ﻣَ ﻻﺎً ﻭَ ﻭَ ﻟَ ﺪً ﺍ137228453917919369105415336120220162142166ﻭَ ﻟَ ﻮْ ﻻَ ﺇِ ﺫْ ﺩَ ﺧَ ﻠْﺖَ ﺟَ ﻨٰ ﺘَﻚَ ﻗُ ﻠْﺖَ ﻣَ ﺷﺎَ ﺀﺎَ ﻠﻟﺍٰ ﻪُ ﻻَ ﻗُ ﻮٰ ﺓَ ﺇِ ﻻٰ ﺑِﻠﻟﺎٰ ﻪِ ﺇِ ﻥْ ﺗَﺮَ ﻥِ ﺃَ ﻧَﺃﺎَ ﻗَ ﻞٰ ﻣِ ﻨْ ﻚَ ﻣَ ﻻﺎً ﻭَ ﻭَ ﻟَ ﺪً ﺍ1092156981932515882161522142081591148673ﻭَ ﻗَ ﺗﺎِﻠُ ﺍﻮْﻓ
ِﺳﻲَ ﺒِﻞﻴِ ﻠﻟﺍّ ﻪِ ﻟﺍٰ ﺬِ ﻦﻳَ ﻳُﻘَ ﺗﺎِﻠُ ﻧﻮَﻜُ ﻢْ ﻭَ ﻻَ ﺗَﻌْ ﺘَﺪُ ﺍﻭْﺇِ ﻥٰ ﻠﻟﺍّ ﻪَ ﻻَ ﻳُﺤِ ﻟﺍﺐْﻤُ ﻌْ ﺘَﺪِ ﻦﻳَ 3812894128177153692381111402517219170205176ﻭَ ﻗَ ﺗﺎِﻠُ ﻓﺍﻮِ ﺳﻲ َﺒِﻞﻴِ ﻠﻟﺍٰ ﻪِ ﻟﺍٰ ﺬِ ﻦﻳَ ﻳُﻘَ ﺗﺎِﻠُ ﻧﻮَﻜُ ﻢْ ﻭَ ﺗﻻَﻌْ ﺘَﺪُ ﺇﺍﻭِ ﻥٰ ﻠﻟﺍٰ ﻪَ ﻳﻻُﺤِ ﺐّ ﻟﺍْﻤُ ﻌْ ﺘَﺪِ ﻦﻳَ 424270673515523024590161391672082015110
Table 5Example of verse tampering discovered by theauthentication system from another source.
Originalﻭَ ﻗَ ﺗﺎِﻠُ ﺍﻮْﻓِ ﺳﻲَ ﺒِﻞﻴِ ﻠﻟﺍّ ﻪِ ﻟﺍٰ ﺬِ ﻦﻳَ ﻳُﻘَ ﺗﺎِﻠُ ﻧﻮَﻜُ ﻢْ ﻭَ ﻻَ ﺗَﻌْ ﺘَﺪُ ﺍﻭْﺇِ ﻥٰ ﻠﻟﺍّ ﻪَ ﻻَ ﻳُﺤِ ﺐّ ﻟﺍْﻤُ ﻌْ ﺘَﺪِ ﻦﻳMD5 b73a3bde38abdda5f073482de2044787ﺍ
ﻭﺚﺣﺎﺒﻟَ ﻗَ ﺗﺎِﻠُ ﺍﻮْﻓِ ﺳﻲَ ﺒِﻞﻴِ ﻠﻟﺍّ ﻪِ ﻟﺍٰ ﺬِ ﻦﻳَ ﻳُﻘَ ﺗﺎِﻠُ ﻧﻮَﻜُ ﻢْ ﻭَ ﻻَ ﺗَﻌْ ﺘَﺪُ ﺍﻭْﺇِ ﻥٰ ﻠﻟﺍّ ﻪَ ﻻَ ﻳُﺤِ ﻟﺍﺐْﻤُ ﻌْ ﺘَﺪِ ﻦﻳَ MD5 25dcb1ccfabd68ﬀcd42556e2a9dd991Quran electronic versions 456. Conclusion and future workWith the current continuous expansion of Internet informationand services, authentication and credibility of users and infor-mation through the web is vital. For the holy Quran book inparticular, authentication is very critical. The authenticityand originality of verses in the digital media can be challengingespecially as it is required to be accomplished in high agile andquick manners. In this paper, we proposed an approach toimplement Quranic authentication system based on informa-tion retrieval techniques and hashing algorithms. We con-ducted several experiments to evaluate the differentcharacteristics that may impact the accuracy of the authentica-tion process. Results showed that hashing veriﬁcation can be agood candidate for the automatic authentication process withhigh conﬁdence. Some exceptional cases such as the differentQuranic readings are yet to be investigated and evaluated.Combining hashing methods with typical text plagiarism meth-ods can be also another alternative approach for the automaticauthentication process. We believe however, that such processis very important as well as applicable. A typical Quran indexercan include one table of verses in rows. Content of the verse, itsnumber, chapter and character size can be the major attributesto include in the table or the Quran indexer.A customized Quranic crawler is developed to search forQuranic verses through the Internet and index pages and infor-mation about websites that include those verses. We developeda case study to analyze Google top 10 search results for Quranicverses where we retrieved results for the verses one by one forthe whole Quran. This was part of an initial assessment to eval-uate the credibility of websites that include Quranic verses andthat are most popular according to Google ranking algorithms.Results showed that while some of the most frequently vis-ited websites for verses search are authentic and credible, how-ever, in many other cases, some verses are indexed by lesscredible websites according to some subjective metrics thatwe deﬁned or according to the fact that some of those pagesare related to personal or social networks that are managedby individuals without any ofﬁcial entity or establishment.While we only conducted the current experiments on Quranverses, we believe that same process and tasks can be appliedto evaluate Hadeeths as well. The case of Quranic verses canbe considered easier as Quranic verses are literally identicaleven in the different Quran readings (with some few and minorexceptions). However, for the case of Hadeeths, someHadeeths are mentioned in different wordings where this needsto be considered in the authentication evaluation process.As a consequence of this study another research work willbe conducted in future to rank the websites that cite or docu-ment the Quran verses based on their authenticity and providethe readers with the top most websites that document theauthenticated Quran verses.References
[1]Alfred J. Menezes, Paul Van Oorschot, S.A. Vanstone, Chapterhash functions and data integrity, in: Handbook of AppliedCryptography: The CRC Press Series on Discrete Mathematicsand Its Applications, CRC Press, 1997, pp. 321–383
. [2]
P.S. Tomar, M. Shreevastava, The study of detecting replicatedocuments using MD5 hash function, Int. J. Adv. Comput. Res.1 (2011) 2277–7970
.[3]
A. Alshareef, A.E. Saddik, A Quranic quote veriﬁcationalgorithm for verses authentication, in: InternationalConference on Innovations in Information Technology (IIT)Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates, IEEE, 2012
. [4]
Y. Alginahi, O. Tayan, M. Kabir, Veriﬁcation of qur’anicquotations embedded in online arabic and islamic websites, Int.J. Islamic Appl. Comput. Sci. Technol. 1 (2013) 10–16
. [5]
Y. Yusoff, R. Ismail, Z. Hassan, Adopting hadith veriﬁcationtechniques in to digital evidence authentication, J. Comput. Sci.6 (2010) 613–618
.[6] A.F. Shamsudin, A. Farooq, AI natural language inmetasynthetics of Al-Qur’an, in: 2000 TENCON Proceedings:Intelligent Systems and Technologies for the New Millennium,Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, 2000, pp. 464–467.[7] M. Warasart, P. Kuacharoen, Paper-based documentauthentication using digital signature and QR code, in: 4thInternational Conference on Computer Engineering andTechnology (ICCET 2012) Bangkok, Thailand, 2012.[8] Kamsin, Amirrudin, Abdullah Gani, Ishak Suliaman, SalinahJaafar, Rohana Mahmud, Md Sabri, Aznul Qalid et al.,Developing the novel Quran and Hadith authenticationsystem, in: Information and Communication Technology forThe Muslim World (ICT4M), 2014 The 5th InternationalConference on, IEEE, 2014, pp. 1–5.[9] Sabbah, Thabit, Ali Selamat, A framework for Quranic versesauthenticity detection in online forum, in: Taibah UniversityInternational Conference on Advances in InformationTechnology for the Holy Quran and Its Sciences, 2013.[10]
Noor Jamaliah Ibrahim, Zaidi Razak, Zulkiﬂi Mohd Yusoff,Mohd Yamani Idna Idris, Emran Mohd Tamil, NoorzailyMohamed Noor, Abdul Rahman, Noor Naemah, Quranic Verserecitation recognition module for support in J-QAF learning: areview, Int. J. Comput. Sci. Netw. Secur. (IJCSNS) 8 (8) (2008)207–216
.[11] Razak, Zaidi, Noor Jamaliah Ibrahim, Zulkiﬂi Mohd Yusoff,Mohd Yamani Idna Idris, Emran Mohd Tamil, Quranic verserecitation feature extraction using mel-frequency cepstralcoefﬁcient (MFCC), in: 4th International Colloquium onSignal Processing and its Applications (CSPA 2008), 2008.[12]
Mohammed Ammar, Mohd Shahrizal Sunar, Md Sah Hj Salam,Quranic verses veriﬁcation using speech recognition techniques,Jurnal Teknologi 73 (2) (2015)
.46 I. Alsmadi, M. Zarour