Optimizing the seed-cellﬁlling performance of an inclined plate seedmetering device using integrated ANN-PSO approach
C.M. Pareeka,⁎, V.K. Tewaria, Rajendra Machavarama, Brajesh Nareb
aAgricultural and Food Engineering Department, Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, West Bengal 721302, India
bIndian Council of Agricultural Research-Central Potato Research Station, Jalandhar, Punjab 144026, India
abstract article info
Article history:Received 30 May 2020Received in revised form 19 November 2020Accepted 24 November 2020Available online 27 November 2020
Keywords:Precision planterInclined plate seed metering deviceCellﬁll percentageANNPSOUniform seed distribution within the row is the prime objective of precision planters for better crop growth andyield. Inclined plate planters are generally used for sowing bold seeds like maize, groundnut, chickpea, and theiroperating parameters like the forward speed of operation, the seed metering plate inclination, and the seed levelin the hopper affect the cellﬁll and subsequently the uniform seed distribution. Therefore, to achieve precise seeddistribution, these parameters need to be optimized. In the present study, out of the different optimization tech-niques, a new intelligent optimization technique based on the integrated ANN-PSO approach has been used toachieve the set goal. A 3–5-1 artiﬁcial neural network (ANN) model was developed for predicting the cell ﬁll of inclined plate seed metering device, and the particle swarm optimization (PSO) algorithm was applied to obtainthe optimum values of the operating parameters corresponding to 100% cell ﬁll. The most appropriate optimal values of the forward speed of operation, the seed metering plate inclination, and the seed level in the hopperfor achieving 100% cellﬁll were found to be 3 km/h, 50-degree, and 75% of total height, respectively. The pro-posed integrated ANN-PSO approach was capable of predicting the optimal values of operating parameterswith a maximum deviation of 2% compared to the experimental results, thus con ﬁrmed the reliability of the pro- posed optimization technique.© 2020 The Authors. Publishing services by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of KeAi Communications Co. Ltd. This is an openaccess article under the CC BY-NC-ND license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ ).
1. IntroductionIn the Indian agriculture scenario, the inclined plate planters arepopularly used for bold seeds like maize, groundnut, soybean, chickpea,cotton, gram, and sunﬂower as these planters provide better seedingperformance with lower seed damage as compared to the horizontaland vertical plate planters. In these planters, the seed metering deviceconsists of a metering plate with cells around its periphery and rotatesin an inclined plane. During the seed metering process, the meteringplate passes through a seed hopper, lifts the seeds to the top of theplate travel, and drops them into the seed delivery tube ( Kepner et al., 1978). In the ideal condition, each cell of the seed metering plate shouldoccupy one seed and meter it into the seed tube, which means thereshould be 100% cellﬁll, which is the prerequisite for achieving the uni-form seed distribution within the row. The accomplishment of the uni-form seed distribution is a highly desirable phenomenon in theprecision planting operation, as it results in better germination andemergence and increases the crop yield by allowing more ef ﬁcient use of soil moisture, nutrients, and light (Donald, 1963). However, under ac- tualﬁeld conditions, missing and multiple seed drop are inevitable andeventually lead to the non-uniform seed distribution. In the case of aninclined plate seed metering device, the uniform seed distribution is sig-niﬁcantly affected by the forward speed of operation, the seed meteringplate inclination, and the seed level in the hopper ( Chhinnan et al., 1975;Chauhan et al., 1999;Yadachi et al., 2013;Sharma et al., 2013). Kepner et al. (1978)also reported that, in cell-type seed metering de-vices, the most uniform seed distribution is usually obtained with cellspeed that gives about 100% average cellﬁll. This cell speed directly de- pends on the forward speed of operation for the given overall gear ratiobetween the drive wheel and the seed metering plate. Thus, it is be-lieved that a signiﬁcant reduction in the non-uniformity of seed distri-bution could be achieved by selecting the best optimal operatingparameters corresponding to 100% cellﬁll under laboratory conditions before going to theﬁeld. For this purpose,ﬁrst, the seed-cellﬁlling per- formance of an inclined plate metering device needs to be modeled, andthe developed model is then linked with an appropriate optimizationtechnique to obtain the best optimal operating parameter settings cor-responding to 100% cellﬁll.In this study, among the various modeling techniques, the arti ﬁcial neural network (ANN) modeling approach was adopted for predictingthe cellﬁll corresponding to the different operating parameters of an in-clined plate seed metering device. The ANN is a data-driven computa-tional modeling tool inspired by the functioning of the human brain.Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 5 (2021) 1 –12
⁎Corresponding author.E-mail address:chaitanyapareek@gmail.com(C.M. Pareek).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aiia.2020.11.0022589-7217/© 2020 The Authors. Publishing services by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of KeAi Communications Co. Ltd. This is an open access article under the C C BY-NC-ND license (http:// creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ ).
Contents lists available atScienceDirect
Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture
journal homepage:http://www.keaipublishing.com/en/journals/artificial-intelligence-in-agriculture/Its high learning ability and information processing potentiality make itsuitable for complex nonlinear modeling without prior knowledgeabout the input-output relationships, which is dif ﬁcult to handle with the statistical approach. In the past, this modeling approach was suc-cessfully applied for the modeling of different agricultural machines' op-erations (Kumar et al., 2009;Anantachar et al., 2010;Chandel et al., 2019;Gundoshmian et al., 2019;Zhang et al., 2019;Nádai et al., 2020), and these methods exhibit better modeling capabilities com-pared to the statistical techniques ( Kumar et al., 2009;Anantachar et al., 2010).So far, in order to enhance the precision of agricultural machines' op-erations, several optimization techniques were utilized to ﬁnd out the best optimal operating parameter settings. In these studies, most ofthe researchers applied statistical optimization techniques like theTaguchi method (TM) and the response surface methodology (RSM)for optimizing the agricultural machines' design and operating parame-ters (Yazgi and Degirmencioglu, 2007;Singh et al., 2008;Hosseini and Shamsi, 2012;Ozturk et al., 2012); but in recent years, for such optimi-zation studies, the interest towards the evolutionary algorithms (EAs)like the genetic algorithm (GA) and the differential evolution (DE) algo-rithm (Kumar et al., 2009;Yuan et al., 2010;Golpira and Golpîra, 2017; Xu et al., 2017;Li et al., 2019;Zhang et al., 2019) has been increased as these approaches are comparatively less time consuming and more eco-nomical. In this study, a relatively new optimization technique, i.e., theparticle swarm optimization (PSO) ( Kennedy and Eberhart, 1995; Eberhart and Kennedy, 1995), was used to optimize the operating pa-rameters of an inclined plate seed metering device. This technique hasbeen successfully applied in various optimization studies ( Eberhart and Shi, 2001), including constrained parameter optimization problems(Hu and Eberhart, 2002). Moreover, it is relatively easy to implementand has fewer parameters to adjust as compared to GA. Furthermore,it also has the features of genetic algorithms (GAs) and evolution strat-egies (ESs) (Zŭperl et al., 2007).So, based on the above literature reviews, it is clearly evident thatthe ANN modeling approach integrated with the PSO algorithm couldbe used for modeling and optimization of the seed-cell ﬁlling perfor- mance of an inclined plate seed metering device. Therefore, the presentstudy aims to apply a new integrated ANN-PSO-based intelligent opti-mization approach for determining the optimal operating parametersof an inclined plate seed metering device corresponding to 100% cellﬁll. With this aim, an artiﬁcial neural network model for predictingthe cellﬁll was developed with the experimental data. The developedANN model was then coupled with a particle swarm optimizer to re-trieve the optimal operating parameters for achieving 100% cell ﬁ
ll. The conﬁrmation tests were also carried out to verify the reliability ofthe proposed optimization approach.
2. Materials and methods2.1. Experimental setupThis research was carried out at the farm machinery workshop of theagricultural and food engineering department, IIT Kharagpur, India. Thetest setup consisted of an inclined plate seed metering device coupled toa DC motor via a chain drive, as shown in Fig. 1. A DC motor controller was used to synchronize the motor speed corresponding to the forwardspeed of operation, and a proximity sensor was provided at the motor'soutput shaft to measure the motor's running speed. An Infrared (IR)sensor was employed at the bottom end of the seed delivery tube to de-tect and count the number of seeds. An Arduino UNO microcontrollerfor synchronizing the sensor signals and a laptop for collecting thedata were also used in the test setup. The schematic diagram of the lab-oratory test setup is shown inFig. 2.
Fig. 1.Laboratory test setup for measuring the cell ﬁll. 1. Inclined plate seed metering device; 2. Electric motor; 3. Motor controller; 4. Gear reduction unit; 5. Infrared sensor; 6. Arduino microcontroller; 7. Laptop; 8. Proximity sensor; 9. LCD Display unit for motor speed; 10. Collecting pan.C.M. Pareek, V.K. Tewari, R. Machavaram et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 5 (2021) 1 –12
22.2. Data collectionIn this study, the forward speed of operation, the seed meteringplate inclination, and the seed level in the hopper were selected as inde-pendent parameters, and the cellﬁll of inclined plate seed metering de-vice was considered as the dependent parameter. The seed meteringplate inclination is deﬁned as the angle of the metering plate measuredfrom the horizontal axis, and it can be varied by tilting the seed hopperupward or downward with respect to the hopper mounting frame withthe help of a nut-bolt arrangement. The cell ﬁll of an inclined plate seed metering device is deﬁned as the total number of seeds discharged bythe metering mechanism in a speciﬁc number of the metering plate'srevolutions divided by the total number of cells passed through the dis-charge point in that revolutions. It is determined using Eq. (1).F
c¼Ns/C2100N
cð1ÞWhere, F
Cdenotes the cellﬁll (%), and N sand N crepresent the total number of metered seeds and the total number of cells passing throughthe discharge point, respectively.In this study, hybrid maize seeds (Suvarna NMH-589) were used.The physical properties of the trial seeds are given in Table 1.T h el a b o - ratory tests were carried out at three levels of the seed metering plateinclination, four levels of the forward speed of operation, and threelevels of the seed level in the hopper of the inclined plate seed meteringdevice. The levels of these variables are given in Table 2. The random- ized block experimental design was adopted, and a total of 36 sets oftests were conducted in the laboratory. During the experiments, theseed spacing was not directly measured; instead, the total number ofdelivered seeds was counted, and the corresponding cell ﬁll value was computed. The DC motor was set to run at 26, 40, 52, and 65 rpm for re-sembling the forward speed of operation at 2, 3, 4, and 5 km/h,respectively, based on 20 cm seed spacing and the given overall gearratio between the drive wheel and the seed metering plate. The seedspassing through the seed delivery tube were detected by the IR sensorinterfaced with the Arduino microcontroller, and the counted seednumbers were recorded in the laptop with the help of a serial monitorapp during the experiment. Initially, the test was conducted by varyingthe forward speed of operation while keeping other parameters con-stant. Similarly, other observations were taken by varying all indepen-dent parameters one by one while keeping the rest parametersconstant. The test setup was run for ten revolutions of the seed meteringplate corresponding to each set of independent parameters. The systemcounted the metered seeds in 10 revolutions, and cell ﬁll was deter- mined. Three replications were taken for each set of conditions, andthe corresponding average cellﬁll was computed. These data were fur-ther utilized to develop the ANN model for predicting the cell ﬁll.2.3. Neural network modeling for prediction of the cell ﬁllIn this study, among different ANN models, a multilayer feed-forward ANN, which is very popular and widely used for solvingcomplex problems due to its remarkable universal approximation capa-bilities, was employed for predicting the underlying relationship be-tween the cellﬁll and the operating parameters of an inclined plateseed metering device. This neural network consisted of three layers ofneurons, i.e., the input layer, the hidden layers, and the output layer.The network output can be computed by applying hidden and outerlayer activation functions, i.e.,f
h(.) andf o(.), to the weighted sum of the previous layer's inputs. The mathematical expression for the kthoutput is given using Eq.(2).
Table 1Physical properties of maize seeds.Physical property Mean Standard errorLength (l), mm 10.52 0.15Width (w), mm 9.27 0.13Thickness (t), mm 4.31 0.09Sphericity (a), % 71.20 – Thousand seed mass, g 293.85 –ac a l c u l a t e da sa¼
lwtðÞ13
l/C2100%Table 2Experimental plan for laboratory test.S. No. Variables LevelsA. Independent variables1. Seed metering plate inclination ( θ) 3 40°, 50° and 60° 2. Forward speed of operation (V) 4 2, 3, 4 and 5 km/h3. Seed level in hopper (L) 3 25%, 50% and 75%B. Dependent variable1. Cellﬁll (F
C)i n%
Fig. 2.Schematic diagram of test setup for measuring the cell ﬁll.C.M. Pareek, V.K. Tewari, R. Machavaram et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 5 (2021) 1 –12
3yk¼fo∑Nh
j¼1Wjk:fh∑Ni
i¼1Wijxiþb hðÞj !þb
oðÞk"# ð2ÞWherey
kis the kth output variable;x iis the ith input variable;f hand f
oare the activation functions in the hidden and the output layer, re-spectively.i,j, and k denote the input layer neuron, hidden layer neuronand output layer neuron, respectively, and given as i=1 , 2…N
i;j= 1,2…N
hand k = 1,2…N o.Wijrepresents the connection weight betweenthe ith input neuron and the jth hidden neuron. W
jkrepresents the con- nection weight between the jth hidden neuron and the kth output neu-ron. (b
h)jdenotes the bias for the jth neuron in the hidden layer, and(b
o)kis the bias for the kth neuron in the output layer.In this study, the MATLAB R2014b package was used for neural net-work modeling. The forward speed of operation (km/h), the seedmetering plate inclination, and the seed level in the hopper (%) wereconsidered as the model inputs, and the cell ﬁll of the inclined plate seed metering device was taken as the model response. The numberof neurons in the input and the output layers of the network were deter-mined by the number of input and output parameters, respectively ( Lek and Guegan, 1999). Thus, the input and output layers had three and oneneurons, respectively. The number of neurons in the hidden layer wasselected by the trial and error method. The upper limit of the numberof neurons in the hidden layer was determined using Eq. (3) (Armaghani et al., 2018) and computed as seven. Therefore, the numberof neurons in the hidden layer was varied from one to seven, and the op-timum number of neurons was selected based on the minimum MSEvalue of the network. The optimal value for hidden layer neurons wasobtained asﬁve. Thus, the hidden layer comprised ofﬁve neurons was incorporated between the neural network's input and output layers.N
h≤2N iþ1 ð3ÞWhereN
hdenotes the maximum number of neurons in the hiddenlayer andN
idenotes the total number of neurons in the input layer.The log-sigmoid transfer function (logsig) and linear transfer func-tion (purelin) were used in the hidden and outer layers as the activationfunction and given by Eqs.(4) and (5), respectively. The topology of de- veloped ANN is shown inFig. 3.fhxðÞ ¼11þe
−x ðÞ,0≤fhxðÞ≤1 ð4Þf
oxðÞ ¼x,−∞≤foxðÞ≤þ∞ ð5ÞAmong various developed neural network training algorithms, theerror backpropagation (EBP) training algorithm ( Rumelhart et al., 1986) is most frequently used to train a neural network model. How-ever, this algorithm may get stuck in local minima and faces dif ﬁculty inﬁnding out the global optimal solution, as it uses the gradient-descent search method; hence, it suffers from the problem of slow con-vergence. In order to avoid these drawbacks, the Levenberg –Marquardt backpropagation learning algorithm ( Levenberg, 1944;Marquardt, 1963) was used in this study for training purpose, as this algorithm pro-duces better results than the other training methods for moderate-sizedneural networks (Hagan and Menhaj, 1994;Kişi and Uncuoğlu, 2005; Kişi, 2007;Adamowski and Karapataki, 2010). This algorithm is a com- bination of the steepest descent and the Gauss-Newton algorithms. Itpossesses the speed advantage of the Gauss-Newton algorithm andthe stability of the steepest descent method; hence, it exhibits fast andstable convergence.During the Levenberg–Marquardt algorithm based training process,the connection weights and biases were adjusted iteratively usingEq.(6)for minimizing the error function, i.e., the mean squared error(MSE) between the target and the model-predicted cell ﬁll values.w
kþ1ðÞ ¼w k−JTkJkþμI/C16/C17−1
Jkek ð6ÞWhere J denotes the Jacobian matrix, e
kis the error in the network; I is the identity matrix, andμis Levenberg's damping factor;w
kand w
(k+1) represent the current and the updated weights, respectively.This algorithm's nature shifts between Gauss-Newton and steepestdescent methods during the training process, depending upon theLevenberg's damping factor (μ). Whenμis very small, this algorithm's behavior is similar to that of the Gauss-Newton method, whereas if μ
Fig. 3.Topology of developed neural network model ( x 1,x2andx 3are input variables, andyis estimated output;b handb oare the bias for the hidden layer and the output layer, respectively;W
ijandW jkare the connection weights of input- hidden layer and hidden-output layer, respectively).C.M. Pareek, V.K. Tewari, R. Machavaram et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 5 (2021) 1 –12
4is very large, this algorithm acts like the steepest descent method ( Yu and Wilamowski, 2011).A major concern during the ANN training process is the over ﬁtting phenomenon, which occurs because of memorizing the training data'strends by the network instead of establishing the underlying relation-ship between input and output datasets, and consequently, the devel-oped neural network exhibit minimal training error but large testerror (i.e., error with unseen dataset), which indicated the poor gener-alization performance. Hence, in this study, the early stopping tech-nique (Prechelt, 1998;Tian et al., 2010) was adopted in the training process to avoid the overﬁtting issue and thus improve the generaliza-tion ability of the trained network. In this technique, the training datasetis randomly divided into three subsets, i.e., training set (70%), testing set(15%), and validation set (15%). The training set is utilized for comput-ing the gradient and adjusting the network weights and bias values tooptimize network performance; the validation set is used to estimatenetwork performance by monitoring the validation error during thetraining process and determine the training stopping point to avoidthe overﬁtting. During the training process, initially, the training errorand the validation error drop rapidly with the number of iterations, asthe network is learning the underlying input-output relationship bymodifying the network weights and bias values, and after that, the val-idation error begins to increase, as the network starts to memorize thetraining examples. If the validation error repeatedly increases for a spec-iﬁed number of iterations, then the network training is terminated toavoid overﬁtting, and the network weights and bias values at the itera-tion corresponding to the minimum validation error are stored as theﬁnal weights and bias for the trained network. The testing dataset isused to measure the generalization ability of the trained network via ex-perimental data, which were not being used in the training process.In this study, 36 sets of samples obtained from the laboratory exper-iments were used for ANN modeling. The entire experimental datasetwas randomly divided into two parts, i.e., the training set and the testingset. The training dataset consisted of approximately 70% (i.e., 25 sam-ples) of the total data and was used for calibrating and designing theANN model. The testing dataset consisted of the remaining approxi-mately 30% (i.e., 11 samples) data and was used to assess the predictiveperformance of the developed ANN model. As the early stoppingmethod was utilized during the network training process to avoid theoverﬁtting issue, therefore the available training dataset was further di-vided into three subsets, i.e., training set (approximately 70% data; 17samples), testing set (approximately 15% data; four samples), and vali-dation set (approximately 15% data; four samples). This partition ofavailable training data was done within the Levemberg –Marquardt back-propagation algorithm during the network training process.Before being utilized for ANN training, the experimental data need tobe normalized in a range that commensurates with the limits of the ap-plied transfer functions to accelerate the training process and provideequal importance to all the variables during the network training. Al-though the sigmoid transfer function outputs are between 0 and 1, thedata should be normalized in the range of 0.1 and 0.9 instead of between0 and 1 to avoid sigmoid function's saturation, which hinders the learn-ing process. Therefore, in this study, the input variables were normal-ized within the interval [0.1, 0.9] using a linear transformation asgiven in Eq.(7)(Basheer and Hajmeer, 2000;Maier and Dandy, 2000).x
n¼0:1þ0:8xo−xmin
xmax−xmin/C18/C19 ð7ÞWherex
nandx oare the normalized and the original values of the in-put parameters, respectively; andx
maxandx minare the maximum and the minimum values of the input parameters, respectively.In the training phase, the network'sﬁnal weights and biases were se- lected using the training dataset. During the training process, the max-imum number of epochs and the minimum performance gradient wereset as 1000 and 10–7, respectively. The damping factor ( μ) was set to0.001, and the maximum validation checks before terminating thetraining process, which represents the number of successive iterationsfor which the validation performance fails to decrease, was taken as 6.The model was adaptively trained by the trial and error method, andthe network connection weights were adjusted to minimize the meansquared error (MSE) between the target and model-predicted cell ﬁll values.The developed ANN model's predictive performance was evaluatedusing two statistical parameters, i.e., the coef ﬁcient of determination (R2) and the mean square error (MSE). The coef ﬁcient of determination (R
2) is a goodness-of-ﬁt measure that represents the robustness of thedeveloped ANN model, and the mean square error (MSE) is a modelerror measure that estimates the accuracy of the predictive model.The higher R
2value and lower MSE value represent the better predictiveperformance of the developed ANN model. The coef ﬁcient of determi- nation (R
2) and mean square error (MSE) were calculated using the fol-lowing equations:R
2¼∑ni¼1Ya−Ya/C0/C1Y
P−YP/C0/C1/C20/C212
∑ni¼1Ya−Ya/C0/C1 2∑ni¼1YP−YP/C0/C1 2ð8ÞMSE¼
1n∑ni¼1Ya−Y P ðÞ2ð9ÞWhereY
aandY Prepresent the experimental and model-predictedcellﬁll values, respectively;
YaandYPare the averages of experimental and model-predicted cellﬁll values, respectively; and n represents thetotal number of datasets.2.4. Sensitivity analysisSensitivity analysis was carried out to evaluate each operatingparameter's relative signiﬁcance on the model-predicted cellﬁll values. The sensitivity analysis was conducted by using the Garson's algorithm(Garson, 1991). In this method, the relative importance of each inputparameter is calculated using the absolute values of the connectionweights of the developed ANN model. Therefore, it does not give anyidea about the direction of the relationship between the independentand dependent variables of the ANN model. The relative importance(RI) of each input parameter of the well trained and tested ANNmodel is calculated using Eq.(10).RI%ðÞ
ik¼∑Nh
j¼1 Wij/C12/C12/C12/C12=∑ Ni
i¼1Wij/C12/C12/C12/C12/C16/C17/C2W
jk/C12/C12/C12/C12/C16/C17∑
Ni
i¼1∑Nh
j¼1 Wij/C12/C12/C12/C12=∑ Ni
i¼1Wij/C12/C12/C12/C12/C16/C17/C2W
jk/C12/C12/C12/C12/C16/C17no /C2100ð10ÞWhere:RI
ikis the relative importance of input variable x ion the out- puty
k.NiandN hare the number of input and hidden neurons, respec-tively.W
ijandW jkrepresent the connection weights of input- hiddenlayer and hidden-output layer, respectively.2.5. Optimization of operating parameters using integrated ANN-PSOalgorithm2.5.1. Basic particle swarm optimization (PSO) algorithmParticle swarm optimization (PSO) is a bio-inspired population-based metaheuristic algorithm. Its working mechanism imitates the so-cial behavior of the birdﬂocking. In this algorithm, each member of agiven swarm, also called a particle, represents a potential solution tothe given optimization problem. Each particle is allowed to move inthe problem space with associated random position and velocity. Ateach iteration, the best position of each particle achieved so far amongall iterations (i.e., personal best) and the best position of any particleachieved so far among all the particles (i.e., global best) are selectedC.M. Pareek, V.K. Tewari, R. Machavaram et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 5 (2021) 1 –12
5by evaluating the objective function value for each particle. Each particleis accelerated towards its personal best and global best positions in eachiteration with the initialization of weighted acceleration randomly bymodifying its velocity and position.Considering a D-dimensional search space, where X
i=(x i,1,xi,2…xi,D) andV
i=(v i,1,vi,2…vi,D) represent the position and velocity of the ith par-ticle, respectively. The position and velocity of the particles are updatedby the following equationsv
i,dtþ1ðÞ ¼wv i,dtðÞ þc 1r1pi,dtðÞ−x i,dtðÞ/C0/C1þc 2r2pg,dtðÞ−x i,dtðÞ/C16/C17ð11ÞX
i,dtþ1ðÞ ¼X i,dtðÞ þV i,dtþ1ðÞ ð 12ÞIn which,i= 1,2,…..,n; n is the swarm size; d represents the dimen-sion index, d = 1,2,…D; t denotes the number of iteration. C
1and C 2
are the acceleration coefﬁcients, 0 < C 1,C2<2 ;r 1and r 2are the random numbers, uniformly distributed between [0,1]; p
i,d(t) denotes the personal best position of the ith particle in the given iteration t; p
g,d(t) refers the global best position in the given iteration correspond-ing to the given swarm size, and w denotes the inertia weight factor.A large inertia weight helps to explore a large search space and facili-tates the PSO as a global search algorithm, while with a small inertiaweight, PSO works like a local search algorithm. For any population-based optimization algorithm, generally, it is better to possess moreglobal search ability at the starting phase and more local search abilityduring the ending phase of a simulation run. In PSO, this phenomenoncan be achieved by decreasing the inertia weight linearly from a rela-tively large value to a small value throughout the PSO simulation run.This PSO variant with linearly varying inertia weight is called modi ﬁed PSO, and it showed a signiﬁcant improvement in the convergence per-formance of the PSO algorithm (Shi and Eberhart, 1998). The linearly varying inertia weight is determined by the following equationwtðÞ¼w
max−t−1ðÞW max−W min ½/C138T−1 ð13ÞWhere W
maxand W minare the maximum and the minimum values ofinertia weight, respectively; t is iteration number, and T is maximumnumber of iterations.2.5.2. Optimal operating parameters selectionThis optimization study aims to obtain the optimal values of inclinedplate seed metering device's operating parameters, which results inachieving 100% cellﬁll. The underlying relationship between these oper-ating parameters and the cellﬁll was established using the ANN model-ing approach in the previous section. In order to determine the optimaloperating parameters, the developed ANN model for predicting the cellﬁll was integrated with the PSO algorithm. The optimization was carriedout by considering this design problem as a minimization problem hav-ing three design variables, i.e., the seed metering plate inclination ( θ), the forward speed of operation (V), and the seed level in the hopper(L), which are denoted asX
1,X2,a n dX 3, respectively. The mathematical expression of this optimization problem can be given as follows:min F X
dðÞðÞ ¼min100−F c jjfg ð 14ÞWhereX
d=[X 1,X2,X3]Tdenotes the design variable vector, F(X d)i st h e objective function of this optimization problem, and F
cis the cellﬁll pre- dicted using the developed ANN model. The goal of this optimizationproblem was to determine a set of design variables that minimized theobjective functionF(X
d) under the given constraints. The minimizationof the objective functionF(X
d) actually maximized the cellﬁll (F c)t o1 0 0 % . The following variable bounds were used:2k m / h≤X
1≤5k m / h40
o≤X2≤60ο25%≤X 3≤75%The workingﬂowchart of the integrated ANN-PSO approach is showninFig. 4. Initially, the objective function and the constraints were de ﬁned; the PSO parameters, i.e., inertia weight, acceleration coef ﬁcients, swarm size, and maximum number of iterations were speci ﬁed, and the particle swarm was initialized with random position and velocity. The cell ﬁll was predicted using the developed ANN model, which was further utilized forcalculating the objective function value for each particle. The particlewith a lower objective function value was considered better than others,as the given optimization problem was a minimization problem. At eachiteration,ﬁrst, the personal best (pBest) and the global best (gBest) posi-tions were selected by evaluating the objective function values for eachparticle, and then each particle moved towards its pBest and the gBest po-sitions by updating its velocity and position. These steps were repeateduntil the convergence criteria, i.e., the maximum number of iterationswas reached. The input parameters were optimized by PSO within themaximum number of iterations, and the particle's dimensions corre-sponding to the gBest atﬁnal iteration were taken as the optimal solution.The results obtained from the integrated ANN-PSO approach were veri-ﬁed for its authentication. For that purpose, the con ﬁrmation tests were carried out using optimal parameter settings, and the experimental andthe model-predicted cellﬁll values were compared for evaluating the ad-equacy of the proposed optimization technique.3. Results and discussion3.1. Effect of operating parameters on cell ﬁll of seed metering deviceThe laboratory tests were conducted for a total of 36 sets of condi-tions, considering the three levels of the seed metering plate inclination,four levels of the forward speed of operation, and three levels of seedlevel in the hopper of inclined plate seed metering device. The data, col-lected from laboratory tests, were analyzed with respective each vari-able and graphically presented inFig. 5.FromFig. 5, it can be observed that the cellﬁll is reduced with an in- crease in the inclination angle of the seed metering plate from 40° to 60°in all the cases of the forward speed of operation and the seed level inthe hopper, as the seed metering plate's lower inclination angle leadsto more multiple seed drops. In contrast, the frequency of skips ismore at a higher inclination angle of the seed metering plate. Similar re-sults were reported bySharma et al. (2013)andYadachi et al. (2013).I t can also be observed that the cellﬁll is increased with an increase in theseed level in the hopper. It may be due to fewer chances of seeds to oc-cupy the cells, as the seed level in the hopper goes down. This result is ingood agreement with theﬁndings reported byChhinnan et al. (1975) andSharma et al. (2013). It is also indicated that the cellﬁll is negatively affected by the forward speed of operation. At a higher speed of opera-tion, the exposure time of cells for picking up the seeds is less, and theseeds also tend to fall back into the hopper due to high vibration. Boththe events contribute to high skips andﬁnally lower down the cellﬁll. The high cellﬁll at a slower speed is due to the high frequency of mul-tiple seed drops because of the more exposure time of cells. This resultis supported by theﬁnding ofChauhan et al. (1999)
andReddy et al. (2012). All the three operating parameters do not have the same effecton cellﬁll, which is evident fromFig. 5; therefore, it becomes necessary to optimize these operating parameters to achieve 100% cell ﬁll and as- sure the uniform seed distribution.3.2. Performance evaluation of developed ANN modelIn this study, a 3–5-1 ANN model was developed to predict the cellﬁll of the inclined plate seed metering device using three independentvariables, i.e., the forward speed of operation, the seed metering plateinclination, and the seed level in the hopper. The Levenberg – Marquardt backpropagation learning algorithm was adopted for theC.M. Pareek, V.K. Tewari, R. Machavaram et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 5 (2021) 1 –12
6ANN training. The ANN model was adaptively trained by trial and errormethod until the convergence criteria, i.e., minimum mean squarederror (MSE) between the target and model-predicted cell ﬁll values,was achieved. The developed ANN model's performance plot, demon-strating the variation in training, validation, and testing errors withthe number of training epochs to assess the possibility of over ﬁtting
Fig. 4.Flowchart of the integrated ANN-PSO algorithm.
Fig. 5.Cellﬁll corresponding to various operating parameters (error bars represent standard deviation of triplicate measurements).C.M. Pareek, V.K. Tewari, R. Machavaram et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 5 (2021) 1 –12
7during the training process, is presented in Fig. 6. In thisﬁgure, the circle indicates the best validation performance, i.e., the lowest validationerror (MSE = 2.0563), which was obtained at the 14th epoch, and theassociated network weights and biases were selected as the ﬁnal model weights and biases. The network training continued as long asthe validation error decreased and terminated at the 20th epoch whenthe validation error increased for six consecutive iterations after thebest validation performance (epoch 14). There may be a possibility ofoverﬁtting if the test error increases signiﬁcantly before the increase in the validation error, but the current training performance plot doesnot indicate any major problem with the training process, as the testand validation performance curves are showing very similar trends.The training state plot of the developed ANN model, demonstratingthe variation in performance gradient, Levenberg's damping factor(mu), and validation checks, is shown in Fig. 7. It can be seen that the gradient value was reduced to 0.18741 at the 20th epoch, and thevalue of the mu factor was 0.1 at that epoch. Moreover, the networktraining was terminated at the 20th epoch considering the six validationchecks after the best validation performance (epoch 14) for avoidingany possible overﬁtting.The neural network regression plots between ANN model-predictedand target cellﬁll values for the training set, validation set, test set, andthe total experimental set with the Levenberg –Marquardt algorithm are shown inFig. 8. The correlation coefﬁcients (R) for training, testing, val-idation, and all dataset using the ANN model were 0.99654, 0.97809,0.98846, and 0.99364, respectively. High R-values (more than 0.97) inthe different phases indicate a good correlation between experimentaland model-predicted cellﬁll values, which implies that the developedANN model can predict the cellﬁll values with a higher accuracy.The scatter plots comparing the experimental and model-predictedcellﬁll values for training and testing datasets are shown in Fig. 9and Fig. 10, respectively. A high degree of regression (R2= 0.9873) with a low MSE (0.6841) value for the training dataset indicates the excellentagreement between experimental and model-predicted cell ﬁll values. Moreover, the R
2(0.9873) value for the training dataset implies thatthe developed ANN model can explain at least 98% of the variability inthe measured cellﬁll values for the training phase.Similarly, an excellent agreement can be observed between experi-mental and model-predicted cellﬁll values for the testing dataset as in-dicated by a high R
2(0.9825) value and low MSE (0.734) value, whichalso conﬁrms the excellent generalization ability of the developedANN model for predicting the cellﬁll. Furthermore, the R
2(0.9825) value for the testing dataset indicates that the developed ANN model
Fig. 6.Performance plot of developed ANN model during training process (best validationperformance is 2.0563 at the 14th training epoch).
Fig. 7.Training state of developed ANN model.C.M. Pareek, V.K. Tewari, R. Machavaram et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 5 (2021) 1 –12
8Fig. 8.Regression plots of the developed ANN model for different phases.
Fig. 9.Actual cellﬁll variation with predicted cellﬁll for the training dataset.
 Fig. 10.Actual cellﬁll variation with predicted cellﬁll for the testing dataset.C.M. Pareek, V.K. Tewari, R. Machavaram et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 5 (2021) 1 –12
9could explain at least 98% of the variability in the measured cell ﬁll values with a new unseen dataset.The comparison between experimental and model-predicted cell ﬁll values for each experimental run is shown in Fig. 11.F r o mt h i sﬁgure, it can be observed that the ANN model-predicted cell ﬁll value lies very close to the experimental cellﬁll value in each run, which conﬁrms the excellent approximation capability of the developed ANN model.The connection weights between input-hidden layer and hidden-output layer of the well trained and tested ANN model are given inTable 3.The relative importance of different operating parameters is pre-sented inFig. 12. It indicates that the forward speed of operation(56.45%) has maximum inﬂuence on the cellﬁll of inclined plate seed metering device, followed by the seed level in the hopper (27.42%)and the seed metering plate inclination (16.13%), respectively.3.3. ANN-PSO simulation results and experimental validationIn this study, the PSO simulation was carried out in MATLAB 2014benvironment using a laptop with an Intel Core i5-3337U CPU at1.80 GHz and 8 GB of RAM. The developed ANN model's output wasfed into particle swarm optimizer for optimizing the input parameterscorresponding to 100% cellﬁll. In all optimization runs, the inertiaweight parameter was linearly decreased from 0.9 to 0.4 for encourag-ing the global exploration in the starting phase of the run and achievingam o r er eﬁned solution near the end of the simulation run. The acceler-ation coefﬁcients (c
1and c 2) were chosen as 2.8 and 1.3, respectively.The swarm size and the maximum number of iterations were selectedas 30 and 50, respectively. These PSO parameters were selected basedon the previous research works (Shi and Eberhart, 1999;Eberhart and Shi, 2000;Carlisle and Dozier, 2001), as these parameters setting yielded better simulation performance. Using this integrated ANN-PSOoptimization approach, the inclined plate seed metering device's oper-ating parameters were optimized to get the minimum ﬁtness value within the maximum number of iterations, i.e., gBest, and the particle'sdimensions corresponding to the gBest at the ﬁnal iteration were taken as the optimal solution. The convergence curve of PSO, demonstratingthe global best and the mean bestﬁtness values of all particles over
Fig. 11.Comparison of experimental values and ANN predicted values of cell ﬁll.
Table 3Connection weights of developed ANN model and relative importance of inputparameters.HiddenNeuronnumberW
ij Wjk
Seed meteringplateinclinationForwardspeedof operationseed levelin thehopper1−1.43249 1.568 1.9446 0.161092−4.3003−2.394 1.9583 0.005177 3 0.060749 0.35606 −0.16875−1.9683 4 2.6562−1.4428−0.07316−0.084708 5−2.7462−1.6353 0.31212 0.11938 Relative Importance(%)16.13 56.45 27.42 –
Fig. 12.Relative importance of different operating parameters.C.M. Pareek, V.K. Tewari, R. Machavaram et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 5 (2021) 1 –12
10the entire particle population at each iteration, is shown in Fig. 13.F r o m thisﬁgure, it can be observed that the meanﬁtness value approached the global bestﬁtness value after 43 iterations; it indicates that all par-ticles of the swarm converged to approximately the same optimum so-lution. The global best and the mean bestﬁtness functions converged to their minimum value after 20 and 43 iterations, respectively, andremained constant within the maximum number of iterations.In this optimization study, the integrated ANN-PSO approach pre-dicted the two sets of optimal operating parameters corresponding to100% cellﬁll. These optimization results were further validated in thelaboratory using the nearest feasible values of the obtained optimal op-erating parameters to verify their reliability. Three replications weretaken, and the corresponding average cell ﬁll value was computed at each optimal parameter setting. The optimal parameters obtainedfrom the integrated ANN-PSO approach and their validation test resultsare given inTable 4.The validation test results showed that the proposed integratedANN-PSO approach provides the best approximation of optimal valuesof operating parameters at 100% cellﬁll with a maximum deviation of 2% between the model-predicted and experimentally observed cell ﬁll values, and thus conﬁrm the reliability of the proposed optimizationtechnique for determining the optimal operating parameters of an in-clined plate seed metering device. The optimization results indicatedthat, for achieving near about 100% cellﬁll, the inclination of the seed metering plate should be set around 50°, the planter should be operatedat a low speed (2 to 3 km/h) and approximately 75% level of seeds in thehopper. However, these experimental results also need to be veri ﬁed under actualﬁeld conditions. This study provides an effective andpromising tool for optimizing the cellﬁlling performance of an inclined plate seed metering device, which is crucial for improving the seedingperformance and achieving the uniform seed distribution withinthe row.4. ConclusionsThis study aimed to improve the seeding uniformity of an inclinedplate seed metering device by optimizing its seed-cell ﬁlling perfor- mance. In this study, the ANN modeling approach, coupled with thePSO technique, was applied to obtain the inclined plate seed meteringdevice's best optimal operating parameter settings corresponding to100% cellﬁll. The forward speed of operation, the seed metering plateinclination, and the seed level in the hopper were chosen as indepen-dent variables, and the cellﬁll of inclined plate seed metering devicewas considered as the model response. A multilayer feed-forwardbackpropagation neural network model with 3-5-1 con ﬁguration was found capable of predicting the cellﬁll of the inclined plate seed metering device, as indicated by high R
2(0.9849) and low MSE (0.709) values. The sensitivity analysis of the developed ANN model re-vealed that the forward speed of operation (56.45%) had the greatest in-ﬂuence on the cellﬁll, followed by the seed level in the hopper (27.42%)and the seed metering plate inclination (16.13%), respectively. Using theintegrated ANN-PSO approach, the most appropriate optimal values ofthe forward speed of operation, the seed metering plate inclination,and the seed level in the hopper were found to be 3 km/h, 50-degree,and 75% of total height, respectively. The cross-validation resultsshowed that the proposed integrated ANN-PSO approach provides the
Fig. 13.Convergence curve of PSO.
Table 4Optimized parameters by integrated ANN-PSO algorithm.S. No. Seed metering plate inclination(degree) Forward speed of operation(km/h) Seed level in hopper (%) Cell ﬁll (%)Predicted Observed Deviation (%)1 47.907 2.0 66.894 100 98.0 2.02 50.066 3.1 75 100 98.8 1.2C.M. Pareek, V.K. Tewari, R. Machavaram et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 5 (2021) 1 –12
11best approximation of optimal values of operating parameters at 100%cellﬁll with a maximum deviation of 2% between the model-predictedand experimentally observed cellﬁll values. These experimental valida-tion results indicate that the proposed optimization technique is feasi-ble to determine the optimal operating parameters of an inclined plateseed metering device. However, these results need to be veri ﬁed under actualﬁeld conditions.This study, thus, proposed a new intelligent optimization techniquebased on the integrated ANN-PSO approach for optimizing the seed-cellﬁlling performance of an inclined plate seed metering device. The ex-perimental results of this study suggested that the proposed optimiza-tion technique could also be effectively applied to determine theoptimal operating parameters of other agricultural machines. Moreover,this study also provides a reference basis for future research on processparameters optimization and precision seeding technology.Declaration of Competing InterestThe authors do not have any type of conﬂict of interest.References
Adamowski, J., Karapataki, C., 2010. Comparison of multivariate regression and arti ﬁcial neural networks for peak urban water-demand forecasting: evaluation of differentANN learning algorithms. J. Hydrol. Eng. 15 (10), 729 –743. Anantachar, M., Kumar, P.G.V., Guruswamy, T., 2010. Neural network prediction of perfor- mance parameters of an inclined plate seed metering device and its reverse mappingfor the determination of optimum design and operational parameters. Comput. Elec-tron. Agric. 72, 87–98.Armaghani, D.J., Hasanipanah, M., Mahdiyar, A., Abd Majid, M.Z., Amnieh, H.B., Tahir,M.M., 2018.Airblast prediction through a hybrid genetic algorithm-ANN model. Neu-ral Comput. & Applic. 29 (9), 619 –629. Basheer, I.A., Hajmeer, M., 2000. Artiﬁcial neural networks: fundamentals, computing, design, and application. J. Microbiol. Methods 43, 3 –31. Carlisle, A., Dozier, G., 2001.An off-the-shelf PSO. Proceedings of the Workshop on Parti-cle Swarm Optimization. Purdue School of Engineering and Technology, Indianapolis,USA, pp. 1–6.Chandel, N.S., Tewari, V.K., Mehta, C.R., 2019. ANN model for predicting operating param- eters of a variable rate applicator. Eng. Agric. Environ. Food 12 (3), 341 –350. Chauhan, A.M., Dhingra, H.S., Bhatia, B.S., 1999. Seed placement behaviour of sun ﬂower. Ama-Agr Mech. Asia Af. 30 (4), 9 –11. Chhinnan, M.S., Young, J.H., Rohrbach, R.P., 1975. Accuracy of seed spacing in peanut planting. Trans. ASAE 18, 828–831. Donald, C.M., 1963.Competition among crop and pasture plants. Adv. Agron. 15, 1 –118. Eberhart, R.C., Kennedy, J., 1995. A new optimizer using particle swarm theory. Proceed-ings of the Sixth International Symposium on Micro Machine and Human Science,IEEE, pp. 39–43.Eberhart, R.C., Shi, Y., 2000.Comparing inertia weights and constriction factors in particleswarm optimization. Proceedings of the 2000 Congress on Evolutionary Computa-tion. vol. 1. IEEE, pp. 84–88.Eberhart, R.C., Shi, Y., 2001.Particle swarm optimization: Developments, applications andresource. In Proceedings of the 2001 Congress on Evolutionary Computation. 1. IEEE,pp. 81–86.Garson, G.D., 1991.Interpreting neural network connection weights. AI Expert. 6, 46 –51. Golpira, H., Golpîra, H., 2017. Soft simulator for redesigning of a chickpea harvesterheader. Comput. Electron. Agric. 135, 252 –259. Gundoshmian, T.M., Ardabili, S., Mosavi, A., Várkonyi-Kóczy, A.R., 2019. Prediction of com- bine harvester performance using hybrid machine learning modeling and responsesurface methodology. International Conference on Global Research and Education.Springer, pp. 345–360.H a g a n ,M . T . ,M e n h a j ,M . B . ,1 9 9 4 . Training feedforward networks with the Marquardt al-gorithm. IEEE Trans. Neu. Net. 5 (6), 989 –993. Hosseini, S.S., Shamsi, M., 2012. Performance optimization of a rotary mower using Taguchi method. Agron. Res. 10 (1), 49 –54.Hu, X., Eberhart, R.C., 2002.Solving constrained nonlinear optimization problems withparticle swarm optimization. Proceedings of the Sixth World Multiconference on Sys-temics, Cybernetics and Informatics. 5, pp. 203 –206.Kennedy, J., Eberhart, R., 1995. Particle swarm optimization. Proceedings of ICNN’95-International Conference on Neural Networks. vol. 4. IEEE, pp. 1942 –1948. Kepner, R.A., Bainer, R., Barger, B.L., 1978. Crop planting. Principles of Farm Machinery, Third edition CBS Publishers and Distributors India, pp. 209 –236. Kişi, Ö., 2007.Streamﬂow forecasting using different arti ﬁcial neural network algorithms. J. Hydrol. Eng. 12 (5), 532–539. Kişi, Ö., Uncuoğlu, E., 2005.Comparison of the three backpropagation training algorithmsfor two case studies. Indian J. Eng. Mater. Sci. 12 (5), 434 –442. Kumar, G., Srivastava, B., Nagesh, D., 2009. Modeling and optimization of parameters of ﬂow rate of paddy rice grains through the horizontal rotating cylindrical drum ofdrum seeder. Comput. Electron. Agric. 65 (1), 26 –35. Lek, S., Guegan, J.F., 1999.Artiﬁcial neural networks as a tool in ecological modelling, anintroduction. Ecol. Model. 120 (2 –3), 65–73. Levenberg, K., 1944.A method for the solution of certain non-linear problems in leastsquares. Q. Appl. Math. 2 (2), 164 –168. Li, Y., Yuan, J., Liu, X., Niu, Z., Chen, B., Liu, X., 2019. Spraying strategy optimization with genetic algorithm for autonomous air-assisted sprayer in Chinese heliogreenhouses.Comput. Electron. Agric. 156, 84 –95. Maier, H.R., Dandy, G.C., 2000. Neural networks for the prediction and forecasting ofwater resources variables: a review of modelling issues and applications. Environ.Model. Softw. 15 (1), 101–124. Marquardt, D.W., 1963.An algorithm for least-squares estimation of nonlinear parame-ters. J. Soc. Ind. Appl. Math. 11 (2), 431 –441. Nádai, L., Imre, F., Ardabili, S., Gundoshmian, T.M., Gergo, P., Mosavi, A., 2020. PerformanceAnalysis of Combine Harvester using Hybrid Model of Arti ﬁcial Neural Networks Par- ticle Swarm Optimization. arXiv preprint. arXiv:2002.11041. Ozturk, I., Yildirim, Y., Hinislioglu, S., Demirl, B., Kus, E., 2012. Optimization of seedﬂow evenness ofﬂuted rolls used in seed drills by Taguchi method. Sci. Res. Essays 7(1), 78–85.Prechelt, L., 1998.Early stopping-but when? Neural Networks: Tricks of the Trade.Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, pp. 55 –69 Reddy, B.S., Satyanarayana, Adake, R.V., Anantachar, M., 2012. Performance of seed planter metering mechanisms under simulated conditions. Indian J. Dryland Agric.Res. Dev. 27 (2), 36–42.Rumelhart, D.E., Hinton, G.E., Williams, R.J., 1986. Learning representations by back prop- agating errors. Nature 323, 533
–536. Sharma, V.K., Sharma, D.N., Kumar, D., 2013. Development and evaluation of tractor drawn inclined cell plate type Bt cotton planter. Int. J. Agric. Eng. 6 (2), 329 –334. Shi, Y., Eberhart, R.C., 1998.Am o d iﬁed particle swarm optimizer. Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Evolutionary Computation. IEEE, pp. 69 –73. Shi, Y., Eberhart, R.C., 1999.Empirical study of particle swarm optimization. Proceedingsof the 1999 Congress on Evolutionary Computation. vol. 3. IEEE, pp. 1945 –1950. Singh, K.P., Pardeshi, I.L., Kumar, M., Srinivas, K., Srivastva, A.K., 2008. Optimization of ma- chine parameters of pedal operated VL paddy thresher for better threshing capacityand efﬁciency. Biosyst. Eng. 100, 591–600. Tian, Z., Wong, L., Safaei, N., 2010. A neural network approach for remaining useful life prediction utilizing both failure and suspension histories. Mech. Syst. Signal Process.24 (5), 1542–1555.Xu, Y.L., Wang, Q., Zhu, L.T., Huang, D.Y., 2017. Numerical simulation and optimization for the vibration of the seed metering device based on a novel ML-IGA method.J. Vibroeng. 19 (5), 3151–3168. Yadachi, S., Mani, I., Kalra, M.S., Kumar, A., Sahoo, P.K., 2013. Development and evaluation of inclined plate metering mechanism for carrot seed. Agr. Eng. Today 35 (1), 10 –16. Yazgi, A., Degirmencioglu, A., 2007. Optimization of the seed spacing uniformity perfor- mance of a vacuum- type precision seeder using response surface methodology.Biosyst. Eng. 97 (3), 347–356.Yu, H., Wilamowski, B.M., 2011. Levenberg-marquardt training. Industrial ElectronicsHandbook, Second edition 5(12). CRC Press, Boca Raton, pp. 1 –16. Yuan, J., Cheng, L.L., Yan, M.L., Qingbing, Z., Xuan, F.Z., 2010. Gaussian processes based bi- variate control parameters optimization of variable-rate granular fertilizer applicator.Comput. Electron. Agric. 70, 33 –41. Zhang, J., Liu, G., Luo, C., Hu, H., Huang, J., 2019. MOEA/D-DE based bivariate control se- quence optimization of a variable-rate fertilizer applicator. Comput. Electron. Agric.167, 105063.Zŭperl, U., Cŭs, F., Gecevska, V., 2007.Optimization of the characteristic parameters in milling using the PSO evolution technique. Aust. J. Mech. Eng. 6, 354 –368.C.M. Pareek, V.K. Tewari, R. Machavaram et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 5 (2021) 1 –12
12