Precise in-situ characterization and cross-validation of theelectromagnetic properties of a switched reluctance motor
Xiao Ling, Liang Gong ⁎, Bingchu Li, Chengling Liu
The State Key Laboratory of Mechanical System and Vibration, School of Mechanical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China
abstract article info
Article history:Received 1 November 2019Received in revised form 14 May 2020Accepted 14 May 2020Available online 28 May 2020
Keywords:Switched reluctance motorElectromagnetic property characterizationSelf-inductanceIncremental inductanceFlux linkageIn-situ measurementThe electrical-magnetic characteristics of a Switched Reluctance Motor (SRM) exhibit highly nonlinear relation-ship with respect to the rotor position and excitation current, which poses challenges for both precise static mea-surements and exact calculation of these properties in real-time control. To guarantee that an in-lab test resultcan be used in the application,ﬁrstly a measurement method is proposed to characterize the SRM's electromag-netic properties such as theﬂux linkage, magnetic co-energy, phase inductance and electromagnetic torque onthe basis of an installed SRM control circuitry and half-bridge power converter. By this means the characteriza-tion process is equivalent to the online observation in its results. Secondly, a theoretical model is built to discrim-inate the physical meaning between the incremental inductance and the phase inductance, which is the origin ofother relevant parameters. This helps to guide the correct utilization of the characterization result. Thirdly anin-situ cross-validation experimentation according to the magnetizing and demagnetizing status measurementveriﬁes the feasibilities and accuracy of the proposed inductance measuring method, which avoid a dubiousFEM-based comparison between the numerical calculation and experimental results. Cross-validation experi-ment shows that the proposed in-situ characterization scheme obtains an accurate full-range electromagneticproperties. The proposed methodology breaks the barrier between the in-lab measurement and on-line utiliza-tion of the SRM parameters, highlighting the merits that it completely includes the in-situ factors and replicatesthe operational scenario without the need of speci ﬁcally designed instrumentation, which is especially suitable for rapidﬁeld characterization for high power motors.© 2020 The Authors. Publishing services by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of KeAi Communications Co. Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ ).
1. IntroductionDue to simple and rugged motor construction, potentially low pro-duction cost, excellent torque/speed characteristics, high operating ef ﬁ- ciency, and inherent fault tolerance, switched reluctance motors (SRMs)are emerging as an attractive drive unit ranging from modern electricalvehicles to high speed aircraft applications ( Kamalakannan et al., 2011; Wen et al., 2013). In recent years, substantial research efforts have beendevoted to various aspects of SRM such as speed regulation perfor-mance analysis, controller design and instrumentation, drive applica-tion, where the accurate knowledge of the SRM's electromagneticcharacteristics is a deﬁning property for all these cases.Generally speaking, there are four principal parameters com-monly used in high performance control of SRMs, namely the ﬂux linkageψ, magnetic co-energyW, phase inductanceLand yielded electromagnetic torqueT. Precise characterization of these electro-magnetic properties is essential for SRM applications. For example,strategies in speed-position control, energy-ef ﬁcient control and po- sition sensor elimination control are highly dependent upon the ac-curacy of phase inductance (Yoo et al., 2009;Kjaer et al., 1995; Brauer et al., 2012;Yu et al., 2015). Soft computing of electromag-netic torque, instead of using a tor que transducer, is extensively adopted for torque ripple minimization and noise reduction ( Cai and Deng, 2012;Moron et al., 2012;Lee et al., 2012;Vujicic, 2012; Zeng et al., 2014). Flux linkage and magnetic co-energy areemployed to realize high-performance four-quadrant operation(Goto et al., 2010;Wong et al., 2009;Cheok and Fukuda, 2002;Shin et al., 2005).To date it remains challenging when precisely characterizing the pa-rameters for control purpose since an SRM presents highly nonlinearcharacteristics due to the motor's doubly salient structure and its inten-tional operation in deep magnetic saturation for higher power density(Miller, 2001;Dowlatshahi et al., 2014). Moreover, a prominent sub- problem associated is that the current accurate in-lab measurement re-sults are rarely applicable in engineering, especially when the preciseparameter evaluation is desired. The considerable errors between thein-lab characterization andﬁeld application stem from manufacturingand material variations from the prototype, neglect of phase mutualArtiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 4 (2020) 74 –80
⁎Corresponding author.E-mail addresses:lingxiao@sjtu.edu.cn(X. Ling),gongliang_mi@sjtu.edu.cn(L. Gong), bchli@sjtu.edu.cn(B. Li),chlliu@sjtu.edu.cn(C. Liu).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aiia.2020.05.0022589-7217/© 2020 The Authors. Publishing services by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of KeAi Communications Co. Ltd. This is an open access article under the C C BY-NC-ND license (http:// creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ ).
Contents lists available atScienceDirect
Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture
journal homepage:http://www.keaipublishing.com/en/journals/artificial-intelligence-in-agriculture/couplings, diverse winding copper and iron losses, and the choppingloss of power electronics devices. Therefore, although precisely charac-terizing the SRMs is extensively investigated ( Zhang et al., 2010; Parreira et al., 2005;Wang et al., 2014) and gives perfect insight into the physics, there still exists a necessity to develop a rapid approachon characterizing the motors individually. In this sense the core issueis how to comprehensively replicate the operating scenario during thecharacterization process, where an in-situ characterization lends itselfto serve this goal.In engineering it deserves measurement innovations under severalregards, including the convenience of experimental setup con ﬁguration, replication of the operating conditions and regimes, and security con-sideration for high power rating machines. Fortunately, these consider-ations can be encompassed via using the power and control circuitriesreadily equipped for a COTS motor product, given that the characteriza-tion abides by the operating state in all electrical tractor. With this orig-inal intention an in-situ method is proposed for precise measurement ofSRM's electromagnetic properties in this paper. Additionally, an analyt-ical solution is addressed to clarify the physical meaning of phase andincremental inductances, laying a theoretical foundation for differentmonitoring and control strategy designs for electrical motor. The veri ﬁ- cation of this characterization plays an importance role in reliably utiliz-ing the result, and correspondingly a cross-validation approach isdeveloped.The organization of this paper is as follows. Section 2proposes a pre- cise SRM characterization model for an SRM, with an emphasis on dis-criminating the deﬁnition of phase and incremental inductance.Section 3describes a COTS circuitry based in-situ characterizing ap-proach for the motor, and the merits of this measuring method arealso highlighted. Parameter measurement results and parameter char-acteristics are illustrated inSection 4, followed by a reliable in-situ cross-validation method. Some conclusions are given in Section 5.2. Electrical model of the SRMDetermination of the magnetic characteristics can be realized nu-merically or experimentally. Measurement-based approaches showthe merits of high precision, isolation of manufacturing variation and in-dependence of prerequisite knowledge of material magnetics whencompared to typical FEA numerical methods. In this section we presentthe theoretical fundamentals for motor characterization and clarify animportant notation on the inductance, then propose a COTS apparatusbased approach capable of easily characterizing the SRMs with highpower ratings and the advantages are discussed.2.1. Characterization fundamentalsCharacterization of an SRM normally stems from measuring the ﬂux linkage proﬁle in one motor phase, and then other relevant propertiescan be derived using standard electrical machine theory. After blockingthe rotor to a certain position, a pulse voltage is applied and the phasecurrent responses are recorded and the measurement is repeated fordifferent rotor positions to proﬁle the motor properties according tothe following electrical equations. By Faraday's law the voltage equationfor one phaseu¼RiþdψiθðÞdt ð1ÞwhereUis the instantaneous voltage across the terminals of a singlephase of an SRM,iis the phase current, andRis the phase resistance. ψis theﬂux linked per phase whose change rate with respect to timecan be obtained.The phase inductanceLis deﬁned byψi;θðÞ ¼Li;θðÞi ð2Þwhen given aﬁxed rotor positionθψi;θðÞ ¼Z
τ0u−RiðÞdt ð3Þhere when the phase currentItraverses from zero to its maximum, theﬂux linkage can be computed accordingly. And the inductance pro ﬁle can be calculated by partially deriving Eq. (3). From the view angle of energy conservation, the input electrical en-ergyW
eis equal to the sum of energy stored in the coil W fand the en- ergy converted into the mechanical work W
m.W
e¼W fþW m ð4ÞWe can deﬁne the stored magnetic energyW
fand its counterpart electromagnetic co-energyWasW
f¼Zψ0iψ;θðÞdψ ð5ÞW¼Z
I0ψi;θðÞdi ð6ÞThe electromagnetic co-energy is introduced since it is common toexpress the electromagnetic torque in terms of current rather thanﬂux linkage. And obviously there exist relations asiψ¼W
fþW ð7ÞNomenclatureA.C. Alternating CurrentCOTS Commercial Off-the-ShelfDD i o d eD.C. Direct CurrentDSP Digital Signal ProcessorFPGA Field Programmable Gate Arrayi Instantaneous Phase Current for Integration (A)IPhase CurrentIGBT Insulated Gate Bipolar TransistorLPhase InductancelIncremental InductanceR Phase ResistanceS Power Switch (IGBT)SDRAM Synchronous Dynamic Random Access MemorySRM Switched Reluctance MotorTElectromagnetic Torqueu Instantaneous Phase Voltage [V]WMagnetic Co-energyW
e Input Electrical EnergyW
m Mechanical EnergyWfMagnetic Field Energy3D Three DimensionGreeksΨPhase Flux linkage [Wb]Θrotor angular position [rad] τIntegration Time[s]75 X. Ling et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 4 (2020) 74 –80and
∂W f.∂θ¼−∂W.∂θ ð8ÞFor the case of constant excitation, the incremental mechanical workis equal to the change rate of co-energy W, which is nothing but thecomplement of theﬁeld energyWf. Hence the incremental mechanicalwork done can be written asδW
m¼δW ð9ÞwhereW¼Z
i0ψθ;iðÞdi ð10ÞThe electromagnetic torque T in terms of the co-energy representedas a function of rotor position and phase current isT¼
δW m
δθ¼∂Ri0ψi;θðÞdi∂θ¼ ∂Ri0Li;θðÞidi∂θð11ÞIn conclusion, once theﬂux linkage versusiandθis proﬁled, all the other electromagnetic properties of an SRM can be hereby deduced.2.2. Distinct inductance modelsWe read from Eq.(2)that the excitation current and theﬂux linkage deﬁne an inductance in an instantaneous status, which partially re ﬂects the stationary behavior of the winding impedance. However, when boththe dynamic and the stationary inductive characteristics are to bediscussed, two distinct models, namely the phase self-inductance L and the incremental inductance l need to be derived.Differentiate Eq.(2), we note that
dψi;θðÞdt¼Li;θðÞ
θ¼constjdidtþi dL i;θðÞdt
i¼constjð13ÞAlternatively,
dψi;θðÞdt¼ ∂ψi;θðÞ∂i didtþ∂ψi;θðÞ∂θ dθdt¼li;θðÞ didtþ∂ψi;θðÞ∂θωð14Þwhereli;θðÞ ¼
∂ψi;θðÞ∂i¼ ∂Rτ0u−RiðÞdt∂i ð15ÞMeanwhile, the relationship between two representations of phaseinductive behavior isLi;θðÞ ¼1iZi0li;θðÞdi ð16ÞNote that the self-inductance is different from the incremental in-ductance when the operating condition is not linear, which is usuallythe case in an SRM drive system. It can be further disserted that onlythe incremental inductance can be used to evaluate the dynamic induc-tive characteristics such as in an algorithm for position sensorless con-trol (Cai and Deng, 2012;Cai and Deng, 2013). Two inductance models can be mutually converted by Eq. (16). Hence in the following sections, only the phase inductance is analyzed unless there is anyneed to discriminate them.3. In-situ characterizing approachZhang et al. (Zhang et al., 2010) proposed a current saturation method for accurately measuring the SRM inductance, which uses lowfrequency and low voltage to minimize the machine loss. Althoughthis measuring setup is simple, unfortunately the proposed solution isnot suitable for high-power SRMs up to multiple hundred KW powerratings. In this section we utilize a COTS SRM control circuitry andhalf-bridge power converter to conduct the measurement, whichmeans the commercially available switched reluctance drive can beused without requiring additional measuring apparatus. A decaying cur-rent method is employed to facilitate the high power SRMcharacterization.Both COTS SRM development kits and industrial application solu-tions are extensively provided by semiconductor manufacturers suchas Fairchild, Inﬁneon, and Texas Instrument that offer supports notonly for the independent central control units, power converters, andintegrated motor drivers but also for the comprehensive solution(DiRenzo, 2000). A general-purpose SRM drive circuit is shown inFig. 1. The A.C. power source is rectiﬁed andﬁltered to provide a D.C. bus voltage, the power switches (IGBTs) S and diodes D are integratedmodules to form a compact asymmetry half bridge power converterfor SRM. Take Phase A for an example, when S
1and S 2are switched on simultaneously, the phase winding is excited by the D.C. source upto rated current, which is limited by a comparing circuitry associatedwith the COTS SRM drive component. When S
1and S 2are switched off, the current decreases.The SRM electromagnetic characteristics measurement is based onthe voltage equation of the SRM in terms of the phase current and ﬂux linkages. As mentioned in previous section, to obtain the parametersfor various positions, this experiment can be repeated by applying apulse voltage in one phase for various locked rotor positions rangingfrom the aligned to the unaligned position of the stator and rotorpoles. Thereby the three-dimensional relationship of ψ(θ,i)v s .ivs.θ can be plotted. This is sufﬁcient for the evaluation of magnetic co-
Fig. 1.Asymmetry half-bridge power converter for SRMs.76 X. Ling et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 4 (2020) 74 –80energy and instantaneous electromagnetic torque for any given currentand rotor position. A schematic diagram for measurement is shown inFig. 2.The measurement could be conducted by monitoring either rising ordecaying current in the phase windings. Clearly, Eq. (1)describes a magnetizing process when the currentﬂow as“+Vs-S
1-Phase A-S 2- Gnd”while the demagnetizing current along “Gnd-D
2-Phase A-D 1- +V
s”. theoretically,−u¼Riþ
dψi;θðÞdt ð17Þhere using the decaying current proﬁle is more appropriate for higher currents since the voltageﬂuctuation during a falling current is negligi-ble and fairly constant (Gobbi et al., 2006). This is because the measure- ment during a decaying current is carried out by eliminating the appliedvoltage to the winding, and an alternative path to the winding current isprovided through a freewheeling diode connected across the machinephase, hence no current drains from the ﬁlter capacity. The voltage across the winding during the decaying current is only the forward volt-age drop of the diode. In contrast, the applied source voltage varieswhile the current is increasing, giving rise to errors due to quantizationand its use in the evaluation ofﬂux linkages (Krishnan, 2001). The manner in which theﬂux linkage is obtained is crucial to the ac-curacy and application of the results. Generally speaking, the proposedcharacterization method offers three advantages. First, its technicalmerits and practical value of using the COTS based experimentationsetup lie in easily characterizing high-power motors and performingthe real application in-system testing. The readily-equipped power con-vert avoids customizing a speciﬁc high power source, and the installedHall current sensor directly measures the excitation current and elimi-nates the need for a high power rating data-acquiring precise resistor.Further the phase current limitation is reliably curbed by using anon-board protective circuitry. Therefore, the COTS circuit based experi-mentation leads to a paradigm shift from laboratory prototyping tomanufacturer on-site characterization. Second, using the decaying cur-rent to characterize the SRMs ensures a high accuracy via minimizingthe voltageﬂuctuation. Third, although the iron/copper losses andphase mutual inductance complicate the measurement of the electro-magnetic properties, the proposed method is capable of genuinely re-vealing the properties since it realistically duplicates the operatingscenario in converter, such as the current path and individual compo-nent loss. Therefore, the proposed method can be applied in character-izing a wide spectrum of SRMs.4. Implementation and experimental results4.1. Experimental setupOn an 8/6 SRM with the rated power of 750 W and 310 V D.C. busvoltage, a COTS power converter is connected in a half-bridge topology.Figs. 3 and 4show the photographs of the experimental platform andcontrol circuitry respectively. And refer to the appendix for the detailedparameters of the motor.In the SRM control board the instantaneous maximum phase currentis limited to 13.0A during test, and the maximum current during motoroperation is 9.0A. The current sensor is LEM HMS 05-P with the accuracyof 1%. The encoder is OMRON E6C2-C with the resolution of 2000 pulse/round. The general controller is a 32-bit 150MIPS TMS320LF2812 DSPwhich includes a 16-channel 12-bit on-chip 3D converter with the12.5 M sampling bandwidth. An Altera FPGA EP2C8Q208C8 (8 speedgrade) is selected to expand the I/O and execute online CMAC NN com-putation, which has 8256 logic cells and 165,888 memory bits. Mean-while the FPGA has a 16 M byte SDRAM for temporarily reserving thesensor-acquired data.4.2. Experimentation of characterizing an SRMFor characterizing an SRM the proposed decaying current methodapplies a D.C. voltage with given width at each rotor position. Thetime span of the voltage pulse is determined by the current's rising tothe maximum.Fig. 5demonstrates a rising and decaying current slopewhen a 700us pulse voltage is applied at certain rotor position. By thismeans the phase current will reach its maximum at all the rotor posi-tions, which enable the characterization covers the entire motor operat-ing regime. The decaying stage is recorded for characterizing the SRM.As can be noticed the current shape is not absolutely symmetry due tothe machine loss and bus voltageﬂuctuation.Since the mechanical period of an 8/6 SRM is 60° for each phase, themeasurements starts from the rotor/stator completely unaligned posi-tion−30° and terminates at +30° by 1° interval. The 0° position hintsthe rotor and stator are strictly aligned. Technically an interpolation al-gorithm is utilized to obtain
ﬁne granular I andθmesh, andﬁnally we obtain theθ[−30°, 30°] with 0.3° resolution and the current [0A,9.0A]with 0.045A interval. Hence the input set ﬁelds are divided into a 201 × 201 mesh, which means a mapping that uses a table looking-upalgorithm will require at least 161,604 byte memory cells for 40,401 sin-gle precisionﬂoating point data storage. The amount of memory occu-pation indicates the direct table looking-up is not suitable forobtaining multiple parameters in embedded control system, which ne-cessitates a model-based algorithm to solve this problem.
Fig. 2.Asymmetry half-bridge power converter for SRMs.
Fig. 3.Experimental system of an SRM.77 X. Ling et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 4 (2020) 74 –80According to the equations established in Section 1, the electromag- netic properties can be characterized. Figs. 6–9render the 3-D relation- ship among the variablesθ,Iandﬂux linkageψ, phase inductanceL, magnetic co-energy W, electro torque T respectively.4.3. Cross-validating the characterization resultTraditionally we often resort to an FEM-based approach to validatethe testing result, which is dubious due to the errors induced by mis-matches between simulation parameters and the real case.In order to validate the effectiveness and accuracy of the characteri-zation, two aspects are considered in this paper. First, decaying currentis used to characterize the incremental inductance and at the same po-sition the rising current is used to validate its result. This approach isname after cross-validation because both the currents are shapes bythe identical inductance regarding to the ﬁxed position. The second as- pect is that a numerical model is built according to the decaying currentmodel and then a full process is simulated and experimentally recordedto show their agreement.At a randomly selected rotor position 41.3066°, a 1100 μs pulse volt- age is applied so as to allow the phase current approach its maximum.The voltage width and the phase current response are recorded toperform the simulation. On the basis of the ﬂux linkage characterization shown inFig. 6, the excitation current proﬁle is generated accordingly. The simulation MATLAB/SIMULINK procedure is shown in Fig. 10, and the experimentally measured current pro ﬁle and the simulation re- sult are compared inFig. 11.Fig. 11shows that the simulated phase cur-rent response to aﬁxed voltage pulse matches the measured current,and it proves that the electromagnetic properties characterization areaccurate at the full spectrum of current and rotor position. The current
Fig. 4.Control and drive circuitry for the SRM with DSP and FPGA processors
Fig. 5.Phase current proﬁle when a pulse voltage is applied.Fig. 6.Linkageﬂux as a function of the rotor position and the phase current.
Fig. 7.Inductance as a function of the rotor position and the phase current.
Fig. 8.Magnetic co-energy as a function of the rotor position and the phase current.78 X. Ling et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 4 (2020) 74 –80plateau at 9A embodies the overcurrent chopping effect in the protec-tion circuit.Clearly, this in-situ validation approach can be conducted immedi-ately after the characterization process, and the results can be evaluatedby simply check the agreement of two one dimensional curves.5. ConclusionThe proposed methodology, including both of the characterizationand veriﬁcation techniques for SRMs, opens up the possibility of pre-cisely calculating its electromagnetic characteristics in real time,which lays a foundation stone for versatile advanced control schemesthat require obtaining accurate electromagnetic parameters incorresponding models. A model-based in-situ measuring system instru-mented in COTS platform enables fast, applicable machine-by-machinecharacterization in a massive production line of the motor manufac-turers, which can be easily involved in an existing infrastructure. Exper-imental results proved that the proposed method could achieve anencouraging performance. Conclusions are listed as follows.1) The proposed measuring approach utilize the off-the-shelf devicesand circuitry to support in-factory SRM test and characterization,easing the burden of developing an ad hoc test bench and possessingthe ability of including all physical effects that exist in the realapplication.2) The precisely measured electromagnetics data and establishedmodel enable detailed and precise examination of SRM behaviorover a wide variety of simulated operating conditions without thelimitations associated with drive circuits, transducers or instrumen-tation, as the case we used for validating the characterization preci-sion inSection 4.2. And it worth noting that all the electromagneticparameters are able to be manipulated under a uni ﬁed computa- tional framework.3) Highly reliable cross validation methodology is proposed for verify-ing the in-situ characterization result, which does not need any spe-ciﬁcally design instrument either.CRediT authorship contribution statementXiao Ling:Conceptualization, Data curation, Formal analysis, Meth-odology, Validation, Writing - original draft. Liang Gong:Data curation, Formal analysis, Investigation, Methodology, Validation, Writing - orig-inal draft, Writing - review & editing.Bingchu Li:Data curation, Method- ology, Validation.Chengling Liu:Funding acquisition, Project administration, Visualization, Writing - review & editing.AcknowledgementsThe authors gratefully acknowledge theﬁnancial support provided by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (project No.11202125 and project No. 51305258).Appendix AMotor data:Number of phases 4;Number of rotor poles 6;Rated power 750 W;Rated torque 5.0 N m;Maximum speed 1500 r/min;Phase current limitation 9A;Design speciﬁcation of the aligned phase inductance 22 mH;Design speciﬁcation of the unaligned phase inductance0.5 mH;Phase resistance 1.3 OhmBus D.C. voltage 300 V;Lamination material: M19 steelReferences
Brauer, H.J., Hennen, M.D., De Doncker, R.W., Jan. 2012. Control for polyphase switched reluctance machines tominimize torque ripple and decrease ohmic machinelosses.IEEE Transactions on Power Electronics 27 (1), 370 –378. Cai, J., Deng, Z.Q., Jul. 2012.Sensorless control of switched reluctance motor based onphase inductance vectors. IEEE Transactions on Power Electronics 27 (7), 3410 –3423. Cai, J., Deng, Z.Q., Mar., 2013.A position sensorless control of switched reluctance motorsbased on phase inductance slope. Journal of Power Electronics 13 (2), 264 –274. Cheok, A.D., Fukuda, Y., Apr. 2002. A new torque andﬂux control method for switched re- luctance motor drives. IEEE Transactions on Power Electronics 17 (4), 543 –557. DiRenzo, Michael T., Feb., 2000. Switched Reluctance Motor Control –Basic Operation and Example Using the TMS320F240. Tech. Memo.spra420a Texas Instruments Inc., Austin. Dowlatshahi, M., Saghaiannejad, S.M., Ahn, J.W., et al., Mar. 2014. Copper loss and torque ripple minimization in switched reluctance motors considering nonlinear and mag-netic saturation effects. Journal of Power Electronics 14 (2), 351 –361. Gobbi, R., Sahoo, N.C., Rajandran, R. Vejian, 2006. Rising and falling current methods for measurement ofﬂux-linkage characteristics of switched reluctance motors: a com-parative study. Proc.of IEEE PECON ’06, pp. 383–387. Goto, H., Nishimiya, A., Guo, H.J., Jan. 2010. Instantaneous torque control using ﬂux-based commutation and phase-torque distribution technique for SR motor EV. COMPEL-International Journal for Computation and Mathematics in Electrical and ElectronicEngineering 29 (1), 173–186.Kamalakannan, C., Kamaraj, V., Paramasivam, S., Paranjothi, S.R., 2011.Switched reluc- tance machine in automotive applications —a technology status review. Proc. ICEES, pp. 187–197.Kjaer, P.C., Nielsen, P., Andersen, L., Blaabjerg, F., May 1995. A new energy optimizing con- trol strategy for switched reluctance motors. IEEE Transactions on Industry Applica-tions 31 (5), 1088–1095.Krishnan, R., 2001.In: Irwin, J.D. (Ed.), Switched Reluctance Motor Drives: Modeling, Sim-ulation, Analysis, Design, and Applications. Boca Raton, London New YorkWashington, D.C.Lee, D.H., Ahn, S.Y., Ahn, J.W., Jan. 2012. A simple negative torque compensation scheme for a high speed switched reluctance motor. Journal of Power Electronics 12 (1),58–66.Miller, T.J.E., 2001.Electronic Control of Switched Reluctance Machines. Newnes D.C, Bur-lington MA,USA.Moron, C., Garcia, A., Tremps, E., Apr 2012. Torque control of switched reluctance motors. IEEE Trans. Magn. 48 (4), 1661 –1664.Fig. 9.Electromagnetic torque as a function of the rotor position and the phase current.
Fig. 10.MATLAB/Simulink procedure for simulating the phase current response to avoltage pulse.79 X. Ling et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 4 (2020) 74 –80Parreira, B., Rafael, S., Pires, A.J., Branco, P.J. Costa, Jun. 2005. Obtaining the magnetic char- acteristics of an 8/6 switched reluctance machine: from FEM analysis to the experi-mental test. IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics 52 (6), 1635 –1643. Shin, D.S., Li, Y.C., Yang, H.Y., et al., Mar. 2005. Rotor position sensing method for switched reluctance motors using an indirect sensor. Journal of Power Electronics 5 (3),173–179.Vujicic, P. Vladan, Jan. 2012.Minimization of torque ripple and copper losses in switchedreluctance drive. IEEE Transactions on Power Electronics 27 (1), 388 –399. Wang, B., Lee, D.H., Lee, C.W., et al., Sep. 2014. Characteristics analysis of a novel segmen- tal rotor axialﬁeld switched reluctance motor with single teeth winding. Journal ofPower Electronics 14 (5), 852 –858. Wen, D., Liu, L., Lou, J.Y., Mar 2013. Design and control of a high-speed switched reluc- tance machine with conical magnetic bearings for aircraft application. IET ElectronicPower Applications 7 (3), 179 –190.Wong, K.F., Cheng, K.W.E., Ho, S.L., Mar 2009. Four-quadrant instantaneous torque control of switched reluctance machine at low speed based on co-energy control. IET Elec-tronic Power Applications 3 (5), 431 –444. Yoo, A., Sul, S.K., Lee, D.C., Jun, C.S., Dec 2009. Novel speed and rotor position estimation strategy using a dual observer for low-resolution position sensors. IEEE Transactionson Power Electronics 24 (12), 2897 –2906. Y u ,S . Y . ,F e n g ,F . G . ,L e e ,D . H . ,e ta l . ,J a n .2 0 1 5 . High efﬁciency operation of a switched reluc- tance generator over a wide speed range. Journal of Power Electronics 15 (1),123–130.Zeng, H., Chen, Z., Chen, H., Mar. 2014. Smooth torque speed characteristic of switched re- luctance motors. Journal of Power Electronics 14 (2), 341 –350. Zhang, P., Cassani, P.A., Williamson, S.S., Sept. 2010. An accurate inductance proﬁle mea- surement technique for switched reluctance machines. IEEE Transactions on Indus-trial Electronics 57 (9), 2972 –2979.
Fig. 11.A comparison between the measured current and the model-generated current.80 X. Ling et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 4 (2020) 74 –80