 AASRI Procedia   5  ( 2013 )  1 
2212-6716 © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
Selection and/or peer review under responsibility of American Applied Science Research Institute
doi: 10.1016/j.aasri.2013.10.050 ScienceDirect
 2013 AASRI Conference on Parallel and Distributed Computing and Systems 
Preface 
The 2013 AASRI Conference on Parallel and Distributed Computing and Systems (DCS 2013) will be held on May 1-2, 
2013, Singapore. The goal of this conference is to bring together the researchers from academia and industry as well as 
practitioners to share ideas, problems and solutions relatin g to the multifaceted aspects of Parallel and Distributed 
Computing and Systems.  
 
The Conference attracted more than 90  excellent manuscripts from at least 15 countries and areas such as Algeria, Austria, 
Brazil, China, Hong Kong, India, Indonesia, Jordan, Korea, Malaysia, Mexico, Pakistan, Thailand, Tunisia, United 
Kingdom. For a high quality proceedings, All the papers were evaluated by peer reviewing with minor modifications, 
more than 55 papers were accepted partly with modifications and 25 papers were weakly accepted and 10 papers were 
rejected. At last more than 40 selected  papers in this  proceedings provides up-to-date, comprehensive and worldwide 
state-of-the technology and knowledge in Parallel and Distributed Computing and Systems.  
 
After the excellent keynote presentations on May 1st, authors from different countries and areas participated warmly 
discussions for their viewpoints with dividing into 4 sessions by paper topics: 1) 16 papers stress on the technologies and 
applications of  Parallel and Distributed Computing and Systems in Communication and sensor network; 2)  12 papers 
talk about the advanced theories and achievement in “Distributed and Parallel Computing”; 3)  11 papers shared their 
research about Parallel and Distributed  Computing in Computer and Internet Application. 4)  2 papers is about III.Mobile 
and Embedded Systems.  
 
 The Conference Committee has decided to publish the American Applied Sciences Research Institute Procedia of 
Elsevier Ltd, which will be submitted for indexing of ScienceDirect ,Scopus and others  famous academic databases. 
 
The committee expresses its entire gratitude to all the authors who presented their works as the Conference DCS2013 and 
contributed in this way to the success of this event. Special thanks are due to the authors from many countries for 
attending the conference and to the reviewers for their support in improving the quality of the papers and finally for the 
assurance the quality of this volume. The organizing committee also addresses warmest thanks to all the members of the 
international committee for their support, and too many others for their contribution in organizing DCS2013 . 
 
We hope that the contents of this volume will prove useful for researchers in Parallel and Distributed Computing field and 
practitioners in developing and applying new theories and technologies . 
 
Wei Deng 
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
Open access under CC BY -NC-ND  license.