 AASRI Procedia   4  ( 2013 )  118 – 124 
2212-6716 © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
Selection and/or peer review under responsibility of American Applied Science Research Institute
doi: 10.1016/j.aasri.2013.10.019 ScienceDirect
Q
Abst
In sp
them
dyna
of am
Theo
intera
of an
 
© 20
Sele
 
Keyw
1. In
W
ama
netw
an a
furth
 
* 
EQualities 
tract 
pontaneous net w
mselves to achi e
amism in these 
malgamating fa
oretical aspect s
action process 
ny networked o r
013 Publishe d
ection and/or p
words: Social net w
ntroduction 
We are witn e
lgamate com p
worked organi
ad hoc organ i
her define SN O
 
Corresponding a
E-mail address:  al2013 AA S
of Inter e
Department of C
worked organi z
eve their goal s
organizations. 
fast. In light o f
s will be desc r
among agents 
rganization. 
d by Elsevier B
peer review u n
work; Organizati o
essing incre a
putational res o
zations may f
ization was i n
O in this pap e
author. Tel.: +1-2 0
lqithami@siu.ed uSRI Confer e
est for S
Saad Alq
Computer Scienc e
zations, or an y
s. Agents usua l
Each agent m u
f this, we co n
ribed includin g
inside such a c
B.V. 
nder responsi b
ons; Social capit a
ased interest 
ources dyna m
form to rally a
ntroduced in 
er by explorin g
02-468-8498; fa x
u. ence on Int e
Spontan e
ithami* , H
e, Southern Illin o
 
y dynamic ope n
lly interact, wi t
ust, therefore, a
nstruct qualitie s
g social harm o
collaborative o r
bility of Ame r
al; Collaboratio n
in cross-org a
mically across o
around a spec i
[1] as spont a
g qualities th a
x: +1-618-453-6 0elligent Sys t
eous Net w
Henry Hex m
ois University, C a
n organization s
th which they 
achieve certain 
s of interest f o
ony, coherenc e
rganization. Th i
rican Applied 
n; SNO  
anization ser v
organizationa l
ific problem s
aneous netwo r
at help elabor a
044. tems and C o
worked 
moor 
arbondale, IL 62 9
s, autonomous 
have no expe r
qualities of int e
or a spontane o
e and spontan e
is study helps t
Science Res e
vice-oriented 
l boundaries. A
suggested by a
rked organiz a
ate nature of aontrol 
Organiz
901, USA 
agents must i n
rience, due to t
erests in order 
ous networked 
eity and their e
to improve the 
earch Institute 
computing t
An ad hoc or g
an agent. A m
ations (SNO) .
a SNO.  zations 
nteract among 
the scale and 
to be capable 
organization. 
effect on the 
social capital 
that aims to 
ganization of 
model of such 
. We aim to 
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
© 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
Selection and/or peer review under responsibility of American Applied Science Research InstituteOpen access under CC BY -NC-ND  license.
Open access under CC BY -NC-ND  license.119  Saad Alqithami and Henry Hexmoor  /  AASRI Procedia   4  ( 2013 )  118 – 124 
C
SNO
Agen
boun
impa
by a
socia
SNO
pred
T
tradi
qual
their
prescon
n
para
2. SN
W
links
envi
parti
gam
envi
that env
i
T
Selfi
of tw
thres
hum
illus
of a live 
bifur
set o
FigurConsidering s o
O generates p
nt based mo d
ndary and the 
act on so me su
agents, who s
al online me d
O through m u
dictions are n o
This article ca p
itional organi
lities of inter e
r effect on th e
ents our me t
nections by p r
ameterization s
NO MODE L
When agents d
s whether i m
ironment, whi
ition to be m o
me. SNO assu m
ironment. Sin c
are adequat e
ironment is a r
The salient pr o
fish allegianc e
wo or more 
shold or a c o
man cognitive c
strate a new t y
networked o r
cycle that s t
rcation, stead i
of agents) tha t
re 1. the life cycl eocial capital m
ositive socia l
deling is sui t
rules for inte r
ustainability s
hare affinitie s
diums, spont a
ultiple meas u
ot sensitive to 
ptures genera l
zation into a 
est among ag e
e social capit a
thods for ge n
resenting the 
s is in section 4
L 
dwell in an o p
mplicitly or e
ch we define 
ore consisten t
mes agents or 
ce decisions a
e for rationa
radical depar tu
operties that s e
es and comm u
agents worki n
ollection set o
capacity. SN O
ype of online o
rganization t h
tarts from fo r
iness, etc. In p
t helps it to as s
e of a SNO may transcen d
l capital, con s
table to expl o
ractions in th e
signs of a SN O
s and posses s
aneously deci d
urements, su c
the absence o
l qualities of t
spontaneous 
ents inside th e
al inside SN O
nerating prot o
way of com p
4. We finally 
pen social e n
explicitly. T h
as a Bayesia n
t with one an o
the leader o f
are made loca l
l decision m
ure from trad i
et SNO apart 
unity social p o
ng on a co m
of agents wo r
O is inspired f
organizations .
hat account fo r
rmation until 
particular, th e
sign tasks. T h
d issues surr o
stituent agent s
ore scenario s
e agents’ mec h
O, a wide ran g
s similar obj e
de and act lo c
ch as social 
or failure of a n
the SNO. Thi s
more elabor a
e SNO. This m
O. The remain
otypical SNO
puting the th r
present relat e
nvironment, t h
hereby, they 
n game. With e
other and to c
f the organiza t
lly, exchange s
making. This 
itional organi z
from other o r
ower, and d. a d
mmon, quick g
rking on lon g
from the ong o
. This new ty p
r rapid rates o
dissolution g
e SNO has a s t
hese stages ar e
Leadership 
Designe r ounding heter
s gain benev o
s through si m
hanism. They
ge of collabor a
ectives or ide o
cally. This w
harmony, c o
ny one of thes e
s amounts to t
ative one. W e
method workder of this ar
t
. Section 3 e
ree qualities o
ed work in se c
hey are interc o
inform one 
each commu n
closer approx i
tion operates 
s of informatiuncertain na
t
zation model s
rganizations a
d-hoc networ k
goal that is p
g term object i
oing change i n
pe facilitates t
of disseminati
going throug h
tructure (i.e., 
e depicted in F
Coordinato r 
Agent se t ogeneity of a
olence and b e
mulation thathave to be c
o
atively gene ra
ologies that a
work develops 
ohesion and 
e measureme n
transforming w
e have devel o
s by capturin g
ticle is struct u
evaluates the 
of interest. F u
ction 5, and c o
onnected thr o
another of p
nication, agen t
imation of acwith incomp
l
on produce l o
ture of parti a
.  
are: a. Openn e
k topology. A 
possibly fast e
ives that are
n the world, s u
the modeling o
on in a d-hoc n
h different st a
leadership, d e
Figure 1. 
agent affiliati o
ehave in trus t
include the s
ompared acco r
ated organiza t
are socially c o
the idea of c
spontaneity, 
nts.  
what was int e
oped a set o f
g types of in t
ured as follo w
spontaneous l
urther descrip t
onclude in sec t
ough their co m
pertinent eve
ts update thei r
tual state of t
lete informati o
ocally consist e
al informatio n
ess, b. Evolvi n
SNO can be a
er than huma n
possibly bey o
uch as the Ar a
of spontaneo u
networks. Th e
ages like vir a
esigner, coor dons. When a 
ting manner. 
skills of the 
rding to their 
tion maintain 
onnec ted via 
controlling a for that the 
ended to be a 
f lightweight 
teraction and 
ws. Section 2 
ly generated 
tion of these 
tion 6. 
mmunication nts of their 
r information 
the Bayesian 
on about the 
ent partitions 
n about the 
ng charter, c. a small team 
n perceptual 
ond a single 
ab Spring, to 
us exigencies 
e SNO has a 
al spreading, 
dinator, and a 120   Saad Alqithami and Henry Hexmoor  /  AASRI Procedia   4  ( 2013 )  118 – 124 
As known in any social networks, agents perform ac tions, which in order produce different types of connections. These actions have more impact on a broad range virtually than in the real life. This is because these spontaneous actions that the agents perform are not usually linked in the organization with a sorted type of structure, such as hierarchy, holarchy or others. In lig ht of this, a SNO becomes the best fit to describe such style of organizations. Further attributes contributin g to this type of organization are characterized by describing salient qualities of interest in order to meas ure the quality of interactions and their effect on the social capital of the organization. 3. Qualities of interest There are many simplified features that have been used in order to study the structure of existing organizations [9][10]. Nevertheless, these proposed feat ures lack the presentational power of representing the SNO. Therefore, we propose three important qualities of inte rest in order to measure the structure of the SNO, in this section. These properties are social harmony, cohesion, and spontaneity.  3.1. Social harmony: For a SNO, social harmony is an important attribute.  Social balance exists when relationships among a group in a social network are congenial [7]. Heider in [7] presented a theory that suggests certain combinations of relationships are harmonious whereas others are not. For example, two pairs of friends who may have a pair of enemies produce an imbalance.  Definition 1: social harmony is the balanced state of the existing connections among agents to the total connections inside the organization. Since SNO is formed with like-minded individuals, we assume a nontrivial degree of social balance. Imbalanced relationships are divisive and fall apart. In  contrast, balanced relationships lead to increased positive interactions that will lead to strengthening dyadic ties, and new positive ties. Therefore, SNO will function better with greater balance.  A balance metric is suggested in Equation 1. 
  (1) Here 
 donates the number of balanced interactions (i.e ., triadic balanced interactions in Heider style analysis) in SNO while 
donates the total number of interactions in the whole SNO.  3.2. Cohesion Cohesion is another important property for organizati ons as well as societies [5]. For an organization, cohesion is produced by repeated interactions in the gr oup to measures triadic closure in a sociogram that is a graph or any other measures (aka, clustering coefficient).  Definition 2: The cohesion of the organization can be reach by frequent connections among the agents through bonding or bridging. Cohesion can be measured with 1) a bonding metric [13]. Bonding measure in SNO is proportional to social capital. 
   (2) In equation 2, 
 is the length of total vectors ( ) that has been formed through the agents’ connections (i.e. triangle paths in the graph,) and 
is the length of two paths ( . 2) When the group size is large enough to have disparate units, it becomes important for an organization to have connections among 121  Saad Alqithami and Henry Hexmoor  /  AASRI Procedia   4  ( 2013 )  118 – 124 
these units measured by the bridging metric 3. 
   (3) Here, 
is the betweenness measure that is averaged over all agents. Betweenness is the number of shortest paths from all vertices to all others that pass through that agent [13]. It can be calculated for the agent 
using the following expression, where is starting point, is ending point of the network and is the number of those paths that pass through
: 
   (4) 3.3. Spontaneity Actions of an organization are largely in response to interactions with sources outside the organizations that are external stimuli (i.e., reactions denoted with
) where the organization attempts to achieve its goals with actions.  However, a proportion of actions are stri ctly generated from internal decision making relying on internal interactions (i.e., internal actions denoted with
).  Definition 3: Spontaneity property a SNO lies in its propensity to initiate unprovoked actions. We take this to mean the SNO is generating internal initiative and plans to promote independent agenda. Spontaneity metric (i.e.,
) is suggested that measures the ratio of internally provoked actions over all actions in the organization. All networked organiza tions may exhibit spontaneity as the need arise. 
    (5) The use of these properties is beneficial to refine study the SNO. However, each one of them has different characteristics that have to be identified in order to be measured inside the organization. The structure of the organization may change depending on the different percentage they have that differ from 0 to 1, on which it has a huge impact. We discuss more about these measurements in the following section. 4. Functionality of the Parameterization  After proposing the three main qualities of interests, we  simplify the functionalities of them by exemplify their effect on the organization. The following, Fi gure 2, will present more description.   
Figure 2. The notion of capturing three key properties, with the maximal or near-maximal values of their associated parameters 
In Figure 2a, presents a structure where the social harmony is highest among the agents, which we presented as network nodes. The positive or negative signs present the type of social harmony whether balanced or not-balanced. We assume that the social ha rmony is equal to 1 when the network is balanced, as exemplified in our earlier discussion. Figure 2b shows tw o types of cohesion, where the solid line presents the bridging and in contrast the dashes present the bonding. The cohesion is equal to 1 when the organization has a fair amount of interactions whether inside through bonding or with outside the organization through a. Social harmon y =1 b. Cohesion =1 c. Spontaneit y =1+
++ +--122   Saad Alqithami and Henry Hexmoor  /  AASRI Procedia   4  ( 2013 )  118 – 124 
bridging. Spontaneity, as in Figure 2c, links different type of agents who may behave irrationally, where the different shapes in the graph state the different kinds of agents, actions, or future interest. It can be satisfied and presented by 1 when any of the agents link with another type. All these qualities of interest differentiate from 0 (minimum) to 1 (maximum). Any organization may reach the maximum value when it is in the full functionality of these qualities of interests.  The SNO has been deliberated here since the leadership does not have a huge impact of its functionality. In fact, leadership and connections are inversely related to many open social environments, Equation 6. 
   (6) Thus, leadership affects more than the social harmony  among the agent to further impacts the cohesion of the organization. Spontaneity indicates that separate agents may have implicit communications with one another indirectly based on shared affinities or interest.  In various ways, these parameters help to measure the social capital discussed next. 5. Social Capital Social capital (SC) in the network can be defined as the cooperative nature of agents who belong to myriad networked organizations who operate independently yet in  unison from their organizational origins when they perform actions together. In other words, it can be characterized as the collocated or virtual collaboration to produce successful outcomes and successful connections [2]. There are two major perspectives on SC in networks. In the macroscopic perspective, SC for the entir e network is considered. In this view individuals do not incrementally add to the system or withdraw units of  SC. Instead, the foci are on the system principles like norms and conventions that provide resources for over all social welfare.  In contrast, the microscopic perspective, adopted here, explores how individuals can gain access to resources by their positions and connections in the network.  Definition 4: Social capital in a link is measured from accumulation of positive values of social flow and  trust plus abundance of communication over the common topic of SNO. At this point we treat all three attributes equally. The previous definition captured a few main elements of the SC, which have a proportional relationship to one another.  Topologically speaking, high bonding rates provide more opportunities for interaction and growth of social capital. However, network structure by itself is inadequate for determination of SC. We must examine the contents of interaction and dispositions th at create social forces that attract or repel individuals. At the level of a single link, the nature of social flow in the link leads to accumulation of SC. Social flows can be benevolent and positive or negative and lack benevolence. Whereas positive flow leads to net positive gain in SC, negative flow leads to loss of SC. Apart from  social flow; dyadic ties may harbor trust or promote distrust [6]. Trust supports SC whereas distrust er odes SC. If the topic of interaction between the pair is centered on the main problem for the SNO, that link pos itively contributes to SC. In sum, flow, trust, and topic are link attributes that are proportional determinants for SC.  6. Related work There have been numerous discussions of network qu alities for organizations [12][3]. Although relevant to qualities we discuss herein, much of literatures prior to 2010 are applicable to human organizations and there is no clear migration connection to online organizations targeted by us. Social networks can be considered as a useful tool to describe the interaction in online organizations. Online organizations typically connect with each other through different types of ties that in sequence will affect the social capital of each one of them.  There are two types of connections among the agents, wh ich are implicit and explicit. Implicit affinities 123  Saad Alqithami and Henry Hexmoor  /  AASRI Procedia   4  ( 2013 )  118 – 124 
can be seen inside the organization where the member ha s more than one interest to share. However, if any of those members has a connection with any other me mbers of another organization, this connection will immediately be considered as explicit affinities, as pr oposed by [11]. These types of connections have studies various social networks structures. Even though bondin g and bridging must exist together or not at all, bonding, however, refers to homogeneous clusters while  bridging refers to heterogeneous clusters. Bonding helps to enlarge the organization to have more focus of the attentions and to oversimplify the efforts. Conversely, bridging helps the organization to further exte nsion of the organization to be able to reach more others in order to take advantage of on jointly valuable collaboration. Macindoe and Richards [8] propose three features of leadership, bonding, and diversity to compare organizations for their network topology. They called it “the network’s fine structure”. To judge the similarities between networks, they developed a tech nique of graph edit-distance to explore the use of hierarchical clustering on several networks based on a variety of sources including social interaction data. In interaction, the distance among agents can affect co operation and persuasion negatively. These problems can be overcome by successive connections among the agents. The effect on the agents’ sociality is the combination of the ties among them as well as both physical and sequential distance [
4]. Thus, the interaction style can affect the outcome performance and process in the organization.  7. Conclusion In open environments, such as the environments envisioned for SNO, agents are integrated dynamically across their organizational and geographical boundaries, to justify each other needs. Thus, SNO model should adapt dynamically to changing circumstances by improving the social harmony, coherence and spontaneity to encounter both agents and organization goal. In light of this, the paper has been argued that the agents amalgamate better in the SNO while in traditional organizations lack the potential power to adopt some of these properties of interaction. In particular, such agents must be able to assess these measurements with their peers, so that they will maintain a sense of continuity toward the goal of their organization. References [1] Alqithami, S. and Hexmoor, H. (2012a), Spontaneous organizations: Collaborative computing model of a networked organization, In the 8th Int. Conf. on Collaborative Computing: Networking, Applications and Worksharing, 643-650.  [2] Alqithami, S. and Hexmoor, H. (2012b). Social Capital in Virtual Organizations, In the 4th International Conference on Intelligent Networking and Collaborative Systems, pp. 682-687, Bucharest, Romania. [3] Anderson, Brigham S., Carter Butts & Kathleen M. Carley, (1999). The Interaction of Size and Density with Graph-Level Measures” to Social Networks . In Social Networks. 21: 239-267, Springer. [4] Bradner, E., & Mark, G. (2002). Why distance matters: effects on cooperation, persuasion and deception. In the 2002 ACM conference on Computer supported cooperative work , 226-235. [5] Chidester, D., Dexter, P., James, W., (2004).  What Holds Us Together: Social Cohesion in South Africa, Human Sciences Research Council. [6] Fukuyama, F. (1995). Social capital and the Global Economy, in Foreign Affairs, vol. 74, No. 5, pp. 89-103. [7] Heider, F. (1958). The Psychology of Interpersonal Relation. John Wiley & Sons.     [8] Macindoe, O., Richards, W. (2011). Comparing networks using their fine structure, In Int. J. Social Computing and Cyber-Physical Systems, Vol. 1, No. 1. [9] Newman, M. E. J. (2003). The structure and function of complex networks, SIAM Review, Vol. 45, 124   Saad Alqithami and Henry Hexmoor  /  AASRI Procedia   4  ( 2013 )  118 – 124 
pp.167–256. [10] Richards, W. and Wormald, N. (2009). Representing small group evolution, In IEEE Conf. on Social Comp., p.232. [11] Smith, M., (2008). Social Capital in Online Communities, in PIKM 2008: pp.17-24. [12] Tichy, N. and Fombrun, C. (1981). Network Analys is in Organizational Settings, In Human Relations, 32(11), 923-965, Sage Pub. 
[13] Wasserman, S. and Faust, K. (1994). Social Network Analysis: Methods and Applications, C ambridge Univ. Press. 