Recent advances in emerging techniques for non-destructive detection ofseed viability: A review
Yu Xiaa,b,e, Yunfei Xua,J i a n g b oL ia,b,c,d, Chi Zhanga,b,c,d,S h u x i a n gF a na,b,c,d,⁎
aBeijing Research Center of Intelligent Equipment for Agriculture, Beijing 100097, China
bNational Research Center of Intelligent Equipment for Agriculture, Beijing 100097, China
cKey Laboratory of Agri-informatics, Ministry of Agriculture, Beijing 100097, China
dBeijing Key Laboratory of Intelligent Equipment Technology for Agriculture, Beijing 100097, China
eCollege of Mechanical and Electronic Engineering, Northwest A&F University, Yangling, Shaanxi 712100, China
abstract article info
Article history:Received 17 April 2019Received in revised form 10 May 2019Accepted 10 May 2019Available online 15 May 2019Over the past decades, imaging and spectroscopy techniques have been developed rapidly with widespread ap-plications in non-destructive agro-food quality determination. Seeds are one of the most fundamental elementsof agriculture and forestry. Seed viability is of great signi ﬁcance in seed quality characteristics re ﬂecting potential seed germination, and there is a great need for a quick and effective method to determine the germination con-dition and viability of seeds prior to cultivate, sale and plant. Some researches based on spectra and/or image pro-cessing and analysis have been explored in terms of the external and internal quality of a variety of seeds. Manyattempts have been made in image segmentation and spectra correction methods to predict seed quality usingvarious traditional and novel methods. This review focuses on the comparative introduction, development andapplications of emerging techniques in the analysis of seed viability, in particular, near infrared spectroscopy,hyperspectral and multispectral imaging, Raman spectroscopy, infrared thermography, and soft X-ray imagingmethods. The basic theories, principle components, relative chemometric processing, analytical methods andprediction accuracies are reported and compared. Additionally, on the foundation of the observed applications,the technical challenges and future outlook for these emerging techniques are also discussed.© 2019 The Authors. Publishing services by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of KeAi Communications Co. Ltd. This is an openaccess article under the CC BY-NC-ND license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ ).
Keywords:Seed viabilityNIRHyperspectral imagingRaman spectroscopyInfrared thermographySoft X-ray imaging
Contents1 . I n t r o d u c t i o n ............................................................... 3 52 . E m e r g i n g t e c h n o l o g i e s.......................................................... 3 62 . 1 . N e a r i n f r a r e d s p e c t r o s c o p y ..................................................... 3 62 . 2 . H y p e r s p e c t r a l a n d m u l t i s p e c t r a l i m a g i n g ............................................... 3 72 . 3 . R a m a n s p e c t r o s c o p y ........................................................ 4 12 . 4 . I n f r a r e d t h e r m o g r a p h y ....................................................... 4 22 . 5 . X - r a y i m a g i n g ........................................................... 4 43 . T e c h n i c a l c h a l l e n g e s a n d t r e n d s...................................................... 4 64 . C o n c l u s i o n s............................................................... 4 6A c k n o w l e d g e m e n t s.............................................................. 4 6R e f e r e n c e s.................................................................. 4 6
1. IntroductionSeeds are one of the most fundamental elements of agriculture andforestry asﬁeld establishment of grain, vegetable, fruit, forage cropsand economic forest crops, which are usually performed with the director indirect use of seeds. Seed quality has a profound effect on the unifor-mity of development, yield and quality of the harvested product.Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 1 (2019) 35 –47
⁎Corresponding author at: Beijing Research Center of Intelligent Equipment forAgriculture, Beijing 100097, China.E-mail address:fanshuxiang@outlook.com(S. Fan).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aiia.2019.05.0012589-7217/© 2019 The Authors. Publishing services by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of KeAi Communications Co. Ltd. This is an open access article under the C C BY-NC-ND license (http:// creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ ).
Contents lists available atScienceDirect
Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture
journal homepage:http://www.keaipublishing.com/en/journals/artificial-intelligence-in-agriculture/Moreover, the safety and quality of seeds and their products directly af-fect human health (Huang et al., 2015;Rahman and Cho, 2016). Seed vigor is more promising in seed quality characteristic re ﬂecting poten- tial seed germination,ﬁeld emergence, resistance to biotic and abioticstress, and seed storage ability under different conditions than standardgermination (Sun et al., 2007). Moreover, it is well known that seedswith preferable viability would be proﬁtable to seed industries by obtaining considerable yield for cultivators and reducing crop variabil-ity. At the same time, seed dealers or companies could bene ﬁtf r o m seeds with promoted viability via a series of higher quality products. In-ternational Seed Testing Association (ISTA) de ﬁned seed vigor as:“seed vigor is the sum of those properties that determine the activity and per-formance of seed lots of acceptable germination in a wide range of envi-ronments; a vigorous seed lot is one that is potentially able to performwell under environmental conditions which are not optimal for the spe-cies”. The high-vigor seeds germinate uniformly, rapidly and grow moreresistant seedlings, then betterﬁeld performance and higher yield arereasonably hopeful (Marcos Filho, 2015). Currently, conventional methods including standard germination test, electrical conductivitytest, seedling growth test, accelerated aging test, cold test and tetrazo-lium have been proposed and applied for the evaluation of seed vigor.However, those methods are usually non-automated, time-consuming,destructive and/or require specialized training and experience. Thus,they are not suitable for large-scale application or compatible with en-dangered species conservation. Therefore, non-invasive and high-throughput screening methods are urgently needed for seed industryto provide high-vigor seeds for farmers before sowing.In the recent decades, great advances in computer, material and elec-tronic technologies have led to the remarkable improvement of optical-based and image-based systems available of evaluating qualities indexesrapidly and accurately on the static and dynamic or online grading equip-ment with less labor force (Gowen et al., 2007). Optical-based and image- based detection systems are of great indispensability in the agro-foodquality determination coupled with satisﬁed reliability and accuracy by removing the instability and inconsistency via human intervention ( Du and Sun, 2004;Elmasry et al., 2012). Speciﬁcally, optical-based or image-based techniques, including computer vision, spectral imaging,near-infrared spectroscopy and other relatively emerging techniques,have been well trained and widely utilized towards fruits and vegetablessorting equipment for non-destructive quality assessment and grading(Elmasry et al., 2012;Huang et al., 2008;Hussain et al., 2018;Lorente et al., 2012;ElMasry and Nakauchi, 2016;Nicolaï et al., 2007;Xia et al., 2019;Zhang et al., 2018a). However, studies and applications towardsseeds are correspondingly few using techniques stated above. Althoughsome emerging techniques are utilized for feasibility exploration, thereis an obvious trend that more emerging techniques are also applied focus-ing on the determination quality indexes of seeds, such as Raman spec-troscopy, infrared thermography, X-ray imaging.In fact, seed vigor is an interaction of characteristics and many fac-tors are involved in the composition and manifestation of seed vigor,such as genetic constitution, environment during seed development,and storage (
Rahman and Cho, 2016), hindering the establishment of ap r e c i s ed eﬁnition of seed vigor (Sun et al., 2007). Therefore, most re- searchers focused on the detection of seed viability instead of seedvigor based on emerging non-destructive techniques, such as near infra-red (NIR) spectroscopy, hyperspectral imaging (HSI) or multispectralimaging (MSI), Raman spectroscopy (RS), infrared thermography(IRT), and soft X-ray imaging. Hence, the applications and trends ofthese techniques in seed viability detection were reviewed in this paper.2. Emerging technologies2.1. Near infrared spectroscopyNear infrared (NIR) spectroscopy is based on the absorption of elec-tromagnetic radiation at wavelengths in the range of 780 –2500 nm(Huang et al., 2008;Nicolaï et al., 2007). While the radiation penetrates agricultural and forest products, their spectral characteristics changethrough wavelength dependent scattering and absorption processes.The tissue structures of products made up of the cells and intra/extracel-lular environments are responsible for the scattering. The absorption ismainly caused by C\\H, O\\H, and N\\H bonds of the main compounds (water, sugars, chlorophylls, carotenoids, etc.). NIR spectra comprisebroad wave bands arising from overlapping absorptions correspondingmainly to overtones and combinations of these chemical bonds, makingit feasible to detect organic and biological materials.Radiation interacting with a sample may be absorbed, transmitted orreﬂected. Specular reﬂection is caused by a smooth surface, while dif-fuse reﬂection is due to a rough surface. Both reﬂection ways provide only information about the surface of samples. Scattering depends onthe size, shape and microstructure of the particles, affecting the inten-sity level of the reﬂected spectrum, while the absorption process affectsthe shape of the reﬂected spectrum. Thus, there are different NIR spec-troscopy measurement modesﬁtting different applications (Nicolaï et al., 2007). The common modes are diffuse reﬂectance and transmit- tance for seed quality measurement ( Fig. 1). In reﬂectance mode, light source and detector are mounted under a speci ﬁc angle to avoid specu- lar reﬂection. The structure of this mode is relatively simple and easy toestablish. However, it can generally obtain the super ﬁcial spectral infor- mation (about 1–2 cm thickness) of samples and is easily affected bystray light. In transmittance mode the light source is positioned oppo-site to the detector. In the wavelength range of 1100 –2500 nm, the amount of scattering makes the path length so high that the transmit-tance of most samples passing through about 1 cm thickness whichcan be negligible (Huang et al., 2008). This mode can easily acquire the internal spectral information with penetration light through sam-ples, but the requirement of sensitivity in charge coupled devices(CCD) in spectrometers is pretty high and light sources with higherpower are also demanded (Xia et al., 2018). However, the fundamental vibrations of these bonds yield absorp-tion peaks in the visible and near infrared (Vis/NIR) regions that arebroad and overlapping, making the Vis/NIR spectra with complex mix-tures hard to interpret. In addition, NIR spectra are 10 to 100 timesweaker than their corresponding fundamental mid-infrared absorptionbands (Fu and Ying, 2016). Therefore, the analytical informationcontained in NIR spectra is hard to explain and select because of its mul-tivariate nature, and it is impossible to distinguish the very slight spec-tral differences between samples. In order to extract useful informationfrom vast amounts of spectral data speedily and ef ﬁciently, advanced chemometric algorithms are needed to extract information by notonly data preprocessing but also quantitative or qualitative analysis asexpected.It is necessary to preprocess the spectral data to remove any irrele-vant information and improve calibration model performance. Spectralpretreatment methods such as spectralﬁltering, smoothing, normaliza- tion, mean centering, auto scaling, baseline offset correction (BOC), ﬁrst and second derivative, Fourier transform (FT), wavelet transform (WT),orthogonal signal correction (OSC), standard normal variate (SNV), andmultiplicative scatter correction (MSC) are commonly utilized. The pre-treatment methods based on spectra are an art and can be found in pre-vious studies (Engel et al., 2013;Nicolaï et al., 2007). Multivariate regression techniques (quantitative analysis) aim at es-tablishing a relationship between the observed response values andspectral data (Nicolaï et al., 2007). Multiple linear regression (MLR) isthe simplest regression analysis technique, in which the response is ap-proximated by a linear combination of the spectral values at each singlewavelength. However, it might work badly if there are more variablesthan samples. In addition, MLR models typically perform worse due tothe high co-linearity of spectra, which might easily lead to over- ﬁtting and loss of robustness of calibration models ( Saranwong et al., 2001). Principal component analysis (PCA) regression uses a small number ofprincipal components (PCs) instead of the original variables as36 Y. Xia et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 1 (2019) 35 –47predictors toﬁt a MLR model (Naes et al., 2002). Partial least squares (PLS) regression is the most widely used regression method comparedto other multivariate methods. Unlike MLR, PLS can be used to analyzedata with strongly collinear (correlated), noisy and redundant variables(Cozzolino et al., 2009). As one of the nonlinear regression techniques,support vectors regression (SVR) has been demonstrated with a verygood performance mainly due to its great immunity to the presence ofoutliers and tolerance to spectral noise in NIR data sets. Arti ﬁcial neural networks (ANN), least squares-support vector machines (LS-SVM) canbe also employed to deal with non-linear relationships between vari-ables. Regarding the development of classi ﬁcation and identiﬁcation methods based on NIR spectroscopy, spectral data have been mostlyprocessed by many well-known qualitative multivariate methods,such as K-nearest neighbor (KNN), linear discriminant analysis (LDA),soft independent modeling of class analogy (SIMCA), partial leastsquares-discriminant analysis (PLS-DA), support vector machine(SVM), etc.Modern spectrometers usually possess high resolution with hun-dreds or thousands of spectral variables including collinearity, redun-dancies, and noise, thus, this situation increases the complexity ofcalibration model built with full range of spectra, and hinders the com-puting speed (Fan et al., 2019). The models built using full spectra arenot suitable for on-line or real-time detection in a rapid and non-destructive manner due to the fact that the calibration process is time-consuming with heavy pressure in computing and data transmission.In addition, the irrelevant information within spectra would negativelyaffect the accuracy and robustness of model ( Li et al., 2014). Therefore, a large number of variable selection methods have been proposed duringthe last decades, such as competitive adaptive reweighted sampling(CARS), interval random frog (iRF), Monte Carlo-uninformative variableelimination (MC-UVE), etc. Infromative variable selection or wave-length selection plays an important role in the quantitative analysis ofspectral data. The details of variable selection methods can be found inprevious studies (Mehmood et al., 2012;Yun et al., 2019). NIR spectroscopy has been successfully employed in the qualityevaluation of natural resources, such as fruits, vegetables, crops, treesand their seeds (Pasquini, 2018). In recent years, it has been widely ex-plored to detect seed viability (Table 1) and the diffuse reﬂection is the most commonly used mode. The viability of soybean seeds were deter-mined using Fourier transform near-infrared (FT-NIR) spectroscopy(Kusumaningrum et al., 2018). A total of 200 soybean seeds were artiﬁ- cially aged (non-viable) by vacuuming intact seeds in plastic bags andaging by incubation for 9 days in a water bath maintained at 42 °Cwith about 100% relative humidity. The other 200 seeds were set as nor-mal seeds (viable). The reﬂectance spectrum of each seed was acquiredwith illumination focused directly on the germ point using a speci ﬁc sample holder with a hole in the center ( Fig. 2a). The sample holder was designed with suitable size and shape for soybean seeds ( Fig. 2b). There were some major spectral differences between viable and non-viable seeds in 1000–1900 nm (Fig. 2d), in which the spectra for viable soybean seeds had a lower reﬂectance than those of non-viable ones. Aclassiﬁcation model based on PLS-DA method was built to classify viableand non-viable seeds. The variable importance in projection (VIP)method for variable selection combined with PLS-DA was employed. Fi-nally, 146 optimal variables out of full set with 1557 variables were se-lected. The results demonstrated that FT-NIR spectral analysis with PLS-
DA method based on all variables or the selected variables showed agood performance with an accuracy of nearly 100%. FT-NIR was testi ﬁed to be a stable and potential method for measuring soybean seed viabilityrapidly.FT-NIR spectroscopy with a PLS-DA classiﬁcation method could also correctly classify viable and non-viable corn seeds with a high accuracyof 100% (Ambrose et al., 2016b), and pepper seeds with accuracy of90.5% for validation set (Seo et al., 2016). A supervised classiﬁcation method called extended canonical variates analysis (ECVA) was ex-plored to predict seeds viability by NIR spectroscopy. The effect of thenumber of seeds in a training sample set on the ability to predict the vi-ability of cabbage or radish seeds was discussed ( Shetty et al., 2011). The results showed that 200 seeds were optimal in a calibration setfor both cabbage and radish data. This conclusion was similar to the mis-classiﬁcation rate obtained using all seeds in calibration set and effec-tively enhanced the cost-effectiveness of NIR spectral analysis. Themisclassiﬁcation rates at optimal sample size were 6% for cabbage and2% for radish, respectively. NIR spectroscopy with proper classi ﬁcation method had also been studied to identify tomato ( Shrestha et al., 2017)a n dJuniperus polycarpos(Daneshvar et al., 2015)w i t ha c c u r a c i e s of more than 90%.2.2. Hyperspectral and multispectral imagingHyperspectral imaging (HSI) system, integrates both spectroscopicand imaging techniques into one system to get a set of monochromaticimages at almost continuous hundreds of wavelengths. This integratedsystem combines NIR spectroscopy and digital imaging to give
Fig. 1.Setup for the acquisition of NIR re ﬂectance (a) and transmittance (b) spectra of seeds.37 Y. Xia et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 1 (2019) 35 –47information about the spatial distribution of compounds. Therefore, HSIsystem creates three-dimensional (3D) “hypercube”datasets composed of two spatial dimensions and a single spectral dimension. In general,point scanning, line scanning and area scanning approaches are threecommonly used modes to acquire hyperspectral image ( Zhang et al., 2014). As the most widespread application type, hyperspectral re ﬂec- tance imaging is carried out in Vis/NIR (400 –1000 nm) or NIR (1000–2500 nm) range to detect defects, contaminants, and quality at-tributes of fruits, vegetables and seeds ( Nicolaï et al., 2014). HSI experiments usually involve three different modules: (I) imageacquisition and image pre-processing, (II) data extraction and datatreatment, (III) data modeling and image post-processing. These typicalmodules are illustrated in theﬂowchart ofFig. 3(ElMasry and Nakauchi, 2016).Theﬁrst step in this module is the acquisition of a high-qualityhyperspectral image by utilizing ideal acquisition parameters, includingmotor speed, exposure time, and object distance. Due to the differencesin camera quantum efﬁciency, the uncorrected radiance may not be thesame, even when HSI system is imaging the same target under the samecondition. Thus, original hyperspectral images need to be corrected toeliminate the inﬂuence (Gowen et al., 2007). Under the same system parameters as the sample image acquisition, the white reference(R
white) is captured by a standard whiteboard with a re ﬂectance of ap- proximately 99.9%, and then the dark reference image ( R
dark)i so b - tained with the lamps turned off and optical lens completely coveredby its cap (Yu et al., 2014). The corrected images (R) are calculated ac- cording to Eq.(1):R¼
Rraw−R dark
Rwhite−R darkð1ÞwhereR
rawrepresents the original hyperspectral image and Rrepre- sents the calibrated image. The calibrated image can be then used forfurther data processing and analyzing.In order to obtain regions of interest (ROIs), which represent differ-ent quality features in the corrected image, segmentation is essentiallyconducted to identify different clustered objects in the image for appro-priate selection of ROIs, classifying objects in the image or buildingimage masks for subsequent analyses on each. The most commonlyemployed method of segmentation is the thresholding by selecting aproper threshold value. Spectral information of the imaged samplethat represents its physicochemical properties could be extracted di-rectly from ROIs. In the most circumstances, the extracted spectraldata contain some noise and variability, if the extracted data showsome problems owing to low signal-to-noise ratio, the data could bepreprocessed to reduce noise using preprocessing methods statedabove, followed by the quantitative or qualitative multivariate analysis.The long acquisition time, required to collect high-dimensionalhyperspectral images, leads to considerable challenges to real-time in-spections. This limits the HSI technology to commercialized packinglines which require a fast speed. As a result, HSI is always applied tooff-line applications to select optimal wavelengths performed to formmultispectral images. A multispectral imaging (MSI) system aims at ac-quiring spatial and spectral information that is directly useful for a spe-ciﬁc application. It only captures images at the selected wavelengths(usually about 10 discrete wavelengths), thus this extensively reducesthe total data volume and improves the processing speed and ef ﬁciency. Rather than using opticalﬁber probes to obtain average concentrationsof sundry quality attributes at local regions of agricultural samples,hyperspectral or multispectral imaging systems have the capability toobtain the classiﬁcation map or visualize the distribution of these attri-butes across the whole sample. The application of HSI or MSI has beenreported in the identiﬁcation of viable seed in the decades.Viability of grains including barley, wheat and sorghum was investi-gated byMcGoverin et al. (2011)with near-infrared hyperspectral im-aging technique. The prediction of viable and non-viable proportionsusing PLS-DA may not be accurate but correlated well with the viableproportion proved using the tetrazolium test. The classi ﬁcation of corn seeds based on their viabilities using HSI was explored by Wakholi et al. (2018). In this study, 600 corn samples were selected, and half ofthem were treated using microwave heat treatment while the rest sam-ples were kept as the control group. HSI data of all the samples werethen collected using a NIR HSI system with a range of 1000 –2500 nm (Fig. 4). During data collection, the samples were placed on the con-veyor belt, irrespective of whether the germinal or the opposite sideof each kernel was facing the camera. The re ﬂectance spectra of the seeds in the treated group were generally higher than those of non-treated corn samples, this was because that the chemical compositionTable 1Overview of applications using emerging technologies to detect seed viability.No. Seed(s) Method(s) Classi ﬁer(s) Result(s) Reference1 Corn FT-NIR PLS-DA 100% Ambrose et al. (2016b) 2 Soybean FT-NIR PLS-DA 100% Kusumaningrum et al. (2018) 3 Pepper FT-NIR PLS-DA 90.5% Seo et al. (2016) 4 Cabbage NIR ECVA 94% Shetty et al. (2011) 5 Radish NIR ECVA 98% Shetty et al. (2011) 6Juniperus polycarpos NIR PLS-DA 98% Daneshvar et al. (2015) 7 Tomato NIR iPLS-DA 93.71% Shrestha et al. (2017) 8 Barley/wheat/sorghum NIR HSI PLS-DA –McGoverin et al. (2011) 9 Corn NIR HSI PLS-DA 100% Wakholi et al. (2018) 10 Muskmelon NIR HSI PLS-DA 94.6% Kandpal et al. (2016) 11 Pepper Vis/NIR HSI PLS-DA 100% Mo et al. (2014) 12 Wheat Vis/NIR HSI SVM, PLS-DA 88.1%, 89.5% Zhang et al. (2018b) 13 Castor MSI Normalized canonical DA 96% Olesen et al. (2015) 14 Spinach Vis/NIR MSI PLS-DA 60% –76%Shetty et al. (2012) 15 Norway spruce Vis/NIR, NIR HSI SVM 83%, N93.3%Dumont et al. (2015) 16 Corn Vis/NIR, NIR HSI PLS-DA 74.4 –95.6%,82.2–95.60%Ambrose et al. (2016b)17 Soybean NIR HSI PLS-DA N95%Baek et al. (2019) 18 Tomato Vis/NIR HSI PLS-DA 90.48% Peng et al. (2018) 19 Pepper RS PLS-DA 94.4% Seo et al. (2016) 20 Corn RS PCA, PLS-DA 93 –100%Ambrose et al. (2016b) 21 Pea IRT SVM 95%, 91.67% Men et al. (2017) 22 Garden pea/wheat/rape IRT NetLogo –Kranner et al. (2010) 23 Lettuce IRT –– Kim et al. (2013) 24 Pepper IRT Pixel-based regression analysis –Kim et al. (2014) 25 Muskmelon Soft X-ray imaging LDA 98.9% Ahmed et al. (2018)38 Y. Xia et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 1 (2019) 35 –47of corn seeds was altered during heat treatment process (denaturizationof proteins, gelatinization of starch, lipid saturation, moisture reduction,etc.). Therefore, the less light was absorbed which meant that more re-ﬂectance was exhibited. Three classiﬁcation methods, LDA, PLS-DA, and SVM, coupled with some preprocessing methods were tested to deter-mine the most suitable method among them. The SVM model exhibitedthe highest accuracies among all models with 100%, 100%, and 98% forwhite, purple, and yellow corn seeds, respectively. The model also pro-ducedﬂawless classiﬁcation images, suggesting that hyperspectral im-aging can be used to classify corn based on viability accurately.A viability evaluation method for pepper seeds based on Vis/NIR wasproposed byMo et al. (2014). The application of images based on PLS-DA model withﬁrst-order derivative of a 31.5 nm gap for red LED illumi-nation (600–700 nm) yielded 100% discrimination accuracy for both vi-able and non-viable seeds. An algorithm of image acquisition andcharacteristic identiﬁcation and classiﬁcation of tomato seeds was pro- posed based on HSI and image processing technology. The characteristicwavelengths, including 535, 577, 595, 654, 684, 713, 744, 768, 809 and840 nm for tomato seed viability were acquired by SPA. The imagesunder above characteristic wavelengths were preprocessed to gain theseed eigen values including area, circularity and average grey. The clas-siﬁcation thresholds were calculated according to eigen values and vi-tality results of calibration set based on statistical regularity.Classiﬁcation accuracy of calibration and validation sets was above85% in eight characteristics wavelengths. 713 nm grey scale imagegave the best result with calibration and validation set accuracy of93.75% and 90.48%, respectively (Peng et al., 2018). Viable and non- viable soybean seeds were distinguished using a NIR HSI techniqueand a PLS-DA classiﬁcation model built based on seven optimalwavebands selected by VIP with the accuracy of over 95% ( Baek et al., 2019). Vis/NIR (400–1000 nm) and NIR HSI (1000 –2500 nm) tech- niques were compared to identify the seed viability of Norway spruce(Dumont et al., 2015) and corn (Ambrose et al., 2016a). The results in- dicated that the Vis/NIR range was not as informative as NIR rangewith respect to seed viability sorting.Although the application of MSI technique is carried out in seed via-bility determination, there are much fewer studies reported than HSI.The ultimate purpose of using HSI systems is to establish a MSI systemas an essential part of a computer-integrated machine vision systemfor different on-line applications (Sendin et al., 2018). As MSI system is equipped with fewer spectral channels, this means shorter acquisitionand processing time than HSI system. In general, fewer characteristicwavelengths make great efforts to faster sensor systems and shorter col-lection time (ElMasry et al., 2019). The viability prediction of castorseeds was explored using MSI technique ( Olesen et al., 2015). The spec- tral imaging system was a VideometerLab instrument, which consisted
Fig. 2.Schematic of FT-NIR spectroscopy (a), single seed holder (b), raw spectra of soybean seeds (c) and average spectra of viable and non-viable seeds in sp ectral range of 1000–1900 nm (d) (Kusumaningrum et al., 2018).39 Y. Xia et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 1 (2019) 35 –47of a 5-mega pixel charge-coupled device (CCD) camera, mounted insidethe top of an integrating sphere and coated with highly white and dif-fusing paint. The illumination set was consisted of 19 narrowbandhigh-power LEDs ranging from 375 to 970 nm placed at the rim to en-sure a uniform and diffuse illumination of the sample at the bottomport of sphere reﬂection (Fig. 5). In order to minimize the distance to
Fig. 3.Modules involved in acquiring, processing and analyzing hyperspectral images and spectral data ( ElMasry and Nakauchi, 2016).
Fig. 4.The NIR HSI prototype used for corn seeds viability inspection ( Wakholi et al., 2018).40 Y. Xia et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 1 (2019) 35 –47achieve observations within the seed color classes and maximize thedifferences between classes, the multispectral images were transformedusing normalized canonical discriminant analysis (nCDA). A speci ﬁed feature (Region MSI mean) combined with nCDA, which can calculatea trimmed mean of MSI transformed pixel values within each singleseed, was employed and viable seeds were distinguished from deadseeds with accuracy of 92%. This model resulted in 96% correct classi ﬁ- cation of seeds for validation set.Moreover, a HSI or MSI system was also utilized to try to predict seedvigor in terms of germination periods or germ length. Kandpal et al. (2016)reported the vigor determination of muskmelon seeds usingNIR HSI. The samples were artiﬁcially aged to obtain seeds with differ-ent viability and vigor. The spectra of seeds with 3 and 5 germinationdays and non-geminate seeds were used for development of a PLS-DAclassiﬁcation model. The model yielded the highest classi ﬁcation accu- racy of 94.6% for a validation set based on 18 wavelengths selected byselectivity ratio (SR). The possibility of using PLS-DA on feature extrac-tion from multispectral images of spinach seeds to detect seed vigor interms of germ length was investigated ( Shetty et al., 2012). Images of 300 seeds including small, medium, and large seeds were studied, andthe seeds were examined for germ length. The results indicated thatlarger seeds had both a signiﬁcantly higher germination potential andgerm length compared with smaller ones. The classi ﬁcation accuracies of validation set for seed vigor according to germ length were 60%,76%, and 68% for the small, medium, and large seeds, respectively. Theresults indicated that larger spinach seeds had not only higher germina-tion potential, but also bigger germ length compared with smallerseeds.2.3. Raman spectroscopyRaman spectroscopy (RS) is a form of analytical spectroscopy basedon Raman scattering, which was discovered by C.V. Raman in 1928. Ac-cording to the principle that vibrational frequencies are speci ﬁct o molecule's chemical bonds and symmetry, Raman peaks are typicallyobvious in most cases, which provideﬁngerprints to identify molecules and make the analysis of chemical compositions more precise ( Yang et al., 2018). However, due to the fact that technologies for detectingRaman scattering effects and strong light sources were not developedsufﬁciently, there were few applications of RS initially. Fortunately, RSwas found to be widely applied with the development of relative tech-nologies in the recent decade (Li-Chan et al., 1994). RS can achieve ex- tremely high detection sensitivity in various applications, such asquality evaluation of meat andﬁsh (Herrero, 2008), detection of bacte- ria (Lee et al., 2017;Lu et al., 2011), ingredients prediction of agricul-tural products (Kizil et al., 2002;Lee et al., 2013), classiﬁcation of oil and fat (Baeten et al., 1998), viability evaluation of seed (Ambrose et al., 2016b;Seo et al., 2016), etc. The advantages of RS techniquesover conventional methods in detecting seed viability include rapidity,robustness, high accuracy and non-invasiveness.Fig. 6a shows a RS system used to capture and analyze the scatteringsignals of pepper (Capsicum annuumL.) seeds for viability assessment
(Seo et al., 2016). The Raman spectrometer (Raman workstation™,K a i - ser Optical Systems Inc., Ann Arbor, MI, USA) consisted of a diode laserand a CCD detector with a resolution of 0.3 cm
−1. The diode laser wave- length was 785 nm, and the CCD had a holographic transmission gratingthat enabled the scanning of a plate with 96 square wells. The laser
Fig. 5.Picture of the VideometerLab instrument (a) and its schematic diagram (b), and overview of seeds of three classes based on visual color of seed coat: ye llow, grey and black (c). Row (1) shows RGB images of the intact seeds; (2) is images transformed by nCDA to divide dead and viable seeds (intact seeds); (3) is RGB images of cut seeds; (4) is images transformed by nCDA to divide dead and viable seeds (based on cut seeds) and (5) is RGB images taken after the cut seeds has been immersed in tetrazolium ( Olesen et al., 2015).41 Y. Xia et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 1 (2019) 35 –47apparatus had a power of 100 mW, a spot size of 3 mm, and an exposuretime of 0.5 s. The spectral range was 150 –1800 cm
−1and each plate was scanned 32 times (Fig. 6).In this study, the pepper seeds initiated germination in 4 days andachieved germination in 168 h. Out of 144 untreated seeds, 141 seedswere germinated and showed a seed viability of 97.9%, and 288 seeds(141 viable and 147 non-viable seeds) were used for analysis in the ger-mination test.Fig. 6d shows the mean plots of Raman spectra for viableand non-viable seeds. Characteristic peaks associated with the basicconstituents of pepper seeds could be observed around 1520 cm
−1
(C=C), 1440 cm−1(=CH 2), 1263 cm−1(=CH), 1154 cm−1(C\\C), and 1090 cm
−1(C\\O) (Baranski et al., 2006;Reitzenstein et al., 2007). A classiﬁcation model was developed using PLS-DA with RSdata in 1800–970 cm
−1. A series of preprocessing methods were alsoproposed to reduce the noise of spectra and compare the classi ﬁcation results. The results showed that RS with raw data (none-preprocesseddata) achieved the best classiﬁcation accuracy of 96.4%. Therefore, RSwas shown to be a reliable spectroscopic method to determine seedquality.In seed viability detection with RS, researches could also be found to-wards corn seeds. The comparison between FT-NIR and RS methods to-wards the classiﬁcation of viable and non-viable hybrid corn kernels(Zea maysL.) could be diagnosed. It was observed that some speci ﬁc wavelengths at which the energy absorption was different betweenthe aged and normal seed groups. The major changes were observedin the range of 1580–1640 cm
−1. The variation in intensity at this regionwas thought to be caused by the germination ability of seeds. The PLS-DA results with various preprocessing methods on Raman spectraldata were analyzed, and the classiﬁcation model presented recognitionand prediction ability of 93 –100% of three groups (white, yellow, andpurple corns). Especially, the mean normalization, MSC, and ﬁrstderivative preprocessing methods showed the highest accuracy(100%) in the calibration model, but a signi ﬁcant number of seeds were overlapping when using PCA (Ambrose et al., 2016b). In a word, RS is useful and promising to be utilized for classi ﬁcation of viable and non-viable seeds instead of the traditional invasive seed quality detec-tion and evaluation methods.2.4. Infrared thermographyInfrared thermography (IRT) is a relatively young discipline with itsorigin traced back to the 17th century when thermometers were devel-oped (Ring, 2010). The discovery of infrared radiation by Sir WilliamHerschel in 1800 was closely followed by the recording of ﬁrst thermal image by his son John Herschel (Ring, 2007). In 1934, Hardy established the diagnostic signiﬁcance of temperature measurement by infraredtechnique which made contribution to the application of IRT in medicalsciences (Hardy, 1934). However, theﬁrst use was reported in 1960 due to the non-availability of quality equipment and technical know-how(Ring, 2010). Recently, IRT as one of the fast, non-contact and non-destructive diagnosis methods has been used in various ﬁelds including medical tests, fault diagnosis, remote sensing, plant diseases and insectpest detection, fruit quality, seed viability evaluation, etc. ( Fernández- Cuevas et al., 2015;Picazo-Ródenas et al., 2013;Usha and Singh, 2013). Compared with hyperspectral imaging and Fourier transformnear-infrared methods, IRT shows the advantages of relatively lowcost and high assessment throughput. IRT also provides two-dimensional (2D) thermal images, which makes a comparison betweenareas of target possible (Usamentiaga et al., 2014). Infrared radiation is the energy radiated by the surface of an object whose temperature isabove absolute zero (Meola, 2012). The fractions of the total radiant en-ergy that are associated with each of these modes of dissipation are
Fig. 6.Schematic of Raman spectrometer used to capture and analyze scattering signals of seeds (a), Raman spectra without removed ﬂuorescence background signal (b), Raman spectra with removedﬂuorescence background signal (c), and mean spectra of viable and non-viable pepper seeds (d) ( Seo et al., 2016).42 Y. Xia et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 1 (2019) 35 –47referred to as the absorptivity, transmissivity and re ﬂectivity of the ob- jects (Howell et al., 2010). Three parameters are used to describe thesephenomena: the spectral absorptanceα
λ, which is the ratio of the spec- tral radiant power absorbed by the object, the spectral re ﬂectanceρ
λ, which is the ratio of the spectral radiant power re ﬂected by the object, and the spectral transmittanceτ
λ, which is the ratio of the spectral radi-ant power transmitted by the object. These three parameters are wave-length dependent (Usamentiaga et al., 2014). The sum of these three parameters must be one at any wavelength, as in Eq. (2):α
λþρλþτλ¼1 ð2ÞFig. 7cs h o w st h ec o nﬁguration of a typical IRT system used to cap-ture and analyze the thermal and visible images of Pisum sativumL. seeds for viability assessment. As shown in Fig. 7c, an infrared thermog- raphy system generally consists of an infrared thermal camera, a digitalcolor CCD camera, a directional light source, a constant temperature in-cubator, a thermostatic water bath, and a computer. Thermal images(320 × 240 pixels) were obtained by the infrared thermal camera Ti55(Fluke, Everett, WA, USA) with a sensitivity of 0.02 °C and initially proc-essed with the Smartview software (Fluke Systems). Visible images(900 × 600 pixels) captured from the CCD were digitized to 8-bit (256grey levels) data and stored. Thermal and visible images were simulta-neously stored every 5 min and could be exported in time sequence.Then, image processing, data analysis and numerical modeling were ap-plied using MATLAB (MathWorks, Natick, MA, USA). As seen in Fig. 7d, the temperature variations (relative seed temperature rT) of the three categories of seeds mainly occurred in the ﬁrst 3 h (Men et al., 2017). In this study, a total of 120 seeds were divided into two groups fordifferent aging process. The root length of each sample was measuredto evaluate the viability. Each individual seed area in the visible imageswas segmented with an edge detection method, image fusiontechnology was adopted to extract seed regions in the thermal imageswith the disk areas in the visible images, and the average temperatureof the corresponding area in the infrared images was calculated as therepresentative temperature for this seed at that time ( Fig. 8). Thirteen characteristic parameters extracted from the temperature curve wereanalyzed to show the difference of the temperature ﬂuctuations be- tween the seeds with different viability. Support vector machine(SVM) was used to classify the seed samples into viable, aged anddead according to the root length with 95% classi ﬁcation rate. With the temperature data ofﬁrst 3 h during the germination, another SVMmodel was calculated with classiﬁcation rate of 91.67%. According tothese experimental results, it can be observed that there were obviousdifferences between the parameters carried out for characterizing thetemperature variations of seeds depended on seed viability. Apparently,infrared thermography can be applied for the prediction of seed viabilitybased on the SVM algorithm.In seed viability detection with IRT, other applications could also befound. The developmental stage of a geminating garden pea ( Pisum sativum) could be diagnosed using IRT by Kranner et al. They provedthe concept that IRT was applicable to other seed types such as wheat(Triticum aestivum) and rape (Brassica napus) seeds. IRT was testiﬁed to link biochemical and biophysical parameters with developmentalchanges and visualize them noninvasively. Moreover, they developeda computer model of“virtual pea seeds”that uses Monte Carlo simula- tion, based on the heart production of major seed storage compoundsto unravel physic-chemical processes of thermogenesis by NetLogo.They also found that IRT could visualize in real time of the earliestphysic-chemical events in pea seed germination and diagnose seed via-bility long before radical emergence (Kranner et al., 2010). And the con- clusion that non-viable seeds failed to degrade starch upon germinationwas demonstrated (Kranner, 2013). Similarly, the lettuce (Lactuca sativa L.) seed viability was evaluated using infrared lifetime thermal imaging
Fig. 7.Visible (a) and thermal images (b) of the experimental samples, schematic diagram of IRT system used to capture and analyze thermal pro ﬁles (c), and heat production during the ﬁrst 5 h in the experiment (d) ( Men et al., 2017).43 Y. Xia et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 1 (2019) 35 –47technique, the results showed that the time-dependent thermal signaldecay characteristics, along with the decay amplitude and delay timeimages, could be used to distinguish aged lettuce seeds from normalseeds easily (Kim et al., 2013). The viability of pepper (Capsicum annuum) seeds was also estimated using IRT and photothermal signaland image reconstruction techniques, pixel-based regression analysiswas used to investigate the photothermal signal from seed and seedgroups was distinguished by the reconstructed images of regression co-efﬁcients. Results showed that time-resolved photothermal characteris-tic, along with the regression coefﬁcient images, can be used to discriminate the aged or dead pepper seeds from the healthy ones(Kim et al., 2014). Therefore, IRT can deﬁnitely be one of the promising methods in the existing destructive and labor-intensive seed-sortingsituations.2.5. X-ray imagingX-ray computed tomography (CT), is electromagnetic radiation withthe wavelength range of 0.01 –10 nm. The photon energy of an X-ray isin the range of 0.1–120 keV, which leads to a strong penetrability. X-ray,similar to other electromagnetic waves, can show the following phe-nomena: reﬂection, refraction, scattering, interference, diffraction, po-larization and absorption. X-ray CT evaluates the internal structure ofa sample by means of an X-ray source and a detector in order to obtaininformation from a projected slice. The X-ray imaging inspection sys-tem, mainly comprises a computer-controlled X-ray generator (i.e. X-ray source tube), a line-scanning sensor for X-ray detection (i.e. an X-ray CCD camera in which an enlarged radiograph (projection) can beproduced), conveying belt, stepping motor, image-acquisition card,and computer (Chen et al., 2013). The differences in attenuation are at-tributable to density and compositional differences within a sample.During image acquisition, an X-ray beam, which is collimated, is di-rected towards a sample, the detector measures the remnant attenuatedradiation and the response is transferred to a computer, resulting in a2D image whose contrast is produced by variations in the X-ray attenu-ation that includes absorption and scattering ( Fig. 9). When a sample is rotated on a translation stage while illuminated with X-ray, the X-rayspass through the object in many different directions and along with dif-ferent pathways to create an image illustrating variation in density atnumerous points in a 2D slice, acquiring a series of 2D radiographs orprojection images (Baker et al., 2012). Mathematical principles can then be used to reconstruct the series of 2D radiographs into a 3D digitalimage, which can be presented as virtual slices at various depths and inmultiple directions or the sample can be viewed as a whole. Image pro-cessing and analysis is followed to visualize CT data and extract suitableinformation from the image. In a word, the basic principles of X-ray CT
Fig. 8.Flowchart of a series of steps for analyzing thermal and visible images data. Visible images are used to acquire the edge regions information (green ar row). Thermal images are used to extract the temperature information (red arrow). Fusion parameters are acquired from fusion image of viable image and thermography image ( Men et al., 2017).44 Y. Xia et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 1 (2019) 35 –47imaging are absorption physics (related to 2D projection images) andreconstruction mathematics (relevant to the generation of a 3D volumefrom a series of 2D images) (Schoeman et al., 2016). Nevertheless, char- acterization analysis of seed morphology based on an X-ray CT system isvery limited.A recent study reported the application of X-ray technology in theevaluation of muskmelon seed viability by analyzing the morphologicalcharacteristics of naturally aged seeds ( Ahmed et al., 2018). The proce- dure for developing the pattern classiﬁcation algorithm for muskmelon seeds based on their internal structures (morphology) as determinedusing CT imaging in connection with viability, is illustrated in Fig. 10.The seeds wereﬁve years old (2012–2017) and were kept in storage at ambient temperature. A total of 100 seeds were randomly selectedfor scanning using X-ray CT image. After the preprocessing by re-slicing, contrast enhancement, noise reduction, and segmentations, ﬁf- teen preprocessed images were nominated from each sample, and fea-tures of interest (i.e. local binary pattern, Gabor, local fast Fouriertransform (FFT), texture, contrast and Haralick textural features) wereextracted. Then, the sequential forward selection (SFS) method was ap-plied as a search strategy to determine the most relevant features forseed viability classiﬁcation from the features extracted above. A germi-nation test was performed to evaluate the seed viability and the
Fig. 9.Schematic illustration of the measurement principle of X-ray CT. An object is exposed to collimated X-rays, generated by the X-ray tube and the detect or converts the X-rays into digital radiographs (Schoeman et al., 2016).
Fig. 10.The methodology applied to develop the pattern classi ﬁcation algorithm to identify viable and non-viable muskmelon seeds using X-ray CT images ( Ahmed et al., 2018).45 Y. Xia et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 1 (2019) 35 –47information was used to construct the training and validation data set.After that, the LDA classiﬁer could result in more promising results,with the accuracy of 98.9% for 10-fold cross-validation using eighteenselected features. Theﬁndings indicate that CT imaging is a potentialtool for the classiﬁcation of seeds based on the characterization of inter-nal morphologically.3. Technical challenges and trendsAs a relatively mature technology, numerous NIR spectroscopy in-struments are commercially available for research, laboratory andindustrial purposes, making the technique enjoy considerable advan-tages in terms of use cost over other optical sensing techniques. Withthe development of tumbling or spinning aid in calibration, scanningseeds tends to obtain higher precision and overcome any other differ-ences between instruments gradually ( Agelet and Hurburgh, 2014). The chemical composition information of seeds, such as lipids, proteins,and carbohydrates, can be captured by NIR, however, it might be easilyaffected by the uniformity with different sample distributions due to thefact that only one a single spot of samples is applied ( Ji et al., 2015). HSI has been shown to be an effective tool for seed viability detection,allowing a rapid and high-throughput analysis at single kernel basis.One of the main advantages is that HSI provides both spatial and spec-tral information and is suitable for both external quality classi ﬁcation and internal chemical composition prediction. However, a drawbackof NIR spectroscopy and HSI/MSI is that a new calibration model is re-quired for each seed species and cultivar, and the calibration modelsshould be based on large datasets incorporating different orchards, sea-sons, cultivation systems, etc. Furthermore, the prediction accuracy alsodepends on temperature, spectrometer, noise and some other externalconditions which are hard to control by operators according to theirsubjective wills. Optimization and customization of optical componentsand sampling systems are required to ensure the success of an applica-tion on a speciﬁc commodity. Owing to the growing interests from bothacademia and industry, the Raman spectroscopy technology has beenevolved quickly during past decades. Challenges still exist for practicalapplications of RS techniques for evaluating seed viability, such ashighﬂuorescence interference from plant materials, poor repeatabilityof SERS techniques, etc. (Qin et al., 2019). X-ray, which does not scale to large operation, can only exhibit the structural integrity of seeds. Di-rectly identifying whether seeds are dead or not can hardly be achieved(Chelladurai et al., 2014). The application of thermal imaging and soft X-ray imaging in seed quality assessment is very limited due to the highuse cost. In addition, the detection efﬁciency restricts the application of those two techniques in practical detection requirement. The combi-nation (fusion) of outputs of different instrumental techniques hasemerged as a means of promoting the reliability of classi ﬁcation or pre- diction of foodstuff speciﬁcations compared with using an analyticaltechnique separately (Borràs et al., 2015). Given that more non- destructive methods have been successfully applied in seed viability de-tection, it would be an interesting task to explore seed viability detec-tion by fusing these different technologies based on data fusionstrategies. With the development in computer hardware with low costand high speed, and artiﬁcial intelligence, some of the mentionedemerging techniques would be more commonly inexpensive, attractiveand realizable for promising applications in quality control and auto-matic detection of seeds.4. ConclusionsOptical-based and/or image-based non-destructive evaluation sys-tems have been gradually investigated and employed in the externaland internal quality inspecting of seeds in recent years. Seed viabilityis of great importance in seed quality characteristics re ﬂecting potential seed germination. This review summarizes emerging technologies andtheir major applications in seed viability detection. These noninvasivetechniques are rapid, accurate, reliable and simple tools for evaluatingseed viability. The reasons why they might encounter problems in prac-tical application are discussed. On the basis of the observed trends, thetechnical challenges and potential future trends for these emergingtechniques are also presented.AcknowledgementsThis work wasﬁnancially supported by the National Natural Science
Foundation of China (31801262 and 31871523) and National Key Re-search and Development Program of China (2018YFD0101004).References
Agelet, L.E., Hurburgh, C.R., 2014. Limitations and current applications of near infrared spectroscopy for single seed analysis. Talanta 121, 288 –299. Ahmed, M.R., Yasmin, J., Collins, W., et al., 2018. X-ray CT image analysis for morphology of muskmelon seed in relation to germination. Biosyst. Eng. 175, 183 –193. Ambrose, A., Kandpal, L.M., Kim, M.S., et al., 2016a. High speed measurement of corn seed viability using hyperspectral imaging. Infrared Phys. Technol. 75, 173 –179. Ambrose, A., Lohumi, S., Lee, W.H., et al., 2016b. Comparative nondestructive measure- ment of corn seed viability using Fourier transform near-infrared (FT-NIR) andRaman spectroscopy. Sens. Actuator B-Chem. 224, 500 –506. Baek, I., Kusumaningrum, D., Kandpal, L.M., et al., 2019. Rapid measurement of soy- bean seed viability using kernel-based mu ltispectral image analysis. Sensors 19 (2), 271.Baeten, V., Hourant, P., Morales, M.T., et al., 1998. Oil and fat classiﬁcation by FT-Raman spectroscopy. J. Agric. Food Chem. 46 (7), 2638 –2646. Baker, D.R., Mancini, L., Polacci, M., et al., 2012. An introduction to the application of X-ray microtomography to the three-dimensional study of igneous rocks. Lithos 148,262–276.Baranski, R., Baranska, M., Schulz, H., et al., 2006. Single seed Raman measurements allow taxonomical discrimination of Apiaceae accessions collected in gene banks. Biopoly-mers 81 (6), 497–505.Borràs, E., Ferré, J., Boqué, R., et al., 2015. Data fusion methodologies for food and beverage authentication and quality assessment –a review. Anal. Chim. Acta 891, 1 –14. Chelladurai, V., Karuppiah, K., Jayas, D.S., et al., 2014. Detection of Callosobruchus maculatus (F.) infestation in soybean using soft X-ray and NIR hyperspectral imagingtechniques. J. Stored Prod. Res. 57, 43 –48. Chen, Q., Zhang, C., Zhao, J., et al., 2013. Recent advances in emerging imaging techniques for non-destructive detection of food quality and safety. TrAC Trends Anal. Chem. 52,261–274.Cozzolino, D., Chree, A., Murray, I., et al., 2009. Usefulness of near infrared spectroscopy to monitor the extent of heat treatment in ﬁsh meal. Int. J. Food Sci. Technol. 44 (8), 1579–1584.Daneshvar, A., Tigabu, M., Karimidoost, A., et al., 2015. Single seed near infrared spectros- copy discriminates viable and non-viable seeds of Juniperus polycarpos. Silva Fennica49 (5).Du, C.J., Sun, D.W., 2004.Recent developments in the applications of image processingtechniques for food quality evaluation. Trends Food Sci. Technol. 15 (5), 230 –249. Dumont, J., Hirvonen, T., Heikkinen, V., et al., 2015. Thermal and hyperspectral imaging for Norway spruce (Picea abies) seeds screening. Comput. Electron. Agric. 116, 118 –124. ElMasry, M.G., Nakauchi, S., 2016. Image analysis operations applied to hyperspectral im-ages for non-invasive sensing of food quality –a comprehensive review. Biosys. Eng. 142, 53–82.Elmasry, G., Kamruzzaman, M., Sun, D.W., et al., 2012. Principles and applications of hyperspectral imaging in quality evaluation of agro-food products: a review. Crit.Rev. Food Sci. Nutr. 52 (11), 999 –1023. ElMasry, G., Mandour, N., Al-Rejaie, S., et al., 2019. Recent applications of multispectral
imaging in seed phenotyping and quality monitoring –an overview. Sensors 19 (5), 32.Engel, J., Gerretzen, J., Szymańska, E., et al., 2013.Breaking with trends in pre-processing? TrAC Trends Anal. Chem. 50, 96 –106. Fan, S., Li, J., Xia, Y., et al., 2019. Long-term evaluation of soluble solids content of appleswith biological variability by using near-infrared spectroscopy and calibration trans-fer method. Postharvest Biol. Technol. 151, 79 –87. Fernández-Cuevas, I., Bouzas Marins, J.C., Arnáiz Lastras, J., et al., 2015. Classiﬁcation of factors inﬂuencing the use of infrared thermography in humans: a review. InfraredPhys. Technol. 71, 28 –55.Fu, X., Ying, Y., 2016.Food safety evaluation based on near infrared spectroscopy and im-aging: a review. Crit. Rev. Food Sci. Nutr. 56 (11), 1913 –1924. Gowen, A.A., O'Donnell, C.P., Cullen, P.J., et al., 2007. Hyperspectral imaging –an emerging process analytical tool for food quality and safety control. Trends Food Sci. Technol.18 (12), 590–598.Hardy, J.D., 1934.The radiation of heat from the human body. 2. A comparison of somemethods of measurement. J. Clin. Invest. 13 (4), 605 –614. Herrero, A.M., 2008.Raman spectroscopy a promising technique for quality assessment ofmeat andﬁsh: a review. Food Chem. 107 (4), 1642 –1651. Howell, J., Siegel, R., Mengüç, M.P., 2010. Thermal Radiation Heat Transfer. Huang, H., Yu, H., Xu, H., et al., 2008. Near infrared spectroscopy for on/in-line monitoring of quality in foods and beverages: a review. J. Food Eng. 87 (3), 303 –313.46 Y. Xia et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 1 (2019) 35 –47Huang, M., Wang, Q.G., Zhu, Q.B., et al., 2015. Review of seed quality and safety tests using optical sensing technologies. Seed Sci. Technol. 43 (3), 337 –366. Hussain, A., Pu, H., Sun, D.W., 2018. Innovative nondestructive imaging techniques for rip- ening and maturity of fruits –a review of recent applications. Trends Food Sci. Technol. 72, 144–152.Ji, G., Huang, G., Yang, Z., et al., 2015. Using consensus interval partial least square in near infrared spectra analysis. Chemometr. Intell. Lab. 144, 56 –62. Kandpal, L.M., Lohumi, S., Kim, M.S., et al., 2016. Near-infrared hyperspectral imaging sys- tem coupled with multivariate methods to predict viability and vigor in muskmelonseeds. Sens. Actuator B-Chem. 229, 534 –544. Kim, G., Kim, G.H., Ahn, C.K., et al., 2013. Mid-infrared lifetime imaging for viability eval- uation of lettuce seeds based on time-dependent thermal decay characterization.Sensors 13 (3), 2986 –2996.Kim, G., Kim, G.H., Lohumi, S., et al., 2014. Viability estimation of pepper seeds using time- resolved photothermal signal characterization. Infrared Phys. Technol. 67, 214 –221. Kizil, R., Irudayaraj, J.M.K., Seetharaman, K., 2002. Characterization of irradiated starches by using FT-Raman and FTIR spectroscopy. J. Agric. Food Chem. 50 (14), 3912 –3918. Kranner, I., 2013.Mechanisms of seed ageing. S. Afr. J. Bot. 86 (3), 140.Kranner, I., Kastberger, G., Hartbauer, M., et al., 2010. Noninvasive diagnosis of seed viabil- ity using infrared thermography. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 107 (8), 3912 –3917. Kusumaningrum, D., Lee, H., Lohumi, S., et al., 2018. Nondestructive technique for deter- mining the viability of soybean (Glycine max) seeds using FT-NIR spectroscopy. J. Sci.Food Agric. 98 (5), 1734 –1742. Lee, H., Cho, B., Kim, M.S., et al., 2013. Prediction of crude protein and oil content of soy- beans using Raman spectroscopy. Sens. Actuator B-Chem. 185, 694 –700. Lee, H., Kim, M.S., Qin, J.W., et al., 2017. Raman hyperspectral imaging for detection of wa- termelon seeds infected with Acidovorax citrulli. Sensors 17 (10), 11.Li, J., Huang, W., Chen, L., et al., 2014. Variable selection in visible and near-infrared spec- tral analysis for noninvasive determination of soluble solids content of ‘Ya’pear. Food Anal. Methods 7 (9), 1891 –1902. Li-Chan, E., Nakai, S., Hirotsuka, M., 1994. Raman Spectroscopy as a Probe of Protein Struc- ture in Food Systems.Lorente, D., Aleixos, N., Gómez-Sanchis, J., et al., 2012. Recent advances and applications of hyperspectral imaging for fruit and vegetable quality assessment. Food. Bioprocess.Tech. 5 (4), 1121–1142.Lu, X., Alqadiri, H.M., Lin, M., et al., 2011. Application of mid-infrared and Raman spectros- copy to the study of bacteria. Food. Bioprocess. Tech. 4 (6), 919 –935. Marcos Filho, J., 2015.Seed vigor testing: an overview of the past, present and future per-spective. Sci. Agric. 72 (4), 363 –374. McGoverin, C.M., Engelbrecht, P., Geladi, P., et al., 2011. Characterisation of non-viable whole barley, wheat and sorghum grains using near-infrared hyperspectral dataand chemometrics. Anal. Bioanal. Chem. 401 (7), 2283 –2289. Mehmood, T., Liland, K.H., Snipen, L., et al., 2012. A review of variable selection methods in partial least squares regression. Chemometr. Intell. Lab. 118, 62 –69.
Men, S., Yan, L., Liu, J.X., et al., 2017. Ac l a s s iﬁcation method for seed viability assessment with infrared thermography. Sensors 17 (4), 14.Meola, C., 2012.Origin and Theory of Infrared Thermography.Mo, C., Kim, G., Lee, K., et al., 2014. Non-destructive quality evaluation of pepper (Capsi- cum annuum L.) seeds using LED-induced hyperspectral re ﬂectance imaging. Sensors 14 (4), 7489–7504.Naes, T., Isaksson, T., Fearn, T., et al., 2002. A User Friendly Guide to Multivariate Calibra- tion and Classiﬁcation.Nicolaï, B.M., Beullens, K., Bobelyn, E., et al., 2007. Nondestructive measurement of fruit and vegetable quality by means of NIR spectroscopy: a review. Postharvest Biol.Technol. 46 (2), 99–118.Nicolaï, B.M., Defraeye, T., Ketelaere, B.D., et al., 2014. Nondestructive measurement of fruit and vegetable quality. Annu. Rev. Food Sci. Technol. 5 (1), 285 –312. Olesen, M.H., Nikneshan, P., Shrestha, S., et al., 2015. Viability prediction of Ricinus cummunis L. seeds using multispectral imaging. Sensors 15 (2), 4592 –4604. Pasquini, C., 2018.Near infrared spectroscopy: a mature analytical technique with newperspectives–a review. Anal. Chim. Acta 1026, 8 –36. Peng, Y., Zhao, F., Bai, J., et al., 2018. Classiﬁcation of tomato seed vitality based on image processing. Transactions of the Chinese Society for Agricultural Machinery 49 (2),327–333.Picazo-Ródenas, M.J., Royo, R., Antonino-Daviu, J., et al., 2013. Use of the infrared data for heating curve computation in induction motors: application to fault diagnosis. Eng.Failure Anal. 35, 178–192.Qin, J., Kim, M.S., Chao, K., et al., 2019. Advances in Raman spectroscopy and imaging tech- niques for quality and safety inspection of horticultural products. Postharvest Biol.Technol. 149, 101–117.Rahman, A., Cho, B.K., 2016.Assessment of seed quality using non-destructive measure-ment techniques: a review. Seed Sci. Res. 26 (04), 285 –305. Reitzenstein, S., Rosch, P., Strehle, M., et al., 2007. Nondestructive analysis of single rape- seeds by means of Raman spectroscopy. J. Raman Spectrosc. 38 (3), 301 –308. Ring, E.F.J., 2007.The historical development of temperature measurement in medicine.Infrared Phys. Technol. 49 (3), 297 –301. Ring, F., 2010.Thermal imaging today and its relevance to diabetes. J. Diabetes Sci.Technol. 4 (4), 857.Saranwong, S., Sornsrivichai, J., Kawano, S., 2001. Improvement of PLS calibration for Brix value and dry matter of mango using information from MLR calibration. J. Near Infra-red Spectrosc. 9 (1), 287 –295. Schoeman, L., Williams, P., du Plessis, A., et al., 2016. X-ray micro-computed tomography (μCT) for non-destructive characterisation of food microstructure. Trends Food Sci.Technol. 47, 10–24.Sendin, K., Manley, M., Williams, P.J., 2018. Classiﬁcation of white maize defects with mul- tispectral imaging. Food Chem. 243, 311 –318. Seo, Y.W., Ahn, C.K., Lee, H., et al., 2016. Non-destructive sorting techniques for viablepepper (Capsicum annuum L.) seeds using Fourier transform near-infrared andRaman spectroscopy. J. Biosyst. Eng. 41 (1), 51 –59. Shetty, N., Min, T.G., Gislum, R., et al., 2011. Optimal sample size for predicting viability of cabbage and radish seeds based on near infrared spectra of single seeds. J. Near Infra-red Spectrosc. 19 (6), 451 –461. Shetty, N., Olesen, M.H., Gislum, R., et al., 2012. Use of partial least squares discriminant analysis on visible-near infrared multispectral image data to examine germinationability and germ length in spinach seeds. J. Chemom. 26 (8 –9), 462–466. Shrestha, S., Deleuran, L., Gislum, R., et al., 2017. Separation of viable and non-viable to- mato (Solanum lycopersicum L.) seeds using single seed near-infrared spectroscopy.Comput. Electron. Agric. 142, 348 –355 Part A. Sun, Q., Wang, J.H., Sun, B.Q., 2007. Advances on seed vigor physiological and genetic mechanisms. Agric. Sci. China 6 (9), 1060 –1066. Usamentiaga, R., Venegas, P., Guerediaga, J., et al., 2014. Infrared thermography for tem- perature measurement and non-destructive testing. Sensors 14 (7), 12305 –12348. Usha, K., Singh, B., 2013.Potential applications of remote sensing in horticulture –ar e - view. Sci. Hortic. 153, 71 –83. Wakholi, C., Kandpal, L.M., Lee, H., et al., 2018. Rapid assessment of corn seed viability using short wave infrared line-scan hyperspectral imaging and chemometrics. Sens.Actuator B-Chem. 255, 498 –507. Xia, Y., Huang, W., Fan, S., et al., 2018. Effect of fruit moving speed on online prediction of soluble solids content of apple using Vis/NIR diffuse transmission. J. Food Process Eng.41 (8), e12915.Xia, Y., Huang, W., Fan, S., et al., 2019. Effect of spectral measurement orientation on on- line prediction of soluble solids content of apple using Vis/NIR diffuse re ﬂectance. In- frared Phys. Technol. 97, 467 –477. Yang, G.Y., Wang, Q.Y., Liu, C., et al., 2018. Rapid and visual detection of the main chemical compositions in maize seeds based on Raman hyperspectral imaging. Spectroc. ActaPt. A-Molec. Biomolec. Spectr. 200, 186 –194. Yu, K., Zhao, Y., Li, X., et al., 2014. Identiﬁcation of crack features in fresh jujube using Vis/ NIR hyperspectral imaging combined with image processing. Comput. Electron. Agric.103, 1–10.Yun, Y.H., Li, H.D., Deng, B.C., et al., 2019. An overview of variable selection methods in multivariate analysis of near-infrared spectra. Trac-Trends Anal. Chem. 113, 102 –115. Zhang, B., Huang, W., Li, J., et al., 2014. Principles, developments and applications of com- puter vision for external quality inspection of fruits and vegetables: a review. FoodRes. Int. 62, 326–343.Zhang, B., Gu, B., Tian, G., et al., 2018a. Challenges and solutions of optical-based nonde- structive quality inspection for robotic fruit and vegetable grading systems: a techni-cal review. Trends Food Sci. Technol. 81, 213 –231. Zhang, T., Wei, W., Zhao, B., et al., 2018b. A reliable methodology for determining seed vi- ability by using hyperspectral data from two sides of wheat seeds. Sensors 18 (3),813.47 Y. Xia et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 1 (2019) 35 –47