Reliable execution of a robust soft computing workplace found on multipleneuro-fuzzy inference systems coupled with multiple nonlinear equations forexhaustive perception of tractor-implement performance in plowing process
S.M. Shafaei, M. Loghavi, S. Kamgar ⁎
Department of Biosystems Engineering, School of Agriculture, Shiraz University, Shiraz 71441-65186, Iran
abstract article info
Article history:Received 7 May 2019Received in revised form 21 June 2019Accepted 21 June 2019Available online 16 July 2019Tendency towards computer simulations linked to agricultural machinery has enormously increased in recentyears. In this regard, the principal contribution of current research was to develop soft computing simulationworkplaces for performance prognostication of tractor-implement system in plowing process. Two neuro-fuzzy strategies based on multiple adaptive neuro-fuzzy inference systems (MANFIS) scenario and the MANFIScoupled with multiple nonlinear equations (MNE) scenario were executed in the workplace. Additionally, neuralstrategy based on artiﬁcial neural network (ANN) scenario was also ful ﬁlled in the workplace. Operational vari- ables of plowing depth (10 –30 cm), forward speed (2–6 km/h), and tillage implement type (moldboard, disk, and chisel plow) were considered as the workplace inputs and ten performance parameters were taken as the work-place outputs. According to the obtained prognostication accuracy, simulation time, and user-friendly con ﬁgura- tion of three scenarios (ANN, MANFIS, and MANFIS+MNE), the MANFIS+MNE was recognized as the prominentsimulation scenario. According to the MANFIS+MNE workplace results, for each tillage implement, the com-pound effect of plowing depth and forward speed on some performance parameters (required draft force of im-plement, tractor rear wheel slip, fuel consumption per working hour, speci ﬁc volumetric fuel consumption, tractor drawbar power, energy requirement for tillage implement, overall energy ef ﬁciency, and tractor tractive efﬁciency) was nonlinearly synergetic. However, it was nonlinearly antagonism in case of speci ﬁc draft force and fuel consumption per tilled area. The MANFIS+MNE workplace simulation results provide opportunity for tech-nical farmer associations involved in the decision-making of agricultural machinery management in order to gainexhaustive fundamental insights into the compound effect of plowing depth and forward speed on performanceof tractor-implement systems in plowing process.© 2019 The Authors. Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of KeAi Communications Co., Ltd. This is anopen access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ ).
Keywords:Draft forceWheel slipFuel consumptionNeuro-fuzzy strategiesIntelligent simulation
1. IntroductionStudying performance of tractor-implement system in plowing pro-cess could be advantageous to gain accurate view about how the systemperforms in the process. The performance realization provides the pos-sibility of upgrading the system mechanisms without performing re-fabrication process. Moreover, the obtained view would be assistive todevise proper management strategies for inventory of tillage systemsand thereby, it could remarkably reduce total cost of crop productionsystems, repair, maintenance, fuel, ownership, and other involved oper-ational issues. On the other hand, performance results of tractor-implement system in plowing process could be applied to develop ex-haustive information bank for multivariate analysis through partitionedgraphical descriptions.In this realm, modeling strategies help to comprehend performanceof tractor-implement system in plowing process on the basis of exten-sion of discrete operational results towards integral interpretable re-sults. The discrete operational data are gained by performing limitedexperiments. The integral interpretable results provide an opportunityto ascertain general trend of variations of dependent performance pa-rameters when independent operational variables change. These deter-minations lead to presentation of physical meaning of phenomenaoccurring in the process and showing what happens along differentworking states of the process. Therefore, it can be indicated that aArtiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 2 (2019) 38 –84
Abbreviations:ANFIS, adaptive neuro-fuzzy inference system; ANN, arti ﬁcial neural network; ASABE, American Society of Agricultural and Biological Engineers; FIS, fuzzy in-ference system; MANFIS, multiple adaptive neuro-fuzzy inference systems; MRDM,mean relative deviation modulus; MAVSRE, mean of absolute values of simulation residualerrors; MANOVA, multivariate analysis of variance; MFWD, mechanical front wheel drive;MLR, multiple linear regression; MNE, multiple nonlinear equation; MNR, multiple nonlin-ear regression; RMSE, root mean square error; RNAM, Regional Network for AgriculturalMachinery; SD, standard deviation; CV, coef ﬁcient of variation; CNU, coefﬁcient of non- uniformity; SLR, simple linear regression; 2WD, two-wheel drive; 4WD, four-wheeldrive; R
2,c o e fﬁcient of determination.⁎Corresponding author at: Department of Biosystems Engineering, School ofAgriculture, Shiraz University, Shiraz, Iran.E-mail address:kamgar@shirazu.ac.ir(S. Kamgar).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aiia.2019.06.0032589-7217/© 2019 The Authors. Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of KeAi Communications Co., Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license ( http:// creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ ).
Contents lists available atScienceDirect
Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture
journal homepage:http://www.keaipublishing.com/en/journals/artificial-intelligence-in-agriculture/well-developed model is able to guarantee presentation of exhaustiveperception of the phenomena in a wide ranges of conditions. Hence, awell-developed model is a supportive tool for researchers, engineers,and managements in solving problems associated with performanceof tractor-implement system and thereby, optimization of the mecha-nized plowing process can be performed without conducting expensiveand time-consumingﬁeld tests.The modeling strategies frequently employed by the researchers canbe classiﬁed into two main branches of mathematical and soft comput-ing models. In general term, mathematical models (SLR, MLR, one vari-able nonlinear regression, MNR, dimensional analysis, etc.) are linear ornonlinear equations with speciﬁc constants and coefﬁcients. However, soft computing models (ANN, FIS, ANFIS, support vector machines,etc.) are computer simulation workplaces which are originally workedthrough predetermined consecutive calculations.Among soft computing models, the ANN performs regarding intelli-gent computational scenario with self-learning algorithm. The FISworks on the basis of predetermined linguistic transparency in form ofIF and THEN rules. The ANFIS includes advantages of both the ANNand the FIS. Therefore, the ANN and ANFIS soft computing scenariosare generally known as intelligent powerful modeling tools for dynamic,uncertain, and multidimensional and highly nonlinear interrelations,especially when physical relationships between input and output dataare not fully understood.The main body of this paper is organized in four parts. The ﬁrst part is review and analysis of literature for relevant published attempts pre-viously completed in domain of model development for prognosticationof performance parameters of tractor-implement system in plowingprocess. In this part, existing deﬁcits of several sequential attempts doc-umented by earlier researchers are discussed and ultimately, aims andquestions of the research are described. The second part is dedicatedto execute simulation workplaces based on intelligent soft computingscenarios. The third part is devoted to extensively validate outstandingsimulation workplace. The forth part presents exhaustive perceptionof performance parameters of tractor-implement system in plowingprocess on the basis of remarkable results obtained from prominentsimulation workplace.1.1. Review and analysis of literatureModeling performance parameters of tractor-implement system inplowing process have been of great interest to researchers over thepastﬁve decades in stationery tests andﬁeld operations. The stationery tests have been commonly performed in indoor soil bin facility or as-phalt test track with load car. Meanwhile, ﬁeld operations have been generally accomplished utilizing tillage implements in farm conditions.Table 1presents tendency of the researchers to apply mathematicalmodels for prognostication of the performance parameters. As it can beseen in theTable 1, the SLR, MLR, ASABE equations, MNR, one variablenonlinear regression, and dimensional analysis methodologies havebeen frequently employed by the researchers to model variations insome performance parameters based on some input variables ofplowing depth, forward speed, static load, tractor engine speed, and im-plement type in conditions ofﬁeld operations or stationery tests. Foreach case, results of these attempts have led to ﬁt several equations to desired performance parameters which are applicable for a speci ﬁcc o n - dition. Although some equations have been satisfactorily ﬁtted to actual data, constants and coefﬁcients of the equations varied as tested condi-tions changed. Moreover, inherent drawback of these parametricmodels conﬁnes them to prognosticate one output variable. Therefore,to prognosticate whole tractor performance parameters, there is aneed to develop several equations with different constants, coef ﬁcients, and assumptions. This fact prevents the widest applicability of accept-able prognostications for set of input and output variables within testedranges. Hence, the researchers focused their efforts to apply anothermethodology with taking multiple input and output variables into ac-count. This scheme motivated the researchers to release user-friendlysoftware and programs with multiple objects. The software and pro-grams are great outreach potential tools for prognostication of someperformance parameters on the basis of several input variables.Table 2summarizes details of the software and programs. Accordingto
the information manifested in theTable 2, it can be pointed out that the software and programs suffer from wide range applicationsowing to dependency to equations deﬁned based on the mathematical relationships documented in the ASABE standards or classical soil me-chanics theory. Therefore, these software and programs, similar tomathematical models, could be only applied for certain conditions ofstationery tests orﬁeld operations.Recent progressive advancements in applications of soft computingmodels in engineering based simulation practices extend range of pos-sibilities in prognostication of some performance parameters oftractor-implement system in plowing process based on multiple opera-tional input variables. In this context, much interest has been focused onthe ANN, FIS, and ANFIS soft computing scenarios by some researchers,in case ofﬁeld operations and stationery tests. The overall descriptionsconcerning these employments are briefed in Table 3.R e v i e w i n gt h er e - sults of cited papers in theTable 3demonstrated that these soft comput-ing scenarios are adaptable computer simulation environments. Itmeans that model structure established based on these soft computingscenarios is trained with inventory data sets and it can be possible to beNomenclatureCNUcoefﬁcient of non-uniformity (%)CVcoefﬁcient of variation (%)E
f implementﬁeld efﬁciency (%)ERTI energy requirement for tillage implement (MJ/ha)FCTA fuel consumption per tilled area (L/ha)FS forward speed (km/h)GTF gross traction force (kN)h working hour (h)IFC implementﬁeld capacity (ha/h)M mean of used dataMAVSREmean of absolute values of simulation residual errorsMRDMmean relative deviation modulus (%)N number of used dataNTF net traction force (kN)OEE overall energy efﬁciency (%)PD plowing depth (m)PP
i ith performance parameterPP
max maximum value of performance parameterPP
min minimum value of performance parameterPP
obtave average of obtained performance parameterPP
obt,i ith obtained performance parameterPP
sim,i ith simulated performance parameterR
2coefﬁcient of determinationRMSEroot mean square errorS driving wheel slip (%)SD standard deviationSDF speciﬁc draft force (kN/m
2)SVFC speciﬁc volumetric fuel consumption (L/kW h)TDP tractor drawbar power (kW)TFC tractor fuel consumption (L)TTE tractor tractive efﬁciency (%)V
f forward speed of outer radius of theﬁfth wheel (km/h) V
d forward speed of outer radius of rear driving wheel ofthe tractor (km/h)w implement working width (m)X dry weight of stubble per unit surface area (Lb/acre)Y percentage of stubble cover (%)39 S.M. Shafaei et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 2 (2019) 38 –84Table 1Mathematical models applied for prognostication of performance parameters of tractor-implement systems in plowing process.ExperimentalconditionsPerformance parameter Modeling strategy AuthorsFieldoperations Draft force, drawbar power SLR Harrison and Reed (1962) Draft force Dimensional analysis Gee-Clough et al. (1978) Draft force MNR Upadhyaya et al. (1984) Draft force One variable nonlinear regressionSummers et al. (1986)Speciﬁc draft force, fuel consumption per tilled area ASABE equation, SLR Cullum et al. (1989) Speciﬁc draft force MLR Bashford et al. (1991) Draft force, fuel consumption per working hour ASABE equation, SLR Ismail and Burkhardt(1993) Draft force, speciﬁc draft force One variable nonlinear regression Smith (1993)Draft force MNR Glancey and Upadhyaya(1995) Draft force ASABE equation Harrigan and Rotz (1995) Draft force Dimensional analysis Glancey et al. (1996) Draft force MNR Grisso et al. (1996) Speciﬁc draft force MNR Al-Janobi and Al-Suhaibani(1998) Draft force, tractor rear wheel slip, fuel consumption per working hour SLR Manian and Kathirvel(2001) Draft force, tractor rear wheel slip, speci ﬁc volumetric fuel consumption MNR Thomas and Singh (2002) Speciﬁc draft force, fuel consumption per working hour, speci ﬁc volumetric fuel consumption ASABE equation, MNR Kheiralla et al. (2004) Draft force, fuel consumption per working hour, speci ﬁc volumetric fuel consumption SLR, MNR Serrano et al. (2007) Fuel consumption per working hour, speci ﬁc volumetric fuel consumption ASABE equation, SLR, MNR Tafesse et al. (2007) Fuel consumption per working hour, fuel consumption per tilled area, draft force, drawbar power ASABE equationGrisso et al. (2007)Draft force One variable nonlinear regressionGodwin et al. (2007)Tractor tractive efﬁciency Dimensional analysis Fakhraei and Karparvarfard(2008) Draft force, fuel consumption per working hour, tractor rear wheel slip One variable nonlinear regressionJuostas and Janulevicius(2008) Energy requirement for tillage implement SLR, one variable nonlinear regression Khadr (2008)Speciﬁc draft force SLR Serrano and Peca (2008) Draft force One variable nonlinear regressionSahay et al. (2009)Fuel consumption per working hour SLR Fathollahzadeh et al.(2009) Fuel consumption per tilled area SLR Fathollahzadeh et al.(2010) Speciﬁc
draft force MNRAl-Suhaibani et al. (2010) Fuel consumption per working hour MNRUdompetaikul et al. (2011) Fuel consumption per tilled area SLR, MNRAjav and Adewoyin (2012) Draft force Dimensional analysisNkakini and Akor (2012) Fuel consumption per tilled area SLR, MNRAdewoyin (2013) Fuel consumption per tilled area SLR, MNRAdewoyin and Ajav (2013) Draft force ASABE equation Askari andKhalifahamzehghasem(2013) Draft force MNRRanjbar et al. (2013) Fuel consumption per working hour, fuel consumption per tilled area SLR, one variable nonlinearregressionMoitzi et al. (2014)Speciﬁc volumetric fuel consumption, draft force ASABE equations Pitla et al. (2014) Draft force Dimensional analysis Moeenifar et al. (2014) Speciﬁc volumetric fuel consumption Dimensional analysis, ASABEequationKarparvarfard andRahmanian-Koushkaki(2015) Draft force Dimensional analysis Nkakini (2015a) Draft force SLRNkakini (2015b) Draft force MLRAl-Suhaibani et al. (2015) Draft force ASABE equationAskari et al. (2016) Fuel consumption per working hour, fuel consumption per tilled area, speci ﬁc volumetric fuel consumption MNRAlmaliki et al. (2016a)Speciﬁc draft force SLRNdisya et al. (2016) Draft force, speciﬁc draft force, drawbar power ASABE equation, classical soilmechanics based equations Ahmadi (2016a)Draft force, speciﬁc draft force, drawbar power Classical soil mechanics basedequationsAhmadi (2016b)Draft force, drawbar power ASABE equation, classical soilmechanics based equations Ahmadi (2016c)Draft force, fuel consumption per working hour, fuel consumption per tilled area, tractor rearwheel slip, drawbar power, overall energy ef ﬁciency, tractor tractive efﬁciencyASABE equation, SLRRanjbarian et al. (2017)Draft force SLRAskari et al. (2017) Drawbar power Classical soil mechanics based Ahmadi (2017a)40 S.M. Shafaei et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 2 (2019) 38 –84extended with the same structure for other future conditions. This em-inent ability encourages the investigators to follow the previous re-searches in order to complement the knowledge in this realm.Careful inspection of available literature which are chronologicallyreported in theTable 3indicated that, although some partial attemptshave been accomplished by the investigators to apply soft computingscenarios for individual or component prognostication of some perfor-mance parameters of tractor-implement system in ﬁeld operations, de- ﬁciency of an exhaustive attempt to simulate whole performanceparameters is tedious.Table 1(continued)ExperimentalconditionsPerformance parameter Modeling strategy Authorsequations Draft force, drawbar power Classical soil mechanics based equationsAhmadi (2017b)Draft force Classical soil mechanics based equationsAhmadi (2018)Draft force, drawbar power One variable nonlinear regression, MNR Okoko et al. (2018)Tractor tractive efﬁciency Dimensional analysis Moinfar and Shahgholi(2018) Drawbar power SLR, one variable nonlinear regressionAlele et al. (2018)Stationarytests Fuel consumption per working hour MNR Hansson et al. (2003) Fuel consumption per working hour, speci ﬁc volumetric fuel consumption ASABE equation, SLR Grisso et al. (2004) Draft force MNR Mamman and Oni (2005) Draft force MNR Sahu and Raheman (2006) Fuel consumption per working hour, speci ﬁc volumetric fuel consumption MNR Grisso et al. (2008) Fuel consumption per working hour, speci ﬁc volumetric fuel consumption MNR Coffman et al. (2010) Fuel consumption per working hour SLR, MNR Kim et al. (2011) Draft force Dimensional analysis Moeenifar et al. (2013) Draft force MNR Machindra and Raheman(2017) Fuel consumption per working hour MLR Kocher et al. (2017) Speciﬁc draft force MNR, ASABE equation Upadhyay and Raheman(2019b)
Table 2Software and program developed for prognostication of performance parameters of tractor-implement systems in plowing process.ExperimentalconditionsPerformance parameter Modeling strategy AuthorsField operations Fuel consumption per tilled area ASABE equations based program Colvin et al. (1989) Fuel consumption per working hour, tractor rear wheel slip ASABE equations based program Alimardani et al.(1989) Tractor rear wheel slip, draft force, tractor tractive ef ﬁciency ASABE equations based program AI-Hamed et al.(1994) Tractor tractive efﬁciency, tractor rear wheel slip, draft force, drawbar power ASABE equations based software Al-Hamed andAl-Janobi (2001) Draft force, tractor rear wheel slip ASABE equations based software Sahu and Raheman(2008) Draft force, fuel consumption per working hour ASABE equations based software Pranav and Pandey(2008) Draft force, tractor rear wheel slip, fuel consumption per working hour, drawbar power ASABE equations based software Kumar and Pandey(2009) Drawbar power, draft force ASABE equations based software Ishola et al. (2010) Drawbar power, tractor tractive ef ﬁciency ASABE equations based software Al-Hamed et al.(2010) Draft force, tractor tractive efﬁciency, tractor rear wheel slip, speci ﬁc volumetric fuel consumption, fuel consumption per tilled area Classical tractor mechanics basedprogram Kolator andBialobrzewski (2011) Drawbar power ASABE equations based software Mehta et al. (2011) Draft force, tractor tractive efﬁciency, tractor rear wheel slip, fuel consumption perworking hour ASABE equations based software Pranav et al. (2012)Fuel consumption per working hour, speci ﬁc volumetric fuel consumption, draft force,tractor rear wheel slip ASABE equations and nonlinearregression based software Kumar and Pandey(2015) Fuel consumption per working hour, drawbar power ASABE equations based program Dahab et al. (2016) Fuel consumption per working hour, fuel consumption per tilled area, speci ﬁc volumetric fuel consumption MLR, ASABE equations based program Lee et al. (2016)Draft force, tractor rear wheel slip, tractor tractive ef ﬁciency, fuel consumption perworking hour ASABE equations based software Kumar et al. (2017a)Draft force ASABE equations based program Battiato and Diserens(2017) Stationary tests Tractor rear wheel slip ASABE equations based software Catalan et al. (2008) Tractor tractive efﬁciency ASABE equations based software Santos and Queiroz(2016)41 S.M. Shafaei et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 2 (2019) 38 –84In a remarkable attempt, some performance parameters (fuel con-sumption per working hour, fuel consumption per tilled area, speci ﬁc volumetric fuel consumption, tractor drawbar power, tractor tractive ef-ﬁciency) in plowing process with moldboard implement were intelli-gently simulated by means of the ANN scenario ( Almaliki et al., 2016b). The ANN simulation workplace was trained well in accordancewith input operational data sets of plowing depth and forward speed.However, the effects of plowing depth and forward speed on requireddraft force of the implement, tractor rear wheel slip, speci ﬁcd r a f t force, energy requirement for tillage implement, and overall energy ef-ﬁciency were not simulated in the research. Additionally, further inter-pretations for presentation of clear physical perceptions of the effect ofthe operational variables on the desired performance parameters havenot been expressed by the researchers. Hence, it is still indispensableto take drastic efforts for extension of the ANN simulation workplaceand employment of another intelligent simulation workplace (ANFIS)of soft computing scenario for exhaustive prognostication of whole per-formance parameters of tractor-implement system in plowing process.1.2. Hypotheses and problematic challenge of researchThe ANFIS soft computing scenario includes unique properties inte-grating advantages of the ANN and FIS soft computing scenarios. The FISprovide a strong mechanism for knowledge representation when expertknowledge is available. However, it does not possess the capabilities forautomated learning. The ANN do not possess knowledge representationcapability, but it has powerful mechanism of learning from sample datawhen expert knowledge is limited. The ANFIS overcomes the limitationsof both soft computing scenarios of the ANN and FIS. It means that theANFIS offers particularly strong simulation workplace with identi ﬁca- tion techniques when relationship between input and output data isnot trivial. Therefore, it is understandable that the ANFIS is able tobuild a fuzzy rule based on the structure of the FIS (IF and THEN) andtune the parameters of the FIS membership functions from a given setof input/output data by training itself, like the ANN. Hence, betweentwo intelligent soft computing scenarios of the ANN and ANFIS, it is an-ticipated that the ANFIS better performs than the ANN in simulationTable 3Soft computing scenarios employed for prognostication of performance parameters of tractor-implement systems in plowing process.ExperimentalconditionsPerformance parameter Soft computing scenario andmodeling strategy AuthorsFieldoperations Speciﬁc draft force ANN Al-Janobi et al. (2001) Draft force ANN Aboukarima and Saad (2006) Draft force ANN, one variable nonlinear regressionAboukarima (2007)Draft force ANN Alimardani et al. (2009) Fuel consumption per tilled area ANN Al-Janobi et al. (2010) Draft force, speciﬁc draft force ANN Al-Hamed et al. (2013) Draft force ANN Saleh and Aly (2013) Fuel consumption per working hour, fuel consumption per tilled area, speci ﬁc volumetric fuel consumption, drawbar power, tractor tractive ef ﬁciency ANNAlmaliki et al. (2016b)Draft force ANFIS, ASABE equation Shafaei et al. (2017a) Fuel consumption per working hour, fuel consumption per tilled area, speci ﬁc volumetric fuel consumption ANN, ANFISShafaei et al. (2018a)Draft force ANN, MLR, ASABE equation Shafaei et al. (2018b) Draft force, speciﬁc draft force ANFIS, ASABE equation Shafaei et al. (2018c) Energy requirement for tillage implement, overall energy ef ﬁciency ANN, ANFIS Shafaei et al. (2019c) Tractor tractive efﬁciency ANN, ANFIS Shafaei et al. (2018d) Tractor rear wheel slip ANN, ANFIS Shafaei et al. (2019e) Stationary tests Draft force ANN Choi et al. (2000) Draft force ANN Roul et al. (2009) Speciﬁc draft force FIS Marakoglu and Carman(2010) Fuel consumption per working hour ANN, MLR Rahimi-Ajdadi andAbbaspour-Gilandeh (2011) Draft force FIS Mohammadi et al. (2012) Draft force ANN Akbarnia et al. (2014)
Table 4Key technical speciﬁcations of 4WD tractor used in the research.Speciﬁcation Value UnitManufacture ITM-Iran – Model MF-399 – Front tires 37.85–60.96 cm Rear tires 46.74/38.10–86.36 cm Wheel base 264 cm Total weight 39.34 kN Drawbar height 43.3 cm Rear axle width 151.8–242.8 cm Front axle width 172.6–209.4 cm Weight of rear axle 24.52 kN Weight of front axle 14.82 kN Maximum power at 2200 rpm 81 kWInﬂation pressure of front tire 204 kPaInﬂation pressure of rear tire 136 kPa42 S.M. Shafaei et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 2 (2019) 38 –84practices. This hypotheses was approved by the authors in their previ-ous researches, especially in case of the component effect of nominaland numeral variables on desired target ( Shafaei et al., 2015;Shafaei et al., 2018d;Shafaei et al., 2019b;Shafaei et al., 2019e). Accordingly, it is desired to validate the hypotheses in case of simulation of the com-ponent effect of plowing depth, forward speed, and tillage implementtype on whole performance parameters (required draft force of imple-ment, tractor rear wheel slip, fuel consumption per working hour, spe-ciﬁc volumetric fuel consumption, tractor drawbar power, energyrequirement for tillage implement, overall energy ef ﬁciency, tractor tractive efﬁciency, speciﬁc draft force, and fuel consumption per tilledarea). To accomplish this, there is need to develop the ANFIS computersimulation workplace with three input variables and ten output param-eters. In this regard, a challenging problem exists in the ANFIS computersimulation workplace, when the number of output parameters is morethan one. Practically, in the ANFIS computer simulation workplace, tolink several input and output data, deﬁnition of fuzzy rules based on the structure of IF and THEN is very complex and impossible. Thus, toavoid this problem, the overall ANFIS structure has been establishedbased on consideration of one output parameter in accordance withseveral input variables.Literature review concerning application of the ANFIS computersimulation workplace for prognostication of several output parametersindicated that the investigators completed desired simulations bymeans of development of a simulation workplace including severalANFIS sub-environments, each for one output parameter, based on thesame multiple input variables (Shafaei et al., 2016a;Shafaei et al., 2018a;Shafaei et al., 2018c;Shafaei et al., 2019c). Although, this simu- lation scenario obviated inherent drawback of structure of the ANFIScomputer simulation workplace for prognostication of several outputparameters, more simulation time required to develop several sub-environments were reported by the investigators. Besides, user-friendly conﬁguration of the simulation workplace was diminishedwith development of several sub-environments.1.3. New simulation scenarioAccording to aggregation of outcome results of some previous pub-lished papers of the same authors (Shafaei et al., 2018a;Shafaei et al., 2018c;Shafaei et al., 2018d;Shafaei et al., 2019c), it was found that mas- ter performance parameters of tractor-implement system in plowingprocess are required draft force of implement, tractor rear wheel slip,and fuel consumption per working hour. Other seven slave performanceparameters (speciﬁc draft force, fuel consumption per tilled area, spe-ciﬁc volumetric fuel consumption, tractor drawbar power, tractor trac-tive efﬁciency, energy requirement for tillage implement, and overallenergy efﬁciency) can be mathematically obtained utilizing the threemaster performance parameters. Hence, to achieve higher prognostica-tion accuracy and user-friendly conﬁguration of the workplace as wellas lower simulation time, a new simulation scenario is presented inthis research for theﬁrst time. The scenario is based on developing sim-ulation workplace for stepwise prognostication of ten performance pa-rameters with respect to three input variables of plowing depth,forward speed, and tillage implement type. The simulation procedureis performed in two main stages. In theﬁr
st stage, the MANFIS conﬁgu- ration consisting of the ANFIS environments is developed to prognosti-cate three master performance parameters. In the second stage, theobtained simulation values of three master performance parametersTable 5Major technical characteristics of the transducers used in the digital instrumentation system.Transducer Model Manufacture Country Speci ﬁcation AccuracyRotary shaft encoders E50S8-500-3-T-24 Autonics Korea 500 (pulse/revolution) 1 (pulse)Flow meters FS300A G3/4 Meinte China 0 –60 (L/min) 0.2 (L) Load cell NS4-5t Mavin China 0 –50 (kN) 2.5 (N)
Fig. 1.An instrumented tractor at base station, a) ﬂow meters, b) rotary shaft encoder mounted on non-driving ﬁfth wheel, c) data acquisition unit, and d) rotary shaft encoder mounted on driving rear wheel.43 S.M. Shafaei et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 2 (2019) 38 –84are employed for stepwise prognostication of the other seven slave per-formance parameters. This task is performed by utilization of two MNEconﬁgurations. Therefore, it can be deduced that new simulation sce-nario is established based on development of the MANFIS coupledwith the MNE. However, efﬁciency of new simulation scenario(MANFIS+MNE) is ascertainable in comparison with the two knownsimulation scenarios (ANN and MANFIS).1.4. Aims and questions of researchThe systematic literature survey concludes that there is an inevitabledemand to obviate the aforementioned problematic challenge and in-vestigate the hypothesis through development of robust soft computingworkplace operated based on the new introduced simulation scenario(MANFIS+MNE) for exhaustive prognostication of whole performanceparameters (required draft force of implement, tractor rear wheel slip,fuel consumption per working hour, speci ﬁc draft force, fuel consump- tion per tilled area, speciﬁc volumetric fuel consumption, tractor draw-bar power, tractor tractive efﬁciency, energy requirement for tillageimplement, and overall energy efﬁciency) of tractor-implement systemregarding three independent input variables of plowing depth, forwardspeed, and tillage implement type. The novelty of this research can beaddressed not only to validate the new simulation scenario, but also tofollow to respond the main questions outlined below:•Is efﬁciency of neuro-fuzzy strategy higher than neural strategy inprognostication of desired output targets based on the compound ef-fect of nominal and numeral input variables?•Are prognostication accuracy and simulation time of the MANFIS+MNE simulation workplace better rated than that of the ANN andMANFIS simulation workplaces?•Is user-friendly conﬁguration of MANFIS+MNE simulation workplacesimple enough to be considered as applicable neuro-fuzzy calculator?•Do physical perceptions obtained from results of prominent simula-tion workplace enrich state of the art in the domain of comprehendingbehavior of the performance parameters?2. Research methodology2.1. Tillage site layoutThree experimental zones in an arable land of Bajgah Agricultural Re- search Station of Shiraz University (29°32 ′N 52°35′E, North West of Shi- raz city, Iran) were considered as tillage site. The site had clay loam soiltexture (35% sand, 30% silt, and 35% clay) and ﬂat topography. Each sitewas partitioned into 27 separated plots (30 m long by 5 m wide) resultingin a total of 81 plots. To measure moisture content of plot soils, in ﬁve ran- dom locations of the plots, a sampling procedure in 30 cm topsoil layerwas carried out utilizing a cylindrical core sampler. The collected soil sam-ples were immediately packed in separate polyethylene bags and trans-ferred to research laboratory. The samples were dried in a convectionoven at 105 ± 1 °C until constant weight was obtained ( SAA, 1977). To avoid experimental error, the drying process was triplicated for eachsoil sample and mean value was used. The moisture content of the sitesoil was found to be 8.84% (g water/g dry sample).One of the tillage sites employed for chiseling process was coveredwith uniform wheat stubble. The percentage of wheat stubble coveragewas calculated 22% based on Eq.(1)(Papendick, 2002).Y¼1−e
−0:000644X/C0/C1/C2100 ð1Þ2.2. Speciﬁcations of tractor-implement systemsA popular 4WD tractor with MFWD system, with its front wheelssmaller than rear wheels, was used in this research. The key technicalspeciﬁcations of the tractor are provided inTable 4. To measure princi- pal performance parameters in plowing process, the tractor was fullyequipped with a digital instrumentation system. The system was devel-oped and validated by the same authors in the previous work ( Shafaei et al., 2019a). The instrumentation system composed of a data acquisi-tion unit and three groups of transducer assembly (two ﬂow meters, three rotary shaft encoders, and one load cell). The major engineeringdetails of the transducers are completely reported in Table 5. The instru- mented tractor at base station is shown in Fig. 1. The twoﬂow meters were utilized for measuring tractor fuel con-sumption. Theﬁrst one was embedded between the injector pumpand fuelﬁlter of the tractor. The second one was also embedded in theline between injection pump and fuel tank and thereby, excess fuelreturned to the tank was measured. The difference between two mea-sured values obtained from theﬂow meters was considered as the trac-tor fuel consumption value.The load cell was used to measure required draft force of implementin accordance with the method standardized by the RNAM institute(RNAM, 1995). This method has been frequently used in previousworks by the researchers (Zhang et al., 2001;Shah et al., 2015; Rahmanian-Koushkaki et al., 2015;Shafaei et al., 2019d). Driving wheel slip can be continuously measured using the methodsuggested byPranav et al. (2010). In this method, to measure forwardspeed of outer radius of the wheels (ground speed), two encoders wereTable 6Principal technical speciﬁcations of the mounted implements used in the research.Implement Model Manufacture Country Main components Working width (cm)Chisel plow CPP Rau Germany Nine spring curved shanks 225Disk plow TAKA 165 TAKA Iran Three disk bottoms 120Moldboard plow 3000IP65 Moradi Iran Three bottoms 90
Table 7Independent and dependent variables considered in the ﬁeld operations.Independent variables Dependent variablesForward speed (km/h) Plowing depth (cm) Implement Master Slave2 10 Chisel plow Required draft force of implement Speci ﬁc draft force 4 20 Disk plow Tractor rear wheel slip Fuel consumption per tilled area6 30 Moldboard plow Fuel consumption per working hour Speci ﬁc volumetric fuel consumptionTractor drawbar powerTractor tractive efﬁciencyEnergy requirement for tillage implementOverall energy efﬁciency44 S.M. Shafaei et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 2 (2019) 38 –84ﬁtted into the wheel hubs of the rear wheels and one on a ﬁfth wheel employing some mechanical joints. Theﬁfth wheel was hinged to the tractor chassis between rear and front wheels as a non-driving wheel. Itwas reasonable to assume that slip of left and right driving wheels oft h er e a ra x l em i g h tn o tb ee q u a la tt h es a m et i m e ,o w i n gt oe x i s t e n c eo fdifferent soil conditions in theﬁeld. Hence, average values of obtainedground speed of left and right driving wheels were considered as theoret-ical forward speed. Meanwhile, measured ground speed of the ﬁfth wheel was considered as actual forward speed. To calculate slip percentage ofrear driving wheel of the tractor, Eq.(2) was applied in data acquisition unit of the digital instrumentation system ( ASAE, 2003).S¼1−
Vf
Vd/C18/C19/C2100 ð2ÞThree mounted implements of disk, chisel, and moldboard plowcommonly used by farmers in southern area of the country wereemployed in this research. Principal technical speci ﬁcations of the im- plements are tabulated inTable 6. To restrict redundant and lateralforces acting on the implement in plowing process, the implement at-tached to the tractor was leveled utilizing three-point hitch links ofthe tractor. Prior toﬁeld operations, initial inspection of the tractor-implement system was also performed at base station.2.3. Field operationsTheﬁeld operations were conducted in a half day (10 AM to 4 PM)on January 16, 2017 in predetermined plots. For each implement type,arrangement of the plots was randomized and blocked based on splitplot design with three replications. In this design, plowing depth andforward speed were considered as major and minor treatments,respectively.Before entering the plots, three-point linkage height lever was acti-vated to lower the implement corresponding to the desired plowingdepth. The tractor, in 2WD mode, was also operated at respective gearand throttle settings (rated speed of engine) to achieve desired forwardspeed at selected plowing depth in a practice area. These settings of thetractor were remained invariable along each test plot. Before each plot, apractice area was considered to adjust operational treatments (plowingdepth and forward speed) until a steady state reached. For each combi-nation of the treatments, three runs were performed to ensure repeat-ability and reliability of collected data. Arithmetic average of thecollected data was then used for next step (data processing). The con-sidered levels of the treatments (independent variables) applied inﬁeld operations and the master performance parameters of tractor-implement systems measured inﬁeld operations in accordance withthe slave calculated performance parameters (dependent variables)are reported inTable 7.In the plots, as the tractor-implement system reached the ﬁrst installedﬂag marking, data collection for the master performance pa-rameters was started utilizing the digital instrumentation system. Thedata collection process continued until end of the plot, and it wasstopped as the tractor-implement system passed the second installedﬂag marking. At end of each plot, a headland area was allocated for turn-ing the tractor-implement system in order to enter into the next plot.In each plot, required draft force of the implement was measuredbased on the RNAM method. According to the method, the maintractor-implement system was pulled by an auxiliary tractor (model:4450, Company: John Deere, Country: USA), while the load cell trans-ducer of the digital instrumentation system was horizontally connectedbetween the two tractors. During applying the RNAM method, it wasensured that the main tractor-implement system and the auxiliary trac-tor were placed on level ground in both lateral and longitudinal direc-tions and the connection line of the transducer was parallel to groundsurface. The operations were carried out with the mounted implementat desired plowing depth and forward speed. Obtained data from thetransducer were considered as gross traction forces. The operationswere also conducted at desired forward speed with the implement intransport position and the collected data from the transducer were con-sidered as rolling resistance force of the tractor wheels. Finally, required
Fig. 2.Flowchart for selection of the best structure of the ANN simulation workplace in accordance with schematic of simulation scenario.45 S.M. Shafaei et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 2 (2019) 38 –84Fig. 3.Flowchart for selection of the best structure of the MANFIS simulation workplace in accordance with schematic of simulation scenario and ﬁve-layered structure of the ANFIS.46 S.M. Shafaei et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 2 (2019) 38 –84draft force of the implement (net traction force) was calculated oncerolling resistance force of the main tractor was deducted from thegross traction force. It should be noted that the operations were con-ducted, while transmission system of the main tractor was set to neutralposition.2.4. Data processingCollected data for the master performance parameters (requireddraft force of implement, tractor rear wheel slip, fuel consumption perworking hour) make it possible to calculate the slave performance pa-rameters (speciﬁc volumetric fuel consumption, tractor drawbarpower, energy requirement for tillage implement, overall energy ef ﬁ- ciency, tractor tractive efﬁciency, speciﬁc draft force, and fuel consump- tion per tilled area) by means of the following equations ( Jr, 1989;ASAE, 2011;Ahmadi, 2016a).SVFC¼
3:6/C2TFCNTF/C2FS/C2h ð3ÞTDP¼
NTF/C2FS3:6 ð4ÞERTI¼
TDPIFC ð5ÞOEE¼
3:6/C2TDP38:7/C2FCTA/C2IFC/C2100 ð6ÞTTE¼1−SðÞ
NTFGTF/C2100 ð7ÞSDF¼
NTFPD/C2w ð8ÞFCTA¼TFCIFC/C2h ð9ÞTo calculate implementﬁeld capacity in order to substitute in theEqs.(5), (6) and (9), the following Eq.(10)was used (ASAE, 2011).IFC¼
w/C2FS/C2E f
10 ð10Þ2.4.1. Statistical descriptionsStatistical descriptions for obtained performance parameters of thetractor-implement system in plowing process were performed by utili-zation of some statistical descriptor parameters (mean, standard devia-tion, coefﬁcient of variation, and coefﬁcient of non-uniformity) based onthe following equations (Shafaei and Kamgar, 2017).M¼
Pi¼Ni¼1PPi
N ð11ÞSD¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃP
i¼Ni¼1PPi−MðÞ2qN ð12ÞCV¼
SDM/C18/C19/C2100 ð13ÞCNU¼
PPmax−PP min
M/C18/C19/C2100 ð14Þ2.5. Execution of soft computing simulation workplace2.5.1. ANNThe multi-layer perceptron architecture of the ANN scenario wasemployed in the simulation workplace. The architecture comprisesthree main layers: an input layer, hidden layer, and an output layer.Each layer includes several nodes. The number of nodes in the inputand output layer is equal to the number of input and output variablesin the simulation workplace. The connections among the nodes in thehidden layer signiﬁcantly inﬂuence prognostication accuracy. The ANN
Fig. 4.Schematic of new simulation scenario of the MANFIS+MNE (FS: forward speed, PD: plowing depth, IT: implement type, FCWH: fuel consumption per working hour, NTF: nettraction force (required draft force of implement), GTF: gross traction force, TRWS: tractor rear wheel slip, FCTA: fuel consumption per tilled area, TDP: tractor drawbar power, SDF:speciﬁc draft force, TTE: tractor tractive ef ﬁciency, SVFC: speciﬁc volumetric fuel consumption; OEE: overall energy ef ﬁciency, ERTI: energy requirement for tillage implement).47 S.M. Shafaei et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 2 (2019) 38 –84scenario repeatedly decreases overall error of prognostication throughmodiﬁcation of its connections among hidden nodes in predeterminedtraining algorithm. In this scenario, prognostication process is automat-ically completed by means of neural computing through the layers. Thedata sets in input layer are intelligently mapped to hidden layer andconsequently mapped to output layer by means of input and outputtransfer functions, respectively.In the simulation workplace, the ANN scenario was developed basedon three layers. The values of three input variables of plowing depth (10,20 and 30 cm), forward speed (2, 4 and 6), and implement type (mold-board, disk, and chisel plow) were imported into the input layer and thevalues of ten performance parameters of tractor-implement systems inplowing process were imported into output layer, too. Therefore, theANN scenario was established with three and ten nodes in input andoutput layers, respectively. In input layer of the simulation workplace,to have possibility of arbitrary selection of the implement, the integers1, 2 and 3 were assigned for moldboard, disk, and chisel plow imple-ment, respectively.To import data sets into the ANN simulation workplace, data setswere randomly classiﬁed into three categories of training, testing andvalidation sets by 70:15:15 ratios. During training the ANN simulationworkplace, the ANN scenario is tested in contradiction of the test data
Fig. 5.Operationalﬂowchart of the program algorithm written for running the new simulation scenario of the MANFIS+MNE.48 S.M. Shafaei et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 2 (2019) 38 –84set to control correctness, and training process is stopped when themean average error remained constant for a speci ﬁcn u m b e ro ft r a i n i n g cycles. This task is considered to avoid over ﬁtting. According to the ANN structure, several structural arrangementswere tried to obtain the best structure with the highest prognosticationaccuracy. Various structural parameters of the scenario (the number oftraining cycles, input and output transfer functions, and the number ofnodes in hidden layer) were run through frequent simulation tests inthe ANN toolbox of STATISTICA 12 software (StatSoft Inc., Tulsa, OK,USA). During development process of the ANN scenario, the numberof nodes in the hidden layer was set to a range from 2 to 10. The transferfunctions of nodes were considered as follows: tangent, logistic, linear,Gaussian, sine, unit step, logarithm, and exponential. Fig. 2illustrates theﬂowchart for selection of the best structure of the ANN simulationworkplace in accordance with schematic of simulation scenario.2.5.2. MANFISTheﬁrst order Takagi-Sugeno-Kang type of the ANFIS scenario wasused to prognosticate ten performance parameters of the tractor-implement systems in plowing process, on the basis of three indepen-dent input variables of plowing depth, forward speed, and implementtype. The ANFIS is aﬁve-layered structure including different nodes ineach layer. The nodes in each layer connect with the nodes in the previ-ous layer and receive input data coming from the previous nodes. Theseﬁve layers are known as fuzziﬁcation, normalization, fuzzy rule,defuzziﬁcation, and output layer, respectively. The ANFIS simulationscenario is completed through passing data sets in these ﬁve layers. The scenario is described in the following paragraph.When input data are assigned to theﬁrst layer nodes, they are graded between zero and one by input membership functions (con-stant, triangular, generalized bell (Gbell), gaussian, trapezium, and sig-moid). The graded data are shifted to the second layer nodes as inputdata. The numerical weights are allocated to the data in the secondlayer. Furthermore, the second layer normalizes the weighted inputdata. The weighted input data are transferred to the third layer nodesas input data of fuzzy rules. These rules are de ﬁned based on the IF and THEN structure. Output data obtained by the rules are gatheredand aggregated to one output value in the fourth layer nodes. Thisvalue is converted to desired output variable by defuzzi ﬁcation method (weighted sum and weighted average) of the inference system. Outputmembership functions (constant and linear) are used for this job. Thedesired output variable isﬁnally obtained in theﬁfth layer node. The second layer of the ANFIS scenario normalizes the weightedinput data by training itself. Training process is performed similar tothat of the ANN scenario. The Hybrid algorithm is commonly used totrain the simulation workplace. The algorithm is a combination ofback-propagation and least square error algorithm. In the ANFIS sce-nario, the rules are also tuned automatically regarding relationships be-tween input and output data. As it has been mentioned in Section 1.2, deﬁnition of fuzzy rules based on the structure of IF and THEN is verycomplex. The overall ANFIS structure has been established based onconsideration of one output parameter in accordance with severalinput variables.In the MANFIS simulation workplace of MATLAB R2016b software(The Mathworks, Inc., Natick, MA, USA), ten ANFIS sub-environmentswere individually developed for prognostication of ten performance pa-rameters based on the same input variables of plowing depth (10, 20and 30 cm), forward speed (2, 4 and 6 km/h), and implement type(moldboard, disk, and chisel plow implement). Similar to the ANN sim-ulation workplace, to introduce implement type as input variable for theMANFIS simulation workplace, the integers 1, 2 and 3 were assigned formoldboard, disk, and chisel plow implement, respectively. Data sets ob-tained from theﬁeld operations were randomly shufﬂed and classiﬁed into three groups. The groups including 70, 15 and 15% of the data fortra
ining, validating and testing, respectively, of each developed ANFISsub-environment. Calibration process was frequently performed untilthe best structure of the ANFIS scenario for each performance parameterwith the highest prognostication accuracy was reached. The processwas completed by trying different training cycles, the number of inputmembership functions, type of input membership functions, type ofoutput membership functions, and defuzzi ﬁcation methods. Flowchart for selection of the best MANFIS scenario in accordance with schematicof simulation scenario andﬁve-layered structure of the ANFIS areshown inFig. 3.2.5.3. MANFIS+MNEThe new simulation scenario of MANFIS+MNE was consideredbased on one MANFIS conﬁguration coupled with two MNE conﬁgura- tions (Fig. 4). The MANFIS conﬁguration consisted of four ANFIS sub-environments. Three ANFIS sub-environments were applied for prog-nostication of three master performance parameters (required draftforce of implement, tractor rear wheel slip, fuel consumption per work-ing hour) of tractor-implement systems in plowing process regardingthree input variables of plowing depth (10, 20 and 30 cm), forwardspeed (2, 4 and 6 km/h), and implement type (moldboard, disk, andchisel plow). The forth ANFIS sub-environment was applied as auxiliaryone for prognostication of gross traction force. The best ﬁnalized struc- tures obtained for the ANFIS1, ANFIS4, and ANFIS9 in the previousSection 2.5.2were employed in the workplace. Similarly, calibrationprocess was frequently performed until the best structure (training cy-cles, the number of input membership functions, type of input member-ship function, type of output membership functions, and defuzzi ﬁcation methods) of the ANFIS4 was obtained for prognostication of gross trac-tion force. The output prognostication values of the MANFIS con ﬁgura- tion could be used in the MNE con ﬁguration1. The MNE conﬁguration1 consisted of four MNE environments for prognosticationof tractor drawbar power, tractor tractive ef ﬁciency, speciﬁc draft force, and fuel consumption per tilled area, based on the Eqs. (4), (7), (8) and (9), respectively. The values of four performance parameters calculatedby the MNE conﬁguration1 were delivered to the MNE conﬁguration2 inTable 8The values of statistical descriptor parameters determined for required draft force of the implements in plowing process.Implement Minimum (kN) Maximum (kN) Mean (kN) SD (kN) CV (%) CNU (%)Chisel plow 7.88 37.81 21.87 10.55 48.24 136.85Disk plow 5.55 21.06 13.52 4.70 34.76 114.72Moldboard plow 3.85 23.04 11.52 5.99 52.00 166.58
Table 9The values of statistical descriptor parameters determined for tractor rear wheel slip in plowing process.Implement Minimum (%) Maximum (%) Mean (%) SD (%) CV (%) CNU (%)Chisel plow 8.98 49.02 27.24 12.24 44.93 146.99Disk plow 5.11 38.65 22.60 10.30 45.58 148.41Moldboard plow 6.54 46.23 23.07 11.52 49.93 172.0449 S.M. Shafaei et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 2 (2019) 38 –84order to calculate other three performance parameters (speci ﬁc volu- metric fuel consumption, energy requirement for tillage implement,and overall energy efﬁciency) on the basis of the Eqs.(3), (5) and (6).F i - nally, obtained values of ten performance parameters were achievablein the simulation workplace output.To run the MANFIS+MNE simulation scenario, a simple code waswritten in Command Window of MATLAB R2016b software. When theprogram (ﬁnalized code) was run, the prerequisite values of plowingdepth in the range of 10–30 cm, forward speed in the range of2–6 km/h, and tillage implement type (the integers 1, 2 and 3 for mold-board, disk, and chisel plow implement, respectively) were receivedand the MANFIS conﬁguration, MNE conﬁguration1, and MNE conﬁgu- ration2 were respectively called to simulate and calculate the ten per-formance parameters. The error message was displayed in CommandWindow, if the prerequisite values were not imported in desired ranges.It should be also noted that required speci ﬁcations (working width and ﬁeld efﬁciency) for each implement were deﬁned for the program to be used in the MNE conﬁguration1 and MNE conﬁguration2. Finally, the prerequisite values in accordance with the ten obtained performanceparameters were placed in predetermined appropriate columns ofworkspace in the MATLAB software. Therefore, it can be pointed outthat the deﬁned program for simulation workplace worked like aneuro-fuzzy calculator in workspace of the MATLAB software. Itmeans that, values of the independent input variables were receivedand values of the ten performance parameters were tabulated. Opera-tionalﬂowchart of the program algorithm is shown in Fig. 5. As it can be seen in theFig. 5, the algorithm consisted of three sub-programsfor the MANFIS conﬁguration, MNE conﬁguration1, and MNE conﬁgura- tion2 which are called, respectively.2.6. Prognostication appraisal of soft computing simulation workplacesGoodness of prognostication accuracy of each performance parame-ter of tractor-implement systems in soft computing simulation work-places for each scenario (the ANN, MANFIS, and MANFIS+MNE) wasappraised by coefﬁcient of determination of regression analysis utilizingEq.(15)(Shafaei et al., 2016b). Moreover, absolute and relative error ofprognostication were ascertained by Eqs. (16) and (17),r e s p e c t i v e l y (Shafaei et al., 2017b). The highest values of coefﬁcient of determination closed to one and the lowest values of the RMSE and MRDM indicate thebest simulation workplace for each scenario. However, prognosticationaccuracy of prominent simulation workplace of each scenario must becompared with that of other ones.R
2¼1−Pi¼Ni¼1PPobt;i−PP sim;i/C0/C12
Pi¼Ni¼1PPobt;i−PP obtave/C0/C12 ! ð15ÞRMSE¼1N∑i¼Ni¼1PPsim;i−PP obt;i/C0/C12"#0:5
ð16ÞMRDM¼
100NXi¼Ni¼1 PPsim;i−PP obt;i/C12/C12/C12/C12PP
obt;i/C18/C19 ð17Þ2.7. Performance benchmark of prominent soft computing simulationworkplacesSimulation residual errors for prominent simulation workplace ofthe ANN, MANFIS, and MANFIS+MNE scenario were plotted to apprisesensitivity of prognostication values to actual data. The MAVSRE wasalso calculated (Eq.(18)) for each prominent simulation workplace.MAVSRE¼
1NXi¼Ni¼1PPsim;i−PP obt;i/C12/C12/C12/C12 ð18ÞTo recognize prominent scenario for prognostication of performanceparameters of tractor-implement systems, not only a comparative trendwas performed between the values obtained from the Eqs. (15)–(18), but also simulation time and user-friendly con ﬁguration of three sce- narios were benchmarked. The scenario with the highest prognostica-tion accuracy, the lowest simulation time, and more user-friendlyconﬁguration was recognized as the prominent one.3. Results and discussion3.1. Statistical descriptions3.1.1. Required draft force of implementTable 8reports values of statistical descriptor parameters obtainedfor required draft force of the implements in plowing process. Accordingto theTable 8, it can be seen although the range of draft force variationsof the implements has overlap, the range for chisel plow implement washigher than that of other two implements. This led to considerablehigher mean value of the draft force of chisel plow implement thanthat of the other two implements. The possible explanation for thiscan be related to higher working width of chisel plow implement incomparison with that of the other ones ( Table 6). Another reason for this fact might be corresponded to wheat stubble coverage of the tillagesite for chiseling process. Because of wheat root concentration in 30 cmtopsoil layer, resistance forces are higher and thereby, more draft forcesare required to cut and break the soil.The minimum and maximum values of draft force tabulated in theTable 8were found in the lowest (forward speed = 2 km/h and plowingdepth = 10 cm) and the highest (forward speed = 6 km/h and plowingdepth = 30 cm) level of combination of the treatments, respectively, forall implements. The draft force variation ranges obtained in thisTable 10The values of statistical descriptor parameters determined for fuel consumption per working hour in plowing process.Implement Minimum (L/h) Maximum (L/h) Mean (L/h) SD (L/h) CV (%) CNU (%)Chisel plow 7.26 22.65 15.56 4.47 28.73 98.91Disk plow 5.29 14.89 9.91 2.99 30.17 96.87Moldboard plow 4.02 13.95 9.10 3.06 33.63 109.12
Table 11The values of statistical descriptor parameters determined for fuel consumption per tilled area in plowing process.Implement Minimum (L/ha) Maximum (L/ha) Mean (L/ha) SD (L/ha) CV (%) CNU (%)Chisel plow 12.18 43.22 23.07 9.66 41.87 134.55Disk plow 12.04 28.38 20.08 5.23 26.05 81.38Moldboard plow 15.58 37.69 27.84 7.39 26.55 79.4250 S.M. Shafaei et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 2 (2019) 38 –84research were within the similar ranges reported by Smith and Williford (1988)andAlmaliki (2018).3.1.2. Tractor rear wheel slipThe values of statistical descriptor parameters determined for tractorrear wheel slip in plowing process are tabulated in Table 9.A si tc a nb e seen in theTable 9, the wheel slip ranged from 5.11 to 49.02% for the im-plements. However, the wheel slip range for chisel plow implement washigher than that of moldboard plow followed by disk plow implement.This discrepancy might be attributable to the higher required draft forceof chisel plow implement than that of other implements which is men-tioned in the previous subset. Due to lack of proper traction force gener-ated by the tractor wheels in some conditions, the wheel slip increases.Moreover, lower contact between the wheels and soil occurs, when thetillage site is covered with uniform wheat stubble. Therefore, higherwheel slip might be related to a condition that luges of the tires do notpenetrate enough into the soil to make proper engagement needed forovercoming the higher implement draft.Similar to the previous subset results, the minimum and maximumvalues of the wheel slip reported in the Table 9were found in the lowest (forward speed = 2 km/h and plowing depth = 10 cm) and the highest(forward speed = 6 km/h and plowing depth = 30 cm) level of combina-tion of the treatments, respectively, for the implements. The range of thewheel slip observed in this research overlaps with the range documentedby previous authors in their research study reports ( Kolahloo and Loghavi, 1994;Tayel et al., 2015;Taiwo and Owusu-Sekyere, 2015).3.1.3. Fuel consumption per working hourThe values of statistical descriptor parameters determined for fuelconsumption per working hour in plowing process are given inTable 10. With reference to theTable 10, it is clear that higher range of the fuel consumption per working hour for chisel plow implementthan that of other implements led to higher associated mean value (ap-proximately 1.6 times) of the fuel consumption for the chisel plow im-plement than that of the other implements. There are two potentialcauses for this observation. Higher required draft force of chisel plowimplement than that of other implements and consequently, higherfuel energy requirements and fuel consumption per working hour. Ad-ditionally, higher wheel slip of tractor results in higher fuel consump-tion (Thansandote et al., 1977).In parallel with two previously discussed performance parameters,the minimum and maximum values of fuel consumption per workinghour noted in theTable 10were found in the lowest (forward speed= 2 km/h and plowing depth = 10 cm) and the highest (forwardspeed = 6 km/h and plowing depth = 30 cm) level of combination ofthe treatments, respectively, for the implements. These results for vari-ation of the fuel consumption are in compliance with the ﬁndings of previous researchers for strip tillage machine ( Sarauskis et al., 2017).3.1.4. Fuel consumption per tilled areaTable 11presents values of statistical descriptor parameters de-termined for fuel consumption per tilled area in plowing process. Itc a nb eo b s e r v e di nt h eTable 11that the fuel consumption rangedfrom 12.04 to 43.22 (L/ha) for the implements. However, the fuelconsumption range for chisel plow implement is higher than thatof other implements. According to Eq. (9), higher value of fuel con- sumption per working hour leads to calculation of higher value offuel consumption per tilled area. Hence, higher values of fuel con-sumption per working hour of chisel plow implement than that ofother implements resulted in the higher values of fuel consump-tion per tilled area of the chisel plow implement than that ofother implements.On the contrary with previously discussed performance parameters,the minimum and maximum values of the fuel consumption mentionedin theTable 11were found in combination of the treatments of forwardspeed = 6 km/h and plowing depth = 10 cm, and forward speed =2 km/h and plowing depth = 30 cm, respectively, for the implements.The variation range of the fuel consumption observed in the present re-search is consistent with the results published by previous researchers(Hu
ghes and Baker, 1977;Hemmat and Khashoei, 1995;Stajnko et al., 2009).3.1.5. Speciﬁc volumetric fuel consumptionThe values of statistical descriptor parameters determined for spe-ciﬁc volumetric fuel consumption in plowing process are organized inTable 12. As it can be found in theTable 12, the variation range of the fuel consumption for disk plow was higher than that of the other imple-ments. One possible explanation for this is related to the Eq. (3).T h eE q . (3)shows the inverse relation between speci ﬁc volumetric fuel con- sumption and the draft force as well as direct relation between speci ﬁc volumetric fuel consumption and fuel consumption per working hour.The combination of these two relations results in various values calcu-lated for speciﬁc volumetric fuel consumption.From analogical point of view, the minimum and maximum valuesof speciﬁc volumetric fuel consumption were obtained in differentlevels of combination of the treatments against those of fuel consump-tion per working hour and fuel consumption per tilled area. The mini-mum and maximum values of speciﬁc volumetric fuel consumption were obtained in the forward speed = 6 km/h and plowing depth =30 cm, and the forward speed = 2 km/h and plowing depth = 10, re-spectively, for the implements. The variation range of the fuel consump-tion observed in the current research is consistent with the results ofParvanloo et al. (2015).3.1.6. Speciﬁc draft forceThe values of statistical descriptor parameters determined for spe-ciﬁc draft force in plowing process are denoted in Table 13.W i t hr e f e r - ence to theTable 13,t h er a n g eo fs p e c iﬁc draft force for moldboard plowTable 12The values of statistical descriptor parameters determined for speci ﬁc volumetric fuel consumption in plowing process.Implement Minimum (L/kW h) Maximum (L/kW h) Mean (L/kW h) SD (L/kW h) CV (%) CNU (%)Chisel plow 0.36 1.66 0.88 0.43 48.86 147.73Disk plow 0.47 2.05 1.07 0.48 44.86 147.66Moldboard plow 0.36 1.87 0.97 0.50 51.55 155.67
Table 13The values of statistical descriptor parameters determined for speci ﬁc draft force in plowing process.Implement Minimum (kN/m
2)Maximum (kN/m2)Mean (kN/m2)SD (kN/m2)CV (%)CNU (%)Chisel plow 35.02 70.09 47.3310.2521.6674.10 Disk plow 46.21 77.27 59.8215.3225.6151.92 Moldboard plow 34.44 109.66 64.2921.7233.7811751 S.M. Shafaei et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 2 (2019) 38 –84implement was higher than that of disk plow followed by chisel plowimplement. This result is reasonable, since implement working widthof moldboard plow was lower than that of other two implements. Ac-cording to Eq.(8), the inverse relation between speciﬁc draft force and implement working width is observed. Therefore, lower implementworking width leads to higher speciﬁc draft force in the same condi- tions. From another point of view, based on Eq. (8), the value of required draft force of implement is important in speci ﬁc draft force calculation. In case of chisel and moldboard plow implement, the minimumvalue of speciﬁc draft force was obtained in forward speed = 2 km/hand plowing depth = 20 cm, while in the case of disk plow implement,the minimum speciﬁc draft occurred in forward speed = 2 km/h andplowing depth = 30 cm. The maximum value of speci ﬁc draft force for moldboard plow implement was obtained in forward speed =6 km/h and plowing depth = 10 cm. Meanwhile, the maximum valueof speciﬁc draft force for disk and chisel plow implement was obtainedin forward speed = 6 km/h and plowing depth = 20 cm. These resultsare closely aligned with those reported by Plouffe et al. (1995)and Arvidsson et al. (2004).3.1.7. Tractor drawbar powerThe values of statistical descriptor parameters determined for tractordrawbar power in plowing process are classi ﬁed inTable 14. In accor- dance with the values of theTable 14, it is clear that the range of the values of tractor drawbar power for chisel plow implement was consid-erably higher than that of other two implements. The reason behind thisresult is explained by the fact of direct relation between required draftforce of implement and tractor drawbar power (Eq. (4)). Hence, based on the Eq.(4), higher required draft force of implement results in highertractor drawbar power in the same tested conditions. Therefore, basedon theTable 8, higher values of the draft force of chisel plow implementthan those of other two implements lead to higher values of the draw-bar power of chisel plow implement than those of other twoimplements.Similar to the results of required draft force of implement, the min-imum and maximum values of tractor drawbar power tabulated in theTable 14were found in the lowest (forward speed = 2 km/h andplowing depth = 10 cm) and the highest (forward speed = 6 km/hand plowing depth = 30 cm) level of combination of the treatments, re-spectively, for the implements. The drawbar power results in this re-search are parallel to the results published by Chaplin et al. (1988), andLoghavi and Moradi (1996).3.1.8. Tractor tractive efﬁciencyTable 15reports the values of statistical descriptor parameters deter-mined for tractor tractive efﬁciency in plowing process. According to theTable 15, tractor tractive efﬁciency is higher when disk plow implementwas attached to the tractor. This might be attributed to lower tractorrear wheel slip (Table 9). Based on the Eq.(7), the tractive efﬁciency is direct function of the wheel slip and net traction force (required draftforce of implement). Therefore, on the basis of the Table 9, lower tractor rear wheel slip, as disk plow implement attached to the tractor, thanthat of other two implement leads to higher tractor tractive ef ﬁciency. The minimum and maximum values of tractor tractive ef ﬁciency re- ported in theTable 15were found in the highest (forward speed =6 km/h and plowing depth = 30 cm) and the lowest (forward speed= 2 km/h and plowing depth = 10 cm) level of combination of thetreatments, respectively, for the implements. The observed results arein general agreement with the results of previous studies conductedbyInchebron et al. (2012)andFar et al. (2015a).3.1.9. Energy requirement for tillage implementTable 16lists values of statistical descriptor parameters determinedfor energy requirement for tillage implements. The mean values of theenergy requirement in theTable 16tend to increase as implement varies from chisel to moldboard plow implement. A possible explana-tion for this result is related to implement working width (Eqs. (5) and (10)). Substitution of the Eq.(10)into the Eq.(5)shows that the energy requirements is an inverse function of implement working width. Ac-cordingly, considering working width of the implements noted in theTable 6, the energy requirement increased as implement workingwidth decreased.Similar to the results of some previously discussed performance pa-rameters, the minimum and maximum values of the energy require-ment noted in theTable 16were found in the lowest (forward speed= 2 km/h and plowing depth = 10 cm) and the highest (forwardspeed = 6 km/h and plowing depth = 30 cm) level of combination ofthe treatments, respectively, for the implements. The energy require-ment results reported byJr et al. (1985)andCelik et al. (2007)are sim- ilar compared to results of this research.3.1.10. Overall energy efﬁciencyTable 17shows values of statistical descriptor parameters deter-mined for overall energy efﬁciency of the tractor-implement systemsin plowing process. The mean value of the ef ﬁciency of disk plow imple- ment in theTable 17is higher than that of chisel plow followed bymoldboard plow implement. This result occurred due to higher tractortractive efﬁciency, when disk plow implement was attached to the trac-tor. Moreover, based on the Eq.(6), overall energy efﬁciency is inverse function of fuel consumption per tilled area. Therefore, the lower valuesof fuel consumption per tilled area for disk plow implement ( Table 11) than those of other two implements were effective in obtained highervalues of overall energy efﬁciency.Similar to the results of some previously discussed performance pa-rameters, the minimum and maximum values of the ef ﬁciency in plowing process documented in theTable 17were found in the lowest (forward speed = 2 km/h and plowing depth = 10 cm) and the highest(forward speed = 6 km/h and plowing depth = 30 cm) level of combi-nation of the treatments, respectively, for the implements. The obtainedvalues for the efﬁciency in current research are similarly ranged withTable 14The values of statistical descriptor parameters determined for tractor drawbar power in plowing process.Implement Minimum (kW) Maximum (kW) Mean (kW) SD (kW) CV (%) CNU (%)Chisel plow 4.38 63.02 26 19.36 74.46 225.54Disk plow 3.08 35.10 16.18 10.35 63.97 122.31Moldboard plow 2.13 38.40 14.18 10.92 77.01 255.78
Table 15The values of statistical descriptor parameters determined for tractor tractive ef ﬁciency in plowing process.Implement Minimum (%) Maximum (%) Mean (%) SD (%) CV (%) CNU (%)Chisel plow 43.69 89.23 68.99 13.23 19.18 66.01Disk plow 65.65 91.26 75.72 11.25 14.86 33.82Moldboard plow 49.43 87.54 71.06 10.18 41.33 53.6352 S.M. Shafaei et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 2 (2019) 38 –84those described byJr (1985),Sumer and Sabanci (2005),a n dFar et al. (2015b).O v e r a l lv i e wo nt h eTables 8–17demonstrated high values obtainedfor the CV and CNU of the performance parameters. These high valuesimply drastic changes of the performance parameters as affected bylevel changes of the treatments (plowing depth and forward speed). Ac-cording to the ranges obtained for the performance parameters oftractor-implement systems in plowing process in clay loam soil, it canbe claimed that these results are complementary for the researchstudy results which were comprehensively conducted by Kheiralla et al. (2004)in sandy clay loam soil of Malaysia in case of moldboard,disk plow, disk harrow, and rotary tiller implements. Hence, it is practi-cally desired that the experts who work in respective realms focus theirattention to these two published research results in order to optimizethe management of machinery in plowing process in the similar condi-tions like these researches.3.2. Performance appraisal of soft computing simulation workplaces3.2.1. ANNThe parameters of the several structural arrangements in accordancewith corresponding R
2, RMSE, and MRDM of selected twenty ANN softcomputing simulation workplaces executed to prognosticate perfor-mance parameters of the tractor-implement systems in plowing processare provided inTables 18–27. As it can be seen in theTables 18–27,t h e prominent ANN soft computing simulation workplace was recognizedwith 6 nodes in hidden layer, 113 training cycles, and exponential andtangent transfer function in input and output layer, respectively. Thecorresponding values of R
2for the prominent simulation workplaceranged from 0.683 to 0.890 for ten performance parameters. Graphicalpresentation of this improper range is illustrated in Fig. 6. With refer- ence to theFig. 6, the simulated and actual values of performance pa-rameters are not clustered perfectly around 1:1 line which indicatespoor agreement between the simulated and actual values. Additionally,scattered distribution of simulation residual error as shown in Fig. 7 clearly depicts that there was no pattern in the errors for the prominentsimulation workplace. However, distribution of the error values wascentralized in wide ranges.Fig. 8displays frequency of simulation resid-ual error that indicates scattered distribution of percentage of the errors.On the discussion about these observations, it can be stated that simula-tion residual errors of the prominent simulation workplace were sensi-tive to actual data and consequently, it is inferred that the simulationworkplace was not matched well to actual data. It is related to the factthat the effect of a variable on performance parameter values was notappropriately simulated by the prominent simulation workplace. Incontrast to this result, some previous investigators ( Taghavifar et al., 2013;Taghavifar and Mardani, 2014a;Taghavifar and Mardani, 2014b; Taghavifar et al., 2015) pronounced excellent prognostication accuracyof well-developed ANN soft computing simulation workplaces forestimation of unit output target on the basis of numeral multiple inputvariables.3.2.2. MANFISThe parameters of the several structural arrangements in accordancewith corresponding R2, RMSE, and MRDM of selected twenty MANFISsoft computing simulation workplaces executed to prognosticate per-formance parameters of the tractor-implement systems in plowing pro-cess are presented inTables 28–37. As it has been emphasized in theTables 28–37, the structural arrangements of each prominent ANFISsub-environment are not identical in comparison with those of othersub-environments.TheTable 28implies that prominent ANFIS soft computing simula-tion sub-environment for prognostication of required draft force of theimplements in plowing process was the one with structural arrange-ments of 125 training cycles, 3 input membership functions for forwardspeed, plowing depth, and implement type, trapezium and linear func-tion for input and output, respectively, and weighted sumdefuzziﬁcation method.TheTable 29presents that prominent ANFIS soft computing simula-tion sub-environment for prognostication of tractor rear wheel slip inplowing process was the one with structural arrangements of 79 train-ing cycles, 2 input membership functions for forward speed, and 3 inputmembership functions for plowing depth and implement type, sigmoidand constant function for input and output, respectively, and weightedsum defuzziﬁcation method.TheTable 30indicates that prominent ANFIS soft computing simula-tion sub-environment for prognostication of fuel consumption perworking hour in plowing process was the one with structural arrange-ments of 124 training cycles, 4 input membership functions for plowingdepth, and 3 input membership functions for forward speed and imple-ment type, sigmoid and linear function for input and output, respec-tively, and weighted sum defuzziﬁcation method.TheTable 31address that prominent ANFIS soft computing simula-tion sub-environment for prognostication of fuel consumption per tilledarea in plowing process was the one with structural arrangements of157 training cycles, 4 input membership functions for forward speedand plowing depth, and 3 input membership functions for implementtype, trapezium and constant function for input and output, respec-tively, and weighted average defuzziﬁcation method.TheTable 32reports that prominent ANFIS soft computing simula-tion sub-environment for prognostication of speci ﬁc volumetric fuel consumption in plowing process was the one with structural arrange-ments of 138 training cycles, 3 input membership functions for forwardspeed and implement type, and 4 input membership functions forplowing depth, triangular and linear function for input and output, re-spectively, and weighted sum defuzziﬁcation method.TheTable 33highlights that prominent ANFIS soft computing simu-lation sub-environment for prognostication of speci ﬁcd r a f tf o r c eo ft h e implements in plowing process was the one with structuralTable 16The values of statistical descriptor parameters determined for energy requirement for the implements in plowing process.Implement Minimum (MJ/ha) Maximum (MJ/ha) Mean (MJ/ha) SD (MJ/ha) CV (%) CNU (%)Chisel plow 11.45 54.92 31.77 15.33 48.25 136.83Disk plow 14.26 54.17 34.77 12.08 34.74 114.78Moldboard plow 12.45 74.85 37.40 19.46 52.03 166.85
Table 17The values of statistical descriptor parameters determined for overall energy ef ﬁciency of the tractor-implement systems in plowing process.Implement Minimum (%) Maximum (%) Mean (%) SD (%) CV (%) CNU (%)Chisel plow 5.61 25.89 14.58 6.91 47.39 139.10Disk plow 6.85 27.69 16.29 6.46 39.66 127.93Moldboard plow 5.64 21.63 11.54 4.82 41.77 138.5653 S.M. Shafaei et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 2 (2019) 38 –84arrangements of 124 training cycles, 3 input membership functions forforward speed plowing depth, and implement type, Gbell and linearfunction for input and output, respectively, and weighted averagedefuzziﬁcation method.TheTable 34describes that prominent ANFIS soft computing simula-tion sub-environment for prognostication of tractor drawbar power inplowing process was the one with structural arrangements of 115 train-ing cycles, 2, 4 and 3 input membership functions for forward speed,plowing depth, and implement type, respectively, sigmoid and constantfunction for input and output, respectively, and weighted sumdefuzziﬁcation method.TheTable 36indicates that prominent ANFIS soft computing simula-tion sub-environment for prognostication of tractor energy require-ment for tillage implements was the one with structural arrangementsof 146 training cycles, 4 input membership functions for forwardspeed and plowing depth, 3 input membership functions for implementtype, triangular and constant function for input and output, respec-tively, and weighted average defuzziﬁcation method.TheTable 37presents that prominent ANFIS soft computing simula-tion sub-environment for prognostication of overall energy ef ﬁciency of the tractor-tillage implements was the one with structural arrange-ments of 144 training cycles, 3 input membership functions for forwardspeed, plowing depth, and implement type, Gbell and linear function forinput and output, respectively, and weighted average defuzzi ﬁcation method.An overview on theTables 28–37issues that the corresponding values of R
2for the prominent sub-environment ranged from 0.971 to0.997 for ten performance parameters. Graphical presentation of thissuperior range is depicted inFig. 9. As it can be seen in theFig. 9, the simulated and actual values of performance parameters wereTable 18The parameters of the several structural arrangements in accordance with corresponding R
2, RMSE, and MRDM of selected twenty ANN soft computing simulation workplaces executed to prognosticate required draft force of the implements in plowing process.The number of nodes in hidden layer The number of training cycles Transfer function R
2RMSE (kN) MRDM (%)Input Output2 107 Tangent Tangent 0.790 5.011 9.4144 85 Logistic Exponential 0.709 5.541 10.1255 145 Tangent Sine 0.805 3.514 9.0599 161 Tangent Logistic 0.814 4.574 9.03710 183 Logistic Logistic 0.628 5.763 11.00210 96 Exponential Gaussian 0.698 5.587 10.58910 112 Tangent Gaussian 0.623 5.897 11.0202 174 Gaussian Tangent 0.777 4.568 9.6453 135 Sine Logistic 0.781 4.460 9.5412 142 Exponential Gaussian 0.629 5.064 10.1243 119 Logistic Tangent 0.755 4.521 9.9747 157 Tangent Logistic 0.804 4.026 9.4128 164 Logistic Logistic 0.798 4.578 9.5682 105 Sine Logistic 0.811 3.596 9.0256 113 Exponential Tangent 0.825 3.116 8.9795 136 Logistic Tangent 0.820 3.158 9.1076 154 Tangent Logistic 0.785 3.546 9.6207 97 Tangent Sine 0.780 3.600 9.6919 189 Logistic Sine 0.769 3.845 9.7855 140 Logistic Tangent 0.792 3.597 10.004The boldfaced line represents prominent simulation workplace.
Table 19The parameters of the several structural arrangements in accordance with corresponding R
2, RMSE, and MRDM of selected twenty ANN soft computing simulation workplaces executed to prognosticate tractor rear wheel slip in plowing process.The number of nodes in hidden layer The number of training cycles Transfer function R
2RMSE (%) MRDM (%)Input Output2 107 Tangent Tangent 0.809 4.001 10.9754 85 Logistic Exponential 0.770 5.068 11.2205 145 Tangent Sine 0.819 3.871 10.4479 161 Tangent Logistic 0.847 3.547 10.15810 183 Logistic Logistic 0.794 4.847 11.02410 96 Exponential Gaussian 0.833 3.714 10.16710 112 Tangent Gaussian 0.818 3.899 10.8102 174 Gaussian Tangent 0.816 3.905 10.8143 135 Sine Logistic 0.838 3.875 9.9122 142 Exponential Gaussian 0.880 3.410 9.8513 119 Logistic Tangent 0.804 4.024 10.9857 157 Tangent Logistic 0.767 5.669 11.2688 164 Logistic Logistic 0.783 5.425 11.1022 105 Sine Logistic 0.773 5.517 11.1616 113 Exponential Tangent 0.890 3.319 9.6465 136 Logistic Tangent 0.760 5.126 11.2156 154 Tangent Logistic 0.848 3.895 9.7857 97 Tangent Sine 0.836 3.911 9.6949 189 Logistic Sine 0.811 4.006 10.0125 140 Logistic Tangent 0.773 5.547 11.120The boldfaced line represents prominent simulation workplace.54 S.M. Shafaei et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 2 (2019) 38 –84appropriately clustered close to 1:1 line which speci ﬁes excellent corre- lation between the simulated and actual values. Furthermore, distribu-tion of simulation residual error is scattered in Fig. 10.T h eFig. 10 clearly illustrates that speciﬁc pattern was not recognized in the errorsfor the prominent sub-environments and distribution of the errorvalues was scattered around zero value. Fig. 11exhibitions frequency of simulation residual error revealing low ranges of percentage of theerrors. Accordingly, it can be pointed out that simulation residualerror of the prominent simulation workplace was not sensitive to actualdata and therefore, it is inferred that the simulation workplace wasmatched well to actual data.According to the observed results, it is found that the performanceparameters of the tractor-implement systems in plowing process weresatisfactorily prognosticated by the prominent MANFIS soft computingsimulation workplace executed in this research. This means that the ef-fect of nominal and numeral variables on the performance parametervalues was appropriately simulated by the prominent simulationworkplace.The previous authors (Taghavifar and Mardani, 2014c;Taghavifar and Mardani, 2015;Taghavifar et al., 2016;Taghavifar and Mardani, 2017) who employed the ANFIS simulation workplace in their Agricul-tural and Biosystems Engineering studies have similarly found properadequacy of the workplace for nonlinear prognostications of desiredvariables.3.2.3. MANFIS+MNEThe parameters of the several structural arrangements in accordancewith corresponding R
2, RMSE, and MRDM of selected twenty ANFIS softcomputing simulation sub-environment executed to prognosticategross traction force of the tractor-implement systems in plowing pro-cess are listed inTable 38. As it can be seen in theTable 38, the promi- nent ANFIS soft sub-environment is highlighted with structuralTable 20The parameters of the several structural arrangements in accordance with corresponding R
2, RMSE, and MRDM of selected twenty ANN soft computing simulation workplaces executed to prognosticate fuel consumption per working hour in plowing process.The number of nodes in hidden layer The number of training cycles Transfer function R
2RMSE (L/h) MRDM (%)Input Output2 107 Tangent Tangent 0.764 2.464 12.1604 85 Logistic Exponential 0.869 1.540 9.8155 145 Tangent Sine 0.772 2.651 11.8959 161 Tangent Logistic 0.857 1.884 10.00710 183 Logistic Logistic 0.838 1.965 9.98410 96 Exponential Gaussian 0.789 2.506 12.05510 112 Tangent Gaussian 0.865 1.823 10.1292 174 Gaussian Tangent 0.797 2.621 11.9843 135 Sine Logistic 0.751 2.776 12.1132 142 Exponential Gaussian 0.868 1.874 9.7173 119 Logistic Tangent 0.831 1.974 10.0077 157 Tangent Logistic 0.756 2.774 12.1158 164 Logistic Logistic 0.870 1.742 10.0142 105 Sine Logistic 0.789 2.336 12.0606 113 Exponential Tangent 0.872 1.472 9.6605 136 Logistic Tangent 0.782 2.512 12.0576 154 Tangent Logistic 0.788 2.498 12.0647 97 Tangent Sine 0.838 1.985 9.9979 189 Logistic Sine 0.750 2.781 12.1175 140 Logistic Tangent 0.757 2.779 12.104The boldfaced line represents prominent simulation workplace.
Table 21The parameters of the several structural arrangements in accordance with corresponding R
2, RMSE, and MRDM of selected twenty ANN soft computing simulation workplaces executed to prognosticate fuel consumption per tilled area in plowing process.The number of nodes in hidden layer The number of training cycles Transfer function R
2RMSE (L/ha) MRDM (%)Input Output2 107 Tangent Tangent 0.646 4.120 11.5154 85 Logistic Exponential 0.657 4.020 11.8565 145 Tangent Sine 0.656 3.895 11.8749 161 Tangent Logistic 0.614 4.195 12.15410 183 Logistic Logistic 0.671 3.822 10.94010 96 Exponential Gaussian 0.649 4.013 11.80710 112 Tangent Gaussian 0.623 3.991 12.0742 174 Gaussian Tangent 0.615 4.198 12.1273 135 Sine Logistic 0.632 4.070 11.9542 142 Exponential Gaussian 0.658 3.641 11.7483 119 Logistic Tangent 0.642 4.075 11.8527 157 Tangent Logistic 0.631 4.076 12.0178 164 Logistic Logistic 0.637 4.069 11.9942 105 Sine Logistic 0.631 4.077 11.9576 113 Exponential Tangent 0.701 3.480 9.0745 136 Logistic Tangent 0.623 4.125 12.0586 154 Tangent Logistic 0.666 3.954 11.9547 97 Tangent Sine 0.678 3.812 11.8959 189 Logistic Sine 0.643 3.710 11.9905 140 Logistic Tangent 0.654 3.784 11.826The boldfaced line represents prominent simulation workplace.55 S.M. Shafaei et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 2 (2019) 38 –84arrangements of 126 training cycles, 4 input membership functions forforward speed and plowing depth, 3 input membership functions forimplement type, Gbell and linear function for input and output, respec-tively, and weighted average defuzziﬁcation method. Meanwhile, its statistical performance criteria is R
2= 0.984, RMSE = 0.985 kN andMRDM = 2.167%. It should be noted that the structural arrangementsof the prominent ANFIS soft computing simulation sub-environmentsfor the three master performance parameters of required draft force ofimplements, tractor rear wheel slip, and fuel consumption per workinghour obtained in the MANFIS soft computing simulation workplacewere also employed in the MANFIS+MNE simulation workplace. Con-sequently, it is expected that the statistical performance criteria relatedto the three master performance parameters in two simulation scenar-ios were the same.Table 39presents statistical performance criteria for three mas-ter as well as seven slave performance parameters prognosticatedin the MANFIS+MNE simulation workplace. As it has been docu-mented in theTable 39, the corresponding values of R2for prognos- tication of ten performance parameters ranged from 0.971 to 0.996.Graphical presentation of this excellent range as shown in Fig. 12 reveals that the simulated and actual values of performance pa-rameters were properly clustered close to 1:1 line which impliedoutstanding correlation between the simulated and actual values.Additionally, distribution of simulation residual error is scatteredinFig. 13.T h eFig. 13clearly exhibits that no speciﬁc pattern was recognized in the errors for the simulation workplace and distribu-tion of the error values was scattered around zero value. Fig. 14dis- plays frequency of simulation residual error revealing low rangesof percentage of the errors. Accordingly, it can be stated that simu-lation residual error of the simulation workplace was not sensitiveto actual data and consequently, it is inferred that the workplacewas matched well to actual data.Table 22The parameters of the several structural arrangements in accordance with corresponding R
2, RMSE, and MRDM of selected twenty ANN soft computing simulation workplaces executed to prognosticate speciﬁc volumetric fuel consumption in plowing process.The number of nodes in hidden layer The number of training cycles Transfer function R
2RMSE (L/kW h) MRDM (%)Input Output2 107 Tangent Tangent 0.831 0.174 8.3764 85 Logistic Exponential 0.782 0.301 9.1745 145 Tangent Sine 0.797 0.284 9.1629 161 Tangent Logistic 0.779 0.312 9.18410 183 Logistic Logistic 0.785 0.294 9.18110 96 Exponential Gaussian 0.850 0.172 8.31510 112 Tangent Gaussian 0.754 0.380 9.2342 174 Gaussian Tangent 0.778 0.315 9.1923 135 Sine Logistic 0.751 0.389 9.2412 142 Exponential Gaussian 0.837 0.191 8.6243 119 Logistic Tangent 0.793 0.321 9.1117 157 Tangent Logistic 0.797 0.324 9.1258 164 Logistic Logistic 0.825 0.184 8.5472 105 Sine Logistic 0.803 0.215 9.0166 113 Exponential Tangent 0.859 0.169 8.2925 136 Logistic Tangent 0.779 0.304 9.2016 154 Tangent Logistic 0.815 0.198 8.5417 97 Tangent Sine 0.775 0.311 9.1989 189 Logistic Sine 0.847 0.178 8.3175 140 Logistic Tangent 0.775 0.310 9.205The boldfaced line represents prominent simulation workplace.
Table 23The parameters of the several structural arrangements in accordance with corresponding R
2, RMSE, and MRDM of selected twenty ANN soft computing simulation workplaces executed to prognosticate speciﬁc draft force of the implements in plowing process.The number of nodes in hidden layer The number of training cycles Transfer function R
2RMSE (kN/m2) MRDM (%)Input Output2 107 Tangent Tangent 0.724 8.142 9.1364 85 Logistic Exponential 0.727 7.900 9.1305 145 Tangent Sine 0.707 8.810 9.4249 161 Tangent Logistic 0.720 7.990 9.13210 183 Logistic Logistic 0.728 7.911 9.11910 96 Exponential Gaussian 0.704 9.045 9.54110 112 Tangent Gaussian 0.721 7.889 9.1202 174 Gaussian Tangent 0.723 7.902 9.1243 135 Sine Logistic 0.714 7.905 9.3262 142 Exponential Gaussian 0.728 8.006 9.1483 119 Logistic Tangent 0.727 7.914 9.1437 157 Tangent Logistic 0.700 8.987 9.5518 164 Logistic Logistic 0.723 7.994 9.0982 105 Sine Logistic 0.723 7.954 9.1026 113 Exponential Tangent 0.731 7.835 8.4905 136 Logistic Tangent 0.708 8.815 9.4926 154 Tangent Logistic 0.727 8.125 9.1217 97 Tangent Sine 0.707 8.812 9.4329 189 Logistic Sine 0.701 8.914 9.4035 140 Logistic Tangent 0.714 7.984 9.326The boldfaced line represents prominent simulation workplace.56 S.M. Shafaei et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 2 (2019) 38 –843.3. Performance benchmark of prominent soft computing simulationworkplacesThe statistical performance criteria of prominent soft computingsimulation workplaces executed based on three simulation scenarios(ANN, MANFIS, and MANFIS+MNE) for prognostication of performanceparameters of the tractor-implement systems in plowing process arecompared inFig. 15. According to theFig. 15, the coefﬁcient of determi- nation varied as 0.683bR
2b0.890, 0.971bR2b0.997 and 0.971bR2b 0.996 for the prominent ANN, MANFIS, and MANFIS+MNE workplace,respectively. Additionally, the relative error of prognostication variedas 7.91%bMRDMb9.66%, 0.91%bMRDMb4.79% and 1.48%bMRDM b4.97% for the prominent ANN, MANFIS, and MANFIS+MNE workplace,respectively. Meanwhile, the RMSE and MAVSRE for the MANFIS andMANFIS+MNE simulation scenarios ranged in a lower bond thanthose of the ANN simulation scenario. Hence, robustness of prognostica-tion accuracy of the MANFIS and MANFIS+MNE simulation scenariothan that of the ANN simulation scenario was approved.In this research, there was no precise relationship between perfor-mance parameters and implement type (nominal variable). Hence,weakness of several trained ANN simulation scenario based on neuralstrategy, to sufﬁciently prognosticate performance parameters resultedin uncovering this imprecise relationship. The neuro-fuzzy strategy canextract sophisticated relationship between output and input parame-ters using both neural and fuzzy beneﬁts. The fuzzy strategy can prog- nosticate output based on multiple input variables using de ﬁned rules which are ascertained by expert knowledge. Unlike the neural strategy,the fuzzy strategy cannotﬁnd relationship between input and outputTable 24The parameters of the several structural arrangements in accordance with corresponding R
2, RMSE, and MRDM of selected twenty ANN soft computing simulation workplaces executed to prognosticate tractor drawbar power in plowing process.The number of nodes in hidden layer The number of training cycles Transfer function R
2RMSE (kW) MRDM (%)Input Output2 107 Tangent Tangent 0.797 5.226 9.9124 85 Logistic Exponential 0.767 5.294 10.0055 145 Tangent Sine 0.742 5.312 10.0199 161 Tangent Logistic 0.838 5.042 9.55110 183 Logistic Logistic 0.817 5.159 9.60910 96 Exponential Gaussian 0.788 5.352 9.95810 112 Tangent Gaussian 0.763 5.315 10.0122 174 Gaussian Tangent 0.745 5.328 10.0173 135 Sine Logistic 0.780 5.249 9.9622 142 Exponential Gaussian 0.812 5.151 9.6343 119 Logistic Tangent 0.778 5.245 9.9627 157 Tangent Logistic 0.760 5.304 9.9148 164 Logistic Logistic 0.800 5.213 9.6472 105 Sine Logistic 0.831 5.042 9.5026 113 Exponential Tangent 0.841 5.005 9.4825 136 Logistic Tangent 0.808 5.203 9.6236 154 Tangent Logistic 0.836 5.096 9.5867 97 Tangent Sine 0.771 5.297 9.9579 189 Logistic Sine 0.838 5.012 9.5845 140 Logistic Tangent 0.810 5.169 9.625The boldfaced line represents prominent simulation workplace.
Table 25The parameters of the several structural arrangements in accordance with corresponding R
2, RMSE, and MRDM of selected twenty ANN soft computing simulation workplaces executed to prognosticate tractor tractive efﬁciency in plowing process.The number of nodes in hidden layer The number of training cycles Transfer function R
2RMSE (%) MRDM (%)Input Output2 107 Tangent Tangent 0.676 4.198 8.4104 85 Logistic Exponential 0.669 4.230 8.5695 145 Tangent Sine 0.611 5.025 8.7999 161 Tangent Logistic 0.680 4.123 7.95610 183 Logistic Logistic 0.635 4.852 8.84710 96 Exponential Gaussian 0.625 4.956 8.92710 112 Tangent Gaussian 0.678 4.145 8.4172 174 Gaussian Tangent 0.658 4.789 8.8693 135 Sine Logistic 0.664 4.119 8.8122 142 Exponential Gaussian 0.635 4.927 9.0243 119 Logistic Tangent 0.610 5.123 9.0117 157 Tangent Logistic 0.634 4.911 9.0168 164 Logistic Logistic 0.618 5.195 8.9022 105 Sine Logistic 0.603 5.114 8.8756 113 Exponential Tangent 0.683 4.046 7.9125 136 Logistic Tangent 0.646 4.751 8.7416 154 Tangent Logistic 0.669 4.239 8.5637 97 Tangent Sine 0.666 4.236 8.5609 189 Logistic Sine 0.651 4.536 8.6675 140 Logistic Tangent 0.625 5.007 8.915The boldfaced line represents prominent simulation workplace.57 S.M. Shafaei et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 2 (2019) 38 –84parameters by training itself. On the other hand, to appropriately prog-nosticate target, the neural strategy based simulation workplace trainsitself and the fuzzy strategy based simulation workplace uses de ﬁned fuzzy rules. The neuro-fuzzy strategyﬁnds proper fuzzy rules based on training itself. Hence, an outstanding ability of the neuro-fuzzy strat-egy based simulation scenario is toﬁnd compound and uncertain rela-tionships between output and input parameters. In this research, itwas found that the prominent MANFIS and MANFIS+MNE simulationworkplaces could detect exhaustive relationships between performanceparameters (dependent variables) and independent numeral variablesof plowing depth and forward speed, and nominal variable of imple-ment type. These relationships were ruled in fuzzy form and thentrained to attain minimum value of simulation residual errors.In parallel with this obtained result, satisfactory prognostication ac-curacy of the ANFIS simulation workplace versus the ANN simulationworkplace in several previous Biosystems Engineering researches hasbeen covered byKhoshnevisan et al. (2014)andKhoshnevisan et al. (2015).Profound appraisal of structural arrangements of the prominentMANFIS and MANFIS+MNE simulation workplaces in the Figs. 3 and 4, andTables 28–38conﬁrms that the statistical performance criteriaof two simulation workplaces were approximately identical. However,in the MANFIS simulation workplace, ten different ANFIS simulationsub-environments with various structural arrangements must be runto acceptably prognosticate the performance parameters of thetractor-implement systems in plowing process. While, in the MANFIS+MNE simulation workplace, four different ANFIS simulation sub-environments must be run. In other words, the ten performance param-eters could be adequately prognosticated with the lower simulationtime and more user-friendly conﬁguration in the MANFIS+MNE simu-lation workplace than MANFIS simulation workplace. Hence, it can bestated that the MANFIS+MNE simulation workplace is trustworthyTable 26The parameters of the several structural arrangements in accordance with corresponding R
2, RMSE, and MRDM of selected twenty ANN soft computing simulation workplaces executed to prognosticate energy requirement for the implements in plowing process.The number of nodes in hidden layer The number of training cycles Transfer function R
2RMSE (MJ/ha) MRDM (%)Input Output2 107 Tangent Tangent 0.728 6.148 10.2014 85 Logistic Exponential 0.792 5.691 9.7075 145 Tangent Sine 0.756 6.009 10.0259 161 Tangent Logistic 0.758 5.998 9.99110 183 Logistic Logistic 0.717 6.211 10.28110 96 Exponential Gaussian 0.756 6.004 10.01710 112 Tangent Gaussian 0.798 5.675 9.6972 174 Gaussian Tangent 0.757 6.004 10.0213 135 Sine Logistic 0.807 5.584 9.6572 142 Exponential Gaussian 0.796 5.681 9.7103 119 Logistic Tangent 0.747 6.094 10.537 157 Tangent Logistic 0.710 6.352 10.3018 164 Logistic Logistic 0.807 5.571 9.6502 105 Sine Logistic 0.724 6.157 10.2126 113 Exponential Tangent 0.813 5.484 9.5825 136 Logistic Tangent 0.737 6.097 10.0536 154 Tangent Logistic 0.742 6.102 10.1077 97 Tangent Sine 0.734 6.102 10.0759 189 Logistic Sine 0.725 6.150 10.2125 140 Logistic Tangent 0.708 6.340 10.325The boldfaced line represents prominent simulation workplace.
Table 27The parameters of the several structural arrangements in accordance with corresponding R
2, RMSE, and MRDM of selected twenty ANN soft computing simulation workplaces executed to prognosticate overall energy efﬁciency of the tractor-implement systems in plowing process.The number of nodes in hidden layer The number of training cycles Transfer function R
2RMSE (%) MRDM (%)Input Output2 107 Tangent Tangent 0.825 2.851 9.2564 85 Logistic Exponential 0.848 2.610 9.1175 145 Tangent Sine 0.803 3.181 9.7049 161 Tangent Logistic 0.852 2.591 9.12510 183 Logistic Logistic 0.848 2.527 9.01910 96 Exponential Gaussian 0.821 3.007 9.41010 112 Tangent Gaussian 0.804 3.179 9.6112 174 Gaussian Tangent 0.839 2.819 9.3673 135 Sine Logistic 0.811 3.124 9.5272 142 Exponential Gaussian 0.839 2.682 9.3033 119 Logistic Tangent 0.852 2.548 9.0737 157 Tangent Logistic 0.831 2.911 9.4178 164 Logistic Logistic 0.831 2.917 9.4262 105 Sine Logistic 0.803 3.180 9.7156 113 Exponential Tangent 0.878 2.142 8.6665 136 Logistic Tangent 0.827 2.806 9.2206 154 Tangent Logistic 0.836 2.709 9.1747 97 Tangent Sine 0.830 2.711 9.2109 189 Logistic Sine 0.859 2.523 9.0065 140 Logistic Tangent 0.865 2.421 8.954The boldfaced line represents prominent simulation workplace.58 S.M. Shafaei et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 2 (2019) 38 –84Fig. 6.Graphical presentation of correlation between the simulated values by the prominent ANN simulation workplace and actual values of performance parameters of tractor-implementsystems in plowing process.59 S.M. Shafaei et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 2 (2019) 38 –84Fig. 7.Simulation residual error plots for the simulated values by the prominent ANN simulation workplace for performance parameters of tractor-implement systems in plowing process.60 S.M. Shafaei et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 2 (2019) 38 –84Fig. 8.Frequency plots of simulation residual error for the simulated values by the prominent ANN simulation workplace for performance parameters of tractor-implement systems inplowing process.61 S.M. Shafaei et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 2 (2019) 38 –84and simple enough to be employed by the users for direct prognostica-tion of the ten performance parameters based on forward speed,plowing depth, and implement type. Therefore, for presentation ofclear physical perceptions of performance parameters of the tractor-implement systems in plowing process in this research, the MANFIS+MNE simulation workplace was employed.3.4. Prognostication of performance parameters of tractor-implementsystems3.4.1. Required draft force of implementFig. 16displays surface and contour plots obtained from the MANFIS+MNE simulation workplace for prognostication of required draft forceof the implements in plowing process. As it is obvious in the surfaceplots of theFig. 16, the draft force for each implement increasednonlinearly as plowing depth and forward speed increased. Moreover,the contour plots of theFig. 16clarify that the dual interaction effectof forward speed and plowing depth on the draft force was increasinglysynergistic. It is clear in the contour plots of the Fig. 16that the draft force increased from the lowest bound ( b4 kN) to the highest bound (N35 kN) when plowing depth along with forward speed increasedfrom 10 to 30 cm and 2 to 6 km/h, respectively.To interpret this obtained result, various physical perception havebeen indicated by previous investigators. Zhang et al. (2001)have stated that at higher plowing depth, the soil might become denser,and density, cohesion and the tensile strength of the soil would increasefurther and results in higher draft force requirement. Additionally, Al- Suhaibani and Ghaly (2013)indicated that with plowing depth incre-ment, the soil volume which should be cut, dispersed and moved in-creases and whereby, higher draft force is required for plowing higher
Table 29The parameters of the several structural arrangements in accordance with corresponding R
2, RMSE, and MRDM of selected twenty ANFIS soft computing simulation sub-environment ex- ecuted to prognosticate tractor rear wheel slip in plowing process.The number of training cycles The number of input membership functions Membership function Defuzzi ﬁcation method R
2RMSE (%) MRDM (%)Input Output60 2,2,3 Triangular Linear Weighted average 0.946 1.911 4.12364 3,4,3 Pi Constant Weighted average 0.943 1.946 4.169123 4,3,3 Gbell Linear Weighted sum 0.913 2.113 4.36983 2,2,3 Sigmoid Constant Weighted sum 0.953 1.903 4.05894 3,3,3 Gaussian Linear Weighted sum 0.937 2.103 4.355120 2,2,3 Triangular Linear Weighted sum 0.948 1.910 4.11976 2,3,3 Sigmoid Linear Weighted average 0.927 2.004 4.264131 3,2,3 Trapezium Constant Weighted sum 0.957 1.894 4.01494 4,4,3 Gbell Constant Weighted sum 0.876 2.412 4.703119 4,2,3 Gaussian Constant Weighted average 0.922 2.078 4.23972 3,3,3 Triangular Linear Weighted average 0.909 2.213 4.40461 3,4,3 Sigmoid Linear Weighted sum 0.970 1.812 3.99365 2,3,3 Gbell Linear Weighted average 0.917 2.096 4.313118 3,3,3 Gbell Constant Weighted average 0.960 1.869 4.00782 3,3,3 Gbell Constant Weighted average 0.912 2.103 4.36479 2,3,3 Sigmoid Constant Weighted sum 0.979 1.716 3.90663 2,2,3 Gaussian Linear Weighted sum 0.900 2.259 4.510109 3,3,3 Sigmoid Linear Weighted sum 0.915 2.023 4.298116 3,4,3 Gaussian Constant Weighted sum 0.890 2.310 4.59473 2,3,3 Sigmoid Constant Weighted sum 0.889 2.398 4.652The boldfaced line represents prominent simulation workplace.Table 28The parameters of the several structural arrangements in accordance with corresponding R
2, RMSE, and MRDM of selected twenty ANFIS soft computing simulation sub-environment ex- ecuted to prognosticate required draft force of the implements in plowing process.The number of training cycles The number of input membership functions Membership function Defuzzi ﬁcation method R
2RMSE (kN) MRDM (%)Input Output125 3,2,3 Gaussian Linear Weighted sum 0.893 2.006 3.01993 4,4,3 Sigmoid Constant Weighted sum 0.882 2.058 3.08480 4,2,3 Gaussian Linear Weighted sum 0.914 1.422 2.60183 3,3,3 Sigmoid Linear Weighted average 0.934 1.416 2.62396 2,2,3 Gaussian Linear Weighted average 0.914 1.420 2.615111 2,4,3 Triangular Constant Weighted average 0.905 1.653 2.729134 4,4,3 Gbell Constant Weighted average 0.949 1.330 2.511125 3,3,3 Trapezium Linear Weighted sum 0.985 1.117 2.26772 2,2,3 Gbell Constant Weighted average 0.947 1.337 2.519108 3,4,3 Gaussian Linear Weighted sum 0.969 1.221 2.325114 4,3,3 Triangular Constant Weighted sum 0.892 2.011 3.02875 2,2,3 Pi Linear Weighted average 0.971 1.198 2.312106 3,3,3 Gbell Constant Weighted average 0.899 1.952 2.913121 3,4,3 Gaussian Linear Weighted sum 0.890 1.984 2.91088 2,3,3 Gaussian Linear Weighted sum 0.958 1.296 2.41095 3,2,3 Trapezium Linear Weighted sum 0.971 1.192 2.296138 4,4,3 Trapezium Constant Weighted sum 0.903 1.782 2.756120 4,2,3 Triangular Constant Weighted sum 0.971 1.188 2.294138 3,3,3 Pi Constant Weighted average 0.910 1.477 2.66579 3,3,3 Gbell Constant Weighted average 0.915 1.418 2.591The boldfaced line represents distinguished simulation framework.62 S.M. Shafaei et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 2 (2019) 38 –84soil volume. Moreover, increment of soil mass gathered around shank,disk or bottom of the implement causes higher normal stress on theshank, disk or bottom and consequently, friction force between shank,disk or bottom surface and soil increases. To overcome higher producedfriction force, higher draft force is required ( Almaliki, 2018;Upadhyay and Raheman, 2019a).On the other side, with increment of forward speed, soil particles aresubjected to higher acceleration. The higher acceleration forces result inincrease of normal loads which are acted on shanks, disks or bottoms ofthe implement. Higher normal loads lead to higher frictional forces andthereby, higher draft force is required ( Kepner et al., 2005). Meanwhile, it is comprehensible that higher forward speed leads to higher shearrate and greater throw of the soil and therefore, higher draft force is ex-pected (Upadhyay and Raheman, 2019a).The results of increasing effect of plowing depth on the draft force ofthe implements in a clay loam soil (current research) were similar tothose announced byMouazen and Ramon (2002)andNaderloo et al. (2009)for subsoiler implement in a sandy loam soil and moldboardplow implement in a clay loam soil, respectively. Besides, the increasingeffect of forward speed on the draft force has been addressed for one-way disk with seeder (Cullum et al., 1989) and cultivator (Novak et al., 2014), which is paralleled to the results of the present research.3.4.2. Tractor rear wheel slipFig. 17shows surface and contour plots obtained from the MANFIS+MNE simulation workplace for prognostication of tractor rear wheelslip in plowing process. As it can be seen in the surface plots of theFig. 17, the wheel slip increased nonlinearly as plowing depth and for-ward speed increased. Additionally, the contour plots of the Fig. 17elu- cidate that the dual interaction effect of forward speed and plowingdepth on the wheel slip was increasingly synergistic. It is observablein the contour plots of theFig. 17that the wheel slip increased fromTable 30The parameters of the several structural arrangements in accordance with corresponding R
2, RMSE, and MRDM of selected twenty ANFIS soft computing simulation sub-environment ex- ecuted to prognosticate fuel consumption per working hour in plowing process.The number of training cycles The number of input membership functions Membership function Defuzzi ﬁcation method R
2RMSE (L/h) MRDM (%)Input Output140 2,3,3 Trapezium Constant Weighted sum 0.927 1.112 3.78599 3,2,3 Trapezium Linear ConstantConstantWeighted average 0.911 1.203 4.007141 4,4,3 Trapezium Linear Weighted average 0.942 1.007 3.512158 4,2,3 Gbell Linear Weighted sum 0.938 1.010 3.687119 3,3,3 Sigmoid Linear Weighted average 0.888 1.302 4.107106 2,2,3 Gaussian Linear Weighted average 0.919 1.159 3.918119 3,4,3 Triangular Constant Weighted average 0.899 1.259 4.056151 4,3,3 Sigmoid Linear Weighted average 0.928 1.078 3.594110 2,2,3 Trapezium Constant Weighted average 0.958 0.956 3.311133 3,3,3 Trapezium Linear Weighted average 0.899 1.263 4.077124 2,2,3 Gaussian Linear Weighted sum 0.881 1.387 4.342144 2,3,3 Triangular Linear Weighted sum 0.872 1.523 4.523114 3,2,3 Sigmoid Constant Weighted average 0.953 0.910 3.298153 3,2,3 Gaussian Constant Weighted average 0.969 0.896 3.25991 4,4,3 Triangular Constant Weighted sum 0.950 0.922 3.303136 2,2,3 Sigmoid Constant Weighted sum 0.962 0.918 3.290124 3,4,3 Sigmoid Linear Weighted sum 0.971 0.803 3.204116 3,3,3 Sigmoid Constant Weighted sum 0.876 1.475 4.400142 2,2,3 Sigmoid Constant Weighted sum 0.887 1.314 4.210128 3,4,3 Sigmoid Constant Weighted sum 0.947 0.963 3.456The boldfaced line represents prominent simulation workplace.
Table 31The parameters of the several structural arrangements in accordance with corresponding R
2, RMSE, and MRDM of selected twenty ANFIS soft computing simulation sub-environment ex- ecuted to prognosticate fuel consumption per tilled area in plowing process.The number of training cycles The number of input membership functions Membership function Defuzzi ﬁcation method R
2RMSE (L/ha) MRDM (%)Input Output152 2,2,3 Gbell Constant Weighted average 0.916 1.603 5.571134 3,4,3 Sigmoid Constant Weighted average 0.895 1.723 5.519168 4,3,3 Gaussian Constant Weighted average 0.961 1.412 5.114168 2,2,3 Triangular Constant Weighted average 0.955 1.358 5.012163 2,3,3 Sigmoid Constant Weighted average 0.929 1.525 5.367169 3,2,3 Trapezium Linear Weighted sum 0.898 1.720 5.523128 3,2,3 Trapezium Linear Weighted sum 0.923 1.574 5.406148 4,4,3 Trapezium Linear Weighted average 0.963 1.392 5.007158 2,3,3 Trapezium Constant Weighted sum 0.896 1.750 5.222157 4,4,3 Trapezium Constant Weighted average 0.979 1.258 4.792127 2,2,3 Sigmoid Linear Weighted sum 0.949 1.492 5.190106 3,3,3 Gaussian Constant Weighted sum 0.915 1.611 5.585148 2,2,3 Triangular Linear Weighted sum 0.884 1.589 5.613114 4,4,3 Pi Linear Weighted sum 0.879 1.692 5.721150 4,2,3 Sigmoid Linear Weighted sum 0.879 1.690 5.843119 3,3,3 Sigmoid Linear Weighted sum 0.870 1.775 6.121168 2,2,3 Trapezium Constant Weighted sum 0.875 1.701 5.916162 3,4,3 Trapezium Linear Weighted sum 0.873 1.746 6.01498 3,3,3 Gbell Constant Weighted sum 0.952 1.450 5.106114 3,3,3 Gbell Linear Weighted sum 0.959 1.311 4.85963 S.M. Shafaei et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 2 (2019) 38 –84the lowest bound (b10%) to the highest bound (N35%) when plowing depth along with forward speed increased from 10 to 30 cm and 2 to6 km/h, respectively.The possible explanation for this observation is associated with higherdraft force required to pull the implement at higher plowing depth. As aresult of lack of adequate traction force produced by the tractor rear driv-ing wheels, at higher plowing depth, the wheel slip increases. It was alsorevealed by previous researchers that required draft force for pulling theimplement grows with increase of forward speed. Consequently, the trac-t i o nf o r c eg e n e r a t e db yt h et r a c t o rm i g h tb ei n a d e q u a t ea n da c c o r d i n g l y ,the wheel slip increases (Raheman and Jha, 2007). Similar to this observed result, the increasing effect of plowing depthand forward speed on the wheel slip in plowing process has been docu-mented in previous published papers ( Raheman and Jha, 2007;Kumar et al., 2017b).3.4.3. Fuel consumption per working hourFig. 18illustrates surface and contour plots obtained from theMANFIS+MNE simulation workplace for prognostication of fuel con-sumption per working hour in plowing process. As it can be seen inthe surface plots of theFig. 18, the fuel consumption increasednonlinearly as plowing depth and forward speed increased. Further-more, the contour plots of theFig. 18reveal that the dual interaction ef-fect of forward speed and plowing depth on the fuel consumption wasincreasingly synergistic. It is visible in the contour plots of the Fig. 18 that the fuel consumption increased from the lowest bound ( b6 L/h) to the highest bound (N22 L/h) as plowing depth along with forwardspeed increased from 10 to 30 cm and 2 to 6 km/h, respectively.As forward speed increases, the time required for movement of anassumed distance becomes smaller and therefore, time decrement willresult in increment of the fuel consumption rate. Moreover, higherTable 32The parameters of the several structural arrangements in accordance with corresponding R
2, RMSE, and MRDM of selected twenty ANFIS soft computing simulation sub-environment ex- ecuted to prognosticate speciﬁc volumetric fuel consumption in plowing process.The number of training cycles The number of input membership functions Membership function Defuzzi ﬁcation method R
2RMSE (L/kW h) MRDM (%)Input Output134 3,3,3 Pi Linear Weighted sum 0.964 0.084 3.926147 2,2,3 Pi Linear Weighted sum 0.912 0.159 4.412117 2,2,3 Gaussian Constant Weighted sum 0.908 0.178 4.53654 2,3,3 Triangular Constant Weighted sum 0.922 0.113 4.19865 3,2,3 Triangular Linear Weighted average 0.877 0.225 4.91795 2,2,3 Triangular Constant Weighted average 0.965 0.085 3.911138 3,4,3 Triangular Linear Weighted average 0.977 0.075 3.885123 3,2,3 Triangular Constant Weighted average 0.960 0.089 3.91659 4,4,3 Sigmoid Constant Weighted average 0.855 0.231 5.21380 4,4,3 Gaussian Linear Weighted average 0.918 0.118 4.250110 4,2,3 Triangular Linear Weighted average 0.917 0.111 4.25680 3,3,3 Pi Linear Weighted average 0.904 0.182 4.59192 2,2,3 Sigmoid Constant Weighted sum 0.886 0.214 4.807137 3,4,3 Trapezium Constant Weighted sum 0.876 0.233 4.912138 4,4,3 Gaussian Constant Weighted average 0.859 0.276 5.103122 3,2,3 Gaussian Linear Weighted sum 0.891 0.196 4.69881 2,2,3 Trapezium Linear Weighted sum 0.926 0.097 4.11771 3,4,3 Trapezium Linear Weighted sum 0.885 0.211 4.88465 3,3,3 Gbell Linear Weighted sum 0.898 0.189 4.634113 3,3,3 Gaussian Linear Weighted sum 0.869 0.249 5.009The boldfaced line represents prominent simulation workplace.
Table 33The parameters of the several structural arrangements in accordance with corresponding R
2, RMSE, and MRDM of selected twenty ANFIS soft computing simulation sub-environment ex- ecuted to prognosticate speciﬁc draft force of the implements in plowing process.The number of training cycles The number of input membership functions Membership function Defuzzi ﬁcation method R
2RMSE (kN/m2) MRDM (%)Input Output117 3,3,3 Trapezium Linear Weighted average 0.901 3.526 5.019124 3,3,3 Gbell Linear Weighted average 0.980 2.651 4.253114 2,2,3 Gbell Constant Weighted average 0.971 2.968 4.380108 2,3,3 Triangular Constant Weighted average 0.954 3.090 4.68073 3,3,3 Triangular Linear Weighted average 0.957 3.102 4.66172 3,2,3 Pi Linear Weighted sum 0.968 3.041 4.51236 4,4,3 Gaussian Linear Weighted sum 0.945 3.170 4.721105 4,4,3 Gaussian Linear Weighted average 0.975 2.914 4.31347 4,2,3 Gaussian Constant Weighted sum 0.924 3.357 4.832121 3,3,3 Trapezium Constant Weighted sum 0.946 3.173 4.71635 3,3,3 Trapezium Linear Weighted sum 0.921 3.392 4.894120 2,2,3 Gbell Linear Weighted sum 0.906 3.517 5.003102 2,2,3 Gaussian Constant Weighted average 0.933 3.330 4.81157 3,4,3 Gbell Constant Weighted average 0.937 3.267 4.75639 4,4,3 Gbell Constant Weighted average 0.953 3.156 4.655109 3,2,3 Triangular Linear Weighted average 0.977 2.886 4.29856 2,2,3 Sigmoid Linear Weighted average 0.912 3.416 4.91673 3,4,3 Gaussian Constant Weighted average 0.901 3.517 5.02566 3,3,3 Triangular Constant Weighted average 0.901 3.569 5.063128 3,3,3 Pi Constant Weighted average 0.901 3.525 5.03464 S.M. Shafaei et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 2 (2019) 38 –84draft force at higher plowing depth results in higher required fuel en-ergy and subsequently, the fuel consumption increment.The same results for increase of the fuel consumption as a result ofplowing depth increment have been found by Sarauskis et al. (2017) for strip tillage machine.3.4.4. Fuel consumption per tilled areaFig. 19exhibits surface and contour plots obtained from the MANFIS+MNE simulation workplace for prognostication of fuel consumptionper tilled area in plowing process. As it can be seen in the surface plotsof theFig. 19, the fuel consumption changed nonlinearly as plowingdepth and forward speed increased. Besides, the contour plots of theFig. 19reveal that the dual interaction effect of forward speed andplowing depth on the fuel consumption was nonlinearly antagonism.It is obvious in the contour plots of the Fig. 19that the fuel consumption changed from the lowest bound (b14 L/ha) to the highest bound(N40 L/ha) as plowing depth along with forward speed increased from10 to 30 cm and 2 to 6 km/h, respectively.Table 34The parameters of the several structural arrangements in accordance with corresponding R
2, RMSE, and MRDM of selected twenty ANFIS soft computing simulation sub-environment ex- ecuted to prognosticate tractor drawbar power in plowing process.The number of training cycles The number of input membership functions Membership function Defuzzi ﬁcation method R
2RMSE (kW) MRDM (%)Input Output99 3,3,3 Gaussian Constant Weighted sum 0.900 1.587 3.20778 3,3,3 Gaussian Constant Weighted sum 0.953 1.195 2.648115 2,4,3 Sigmoid Constant Weighted sum 0.997 0.821 2.10175 2,3,3 Trapezium Constant Weighted average 0.953 1.103 2.412129 3,3,3 Trapezium Constant Weighted sum 0.921 1.370 2.944130 3,2,3 Trapezium Constant Weighted sum 0.945 1.017 2.36934 4,4,3 Gaussian Constant Weighted sum 0.965 0.954 2.298
84 4,4,3 Triangular Linear Weighted average 0.934 1.216 2.70471 4,4,3 Gbell Linear Weighted sum 0.988 0.897 2.15686 3,2,3 Gaussian Linear Weighted average 0.916 1.455 3.00449 2,3,3 Gaussian Linear Weighted average 0.956 1.025 2.38896 3,3,3 Triangular Linear Weighted average 0.904 1.511 3.118109 3,2,3 Triangular Constant Weighted average 0.956 1.188 2.59861 4,4,3 Pi Linear Weighted sum 0.951 1.185 2.65289 4,4,3 Gaussian Linear Weighted sum 0.975 0.916 2.21773 4,2,3 Gaussian Constant Weighted average 0.926 1.354 2.88449 3,3,3 Gaussian Constant Weighted average 0.950 1.196 2.74280 2,2,3 Trapezium Constant Weighted average 0.928 1.356 2.81880 3,4,3 Trapezium Linear Weighted average 0.922 1.371 2.93573 4,4,3 Trapezium Linear Weighted average 0.927 1.312 2.750The boldfaced line represents prominent simulation workplace.
Table 35The parameters of the several structural arrangements in accordance with corresponding R
2, RMSE, and MRDM of selected twenty ANFIS soft computing simulation sub-environment ex- ecuted to prognosticate tractor tractive ef ﬁciency in plowing process.The number of training cycles The number of input membership functions Membership function Defuzzi ﬁcation method R
2RMSE (%) MRDM (%)Input Output90 4,4,3 Triangular Constant Weighted sum 0.954 1.213 1.303
150 4,4,3 Gbell Linear Weighted sum 0.963 1.159 1.24379 3,2,3 Gaussian Constant Weighted sum 0.943 1.312 1.51261 2,3,3 Gaussian Constant Weighted average 0.942 1.315 1.50392 3,3,3 Pi Linear Weighted average 0.910 1.562 1.912128 4,4,3 Gaussian Linear Weighted average 0.917 1.512 1.86785 4,2,3 Gaussian Constant Weighted average 0.955 1.311 1.458142 3,3,3 Trapezium Linear Weighted sum 0.918 1.487 1.852142 2,2,3 Gaussian Constant Weighted sum 0.930 1.467 1.617130 3,4,3 Triangular Constant Weighted average 0.930 1.450 1.623125 3,3,3 Triangular Constant Weighted sum 0.972 1.016 1.051146 3,3,3 Triangular Linear Weighted sum 0.962 1.124 1.187107 3,4,3 Trapezium Constant Weighted sum 0.994 0.871 0.913109 3,3,3 Triangular Constant Weighted average 0.990 0.914 0.994
57 4,4,3 Triangular Linear Weighted average 0.973 1.011 1.08860 3,2,3 Trapezium Linear Weighted average 0.943 1.290 1.36952 2,3,3 Trapezium Constant Weighted average 0.952 1.215 1.31084 3,3,3 Gaussian Constant Weighted sum 0.912 1.554 1.903101 3,2,3 Triangular Constant Weighted sum 0.965 1.136 1.800100 3,3,3 Triangular Linear Weighted sum 0.969 1.147 1.326The boldfaced line represents prominent simulation workplace.65 S.M. Shafaei et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 2 (2019) 38 –84The physical perception for this observed result can be explained asan assumed distance is traveled in shorter time when forward speed in-creases. Thus, the fuel consumption decrease as caused by time decre-ment. Meanwhile, it should be considered that higher draft forcerequired for higher plowing depth might result in higher required fuelenergy in hectare scale and accordingly, the fuel consumptionincrement.The same trend of fuel consumption increment as affected byplowing depth increment was previously described by Sirhan et al. (2002)andAjav and Adewoyin (2012). This phenomenon was also found bySerrano et al. (2003)andGulsoylu et al. (2012)for forward speed increment of offset disk harrow and chisel plow implement,respectively.3.4.5. Speciﬁc volumetric fuel consumptionFig. 20presents surface and contour plots obtained from theMANFIS+MNE simulation workplace for prognostication of speci ﬁc volumetric fuel consumption in plowing process. As it can be seenin the surface plots of theFig. 20, the fuel consumption decreasednonlinearly as plowing depth and forward speed increased. More-over, the contour plots of theFig. 20indicate that the dual interactioneffect of forward speed and plowing depth on the fuel consumptionwas decreasingly synergistic. It is evident in the contour plots oftheFig. 20that the fuel consumption decreased from the highestbound (N3 L/kW h) to the lowest bound (b0 . 4L / k Wh )a sp l o w i n g depth along with forward speed increased from 10 to 30 cm and 2to 6 km/h, respectively.Table 36The parameters of the several structural arrangements in accordance with corresponding R
2, RMSE, and MRDM of selected twenty ANFIS soft computing simulation sub-environment ex- ecuted to prognosticate energy requirement for the implements in plowing process.The number of training cycles The number of input membership functions Membership function Defuzzi ﬁcation method R
2RMSE (MJ/ha) MRDM (%)Input Output170 3,3,3 Gbell Constant Weighted sum 0.985 1.013 2.08653 3,2,3 Triangular Linear Weighted sum 0.995 0.885 1.823107 2,3,3 Triangular Constant Weighted sum 0.969 1.152 2.31395 3,3,3 Gaussian Constant Weighted sum 0.977 1.137 2.287126 4,4,3 Gaussian Constant Weighted average 0.980 1.086 2.165103 4,2,3 Gaussian Linear Weighted average 0.979 1.110 2.20786 3,3,3 Gaussian Linear Weighted average 0.955 1.281 2.410154 2,2,3 Trapezium Constant Weighted sum 0.944 1.311 2.710122 3,3,3 Gaussian Constant Weighted sum 0.989 0.985 1.91151 3,2,3 Gaussian Constant Weighted sum 0.966 1.181 2.315128 3,2,3 Pi Constant Weighted average 0.940 1.387 2.852167 2,3,3 Gaussian Linear Weighted average 0.958 1.198 2.35795 4,4,3 Gaussian Constant Weighted average 0.974 1.139 2.27295 2,3,3 Trapezium Constant Weighted sum 0.988 1.004 2.007
99 3,3,3 Gaussian Constant Weighted sum 0.970 1.145 2.301161 4,4,3 Triangular Constant Weighted average 0.976 1.140 2.283190 2,3,3 Gaussian Linear Weighted average 0.990 0.968 1.983101 3,3,3 Gaussian Linear Weighted sum 0.993 0.894 1.915146 4,4,3 Triangular Constant Weighted average 0.997 0.873 1.80958 3,3,3 Gbell Linear Weighted sum 0.941 1.352 2.804The boldfaced line represents prominent simulation workplace.
Table 37The parameters of the several structural arrangements in accordance with corresponding R
2, RMSE, and MRDM of selected twenty ANFIS soft computing simulation sub-environment ex- ecuted to prognosticate overall energy ef ﬁciency of the tractor-implement systems in plowing process.The number of training cycles The number of input membership functions Membership function Defuzzi ﬁcation method R
2RMSE (%) MRDM (%)Input Output142 4,2,3 Trapezium Linear Weighted average 0.917 1.303 4.45588 3,3,3 Triangular Linear Weighted average 0.936 1.159 4.36837 2,2,3 Gaussian Constant Weighted sum 0.945 1.123 4.23053 3,3,3 Gaussian Constant Weighted sum 0.953 1.103 4.11754 3,2,3 Gaussian Constant Weighted sum 0.930 1.211 4.401149 3,2,3 Gaussian Constant Weighted average 0.960 0.986 4.103120 2,3,3 Triangular Constant Weighted average 0.960 0.988 4.11042 4,4,3 Triangular Constant Weighted average 0.957 1.051 4.092144 3,3,3 Sigmoid Linear Weighted average 0.984 0.817 3.809138 3,2,3 Trapezium Constant Weighted sum 0.966 0.977 4.07652 3,3,3 Trapezium Constant Weighted sum 0.959 1.084 4.111115 2,2,3 Gbell Linear Weighted sum 0.972 0.898 3.926121 3,2,3 Triangular Linear Weighted sum 0.960 1.075 4.109136 3,2,3 Triangular Constant Weighted sum 0.944 1.156 4.268116 3,3,3 Gaussian Constant Weighted average 0.961 1.066 4.098141 2,2,3 Trapezium Constant Weighted sum 0.963 0.958 4.02899 3,3,3 Gaussian Constant Weighted sum 0.953 1.103 4.16947 3,2,3 Gaussian Constant Weighted sum 0.927 1.269 4.49879 3,2,3 Pi Constant Weighted sum 0.952 1.105 4.220149 2,3,3 Triangular Constant Weighted average 0.933 1.202 4.387The boldfaced line represents prominent simulation workplace.66 S.M. Shafaei et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 2 (2019) 38 –84Fig. 9.Graphical presentation of correlation between the simulated values by the prominent MANFIS simulation workplace and actual values of performance parameters of tractor-implement systems in plowing process.67 S.M. Shafaei et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 2 (2019) 38 –84Fig. 10.Simulation residual error plots for the simulated values by the prominent MANFIS simulation workplace for performance parameters of tractor-implement systems in plowingprocess.68 S.M. Shafaei et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 2 (2019) 38 –84Fig. 11.Frequency plots of simulation residual error for the simulated values by the prominent MANFIS simulation workplace for performance parameters of tractor-implement systems inplowing process.69 S.M. Shafaei et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 2 (2019) 38 –84Speciﬁc volumetric fuel consumption indicates how much fuel isconsumed per each unit of effective engine power output. Accordingto the obtained results, the fuel consumption diminishes due to forwardspeed growth because the fuel consumption is an inverse function offorward speed (Eq.(3)). The fuel consumption decrease regardingplowing depth increment is due to increase of the draft force.The observed trend in this research for the fuel consumption as af-fected by forward speed in plowing process is consistent with thetrend found byParvanloo et al. (2015)in previous research.3.4.6. Speciﬁc draft forceFig. 21shows surface and contour plots obtained from the MANFIS+MNE simulation workplace for prognostication of speci ﬁc draft force of the implements in plowing process. As it can be seen in the surfaceplots of theFig. 21,s p e c iﬁc draft force changed nonlinearly as plowingdepth and forward speed increased. In addition, the contour plots oftheFig. 21represent that the dual interaction effect of forward speedand plowing depth on speciﬁc draft force was nonlinearly antagonism.It is recognizable in the contour plots of the Fig. 21that speciﬁc draft force changed from the lowest bound ( b40 kN/m
2) to the highest bound (N100 kN/m
2) as plowing depth along with forward speed in-creased from 10 to 30 cm and 2 to 6 km/h, respectively.According to the Eq.(8),s p e c iﬁc draft force is direct function of draftforce and invers function of plowing depth. Taking note that draft forceis direct function of plowing depth and forward speed. Therefore, thecomponent direct effect of plowing depth and forward speed, andinverse effect of plowing depth on speciﬁc draft force is effective. The surface plots in theFig. 21demonstrate that speciﬁc draft force in- creased as forward speed increased (the direct effect of forwardspeed). However, in case of moldboard plow implement, it ﬁrstly de- creased and in the following increased nonlinearly as plowing depth in-creased. In case of disk and chisel plow implement, it ﬁrstly increased and then decreased nonlinearly as plowing depth increased. For themoldboard plow implement, in theﬁrst stage, it seems the inverse effectof plowing depth was more effective than direct effect of plowing depthand therefore, speciﬁc draft force decreased. In the second stage, the di-rect effect of plowing depth was more pronounced than the inverse ef-fect of plowing depth. In case of disk and chisel plow implement, itseems the direct effect of plowing depth was predominant over the in-verse effect of plowing depth in theﬁrst stage and therefore, speciﬁc draft force increased. In the second stage, the inverse effect of plowingdepth was greater than the direct effect of plowing depth.The direct positive effect of forward speed on speci ﬁc draft force based on N/mm was similarly reported by Al-Suhaibani and Al-Janobi (1997),a n dAl-Janobi and Al-Suhaibani (1998)for chisel, offset disk harrow, moldboard plow, and disk plow implements.3.4.7. Tractor drawbar powerFig. 22provides surface and contour plots obtained from the MANFIS+MNE simulation workplace for prognostication of tractor drawbarpower in plowing process. As it can be seen in the surface plots of theFig. 22, the drawbar power increased nonlinearly as plowing depthTable 38The parameters of the several structural arrangements in accordance with corresponding R
2, RMSE, and MRDM of selected twenty ANFIS soft computing simulation sub-environment ex- ecuted to prognosticate gross traction force of the tractor-implement systems in plowing process.The number of training cycles The number of input membership functions Membership function Defuzzi ﬁcation method R
2RMSE (kN) MRDM (%)Input Output91 2,2,3 Gaussian Linear Weighted sum 0.974 1.018 2.220137 3,2,3 Triangular Linear Weighted average 0.953 1.120 2.352144 3,2,3 Triangular Linear Weighted sum 0.911 1.552 2.689165 3,3,3 Sigmoid Linear Weighted average 0.959 1.113 2.357150 2,2,3 Trapezium Linear Weighted average 0.973 1.016 2.221155 2,2,3 Trapezium Constant Weighted average 0.949 1.218 2.36875 4,4,3 Gbell Constant Weighted sum 0.944 1.320 2.43783 4,4,3 Gbell Constant Weighted average 0.904 1.601 2.712126 4,4,3 Gbell Linear Weighted average 0.984 0.985 2.167101 4,2,3 Gaussian Constant Weighted sum 0.973 1.021 2.118167 3,3,3 Trapezium Constant Weighted sum 0.945 1.320 2.51186 2,2,3 Gaussian Linear Weighted sum 0.900 1.615 2.71475 3,3,3 Gaussian Linear Weighted average 0.901 1.626 2.756138 3,2,3 Pi Linear Weighted sum 0.897 1.789 2.803150 3,2,3 Gaussian Linear Weighted sum 0.914 1.465 2.55199 2,3,3 Gbell Linear Weighted average 0.949 1.222 2.352163 4,4,3 Triangular Linear Weighted average 0.901 1.612 2.659164 4,4,3 Triangular Linear Weighted average 0.969 1.156 2.207169 4,4,3 Gbell Linear Weighted average 0.975 0.991 2.194145 4,4,3 Gbell Constant Weighted average 0.945 1.324 2.412The boldfaced line represents prominent simulation workplace.
Table 39The values of the statistical performance criteria for prognostication of ten performance parameters of the tractor-implement systems in plowing process obtained from MANFIS+MNEsimulation workplace.Performance parameter Unit R
2RMSE MRDM (%)Required draft force of the implements kN 0.985 1.117 2.267 Tractor rear wheel slip % 0.979 1.716 3.906 Fuel consumption per working hour L/h 0.971 0.803 3.204 Fuel consumption per tilled area L/ha 0.990 0.786 3.036 Speciﬁc volumetric fuel consumption L/kW h 0.985 0.062 4.965 Speciﬁc draft force kN/m
20.995 1.264 1.931 Tractor drawbar power kW 0.996 1.031 4.175 Tractor tractive efﬁciency % 0.984 1.416 1.479 Energy requirement for tillage implements MJ/ha 0.996 1.095 2.918 Overall energy efﬁciency % 0.985 0.808 4.20270 S.M. Shafaei et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 2 (2019) 38 –84Fig. 12.Graphical presentation of correlation between the simulated values by the prominent MANFIS+MNR simulation workplace and actual values of performance parameters oftractor-implement systems in plowing process.71 S.M. Shafaei et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 2 (2019) 38 –84Fig. 13.Simulation residual error plots for the simulated values by the prominent MANFIS+MNR simulation workplace for performance parameters of tractor-implement systems inplowing process.72 S.M. Shafaei et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 2 (2019) 38 –84Fig. 14.Frequency plots of simulation residual error for the simulated values by the prominent MANFIS+MNE simulation workplace for performance parameters of tractor-implementsystems in plowing process.73 S.M. Shafaei et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 2 (2019) 38 –8474 S.M. Shafaei et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 2 (2019) 38 –84Fig. 15.a–b Comparison between the statistical performance criteria of three simulation scenarios for prognostication of performance parameters of tractor-implement systems in plowingprocess.75 S.M. Shafaei et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 2 (2019) 38 –84and forward speed increased. Furthermore, the contour plots of theFig. 22clarify that the dual interaction effect of forward speed andplowing depth on the drawbar power was increasingly synergistic. Itis plausible in the contour plots of theFig. 22that the drawbar power in- creased from the lowest bound (b5 kW) to the highest bound (N60 kW)as plowing depth along with forward speed increased from 10 to 30 cmand 2 to 6 km/h, respectively.According to the Eq.(4), the drawbar power is direct function of for-ward speed and draft force. The draft force is direct function of plowingdepth and forward speed. Therefore, it can be inferred that the drawbar
Fig. 16.Surface and contour plots obtained from the MANFIS+MNE simulation workplace for prognostication of required draft force of the implement in plowing process (a: moldboard, b:disk, and c: chisel plow implement).
Fig. 17.Surface and contour plots obtained from the MANFIS+MNE simulation workplace for prognostication of tractor rear wheel slip in plowing process (a: moldboard, b: disk, and c:chisel plow implement).76 S.M. Shafaei et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 2 (2019) 38 –84power is direct function of forward speed and plowing depth. Accord-ingly, the drawbar power increases with increase of forward speedand plowing depth.The increasing effect of plowing depth on the drawbar power inplowing process was also addressed by KarimiInchebron et al. (2012) which is associate with the result of this research.3.4.8. Tractor tractive efﬁciencyFig. 23depicts surface and contour plots obtained from the MANFIS+MNE simulation workplace for prognostication of tractor tractive ef ﬁ- ciency in plowing process. As it can be seen in the surface plots of theFig. 23, the tractive efﬁciency decreased nonlinearly as plowing depthand forward speed increased. Moreover, the contour plots of the
Fig. 18.Surface and contour plots obtained from the MANFIS+MNE simulation workplace for prognostication of fuel consumption per working hour in plowing process (a: moldboard, b:disk, and c: chisel plow implement).
Fig. 19.Surface and contour plots obtained from the MANFIS+MNE simulation workplace for prognostication of fuel consumption per tilled area in plowing process (a: moldboard, b: disk,a n dc :c h i s e lp l o wi m p l e m e n t ) .77 S.M. Shafaei et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 2 (2019) 38 –84Fig. 23state that the dual interaction effect of forward speed andplowing depth on the tractive efﬁciency was decreasingly synergistic.It is observable in the contour plots of the Fig. 23that the tractive efﬁ- ciency decreased from the highest bound ( N90%) to the lowest bound (b50%) as plowing depth along with forward speed increased from 10to 30 cm and 2 to 6 km/h, respectively.To interpret the obtained trend, it should be considered that with in-crease of plowing depth and forward speed, tractor rear wheel slip in-creases (Section 3.4.2). According to the Eq.(7), the tractive efﬁciency is negative direct function of the wheel slip. Therefore, as plowingdepth or forward speed increases, the wheel slip increases and conse-quently, the tractive efﬁciency decreases. Another interpretation is
Fig. 20.Surface and contour plots obtained from the MANFIS+MNE simulation workplace for prognostication of speci ﬁc volumetric fuel consumption in plowing process (a: moldboard, b: disk, and c: chisel plow implement).
Fig. 21.Surface and contour plots obtained from the MANFIS+MNE simulation workplace for prognostication of speci ﬁc draft force of the implements in plowing process (a: moldboard, b: disk, and c: chisel plow implement).78 S.M. Shafaei et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 2 (2019) 38 –84attributed to gross traction force (draft force plus rolling resistanceforce). According to the Eq.(7),t h et r a c t i v ee fﬁciency is inverse function of gross traction force. Increment of plowing depth or forward speedleads to draft force increment (Section 3.4.1). Increment of draft force results in the tractive efﬁciency decrease.The observed decreasing trend of the tractive ef ﬁciency as inﬂu- enced by increment of plowing depth and forward speed was in generalagreement with the results of previous researches conducted byInchebron et al. (2012)andRanjbarian et al. (2017).3.4.9. Energy requirement for tillage implementFig. 24illustrates surface and contour plots obtained from theMANFIS+MNE simulation workplace for prognostication of energy re-quirement for tillage implements in plowing process. As it can be seen
Fig. 22.Surface and contour plots obtained from the MANFIS+MNE simulation workplace for prognostication of tractor drawbar power in plowing process (a: mol dboard, b: disk, and c: chisel plow implement).
Fig. 23.Surface and contour plots obtained from the MANFIS+MNE simulation workplace for prognostication of tractor tractive ef ﬁciency in plowing process (a: moldboard, b: disk, and c: chisel plow implement).79 S.M. Shafaei et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 2 (2019) 38 –84in the surface plots of theFig. 24, the energy requirement increasednonlinearly as plowing depth and forward speed increased. Besides,the contour plots of theFig. 24display that the dual interaction effectof forward speed and plowing depth on the energy requirement was in-creasingly synergistic. It is perceptible in the contour plots of the Fig. 24 that the energy requirement increased from the lowest bound(b15 MJ/ha) to the highest bound (N70 MJ/ha) as plowing depth alongwith forward speed increased from 10 to 30 cm and 2 to 6 km/h,respectively.According to the Eqs.(4) and (5), the energy requirement is directlyrelated to the draft force. As it has been discussed in the Section 3.4.1, the draft force increases as increment of plowing depth and forward
Fig. 24.Surface and contour plots obtained from the MANFIS+MNE simulation workplace for prognostication of energy requirement for the implements in plowing process (a: moldboard,b: disk, and c: chisel plow implement).
Fig. 25.Surface and contour plots obtained from the MANFIS+MNE simulation workplace for prognostication of overall energy ef ﬁciency of tractor-implement systems in plowing process (a: moldboard, b: disk, and c: chisel plow implement).80 S.M. Shafaei et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 2 (2019) 38 –84speed. Thus, the energy requirement rises due to increment of forwardspeed and plowing depth. The increasing effect of forward speed on theenergy requirement was also mentioned in the published paper byThomas and Singh (2002).3.4.10. Overall energy efﬁciencyFig. 25shows surface and contour plots obtained from the MANFIS+MNE simulation workplace for prognostication of overall energy ef ﬁ- ciency of the tractor-implement systems in plowing process. As it can beseen in the surface plots of theFig. 25,t h ee fﬁciency increased nonlinearly as plowing depth and forward speed increased. Moreover,the contour plots of theFig. 25indicate that the dual interaction effectof forward speed and plowing depth on the ef ﬁciency was increasingly synergistic. It is visible in the contour plots of the Fig. 25that the efﬁ- ciency increased from the lowest bound ( b6%) to the highest bound (N26%) as plowing depth along with forward speed increased from 10to 30 cm and 2 to 6 km/h, respectively.According to the Eq.(6), overall energy efﬁciency is direct function of tractor drawbar power. The drawbar power is function of forward speedand the draft force (Eq.(4)). The draft force is direct function of plowingdepth and forward speed (Section 3.4.1). Therefore, it can be stated that the efﬁciency is direct function of plowing depth and forward speed.Hence, it is anticipated that the efﬁciency increases with increment ofplowing depth and forward speed.Jr (1985)has pointed out that the range of 10 –20% for overall energy efﬁciency should be considered as normal range. The ef ﬁciencyb10% is known as poor tractive efﬁciency and/or load matching. It is also consid-ered as good tractive efﬁciency and/or load match for the efﬁciency above 20%. In this research, the efﬁciency ranged from 5.61 to 27.69%for three tillage implements (Table 17). The efﬁciencyb10% was related to treatment of plowing depth = 10 cm and forward speed = 2 km/h.With increment of plowing depth and forward speed, the ef ﬁciency ranged from 10 to 20% andﬁnally, it reached above 20%. Therefore, itcan be stated that in this research, proper tractive ef ﬁciency of the trac- tor and good load match between implement and the tractor wereachieved at the upper levels of the plowing depth and forward speed.The previous study results ofKheiralla et al. (2004)are similar to the range and trend of overall energy efﬁcie
 ncy of tractor-implement sys- tems in this research.4. Summary and conclusionThis research focused on development of soft computing simulationworkplaces for performance prognostication of tractor-implement sys-tems in plowing process. Three simulation scenarios (ANN, MANFIS,and MANFIS+MNE) were executed in the workplace. The operationalvariables of plowing depth (10, 20 and 30 cm), forward speed (2, 4and 6 km/h), and tillage implement type (moldboard, disk, and chiselplow) were taken as the workplace inputs and ten performance param-eters (required draft force of implement, tractor rear wheel slip, fuelconsumption per working hour, speciﬁc draft force, fuel consumption per tilled area, speciﬁc volumetric fuel consumption, tractor drawbarpower, tractor tractive efﬁciency, energy requirement for tillage imple-ment, and overall energy efﬁciency) were considered as the workplaceoutputs. According to aggregation of the results obtained in this re-search, it can be asserted that this research satis ﬁed both quantity and quality aspects concerned in this realm, and the following conclusionswere drawn from the results:1- In case of chisel plow implement with higher working width thanthat of other implements, draft force, fuel energy, and drawbarpower required to pull the implement within soil were higher thanthose of other implements.2- Comparison of prognostication accuracy of two soft computing sce-narios of the MANFIS and the ANN simulation workplace indicatedhigher performance of the MANFIS against the ANN, based on theobtained statistical performance criteria. Therefore, the hypothesesof higher performance of neuro-fuzzy strategy than neural strategyin prognostication of desired output targets based on the compoundeffect of nominal and numeral input variables was approved.3- According to obtained prognostication accuracy based on statisticalperformance criteria, simulation time, and user-friendly con ﬁgura- tion of two neuro-fuzzy strategies based on the MANFIS andMANFIS+MNE, the MANFIS+MNE simulation workplace was rec-ognized as prominent simulation scenario. Therefore, the claim ofapplicability of new simulation scenario of the MANFIS+MNE as asimple neuro-fuzzy calculator was asserted. Accordingly, it can bementioned that difﬁculties of utilization of puzzling tables andgraphical charts for calculation of performance parameters are elim-inated by means of neuro-fuzzy calculator.4- In accordance with previous conclusions 2 and 3, the prominent sim-ulation scenario among three simulation scenarios (ANN, MANFIS,and MANFIS+MNE), executed in the workplace, was the MANFIS+MNE simulation scenario.5- The MANFIS+MNE simulation results revealed that simultaneousincrease of forward speed and plowing depth led to nonlinear incre-ment of required draft force of implement, tractor rear wheel slip,fuel consumption per working hour, tractor drawbar power, energyrequirement for tillage implement, and overall energy ef ﬁciency for each tillage implement. Moreover, it demonstrated that simulta-neous increase of forward speed and plowing depth led to nonlineardecrement of speciﬁc volumetric fuel consumption and tractor trac-tive efﬁciency.6- The exhaustive physical perception obtained from the MANFIS+MNE simulation results presented that the dual interaction effectof forward speed and plowing depth on some performance parame-ters (required draft force of implement, tractor rear wheel slip, fuelconsumption per working hour, speciﬁc volumetric fuel consump- tion, tractor drawbar power, energy requirement for tillage imple-ment, overall energy efﬁciency, and tractor tractive efﬁciency) was nonlinearly synergetic. However, it was nonlinearly antagonism forspeciﬁc draft force and fuel consumption per tilled area. Based onthese interpretations, it can be advocated that the physical percep-tion obtained from the MANFIS+MNE simulation results enrichstate of the art in the domain of comprehending behavior of the per-formance of tractor-implement systems in plowing process.These remarkable conclusions are in response to the fundamentalquestions presented in theSection 1.4. Hence, it is desired to apply the MANFIS+MNE simulation workplace and related physical perceptionsby technical farmer associations involved in the decision-making of ag-ricultural machinery management in plowing process.5
. Recommendations for future research requirements•Deﬁciency of soil moisture content and tractor driving mode (2WDand 4WD) as input variables and tractor front wheel slip as outputvariable of robust soft computing simulation workplace found onthe MANFIS+MNE scenario indicates requirement for further re-searches to extend capability of the workplace. Hence, the associatedresearchers in this realm are strongly encouraged to follow this exten-sion in their future research works.•Parametric analysis to ascertain the interaction effect of independentvariables (forward speed, plowing depth, and implement type) on de-pendent variables (required draft force of implement, tractor rearwheel slip, fuel consumption per working hour, speci ﬁc draft force, fuel consumption per tilled area, speciﬁc volumetric fuel consump- tion, tractor drawbar power, tractor tractive ef ﬁciency, energy re- quirement for tillage implement, and overall energy ef ﬁciency) was not considered in the framework of the present research. Hence, itshould be investigated in more detail utilizing the MANOVA tech-nique.81 S.M. Shafaei et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 2 (2019) 38 –84•Prior to recommendation of this MANFIS+MNE simulation scenariofor practical applications, its employment is recommended as a re-source for forthcoming commercial attempts to release an exhaustiveuser friendly graphical software package for prognostication of theperformance parameters of tractor-implement systems in plowingprocess. The software package could be applied, as a new computa-tional tool (neuro-fuzzy calculator), by the associated researchers, en-gineers, managements and students in order to familiarizefundamental concepts of variation trends of the performance param-eters as inﬂuenced byﬁeld operational variables.References
Aboukarima, A.E.W.M., 2007.Draft models of chisel plow based on simulation using arti-ﬁcial neural networks. Misr J. Ag. Eng. 24 (1), 42 –61. Aboukarima, A.E.W.M., Saad, A.F., 2006. Assessment of different indices depicting soil tex- ture for predicting chisel plow draft using neural networks. ASEJ 27 (2), 170 –180. Adewoyin, A.O., 2013.Fuel consumption evaluation of some commonly used farm trac-tors for ploughing operations on the sandy-loam soil of Oyo state, Nigeria. Res.J. Appl. Sci. Eng. Technol. 6 (15), 2865 –2871. Adewoyin, A.O., Ajav, E.A., 2013. Fuel consumption of some tractor models for ploughingoperations in the sandy-loam soil of Nigeria at various speeds and ploughing depths.Agric. Eng. Int. CIGR J. 15 (3), 67 –74. Ahmadi, I., 2016a.Development and evaluation of a draft force calculator for moldboardplow using the laws of classical mechanics. Soil Tillage Res. 161 (1), 129 –134. Ahmadi, I., 2016b.Development and assessment of a draft force calculator for disk plowusing the laws of classical mechanics. Soil Tillage Res. 163 (1), 32 –40. Ahmadi, I., 2016c.Effect of soil, machine, and working state parameters on the requireddraft force of a subsoiler using a theoretical draft-calculating model. Soil Res. 55(4), 389–400.Ahmadi, I., 2017a.A torque calculator for rotary tiller using the laws of classical mechan-ics. Soil Tillage Res. 165 (1), 137 –143. Ahmadi, I., 2017b.A power estimator for an integrated active-passive tillage machineusing the laws of classical mechanics. Soil Tillage Res. 171 (1), 1 –8. Ahmadi, I., 2018.A draught force estimator for disc harrow using the laws of classical soilmechanics. Biosyst. Eng. 171 (1), 52 –62. AI-Hamed, S.A., Grisso, R.D., Zoz, F.M., Bargen, K.V., 1994. Tractor performance spread- sheet for radial tires. Comput. Electron. Agric. 10 (1), 45 –62. Ajav, E.A., Adewoyin, A.O., 2012. Effect of ploughing depth and speed on tractor fuel con-sumption in a sandy-loam soil of Oyo State-Nigeria. J. Agric. Eng. Technol. 20 (2),1–10.Akbarnia, A., Mohammadi, A., Farhani, F., Alimardani, R., 2014. Simulation of draft force of winged share tillage tool using arti ﬁcial neural network model. Agric. Eng. Int. CIGR J. 16 (4), 57–65.Alele, J.O., Ngunjiri, G.M.N., Njue, M.R., 2018. Effects of depth and speed on power require- ments for disc and mouldboard ploughs in silt loam soils. Int. J. Sci. Technol. Res. 7(8), 167–174.Al-Hamed, S.A., Al-Janobi, A.A., 2001. A program for predicting tractor performance in vi- sual C++. Comput. Electron. Agric. 31 (2), 137 –149. Al-Hamed, S.A., Al-Suhaibani, S.A., Mohammad, F.S., Wahby, M.F.I., 2010. Development of a comprehensive computer program for predicting farm energy. Am. J. Agric. Biol. Sci.5( 1 ) ,8 9–101.Al-Hamed, S.A., Wahby, M.F., Al-Saqer, S.M., Aboukarima, A.M., Sayedahmed, A.A., 2013.Artiﬁcial neural network model for predicting draft and energy requirements ofdisk plow. J. Anim. Plant Sci. 23 (6), 1714 –1724. Alimardani, R., Colvin, T.S., Marley, S.J., 1989. Veriﬁcation of the“TERMS”t
raction predic- tion model. Trans. ASAE 32 (3), 817 –821. Alimardani, R., Abbaspour-Gilandeh, Y., Khalilian, A., Keyhani, A., Sadati, S.H., 2009. Pre- diction of draft force and energy of subsoiling operation using ANN model. J. FoodAgric. Environ. 7 (3&4), 537 –542. Al-Janobi, A.A., Al-Suhaibani, S.A., 1998. Draft of primary tillage implements in sandy loam soil. Appl. Eng. Agric. 14 (4), 343 –348. Al-Janobi, A.A., Aboukarima, A.M., Ahmed, K.A., 2001. Prediction of speciﬁc draft of differ- ent tillage implements using neural networks. Misr J. Ag. Eng. 18 (3), 699 –714. Al-Janobi, A., Al-Hamed, S., Aboukarima, A.M., 2010. An excel spreadsheet to estimate per- formance parameters for chisel plow-tractor combination based on trained an arti ﬁ- cial neural network. Bull. USAMV Agric. 67 (2), 1 –9. Almaliki, S., 2018.Simulation of draft force for three types of plow using response surfacemethod under variousﬁeld conditions. Iraqi J. Agri. Sci. 49 (6), 1123 –1131. Almaliki, S., Alimardani, R., Omid, M., 2016a. Fuel consumption models of MF285 tractor under variousﬁeld conditions. Agric. Eng. Int. CIGR J. 18 (3), 147 –158. Almaliki, S., Alimardani, R., Omid, M., 2016b. Artiﬁcial neural network based modeling of tractor performance at different ﬁeld conditions. Agric. Eng. Int. CIGR J. 18 (4), 262–274.Al-Suhaibani, S.A., Al-Janobi, A.A., 1997. Draught requirements of tillage implements op- erating on sandy loam soil. J. Agric. Eng. Res. 66 (3), 177 –182. Al-Suhaibani, S.A., Ghaly, A.E., 2013. Comparative study of the kinetic parameters of three chisel plows operating at different depths and forward speed in a sandy soil. Int.J. Eng. Sci. 2 (7), 42–59.Al-Suhaibani, S.A., Al-Janobi, A.A., Al-Majhadi, Y.N., 2010. Development and evaluation of tractors and tillage implements instrumentation system. Am. J. Eng. Appl. Sci. 3 (2),363–371.Al-Suhaibani, S.A., Wahby, M.F., Aboukarima, A.M., Tabash, I.S., 2015. Study on the effect of soil moisture content and plowing speed on draft requirements of a moldboardplow. J. Adv. Agric. 4 (3), 477 –486. Arvidsson, J., Keller, T., Gustafsson, K., 2004. Speciﬁc draught for mouldboard plough, chisel plough and disc harrow at different water contents. Soil Tillage Res. 79 (2),221–231.ASAE, 2003.ANSI/ASAE S296.5. General Terminology for Traction of Agricultural Tractionand Transport Devices and Vehicles. ASAE, St. Joseph, MI, USA.ASAE, 2011.ASAE D497.7. Agricultural Machinery Management Data. ASAE, St. Joseph, MI,USA.Askari, M., Khalifahamzehghasem, S., 2013. Draft force inputs for primary and secondary tillage implements in a clay loam soil. World Appl. Sci. J. 21 (12), 1789 –1794. Askari, M., Shahgholi, G., Abbaspour-Gilandeh, Y., Tash-Shamsabadi, H., 2016. The effect of new wings on subsoiler performance. Appl. Eng. Agric. 32 (3), 353 –362. As kari, M., Shahgholi, G., Abbaspour-Gilandeh, Y., 2017. The effect of tine, wing, operating depth and speed on the draft requirement of subsoil tillage tines. Res. Agric. Eng. 63(4), 160–167.Bashford, L.L., Byerly, D.V., Grisso, R.D., 1991. Draft and energy requirements of agricul- tural implements in semi-arid regions of Morocco. Agric. Mech. Asia Afr. Lat. Am.22 (3), 79–82.Battiato, A., Diserens, E., 2017.Tractor traction performance simulation on differently tex-tured soils and validation: a basic study to make traction and energy requirementsaccessible to the practice. Soil Tillage Res. 166 (1), 18 –32. Catalan, H., Linares, P., Mendez, V., 2008. Tractor PT: a traction prediction software for ag- ricultural tractors. Comput. Electron. Agric. 60 (2), 289 –295. Celik, A., Boydas, M.G., Turgut, N., 2007. Comparison of the energy requirements of an ex- perimental plow, a moldboard plow and a disk plow. Philipp. Agric. Sci. 9 (2),173–178.Chaplin, J., Jenane, C., Lueders, M., 1988. Drawbar energy use for tillage operations on loamy sand. Trans. ASAE 31 (6), 1692 –1694. Choi, Y.S., Lee, K.S., Park, W.Y., 2000. Application of a neural network to dynamic draft model. Agric. Biosyst. Eng. 1 (2), 67 –72. Coffman, B.A., Kocher, M.F., Adamchuk, V.I., Hoy, R.M., Blankenship, E.E., 2010. Testing fuel efﬁciency of a tractor with a continuously variable transmission. Appl. Eng. Agric. 26(1), 31–36.Colvin, T.S., McConnell, K.L., Catus, B.J., 1989. “TERMS”: a computer model forﬁeld simu- lation. Trans. ASAE 32 (2), 391 –396. Cullum, R.F., Graham, W.D., Gaultney, L.D., 1989. Tillage energy requirements in interior Alaska. Soil Tillage Res. 13 (3), 317 –327. Dahab, M.H., Kheiry, A.N.O., Talha, T.H.A., 2016. A computer model of fuel consumption estimation for different agricultural farm operations. Int. J. Env. Agr. Res. 2 (3), 77 –85. Fakhraei, O., Karparvarfard, S.H., 2008. Development of a general equation for estimation of tractive efﬁciency by dimensional analysis. J. Agric. Machin. Sci. 4 (1), 19 –26. Far, S.A., Kazemi, N., Rahnama, M., Nejad, M.G., 2015a. Effect of ballasting and changing of angles disk offset on performance of tractors. Euro J. Acad. Ess. 2 (5), 5 –9. Far, S.A., Kazemi, N., Rahnama, M., Nejad, M.G., 2015b. Simultaneous comparison of the effects of shaft load and shaft positions on tractor OEE in two soil conditions (culti-vated and uncultivated). Int. J. Farm Alli. Sci. 4 (3), 215 –221. Fathollahzadeh, H., Mobli, H., Tabatabaie, S.M.H., 2009. Effect of ploughing depth on aver- age and instantaneous tractor fuel consumption with three-share disc plough. Int.Agrophys. 23 (4), 399–402.Fathollahzadeh, H., Mobli, H., Rajabipour, A., Minaee, S., Jafari, A., Tabatabaie, S.M.H., 2010.Average and instantaneous fuel consumption of Iranian conventional tractor withmoldboard plow in tillage. ARPN J. Eng. Appl. Sci. 5 (2), 30 –35. Gee-Clough, D., McAllister, M., Pearson, G., Evernden, D.W., 1978. The empirical predic- tion of tractor-implementﬁeld performance. J. Terrramech. 15 (2), 81 –94
 . Glancey, J.L., Upadhyaya, S.K., 1995. An improved technique for agricultural implement draught analysis. Soil Tillage Res. 35 (4), 175 –182. Glancey, J.L., Upadhyaya, S.K., Chancellor, W.J., Rumsey, J.W., 1996. Prediction of agricul- tural implement draft using an instrumented analog tillage tool. Soil Tillage Res. 37(1), 47–65.Godwin, R.J., O'Dogherty, M.J., Saunders, C., Balafoutis, A.T., 2007. A force prediction model for mouldboard ploughs incorporating the effects of soil characteristic properties,plough geometric factors and ploughing speed. Biosyst. Eng. 97 (1), 117 –129. Grisso, R.D., Yasin, M., Kocher, M.F., 1996. Tillage implement forces operating in silty clay loam. Trans. ASAE 39 (6), 977 –1982. Grisso, R.D., Kocher, M.F., Vaughan, D.H., 2004. Predicting tractor fuel consumption. Appl. Eng. Agric. 20 (5), 553 –561.Grisso, R.D., Perumpral, J.V., Zoz, F.M., 2007. Spreadsheet for matching tractors and drawn implements. Appl. Eng. Agric. 23 (3), 259 –265. Grisso, R.D., Vaughan, D.H., Roberson, G.T., 2008. Fuel prediction for speciﬁc tractor models. Appl. Eng. Agric. 24 (4), 423 –428. Gulsoylu, E., Cakir, E., Aykas, E., Yalcin, H., Cakmak, B., Cay, A., 2012. Determination of the ﬁeld performances of different types of chisel legs. Bulgarian J. Agr. Sci. 18 (5),794–800.Hansson, P.A., Lindgren, M., Nordin, M., Pettersson, O., 2003. A methodology for measur- ing the effects of transient loads on the fuel ef ﬁciency of agricultural tractors. Appl. Eng. Agric. 19 (3), 251 –257.Harrigan, T.M., Rotz, C.A., 1995. Draft relationships for tillage and seeding equipment.Appl. Eng. Agric. 11 (6), 773 –783. Harrison, H.P., Reed, W.B., 1962. An analysis of draft, depth and speed of tillage equip-ment. Can. Agric. Eng. 4 (1), 20 –23. Hemmat, A., Khashoei, A.A., 1995. Fuel requirements and machine capacity for tillage andplanting operations on a clay loam soil in Isfahan. Iran Agric. Res. 14 (2), 175 –201. Hughes, K.A., Baker, C.J., 1977. Tractor fuel requirements of two tillage systems and zero-tillage. N. Z. J. Exp. Agric. 5 (4), 370 –388.82 S.M. Shafaei et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 2 (2019) 38 –84Inchebron, K., Seyedi, S.R.M., Tabatabaekoloor, R., 2012. Performance evaluation of a light tractor during plowing at different levels of depth and soil moisture content. Int. Res.J. Basic Appl. Sci. 3 (3), 626 –631. Ishola, T.A., Ogunlela, A.O., Abubakar, M.S., 2010. An object-oriented program for matching tractors and implements. Int. J. Eng. Tech. 10 (2), 1 –4. Ismail, W.I.W., Burkhardt, T.H., 1993. Draft and fuel requirements measurement using tractor on board data acquisition system. Pertanika J. Sci. Technol. 1 (1), 51 –64. Jr, C.G.B., 1985.Southeastern tillage energy data and recommended reporting. Trans.ASAE 28 (3), 731–737.Jr, C.G.B., 1989.Tillage draft and energy measurements for twelve southeastern soil series.Trans. ASAE 32 (5), 1492 –1502. Jr, J.A.M., Fornstrom, K.J., Borrelli, J., 1985. Energy requirements of two tillage systems for irrigated sugarbeets, dry beans and corn. Trans. ASAE 28 (6), 1731 –1735. Juostas, A., Janulevicius, A., 2008. Investigation of tractor engine power and economicalworking conditions utilization during transport operation. Transport 23 (1), 37 –43. KarimiInchebron, A., Seyedi, S.R.M., Koloor, R.T., 2012. Investigating the effect of soil mois- ture content and depth on the draught, speci ﬁc draught and drawbar power of a light tractor. Int. Res. J. Basic Appl. Sci. 3 (11), 2289 –2293. Karparvarfard, S.H., Rahmanian-Koushkaki, H., 2015. Development of a fuel consumption equation: test case for a tractor chisel-ploughing in a clay loam soil. Biosyst. Eng. 130(1), 23–33.Kepner, R.A., Bainer, R., Barger, E.L., 2005. Principles of Farm Machinery. 3rd edition. Pub- lished by CBS Publishers and Distributors Pvt. Ltd., New Delhi.Khadr, K.A.A., 2008.Effect of some primary tillage implement on soil pulverization andspeciﬁc energy. Misr J. Ag. Eng. 25 (3), 731 –745. Kheiralla, A.F., Yahya, A., Zohadie, M., Ishak, M., 2004. Modelling of power and energy re- quirements for tillage implements operating in Serdang sandy clay loam, Malaysia.Soil Tillage Res. 78 (1), 21 –34. Khoshnevisan, B., Raﬁee, S., Omid, M., Mousazadeh, H., 2014. Development of an intelli- gent system based on ANFIS for predicting wheat grain yield on the basis of energyinputs. Info. Proc. Agri. 1 (1), 14 –22. Khoshnevisan, B., Raﬁee, S., Igbal, J., Shamshirband, S., Omid, M., Anuar, N.B., Wahab,A.W.A., 2015.A comparative study between arti ﬁcial neural networks and adaptive neuro-fuzzy inference systems for modeling energy consumption in greenhouse to-mato production: a case study in Isfahan province. J. Agric. Sci. Technol. 17 (1), 49 –62. Kim, S.C., Kim, K.U., Kim, D.C., 2011. Prediction of fuel consumption of agricultural trac- tors. Appl. Eng. Agric. 27 (5), 705 –709. Kocher, M.F., Smith, B.J., Hoy, R.M., Woldstad, J.C., Pitla, S.K., 2017. Fuel consumption models for tractor test reports. Trans. ASABE 60 (3), 693 –701. Kolahloo, A.A.M., Loghavi, M., 1994. Evaluation and comparison of traction performance of two common tractors in Iran. Iran Agric. Res. 13 (2), 77 –95. Kolator, B., Bialobrzewski, I., 2011. A simulation model of 2WD tractor performance. Comput. Electron. Agric. 76 (2), 231 –23
 9. Kumar, R., Pandey, K.P., 2009. A program in visual basic for predicting haulage and ﬁeld performance of 2WD tractors. Comput. Electron. Agric. 67 (1 –2), 18–26. Kumar, N., Pandey, K.P., 2015. A visual basic program for predicting optimum gear andthrottle position for best fuel economy for 32 kW tractor. Comput. Electron. Agric.119 (1), 217–227.Kumar, A.A., Tewari, V.K., Gupta, C., Kumar, N., 2017a. A visual basic program and instru- mentation system for power and energy mapping of tractor implement. Eng. Agric.Env. Food 10 (2), 121–132.Kumar, A.A., Tewari, V.K., Gupta, C., Pareek, C.M., 2017b. A device to measure wheel slip to improve the fuel efﬁciency of off road vehicles. J. Terrramech. 70 (1), 1 –11. Lee, J.W., Kim, J.S., Kim, K.U., 2016. Computer simulations to maximise fuel ef ﬁciency and work performance of agricultural tractors in rotovating and ploughing operations.Biosyst. Eng. 142 (1), 1 –11.Loghavi, M., Moradi, A., 1996.Draft and drawbar power equirement of moldboard plow ina clay loam soil. Iran Agric. Res. 15 (2), 203 –214. Machindra, A.R., Raheman, H., 2017. Investigations on power requirement of active- passive combination tillage implement. Eng. Agric. Env. Food 10 (1), 4 –13. Mamman, E., Oni, K.C., 2005.Draught performance of a range of model chisel furrowers.Agric. Eng. Int. CIGR EJ VII (Manuscript PM 05 003).Manian, R., Kathirvel, K., 2001. Development and evaluation of an active-passive tillagemachine. Agric. Mech. Asia Afr. Lat. Am. 32 (1), 9 –18. Marakoglu, T., Carman, K., 2010. Fuzzy knowledge-based model for prediction of soil loos-ening and draft efﬁciency in tillage. J. Terrramech. 47 (3), 173 –178. Mehta, C.R., Singh, K., Selvan, M.M., 2011. A decision support system for selection of tractor-implement system used on Indian farms. J. Terrramech. 48 (1), 65 –73. Moeenifar, A.M., Kalantari, D., Seyedi, S.R.M., 2013. Application of dimensional analysis in determination of traction force acting on a narrow blade. Int. J. Agric. Crop. Sci. 5 (9),1034–1039.Moeenifar, A., Mousavi-Seyedi, S.R., Kalantari, D., 2014. Inﬂuence of tillage depth, penetra- tion angle and forward speed on the soil/thin-blade interaction force. Agric. Eng. Int.CIGR J. 16 (1), 69–74.Mohammadi, A., Alimardani, R., Akbarnia, A., Akram, A., 2012. Modeling of draft force var- iation in a winged share tillage tool using fuzzy table look-up scheme. Agric. Eng. Int.CIGR J. 14 (4), 262–268.Moinfar, A.M., Shahgholi, G., 2018. Dimensional analysis of the tractor tractive ef ﬁciency parameters. Acta Tech. Agri. 21 (3), 94 –99. Moitzi, G., Wagentristl, H., Refenner, K., Weingartmann, H., Piringer, G., Boxberger, J.,Gronauer, A., 2014.Effects of working depth and wheel slip on fuel consumption ofselected tillage implements. Agric. Eng. Int. CIGR J. 16 (1), 182 –190. Mouazen,
 A.M., Ramon, H., 2002.A numerical-statistical hybrid modelling scheme for evaluation of draught requirements of a subsoiler cutting a sandy loam soil, as af-fected by moisture content, bulk density and depth. Soil Tillage Res. 63 (3 –4), 155–165.Naderloo, L., Alimadani, R., Akram, A., Javadikia, P., Khanghah, H.Z., 2009. Tillage depth and forward speed effects on draft of three primary tillage implements in clay loamsoil. J. Food Agric. Environ. 7 (3&4), 382 –385. Ndisya, J., Gitau, A., Mbuge, D., Hiuhu, A., 2016. The effect of the operational parameters on the draft requirement of ripping in a sandy clay soil. Open J. Optim. 5 (1), 1 –13. Nkakini, S.O., 2015a.Draught force requirements of a disc plough at various tractor for-ward speeds in loamy sand soil during ploughing. Int. J. Adv. Res. Sci. Eng. Technol.6( 7 ) ,5 2–68.Nkakini, S.O., 2015b.Measuring the sensitivity of parameters estimates to evaluate thetractive force model. Agric. Eng. Int. CIGR J. 17 (3), 43 –60. Nkakini, S.O., Akor, A.J., 2012.Modeling tractive force requirements of wheel tractors fordisc ploughing in sandy loam soil. Int. J. Eng. Technol. 2 (10), 1707 –1716. Novak, P., Chyba, J., Kumhala, F., Prochazk, P., 2014. Measurement of stubble cultivator draught force under different soil conditions. Agron. Res. 12 (1), 135 –142. Okoko, P., Ajav, E.A., Olosunde, W.A., 2018. Draft and power requirements for some tillage implements operating in clay loam soil. Agric. Eng. Int. CIGR J. 20 (1), 95 –102. Papendick, R., 2002.Managing Soil Cover and Farming With the Wind. Department ofCrop and Soil Sciences, Washington State University, USA.Parvanloo, M., Kazemi, N., Rahnama, M., Sheikhdavoodi, M.J., 2015. Assessment and equipment of parameters of MF399 tractor with synthetic fuel system of gasolineand liquid petroleum gas (LPG). Int. J. Farm Alli. Sci. 4 (5), 434 –441. Pitla, S.K., Lin, N., Shearer, S.A., Luck, J.D., 2014. Use of controller area network (CAN) data to determineﬁeld efﬁciencies of agricultural machinery. Appl. Eng. Agric. 30 (6),829–839.Plouffe, C., McLaughlin, N.B., Tessier, S., Lague, C., 1995. Energy requirements and depth stability of two different moldboard plow bottoms in a heavy clay soil. Can. Agric.Eng. 37 (4), 279–285.Pranav, P.K., Pandey, K.P., 2008. Computer simulation of ballast management for agricul-tural tractors. J. Terrramech. 45 (6), 185 –192. Pranav, P.K., Pandey, K.P., Tewari, V.K., 2010. Digital wheel slipmeter for agricultural 2WD tractors. Comput. Electron. Agric. 73 (2), 188 –193. Pranav, P.K., Patel, T., Rathore, M., Sonowal, A.J., Tapang, T., Laji, S., 2012. Computer simu- lation for haulage performance of power tiller. Int. J. Comput. Appl. 58 (5), 19 –25. Raheman, H., Jha, S.K., 2007.Wheel slip measurement in 2WD tractor. J. Terrramech. 44(1), 89–94.Rahimi-Ajdadi, F., Abbaspour-Gilandeh, Y., 2011. Artiﬁcial neural network and stepwise multiple range regression methods for prediction of tractor fuel consumption. Mea-surement 44 (10), 2104 –2111.Rahmanian-Koushkaki, H., Karparvarfard, S.H., Mortezaei, A., 2015. The effect of the oper- ational characteristics of the tractor composite electronic measurement system bythe standards of emotion on the performance of chisel plows in a clay loam soil.Agric. Eng. Int. CIGR J. 17 (1), 44 –49. Ranjbar, I., Rashidi, M., Najjarzadeh, I., Niazkhani, A., Niyazadeh, M., 2013. Modeling of moldboard plow draft force based on tillage depth and operation speed. Middle-East J. Sci. Res. 17 (7), 891 –897. Ranjbarian, S., Askari, M., Jannatkhah, J., 2017. Performance of tractor and tillage imple- ments in clay soil. J. Saudi Soc. Agric. Sci. 16 (2), 154 –162. RNAM, 1995.RNAM test codes and procedures for farm machinery/Economic and SocialCommission for Asia and the Paci ﬁc, Regional Network for Agricultural Machinery. RNAM Technical Publications: 12. Thailand, Bangkok.Roul, A.K., Raheman, H., Pansare, M.S., Machavaram, R., 2009. Predicting the draught re- quirement of tillage implements in sandy clay loam soil using an arti ﬁcial neural net- work. Biosyst. Eng. 104 (4), 476 –485. SAA, 1977.Standards Association of Australia. AS 1289 B1.1. Determination of the Mois-ture Content of a Soil: Oven Drying Method.Sahay, C.S., Thomas, E.V., Satapathy, K.K., 2009. Performance evaluation of a novel power- tiller-operated oscillatory tillage implement for dry land tillage. Biosyst. Eng. 102 (4),385–391.Sahu, R.K., Raheman, H., 2006.An approach for draft prediction of combination tillage im-plements in sandy clay loam soil. Soil Tillage Res. 90 (1 –2), 145–155. Sahu, R.K., Raheman, H., 2008. A decision support system on matching and ﬁeld perfor- mance prediction of tractor-implement system. Comput. Electron. Agric. 60 (1),76–86.Saleh, B., Aly, A.A., 2013.Artiﬁcial neural network model for evaluation of the plowingprocess performance. Int. J. Control. Autom. Syst. 2 (2), 1 –11. Santos, F.L., Queiroz, D.M.D., 2016. Simtrac-an application for simulation of traction ef ﬁ- ciency of agricultural tractors with front wheel assist. Acta Sci. Tech. 38 (4), 423 –430. Sarauskis, E., Vaitauskiene, K., Romaneckas, K., Jasinskas, A., Butkus, V., Kriauciuniene, Z.,2017.Fuel consumption and CO
2emission analysis in different strip tillage scenarios. Energy 118 (1), 957–968.Serrano, J.M., Peca, J.O., 2008.The forward speed effect on draught force required to pulltrailed disc harrows. Span. J. Agric. Res. 6 (2), 182 –188. Serrano, J.M., Peca, J.O., Pinheiro, A., Carvalho, M., Nunes, M., Ribeiro, L., Santos, F., 2003.The effect of gang angle of offset disc harrows on soil tilth, work rate and fuel con-sumption. Biosyst. Eng. 84 (2), 171 –176. Serrano, J.M., Peca, J.O., Silva, J.M.D., Pinheiro, A., Carvalho, M., 2007. Tractor energy re- quirements in disc harrow systems. Biosyst. Eng. 98 (3), 286 –296. Shafaei, S.M., Kamgar, S., 2017. A comprehensive investigation on static and dynamic fric-tion coefﬁcients of wheat grain with the adoption of statistical analysis. J. Adv. Res. 8(4), 351–361.Shafaei, S.M., Heydari, A.R., Masoumi, A.A., Sadeghi, M., 2015. Determining and modeling of static friction coefﬁcient of some agricultural seeds. Jordan J. Agric. Sci. 11 (4),1007–1019.Shafaei, S.M., Nourmohamadi-Moghadami, A., Kamgar, S., 2016a. Development of artiﬁ- cial intelligence based systems for prediction of hydration characteristics of wheat.Comput. Electron. Agric. 128 (1), 34 –45.83 S.M. Shafaei et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 2 (2019) 38 –84Shafaei, S.M., Masoumi, A.A., Roshan, H., 2016b. Analysis of water absorption of bean and chickpea during soaking using Peleg model. J. Saudi Soc. Agric. Sci. 15 (2), 135 –144. Shafaei, S.M., Loghavi, M., Kamgar, S., 2017a. Appraisal of Takagi-Sugeno-Kang type of adaptive neuro-fuzzy inference system for draft force prediction of chisel plow im-plement. Comput. Electron. Agric. 142 (1), 406 –415. Shafaei, S.M., Nourmohamadi-Moghadami, A., Kamgar, S., 2017b. Experimental analysis and modeling of frictional behavior of lavender ﬂowers (Lavandula stoechasL.). J. Appl. Res. Med. Aromat. Plants 4 (1), 5 –11. Shafaei, S.M., Loghavi, M., Kamgar, S., 2018a. On the neurocomputing based intelligent simulation of tractor fuel efﬁciency parameters. Info. Proc. Agri. 5 (2), 205 –223. Shafaei, S.M., Loghavi, M., Kamgar, S., 2018b. A comparative study between mathematical models and the ANN data mining technique in draft force prediction of disk plow im-plement in clay loam soil. Agric. Eng. Int. CIGR J. 20 (2), 71 –79. Shafaei, S.M., Loghavi, M., Kamgar, S., Raoufat, M.H., 2018c. Potential assessment of neuro- fuzzy strategy in prognostication of draft parameters of primary tillage implement.Ann. Agric. Sci. 16 (3), 257 –266. Shafaei, S.M., Loghavi, M., Kamgar, S., 2018d. An extensive validation of computer simula- tion frameworks for neural prognostication of tractor tractive ef ﬁciency. Comput. Electron. Agric. 155 (1), 283 –297. Shafaei, S.M., Loghavi, M., Kamgar, S., 2019a. Development and implementation of a human machine interface-assisted digital instrumentation system for high precisionmeasurement of tractor performance parameters. Eng. Agric. Env. Food 12 (1), 11 –23. Shafaei, S.M., Nourmohamadi-Moghadami, A., Rahmanian-Koushkaki, H., Kamgar, S.,2019b.Neural computing efforts for integrated simulation of ultrasound-assisted hy-dration kinetics of wheat. Info. Proc. Agri. (in Press).Shafaei, S.M., Loghavi, M., Kamgar, S., 2019c. Prognostication of energy indices of tractor- implement utilizing soft computing techniques. Info. Proc. Agri. 6 (1), 132 –149. Shafaei, S.M., Loghavi, M., Kamgar, S., 2019d. A practical effort to equip tractor-implement with fuzzy depth and draft control system. Eng. Agric. Env. Food 12 (2), 191 –203. Shafaei, S.M., Loghavi, M., Kamgar, S., 2019e. Feasibility of implementation of intelligent simulation conﬁgurations based on data mining methodologies for prediction of trac-tor wheel slip. Info. Proc. Agri. 6 (2), 183 –199. Shah, A.R., Mirjat, M.S., Mughal, A.Q., Rajper, I., Mirani, A.A., 2015. Performance evaluation of different tillage systems in a clay loam soil. Pak. J. Agric. Res. 28 (4), 369 –376. Sirhan, A.A., Battikhi, A., Snobar, B., 2002. Management of primary tillage operation to re- duce tractor fuel consumption. Agric. Mech. Asia Afr. Lat. Am. 33 (4), 9 –11. Smith, L.A., 1993.Energy requirements for selected crop production implements. Soil Till-age Res. 25 (4), 281–299.Smith, L.A., Williford, J.R., 1988. Power requirements of conventional, triplex, and para-bolic subsoilers. Trans. ASAE 31 (6), 1685 –1688. Stajnko, D., Lakota, M., Vucajnk, F., Bernik, R., 2009. Effects of different tillage systems on fuel savings and reduction of CO
2emissions in production of silage corn in eastern Slovenia. Pol. J. Environ. Stud. 18 (4), 711 –716. Sumer, S.K., Sabanci, A., 2005. Effects of different tire conﬁgurations on tractor perfor- mance. Turk. J. Agric. For. 29 (6), 461 –468. Summers, J.D., Khalilian, A., Batchelder, D.G., 1986. Draft relationships for primary tillage in Oklahoma soils. Trans. ASAE 29 (1), 37 –39.Tafesse, M., Intaravichai, S., Saitthiti, B., Kiatiwat, T., 2007. Regression modeling of fuel consumption optimization of rotary blades of power tiller under sandy clay loamcondition. Kasetsart J. (Nat. Sci.) 41 (3), 586 –600. Taghavifar, H., Mardani, A., 2014a. Application of artiﬁcial neural networks for the predic- tion of traction performance parameters. J. Saudi Soc. Agric. Sci. 13 (1), 35 –43. Taghavifar, H., Mardani, A., 2014b. Wavelet neural network applied for prognostication ofcontact pressure between soil and driving wheel. Info. Proc. Agri. 1 (1), 51 –56. Taghavifar, H., Mardani, A., 2014c. On the modeling of energy efﬁciency indices of agricul- tural tractor driving wheels applying adaptive neuro-fuzzy inference system.J. Terrramech. 56 (1), 37 –47.Taghavifar, H., Mardani, A., 2015. Evaluating the effect of tire parameters on required drawbar pull energy model using adaptive neuro-fuzzy inference system. Energy85 (1), 586–593.Taghavifar, H., Mardani, A., 2017. Off-road Vehicle Dynamics. Springer, USA. Taghavifar, H., Mardani, A., Karim-Maslak, H., Kalbkhani, H., 2013. Artiﬁcial neural net- work estimation of wheel rolling resistance in clay loam soil. Appl. Soft Comput. 13(8), 3544–3551.Taghavifar, H., Mardani, A., Hosseinloo, A.H., 2015. Appraisal of artiﬁcial neural network- genetic algorithm based model for prediction of the power provided by the agricul-tural tractors. Energy 93 (2), 1704 –1710. Taghavifar, H., Motlagh, A.M., Mardani, A., Hassanpour, A., Hosseinloo, A.H., Taghavifar, L.,Wei, C., 2016.Appraisal of Takagi-Sugeno type neuro-fuzzy network system with amodiﬁed differential evolution method to predict nonlinear wheel dynamics causedby road irregularities. Transport 31 (2), 211 –220. Taiwo, A., Owusu-Sekyere, J.D., 2015. Slippage study of a two-wheel drive tractor during tillage operations on different soil surface conditions of the Atabadzi soil series ofGhana. Int. Res. J. Eng. Tech. 2 (6), 870 –875. Tayel, M.Y., Shaaban, S.M., Mansour, H.A., 2015. Effect of plowing conditions on the tractor wheel slippage and fuel consumption in sandy soil. Int. J. Chem. Res. 8 (12), 151 –159. Thansandote, A., Stuchly, S.S., Mladek, J., Townsend, J.S., Shlosser, H., 1977. A new slip monitor for traction equipment. Trans. ASAE 20 (5), 851 –856. Thomas, E.V., Singh, B., 2002. Performance of tractor implement combination. Agric.Mech. Asia Afr. Lat. Am. 33 (2), 25 –28. Udompetaikul, V., Upadhyaya, S.K., Vannucci, B., 2011. The effect of tire inﬂation pressure on fuel consumption of an agricultural tractor operating on paved roads. Trans.ASABE 54 (1), 25–30.Upadhyay, G., Raheman, H., 2019a. Comparative analysis of tillage in sandy clay loam soil by free rolling and powered disc harrow. Eng. Agric. Env. Food 12 (1), 118 –125. Upadhyay, G., Raheman, H., 2019b. Speciﬁc draft estimation model for offset disc harrows. Soil Tillage Res. 191 (1), 75 –84. Upadhyaya, S.K., Williams, T.H., Kemble, L.J., Collins, N.E., 1984. Energy requirements for chiseling in coastal plain soils. Trans. ASAE 27 (6), 1643 –1649. Zhang, C., Araya, K., Kudoh, M., Liu, F., Jia, H., Zhang, H., Yang, S., 2001. A three-stage soil layer mixing plough for the improvement of meadow soil, part 3: ﬁeld evaluation. J. Agric. Eng. Res. 79 (1), 47 –53.84 S.M. Shafaei et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 2 (2019) 38 –84