Original Article
Risk level reduction in construction sites: Towards a computer aidedmethodology – A case study
Nuno Ferreiraa,c, Gilberto Santosb,⇑, Rui Silvac
aJoaquim Peixoto Azevedo & Filhos, Lda, R. de Longras 44, Vila Verde, Braga, Portugal
bCollege of Design, Polytechnic Institute Cavado and Ave, Barcelos, Portugal
cLusíada University, CLEGI, Vila Nova de Famalicão, Portugal
article info
Article history:Received 24 May 2017Revised 15 January 2018Accepted 17 January 2018Available online 31 January 2018Keywords:Computer aided methodologyOccupational health and safetyRisk evaluationRisk distribution chronogramabstract
There has been increased concern in the evaluation of risk in the construction ﬁeld and it is common tohave it performed for every task, function and machine. Nonetheless this commonly used approach doesnot take into account most of the intrinsic variables inherent to a site construction and hence several fac-tors reported in literature, as well as experience based analysis, suggest that spatial and temporal vari-ables have a strong inﬂuence on risk level distribution. To evaluate the impact of these factors a studywas conducted concerning the simultaneity of risks in the construction of an Aged People Hostel, inthe district of Braga, Portugal. A method was developed in order to reduce peaks of previously estimatedrisk levels through the reorganization of tasks in time and space attaining a substantial reduction in peakrisk tasks. This study, along with the increasing availability of computing tools pertaining to the construc-tion area, demonstrates the necessity for the development of new strategies regarding integrated riskmanagement and planning during the project phase that substantially mitigate risk peaks duringconstruction./C2112018 The Authors. Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of King Saud University. This is anopen access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ ).
1. IntroductionRisk evaluation has begun half a century following the indus-trial revolution in England[1]due to a growing concern regardingworking conditions, accidents and other risk factors, which werecommon in the domain of ﬁrst industries. Nevertheless it was inthe United States of America that the ﬁrst initiatives regarding riskprevention took place, given the government, entrepreneurs andspecialists intervention. In 1928The American Engineering Councilhad already demonstrated the existing connections between thedirect and indirect costs linked to accidents such as payment ofnon-productive manpower, ﬁnancial losses and production disrup-tion. In 1931 H.W. Heinrich[2]made public a study revealing thedirect and indirect costs of work accidents outlining a method thatwas later known as the domino theory. The study underlined thecausality effect as determinant for a cascade effect ruled by ﬁvefactors: social ambience, human error, dangerous conditions, acci-dent and personal damage[3]. Risk assessment is an importanttool for risk prevention at work and regardless of the method itsassessment is fundamental[4,5,11].A greater concern towards both cause and effect of risk has beengrowing and reported approaches are abundant in literature.Simonds[4]presented a method for the calculation of costs associ-ated with some types of accidents which might result in lesions,medical assistance, ﬁrst aid help and accidents without injuries[5]. In 1953 Recommendation n/C17697 ofThe International Conference of Worksets some basic guidelines for the protection of health con-cerning the workers: practical actions to prevent, reduce and elim-inate risks, medical care for workers, notiﬁcation of occupationaldiseases and facilities for ﬁrst aid and emergency treatment in caseof accident. Bird & Germain[6]published another study where90,000 accidents in a siderurgical enterprise were analysed givingplace to measures that were motivated by the costs resulting fromaccidents. Towards the end of the 20th century a growing concernemerged on the prevention of risk factor exposure or professionaldisease[7,8,9,39]. Further, research and practice demonstratedthat decisions made prior to work at construction sites can
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aci.2018.01.0032210-8327//C2112018 The Authors. Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of King Saud University.This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ ).⇑Corresponding author at: ESD - Campus do IPCA, Vila Nova Frescaínha, 4750-810 Barcelos Portugal.E-mail address:gsantos@ipca.pt(G. Santos). Peer review under responsibility of King Saud University.
Production and hosting by ElsevierApplied Computing and Informatics 15 (2019) 136–143
Contents lists available atScienceDirect
Applied Computing and Informatics
journal homepage: www.sciencedirect.com
inﬂuence the safety of construction workers [10]. In fact, according to Kuo and Lu[11]an effective risk management of constructionprojects requires a reliable risk assessment and risk treatmentplan. Risk analysis is a core process of safety management [12] and also, safety is a prominent feature in complex systems andthere is an abundance of different approaches on how to handleit[13]. By deﬁnition, risk analysis deals with uncertain situations,that is, with situations in which there is no complete and accurateknowledge about the state of the system [14]. With the industrial and social development already attained the perspective of riskassessment has gained another dimension.2. Integrated risk managementFalls represent a major care and cost problem to health andsocial services world-widely given that 50% of falls result in aninjury[15]and it is known that injuries at work have a substantialeconomic and societal burden[16,17]. Doulamis et al.[40]; Bourke et al.[41]and Li et al.[42]proposed new methodologies based onaccelerometers and gyroscopes for the detection of falls neverthe-less the main drawbacks of these studies concern the distinctionbetween involuntary human falls from normal movements similarto falls. The difﬁculties encountered in these studies demonstratethe importance of detecting and preventing the risk of falls. In gen-eral organizations adopt safety management systems or behavior-based systems approaches to safety functions in an attempt toachieve performance excellence[18,19]. Some authors defend that safety and health management atwork should be initiated and integrated during the project period[20]and safety management must be organized in function ofthe building processes, the architectonic and structural solutionadopted. Santos et al.[21]characterize the Portuguese view onhow enterprises deal with the Occupational Health and SafetyManagement Systems certiﬁcation process, after receiving theQuality Management System certiﬁcation. The authors found thatin most cases the Occupational Health and Safety ManagementSystems certiﬁcation process are the last to be implemented whichis corroborated by other authors [22,23,24]. An Occupational Health and Safety Management System is deﬁned as ‘‘a set of toolsthat enhance safety risk management efﬁciency related to all theorganization‘s work activities”[25,26]however enterprises that have implemented the Quality Management System certiﬁcationreported improvements in working conditions and in ensuringcompliance with applicable health and safety legislation [21].I n high-risk organizations much effort has been made to standardizeprocedures in order to streamline human action to decrease riskand increase productivity[26].Badri et al.[27], upon his literature review on the integrationand management of safety with the project management, statethe existence of many published books (60% of the selected pub-lished books) that envisage the integration of risks managementwith process control in the civil construction ﬁeld as a fatality.Lately different approaches to the problem have been suggested,several authors[28,29,30]have tried to combine scheduled tasksto the programming and safety measures. Also, and due to criticalnature and high number of working accidents, several researchershave proposed tools to integrate safety management in the processof production programming. The following authors are just a fewthat made attempts to integrate different aspects regarding riskassessment and control: Hare et al. [29]tried to integrate safety management within the project phase. He used an approach basedon discussions with experts on civil construction in order todetermine the critical and detriment factors for the developmentof an integrative model for safety management; Zhang et al. [31]
proposed an automatic application integrated in recent systemsBuilding Information Modelling (BIM) - This application allowsfor an automatic analysis of the virtual construction model in orderto detect and suggest preventive measures. It allows for the iden-tiﬁcation of locations and periods during which safety measuresshould be implemented in earlier stages of construction; Yi & Lang-ford[30]introduced the concept of combining the timetable of dif-ferent tasks with the programming of safety measures. They aim atimproving the perception of places and periods during which theworkers are potentially more prone and vulnerable to serious acci-dents. They defend that if the mentioned places and periods arepreviously identiﬁed necessary and adequate safety measurescan be taken to avoid situations of high risk. They also state thatsafety planning requires coordination with the programming/chronological register of works to identify situations when the riskexceeds the admissible limits for the project. Besides reducing theaccident indexes this coordination concurs for the reduction in theproject costs; Doulamis et al.[43]use a different approach and apply a resource allocation algorithm to minimize, but not elimi-nate, overlapping tasks assigned to the same processor.Other approaches to risk management increasingly take advan-tage of digital technology[8]and its inherent capability to handlemassive quantities of information. Zhou et al. [32]established a relationship between the risks in civil construction industry andthe digital and technological development veriﬁed in the concep-tion of buildings and show the existence of several digital toolswhich broach the safety questions during the construction period.Nevertheless very few digital tools promote safety during the pro-ject phase integrated into the work planning. They go on sayingthat the digital tools broaching the safety measures in the projectphase are technically precocious. Hadikusumo & Rowlinson [33] developed a tool to visualize the building process taking advantageof recent virtual reality technologies - they developed a model ableto see all the constructive process still in the project phase. The useof this tool during construction planning allows managers to accesssafety management and identify, evaluate and control the existingrisks in the construction site. Kartam [28]through the Critical Path Method (CPM) joined safety management with work managementprogramming based on planning, organization, control and leader-ship principles. The proposed methodology has processes of con-trol through engineering procedures, training and the rightfulﬁlment of normative requests and it allows for the program-ming, management and safety control in every phase of the con-struction project. Fung et al.[34]developed a Risk Assessment Model (RAM) for the different periods of a project in the civil con-struction to help safety managers and workers in understandingthe real risks in their working functions. This method gives a quan-titative evaluation based on historical data and was tested in a realworking atmosphere to validate its credibility. Thus, proactive haz-ard identiﬁcation and elimination is always safer and more costeffective than reactive hazard management [35]. Liu et al.[36]pre- sents an improved risk priority number approach based on a fuzzymeasure and fuzzy integral. A fuzzy measure is used to reﬂect theimportance of the individual indicators and the indicator set and afuzzy integral is a nonlinear function deﬁned on the basis of fuzzymeasure. Molen et al.[37]evaluates the effectiveness of a face-to-face strategy and a direct mailing strategy on safety violationswhile working from heights among construction companies com-pared to a control condition.3. Material and methodsThe work presented in this paper addresses some of thelimitations presented by other approaches regarding the evalua-tion and use of different risk probability variability within a con-struction site location and proposes enhancements concerningN. Ferreira et al. / Applied Computing and Informatics 15 (2019) 136–143 137the optimized distribution of risk within the project plan. Takinginto consideration the presented approaches for risk assessmentand their limitations, this study adds a physical and temporaldimension to the problem and is later assessed through a casestudy. This paper presents a new methodology for risk assessmentin construction sites and it is designed to explore some of the lim-itations of the previously presented studies. It takes into consider-ation previous frameworks and addresses the limited results on therelationship between physical and temporal risk hazard locationsproviding a map that can be easily assessed to depict critical riskin time and space. There are several theoretical assessmentmethodologies, however, evaluations that address time and spaceand are corroborated by a case study have not been yet been pre-sented and validated.This method was explored and evaluated during the construc-tion of an Aged People Hostel - The building budgeted in 2.5 mil-lion Euro has three ﬂoors and approximately 4000 m
2of construction area and a construction period of one year. The infor-mation registered for this construction site was the following: therequired working days to accomplish each task, their start and con-clusion date and if applicable the total number of periods of work.Fig. 1details the information previously described in the form of achronogram.Together with task records it was conducted an evaluation ofrisk for each of the tasks (162 tasks) using the Composed MatrixMethod[38]. This method (by the Instituto Nacional de Seguridade Higiene en el Trabalho, 1995) enables the estimation of risk mag-nitude through the identiﬁcation of existing deﬁciencies, theirprobability of occurrence and associated risk consequence. TheRisk Level (RL) is a function of the Probability Level (PL) of someaccident and Consequence Level (CL) regarding associated dam-ages, and can be represented as follows:
RL¼PL/C2CL
The Probability Level (PL) can be determined as a function ofDeﬁciency (insufﬁcient) Level (DL) of the preventive measuresand Exposure Level (EL) to risk, and can be expressed by:
PL¼DL/C2EL
where the Deﬁciency Level (DL) is the expectable amplitudebetween the set of risk factors considered and its direct relationto possible accidents. The Exposure Level (EL) is a measure of fre-quency of occurrence of risk exposure and is estimated on the basisof start times in work areas[38].
The quantiﬁcation of Deﬁciency Level, exposure and conse-quence, was performed by direct observation of each task in thereal working environment. To get the most rigorous risk assess-ment and therefore reﬂect the reality of this type of work therewas no interference in the form of the work involved or the timerequired to perform tasks. Only preventive measures were consid-ered, veriﬁed and implemented by workers during working hours.The quantiﬁcation of risk associated with each task was throughthe matrix represented schematically in Fig. 2. Risk characteristics of each task are represented by the sum of the risks associated withthe different activities required to complete the respective task.The tasks presented inFig. 2, including ﬁling reinforced con-crete pillars, ﬁling reinforced concrete stairs, walls rooﬁng ﬁllinglayer implementation, ﬁlling pavements, application of protectionguards on balconies and stairs, respectively obtained the followingindividual levels of risk: 116,330, 92,820, 41,600, 37,980, 17,930and 17,930. The most observed risks in the majority of task werethe following: the risks of falls from higher levels; falls at the samelevel; incorrect ergonomic postures; and, electrical hazard. The cal-culated risk was distributed along the chronogram of work to get areal chronogram with the quantiﬁcation of associated risks foreach task, that is to say, a risk map. Fig. 3presents a schematicrepresentation of the risk chronogram and associated task riskmagnitude.The obtained risk map combined with the working chronogramand associated risk evaluation makes it possible to quantify thedaily level of accumulated risk as function of the work taking placeat each spot. Several types of graphics may now be developed con-sidering the temporal factor and the evaluated risk distribution.This new approach can be analysed from different perspectives,according to the relevance of the combined factors, these are:– For tasks with the same level of risk evaluation, linked but notjuxtaposed, a graph of accumulated risk is developed, linearand constant according toFig. 4. This type of graph is ideal tomonitor and treat associated risk. Although in some phases of
Fig. 1.Schematic representation of the chronogram in the initial works. Adaptedfrom[5].
Fig. 2.Schematic representation of the risk assessment matrix. Adapted from [5].
Fig. 3.Schematic representation of the risk distribution by the work schedule.Adapted from[5].138 N. Ferreira et al. / Applied Computing and Informatics 15 (2019) 136–143construction there are some duly linked tasks which cannotbegin without the conclusion of previous ones quantiﬁcationof individual risk level is not always equal.– For tasks linked sequentially with different levels of risk, but notjuxtaposed, a graph of accumulated variable risk is developedwith deﬁned levels according toFig. 5. This is the type of graph which better mirrors a sequence of tasks of different nature butduly linked. That is to say that this graph characterizes the set ofseveral tasks with different risk level, developed in sequence,one after the other.– For tasks simultaneously executed with different levels of risk(in the same period of time) a graph of accumulated risk isdeveloped, variable with well-deﬁned levels but with very dif-ferent valuations, according toFig.6. With the simultaneity of tasks the level of accumulated risk represents the total amountof risk levels juxtaposed. This is the most usual and commongraph observed during construction.Following the identiﬁcation of the phases of the work withhigher risk probability a number of organizational measures wereadopted that aimed at reducing peak risks values. The introducedalterations aimed at reducing the number of simultaneous taskswithout interfering with critical activities and in the majority ofthe cases resulted in the adjustment on the days pertaining tothe beginning and end of tasks, preserving the working days neces-sary for the site construction. Critical activities are those that can-not have any delay on completion and must be completed at adeﬁned / scheduled time. Taking into account the initial chrono-gram and the introduced alterations a new histogram of accumu-lated risk was obtained.4. ResultsThe following three subsections present the differentapproaches to risk distribution assessment and prediction as wellas a ﬁnal comparison subsection. In the ﬁrst part it is presentedthe traditional analyses carried to determine probable problematicperiods concerning risk levels. The second part introduces into therisk assessment analyses the proposed method taking into accounttime and space redistribution of risk. The ﬁnal part gives a compar-ison concerning the implementation of this method as well asproviding evidences pertaining to its beneﬁts on assessing riskand complementary planning of tasks during construction.4.1. Initial histogramThe obtained risk distribution histogram ( Fig.7) is characteristic of this type of construction for the category of building. This type ischaracterized by two distinct phases of higher risk normallyseparated by a lower risk period of time. The ﬁrst period includes
Fig. 5.Schematic representation for tasks with different levels of risk linkedsequentially, but not juxtaposed.
Fig. 6.Schematic representation for tasks with different levels of risk simultane-ously executed (in the same period of time).
 Fig. 4.Schematic representation for tasks with the same level of risk evaluation,linked but not juxtaposed.
Fig. 7.Histogram of level of accumulated risk. Adapted from [5].N. Ferreira et al. / Applied Computing and Informatics 15 (2019) 136–143 139formwork and stripping of every element of concrete which com-pose the building. The second includes the execution of all neces-sary ﬁnishing works. Generally, between these phases there is asmall appeasement or even a total stop of every kind of work. Thisappeasement or pause is due to the time required for hardening ofthe concrete elements, which attain their project resistance after28 days.According toFig. 7it is shown that the ﬁrst month of workreveals a small and residual level of risk given the tasks associated,namely the settlement of the dock and cleaning of the ground. Dur-ing the following months tasks such as installation and preparationof every type of support equipment takes place as well as theinstallation of sanitary facilities and social ﬁttings giving rise tohigher levels of risk. Additionally there are a number of differenttasks developed simultaneously concerning mainly to the execu-tion of elements in concrete. Generally the execution of tasks inthis period have the highest risk index since it involves works inheight, digging works and movement of hanging cargoes.Following this higher level of risk there is a reduction in thenumber of tasks executed simultaneously that lasts approximately28 days, the required period for the concrete elements to attain thenecessary resistance. It is also shown that works will not cease andhence the correspondent risk associated persists, although smaller.The following four months are characterized by irregular and broadpeaks due mainly to the high simultaneity of developed tasks.Although the risks associated with on-going tasks have lowerlevels there is high simultaneity of tasks and people working inthe building causing a rather high accumulated risk. Althoughthe last two months are also characterized by a high simultaneityof tasks the risk level associated with each task is smaller givingrise to a lower accumulated risk, due mainly to ﬁnishing tasks,tests and cleaning. Hence, the accumulated risk pattern generatedfor this construction site reveal two distinct phases of higher riskincidence mainly due to the accumulated risk inherent to simulta-neous execution of tasks. Generally, these histograms are obtainedusing data collected on site and represent the risk accumulateddaily during the period of execution of the work. This methodcan be applied to other types of construction works.4.2. Redistribution of risk and task simultaneity analysisFollowing the identiﬁcation of risk distribution along the execu-tion plan measures were studied in order to diminishing the riskpeaks throughout the timeline of the project. These organizationalmeasures were established, without limiting the correct develop-ment of work, i.e. without interfering with critic activities, consid-ering mostly the reduction of simultaneous tasks with the aim ofdiminishing the peaks obtained in each of the phases. Critical tasksare those that cannot be delayed and hence be completed within apredeﬁned / scheduled time and determine the critical path.The modiﬁcations introduced preserve the duration of the pro-ject and concern mainly in shifting tasks that are not on the criticalpath and may have their schedule changed without major impacton the overall project. The proposed and adopted alterations areas follow:– Considering the existence of three distinct periods concerningthe setting of concrete on pillars it was considered a shift onthe second period anticipating it by eight working days;– Concrete setting in stairs were anticipated by eight workingdays;– Wall prooﬁng was anticipated by one working day, while thesecond phase was delayed three working days;– The ﬁrst pavement ﬁlling layer stages, on the very beginningsubdivided into three periods, was divided in two, anticipatingthe second in eleven working days;– The task of applying protection guards in interior and exterioropenings was delayed seventeen days;– The task of applying protection guards in stairs was anticipatednine days.Project plans before and after the implementation of organiza-tional measures are presented inFig.8andFig.9. Fig. 10presents the combined histogram of accumulated riskand working program resulting from the implementation of thepresented organizational measures. In the ﬁrst phase, period dur-ing which the tasks have the highest risk level, a simple reductionon one or two simultaneous tasks causes meaningful reductions inthe level of accumulated risk. Further, in the second phase, periodduring which the tasks have a lower level of risk, the reduction oftasks done simultaneously creates a graph with peaks in moredeﬁned levels.4.3. Comparison between the initial and ﬁnal improvementsThe organization measures implemented gave rise to a new riskhistogram that reduced peak risk and redistributed the accumu-lated risk in a more homogeneous fashion. This redistribution gaverise to an increase in risk level in some parts where the risk waspreviously lower but resulted essentially in the reduction of riskpeaks that given their hazard brought higher beneﬁts to healthand safety and associated costs. As expected global accumulatedrisk has not been reduced, it was simply redistributed along thetimeline of the project. In order to better judge on the redistribu-tion of risk,Fig. 11shows a comparison between the initial andthe latest results.
Fig. 8.Schematic representation of the working chronogram before the establish-ment of organizational measures. Adapted from [5].
Fig. 9.Schematic representation of the working chronogram after the establish-ment of organizational measures. Adapted from [5].140 N. Ferreira et al. / Applied Computing and Informatics 15 (2019) 136–143In order to better understand the improvements changes in thehistogram were highlighted – different colours were used to high-light changes. According toFig.12the areas in green show a decrease of accumulated risk and the areas in red, those with anincrease in accumulated risk.The higher risk levels on the initial setting, corresponding to thebeginning of the third month of work, were redistributed along thebeginning of the second month. Further, some of the peaks identi-ﬁed in the beginning of the ninth and tenth month of work wereredistributed along the seventh, eighth and mainly eleventh monthof work.5. DiscussionThe histogram of accumulated risk has shown that this con-struction project is mainly characterized by two distinctive stages.During the ﬁrst stage the higher risk accumulated tasks demandspecial attention since higher levels of risk appear mainly due tothe cumulative effect of similar tasks duly mixed in the initial con-structive process phase. The second stage is characterized by a highnumber of activities developed simultaneously with meaningfulaccumulated risk. That is, lower risk activities in conjunction withthe high simultaneity of tasks represent a level of accumulated riskthat cannot be underestimated.Given the previous scenario organizational measures weredeﬁned and implemented to diminish the number of simultaneoustasks. Shifting in time one or more of the tasks during the ﬁrst stageshould be enough to generate a signiﬁcant change in the distributedrisk since tasks at this stage possess higher levels of risk. The task inthe second stage carries a lower level of risk and therefore is moredifﬁcult to soften risk peaks levels. With the implementation ofthe proposed organizational measures in the chronological registerof tasks it was possible to reduce the peaks of risk and transformthe histogram of accumulated risk into a smother and predictableitem. It was also veriﬁed that the global potential of existing riskwas not reduced; it was simply redistributed along the period oftime. The overall accumulated risk, as expected, was not reducedsince there was an overall redistribution of chronological tasks.Although simultaneity was not taken into account it is known thatan increased number of simultaneous tasks give rise to increasedrisk and hence a simultaneity coefﬁcient should be introduced.Therefore, as well as redistributing tasks in time, risk should con-template the effect of simultaneity since there is an augmented riskwhile performing a higher number of tasks.The results demonstrate that project planning should pay spe-cial attention to risk maps since these have a strong impact inthe management of construction sites. Systematic changes in theworkforce, the continuous change of conditions and sceneries ofwork, the exposure to the weather conditions and some other vari-able factors render difﬁcult the task of identifying, observing, eval-uating and gathering data that continuously mutate. It is thereforeimportant that safety managers have access to the risk characteris-tic curves of each type of construction task in order to introducepossible improvements regarding the reduction of accumulatedrisk in order to accommodate changes in updates of the projectplan.A method was developed in order to reduce peaks of previouslyestimated risk levels through the reorganization of tasks in timeand space attaining a substantial reduction in peak risk tasks. Itis a new and innovative method because it allows companies thatadopt it to reduce the accumulated risks on a daily basis, and con-sequently reduce accident levels in construction, as shown inFig.10,Fig.11andFig.12.The organizational measures introduced and detailed previ-ously suggest a number of actions that sustain more generic proce-dures to be adopted by project managers as well as computer aidedtools. The following indications provide generic procedures toreduce peak risk:– Develop ﬁrst draft of project plan and identify problematicspots;– Fix critical path tasks and identify a time window for othertasks;– Avoid simultaneity of high risk tasks when redistributing tasks;– Identify feasible solutions in the beginning of the project planthat allow for simultaneity;– Iterate through initial feasible solutions until a minimum risklevel is attained;
Fig. 12.Areas of increase and decrease of accumulated risk. Adapted from [5].
Fig. 10.Level of risk accumulated after the introduction of organizationalmeasures. Adapted from[5].
Fig. 11.Comparison of the levels of accumulated risk before and after theimplementation of organizational measures. Adapted from [5].N. Ferreira et al. / Applied Computing and Informatics 15 (2019) 136–143 141– Set the initial project plan tasks according to the above solutionand proceed, as above, searching for best feasible solutionsaccording to the previous approach.Together with the reported state of the art concerning thedevelopment of computer aided tools, according to the differentauthors, it is fully justiﬁable the development of new tools thatincorporate and implement some of the presented organizationalmeasures in order to help managing risk under continuously vary-ing construction site conditions taking into account a space dimen-sion. Thus, it is evermore required further research intomethodologies that deal with risk assessment linked to projectplanning in order to reduce construction site risks associated withvariable and evolving conditions.6. ConclusionWith the implementation of the proposed organizational mea-sures with computer aided tools primarily project planning related,it is possible to reduce the peaks of risk and transform the his-togram of accumulated risk into a smother and predictable item.The reduction of risk to lower levels constitute a strong motivationtowards this approach since managing lower levels of risk resultsin lighter risk measures which in turn reduce cost and hazard per-taining to the construction site. Along with the side effects ofreducing the risk levels it is possible to envisage a more predictableproject planning. Along with the proposed organizational mea-sures this work provides important insights pertaining to the char-acteristic curve of accumulated risk in this type of buildingconstruction. In further studies it would be important to determinethe curve of accumulated risk characteristic of other types of worksand enable a thorough comparison.This study further unveils the potential pertaining to the devel-opment of new computer aided tools, as well as, new methodolo-gies concerning risk management intertwined with projectplanning and managing. The reported organizational measureswere successful in reducing peak risk levels and contributetowards the development of methodologies regarding risk man-agement and its dynamic control during construction. The follow-ing research step is to evaluate the efﬁciency of genetic algorithmsin optimizing the redistribution of tasks given the restrictionsposed by this problem targeted at reducing risk peaks.Authors’ contributionsThe three authors worked together as a team contributingequally to this paper. All authors read and approved the ﬁnalmanuscript.References
[1]F. Nunes, Segurança e Higiene do Trabalho, Escola Proﬁssional Gustave Eiffel(2009)
.[2]
H.W. Heinrich, Industrial Accident Prevention, A Scientiﬁc Approach, McGraw-Hill book Company, Incorporated, 1931
. [3]
E. Lago, Proposta de sistemas de gestão em segurança no trabalho paraempresas de construção civil, Programa de pós-graduação em engenharia civil.Universidade católica de Pernambuco, Recife, 2006, p. 195
. [4] ] R.H. Simonds, Safety Management Accident Cost And Control, R.D. Irwin,1947[5]
N. Ferreira, G. Santos, Simultaneity of risk in the civil site construction: Ananalysis of accumulated risk, in: Proceedings of the International Symposiumon Occupational Safety and Hygiene, SHO, Taylor & Francis Group, London,2014, pp. 259–264
.[6]
F. Bird, G. Germain, Damage control; a new horizon in accident prevention andcost improvement, American Management Association, New York, 1966
. [7]
A.A. Meneghetti, A Importância da Auditoria Comportamental para aPrevenção de Acidentes na Indústria Petroquímica, Universidade FederalFluminense, Niterói, 2010
.[8] M.F. Rebelo, G. Santos, R. Silva, The integration of standardized ManagementSystems: managing business risk, Int. J. Quality Reliab. Manage. 34 (3) (2017)395–405,https://doi.org/10.1108/IJQRM-11-2014-0170 . [9]M.F. Rebelo, G. Santos, R. Silva, Integration of management systems: towardsthe sustained success and development of organizations, J. Clean. Prod. 127(2016) 96–111
.[10]
M. Gangolells, M. Casals, N. Forcada, X. Roca, A. Fuertes, Mitigatingconstruction safety risks using prevention through design, J. Safety Res.(2010) 107–122
.[11]
Y.C. Kuo, S.T. Lu, Using fuzzy multiple criteria decision making approach toenhance risk assessment for metropolitan construction projects, Int. J. ProjectManage. 31 (2013) 602–614
. [12]
H.H. Wang, F. Boukamp, An ontology-based representation and reasoningframework for supporting job hazard analysis, J. Comput. Civil Eng. 25 (6)(2011) 442–457
.[13]
L. Harms-Ringdahl, Relationships between accident investigations, riskanalysis, and safety management, J. Hazard. Mater. (2004) 13–19
. [14]
G.E. Gurcanli, U. Mungen, An occupational safety risk analysis method atconstruction sites using fuzzy sets, Int. J. Ind. Ergon. (2009) 371–387
. [15]
M. Marques, M. Terroso, R. Freitas, A.T. Marques, J. Gabriel, R. Simoes, Aprocedure for a mechanical evaluation of an undeﬁned osteo-protectivematerial, Accident Anal. Prevent. 75 (2015) 285–291
. [16]
P.M. Smith, R. Saunders, M. Lifshen, O. Black, M. Lay, F.C. Breslin, A.D.M.Montagne, E. Tompa, The development of a conceptual model and self-reported measure of occupational health and safety vulnerability, AccidentAnal. Prevent. 82 (2015) 234–243
. [17]
P. Monteiro, F. Santos, G. Santos, Costs of safety at work vs. Costs of ‘‘no” safetyat work-building sector, in: Proceedings of the International Symposium onOccupational Safety and Hygiene, SHO, Taylor & Francis Group, London, 2013,pp. 149–152
.[18]
J.K. Wachter, L. Patrick, P.L. Yorio, A system of safety management practicesand worker engagement for reducing and preventing accidents: An empiricaland theoretical investigation, Accident Anal. Prevent. 68 (2014) 117–130
. [19]
M.F. Rebelo, R. Silva, G. Santos, P. Mendes, Model Based Integration ofManagement Systems (MSS) – Casy study, TQM Journal. 28 (6) (2016) 907–932
.[20] S. Nenonen, J. Vasara, Safety management in multiemployer worksites in themanufacturing industry: opinions on co-operation and problems encountered,Int. J. Occup. Safety Ergon. 19 (2) (2013) 168–183, https://doi.org/10.1080/ 10803548.2013.11076976. [21]
G. Santos, A.L. Milán, Motivation and beneﬁts of implementation andcertiﬁcation according ISO 9001 – The Portuguese experience, Int. J. Qual.Res. 7 (1) (2013) 71–86
. [22] D. Podgórski, Occupational health and safety management in polishenterprises implementing total quality management systems, Int. J. Occup.Safety Ergon. 6 (sup1) (2000) 85–101, https://doi.org/10.1080/ 10803548.2000.11105110. [23] J. Rzepecki, Cost and beneﬁts of implementing an occupational safety andhealth management system (OSH MS) in enterprises in Poland, Int. J. Occup.Safety Ergon. 18 (2) (2012) 181–193, https://doi.org/10.1080/ 10803548.2012.11076927. [24] C. Qiang, W.K. Chow, A discussion of occupational health and safetymanagement for the catering industry in China, Int. J. Occup. Safety Ergon.13 (3) (2007) 333–339,https://doi.org/10.1080/10803548.2007.11076732 . [25]
G. Santos, S. Barros, F. Mendes, N. Lopes, The main beneﬁts associated withhealth and safety management systems certiﬁcation in Portuguese small andmedium enterprises post quality management system certiﬁcation, Safety Sci.51 (2013) 29–36
.[26]
T. Wold, K. Laumann, Safety management systems – deﬁnitions, challenges foruse and recommendations for improvements, Safety Sci. Monitor 19 (1)(2015), article 1.
.[27]
A. Badri, A. Gbodossou, S. Nadeau, Occupational health and safety risks:Towards the integration into project management, Safety Sci., 50, 2012, pp.190–198
.[28]
N.A. Kartam, Integrating safety and health performance into construction CPM,J. Constr. Eng. Manage. 123 (2) (1997) 121–126
. [29]
B. Hare, I. Cameron, A.R. Duff, Exploring the integration of health and safetywith pre-construction planning, Eng. Constr. Arch. Manage. 13 (5) (2006) 438–450
.[30]
K.J. Yi, D. Langford, Scheduling-based risk estimation and safety planning forconstruction projects, J. Constr. Eng. Manage. 132 (6) (2006) 626–635
. [31]
S. Zhang, J. Teizer, J.K. Lee, C.M. Eastman, M. Venugopal, Building informationmodeling (BIM) and safety: automatic safety checking of construction modelsand schedules, Automat. Constr. 29 (2013) 183–195
. [32]
W. Zhou, J. Whyte, R. Sacks, Construction safety and digital design: a review,Automat. Constr. 22 (2012) 102–111
. [33]
B.H. Hadikusumo, S. Rowlinson, Integration of virtually real constructionmodel and design-for-safety-process database, Automat. Constr. 11 (5) (2002)501–509
.[34]
I.W. Fung, V.W. Tam, T.Y. Lo, L.L. Lu, Developing a risk assessment model forconstruction safety, Int. J. Project Manage. 28 (6) (2010) 593–600
. [35]
T.M. Toole, J.A. Gambatese, The trajectories of prevention through design inconstruction, J. Safety Res. 39 (2) (2008) 225–230
. [36] H. Liu, X. Deng, W. Jiang, Risk evaluation in failure mode and effects analysisusing fuzzy measure and fuzzy integral, Symmetry 9 (162) (2017) 1–13,https://doi.org/10.3390/sym9080162 .142 N. Ferreira et al. / Applied Computing and Informatics 15 (2019) 136–143[37] V. Molen, A. Helder, J. Warning, M.H.W. Frings-Dresen, National evaluation ofstrategies to reduce safety violations for working from heights in constructioncompanies: results from a randomized controlled trial, BMC Public Health 16(19) (2016) 1–8,https://doi.org/10.1186/s12889-016-2693-x . [38] NTP330, Sistema simpliﬁcado de evaluación de riesgos de accidente. Espanã:Ministerio de Trabajo y Asuntos Sociales - Instituto Nacional de Seguridad eHigiene en el Trabajo (1995).[39]G. Santos, M.F. Rebelo, S. Barros, R. Silva, M. Pereira, G. Ramos, N. Lopes,Developments regarding the integration of the Occupational Safety and Healthwith Quality and Environment Management Systems (eBook), Chapter 6, TheNova Science Publishers, New York, 2014, pp. 113–146
. [40]
A. Doulamis, N. Doulamis, I. Kalisperakis, C. Stentoumis, A real-time single-camera approach for automatic fall detection ISPRS Commission V, CloseRange Image measurements Techniques 38 (2010) 207–212
. [41]
A.K. Bourke, J.V. O’brien, G.M. Lyons, Evaluation of a threshold-based tri-axialaccelerometer fall detection algorithm, Gait Posture 26 (2) (2007) 194–199
. [42] Q. Li, J.A. Stankovic, M.A. Hanson, A.T. Barth, J. Lach, G. Zhou, Accurate, fast falldetection using gyroscopes and accelerometer-derived posture information,In: Wearable and Implantable Body Sensor Networks, 2009. BSN 2009. SixthInternational Workshop on. IEEE, June 2009, pp. 138–143.[43]
N.D. Doulamis, P. Kokkinos, E. Varvarigos, Resource selection for tasks withtime requirements using spectral clustering, IEEE Trans. Computers 63 (2)(2014) 461–474
.Nuno Ferreiragraduated in Civil Engineering, from the Polyt Institute of Bragança –Portugal. He is working in the company Joaquim Peixoto Azevedo & Filhos, in VilaVerde, Braga, Portugal. In 2014 he completed a master course in Integrated Man-agement Systems Quality, Environment and Safety from the Polytechnic InstituteCávado e Ave. Nuno is a PhD student since 2014 at Lusíada University in Vila Novade Famalicão – Portugal.Gilberto Santosgraduated in Mechanical Engineering from the Slovaks TechnicalUniversity. He completed a postgraduate course in quality engineering at the NewUniversity of Lisbon (Portugal) and he received a PhD in mechanical engineering –production technologies (branch – industrial quality) from the University of Minhoin Portugal. Gilberto has worked in the mechanical engineering departments at theNew University of Lisbon and the University of Minho. He founded a master’scourse ‘‘Integrated Management Systems QES (Quality, Environment and Safety)” atthe College of Technology of Polytechnic Institute Cávado e Ave where he is aProfessor from 2006 and the Director of the MSc from 2008. Gilberto participates asa speaker in several national and international conferences and he is currentlyauthor of several publications in Integrated Management Systems, Quality, Envi-ronment and Safety in international and national journals. He is member of theresearch team of several IMS – QES research projects and also supervises masterand PhD thesis and also serves as a reviewer for international journals. In 2004,Gilberto became a ‘‘senior member” of the Board of the Portuguese EngineerAssociation and in 2006, he was distinguished by Yorker International Universitywith the Honorary Doctorate of Mechanical Engineering – ‘‘has walked an excep-tional path of Professional life and is the perfect candidate for such degree”. In 2011,he received the badge of silver by the 25 years as a member of Portuguese EngineerAssociation. Professor Gilberto Santos is the corresponding author and can becontacted at: gsantos@ipca.ptRui Silvais an Associated Professor in the Engineering and Technology Faculty atthe Universidade Lusíada of Vila Nova de Famalicão, Portugal. He holds a PhDdegree in Mechanical Engineering from the University of Glamorgan, UK. His cur-rent research interests include industrial management, operations managementand artiﬁcial intelligence. He is Cofounder and Principal Investigator of the Engi-neering and Industrial Management Research Centre since 2006. He is the head ofthe Engineering and Technology Faculty since 2008.N. Ferreira et al. / Applied Computing and Informatics 15 (2019) 136–143 143