 AASRI Procedia   2  ( 2012 )  223 – 228 
2212-6716 © 2012 Published by Elsevier B.V. Selection and/or peer review under responsibility of American Applied Science Research Institute doi: 10.1016/j.aasri.2012.09.038 © 2012 Published by Elsevier B.V. Selection and/or peer review under responsibility of American Applied Science Research Institute
 
 2012 AASRI Conference on Power and Energy Systems 
Seawave Power Farm Design: A Case Study 
V. Franzittaa, A. Violaa and M. Trapaneseb* 
aUniversità di Palermo –Dipartimento di Ricerche Energetiche e Ambientali- Palermo-Italy 
bUniversità di Palermo – Dipartimento di Ingegneria Elettrica, Elettronica e delle Telecomunicazioni – Palermo – Italy.  
Abstract 
Current energy crisis and general concerns on environmental i ssues have triggered an ever increasing effort on harvesting renewable energies. Amongst renewable energy sources, sea wave energy is definitely the one that has been less utilised.  This is probably caused by two reasons: i) the strong technica l novelties that are required to extract the energy that is contained in a highly and stochastically variable motion; ii) th e difficulty o find a suitable electrical system able to convert  the energy contained in the motion of the sea into electrical energy. In this paper we propose an approach to set up a general methodology toward the design of a seawave farm. The first step is explained how to choose the conversion system, in the second step is discussed the connection scheme among the converters, in the third step is reported a case study of a whole seawave farm. 
 © 2012 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. Selection and/or peer review under responsibility of American Applied Science Research Institute  
Keywords:seawave; linear  generator; power farm; 
1. Introduction Public concerns on environmental issues have stimulated an ever increasing effort on harvesting renewable energies [1-5].Among them, several approaches to harv est sea wave energy have been proposed; almost all of them introduce a mechanical conversion device between the waves and the electromagnetic generator. [6] 
 
 
* Corresponding author. Tel.: +39-091-23860292 fax: +39-091-488452. E-mail address:marco.trapanese@unipa.it. 
AASRI
Procedia
www.elsevier.com/locate/procediaAvailable online at www.sciencedirect.com
© 2012 Published by Elsevier B.V. Selection and/or peer review under responsibility of American Applied Science Research Institute
Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.224   V . Franzitta et al.  /  AASRI Procedia   2  ( 2012 )  223 – 228 
 To generate a substantial amount of power, Wave  Energy Converters have been proposed. Several solutions have been discussed, some consider a single en ergy absorber others consider several abosrbing unit. In this case, the absorbing units are arranged in several rowsor in a farm.Such units may generate 10–100 [kW] depending on their size and wave spectrum. A larg er buoy may absorb more energy but a too large buoy will not rise, only sways.[7] This stage converts the mechanical energy contained in  the waves into a more usable mechanical energy; it can be a hydraulic coupling device or a mechanical gear  and, in any case, introduces additional losses and additional maintenance requirements. In order to reduce  these losses a generator directly coupled to the sea waves should be used. Linear electrical generator has been recently studied for the exploitation of sea wave energy. Most of these projects considers mechanical conv erters in MWs scale and therefore not very suitable for a sea like Mediterranean sea where the energy density is lower than in the ocean. Moreover a general methodology to design a seawave power farm has not been fully established. In this paper we discuss an approach to design a seawav e farm through a case study. This case is located in north west part of sicily. 2. Description of the proposed design approach The first step to approach  the general design of a seawave farm is the choice of the converter. In order to perform  this task one must consider the characteristics (i n terms of waves, sea depth, currents etc) of the area where the generator will be located. In the case under study the waves are not very high (as it is shown in a following section we are in the mediterranean sea) as a result one must use a converter that is able to exploit  such a limited source. It can be seen that in this case the best solution is represented by a  conversion system has the structure of fig.1. Other conversion topologies  can be realized but the one of fig.1 captures the essential features of the most of conversion systems.            
Fig. 1. Schematic description of conversion system based on PM linear generator 
In this device the slider of the PM linear generator is driven from a buoyant (that is rigidly connected to the slider) and counteracted by a spring. The generated emf is produced from the motion of the vertical level of the sea. The typical frequency of sea waves is in the range of the tenth of Hz and as a result a machine with a high number of poles is needed in order to obtain an output whose average frequency is in a range that is easily convertible. The choice of the technology is the input for the design of the farm, which is split in 8 steps. The first step deals with the site evaluation and prep aration: the characteristics of waves are measured and are used to chose the detailed design of the converter to be used and th e preparation which are needed in the installation area.  
225  V . Franzitta et al.  /  AASRI Procedia   2  ( 2012 )  223 – 228 
 In the second step, the mechanical installation requirem ents are specified and the mechanical drawing of the installation  are specified.  In the third step the level of low voltage is chosen. In the fourth section the distribution equipment to be used is identified. In this section a discussion on the maintenance strategy to be used in the farm is given. In section fifth and sixth losses and voltage drop and power quality are calculated.  In this section the energy requirements needed are calculated. The evaluation of section 4, 5 and 6 are used in section 7 to design the protective relays to be used in  the farm. Finally, in section 8 a business plan of the plant is presented. Following the above outlined steps, a power farm has been designed and its size has been chosen in order to maximize the energy extraction in the waters of west  Sicily. The data used to optimize the converter and the farm are some experimental data on the energy density of seawes on a point located on the north west part of Sicily in the middle of Mediterranean sea. The nu merical results and optimization of this procedure is illustrated in this paper[1]. 3. Generator structure and interconnection scheme The design approach above outlined has led to design a power farm based on several low power units electrically interconnected.  The parameters of the first prototype are shown in the following table: 
Table 1.Characteristics of the PM generator obtained 
Geometric Parameter Value 
Pole pitch [mm] 150 
Slot height 70 
Number of phases 1/3 
Number of slots per pole per phase 3/1 
Stator slot width [mm] 12.5 
Tooth height [mm] 12.5 
Stator yoke height [mm] 60 
Length of the magnet [mm] 50 
The prototype has been manufactured and is shown in fig.2.  
 
 Fig.2 a) Half of the stator of the machine  and b) cr oss section of one of modules that compose the stator. 
Two interconnection schemes have been chosen and compared-They are shown in fig.3 
226   V . Franzitta et al.  /  AASRI Procedia   2  ( 2012 )  223 – 228 
   
 Fig.3 Interconnection schemes The converter were simulated by assuming a standard nu merical model of the inverter. The parameters that we have considered is the ripple in dc link, the time of  use of each inverter the continuity of the generation. The simulation was run many times and in each run each generator was exposed to a set of waveform generated as illustrated. Each generator had the characteristics of the one reported above. In fig. 4 the ripples of the dc link for the two approach es are compared. In fig. 4 the voltage ripple of the dc link of the centralized approach is compared to the ty pical voltage ripple of a single generic converter in the case of the decentralized approach.  It can be clearly se en that in all respects the partially centralized approach guarantees a more reliable and efficient operating cond ition. Moreover, the requirement on the buffer capacitance are less tight because the dc link continuous ly receives power from some generators of the farm and, therefore, its voltage is more easily kept at the value required to generate power in optimum condition. As far as the use of each inverter is concerned, in the partially centralized approach the inverter is used constantly even if the energy carried by the seawaves is small, for the decentralized approach the inverter are used discontinuously and for a percentage of time lowe r than 50 %. The continuity and the smoothness of the generation is enormously higher in  the partially cent ralized approach. This is due to the fact that a common dc link can have a higher buffer capacitance and therefor e it is much more stable than a dc link connected to a single generator.           
0 0,5 1 1,5 2 
0 0,1 0,2 0,3 0,4 Vd 
t 227  V . Franzitta et al.  /  AASRI Procedia   2  ( 2012 )  223 – 228 
  
Fig. 4Voltage ripple of the dc link (continuos line decentralized approach, dotted line semi centralized approach) 
4. Case study The previous solutions have been chosen with the methodology above outlined in order to be installed on the north west part of sicily. The location is shown in fig. 5            
Fig. 5 Geographical location of seawave farm 
 The power farm will not connected to the grid but it w ill be used to produce hydrogen. That will be used to produce electricity through a fuel cell. 5. Conclusions In this paper we present an approach to the design of  seawave power farm. The generators used in the farm are Permanent Magnet (PM) linear generators driven by  the seawavesand, therefore, they generate highly distorted emfs. We propose and compare two possible ways  to connect the generator to the grid. One is a decentralized approach where for each generator there is a conversion subsystem that permits the direct connection of the generator to the a.c. grid, the other one is based on partially centralized approach where an a.c.-d.c. rectifier is connected  to the generator and the rectifier outputs is pumped into a dc link that can receive the power from other units and that can supply a dc-ac converter directly connected to the power grid. We compare the performances of the two approaches in terms of ripple of the dc link voltage, the time of use of each inverter and the continuity of the generation and we show that the partially centralized approach is definitely more efficient and reliable of the centralized approach. Finally we present the location of a case study in north west part of Sicily (Italy) Acknowledgment This work was funded in part by "IMPETUS" program of Italian "Ministerodell'ambiente"   
228   V . Franzitta et al.  /  AASRI Procedia   2  ( 2012 )  223 – 228 
 References [1] Bonanno, A., Franzitta, V., Muzio, F.P., Trapanese,  M. A multiphysics approach to the design of a seawave energy conversion system. Proceedings of ICEST, Singapore, 2008: 2197. [2] Di Dio, V., Franzitta, V., Muzio, F., Scaccianoce, G., Trapanese, M. The use of sea waves for generation of electrical energy and hydrogen. MTS/IEEE Biloxi - Ma rine Technology for Our Future: Global and Local Challenges, OCEANS, 2009. [3] Franzitta, V., La Gennusa, M., Peri, G., Rizzo, G., Scaccianoce, G.– A Toward a European Eco-label brand for residential buildings: Holistic or by-components approaches? Energy 2011;36:4 -1884. [4] Franzitta, V., Rizzo, G., Renewable energy sources: A mediterranean perspective ICBEE 2010 - 2nd International Conference on Chemical, Biological an d Environmental Engineering, Proceedings : 48. [5]Lo Brano V. , Orioli A., Ciulla G., Culotta S.Quality of wind speed fitting distributions for the urban area of Palermo, Renew Energy 2011;36:3- 1026. [6] Beels C., Troch P., Kofoed J.P, Frigaard P., Krin gelum J.V., Kromann P.C., Donovan M.H., De Rouck J., De Backer G.A methodology for production and cost assess ment of a farm of wave energy converters. Renew Energy 2011;36- 3402. [7] ThorburnK.,Leijon M., Farm size comparison with  analytical model of linear generator wave energy converters- Ocean Eng 2007;34-908. 