Security challenges to smart agriculture: Current state, key issues, andfuture directions
Angelita Rettore de Araujo Zanellaa,b,*, Eduardo da Silvac, Luiz Carlos Pessoa Albinib
aCatarinense Federal Institute, Rod. SC 135, Km 125, Campo Experimental, Videira, Brazil
bDepartment of Informatics, Federal University of Paran /C19a, Rua Cel. Francisco Her/C19aclito dos Santos, 100, Curitiba, Brazil
cCatarinense Federal Institute, Rod BR 280, km 27, Araquari, Brazil
ARTICLE INFO
Keywords:Smart agricultureSecurityOpen-ﬁeld agricultureABSTRACT
Smart agriculture integrates a set of technologies, devices, protocols, and computational paradigms to improveagricultural processes. Big data, artiﬁcial intelligence, cloud, and edge computing provide capabilities and so- lutions to keep, store, and analyze the massive data generated by components. However, smart agriculture is stillemerging and has a low level of security features. Future solutions will demand data availability and accuracy askey points to help farmers, and security is crucial to building robust and ef ﬁcient systems. Since smart agriculture comprises a wide variety and quantity of resources, security addresses issues such as compatibility, constrainedresources, and massive data. Conventional protection schemes used in the traditional Internet or Internet ofThings may not be useful for agricultural systems, creating extra demands and opportunities. This paper aims atreviewing the state-of-the art of smart agriculture security, particularly in open- ﬁeld agriculture, discussing its architecture, describing security issues, presenting the major challenges and future directions.
1. IntroductionAgriculture is the most important provider of food and plays anessential role in economic growth. The Food and Agriculture Organiza-tion of the United Nations (FAO) states that global demand for food mustgrow to 70% by 2050 to meet demand. While current production suf ﬁces to feed the entire world population, 500 million people still suffer frommalnutrition, and over 821 million go hungry. The United Nations esti-mates that the world’s population will increase by over 2 billion people,most living in urban areas. More than half of this increase will occur inIndia, Nigeria, Pakistan, the Democratic Republic of Congo, Ethiopia, theUnited Republic of Tanzania, Indonesia, Egypt, and the United States.Projections show India and Nigeria to account for the increase ofapproximately 473 million people between 2019 and 2050 [ 1]. This population increase represents a challenge to reach the goal of zerohunger deﬁned in the textSustainable Development Goals(SDGs) [2]. These expectations for the coming years inﬂuence the global demand for food. It may be difﬁcult to meet 40% of water demands by 2030, and thedegradation of 20% of arable land will reduce food supply. Therefore,food production requires more resources than currently available andmore sustainable systems to increase cultivation rates and reduce the useof natural resources [3].Annual cereal production must increase by 3 billion tons, and meatproduction has to grow over 200% by 2050 to meet the demand [ 4]. Cereal supplies will depend on the increase in yields. This increase re-quires the improvement of cultivation practices, structural changes to-wards larger farms, and the ability to adapt technologies [ 5]. Although it may be possible to meet the growing demand, it is not clear how toachieve it sustainably and inclusively. Then, there is a crucial need tostreamline the farming system transformation at extraordinary speed andscale-up [4]. At the same time, theFourth Industrial Revolution(Industry 4.0) and theInternet of Things(IoT) provide new technologies and in-novations. These new technologies and innovations applied in agricul-ture are calledsmart agriculture,smart farming,o rAgriculture 4.0. These terms are used interchangeably throughout this paper. Agriculture 4.0can provide information on improving plantation productivity withoutincreasing the crop area, optimizing irrigation processes by consumingless water and energy, or providing resources to control pests moreefﬁciently, for example. These will be possible by integrating technolo-gies for environmental measurements, prediction, and automation tools.New capabilities created by smart farming can optimize agriculturalprocesses, allowing production to escalate while using fewer natural
* Corresponding author. Catarinense Federal Institute, Rod. SC 135, Km 125, Campo Experimental, Videira, Brazil.E-mail addresses:angelita.zanella@ifc.edu.br,gelirettore@gmail.com(A. Rettore de Araujo Zanella), eduardo.silva@ifc.edu.br(E. da Silva),albini@inf.ufpr.br (L.C. Pessoa Albini).
Contents lists available atScienceDirect
Array
journal homepage:www.elsevier.com/journals/array/2590-0056/open-access-journal
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.array.2020.100048Received 22 July 2020; Received in revised form 13 October 2020; Accepted 16 October 2020Available online 21 November 20202590-0056/©2020 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. This is an open access article under the CC BY license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ ).Array 8 (2020) 100048resources.Smart farming combines different technologies, devices, protocols,and computing paradigms to enable the farmers to make the most out ofinnovations. Innovations in agriculture are called the ‘‘digital agricultural revolution’’and will transform all aspects of agriculture, resulting in moreproductive, efﬁcient, sustainable, inclusive, transparent, and resilientsystems. Nevertheless, integrating technologies into the agriculturalsector depends on the complexity and maturity of technologies such asmobile devices, precision agriculture, remote sensing, big data, cloud,analytics, cybersecurity, and intelligent systems [ 4]. Although there are several security issues related to the smart farming, such as compatibility,heterogeneity, constrained devices, processing, and protection ofmassive data, few resources have been incorporated in Agriculture 4.0 sofar. Therefore, this paper addresses the security challenges in thesesystems.To build robust and efﬁcient systems, Agriculture 4.0 must ensure ðiÞ the correct and complete generation, transfer, and processing of data, andðiiÞthat the system has adequate security features to prevent attacks. Dataintegrity is essential to enable the proper operation of data-driven tech-nologies, such as analytics and smart systems. Malfunctioning hardwareor attacks, whether directed to the system or using the system as anintermediary for external attacks, can put security at risk. Heterogeneityof resources raises a lot of security concerns, such as keeping privacy,maintaining trust and reliability, which can be crucial to meet the de-mand and potential of emerging applications [ 6,7]. Since smart agriculture integrates elements from the traditionalInternet, IoT, cellular, and wireless networks, it may incorporate all se-curity problems these technologies present. It also deals with new specialsecurity issues such as data and device integrity, data accuracy, andavailability. In smart farming, the devices (sensors and actuators) andcommunication systems are exposed to climatic ﬂuctuations (sun, rain, snow), natural events (lightning, hail), engines (used in agriculture),power line transmissions (common in some rural regions), wanderinganimals, people and agricultural machinery. These elements make smartfarming vulnerable to problems that have not been addressed in othercontexts so far.For instance, smart agriculture has devices installed in open areas andexposed to external agents such as animals, humans, or agriculturalmachinery. These agents can unintentionally remove the sensor from theoriginal location or damage them. Most times, the devices cannot useprotection boxes to prevent these external agents from approaching as inother scenarios, such as in smart cities. The lack of protection leavesdevices vulnerable to security incidents and reveals a distinctive featureconcerning applications in agricultural systems.Another threat isagroterrorism, which has been around since the 6
th
century B.C [8]. This type of terrorism can have several objectives, suchas causingﬁnancial damage, fear, and social instability [ 9,10]. Through crises in agriculture and the food industry, terrorists can stimulate socialunrest and loss of trust in government, which can serve a variety of in-terests in the globalized world. For example, terrorists and governmentsin trade disputes may want to cause economic damage to a nation, eco-nomic opportunists may attempt to manipulate markets, and unbalancedor disgruntled people may commit attacks with idiosyncratic or narcis-sistic motivations [8]. New technologies, such as smart agriculture, cancontribute to the evolution of agroterrorism, creating cyberagroterrorism. It might use computer systems in agricultural environments to damagecrops, livestock, and generateﬁnancial losses. Cyberagroterrorists canact both locally, on farms, and online, operating the attacks throughcyber resources.This article presents special security issues in Agriculture 4.0. The aimis to highlight the main solutions in this area and discuss security threats.Section2reviews smart agriculture and the architecture used by mostsystems. Section3outlines the major security threats from a layeredperspective. Section4summarizes the current state of intelligent agri-culture applications. The last section presents the key challenges in thisarea and points to future directions.2. Smart agriculture overviewAgriculture has undergone several revolutions, which improved thesector’se fﬁciency and proﬁtability. The plant domestication (10,000 BC)led to the world’sﬁrst societies and civilization. In recent centuries,agricultural mechanization (between 1900 and 1930) introduced ma-chines and implements to mechanize work, increasing farmworker ’s productivity. The Green Revolution (about the 1960s) enabled farmers touse new crop varieties and agrochemicals. In the late 20thcentury and early 21
stcentury (from 1990 to 2005), biotechnology allowed the cre-ation of plants with pre-selected traits, such as increased yield andresistance to pests, drought, and herbicide. Now, the digital revolutioncould help humanity to survive and thrive long into the future [ 4].Fig. 1 presents an overview of major agricultural revolutions, that preceded thedigital revolution.Theﬁrst steps toward the digital revolution focused on automationtechniques, including few computational functionalities [ 11,12]. Next, smart agricultural systems had sensors to collect climate or environ-mental data. Sensors connect to a constrained border device, namedgateway, linked to a local computer through a network connection,frequently wireless. The local computer receives data from the gateway,stores it in a database, and shows processed information on a web page.Local systems did not integrate with external systems or the Internet.In recent years, the scenario has changed, with researches in arti ﬁcial intelligence and machine learning focusing on agricultural contexts,irrigation, animals, and farms. In the irrigation ﬁeld, monitoring, con- trolling, and decision-making solutions attempted to save water andimprove production [13–18]. Some studies focus on hydroponic [ 19], horticulture [20], vineyards [21] and leaf disease detection [22]. General-purpose systems [23–25], just implement IoT technologies andresources or design web-services [26], alert services [27], traceability resources [28] and control on the cloud [12]. Although there are several solutions in Agriculture 4.0, they are still immature and provide a lowlevel of intelligence. Many of these proposals are automation-restricted,with sensors and actuators sending data to the gateway. In most cases,there is no integration with the Internet, though in a few cases, localsystems store data in the cloud.The above systems have been built up in architecture (see Fig. 2) that consists of perception layer devices, network layer capabilities, edgeresources, and cloud-based applications and services [ 29,30]. The perception layer includes sensors, GPS, tags RFID, cameras, actuators,and any other devices responsible for collecting data from the farmenvironment and acting to modify them. These devices do not have thecomputational capacity to process or store data and perform at the edgeor the cloud. This layer connects to edge resources via network tech-nologies, which is usually a Wireless Sensor Network (WSN).The edge layer may contain a variety of resources such as securityfeatures, dataﬁlters, decision-making capability, diversiﬁed processing, in-out interface, and the gateway. Including one or more resources at theedge depends on the features of the appliance. Some appliances supportonly the retransmission of data, while others have the computationalcapability to perform more tasks. More robust gateways can process data,make decisions, send commands to actuators and data to the cloud. TheInternet Service Provider (ISP) connects the gateway to the cloud. Thecloud processes and stores data to provide end-users with informationand services. Data processing is a challenge, considering a large mass ofdata produced by the perception devices reaching the Big Data world,and theﬁnancial cost of processing in the cloud.Processing everything in the cloud, as proposed by many solutions,implies enormous bandwidth requirements and high ﬁ
nancing costs. It can be advantageous to use a robust gateway and perform part of theprocessing at the edge. Moving part of the subsystems to the edge mayreduce theﬁnancial costs of smart farming. Data consumed or pre-processed at the edge saves bandwidth and can reduce the computingresources required from the cloud, protects privacy, and preserves thebattery life of some devices. Thus, the cloud could store and processA. Rettore de Araujo Zanella et al. Array 8 (2020) 100048
2massive data, make decisions, and interact with the user. Processing bigdata to make decisions at the edge may require tools like arti ﬁcial intelligence.The improvement of devices and communication technologies willmake it possible for more computational resources to be integrated intosystems. Such integration aims at meeting different demands of agri-cultural automation, farm management, and precision farming [ 12,30]. Solutions must evolve to management systems rather than just moni-toring, which can result in new challenges and possibilities. Anotherissue is the security of data. From the detection up to the storage anddecision-making in the cloud, it is mandatory to provide data privacy,reliability, and accuracy. Security issues in smart farming are a greatchallenge and will be detailed in section 3.3. Smart agriculture security threatsAs discussed in Section2, smart systems have four layers: ( i) perception layer; (ii) network layer; (iii) edge; (iv) application.Table 1 shows the resources responsible for collecting, transporting, processing,and storing data at each layer. The set of devices, protocols, and tech-nologies use the data to monitor environments and automate farmingactivities [29]. Storage, management, and data processing combinedwith Internet connectivity bring several issues and security threats. Fig. 3 summarizes attacks on smart agriculture in the layered perspective.Security incidents may be accidental or intentional. Animals, farmworking, and machinery can easily access farming environments andcause incidents. Additionally, smart systems comprise heterogeneousdevices and software from distinct manufacturers installed betweengrowth areas and the cloud. These speciﬁc features might make several security breaches and could result in incidents that compromise the smartsystem. Nevertheless, this topic has not been studied in most systems inuse so far.The system design should consider compatibility with distinct de-vices, protocols, subsystems, and multi-access methods. Smart Agricul-ture usesmachine-to-machine(M2M) communication and devicesmanufactured by different vendors. However, most security mechanismswere developed for the communication model used by TCP/IP networks.These mechanisms usually ignore the existence of multiple heteroge-neous devices communicating simultaneously. Security features createdfor TCP/IP networks can divide the relationship between smart farmingdevices, reducing their efﬁciency. Multi-access methods and heteroge-neity hinder security, interoperability, and network coordination,increasing security vulnerabilities [31].Agriculture 4.0 is exposed to a vast spectrum of cyberattacks. Securityconcern needs to be part of the system, maximizing their potential.Among these issues, there is also access control, management, informa-tion storage, data integrity, and reliability. Most of the security problemsare quite common in other systems, but some are present only in those
Fig. 1.Agricultural revolutions.
Fig. 2.Structure of smart agriculture components.A. Rettore de Araujo Zanella et al. Array 8 (2020) 100048
3that operate in open-ﬁeld systems, such as smart agriculture. Althoughprivacy is unnecessary in most contexts, others might require it. Thiswork addresses all security requirements regardless of the context.Therefore, the developer must select the features related to each system.Here we introduce some of the current security issues in Agriculture 4.0,describing the most relevant threats in each layer separately.3.1. Security issues at perception layerThe perception layer mainly deals with physical devices, such assensors and actuators. They can be installed in small farm areas, such asthose found in Europe, or scattered along with large farms, current in theUSA, Australia, and Brazil. Physical devices may malfunction because ofaccidental or intentional human action, viruses, malware, or cybercri-minals. There are many kinds of sensors and technologies used by smartfarming applications, and this variety enables several security threats justas follow:Random sensor incidents -It is the unintentional physical modiﬁ- cation of a perception device that diverts it from the regular operation.Smart systems developed for small or large farms may have devicesinstalled outdoors. In many cases, these devices do not have tamper-resistant boxes, as this would make it expensive. The lack of tamper-resistant boxes exposes the device to interactions with external agentssuch as people, animals, or agricultural equipment. A farmworker or wildanimal may accidently collide with a sensor, moving or removing thedevice from its original location, violating system integrity. Farmequipment, such as a tractor, may hit the device causing temporary orpermanent physical damage, leading to data corruption, data unavail-ability, or damage to the device. This threat is not exclusive to smartfarming but may be present in other contexts, such as smart cities.However, it is a relevant issue because it can have a deep impact on thereliability of the solution. In most cases, there is no way to avoid thisthreat, though it is necessary to identify it to avoid its effects.Autonomous system hijacking -It consists in hijacking autonomous systems such as tractors, drones/UAV, and sowing robots. Severalfarming activities use autonomous systems, such as drones and robots.Drones could spray pesticides and fertilizers, and robots may performweeding and disease detection. If a malicious agent hijacks an autono-mous system, the hijacker can remotely control and guide withoutauthorization. This type of attack could have several impacts, from theunavailability of the system to perform a task to its complete damage orcrop damage.Autonomous system disruption -It is an intentional modiﬁcation of autonomous system resources. Autonomous tractors, robots, and UAV(Unmanned Aerial Vehicles) are technologies increasingly present inprecision agriculture, especially in large farms. These equipment have aseries of features that are essential to their operation, such as sensors,cameras, GPS, maps, and remote-control systems. If an opponent mod-iﬁes one or more components, the autonomous system may workimproperly or suffer/cause accidents. Malfunctions could result in severelosses, resulting from incorrect soil or crop management, damage tocrops, buildings, equipment, and machinery, including the autonomoustractor itself.Optical deformation -It is the deformation of images from camerasinstalled in robots or autonomous devices. Some autonomous systemshave cameras to capture images. The cameras usually have an essentialfunction in the system, and the captured images should have a minimumquality. Cameras are usually vital to the system. Pictures must meet aminimum quality standard in order to ensure the whole process to runsmoothly. Below standard pictures may mislead the harvesting systeminto picking spoiled or unripe fruit or even damaging the fruit trees.Irregular measurement -It consists of abnormal measurements orreadings caused by data corruption, energy depletion, electromagneticTable 1Smart agriculture elements.
Layer Resource DescriptionPerception Sensor andCameraSmall devices to collecting environment data,such as humidity and temperature.Actuator Devices or systems for changing theenvironment state. Example: sprinkler,ventilation, and irrigation systems.Tag RFID Small devices to storing data, such as livestockidentiﬁcation number. GPS A System that provides geolocation ofagricultural machinery, farm resources and mayassist precision farming system. Network ConnectionTechnologiesDevices and technologies to interconnectingremote devices and transferring data. Example:router, access points, protocols. Edge Security features Security protocols and schemes for ensuring the availability, integrity, and conﬁdentiality of the system and data.In-out interface Software and hardware interface forcommunication beyond the local area.Diverse resources Software features applied to decision-making,processing data and so on.Gateway System located at the edge of the network,connected with farm devices (perception layer)and the cloud. This system can process data,store small amount of data and communicatewith the cloud. Application Database System for storing data produced by the smart system.Web tools Resources for exchanging data between theremote application and provide access to theend-user application on the Internet.Decision-making System to making-decisions to change the stateof the environment.End-userapplicationSoftware for presenting information to the user.
Fig. 3.Smart agriculture main attacks.A. Rettore de Araujo Zanella et al. Array 8 (2020) 100048
4interference, interception of variable connectivity, severe weather, mal-functions, or false inputs. In some regions, usually in large farms, high-voltage grids pass over agricultural areas and can generate an electro-magneticﬁeld, causing distortions or data corruption. Power depletion ofbattery-powered devices, variable connectivity, or malfunctioning ofsome device components can cause irregular readings, compromisingdata availability or integrity, which results in inaccurate data. Inaccuratedata can be dangerous for decision making, resulting in incorrect dataanalysis, and reducing system’s accuracy.Sensor weakening -This is the normal degeneration of sensorsbecause of processes such as corrosion, oxidation, dust accumulation, andsaturation. Some sensors used in smart farms can suffer gradual degra-dation for exposure to environmental conditions and physical-chemicalor climatic phenomena. For example, wind speed sensors installed industy environments can suffer from dust accumulation, which graduallyprevents the rods from moving. Humidity sensors can saturate whenexposed to high humidity levels. Sensors built with copper may sufferoxidation. This way, the sensors register incorrect or irregular measure-ments. The natural degradation of the sensors requires their periodicreplacement. However, some events may expect device degradation,causing failures earlier than expected. It is still not possible to avoid thenatural degradation of the sensors. However, it is necessary to detectsensor weakening, to prevent the use of inaccurate data by the system.Traditional network and IoT attacks can affect the security of smartfarming applications, for example:Node capture -It consists of the physical capture of a node or device.This operation could be performed by entirely replacing the device ormodifying components of hardware or software [ 32,33]. Node capture may not generate a signiﬁcant impact if performed on a single node andmight not trigger other attacks. However, after capturing a device, theopponent may modify the hardware or software, gain access to the sys-tem, or inject false data. A node capture breaches the integrity of thesystem and can potentially interfere with decision-making. It might alsodamage the cultivation and causeﬁnancial loss. For example, a hostile actuator in an irrigation system could never start irrigation or ﬂood the crop. A dissatisﬁed employee or commercial competitor who has physicalor logical access to the system could perform this attack for severalreasons.Fake node -An adversary adds fake or malicious nodes to the systemto disrupt their operation [31]. A node capture could trigger this attackand lead to node replication. This kind of attack usually aims at both tomanipulate data or to shutdown services and devices. In a system withinsufﬁcient or fraudulent identity control, malicious sensors could sendwrong data interfering with decision-making, or inject multiple packetsinto the network causing a denial of service, or sleep deprivation. Like-wise, actuators may act maliciously, hostile gateways may send falsecommands to legitimate actuators, or act as black holes to cause harm.Sleep deprivation -This attack aims to drain the battery of the deviceuntil depleting it. Smart farming sensors are energy-restricted and usu-ally use power batteries. To reduce the power consumption and prolongbattery life, the nodes should enter in sleep mode when they are notworking [34,35]. Sleep deprivation attack sends sets of apparentlylegitimate requests so that the devices remain awake as long as possible.Therefore, the battery of the device will deplete, and the node shuts down[34,35]. Once the sensors turn off, sensed data is no longer sent,compromising decision-making, and system ef ﬁciency. Since Agriculture 4.0 systems are open-ﬁeld, they are susceptible to environmental conditions, climateﬂuctuations, and human action. Weaksecurity measures could affect the reliability and trust of the system,exposing them to accidental use of corrupted data, remote control, andphysical damage. Sensors do not have computational resources that allowthe adoption of traditional security methods, such as cryptography,which makes security even more challenging. Therefore, adding inno-vative security solutions to this layer is as challenging, as necessary.3.2. Security issues at network layerThe network layer transmits data from the perception layer to themost robust computational unit, usually the cloud. The transmission of alarge amount of data over a wide transmission area makes this layersusceptible to attacks, which generally threaten con ﬁdentiality and integrity [36]. Although the existing communication network has rela-tively complete security protection measures, there are still some com-mon threats that can compromise network resources [ 31,37]. Major security issues in the network layer are as follow:DoS/DDoS -It is a transversal attack that affects all layers. Denial ofService (DoS) aims to prevent access to services or devices either byoverloading the network or by exploiting protocol vulnerabilities thatlead to the collapse of resources, such as CPU and memory [ 38]. There are several ways to achieve this attack, such as ﬂooding servers or routers with numerous requests. Flooding attacks can cause network delays,disable devices, and make the service unavailable. When the attackeruses multiple sources toﬂood the target, then such an attack is termed asa Distributed Denial of Service attack (DDoS). Although such attackswere not designed speciﬁcally for smart systems, Internet connectivity,pervasiveness, heterogeneity, and high vulnerability of these systemsmake them prone to such attacks [39]. In farming systems, DoS attacks could prevent measurements from reaching the edge or cloud on time,delay commands to actuators, and make services unavailable.Data Transit Attacks -Some attacks intend to intercept dataexchanged between network components to ﬁnd sensitive information [7]. Different connection technologies connecting distinct points on thenetwork and wireless networking carrying clear (unencrypted) datamake these systems susceptible to data breaches [ 7,40]. An opponent could conduct trafﬁc interception through malicious access points or byman-in-the-middle attacks [40]. Trafﬁc interception exposes sensitive information such as unique identiﬁers, access credentials, or crypto- graphic keys. Other transit attacks can corrupt network traf ﬁc, enabling malicious control, or even compromising the entire system.Routing Attacks -They intend to alter network routes to achievecontrol of trafﬁc. IoT networks may have malicious nodes that try toredirect routing paths during the data transmission process. Attacks suchas sinkhole and wormhole could subvert the communication network andget unauthorized access. The sinkhole is routing attacks where a rivalannounces a shorter routing path and draws nodes to route traf ﬁc through it. Malicious routes allow disrupting the traf ﬁcﬂow [7,41]. In a wormhole, an opponent creates a tunnel between two nodes for fastpacket transferring to create a shortcut on the network and control traf ﬁc [7,42]. During these attacks, the recipient may receive the informationlate, receive partial or changed information, or not receive one data [
41, 42].Network layer resources on smart farming and IoT systems have somecommon security vulnerabilities. However, smart farming can consist ofmultiple systems and integrate technologies and subsystems fromdifferent vendors. Therefore, integrating systems and technologies re-quires caution to avoid incompatibilities. Likewise, the security featuresof these systems and technologies cannot be fully trusted, as they maycontain vulnerabilities embedded in the system or generated by theintegration process.3.3. Security issues at edgeThe edge contains critical elements monitoring and controlling sub-systems, communicating with all layers, and accessing strategic re-sources. The processing of massive amounts of data generated byperception layer can be local, instead of centralized in the cloud. Thiswould save energy, bandwidth and cloud-processing costs. Due to thedistributed architecture of edge computing, this layer might provideservices with faster response and higher quality, in contrast with cloudA. Rettore de Araujo Zanella et al. Array 8 (2020) 100048
5computing [33]. Direct connection to cloud and perception resourcesmake the edge a strategic point, making security a fundamentalrequirement to ensure system reliability. Major edge security issues arethe following.Forged controls for actuators -It is the injection of false measures/ data to manipulate the system. The perception devices are usuallyresource constrained and do not support complex security features.Typically, the gateway receives the data in plain text. The gateway mayreceive data from the perception or cloud by Supervisory Control andData Acquisition (SCADA) systems or other control systems. An opponentwho knows the data patterns sent by the sensors to the gateway or cloudcan use a computational device to inject the same data pattern into thesystem. If the control system receiving the data at the gateway does nothave sufﬁcient security mechanisms, the data will be accepted and maypropagate through the system. False data will cause incorrect decisionmaking. For example, to manipulate a smart irrigation system, anopponent could inject incorrect soil moisture measurements.Gateway-cloud request forgery -Gateway and cloud are connected through an Internet Service Provider or cellular network. Usually, thecloud is connected to the Internet and therefore exposed to a wide varietyof attacks. An Internet adversary could impersonate a gateway and forgerequests for the cloud. From these requests, the adversary could modifyparameters in smart farming, control requests for vulnerable services, ormanipulate system resources. The gateway is usually a constrainedresource, but the cloud has the computational capability to incorporaterobust security mechanisms. These mechanisms must be incorporatedinto the system to maximize system reliability.Forged measure injection -It consists of the injection of falsemeasurements/readings to manipulate the system. Perception devicesgenerally are resource-constrained and do not support complex securityfeatures. In general, data exchange with the gateway is done in plain text,creating several vulnerabilities. An opponent who knows the patterns ofdata sent by sensors to the gateway or the cloud can use a computationaldevice to inject the same data pattern into the system. Sending false datacould result in wrong decision-making. For instance, to manipulate anintelligent irrigation system, an opponent may inject incorrect soilmoisture measurements.Booting -IoT evolution has driven the development of low-cost andresource-constrained devices. These devices are becoming smaller andcheaper. However, innovations do not advance into the ﬁeld of security [43]. Smart agriculture uses resource-constrained artifacts in theperception and edge layers. Usually, these artifacts have few securityfeatures and rarely include boot protection. Lack of security processes onbooting, leaving devices vulnerable to attacks [ 44]. For instance, SD-cards and USB sticks may contain malicious scripts that could run atstartup [43]. Malicious boot processes could trigger a series of attacks tothe edge with weak protection. Those processes could open back doors orallow elevation of privileges. Insufﬁcient computing resources and directconnection to perception and the cloud make it imperative to protect thestart-up process.Unauthorized access -Authentication and access control are crucialelements of security. Access control is a technology that satis ﬁes prop- erties such as conﬁdentiality, integrity, and availability [ 45]. Providing adequate access control to the edge elements is essential as these canusually communicate with perception and the cloud. In particular, thegateway is a critical element as all data pass through it. Limited orinsufﬁcient authentication and access control mechanisms allow anopponent to access the gateway by cloud connection. For the largenumber of things communicating with edge devices or services,authentication methods need to be scalable, easily manageable, andrequiring minimal human intervention [ 33,45]. However, several agri- cultural systems use gateways with weak or insuf ﬁcient access controls. Researchers developing projects to smart agriculture do not discuss theuse of access control resources, and existing commercial solutions rarelychange the credentials after deployment.Man-in-the-middle -In this attack, an opponent intercepts acommunication to collect information or even replace it. Compromiseddevices or malicious nodes can trigger several internal or external attacks
in systems with weak or missing security [ 46,47]. Many solutions use communication protocols that use the publish-subscribe model with abroker, which effectively acts as a proxy. These protocols allow decou-pling the publishing and subscribing clients from each other, authorizingmessages to be sent to an unknown destination. An attacker who achievesthe broker control and becomes a man-in-the-middle may obtain fullcontrol of communication without being noticed by the clients [ 7]. Signature wrapping -This attack modiﬁes the original message by injecting a fake element to perform an arbitrary Web Service requestwhile authenticating yourself as a legitimate user [ 48]. Web services for edge to cloud communication usually use XML signatures. An adversary,who breaks the signature algorithm, can perform operations or changethe heard message by exploiting protocol vulnerabilities, such as the step[7]. An opponent may control the actuators or manipulate thedecision-making systems by using malicious messages.Flooding -This is a DDoS attack where many packets are sent to asystem or network to overload it. In farming systems, infected devicescould start aﬂood attack toward the edge devices to compromise theQuality-of-Service (QoS) or even to stop it. A hostile device at theperception layer or a malicious portal in the cloud could send multiplerequests to service until their exhaustion. These attacks could impactseverely on the systems, overloading the edge and resulting in a denial ofservice. Flooding could also be performed at the network layer and in thecloud [6,7].Edge resources provide computing services for clients or applicationsand can connect to distinct features from all layers. Both locally andexternally processed data pass-through this layer. Protecting devicesfrom remote access and using appropriate cryptographic resources arekey security challenges. Therefore, it is imperative to achieve securityfeatures to avoid compromising data and edge resources.3.4. Security issues at application layerThe application layer aims at providing services to end-users, storingdata, and making decisions within the system. Security issues in this layerfocus on preventing data theft and ensuring privacy and are speci ﬁct o different applications. Some applications comprise a sub-layer, whichsupports services, and helps intelligent resource allocation [ 7,33]. Each application has distinct characteristics, and it is impossible to predict allvulnerabilities which could affect them. Therefore, the security issueslisted below are some threats that might affect cloud-based applicationsand services.Phishing -It is a virtual pest that aims to fraudulently obtain con ﬁ- dential user data, such as ID and password. Phishing usually achievesend-user from fraudulent emails or websites [ 49,50]. An opponent who accesses the system with administrative credentials may send fraudulentcommands to actuators and change system settings. In critical cases, theattacker could interfere with decision-making processes or other internalprocesses. It is impossible to avoid this type of attack, but secure accesscontrol systems can mitigate it. However, the most ef ﬁcient protection would be to have the users themselves keep vigilant while sur ﬁng the net [33].Malicious scripts -The connectivity of agricultural solutions to theInternet allows them to interact with other online services and users. Thisinteraction makes them targets for malicious scripts such as Java applets,Active-X scripts, and cross-site scripting (XSS) [ 33,36]. Malicious scripts can mislead customers, inject malicious information, access sensitiveinformation, and break security mechanisms. Cybercriminals often makethis attack by personal,ﬁ
nancial, and political ends. From maliciousscripts, they can damage or disrupt the service operation, displayingunwanted advertisements, and extorting money [ 51]. Denial of Services -This attack causes service interruptions byoverloading the network trafﬁco rb yﬂooding the service with multiple requests [52]. Weak security conﬁgurations enable an adversary to startA. Rettore de Araujo Zanella et al. Array 8 (2020) 100048
6this attack from the Internet or a subsystem [ 7]. Such attacks deprive legitimate users of using the services, prevent the proper processing orstorage of non-persistent information, reduce the ef ﬁciency of critical systems (such as environmental controls in mushroom greenhouses), andmay even cause a complete system shutdown.The application layer includes cloud-based applications and services,so it has all cloud security issues. The cloud exposes applications andresources to Internet-based attacks becoming urgent to take preventivesecurity measures. Usually, security focuses on privacy and access controlto protect the many sensitive data stored and processed in the cloud.However, it is essential to consider more than just privacy and accesscontrol, adopting security measures to ensure the availability andintegrity of the complete system.Smart farming systems incorporate a set of devices, with greater orlesser levels of limitations, that interact with each other. Many weakpoints are because of the constraints of the devices, which make itimpossible to use existing tools and security techniques. Technologiesdeveloped for other systems, such as IoT or Industry 4.0, support security,but using them requires processing and memory resources that somedevices do not have. However, it is necessary to know the existing vul-nerabilities and create mechanisms to mitigate the effects of incidents.Then, security measures can be done at the highest layers and on devicesequipped with the necessary resources. Top-layer appliances with robustcomputing capabilities could adopt more robust security mechanisms toensure efﬁcient and reliable operation.4. Current state of security in smart agricultureIn the past few years, there has been a growing effort to develop smartsystems to improve agricultural activity. Farmers usually conduct theseactivities in open-ﬁeld or greenhouses. This work focuses on open- ﬁeld agriculture, as it is an immature area with security features limited toaccess control and web encryption. Therefore, it analyzes smart agri-culture projects and explores information on the security featuresimplemented by them.In this scope, most efforts focus on irrigation processes, diseasedetection, crop management, and traceability. The control may beautomatic or manual. In both cases, the system uses sensors for moni-toring and actuators for changing the environment. The decision aboutactuators’actions may be made automatically by the system or manuallyby a user. Some projects only automate the farms, while others integrateindustry 4.0 or IoT technologies.It is relevant to show that most current smart agriculture projects arebased on IoT technologies and may direct inherit its security ﬂaws. Others do not consider security at all. Protocols such as MQTT and CoAPdisable security features by default, and the developer must enable themaccording to the requirements of each project. Since researchers do notreport security features enablement, they probably remain disabled.Table 2presents a taxonomy of current smart agriculture securityresources.The paper of [13] presents a system to predict irrigation requirementsbased on climate and environmental information. The system uses datacollected by sensors to predict soil moisture and provides irrigationsuggestions. End-user interacts with the system from a web page. Theauthors do not show any security features, validation processes, or failurechecks in the collecting, transferring, or storing phases. The lack of se-curity makes systems vulnerable to all attacks presented in Section 3, i.e., the system is highly insecure. Incidents leading to corruption or inaccu-racy of data result in prediction errors and wrong decisions. Wrong de-cisions can damage the cultivation and reduce the adoption of the system.Similarly [17], develops a system to monitorﬁelds through soil moisture, temperature, humidity, and light levels. Irrigation control canbe manual or automatic through the web or mobile applications. Thesystem description does not contain information on any security features,which exposes the system to the full range of attacks presented in theprevious section. Control of actuators driven by commands from a websystem without strict security features is an excellent opportunity formalicious opponents, who may use malicious scripts and unauthorizedaccess to manipulate the system.[18] propose a smart irrigation system to control irrigation devices.These devices are remotely controlled by a server and managed from aweb application. There are no details about security resources, creatingthe chance for opportunistic adversaries to gain improper access to thesystem, inject forged measures, forge controls for actuators, or conductany previously reported attacks to deviate the system from its regularoperation.[19
] introduce a Hydroponic Farming Ecosystem (HFE) to monitorthe growing environment. The control is automatic, and the user may usea web interface to monitor the farming. Automated systems requirerigorous protection to avoid or detect random sensor incidents, sensorweakening, false data injection, and other threats that could corrupt dataand disturb the system’s reliability. However, HFE fails to providemechanisms to avoid the threats introduced in Section 3. [22] have designed an intelligent solution for the detection of leafdiseases. The system identiﬁes leaf diseases based on data of sensors andimages from cameras. The end-user interacts with the system by a mobileor web application. This paper does not discuss the implementation de-tails or security. If this system is part of a disease control process andreceives corrupted or malicious data, the images suffer optical defor-mation, or an opponent compromises system, then security incidents canhinder disease detection and cause misuse of agricultural resources. Incritical cases, this may cause loss of the entire production.[28] introduces NETPIE, a system that provides information aboutagricultural products. Using a set of perception devices, NETPIE controlsand monitors the growing environment. The production information issummarized and saved in a QR code and available to the customer. Justlike the other presented systems, NETPIE does not discuss security re-sources. Any of the attacks that disrupts data accuracy may break thereliability of the information summarized in the QR code.[12] present a cloud-based Wireless Sensor and Actuator Network(WSAN) communication system to monitor and control farm devices. Thesystem monitors environmental conditions, predicts the irrigation re-quirements, and acts automatically on the environment. The paper de-scribes the system architecture, including appliances and protocols,allowing the WSAN to remain vulnerable to the attacks shown in Section3.
Table 2Taxonomy of security in smart agriculture.
SecuritytargetSecurity Resources SolutionsNotconsideredNone Sales et al. [ 12], Goap et al. [13], Mahalakshmi [14], Rajalakshmi and Mahalakshmi [ 17], Zhao et al. [18], Ruengittinun et al. [19], Thorat et al. [22], Yoon et al. [23], Wongpatikaseree et al. [28] DataExchangeHTTPS Khelifa et al. [ 11], Minh et al. [25]AccessControlIP Authentication Nageswara Rao and Sridhar [ 15]User and DeviceManagement Oliver et al. [21]A. Rettore de Araujo Zanella et al. Array 8 (2020) 100048
7Likewise [23], propose a smart farming system for data exchangebetween the server, the gateway, and the nodes. The paper describes theconstruction of the system but does not mention any user interaction orremote control and does not demonstrate any security concerns. Becauseit is a system for data exchange, the most critical attacks are those thataffect the network layer, such as DoS, signal disruption, data transit, androuting.Similarly [14], introduces an automated irrigation system. The paperpresents the step-by-step construction of the system, which monitors andcontrols waterﬂow remotely. Although the system controls and monitorsirrigation devices, there is no evidence of the addition of security capa-bilities. Attacks on the perception layer, as well as attacks that cause adenial of service, can damage correct system operation. Unauthorizedaccess, malicious scripts, and false data injection can deliberatelymanipulate the system.On the other hand, some solutions add a small level of security. The[11] strategy, for instance, includes encryption in the communicationbetween cloud and user applications. This proposal intends to create asmart irrigation system controlled remotely by the user. Farmers managethe irrigation process from a mobile application. This strategy usesHTTPS to encrypt the communication between the server and smart-phone. The use of cryptography protects data in transit, preventing anadversary from intercepting the communication, obtaining sensitive in-formation, and impersonating the mobile application. However, there isno information about other security features deployed by the system,which exposes the system to other previously presented attacks.Another proposal that uses HTTPS is that of [ 25], which has devel- oped an intelligent system to manage and control mushroom and hybridmaize farms. This system automatically controls the production envi-ronments remotely. The webserver uses HTTPS for user communication,protecting data in transit. However, this security feature is insuf ﬁcient, considering that the system automatically controls the water pumps, lightlevels, and fans. Automated controls, especially for environmental con-trol systems for crops as sensitive as mushrooms, demands accurate se-curity features to avoid that Random Sensor Incident, IrregularMeasurement, and Sensor Weakening, Forged Measure Injection, orForged Controls for Actuators affect the system accuracy.On the other hand [21], introduce a system called SEnviro. Thissystem is designed to remotely monitor vineyards and predicts somediseases. The paper presents the developed platform and does not discussprediction. The system includes a user and device manager, which per-mits to manage authorized users and devices to interact with the system.Access control prevents unauthorized devices or users from gaining ac-cess to the system and acting maliciously. Nevertheless, this resource isinsufﬁcient to protect a platform designed to predict disease andremotely monitor, as it does not prevent events that could interfere withthe accuracy of the data or that could take the system to an unreliablestate.In the same way [15], proposes a remote crop-ﬁeld and automatic irritation monitoring system using IoT technologies. The system usescollected data from sensors to estimate the quantity of water required forirrigation. The system uses measurement data to estimate the volume ofwater for irrigation. As well as the access control presented by Ref. [ 21], the authentication scheme used by Ref. [ 15] avoids unauthorized access to the service but does not protect the edge and other subsystems. Weakprotection of automatic control systems is critical, as incidents that affectdata accuracy or cause system malfunctions can result in signi ﬁcant losses to the plantation.Summarizing the related papers, from a security perspective, they usesensors and actuators without any security features. Besides, there is nosecurity information on the gateway. Systems developed so far do notpresent information about transmission privacy or device authentication.Features such as access control, identity management, or encryption adda bit of security to Internet communication. Table 3shows that little security in farming systems is limited to privacy and reliable datatransmission between the user and the cloud or between the gateway andthe cloud.Many solutions for smart farming only include security mechanismsin the application layer. While [12,13] use HTTPS for communication between the cloud and the end-user application, most systems use the
HTTP, CoAP, and MQTT protocols without any integration with SSL orTLS protocols. Similarly, many proposals do not implement access con-trol or use it with limited resources. The absence of robust security fea-tures for communication between the cloud and the end-user createsseveral security breaches. There is no information about con ﬁguring security features in database management systems or using secure datasearch techniques in web applications. Thus, these features are probablynot included.Currently, smart agriculture is an easy target for malicious agents.Attacks may have several motivations, such as commercial, ideological,or even terrorist reasons. For instance, terrorist groups can in ﬂict eco- nomic harm to a nation, economic opportunists may try to manipulatemarkets, and an individual employee may proceed with an attack for avariety of reasons [8]. Thus, it is urgent to add security as an essentialresource for smart farming, contributing to the development and popu-larization of reliable and efﬁcient systems.5. Improvements and enhancements required for upcomingapplicationsDevices from traditional Internet have many security features builtinto them, likeﬁrewalls, authentication, and access control schemes, andso on. However, these security shields are missing on Agriculture 4.0 orlimited in use. Sometimes this is due to smart farming is still emerging,Table 3Security features added to Agriculture 4.0
Layer Security issues Security Resources PapersApplication Data thefts HTTPS Khelifa et al. [ 11],Minh et al. [25] Snifﬁng HTTPS Khelifa et al. [ 11],Minh et al. [25] Access Control IP Authentication Nageswara Rao and Sridhar [15] User and DeviceManagementOliver et al. [21]Phishing attack Use not reported Open issueMalicious scripts Use not reported Open issueDeny of services Use not reported Open issueEdge Man-in-the-middle Use not reported Open issueBootingvulnerabilitiesUse not reported Open issueUnauthorized access Use not reported Open issueSignature wrapping Use not reported Open issueFlooding Use not reported Open issueForged control foractuatorsUse not reported Open issueGateway-cloudrequest forgeryUse not reported Open issueForged measureinjectionUse not reported Open issueNetwork DoS/DDoS Use not reported Open issueData transit attacks Use not reported Open issueRouting attacks Use not reported Open issueSignal disruptions Use not reported Open issuePerception Random sensorincidentsUse not reported Open issueAutonomous systemhijackingUse not reported Open issueAutonomous systemdisruptionUse not reported Open issueOptical deformation Use not reported Open issueIrregularmeasurementUse not reported Open issueSensor weakening Use not reported Open issueNode capture Use not reported Open issueFake node Use not reported Open issueSleep deprivation Use not reported Open issueA. Rettore de Araujo Zanella et al. Array 8 (2020) 100048
8sometimes because the resources are inadequate for this technology orthe absence of professionals to manage these resources. Also, a well-deﬁned framework and standard to guide an end-to-end applicationdevelopment are not available yet. Usually, solutions are not standalone,but it is an embedded product that integrates many individuals and in-dustries and requires an architecture that can handle heterogeneity,interoperability, and numerous devices. This architecture should allowmultiple access, in a secure and coordinated way, to avoid data loss andcompromise the system efﬁciency. Security resources presented inTable 4may improve smart farm security in different scenarios.On the perception layer, devices could be resistant packaging toprevent some sensor incidents and autonomous system disruption.However, this can be very expensive to use for some low-cost systems orthose using many sensors. If it is not possible to avoid incidents, then it isnecessary to use techniques to prevent disrupted data from affectingsystem accuracy and inﬂuencing decision-making. Therefore, it isessential to develop security schemes to detect sensor or incidents andavoid the use of corrupt or inconsistent data. On the other hand,Autonomous Tractor is robust equipment that requires more precisionand reliability. The tractors have a structure to support the inclusion oftamper-resistant boxes. Thus, it is possible to prevent a maliciousemployee or a commercial competitor from modifying or damaging thesesubsystems, for example.GPS is an essential component of many autonomous systems, whethertractors, drones, or UAVs, and requires security to prevent threats thataffect their accuracy [53,54]. Therefore, it is necessary to invest inmechanisms to protect the GPS used by autonomous systems. Violationsof the GPS can result in signiﬁcant physical damage to the AutonomousSystem, the crop, or the farm. Similarly, manufacturers of these systemsmust create strategies to protect the remote control system, including,but not limiting to, features such as data encryption and access control.Irregular measurement, sensor weakening, optical deformation, andsignal disruption could trigger inconsistent data resulting in incorrectdecision-making. Usually, it is not possible or quite dif ﬁcult to avoid such threats, but it is necessary to prevent inconsistent data from propagatingthrough the system. Inconsistencies can be misinterpreted as attacks andinadequately handled by security systems. Thus, it is essential to identifyboth attacks to the system, Sensor Weakening, Irregular Measurement,Optical Deformation, and Signal Disruption to prevent the system fromgenerating or using incorrect data that makes the system operate unre-liably. Some solutions designed for errors, faults, and failures detection,such as those proposed by Ref. [55,56], could be adapted for this purpose.Other preventive measures include the use of big data algorithms toﬁlter data [57], and Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS) to detect dataintruders. However, including IDS in smart farming can be challenging asthere is usually no IT department to manage the system, and the farmerdoes not have the technical knowledge to maintain this resource.Therefore, IDSs developed for Agriculture 4.0 need to be transparent, asfar as possible, and easy to manage. Besides, most IDSs analyze networktrafﬁc patterns [58,59], which may be efﬁcient in identifying DoS/DDoS, forged control for actuators, gateway-cloud request forgery, forgedmeasure injection, and other network-bound attacks but is inef ﬁcient in identifying failures, data noise, and false data injection. For these threats,it is possible to use a set of strategies, such as anomaly detection,encryption, and authentication.Some attacks require additional preventive measures. For example,integrity veriﬁcation protocols [32] or schemes capable of identifyingmalicious nodes [60,61] could identify or mitigate autonomous systemhijacking, node capture attacks. Systems designed for low power con-sumption networks may detect sleep deprivation [
62]. Artiﬁcial intelli- gence algorithms and machine learning could discover forged control foractuators, gateway-cloud request forgery, forged measure injection, andfalse data injection [63]. Solutions like XPath and FastXPath can mitigatesignature wrapping attacks [48].Authentication services applied to devices and services at all layerscan make it difﬁcult or limit forged control for actuators, gateway-cloudrequest forgery, forged measure injection, and prevent unauthorizedaccess. The edge is the middle element, and it becomes a critical securitypoint, which needs strict access controls, and schemes to avoid false datainjection. However, the current access control systems may not be ef ﬁ- cient in the context of smart agriculture. Access controls that requirehuman intervention are impractical in intelligent agriculture because ofthe characteristics of the machines and users involved. For example, end-user authentication may use user and password-based or biometricschemes. Key-based access schemes could be feasible for systems thatinclude up to a hundred devices or services, as long as they do not requireperiodic modiﬁcation. However, some solutions may incorporate morefeatures or demand periodical key updating to achieve an adequate levelof security. The large number and variety of devices used by smartfarming require new authentication schemes to manage them by the user[37,64], who usually does not have the technical knowledge to manageauthentication services. New authentication schemes must be trans-parent to the user, lightweight to operating on constrained devices, andefﬁcient.Gateways must have security features to prevent unauthorized remoteaccess and control by malicious agents. Barriers like ﬁrewalls, Intrusion Prevention Systems (IPS), authentication, and access control schemes canbe useful, but gateways have restricted resources, requiring lightweightand efﬁcient controls [6,37]. Some gateways are more restricted, makingit impossible to use most security mechanisms, which makes this taskeven more challenging. Others have more computational resources andinclude a small operating system, limited processor, and little memory.The software developed for these devices should be lightweight and easyto manage to be operated by farmers. Once the gateway accesses manyresources and devices, and intermediates communication between theperception and cloud layers, it is a critical element in the smart systemand compromising it may affect the whole system.Traditional cryptographic schemes may be unsuitable in smart sys-tems. The perception layer has constrained devices that do not have thememory, processing power, and energy to compute traditional
Table 4Security resources to improve security in smart agriculture.
Security resources IoT Resource Security threatsIDS Cloud, gateway DoS/DDoS, autonomous system hijacking, forged control for actuators,gateway-cloud request forgery, forgedmeasure injection,ﬂooding, XSSattack, SQL injection, inﬁltration, portscan, backdoors, worms, routingattacks, and others cyberattacks AnomalydetectionsystemData, services Random sensor incidents, autonomoussystem disruption, opticaldeformation, irregular measurement,sensor weakening, gateway-cloudrequest forgery, forged measureinjection, data transit attacks andothers cyberattacks Cryptography Data,communication linkForged measure injection, false datainjection, eavesdropping, trafﬁc interception, man-in-the-middle, datacapture Authentication Services, devices Forged control for actuators, gateway- cloud request forgery, fake node,forged measure injection, false datainjection, advanced persistent attack,malicious scripts, unauthorized access Access Control Services, devices Unauthorized accessFirewall Cloud, gateway Unauthorized accessAnti-virus/malwareCloud Phishing, virus, wormSpecializedsolutionsApplications,services, protocolsNode capture, autonomous systemhijacking, routing attacks, sleepdeprivation, signature wrapping Open Issue BootingA. Rettore de Araujo Zanella et al. Array 8 (2020) 100048
9algorithms [64]. Encryption is an efﬁcient tool to minimize attacks such as trafﬁc interception, data theft, and snifﬁng and may be used to hinder attacks such as forged measure injection. This tool can provide reliabledata transfer between perception layer devices and the gateway. How-ever, the use of cryptography in intelligent agriculture requires newencryption schemes that are lighter and more ef ﬁcient than those currently in use.DoS attacks may affect all services and devices in the system. Theperception layer does not have the computational power to run intrusiondetection systems. Therefore,ﬁrmware should prevent excessive requestsfrom draining system resources. Edge services must accept a limitedamount of connections to avoid delays and service disruption. Further-more, IDSs or anomaly detectors designed for the edge may provide away to mitigate such attacks. These detectors may identify several threatssuch as jamming and false data injection [ 65], malicious devices [66,67], and several routing attacks [68–70]. The cloud could use robust securityschemes to mitigate DoS, such as traditional IDSs or anomaly detectors,while conﬁguring services to prevent them from being affected by anexcessive amount of requests, both from the system itself and theInternet.Communication between devices could use one or more technologies,such as LoRa, LoRaWan, Sigfox, Zigbee, and LTE. Some standards allowconnecting devices over wide areas, simplifying management andreducing installation and maintenance costs. However, only these fea-tures are not enough to guarantee data transmission security. Technol-ogies that support some level of encryption can maximize datatransmission security, reducing the risk of traf ﬁc interception. Networks operating over TCP/IP, whether in the perception, edge orcloud, could maximize communication security using protocols lighterand moreﬂexible than HTTP. The HTTP protocol used on the traditionalInternet is not suitable for systems such as smart farming because it iscomputationally complex, incurs an enormous overhead, and is poten-tially insecure [7]. There are several alternative protocols such as MQTT,SMQTT, CoAP, XMPP, UPNP, AMQP, M3DA, DDS, JMS, and Jav-ascriptIoT. These protocols were developed for industrial communica-tions or IoT and are more suitable for smart agriculture. Some of themhave cryptography support, appropriate for networks that have no se-crecy in the communication layer. It is important to emphasize that, evenif the sensors’data are not sensitive, the system usually exchange privateinformation over the network, such as identi ﬁers and access credentials. Any sensible data transmitted over the network requires securecommunication.The application layer should have more security resources because ofthe Internet connection. Robust and rigorous access control is essential toprevent unauthorized access and remote control of services and appli-cations. In the cloud, it is imperative to add features such as ﬁrewalls for perimeter protection, antivirus, and antiphishing to reduce risks withphishing, malicious scripts, and viruses/worms. Cloud services mustrestrict connections to other services or users as much as possible toprevent data leakage and denials of service. Using microservices favorsenvironment security if properly conﬁgured.In summary, edge and gateway protection schemes should includefeatures such as compatibility, low resource consumption, and effec-tiveness. The identity management system must be transparent to end-user and able to work with numerous and different devices, protectingthe devices and services. Data must be protected at all stages to ensuresystem reliability and efﬁciency. However, system constraints requirelight and efﬁcient algorithms. The cloud can use security schemesdeveloped for the traditional Internet since this layer has the necessarycomputational resources for its execution.
6. ConclusionThe agricultural methods modernization is essential to increase pro-duction rates and preserve natural resources. Smart agriculture canenhance farming tasks by providing ef ﬁcient control of actuators,optimizing utility and resource use, managing production, maximizingproﬁt, and minimizing costs. However, to achieve this goal, smart sys-tems must include more computational capabilities, such as edgecomputing, handling massive data, artiﬁcial intelligence resources, and security features. Security requires special attention as constrained de-vices generate a large volume of data and forward them to the gateway orthe cloud. The farming system must protect the data from the detectionthrough to decision-making and storage.Although many security threats can affect agricultural systems, theystill incorporate a few security resources. Possibly this is because thesesolutions are still in their early stages of development. Most times, thereare only automation resources implemented, and these have fewcomputational resources. Thus, security features are not yet on the list ofsystem requirements. However, reaching an additional level of smartfarming demands solutions with security mechanisms that give themenough reliability and accuracy to implement these systems on a largescale. As smart farming creates an extra set of challenges, it also presentsfresh research opportunities both in security and in other areas of com-puter science.Declaration of competing interestThe authors declare that they have no known competing ﬁnancial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to in ﬂuence the work reported in this paper.References[1]United Nations, Department of Economic, Affairs Social, Division Population. Worldpopulation prospects 2019: highlights. 2019 . [2] Nation United. Sustainable development goals. https://sdgs.un.org/goals; 2017. [3] Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations - FAO. Strengthenedglobal partnerships needed to end hunger and malnutrition. 2019. http://www.fa o.org/news/story/en/item/1194310/icode/ . [4]Trendov NM, Varas S, Zeng M. Digital technologies in agriculture and rural areas -status report, Tech. Rep., Nations. Rome, Italy: Food and Agriculture Organizationof the United; 2019.[5] OECD. Food, A. O. Of the united nations, OECD-FAO agricultural outlook 2020-2029. 2020.https://doi.org/10.1787/1112c23b-en .https://www.oecd-ilibrary.or g/content/publication/1112c23b-en . [6] Varga P, Plosz S, Soos G, Hegedus C. Security threats and issues in automation IoT.In: IEEE international workshop on factory communication systems - proceedings,WFCS, IEEE, trondheim, Norway, ISBN 9781509057887. p. 6. https://doi.org/ 10.1109/WFCS.2017.7991968} . [7]Hassija V, Chamola V, Saxena V, Jain D, Goyal P, Sikdar B. A survey on IoT security:application areas, security threats, and solution architectures, vols. 1 –1. IEEE Access; 2019. ISSN 2169-3536 . [8] Olson D. Agroterrorism: threats to America ’s economy and food supply. https://le b.fbi.gov/articles/featured-articles/agroterrorism-threats-to-americas-economy-and-food-supply; 2012.[9]/C19Ozvv/C19ari L, Kasza G, Lakner Z. Historical and economic aspects of bioterrorism. In:Management, organizations and society; 2017. p. 179 –86.https://doi.org/ 10.18515/dBEM.M2017.n01.ch18 . chap. 18,http://real.mtak.hu/39950/1/Mana gement_Organizations_and_Society-Agroinform-2017jan08-DOI_CrossRef-Chapter_3.2.pdf.[10]Monke J. Agro-terrorism: threats and preparedness, tech. Rep., congressionalresearch service. 2008 {March12,2007} . [11] Khelifa B, Amel D, Amel B, Mohamed C, Tarek B. Smart irrigation using internet ofthings. In: 4th international conference on future generation communicationtechnology, FGCT 2015. Luton, UK: IEEE; 2015, ISBN 9781479982660. p. 91 –6. https://doi.org/10.1109/FGCT.2015.7300252} . ISSN 2377-262X. [12] Sales N, Remedios O, Arsenio A. Wireless sensor and actuator system for smartirrigation on the cloud. In: IEEE world forum on Internet of things. Milan; Italy: WF-IoT, IEEE; 2015, ISBN 9781509003655. p. 693 –8.https://doi.org/10.1109/WF- IoT.2015.7389138. ISSN 0954-4089.[13] Goap A, Sharma D, Shukla AK, Rama Krishna C. An IoT based smart irrigationmanagement system using Machine learning and open source technologies. ComputElectron Agric 2018;155:41–9.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compag.2018.09.040} . ISSN 01681699.[14]Mahalakshmi M. Distant monitoring and controlling of solar driven irrigationsystem through IoT. In: National power engineering conference (NPEC). Madurai,India: IEEE; 2018, ISBN 9781538638033. p. 1 –5. [15] Nageswara Rao R, Sridhar B. IoT based smart crop- ﬁeld monitoring and automation irrigation system. In: 2nd international conference on inventive systems andcontrol, ICISC 2018. Coimbatore, India: IEEE; 2018, ISBN 9781538608074.p. 478–83.https://doi.org/10.1109/ICISC.2018.8399118}
. ISSN 1472-4472.A. Rettore de Araujo Zanella et al. Array 8 (2020) 100048
10[16] Navarro-Hellín H, Martínez-del Rincon J, Domingo-Miguel R, Soto-Valles F, Torres-S/C19anchez R. A decision support system for managing irrigation in agriculture.Comput Electron Agric 2016;124:121 –31.https://doi.org/10.1016/ j.compag.2016.04.003}. ISSN 01681699. [17] Rajalakshmi P, Mahalakshmi SD. IOT based crop- ﬁeld monitoring and irrigation automation. In: 10th international conference on intelligent systems and control,ISCO 2016. IEEE, Coimbatore; India; 2016, ISBN 9781467378079. p. 1 –6.https:// doi.org/10.1109/ISCO.2016.7726900} . ISSN 0018-9197. [18] Zhao W, Lin S, Han J, Xu R, Hou L. Design and implementation of a smart irrigationsystem based on LoRa. In: IEEE globecom workshops. Singapore: IEEE, Singapore;2017, ISBN 978-1-78561-238-1. p. 1 –6.https://doi.org/10.1049/cp.2016.1357} . [19] Ruengittinun S, Phongsamsuan S, Sureeratanakorn P. Applied internet of thing forsmart hydroponic farming ecosystem (HFE). In: 10th international conference onubi-media computing and workshops with the 4th international workshop onadvanced E-learning and the 1st international workshop on multimedia and IoT:networks, systems and applications (Ubi-Media 2017). IEEE Inc, BeachRoadPattaya; Thailand; 2017, ISBN 9781538627617. p. 1 –4.https://doi.org/ 10.1109/UMEDIA.2017.8074148} . [20] Lee M, Kim H, Yoe H. Intelligent environment management system for controlledhorticulture. In: 4th NAFOSTED conference on information and computer science,NICS 2017 - proceedings. Hanoi; Vietnam: IEEE Inc; 2017, ISBN 9781538632109.p. 116–9.https://doi.org/10.1109/NAFOSTED.2017.8108049} . [21] Oliver ST, Gonz/C19alez-P/C19erez A, Guijarro JH. An IoT proposal for monitoring vineyardscalled SEnviro for agriculture. In: Proceedings of the 8th international conferenceon the Internet of things - IOT’18, 1, ACM New York, santa barbara; United States, ISBN 9781450365642. p. 1–4.https://doi.org/10.1145/3277593.3277625} . [22] Thorat A, Kumari S, Valakunde ND. An IoT based smart solution for leaf diseasedetection. In: International conference on big data, IoT and data science, BID 2017,2018-Janua. Pune, India: IEEE; 2018, ISBN 9781509065936. p. 193 –8.https:// doi.org/10.1109/BID.2017.8336597} . ISSN 13456652. [23] Yoon C, Huh M, Kang S-G, Park J, Lee C. Implement smart farm with IoTtechnology. In: 20th international conference on advanced communicationtechnology (ICACT). Korea (South), Korea (South): IEEE, Chuncheon-si Gangwon-do; 2018, ISBN 9791188428007. p. 749 –52.https://doi.org/10.23919/ ICACT.2018.8323908}. ISSN 17389445.[24] Musat GA, Colezea M, Pop F, Negru C, Mocanu M, Esposito C, Castiglione A.Advanced services for efﬁcient management of smart farms. J Parallel Distr Comput2018;116:3–17.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpdc.2017.10.017} . ISSN 07437315. [25] Minh QT, Phan TN, Takahashi A, Thanh TT, Duy SN, Thanh MN, Hong CN. A cost-effective smart farming system with knowledge base. In: 8th internationalsymposium on information and communication technology - SoICT 2017. NhaTrang; Vietnam: ACM New York; 2017, ISBN 9781450353281. p. 309 –16.https:// doi.org/10.1145/3155133.3155151} . ISSN 00243795. [26] Colezea M, Musat G, Pop F, Negru C, Dumitrascu A, Mocanu M. CLUeFARM:integrated web-service platform for smart farms. Comput Electron Agric 2018;154(August):134–54.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compag.2018.08.015} . ISSN
01681699.[27] Raducu IG, Bojan VC, Pop F, Mocanu M, Cristea V. Real-time alert service for cyber-infrastructure environments. In: 10th international conference on P2P, parallel,grid, cloud and Internet computing, 3PGCIC 2015. Poland: IEEE, Krakow; 2015,ISBN 9781467394734. p. 296–303.https://doi.org/10.1109/3PGCIC.2015.122} . [28] Wongpatikaseree K, Kanka P, Ratikan A. Developing smart farm and traceabilitysystem for agricultural products using IoT technology. In: IEEE/ACIS 17thinternational conference on computer and information science (ICIS). Singapore:IEEE, Singapore; 2018, ISBN 9781538658925. p. 180 –4.https://doi.org/10.1109/ ICIS.2018.8466479}.[29] Mekala MS, Viswanathan P. A Survey: smart agriculture IoT with cloud computing.In: International conference on microelectronic devices, circuits and systems,ICMDCS 2017. Vellore, India: IEEE; 2017, ISBN 9781538617168. p. 1 –7.https:// doi.org/10.1109/ICMDCS.2017.8211551} . [30] Ray PP. Internet of things for smart agriculture: technologies, practices and futuredirection. J Ambient Intell Smart Environ 2017;9(4):395 –420.https://doi.org/ 10.3233/AIS-170440. ISSN 18761364.[31] Zhao K, Ge L. A survey on the internet of things security. In: 2013 ninthinternational conference on computational intelligence and security. Leshan, China:IEEE; 2013, ISBN 9781479925483. p. 663 –7.https://doi.org/10.1109/ CIS.2013.145}. ISSN 2316-9451.[32] Agrawal S, Das ML, Lopez J. Detection of node capture attack in wireless sensornetworks. IEEE Systems Journal 2019;13(1):238 –47.https://doi.org/10.1109/ JSYST.2018.2863229. ISSN 19379234.[33] Lin J, Yu W, Zhang N, Yang X, Zhang H, Zhao W. A survey on internet of things:architecture, enabling technologies, security and privacy, and applications. IEEEInternet of Things Journal 2017;4(5):1125 –42.https://doi.org/10.1109/ JIOT.2017.2683200}. ISSN 23274662.[34] Sarma R, Barbhuiya FA. Internet of things: attacks and defences. In: 2019 7thinternational conference on smart computing and communications, ICSCC 2019.Sarawak, Malaysia: IEEE; 2019, ISBN 9781728115573. p. 1 –5.https://doi.org/ 10.1109/ICSCC.2019.8843649} . [35]Syed A, Shah SH. A comprehensive security model for internet of things. Int JComput Commun Netw 2019;1(2):38 –46. [36] Kumar SA, Vealey T, Srivastava H. Security in internet of things: challenges,solutions and future directions. In: Proceedings of the annual Hawaii internationalconference on system sciences. Koloa, HI, USA: IEEE; 2016, ISBN 9780769556703.p. 5772–81.https://doi.org/10.1109/HICSS.2016.714} . ISSN 15301605. [37] Chahid Y, Benabdellah M, Azizi A. Internet of things security. In: 2017 internationalconference on wireless technologies, embedded and intelligent systems, WITS 2017.IEEE; 2017, ISBN 9781509066810. p. 1 –6.https://doi.org/10.1109/ WITS.2017.7934655}.[38] Vasques AT, Gondim JJ. Ampli ﬁed reﬂection DDoS attacks over iot mirrors: a saturation analysis. In: WCNPS 2019 - workshop on communication networks andpower systems. IEEE, Brasília, Brasil; 2019, ISBN 9781728129204. p. 1 –6.https:// doi.org/10.1109/WCNPS.2019.8896290} . [39]Kolias C, Kambourakis G, Stavrou A, Voas Jeffrey. DDoS in the IoT: mirai and otherbotnets. Computer 2017;50(7):80 –4.[40]Capellupo M, Liranzo J, Bhuiyan MZA, Hayajneh T, Wang G. Security and attackvector analysis of IoT devices. In: Security, privacy, and anonymity in computation,communication, and storage. Cham: Springer International Publishing; 2017. 978-3-319-72395-2, 593–606. [41] Pundir S, Wazid M, Singh DP, Das AK, Rodrigues JJ, Park Y. Designing ef ﬁcient sinkhole attack detection mechanism in edge-based IoT deployment. Sensors 2020;20(5):1300.https://doi.org/10.3390/s20051300} . ISSN 14248220. [42] Goyal M, Dutta M, IEEE. Intrusion detection of wormhole attack in IoT: a review. In:2018 international conference on circuits and systems in digital enterprisetechnology, ICCSDET 2018. Kottayam, India: IEEE; 2018, ISBN 9781538605769.p. 1–5.https://doi.org/10.1109/ICCSDET.2018.8821160} . [43]Schulz S, Schaller A, Kohnh €auser F, Katzenbeisser S, Boot Attestation. Secureremote reporting with off-the-shelf IoT sensors. In: Computer security –ESORICS 2017, vol. 1. Cham, Oslo, Norway: Springer; 2017. p. 437 –55. [44] L. Garcia, L. Parra, J. M. Jimenez, J. Lloret, IoT-based smart irrigation systems : anoverview on the recent trends on sensors and IoT systems for irrigation in precisionagriculture, Sensors 20 (4).[45]Ouaddah A, Mousannif H, Abou Elkalam A, Ait Ouahman A. Access control in theInternet of Things: big challenges and new opportunities. Comput Network 2017;112:237–62.[46] Navas RE, Bouder HL, Cuppens N, Cuppens F, Papadopoulos GZ. Demo: do not trustyour neighbors! A small IoT platform illustrating a man-in-the-middle attack. In:DHOC-NOW: international conference on ad hoc networks and wireless, september.Cham, Saint-Malo, France.: Springer; 2018, ISBN 9783030002473. p. 1 –6.https:// doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-00247-3} . [47] Stojmenovic I, Wen S. The Fog computing paradigm: scenarios and security issues.In: 2014 federated conference on computer science and information systems,FedCSIS 2014, vol. 2. Warsaw, Poland: IEEE; 2014, ISBN 9788360810583. p. 1 –8. https://doi.org/10.15439/2014F503} . [48]Gajek S, Jensen M, Liao L, Schwenk J. Analysis of signature wrapping attacks andcountermeasures. In: 2009 IEEE international conference on web services, ICWS2009. Los Angeles, USA: IEEE; 2009. p. 575 –82. [49]Benavides E, Fuertes W, Sanchez S, Sanchez M. Classi ﬁcation of phishing attack solutions by employing deep learning techniques : a systematic literature review. In:Developments and advances in defense and security. Singapore: Springer Singapore;2020. p. 51–64.[50] Guarda T, Augusto MF, Lopes I. The art of phishing. In: Advances in intelligentsystems and computing. Cham, Bogots, Colombia: Springer; 2019, ISBN9783030118891. p. 683–90.https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-11890-7_64} . ISSN 21945357.[51]Khan N, Abdullah J, Khan AS. Defending malicious script attacks using machinelearning classiﬁers. Wireless Communications and Mobile Computing 2017 2017:9 . [52]Shurman MM, Khrais RM, Yateem AA. IoT denial-of-service attack detection andprevention using hybrid IDS. In: International arab conference on informationtechnology (ACIT), vol. 3. IEEE, Al Ain, United Arab Emirates; 2019 . [53]Manesh MR, Kenney J, Hu WC, Devabhaktuni VK, Kaabouch N. Detection of GPSspooﬁng attacks on unmanned aerial systems. In: 2019 16th IEEE annual consumercommunications networking conference (CCNC). IEEE; 2019. p. 1 –6. [54]
Bonebrake C, O’Neil LR. Attacks on GPS time reliability. IEEE Security Privacy2014;12(3):82–4.[55] Di Modica G, Gulino S, Tomarchio O. IoT fault management in cloud/fogenvironments. In: ACM international conference on the Internet of things. NewYork, USA: ACM; 2019, ISBN 9781450372077. p. 1 –4.https://doi.org/10.1145/ 3365871.3365882}.[56]Power A, Kotonya G. Complex patterns of failure: fault tolerance via complex eventprocessing for iot systems. In: International conference on Internet of things(iThings) and IEEE green computing and communications (GreenCom) and IEEEcyber, physical and social computing (CPSCom) and IEEE smart data (SmartData).Atlanta, USA: IEEE; 2019. p. 986 –93. [57] García-Gil D, Luengo J, García S, Herrera F. Enabling smart data: noise ﬁltering in big data classiﬁcation. Inf Sci 2019;479(2019):135 –52.https://doi.org/10.1016/ j.ins.2018.12.002}. ISSN 00200255.[58]Liu L, Xu B, Zhang X, Wu X. An intrusion detection method for internet of thingsbased on suppressed fuzzy clustering. EURASIP J Wirel Commun Netw 2018;(1) . [59]Santos L, Rabadao C, Goncalves R. Intrusion detection systems in Internet of Things:a literature review. In: 13th iberian conference on information systems andtechnologies (CISTI). Caceres: IEEE; 2018. p. 1 –7. [60] Dimitriou T, Alrashed EA, Karaata MH, Hamdan A. Imposter detection forreplication attacks in mobile sensor networks. Comput Network 2016;108:210 –22. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.comnet.2016.08.019} . ISSN 13891286. [61]Smache M, Mrabet NE, Gilquijano JJ, Tria A, Riou E, Gregory C. Modeling a nodecapture attack in a secure wireless sensor networks. In: 2016 IEEE 3rd world forumon Internet of things, WF-IoT 2016. Reston, USA: IEEE; 2016. p. 188 –93. [62]Jahir Husain A, Maluk Mohamed MA. IMBF counteracting denial-of-sleep attacks in6LoWPAN based internet of things. J Inf Sci Eng 2019;35(2):361 –74. [63]Mode GR, Calyam P, Hoque KA. False data injection attacks in internet of things anddeep learning enabled predictive analytics. In: EEE/IFIP network operations andManagementSymposium. Budapest, Hungary: IEEE; 2020. p. 1 –11.A. Rettore de Araujo Zanella et al. Array 8 (2020) 100048
11[64]Partra L, Rao UP. Internet of Things —architecture, applications, security and other major challenges. In: 2016 3rd international conference on computing forsustainable global development (INDIACom). New Delhi, India: IEEE; 2016.p. 1201–6.[65]Fu Y, Yan Z, Cao J, Kon/C19e O, Cao X. An automata based intrusion detection methodfor Internet of things. Mobile Information Systems; 2017 . [66]Sohal AS, Sandhu R, Sood SK, Chang V. A cybersecurity framework to identifymalicious edge device in fog computing and cloud-of-things environments. ComputSecur 2018;74:340–54.[67] J. Pacheco, S. Hariri, Anomaly behavior analysis for IoT sensors, Transactions onEmerging Telecommunications Technologies 29 (4).[68]Razaa S, Wallgren L, Voigt T. SVELTE: real-time intrusion detection in the internetof things. Ad Hoc Netw 2013;11(8):2661 –74. [69]Sun Z, Xu Y, Liang G, Zhou Z. An intrusion detection model for wireless sensornetworks with an improved V-detector algorithm. IEEE Sensor J 2018;18(5):1971–84. ISSN 1530437X. [70]Sedjelmaci H, Senouci SM, Al-Bahri M. A lightweight anomaly detection techniquefor low-resource IoT devices: a game-theoretic methodology. In: IEEE internationalconference on communications, ICC 2016, vol. 6. Kuala Lumpur: IEEE; 2016 .A. Rettore de Araujo Zanella et al. Array 8 (2020) 100048
12