Signal processing techniques for motor imagery brain computer interface:A review
Swati Aggarwal*, Nupur Chugh
Division of Computer Engineering, Netaji Subhas University of Technology, Delhi, India
ARTICLE INFO
Keywords:Brain computer interfaceMotor imageryElectroencephalogram (EEG)Motor task classiﬁcationSignal analysisABSTRACT
Motor Imagery Brain Computer Interface (MI-BCI) provides a non-muscular channel for communication to thosewho are suffering from neuronal disorders. The designing of an accurate and reliable MI-BCI system requires theextraction of informative and discriminative features. Common Spatial Pattern (CSP) has been potent and iswidely used in BCI for extracting features in motor imagery tasks. The classi ﬁers translate these features into device commands. Many classiﬁcation algorithms have been devised, among those Support Vector Machine (SVM) andLinear Discriminate Analysis (LDA) have been widely used. In recent studies, the researchers are using deepneural networks for the classiﬁcation of motor imagery tasks. This paper provides a comprehensive review ofdominant feature extraction methods and classi ﬁcation algorithms in brain-computer interface for motor imagery tasks. Authors discuss existing challenges in the domain of motor imagery brain-computer interface and suggestpossible research directions.
1. IntroductionA Brain Computer Interface (BCI) utilizes signals to establish aconnection between a person ’s state of mind and a computer-based signalprocessing system, which interprets the signals [1]. BCI provides a direct communicational channel between the brain and an external devicewithout involving any muscular activities. These systems either useelectroencephalogram (EEG) activity recorded from the scalp or the ac-tivity of individual cortical neurons recorded from implanted electrodes[2].EEG has relatively short time constants, and requires simple andinexpensive equipment; therefore at present EEG-based BCI systems arewidely used[2–6]. Various forms of electrical brain activities have beenused to discern EEG based BCI systems, such as mu rhythm [7,8], slow cortical potential[9], event-related p300[10]and steady-state visual evoked potential[11,12]. Among various types of electrical brain ac-tivities, the one related to motor tasks is mu rhythm [13]. Motor imagery (MI) is deﬁned as the cognitive process of imaginingthe movement of your own body part without actually moving that bodypart[14]. Motor imagery based Brain Computer Interface (MI BCI)provides an interface for the patients with motor impairment or thosewho are in completely locked-in-state to interact with the environmentby controlling robotic prostheses, wheelchairs, and other devices [15]. MI BCI has a wide range of applications, such as controlling awheelchair, virtual reality, neurorehabilitation and controlling devicessuch as quadcopters in 2-D/3-D space [16–19]. The EEG signal processing for MI BCI involves feature extraction andclassiﬁcation. In feature extraction phase the EEG signal acquired for MIBCI reveals task-speciﬁc features in both spectral domain and spatialdomain[20]. Several spectral processing methods such as wavelettransform[21–23], fourier transform[24], autoregressive model[25] and spatial method such as common spatial pattern (CSP) [26–29]have been used in literature to extract the features from these EEG signals. CSPalgorithm is the most successful and is widely used in MI BCI due to itshigh recognition rate and computational simplicity [30]. The goal of classiﬁcation is to translate the signal features provided bythe feature extractor into commands or orders that carry out user ’s intent [2]. In MI BCI, classiﬁers convert discriminative features into different MItasks such as left-right hand movement, foot movement, tongue move-ment or word generation. Copious classi ﬁcation algorithms, such as support vector machines[31,32], linear discriminate analysis (LDA)[26–
28]neural networks[22,33,34], and deep neural networks[23,24, 35–38]have been applied on MI BCI.
* Corresponding author.E-mail addresses:swati1178@gmail.com(S. Aggarwal),nupur.chugh@gmail.com(N. Chugh).
Contents lists available atScienceDirect
Array
journal homepage:www.elsevier.com/journals/array/2590-0056/open-access-journal
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.array.2019.100003Received 16 January 2019; Received in revised form 4 June 2019; Accepted 1 August 2019Available online 7 August 20192590-0056/©2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. This is an open access article under the CC BY license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ ).Array 1-2 (2019) 1000032. Related workThe relevant reviews available on signal processing techniques mostlyfocus either on feature extraction methods or on classi ﬁcation tech- niques.Table 1shows all reviews that are related to feature extractionand classiﬁcation techniques. The label Yes in table implies that articlepresented that particular technique and label No implies vice versa.Swati Vaid et al.[39]describe the model of BCI system. The authorcategorized the techniques into basic techniques and advanced tech-niques. The basic techniques are time domain and frequency domaintechniques. Advanced techniques are classi ﬁed into time frequency domain and space-time frequency domain. Further, they have summa-rized the features and its techniques in respective domains.M. Rajya Lakshmi et al.[40]brieﬂy describe the feature extraction techniques, which are Principal Component Analysis (PCA), IndependentComponent Analysis (ICA), Auto Regressive Model (AR), WaveletTransform (WT) and Wavelet Packet Decomposition (WPD). Further-more, the paper has explored the signal processing methods used in eachstage of brain computer interface.Amjed S. Al-Fahoum and Ausilah A. Al-Fraihat [25]discuss the feature extraction techniques in frequency domain and time frequencydomain such as fast fourier transform, auto regressive model, wavelettransform, eigen vectors and time frequency distribution. The authorshave provided recommendations based on the performance.Lotte et al.[41]discussed the classiﬁcation algorithms used for EEG based brain computer interfaces. The authors described the properties ofalgorithms in detail and compared the performances of the classi ﬁers. Based on the performances the authors provide the guidelines forselecting the best-suited classiﬁer.Rupal Chaudhary et al.[42]described the different stages of BCI. Theauthors provided a review of classiﬁcation of motor imagery tasks. It hasprovided a summary of the paper selected and studied by the author.All the works discussed inTable 1provide brief description about any one of the two important components of signal processing, that is featureextraction or classiﬁcation. Though M. Rajya et al. has discussed bothfeature extraction and classiﬁcation but discussion is not comprehensive.Certainly, the description and discussion of various signal-processingcomponents needs further elaboration. It is understood that it would bemore helpful if all the elements of signal processing were presented in acomprehensive and holistic manner. Based on this perspective the au-thors have summarized the algorithms available for feature extractionand classiﬁcation for brain computer interfaces.Authors in this paper have presented the variants available for featureextraction methods and all the components are classi ﬁed appropriately. Recently Deep Learning has been introduced as the classi ﬁcation methods for brain computer interfaces [23,24,35–38], which has not been discussed in previous related works listed in Table 1. As beneﬁts ofdeep learning in BCI has been highlighted by different researchers[35–38], authors in this paper have included a discussion on deeplearning classiﬁcation methods for BCI. Furthermore, the review also
critically examines the various challenges of different modules of BCI.3. Working principle of BCI systemThe working of the BCI system requires three modules that are signalacquisition module, signal processing, and application module. Thissection describes the working of each module. Fig. 1shows the compo- nents of BCI and their interactions.3.1. Signal acquisition moduleThe Signal Acquisition Module is liable for recording the electro-physiological signals that provide input to the BCI. These signals arerecorded from the scalp or from the surface of the brain or neuronalactivity[43]. BCI might use either invasive methods or non-invasivemethods for signal acquisition. Invasive methods are electrocardio-grams (ECoG) and single-neuron recordings [43,44]and have better signal quality as compared to non-invasive methods. Non-invasivemethods are Electroencephalogram (EEG), Magnetoencephalogram(MEG), Positron Emission Tomography (PET), Functional MagneticResonance Imaging (fMRI) and Near-Infrared Spectroscopy (NIRs) [44]. The acquired signals are ampliﬁed to enhance the strength and aredigitized before they are used by any of the computer application.3.2. Signal processing module3.2.1. PreprocessingThe task of preprocessing is to prepare the recorded signals for pro-cessing by enhancing the signal –to- noise ratio (SNR). The part of EEGsignal that comes from muscular activity of head, and eye movementgenerate electrical activity that is unrelated to the brain. Such part ofsignal is considered as artifact and should not be processed in order topreserve and exhibit the relevant information; therefore preprocessing isdone to remove artifacts in EEG signals. In BCI research, the properpreprocessing of EEG signal is important in order to obtain high classi-ﬁcation accuracy. Preprocessing of BCI is based on the Covariance MatrixAdaptation Evolution Strategy (CMA-ES) which obtains the spatial andfrequency selectionﬁlters automatically[45].3.2.2. Feature extractionAfter preprocessing the signal is fed into one or more type of featureextraction algorithms. This component extracts features in the timedomain and frequency domain that encode messages or commands [43]. Wide varieties of feature extraction methods are used in BCI system;
Table 1Signal Processing techniques presented in related work.
Category Techniques ArticleRupal Chaudhari et al.(2017)[42]Swati Vaid et al.(2015)[39]M. Rajya Lakshmi et al.(2014)[40]Amjed S. Al-Fahoum1(2014)[25]F Lotte et al.(2007)[41] FeatureExtractionFast Fourier Transform Yes Yes YesShort Term FourierTransform Yes No NoAuto Regressive Model Yes Yes YesWavelet Transform Yes Yes YesWavlet PacketDecomposition Yes Yes NoCommon Spatial Pattern Yes No NoClassiﬁcation Linear DiscriminantAnalysisYes Yes YesSupport Vector Machine No Yes YesArtiﬁcial NeuralNetworkYes No Yes YesDeep Learning No NoS. Aggarwal, N. Chugh Array 1-2 (2019) 100003
2some of these methods include amplitude measures, band power, Hjorthparameters, autoregressive models, and wavelets and spatial ﬁlters[9].3.2.3. ClassiﬁcationThe task of the classiﬁcation component is to translate the featuresprovided by the feature extractor to a category of brain patterns; that isthe independent variable is converted into the dependent variable. Theclassiﬁcation algorithms may use linear methods like Linear DiscriminantAnalysis (LDA) and Support Vector Machine (SVM) or non-linearmethods such as neural networks.3.3. Application moduleFor most current BCIs, the output device is a computer screen and theoutput is the selection of targets, letters, or icons presented on it [19]. Some BCIs provide an output, such as cursor movement toward the itemprior to its selection.The output generated by the output device is the feedback provided tothe user to notify the user about the recognized brain activity pattern.This pattern is then used to sustain and enhance the accuracy and speedof communication.There are various key components in the BCI closed loop, one isfeature extraction and the other is classiﬁcation. There is a large diversity of feature extraction and classiﬁcation methods that have been exploredin BCI for motor imagery tasks. This paper gives an extensive review ofthese two components that are described in the following sections.4. Feature extraction techniquesDuring Feature extraction, features are extracted from the signals ineither time domain or frequency domain. As shown in Fig. 2the feature extraction process involves frequencyﬁltering, windowing in which short segments are selected, feature extractor and the feature selectionwhich outputs the selected features that are being fed into the classi ﬁer. In BCI, frequency band power features and time domain features repre-sent EEG signals. Band power features represent the power of EEG signalsfor a given frequency band averaged over a time window and timedomain features are the combination of EEG signals from all channels. MIBCI extensively uses band power features. Based on the literature foundand studied as shown inTable 4it has been noticed that most of the used
Fig. 1.Components of a BCI system[21].
Fig. 2.Processes involved in Feature Extraction.S. Aggarwal, N. Chugh Array 1-2 (2019) 100003
3or referenced techniques for feature extraction in motor imagery braincomputer interfaces are Short Term Fourier Transform (STFT), AutoRegressive Model (AR), Wavelet Transform (WT), and Common SpatialPattern (CSP). This section gives detailed description of the variedfeature extraction methods used for motor imagery tasks.4.1. Fast fourier transform (FFT)Theﬁrst feature extraction method used for MI BCI was based on FastFourier Transform[25]that is applied to estimate the power at chosenfrequency bands in FFT generated spectra. Fourier analysis decomposesthe signal into its frequency components and determines their relativestrengths. FFT does not consider time information, thus it is not able toanalyze non-stationary EEG signals. In order to represent thenon-stationary signal the author uses Short Term Fourier Transform(STFT)[25,46]. In STFT, the signal is divided into small overlappingframes on which FFT is applied by placing a window function on timeaxis as shown inFig. 3.Whenﬁxed time window function is applied to STFT, it producesﬁxed time-frequency resolution that limits the use of STFT. This meansthat one can only trade time resolution for frequency resolution or viceversa.4.2. Autoregressive (AR) modelThe Autoregressive model is the parametric approach that estimatesthe Power Spectrum Density (PSD) of the signal. Typically, short epochsare preferred over longer epochs for analysis in order to characterize therapid changes that occur in EEG signal. The spectra obtained from FFT onshort epochs have poor resolution when compared to an autoregressivemodel. Although the resolution of FFT could be improved by applyingwindow function such as Hanning window, but still it have poor reso-lution as compared to autoregressive model as shown in Fig. 4. The validity of spectral estimate depends on the selection of proper modelorder where model order roughly determines the number of spectralpeaks that need to be captured. If the model order is too low, AR yieldssmooth spectrum whereas, if it is too high the spectrum has spuriouspeaks[19]. The model order for EEG ranges from 3 to 20 [47].4.3. Wavelet transform (WT)Wavelet Transform is the feature extraction technique that extractsfeatures in time-domain and is used to represent the function by aninﬁnite number of wavelets where each wavelet has speci ﬁc time- frequency characteristics. The above two techniques, FFT and ARmodel uncover only spectral characteristics of signals and do not obtaingood performance with non-stationary EEG signal. Wavelet Transformcombines frequency information and time domain information, whichgives better performance as compared to FFT or AR [25]. WT uses varying size window such that high frequencies are evaluated on theshorter window and low frequencies over longer window [48,49]thus WT performs better in time resolution of high frequencies as compared toSTFT as shown inFig. 5. The other extensions of WT have also been usedin MI BCI such as Wavelet Packet Transform (WPT) [50]and Wavelet Packet Best Basis Decomposition (WPBBD) [51].4.4. Common spatial pattern (CSP)In MI BCI, spatial information is required in multichannel EEG re-cordings to discriminate intent patterns and therefore, the spatial ﬁlters have been used to extract spatial information from the signal. CommonSpatial Pattern generates spatialﬁlters that minimize the variance of oneclass and maximize the variance of other class simultaneously. Themultichannel EEG signal is passed into bandpass ﬁlter for selecting the frequency. After frequencyﬁltering, spatialﬁltering is performed that uses spatialﬁlters and FIR
ﬁlters. The process of common spatial pattern
Fig. 3.Short term Fourier Transform Process.S. Aggarwal, N. Chugh Array 1-2 (2019) 100003
4is shown inFig. 6. CSP is one of the most effective feature extractionmethods used in binary motor imagery task classi ﬁcation. In brain computer interface the objective of spatial ﬁltering used by the CSP algorithm is to compute features whose variances are optimal fordiscriminating two classes of EEG measurements [52]. The performance of this spatialﬁltering depends on the operational frequency band ofEEG. Several approaches have been proposed to ﬁne-tune thesubject-speciﬁc frequency range for CSP algorithm. One such approach isthe Common Spatio-Spectral Pattern (CSSP) [53], which optimizes sim- pleﬁlters with a spatialﬁlter. Another approach was the Common SparseSpectral-Spatial Pattern (CSSSP)[54]. It improves the CSSP algorithm by performing simultaneous optimization of an arbitrary FIR ﬁlter within the CSP algorithm.An alternative approach called Sub Band Common Spatial Pattern
Fig. 4.Comparison of Spectra generated by FFT and AR model [47].
Fig. 5.Comparison of resolution obtained by STFT and WT.S. Aggarwal, N. Chugh Array 1-2 (2019) 100003
5(SBCSP)[55]was proposed in which EEG signals are decomposed intosub-bands. CSP is applied to each sub-band that de ﬁnes sub-band score and then these scores are fused together to derive the ﬁnal decision. SBCSP has improved classiﬁcation accuracy when compared to CSSP andCSSSP.As compared to SBCSP, a more generalized approach called FilterBank Common Spatial Pattern (FBCSP) [56]was proposed that comprised of four stages: frequencyﬁltering, spatialﬁltering, feature selection, and classiﬁcation. It deploys a small subset of effective spatialﬁlters that reduces computational complexity against SBCSP. A variant,named Discriminative FBCSP (DFBCSP) [57]was proposed to enhance classiﬁcation accuracy. DFBCSP extracts subject speci ﬁc discriminative frequency bands from the set ofﬁlters instead of usingﬁxed frequency bands for all subjects as in FBCSP.In 2016, Separable Common Spatio Spectral Patterns (SCSSP) [20] had been proposed that jointly processed the data in both spectral andspatial domains and had low computational cost over FBCSP. Thisapproach was suitable for wearable mobile BCI systems. FBCSP used theﬁxed partition of a frequency band that leads to loss of information in thefrequency domain. The augmented CSP [58]based on varying partition of the frequency band with different bandwidths had solved the problemof information loss.Some other variants of CSP found in literature are sparse CSP [59] that impose sparsity on weights by adding regularization factor on spatialﬁlter, stationary CSP[60]that uses stationary subspaces, divergence CSP[61]that utilizes information from other subjects and enforce differentinvariance formulating divergence maximization problem, and probabi-listic CSP[62]that solves the problem of overﬁtting. While all these variants improve the standard CSP algorithm, they arestill unable to characterize temporal (time-related) dynamics; thus, moresophisticated techniques that consider time-related information arerequired. The features extracted from CSP are then fed into variousclassiﬁers for classiﬁcation.The different prominent feature extraction techniques used for MI BCIalong with advantages and limitations are summarized in Table 2.5. Classiﬁcation techniquesThe classiﬁcation is a process of predicting the target variables orclasses from the given input. To build the classi ﬁcation model, learning algorithm is applied in the training phase to adjust the parameters of themodel as shown inFig. 7. The same model is then used in the testingphase to extract the output. In motor imagery brain computer interfacethe features extracted by various feature extraction techniques are con-verted into different motor imagery tasks like hand movements, footmovement, word generation and alike through classi ﬁcation algorithms. The authors have classi
ﬁed the classiﬁcation algorithms used in the literature as linear classiﬁers, neural networks, non-linear classiﬁers, and deep neural networks. Linear Classiﬁers use the linear function to distinguish classes. Two main types of linear classi ﬁers are Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA)[26–38]and Support Vector Machine (SVM) [29,31,63]and have been commonly used in testing of BCI. NeuralNetwork (NN) is an assembly of different arti ﬁcial neurons, which en- ables to produce nonlinear decision boundaries. The NN speci ﬁcally created and used for BCI is Gaussian Classiﬁer[41]. Non-linear classiﬁers produce non-linear decision boundaries and are generative. These clas-siﬁers are not widespread and not popular as the linear classi ﬁer and neural networks in MI BCI. Deep Neural network (DNN) is an arti ﬁcial network with multiple layers called as hidden layers between input andoutput layers and is used to model complex non-linear relationships. Theclassiﬁers based on deep neural networks have been used in MI BCIresearch to improve the accuracy of multiclass signal analysis.This section gives a detailed description of the linear classi ﬁer,
Fig. 6.Process of common spatial pattern.
Table 2Comparison of Feature Extraction Techniques used for MI BCI.
Technique Advantages Limitations Analysis MethodFast FourierTransform(FFT)/C15FFT is accurate at frequency composition of a signal./C15It has enhanced speed over all other methods. /C15FFT is not suitable for analyzing non- linear signals./C15It does not take into time information into account. FrequencyAutoregressive Model (AR)/C15It provides good frequency resolution./C15It has reasonable spectral estimates for short segments. Validity of the model depends upon the proper selection ofmodel order. FrequencyWavelet Transform(WT)/C15WT provides improved balance between window length andspectral resolution./C15It is better suited for sudden changes in signal.Proper selection of appropriate mother wavelet is required. Time- FrequencyCommon Spatial Pattern(CSP)/C15CSP is suitable for multichannel signal analysis./C15It is used to tune subject speciﬁc frequency range. /C15CSP does not able to handle temporal dynamics./C15It has slow convergence. Spatial Filters
Fig. 7.Classiﬁcation process.S. Aggarwal, N. Chugh Array 1-2 (2019) 100003
6classiﬁer based on neural network and the deep neural network that isused in theﬁeld of MI BCI.5.1. Linear discriminative analysis (LDA)LDA classiﬁer has the low computational requirement that makes it acommonly used classiﬁer in EEG based BCI applications. LDA projectsdata into new space using projection y¼w
Txthat minimizes the scatter within the class and maximizes between the classes as illustrated inFig. 8.LDA has been successfully used for classiﬁcation of right and left-hand motor imagery[41]. The main drawback of LDA is that it provides thepoor result on complex nonlinear EEG data [65]. Regularized Fisher LDA [27], an enhancement of LDA has also been used for right and left-handmotor imagery that uses decision boundary or hyperplane in featurespace for classifying features in distinct classes. Fisher LDA obtains bettergeneralization capabilities and gives better results than LDA [65].5.2. Support vector machine (SVM)Support Vector Machine has been very popular in BCI research. SVMselects the hyperplane that maximizes the distance from the nearesttraining points. Linear SVM uses the linear function as decision bound-aries while nonlinear SVM uses the kernel function to map the data intohigher dimensional space[29]. Linear SVM and non-linear SVM is showninFig. 9.Md Rabiul Islam et al. (2017)[63]uses SVM on features with reduced dimension obtained by employing multiband TSM and PCA respectivelyfor four class classiﬁcation problems. Some otherﬂavors of SVM like Transition Detection based SVM (TD-SVM) [31]and Evolvedﬁlters based SVM[32]have been used for MI BCI. In TD-SVM, the classi ﬁcation problem is divided into two sub-problems: detecting class transitions anddetermining the class for sequences of instances between transitions.Evolvedﬁlters based SVM algorithm optimizes spatial andfrequency-selectionﬁlters by means of the Covariance Matrix AdaptationEvolution Strategy. SVM is known to have good generalization propertiesand is insensitive to the curse-of-dimensionality [64].5.3. Neural network (NN)SVM gives high-quality results but is not able to handle the multiclassproblem and dynamic nature of EEG signal effectively. Robust classi ﬁers give better performance but need more time; therefore, there is a tradeoffbetween accuracy and speed. As the neural network provides reasonabletradeoff, it has been extensively used in BCI research. There are severalNN architectures used in theﬁeld of BCI, the one that has beenspeciﬁcally created for BCI is the Gaussian classiﬁer[65,66]. Each unit of this NN is a Gaussian discriminant function representing a class proto-type. This classiﬁer has been applied with success to motor imagery [22] and mental task classiﬁcation[34]. Other NN architectures such as Multilayer Perceptron (MLP), neural network based on Radial BasisFunction (RBF), spiking neural network [67]that uses Online Meta neuron based Learning Algorithm (OMLA) has been applied for classi ﬁ- cation of MI tasks. NN has also been successfully applied for multiclassmultiuser MI tasks[22]
classiﬁcation.5.4. Deep learningIn the traditional neural network, weights have to be chosen verycarefully. This is a major obstacle in the effective use of the neuralnetwork in many applications of BCI. In recent studies, researchers havebeen using deep learning approach as deep neural network has highdescriptive power and thus improves the accuracy of the system. Deeplearning has successful performance in theﬁeld of computer vision and in recent years has also been applied in classiﬁcation of motor imagery tasks [24,68]. Initially, Na Lu et al.[24]proposed an approach to use manuallyextracted features from the channels based on FFT and then feed theminto a Deep Belief Network (DBN). Among various deep learning archi-tectures Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) is effectively used forclassiﬁcation of motor imagery tasks[23,35–38,69]due to its regulari- zation structure and degree of translation invariance. The Convolutionalneural network is a class of deep feed-forward arti ﬁcial neural network that uses a variation of multilayer perceptrons. A simple CNN is asequence of layers, and every layer of a CNN transforms one volume ofactivations to another through a differentiable function. CNN architec-ture consists of the input layer, convolution layer, pooling layer, fullyconnected layer and output layer as shown in Fig. 10. The Convolutional layer is the core building block of CNN and does most of the computation.Pooling layer reduces the spatial size of representation and neurons infully connected layer have full connections to the previous layer.Siavash et al.[36]and Huijuan et al.[58]proposed CNN architecture that uses dynamic energy based features for classifying multiclass motorimagery EEG signals. In Ref.[36]the author proposed a parallel archi-tecture that uses 3 layered MLP for static energy features and CNN fordynamic energy features with dropout regularization. The predictionsfrom both the networks are joined via averaging. The framework yields asigniﬁcant increase in classiﬁcation accuracy as compared to the supportvector machine. In Ref.[58]the author proposed an architecture thatuses augmented CSP for feature extraction. The energy features are ar-ranged on a 2D matrix and CNN is then trained on this matrix todiscriminate the features. Further, the feature maps are selected by usingthe map selection algorithm after the convolution.In the past, CNN has been used for classi ﬁcation of left and right motor imageries that use time-frequency representation as input [23,35]. The author[23]proposed an architecture that uses Continuous WaveletTransform with morlet and bump wavelets for feature learning. The 1Dconvolution is conducted at convolution layer to analyze spectral char-acteristics over time. The framework has achieved promisingperformance.More recently, CNN has been applied for the classi ﬁcation of multi- class motor imagery tasks using temporal representations [38]. Another framework[37]that is applied for multiclass motor imagery task consistsof temporal feature extractor, spatial feature extractor and a classi ﬁer that is learned jointly in an end-to-end manner. The framework usesrecurrent convolution layers and has shown acceptable performance.The classiﬁers in theﬁeld of MI BCI, along with their advantages andlimitations, have been described inTable 3.
6. Literature citedAccording to various studies reviewed in this paper, it has been foundthat most of the work is based on publicly available dataset and is limited
Fig. 8.Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA) projection [26].S. Aggarwal, N. Chugh Array 1-2 (2019) 100003
7to upper limb imageries. Among the classi ﬁcation methods, SVM is commonly used and has promising results. Although Shallow CNN hasshown the promising results in MI BCI research; still the deep neuralnetworks is lagging in performance due to unavailability of the largetraining dataset. The earlier studies focus on two class motor imagerythat is now shifting towards multiclass and multilabel motor imageries inrecent studies.Table 4presents the summary of the literature studied related to themotor imagery brain computer interface.Table 5shows the performance comparison of Common SpatialPattern and Wavelet Transform with different classi ﬁcation techniques using publicly available dataset BCI Competition III. The table revealsthat the Wavelet Transform has accuracy of 86.20% with CNN classi ﬁer, which is highest among all other classiﬁers, used with Wavelet Trans- form. Moreover, Common Spatial Pattern is also effective with the clas-siﬁcation techniques that are based on Deep Learning or Deep NeuralNetwork.7. ChallengesVarious feature extraction and classiﬁcation algorithms have been applied successfully for EEG based BCI for motor imagery tasks and ob-tained good accuracy results, still, there are some unresolved issues andchallenges that attract attention from researchers from varied domains.Pertaining to open issues and challenges are listed in Table 6.7.1. Feature extractionEEG signal is usually very noisy and time-variable; therefore, it ischallenging to extract relevant features from EEG measurements in a veryshort time window. Although Common Spatial Pattern (CSP) and itsvariants are popular and extensively used in BCI, it does not consider thetemporal structure of the signal that results in loss of temporal infor-mation (time-related information)[77]. Thus, sophisticated time series modeling techniques are required that consider temporal dynamics.There has been some research[28,36,38]in recent years that has considered temporal dynamics and improved the classi ﬁcation accuracy to some extent. The author in Ref.[38]proposed a parallel MLP and CNN architecture where MLP uses log energy based features and CNN uses atemporal representation of selective EEG channels from FBCSP algo-rithm. The combination of architecture used by the author resulted in asmall and consistent increase in all subjects. The author has suggestedresearch directions in preprocessing of data, optimization of hyper-parameter in parameter selection and in proposing a modi ﬁed architec- ture that should be based on the combination of static and dynamicenergy features.The author in Ref.[28]presents an algorithm for determining fea-tures that used a combination of temporal, spectral and spatial infor-mation. The proposed algorithm is a four-phase method based on thestatic selection of subject-speciﬁc information to reduce classiﬁcation error. The authors suggested that automatic subject selection andmultivariate feature selection methods might be used further to enhancethe accuracy of the system.Owing to the efﬁciency of CSP for binary classiﬁcation, it has been extensively used in brain computer interfaces to overcome the limitationof the subject-speciﬁc frequency band. However, the performance of CSPand its variants in multiclass classiﬁcation remain an open challenge dueto the dramatic increase in the number of feature subsets in MI tasks.7.2. ClassiﬁcationThe challenges related to classiﬁcation have been discussed in threearticles where Na Lu et al.
[24]suggested that the classiﬁcation algo- rithms available needed large computation and are unsuitable for online
Fig. 9.Linear and non-linear support vector machine.
Fig. 10.Convolutional neural network.
Table 3Comparison of classiﬁcation algorithms used for MI BCI.
Technique Advantages LimitationsLinearDiscriminantAnalysis (LDA)/C15LDA has low computationalrequirement./C15It is Simple to use.It is not suitable forcomplex non-linear EEGdata. Support VectorMachine (SVM)/C15SVM has better generalisationproperties./C15It is insensitive to curse todimensionality.It is not suitable forhandling dynamic natureof signal.Neural Networks(NN)NN provides reasonable tradeoffbetween accuracy and speed. Weights have to be chosencarefully. Deep NeuralNetworks(DNN)It is able to learn discriminatfeatures and classiﬁersimultaneously from raw EEGdata.DNN has largecomputational complexityfor training and testing.S. Aggarwal, N. Chugh Array 1-2 (2019) 100003
8Table 4Summary of literature studied in MI BCI.
Paper Title Year Feature Extraction techniqueEEG Features Class Motor Imagery Classi ﬁcation Dataset AccuracyEvolving Spatial andFrequency SelectionFilters for Brain-Computer Interfaces[32]2010 CSP Frequency based 3 Left hand, Right hand and generation ofwordsSVM BCI-IIIcompetitionEvolved Filters-Subject1- 77.96%,Subject2-75.11%,Subject-3 57.76%EEG feature comparisonand classiﬁcation ofsimple and compoundlimb motor imagery[71]2013 CSP Band Power 7 Compound(both hands, left handþright foot, right handþleft foot), rest stateSVM Author Prepared 70%
A Novel ClassiﬁcationMethod for MotorImagery Based onBrain-ComputerInterface[26]2014 CSP Spatial features 2 Left and Right Motor ImageryLDA Author prepared 91.25
Increase performance offour-class classiﬁcationfor Motor-Imagerybased Brain-ComputerInterface[29]2014 CSP ERD/ERS 4 Left hand, right hand, foot and tongueLDA, QDA,SVMBCI competition2008 (Graz dataset 2A)LDA- 78.82%
Neural Network-basedThree-Class MotorImagery ClassiﬁcationUsing Time-DomainFeatures for BCIApplications[33]2014 Root mean Squareand integratedEEGTime domain 3 Left hand, right hand and tongueNeuralnetworkAuthor Prepared MLP RMS-82.50%,IEEG- 81.07%RBF RMS- 84.94%,IEEG- 81.52%Parallel Convolutional-Linear Neural NetworkFor Motor ImageryClassiﬁcation[36]2015 FBCSP Energy based 4 Left hand, right hand, feet and tongueCNN BCI competitionIV dataset 2A70.60%
On the Use ofConvolutional NeuralNetworks andAugmented CSPFeatures for Multi-classMotor Imagery of EEGSignals Classiﬁcation[58]2015 Augemented CSP Frequency based Multi classLeft hand, right hand,both feet and tongueCNN BCI competitionIV dataset 2AComplementaryfeature map selectionscheme–68.45%, Fullmap scheme–69.27%
A Multi-labelClassiﬁcation Methodfor Detection ofCombined MotorImageries[72]2015 CSP Band Power 4 Rest, right hand, left
hand and both handsLDA Author Prepared 51.67%
A Deep Learning Schemefor Motor ImageryClassiﬁcation based onRestricted BoltzmannMachines[24]2016 Fast FourierTransform andwavelet packetdecompositionFrequencydomain features2 Left and Right motorimageryDeep NeuralNetworkBCI competitionIV data set 2BNot Provided
EEG Feature Extractionand Classiﬁcation inMulticlass MultiuserMotor Imagery BrainComputer Interfaceusing BayesianNetwork and ANN[22]2017 WaveletdecompositionSensorimotorrhythmsMulticlassRest state, leftﬁst,bothﬁsts, rightﬁst,both feet movementNeuralnetworkPhysionet datasetrecord93.05%
A Deep LearningApproach for MotorImagery EEG SignalClassiﬁcation[68]2017 Common SpatialPatternVariance basedCSP features2 Left and Right hand Deep Neural NetworkBCI competitionIII dataset 4ANot Provided
A Convolution NeuralNetworks Scheme forClassiﬁcation of MotorImagery EEG based onWavelet Time-Frequency Image[23]2018 ContinousWavelettransformTime -frequencyRepresentations2 Left and Right hand CNN BCI competition IV dataset 2BMorlet- 78.93%,Bump-77.25%
Deep ConvolutionalNeural Network forDecoding MotorImagery based BrainComputer Interface[35]2017 STFT Time -frequency Representations2 Left and Right hand CNN Author Prepared CNN(RELU)- 86.74%, CNN(ELU)–88.92,CNN(SELU)- 92.73%
Classiﬁcation of MotorImagery for Ear-EEG2018 CSP Log variance features2 Motorþear RLDA Dataset 1: Author prepared, DatasetDataset 1: 77.71%,Dataset 2: 74.28%(
continued on next page)S. Aggarwal, N. Chugh Array 1-2 (2019) 100003
9processing. Thus, there is a need to test and validate classi ﬁcation algo- rithms online as they are computationally ef ﬁcient and can be used in real time. Further, in order to provide a reasonable tradeoff betweenaccuracy and efﬁciency, robust classiﬁers have to be developed that can be easily used online and are able to work with non-stationary dataefﬁciently. Furthermore, the authors in Refs. [19,74]suggested a new generation of classiﬁcation methods considering the user in the loop hasto be developed to ensure efﬁcient brain computer interfaces.7.3. Hardware and BCI functioningChih-Yu Chen et al.[26]proposed a novel classiﬁcation method that has used CSP for feature extraction and LDA for classi ﬁcation to solve the misclassifying problem. The proposed method is ef ﬁcient and has high accuracy. The author also suggested having algorithm-device integrationto make the system more efﬁcient and practicable.In traditional methods of signal processing, feature extraction andclassiﬁcation was performed separately which associates heavy compu-tational burden. The concept of neural network combines the featureextraction and classiﬁcation in one pipeline and has been explored forbinary classiﬁcation[24]. However, the use of neural network is suc-cessful in binary classiﬁcation but increases the calibration time in BCI[38]. The author suggested adopting transfer learning and domainadaptation to have calibration free BCIs. Moreover pipelining in multi-class classiﬁcation is still a challenge[29].7.4. Data collection and modalityDeep architectures have been successful in computer vision and otherﬁelds due to their high learning capacity and being trained on the hugeamount of data. In EEG-based BCI researches, gathering subject-speci ﬁc data and capturing non-stationary nature is a hindrance to classi ﬁca- tion accuracy of MI tasks[36].Other challenges could be signal modality [36]and lack of training data[36]that hinders the development of efﬁcient brain computer interfaces.The above-stated challenges can be explored in different domains,which are machine learning, signal processing, and hardware speci ﬁca- tions. Correlation between reported challenges in Table 4and the pro- spective research domains have been represented by Fig. 11.Table 4(continued)
Paper Title Year Feature Extraction techniqueEEG Features Class Motor Imagery Classi ﬁcation Dataset Accuracybased Brain-ComputerInterface[73] 2: BCICompetition IIIdataset 4A Learning TemporalInformation for Brain-Computer InterfaceUsing ConvolutionalNeural Networks[38]2018 FBCSP Temporal 4 Left, right, feet and tongueCNN BCI competitionIV dataset 2A74.46%
Deep Recurrent Spatio-Temporal NeuralNetwork for MotorImagery based BCI[37]2018 Recurrent CNN Spatial and temporalfeatures4 Left hand, right hand,feet and tongueRecurrentCNNBCI CompetitionIV dataset 2A45%
Table 5Performance Comparison of Common Spatial Pattern and Wavelet Transform on different Classi ﬁers.
Paper Title Feature ExtractionClassiﬁcation Dataset AccuracyEvolving Spatial and Frequency Selection Filters for Brain-ComputerInterfaces[32] CSP SVM BCI-III competitionEvolved Filters- Subject1- 77.96%, Subject2-75.11%, Subject-3 57.76% Classiﬁcation of Motor Imagery for Ear-EEG based Brain-ComputerInterface[70] CSP RLDA BCI-III competition74.28%A Deep Learning Approach for Motor Imagery EEG SignalClassiﬁcation[65] CSP DNN BCI-III competitionPercentage Error- 10%A Motor Imagery BCI Experiment using Wavelet Analysis and SpatialPatterns Feature Extraction[74] WT LDA BCI III CompetitionMisClassiﬁcation Rate: 0.1286Enhancing EEG Signals in Brain Computer Interface Using WaveletTransform[75] WT SVM BCI III Competition85.54%Enhancing EEG Signals in Brain Computer Interface Using WaveletTransform[75] WT NN BCI III Competition82.43%Deep Fusion Feature Learning Network for MI-EEG Classi ﬁcation[76]WT CNN BCI III Competition86.20%
Table 6Category wise reported challenges.
Category Challenges PapersFeature Extraction Time series modeling techniques [TSM] [36,70] Automatic selection of subject speci ﬁc characteristics [ASSC] [28]Number of components to be chosen in featureselection [NCC] [29]Classiﬁcation Robust classiﬁers [RC] [33] Classiﬁcation methods considering user in the loop[CM] [21,71] SignalInterpretabilityInterpretability of learned algorithms [ILA] [36]Hardware Algorithm device integration [ADI] [26] Data collection Gathering data for individual subject [GD] [36] BCI functioning Long caliberation time [LCI] [38] Signal processing pipeline in multiclassclassiﬁcation [SPP] [29]Modality High dimensionality of EEG signal [HD] [36] Low signal to noise ratio[SNR]Presence of noise [PON]S. Aggarwal, N. Chugh Array 1-2 (2019) 100003
108. ConclusionThe paper presented the comprehensive comparison of prominentfeature extraction techniques used for EEG based BCI for motor imagerytasks. Currently CSP is the most preferred method of feature extraction.The presented review highlighted the various features like frequencyband, spatialﬁlters, and presence of artifacts in the signal on which theperformance of CSP is highly dependent.This paper also discussed the various classiﬁcation methods currently used for motor imagery BCI. Classiﬁcation methods are detailed by various categories: linear, non-linear, neural network and deep learning.Support vector machine is the commonly used classi ﬁer as it is insensitive to curse of dimensionality. In recent studies, several deep learning ar-chitectures were also used as a classiﬁcation method for motor imagery tasks, among that shallow convolutional neural network is the prominentarchitecture and has outperformed the traditional methods ofclassiﬁcation.Authors have explored the various challenges of different modules ofBCI and these challenges were mapped with the domains of machinelearning, signal processing and hardware speci ﬁcations. Future work related to MI BCI should focus on developing informa-tion extraction techniques that consider the automatic selection of sub-ject relevant temporal information. Additionally, robust classi ﬁers needs to be evolved so as to work with noisy signals and high dimensionalitydata. There is also a need to develop the new generation of classi ﬁcation methods that should consider the user in the loop to provide feedbackfrom which the user can learn; and help to build an accurate and ef ﬁcient BCI system.Declaration of Competing InterestThe authors declare no conﬂict of interest.References[1]Nicolelis MA. Brain–machine interfaces to restore motor function and probe neuralcircuits. Nat Rev Neurosci 2003;4:417 . [2]Wolpaw JR, Birbaumer N, Heetderks WJ, McFarland DJ, Peckham PH, Schalk G,Donchin E, Quatrano LA, Robinson CJ, Vaughan TM. Brain-computer interfacetechnology: a review of theﬁrst international meeting. IEEE Trans Rehabil Eng 2000;8:164–73.[3]Wolpaw JR, McFarland DJ, Neat GW, Forneris CA. An EEG-based brain-computerinterface for cursor control. Electroencephalogr Clin Neurophysiol 1991;78:252 –9. [4]Pfurtscheller G, Neuper C. Event-related synchronization of mu rhythm in the EEGover the cortical hand area in man. Neurosci Lett 1994;174:93 –6. [5]Pfurtscheller G, Neuper C, Flotzinger D, Pregenzer M. EEG-based discriminationbetween imagination of right and left hand movement. Electroencephalogr ClinNeurophysiol 1997;103:642 –51. [6]Piccione F, Giorgi F, Tonin P, Priftis K, Giove S, Silvoni S, Palmas G, Beverina F.P300-based brain computer interface: reliability and performance in healthy andparalysed participants. Clin Neurophysiol 2006;117:531 –7. [7]Chatterjee A, Aggarwal V, Ramos A, Acharya S, Thakor NV. A brain-computerinterface with vibrotactile biofeedback for haptic information. J NeuroEng Rehabil2007;4:40.[8]Kamousi B, Amini AN, He B. Classi ﬁcation of motor imagery by means of cortical current density estimation and Von Neumann entropy. J Neural Eng 2007;4:17 . [9]Birbaumer N. Slow cortical potentials: plasticity, operant control, and behavioraleffects. The Neuroscientist 1999;5:74 –80. [10]Hoffmann U, Vesin JM, Ebrahimi T, Diserens K. An ef ﬁcient P300-based brain–computer interface for disabled subjects. J Neurosci Methods 2008;167:115–25.[11]Middendorf M, McMillan G, Calhoun G, Jones KS. Brain-computer interfaces basedon the steady-state visual-evoked response. IEEE Trans Rehabil Eng 2000;8(2):211–4.[12]Lalor Edmund C, et al. Steady-state VEP-based brain-computer interface control inan immersive 3D gaming environment. EURASIP J. Adv. Signal Process. 2005 2005;19:706906.[13]Hwang HJ, Kwon K, Im CH. Neurofeedback-based motor imagery training forbrain–computer interface (BCI). J Neurosci Methods 2009;179:150 –60. [14]De Vries S, Mulder T. Motor imagery and stroke rehabilitation: a critical discussion.J Rehabil Med 2007;39:5 –13. [15]Mokienko OA, Chernikova LA, Frolov AA, Bobrov PD. Motor imagery and itspractical application. Neurosci Behav Physiol 2014;44:483 –9.
[16]Huang D, Qian K, Fei DY, Jia W, Chen X, Bai O. Electroencephalography (EEG)-based brain–computer interface(BCI): a 2-D virtual wheelchair control based onevent-related desynchronization/synchronization and state control. IEEE TransNeural Syst Rehabil Eng 2012;20:379 –88. [17]Scherer R, Muller GR, Neuper C, Graimann B, Pfurtscheller G. An asynchronouslycontrolled EEG-based virtual keyboard: improvement of the spelling rate. IEEE (InstElectr Electron Eng) Trans Biomed Eng 2004;51:979 –84. [18]Royer AS, Doud AJ, Rose ML, He B. EEG control of a virtual helicopter in 3-dimensional space using intelligent control strategies. IEEE Trans Neural SystRehabil Eng 2010;18:581 –9. [19]LaFleur K, Cassady K, Doud A, Shades K, Rogin E, He B. Quadcopter control inthree-dimensional space using a noninvasive motor imagery-based brain –computer interface. J Neural Eng 2013;10:046003 . [20]Aghaei AS, Mahanta MS, Plataniotis KN. Separable common spatio-spectral patternsfor motor imagery BCI systems. IEEE (Inst Electr Electron Eng) Trans Biomed Eng2016;63:15–29.[21]Pfurtscheller G, Neuper C, Birbaumer N. Human brain-computer interface (BCI). In:Riehle A, Vaadia E, editors. A distributed system for distributed functions; 2005.p. 367–401. Motor Cortex in Voluntary Movements . [22]Sagee GS, Hema S. EEG feature extraction and classi ﬁcation in multiclass multiuser motor imagery brain computer interface using Bayesian Network and ANN,Intelligent Computing, Instrumentation and Control Technologies (ICICICT), 2017International Conference on. IEEE; 2017 . [23]Lee Hyeon Kyu, Choi Young-Seok. A convolution neural networks scheme forclassiﬁcation of motor imagery EEG based on wavelet time-frequecy image,Information Networking (ICOIN), 2018 International Conference on. IEEE; 2018 . [24]Lu N, Li T, Ren X, Miao H. A deep learning scheme for motor imagery classi ﬁcation based on restricted Boltzmann machines. IEEE Trans Neural Syst Rehabil Eng 2017;25:566–76.[25]Al-Fahoum, Amjed S, Al-Fraihat Ausilah A. Methods of EEG signal featuresextraction using linear analysis in frequency and time-frequency domains. ISRNneuroscience2014; 2014. [26]Chen Chih-Yu, et al. A novel classi ﬁcation method for motor imagery based on brain-computer interface, neural networks (IJCNN), 2014 international jointconference on. IEEE; 2014. [27]Gaur Pramod, et al. Empirical mode decomposition based ﬁltering method for classiﬁcation of motor-imagery EEG signals for enhancing brain-computer interface,Neural Networks (IJCNN), 2015 International Joint Conference on. IEEE; 2015 . [28]Kirar JS, Agrawal RK. Relevant feature selection from a combination of spectral-temporal and spatial features for classi ﬁcation of motor imagery EEG. J Med Syst 2018;42:78.[29]Temiyasathit Chivalai. Increase performance of four-class classi ﬁcation for motor- imagery based brain-computer interface. In: Computer, information andtelecommunication systems (CITS), 2014 international conference on. IEEE; 2014 .
[30]Ramoser H, Muller-Gerking J, Pfurtscheller G. Optimal spatial ﬁltering of single trial EEG during imagined hand movement. IEEE Trans Rehabil Eng 2000;8:441 –6.
Fig. 11.Challenges coverage across varied domains. The challenges are TimeSeries Modeling Techniques (TSM), Automatic selection of Subject Speci ﬁc Characteristics (ASSC), Number of Components (NCC), Classi ﬁcation Methods (CM), Interpretability of Learned Algorithms (ILA), Algorithm-Device Integra-tion (ADI), Gathering Data (GD), Long Calibration Time (LCT), Signal ProcessingPipelining (SPP), High Dimensionality of EEG (HD), Signal to Noise Ratio (SNR),Presence of Noise (PON).S. Aggarwal, N. Chugh Array 1-2 (2019) 100003
11[31]Aler Ricardo, Galv/C19an In/C19es M, Valls Jos/C19e M. Transition detection for brain computer interface classiﬁcation. In: International joint conference on biomedical engineeringsystems and technologies. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer; 2009 . [32]Aler Ricardo, Galv/C19an In/C19es M, Valls Jos/C19e M. Evolving spatial and frequency selection ﬁlters for brain-computer interfaces, Evolutionary Computation (CEC), 2010 IEEECongress on. IEEE; 2010. [33]Hamedi M, Salleh SH, Noor AM, Mohammad-Rezazadeh I. Neural network-basedthree-class motor imagery classiﬁcation using time-domain features for BCI applications. Region 10 Symposium. Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia: IEEE; 2014 Apr 14-16.[34]Agarwal SK, Shah S, Kumar R. Classi ﬁcation of mental tasks from EEG data using backtracking search optimization based neural classi ﬁer. Neurocomputing 2015; 166:397–403.[35]Zhang Jin, Yan Chungang, Gong Xiaoliang. Deep convolutional neural network fordecoding motor imagery based brain computer interface, Signal Processing,Communications and Computing (ICSPCC). IEEE International Conference on, IEEE,2017; 2017.[36]Sakhavi Siavash, Guan Cuntai, Yan Shuicheng. Parallel convolutional-linear neuralnetwork for motor imagery classiﬁcation, Signal Processing Conference (EUSIPCO), 2015 23rd European. IEEE; 2015 . [37]Ko Wonjun, et al. Deep recurrent spatio-temporal neural network for motor imagerybased BCI. In: Brain-computer interface (BCI), 2018 6th international conferenceon. IEEE; 2018.[38]Sakhavi Siavash, Guan Cuntai, Yan Shuicheng. Learning temporal information forbrain-computer interface using convolutional neural networks. IEEE Transactionson Neural Networks and Learning Systems; 2018 . [39]Vaid Swati, Singh Preeti, Kaur Chamandeep. EEG signal analysis for BCI interface: areview. In: 2015ﬁfth international conference on advanced computing & communication technologies. IEEE; 2015. p. 143 –7. [40]Lakshmi M Rajya, Prasad TV, Chandra Prakash Dr V. Survey on EEG signalprocessing methods. Int J Adv Res Comput Sci Softw Eng 2014;4(1) . [41]Lotte F, Congedo M, L/C19ecuyer A, Lamarche F, Arnaldi B. A review of classi ﬁcation algorithms for EEG-based brain –computer interfaces. J Neural Eng 2007;4:R1 . [42]Chaudhari Rupal, Galiyawala Hiren J. A review on motor imagery signalclassiﬁcation for BCI. Signal Process Int J(SPIJ) 2017;11(2) . [43]Donoghue JP. Connecting cortex to machines: recent advances in brain interfaces.Nat Neurosci 2002;5:1085.
[44]Serruya Mijail D, et al. Brain-machine interface: instant neural control of amovement signal. Nature 2002;416:141 . [45]Aler R, Galv/C19aN IM, Valls JM. Applying evolution strategies to preprocessing EEGsignals for brain–computer interfaces. Inf Sci 2012;215:53 –66. [46]Suleiman Abdul-Bary Raouf, Toka Abdul-Hameed Fatehi. Features extractiontechniques of EEG signal for BCI applications. Iraq: Faculty of Computer andInformation Engineering Department College of Electronics Engineering, Universityof Mosul; 2007.[47]Chang-Hwan Im, editor. Computational EEG analysis: methods and applications.Springer; 2018.[48] Wavelet transform.https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wavelet_transform/ . [49]Wang Y, Veluvolu KC, Lee M. Time-frequency analysis of band-limited EEG withBMFLC and Kalmanﬁlter for BCI applications. J NeuroEng Rehabil 2013;10:109 . [50]Ting W, Guo-zheng Y, Bang-hua Y, Hong S. EEG feature extraction based on waveletpacket decomposition for brain computer interface. Measurement 2008;41:618 –25. [51]Yang BH, Yan GZ, Yan RG, Wu T. Adaptive subject-based feature extraction inbrain–computer interfaces using wavelet packet best basis decomposition. Med EngPhys 2007;29:48–53.[52]Müller-Gerking J, Pfurtscheller G, Flyvbjerg H. Designing optimal spatial ﬁlters for single-trial EEG classiﬁcation in a movement task. Clin Neurophysiol 1999;110:787–98.[53]Lemm S, Blankertz B, Curio G, Muller KR. Spatio-spectral ﬁlters for improving the classiﬁcation of single trial EEG. IEEE Trans Biomed Eng 2005;52:1541 –8. [54]Dornhege G, Blankertz B, Krauledat M, Losch F, Curio G, Muller KR. Combinedoptimization of spatial and temporal ﬁlters for improving brain-computer interfacing. IEEE Trans Biomed Eng 2006;53:2274 –81. [55]Novi Quadrianto, et al. Sub-band common spatial pattern (SBCSP) for brain-computer interface, Neural Engineering. In: 2007, CNE ’07, 3rd international IEEE/ EMBS conference on. IEEE; 2007 .[56]Ang Kai Keng, et al. Filter bank common spatial pattern (FBCSP) in brain-computerinterface, Neural Networks. In: 2008, IJCNN 2008,(IEEE world congress oncomputational intelligence), IEEE international joint conference on. IEEE; 2008 . [57]Thomas KP, Guan C, Lau CT, Vinod AP, Ang KK. A new discriminative commonspatial pattern method for motor imagery brain –computer interfaces. IEEE (Inst Electr Electron Eng) Trans Biomed Eng 2009;56:2730 –3. [58]Yang Huijuan, et al. On the use of convolutional neural networks and augmentedCSP features for multi-class motor imagery of EEG signals classi ﬁcation. In: Engineering in medicine and biology society (EMBC), 2015 37th annualinternational conference of the IEEE. IEEE; 2015 . [59]Goksu Fikri, Ince N Firat, Tewﬁk Ahmed H. Sparse common spatial patterns in brain computer interface applications, Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP).In: 2011 IEEE international conference on. IEEE; 2011 . [60]Samek W, Vidaurre C, Müller KR, Kawanabe M. Stationary common spatial patternsfor brain–computer interfacing. J Neural Eng 2012;9:026013 . [61]Samek W, Kawanabe M, Müller KR. Divergence-based framework for commonspatial patterns algorithms. IEEE Rev. Biomed. Eng. 2014;7:50 –72. [62]Wu W, Chen Z, Gao X, Li Y, Brown EN, Gao S. Probabilistic common spatial patternsfor multichannel EEG analysis. IEEE Trans Pattern Anal Mach Intell 2015;37:639–53.[63]Islam, Rabiul Md, et al. Classiﬁcation of motor imagery BCI using multiband tangent space mapping. In: Digital signal processing (DSP), 2017 22nd internationalconference on. IEEE; 2017. [64]Mill/C19an JR, Renkens F, Mourino J, Gerstner W. Noninvasive brain-actuated controlof a mobile robot by human EEG. IEEE Trans Biomed Eng 2004;51:1026 –33. [65]Garcia, Gary N., Touradj Ebrahimi, and J-M. Vesin. Support vector EEGclassiﬁcation in the Fourier and time-frequency correlation domains, NeuralEngineering. In: 2003, conference proceedings, ﬁrst international IEEE EMBS conference on. IEEE; 2003. [66] Introduction to support vector machine. 2017. https://medium.com/@LSchultebr aucks/introduction-to-support-vector-machines-9f8161ae2fcb/ . [Accessed 22 September 2017].[67]Niranjani A Naga, Sivachitra M. Motor imagery signal classi ﬁcation using spiking neural network. In: 2017 international conference on intelligent sustainablesystems (ICISS). IEEE; 2017. [68]Kumar Shiu, et al. A deep learning approach for motor imagery EEG signalclassiﬁcation. In: Computer science and engineering (APWC on CSE), 2016 3rd asia-paciﬁc world congress on. IEEE; 2016 . [69]Zhao Yiran, et al. On the improvement of classifying EEG recordings using neuralnetworks, Big Data (Big Data). In: 2017 IEEE international conference on. IEEE;2017.[70]Schirrmeister RT, Springenberg JT, Fiederer LD, Glasstetter M, Eggensperger K,Tangermann M, Hutter F, Burgard W, Ball T. Deep learning with convolutionalneural networks for EEG decoding and visualization. Hum Brain Mapp 2017;38:5391–420.[71]Yi W, Qiu S, Qi H, Zhang L, Wan B, Ming D. EEG feature comparison andclassiﬁcation of simple and compound limb motor imagery. J NeuroEng Rehabil2013;10:106.[72]Lindig-Leon Cecilia, Laurent Bougrain. A multi-label classi ﬁ
cation method for detection of combined motor imageries, Systems, Man, and Cybernetics (SMC). In:2015 IEEE international conference on. IEEE; 2015 . [73]Kim Yong-Jeong, Kwak No-Sang, Lee Seong-Whan. Classi ﬁcation of motor imagery for Ear-EEG based brain-computer interface. In: Brain-computer interface (BCI),2018 6th international conference on. IEEE; 2018 . [74]Carrera-Leon Obed, Manuel Ramirez Juan, Alarcon-Aquino Vicente, Baker Mary,D’Croz-Baron David, Gomez-Gil Pilar. A motor imagery BCI experiment usingwavelet analysis and spatial patterns feature extraction. In: 2012 workshop onengineering applications. IEEE; 2012. p. 1 –6. [75]Mohamed Eltaf Abdalsalam, Yusoff Mohd Zuki B, Nidal Kamel Selman, SaeedMalik Aamir. Enhancing EEG signals in brain computer interface using wavelettransform. Int. J. Inf. Electron. Eng. 2014;4(3) . [76]Yang Jun, Yao Shaowen, Wang Jin. Deep fusion feature learning network for MI-EEG classiﬁcation. IEEE Access 2018;6:79050 –9. [77]Chavarriaga R, Fried-Oken M, Kleih S, Lotte F, Scherer R. Heading for new shores!Overcoming pitfalls in BCI design. Brain Comput. Interfaces 2017;4:60 –73.S. Aggarwal, N. Chugh Array 1-2 (2019) 100003
12