Smart tourism: State of the art and literature review for the last six years
Aristea Kontogianni*, Efthimios Alepis
Department of Informatics, University of Piraeus, Piraeus, Greece
ARTICLE INFO
Keywords:Smart tourismUser modelingPrivacy preservingRecommender systemsIoTBig dataABSTRACT
In the modern era, the tourism sector has grown to be one of the dominant sectors globally while technologycontinues to evolve. These facts have given birth to the “Smart Tourism”concept which can be characterized as a progression from traditional tourism. In order to realize an actual Smart Tourism experience, the proper servicesneed to be delivered to the right user at the right time with the best possible way. During the last six years, therehas been a signiﬁcant amount of research in the Smart Tourism ﬁeld which, to the best of our knowledge, have not yet been presented in a thorough literature review. In this paper, after carefully reviewing a wide number ofpapers, we have managed to identify the most commonly used approaches and basic concepts in the SmartTourism sector and present them in detail along with the papers that focus on them. In this study, “key concepts” include: Privacy Preserving, Context Awareness, Cultural Heritage, Recommender Systems, Social Media, Internetof Things, User Experience, Real Time, User Modeling, Augmented Reality and Big Data. At the same time, majorSmart Tourism challenges are presented so as to lay the foundations for future researches in the ﬁeld.
1. IntroductionThe tourism sector, one of the biggest sectors globally [ 1], is a crucial component of the social and economic activity of a plethora of countriesas it generates job openings and business opportunities [ 2]. The tourism industry steadily increases its growth yearly, with tourist arrivals havingreached the amount of 1.19 billion in 2015, from 528 million in 2005,while it is expected to grow even more than 1.8 billion by 2030.2017statistics indicate that the tourism industry contributed directly thetremendous amount of approximately 2.57 trillion U.S dollars, creatingmillions of jobs worldwide [3]. The realization that the travel industrycan be highly beneﬁcial for a country has led to the demanding need tomake tourism destinations as appealing as possible, both for the lesstraveled and also for the well-established ones.While the tourism industry grows, we are witnessing an era of radicalevolution of software environments that allow access to a plethora oftourist related data. These data may regard accommodation, food andbeverages establishments, cultural heritage points of interest, etc, alongwith reviews, ratings and tourist generated suggestions [ 4]. With such a data explosion, though, choices increase dramatically along with the riskof information overload. Thus, the need to comprehend tourists ’needs and behavior has become even more important so as to improve thewhole tourist experience by offering the proper service to the right user atthe right time. The aforementioned facts have led to the creation of the“Smart Touris”concept, which can be deﬁned as the progression from traditional tourism [5,6].Based on [7], a Smart Tourism Destination has a primary goal to offera smart experience to tourists enhanced by personalization,context-awareness, real-time data and mediation by technologies. Whilea Smart Tourism destination should be an innovative place accessible toall visitors that can experience an improved, more interactive and ofhigher-quality travel, it should also improve residents ’quality of life [6]. When aiming to create a“Smart Tourism”Destination, a number of challenges arise such as how to personalize the content presented to auser [7], which are the most appropriate sources for data collection, howthese data should be extracted ie. implicitly or explicitly, privacy issuesetc. At the same time, technological infrastructures like sensors, cloudcomputing services, smartphones, radio-frequency-identi ﬁcation (RFID) and Wi-Fi could also have a vital role in Smart Tourism development [ 8]. Currently, there are several attempts to offer Smart Tourism services, likerecommender systems that aim at suggesting the most relevant touristattraction based on users’proﬁle [9], location tracking systems that try toassume users’behavior and achieve location-based advertising [ 10], apps that utilize Sensors to help tourists that have limited amount of timeto visit a city [11] etc.In the last six years, there has been a number of research efforts,concepts, challenges and concerns discussed in Smart Tourism relatedpapers. The interest in these sectors continues to grow, as illustrated in
* Corresponding author.E-mail addresses:akontogianni@unipi.gr(A. Kontogianni),talepis@unipi.gr(E. Alepis).
Contents lists available atScienceDirect
Array
journal homepage:www.elsevier.com/journals/array/2590-0056/open-access-journal
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.array.2020.100020Received 7 September 2019; Received in revised form 13 January 2020; Accepted 3 February 2020Available online 13 February 20202590-0056/©2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. This is an open access article under the CC BY license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ ).Array 6 (2020) 100020Fig. 2, and the need to collect all knowledge produced up to this point inthis newly established sector in a single paper arises, so as to offer betterinsight into thisﬁeld and set the ground for further research. In thisliterature review, we take up this challenge and after reviewing a widenumber of papers that focus on the Smart Tourism sector we attempt toidentify the most commonly used approaches/concepts, something that,to the best of our knowledge, is yet to be done. Eleven “key concepts” have been identiﬁed and presented within the scope of this paper.Namely, these concepts are Privacy Preserving, Context Awareness,Cultural Heritage, Recommender Systems, Social Media, Internet ofThings, User Experience, Real Time, User Modeling, Augmented Realityand Big Data, along with a number of researches that offer theoreticalcontribution in the Smart Tourism sector. At the same time, this studyalso illustrates major challenges that need to be faced in this ﬁeld. It comes at no surprise that a sector with research still undergoing has manychallenges that have already emerged and others that are expected to be“discovered”. Thus, it is of great importance for practitioners and re-searchers to have an insight into issues that have already been identi ﬁed in a number of papers so as to either attempt to resolve them, or discoverareas that require further study and even build upon them.2. Criteria for inclusion in the literature reviewThe literature review presented and discussed in this research, isbased on an extensive study of Smart Tourism relevant papers that havebeen published from 2013 to 2019. Our paper research was conductedmainly through DBLP [12], Google Scholar [13], Scopus [14], Academia [15] and ResearchGate [16]. DBLP is a bibliography website that lists allimportant journals, proceedings, conference papers as well as books andthesis on computer science. Starting in 1993 and with more than 4,5
Table 1Smart Tourism literature approaches: 2013 –2019.
ContextAwarenessReco-mmendersystemSocialMediaIoT UserExperienceRealTimeUserModelingAugme-nted RealityBigDataTheore- ticalCondtributionCulturalheritagePrivacypreserving[19]✓✓ ✓[20] ✓✓ [21] ✓✓ ✓ [22] ✓✓ [23] ✓ [24]✓✓ ✓[7] ✓ [25] ✓✓ ✓ [26] ✓ [27]✓✓ ✓ ✓ ✓[11]✓✓ ✓ ✓ ✓[28]✓ ✓ [29]✓✓[30]✓✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓[9] ✓ [31] ✓✓ ✓ [32]✓✓ ✓ ✓ ✓[33]✓ ✓ [34] ✓ [
35] ✓ ✓ [36] ✓ [37]✓✓ ✓ ✓[38]✓✓ ✓ ✓ ✓[39] ✓ [6]✓✓ ✓ ✓[40]✓ ✓ [41] ✓ [42]✓✓ ✓ ✓[43] ✓ [44]✓✓ ✓ ✓[45] ✓✓ ✓ [46] ✓ [47]✓✓ ✓[48] ✓ [49]✓✓ ✓ [4]✓✓ ✓ ✓[8] ✓✓ ✓ [50] ✓ [51]✓ ✓ [52]✓[10] ✓✓ ✓ [53] ✓ [54] ✓ [55
] ✓✓ [1]✓✓[56]✓✓ ✓[2] ✓ ✓ [57]✓✓[5] ✓✓ ✓ [58] ✓ [59] ✓✓ [60] ✓✓ [61]✓✓A. Kontogianni, E. Alepis Array 6 (2020) 100020
2million publications by 2017, its number of publications per year isconstantly increasing as statistics indicate [ 17], with the total number of publications rising to 330.755 in 2018. Google Scholar a freely accessibleweb search engine, released in 2004, contains most peer-reviewed onlineacademic journals, books, conference papers as well as other publica-tions. With its number of publications estimated at 389 million at the endof 2018, it can be considered the worlds ’most comprehensive academic search engine [18].At the same time, researchers that contributed to the writing of theincluded papers are at their majority prominent scientists, renowned intheir scientiﬁc sector. Thus, their work is internationally recognized andused in a plethora of papers. Moreover, another qualitative criterion forinclusion in this literature review is the scienti ﬁc documentation of each paper like the references used in order to support theories and proposedapproaches, as well as already proved methods exploited in researches.With that being said, papers included in this literature review areassumed to be of high quality.3. Smart tourismAfter an extensive research in the scientiﬁc literature regarding the “Smart Tourism”sector we identiﬁed the most widely used approachesand concepts in thisﬁeld in terms of“key-concepts”, as already mentioned. The bar graph illustrated in Fig. 2displays the number of papers reviewed per approach/concept. Nevertheless, it should be notedthat many papers focus on more than one of the concepts mentionedabove. In order to provide a clearer picture of the papers reviewed andthe approaches discussed in each one of them, Table 1has been created.Table 2Literature review: Smart Tourism systems.
Paper System Systems ’Goal Methods used Year[19] iTour a Java-based IoT framework that aims to involve citizens in the tourism development process 2018[21] MuseFy a mobile application which adapts its ’UI and provides personalized assistance to users 2017[24] CURUMIM a tourism recommender system that uses data available on the Facebook social network, in order to offer personalizedrecommendation to its’users and positively surprise themContent Based (CB) and Collaborative Filtering (CF)techniques to discard from the whole set of possibleplaces to recommend2017[11] a mobile app that utilizes Sensors placed in entrances of Points of Interest so as to help tourists that have limited amount of time to visitthe cityThe optimisation problem for recommending theoptimal route to tourists is dealt as a typical TravellingSalesman Problem (TSP)2017[30] TreSight a context-aware recommendation system named that integrates IoT and big data analytics for Smart Tourism and sustainable culturalheritage in the city of Trento, Italy2016[2] Find Tourist Proﬁle detects users ’preferences implicitly, based on the geolocation of socialmedia photos Deep Learning and Fuzzy Logic techniques 2017[38] UTravel a mobile app that utilizes user pro ﬁling in combination with context based data in order to guide individuals to POIs based on their currentlocation as well as their previous evaluations via the collaborativeﬁltering principlesUTA algorithm [62]/K-Means clustering algorithm 2017
[61] HotCity a social context crowdsourcing platform that exploits users ’social geo- tagged data such as likes and check ins as well as their location in orderto highlight popular“spaces“and locals’preferences2017[54] ARTS smartphone based AR Tourism System that deploys 3D scans in order to achieve interaction between urban fabric, cultural heritage tourismand pedagogy.2019[4] Novel Pre-Tourist Experiencemodule used in the Find Trip Platform so as to implicitly gain tourists ’ preferences via social media photos and recommend attractions For tourist classiﬁcation: Convolutional NeuralNetwork and Fuzzy logic/For Tourismrecommendation: collaborativeﬁltering approach2018[32] Madrid Live system that takes into account user ’s preferences in conjunction with some other factors such as location and weather to suggest tourism andleisure activities in MadridThe recommender process is based on a Case-BasedReasoning (CBR) algorithm [ 63]2017
[37] a Smart Tourism Recommendation System that predicts tourist ’real- time context and offers individualized services The proposed algorithm is described in the paper 2018[52] Space-Based TouristRecommendation System a system that makes recommendations based on users with similarinterests context generalization method, collaborative ﬁltering 2014[44] a Smart POI recommendation algorithm that considers tourist preferences as well as location when recommending new places to visit collaborativeﬁltering 2017[44,45]HGRM - Happy GuestRelationship Managementsystema unique platform that offers dynamically formed personalizedexperience between guests and employees 2015[44,55]ToARist a tourism AR application that is based on User-Centered design combination of task analysis, expert guidelines and user-centered evaluation 2017[56] Smart Tourism service mechanism that offers personalized recommendations 2014[47] South Tyrol Suggests recommender system that generates context-aware recommendations from a dataset of 27,000 POIs a method called Largest Deviation is used to measurethe usefulness of a speciﬁc contextual factor 2017[48] BloHosT a framework that allows safe interaction between tourists and stakeholders via a wallet identiﬁer connected with a cryptocurrency server to initiate payments2019[57] app that transmits both real-time location and survey data that aims to capture user experiences, preferences, etc 2017[64] SHCity a mobile application that integrates real-time data and routing algorithms so as to enrich tourism experience genetic algorithms 2018[50] an IoT system that attempts to achieve Smart Tourism management Improved Simulated Annealing algorithm 2019[58] AudioNear a prototype that enriches users ’experience when visiting open urban environments by providing speech-based assistance regarding his/herssurroundings2018A. Kontogianni, E. Alepis Array 6 (2020) 100020
3Moreover, inspired by Ref. [61] and as a number of papers present SmartTourism systems of great interest, that could be an inspiration for re-searchers and practitioners in the Smart Tourism sector, we createdTable 2that focuses on presenting developed systems described inreviewed papers along with their goal, methods used and year published.In this section we attempt to extensively present the aforementionedconcepts, along with papers that refer to them, organized in subsections.3.1. Theoretical contributionContributing to theory and improving it, is both a challenging and animportant task. Theory can aid to the development of science as it offersstructure and cohesion to several research questions [ 55,65]. It helps understanding what factors should be studied, the relation between themas well as how they can be applied to practical situations [ 65]. In the Smart Tourism sector too, there is a number of papers that attempt tooffer theoretical insight.Jasrotia et al. in their research [53] focus on reviewing the existing literature of concepts of both Smart Cities and Smart Tourism destina-tions. Authors in Ref. [39] attempt to offer a deﬁnition for Smart Tourism as well as outline the differences between Smart Tourism and e-tourism.In particular, a quite interesting conclusion which arises from theirresearch is that e-tourism is focused on digital connections like linkingconsumers with businesses, while Smart Tourism is more about linkingthe physical world with the digital one by taking advantage of socialmedia, cloud computing and IoT. An insight on the types of recommendersystems along with a thorough presentation of existing mobile tourismRSs is offered in Ref. [9]. The authors of this paper attempt to classifymobile tourism in terms of architecture, degree of users ’involvement and the criteria that the recommendations are based on. Finally, challenges intheﬁeld are presented, which reveal that this sector is far from beingfully explored and reach maturity. Another theoretical, methodologicaland practical approach regarding Smart Tourism from organization,business and tourist points of view is presented in Ref. [ 34] where 11 papers that include research in the Smart Tourism ﬁeld are presented. Authors in Ref. [41] suggest an innovative, more artistic point of viewfor Smart Tourism. Their approach is based on a concept they name“Creative Computing”. Another introduced concept named “service-- dominant logic”which can be used as an alternative approach of un-derstanding Smart Tourism development implications, is presented inRef. [43]. The authors invite readers to consider three perspectives whenit comes to creating a Smart Tourism destination: the transformation oftourist experience, the development of a two-way communication strat-egy and the competitiveness of a destination. Buhalis et al. [ 26], attempt to identify both opportunities and challenges in the Smart TourismDestinations sector as well as how it affects various stakeholders gov-ernments, tourist organizations, tourists etc. Realizing that blockchaintechnologies could highly affect the Smart Tourism sector, Calvaresi et al.in their paper [59] provide a systematic scientiﬁc literature review of researches that involve blockchain in tourism systems. In this reviewboth theoretical contributions and practical implementations of block-chain in the Smart Tourism sector are analyzed along with a discussion offuture challenges. Concluding,Table 1illustrates all papers that contribute to Smart Tourism theory.3.2. Context awarenessA concept highly studied when referring to Smart Tourism is “Context Awareness”
, as illustrated inFig. 2. In an era of technological explosion,humans seem to tend to develop a tight “bond”between them and their smartphones with the number of actual interactions with these devicesbeing calculated in terms of tens per hour [ 66]. It would not be an exaggeration to say that these portable devices have become some kind of“wearable”, accompanying users almost everywhere and at any time, incontradiction to personal computers or laptops. Thus when travelling,these powerful ultramobile devices that contain a plethora of sensors, areconstantly in the users’context. In the Smart Tourism area of interest, weare focusing on the aforementioned sensors that offer an interactionbetween the smartphone and the environment and consequently contextawareness [67]. As an example, extracted data could include currentdate, time and month, location, environmental temperature as well asusers’speed. As context plays a crucial role on user preferences [ 68], the aforementioned data is quite important in order to offer personalizedservices in a Smart Tourism system. Contextual information impact indecision-making processes in a wide number of domains along with thetourism one is already recognized by researchers [ 32]. In the present literature review a wide number of systems that focuson context awareness are included, such as a context-aware recom-mender system named Madrid Live [ 32] and HotCity [61]. A user-centered service mechanism based on context awareness is pre-sented in Ref. [56]. The structure of the proposed Smart Tourism systemis composed of data deriving from human input and sensors, the platformthat offers high data processing ability and compatibility that can besupported by cloud computing andﬁnally the Service that adapts to tourist needs. Another context-aware recommender system that makesuse of user contextual information so as to also generate the personalizedrecommendations that shall enrich user experience is presented inRef. [47]. Based on the fact that only appropriate contextual factorsshould be taken into account in a recommender app, authors in Ref. [ 47] propose a method that predicts the contextual factors that affect userswhen rating an item so as to use the aforementioned factor in therecommendation process and thus result in more accuraterecommendations.3.3. Recommender systemsDecision and recommendation making in the era of Big Data canprove to be a challenging task. In some cases there is too much data toprocess, in others sufﬁcient knowledge regarding the alternatives is notavailable, while there are cases when even time and place is not thesuitable one for the right decisions to thrive [ 47]. Personalized infor- mationﬁltering and decision support tools that aim at suggesting relativeitems to users [32], namely recommender systems, pose a solution to theaforementioned issues [69]. Recommendations in such systems can beproduced via a substantial number of techniques, that can be classi ﬁed to four major classes based on [70] collaborativeﬁltering, content-based, knowledge-based and hybrid ones [47].In the tourism sector, recommender systems have been widelyexploited resulting in apps that offer personalized guides to tourists [ 6,9, 47]. Suggestions in tourism recommendation tools can be produced viaﬁltering information, services, products [ 71], contextual data, such as time, location, budget, weather conditions [ 32] and an enormous dataset of options, locations, cultural heritages points of interest, hotels, attrac-tion, etc. so as to cover users’interest, preferences and needs [6,71]. With such diversity in tourists’proﬁles and services available it can transformthe recommendation process to a quite challenging one [ 6], a fact that enables a great number of researches to propose viable solutions.Authors in Ref. [32] propose a context-aware recommender systemthey name Madrid Live, that takes into account users ’preferences in conjunction with some other factors such as location and weather tosuggest tourism and leisure activities in Madrid. In particular, the systemrecommends plans as a timetable that consist of a collection of activities.Each plan performed by a user is stored and proposed to other users withsimilar preferences. The contextual information that affect the recom-mendations are time, location, weather, users ’budget and if they wish to use public transport. As contextual information may contradict users ’ preferences resulting in a plan that does not suit his/her wishes, analternative plan is proposed with an explanation as to what context re-strictions occur in the aforementioned plan. Another recommender sys-tem that makes use of uses tourists ’context is presented in Ref. [52]. Smirnov et al., in this research present a Smart space-based Touristrecommendation mobile application that is able to recommend andA. Kontogianni, E. Alepis Array 6 (2020) 100020
4provide access to tourist Points of Interest as well as suggest the appro-priate transportation means for reaching them. The system exploits users ’ context (location, weather, etc), proﬁle (trip length, interaction mode, etc.) and a collaborativeﬁltering method so as to make recommendationsbased on users with similar interests.Khallouki H. et al. [37] suggest another approach that attempts tointegrate context awareness in a mobile tourism recommender system. Soas to provide the appropriate services via predicting tourists ’real-time context, a combination of Internet of Things technologies with seman-tic web ones is made. An app based on a Smart POI (Point of Interaction)recommendation algorithm that takes into account both the geographicallocation and user preferences so as to make suggestions to its ’tourists is presented in Ref. [44]. Two versions of the algorithm are set to bedeveloped, one that takes into account only user preferences and anextended one that considers the geographical in ﬂuence too for the recommendation process.3.4. Social media in smart tourism“Six Degrees”, created in 1997, is considered to be the ﬁrst social media site that offered users the ability to upload a pro ﬁle and add friends. Since then, a number of social networks have emerged with theiruse, nowadays, being the most favoured activity online, as web traf ﬁc reports indicate [72]. In particular, as also depicted in number statistics,the monthly active users of social media shall reach by 2021 the titanicamount of 3.02 billion [73]. As more and more users tend to be active in aplethora of social networks, like professional, photo sharing and travel-ling ones, more and more practitioners and academics are allured by theresources these networks offer. With that being said, it comes as nosurprise that a substantial number of researches has been published thatcombine Smart Tourism with social networks as illustrated in Table 1and Fig. 1.Social media channels store a big amount of data regarding their usersboth via the proﬁles directlyﬁlled by them, as well as information that isgenerated from their interaction with the social network media channelssuch as uploading images, making reviews and checking into locations.Raw data of such size can be fairly considered as valuable resources foruser modeling. For example, a tourism recommender system that exploitsdata available on the Facebook social network, in order to offer person-alized recommendation to its ’users and positively surprise them is pre-sented in Ref. [24]. Authors in Ref. [4], aim to propose a new module that detects tourists’preferences implicitly, based on social media photos andpersonalizes its recommendations of tourism attractions. Initially, amicro service architecture is presented that gathers and processes a bigamount of photos that derive from Facebook, Instagram and Google Plus,depending on users’choice. This process consists of two steps, namelyusers’login using one of the aforementioned social networks and thecollection of his/hers photos via a web interface component that utilizesthe permissions given through the authentication process. Thereafter, anapproach is presented that exploits Deep Learning and Fuzzy Logictechniques to determine users ’preferences from photos and classify themto the following categories: Historical/Cultural; Adventure; Urban;Shopping; and Landscape. The last module is a tourism recommendersystem that matches tourists’
proﬁles with the more suitable attractions.The experimental results indicate that at least 90% of the attractionsprovided by the system can be considered relevant for each tourist,proving the feasibility of this research.Another undeniable fact is that social networking services websiteslike Facebook, Instagram and Twitter can offer users the ability to bothacquire and share, in real-time, a plethora of data [ 28]. Based on the fact that users have real-time access on travel information like reviews, rat-ings, etc. that derive for smartphone social networking services, authorsin Ref. [28] attempt to explore mobile users ’trust regarding this infor- mation. Another attempt to exploit a social media channel, namelyFacebook, for Smart Tourism purposes are presented in Ref. [ 51]. This paper focuses on the ways that local Korean governments utilize socialnetworking sites in order to promote tourism. Another contribution ofthis work is the theoretical and practical implications of the SmartTourism sector. Based on Twitter data, authors in Ref. [ 1] focus on spatial analysis and text mining in order to reveal how social networks canprovide a platform to develop smart services for urban tourism. Theyhave exploited a dataset containing more than 600,000 tweets for the cityof San Francisco, where each one of them contains text, geographicallocation, the user who posted it, as well as other supplementary infor-mation like images and videos. By analyzing the aforementioned data,the paper’s authotrs provide evidence that information contained in so-cial media data offers awareness regarding the presence, the engagementwith the environment and topical engagement of users across the SanFrancisco. Apart from the contribution in the tourism sector under-standing where beneﬁts arise for businesses, governments and tourists,these dynamics are crucial in a Smart City scenario too and offer solutionsthat do not requireﬁnancial investment and can improve urban life. Lastbut not least, a paper that attempts to spot cultural heritage resourcesfrom geotagged social media is presented in Ref. [ 49].3.5. Internet of ThingsA concept that could add another dimension to Smart Tourism is theInternet of Things. Internet of Things (IoT) was ﬁrstly brought into ex- istence by Kevin Ashton (MIT) in 1999 and was de ﬁned as an intercon- nection among devices anytime and in anyplace [ 76],[102]. In other words, IoT is the network of physical objects that incorporate the tech-nology required which allows them to communicate with each other andsense or interact with their internal state, or with the external environ-ment [74]. In an IoT world, real-time interactions between physical ob-jects and users leverage the gap between the real and digital world [ 9], [21] With statistics indicating that IoT will consist of almost 75 billioninterconnected devices by 2025 [75], an evolution in a plethora of sec- tors like manufacturing, smart grids, security, healthcare, education aswell as the tourism sector is highly expected [ 76]. When it comes to tourism, IoT can enable the creation of smarttechnological environments that connect their physical and digital in-frastructures. This shall allow systems to be able to identify tourists ’ context in a pervasive but not intrusive way and attend to their needs.With that being said and based on the fact that sensors integrated intourist attraction may offer location based assistance to users [ 5], authors in Ref. [11] propose an IoT architecture for a sustainable tourism appwhere sensors are utilized in Points of Interest. In particular, this scenariofocuses on tourists that have limited amount of time to visit the city of
Fig. 1.Number of Papers focusing in each investigated category.A. Kontogianni, E. Alepis Array 6 (2020) 100020
5Cagliari in Sardinia Italy and in order to do so they specify the Points ofinterest they wish to see via a mobile app. These authors ’approach at- tempts to resolve two factors that may cause delay when visiting alocation, namely choosing the wrong transportation, or face delays due tolong queues. The aforementioned sensors placed in entrances of Points ofInterest measure queue waiting in combination with speci ﬁc timestamps during the day. This estimation along with required time to access alocation are used to recommend the best route so as to visit all points ofinterest to tourists. Authors also deal with the underlying optimisationproblem, as a typical Travelling Salesman problem. Further contributionis made in their work as key requirements for an IoT platform in a SmartCity environment are set, that speciﬁcally are Security Requirements, Flexibility and Data Requirements.Moreover,ﬁrmly supporting that IoT can be used so as to overcometourism issues, Tripathy et al. [19] introduce a Java-based IoT frameworknamed iTour, which aims to involve citizens in the tourism developmentprocess. With the help of a smart map, tourists have the ability to spotinformation about hotels, points of interests, volunteers as well as traf ﬁc and on-road police and request assistance. At the same time, the iTourmanager, tourism department, home department, and other governmentofﬁcials are able to view all the resources on the city map in real-time andmeasure their effectiveness.As wearable devices like bracelets, watches and glasses can signi ﬁ- cantly affect tourists’interaction with their surroundings [35] it comes at no surprise that Atembe in his research [ 35] seeks to conceptualize the use of wearable devices in the tourism sector and determine how theaforementioned devices could affect tourism behavior. Tussyadiah et al.support that wearable devices are able to extend the way tourists sense,comprehend, orientate and interact with tourism attractions when nav-igation in a destination of touristic interest [ 25]. A system that makes use of wearable bracelets in a tourism scenario isproposed in Ref. [30]. In particular, a case study is presented of acontext-aware recommendation system named TreSight that integratesIoT and big data analytics for Smart Tourism and sustainable culturalheritage in the city of Trento, Italy. The aforementioned system gathersdynamic data from real-time monitoring of weather stations, wearablebracelets and hotspots that offer data about availability in the places,how crowded they are as well as opening and closing hours. All dynamicdata will be exploited by a mobile app that will “communicate”with thebracelet and make recommendations to tourists, offer promotions andpresent valuable information about Points of Interest. Another IoT systemthat relies on wearables is proposed in Ref. [ 50]. This system takes into account 3D topographic differences in order to integrate Smart Tourismmanagement. The aforementioned system deploys wearables and sinknodes in a recreation park that gather data from tourists ’wearable de- vices so as to offer a number of services like interaction with the land-scape, detection of physiological data etc.3.6. User experienceThe user experience (UX) concept is a multidimensional one [ 77] with a wide number of models being proposed in this sector in the lastdecades [32,65,77]. A primary goal in user experience design is to reachand maintain a high degree of user contentment via the usefulness,convenience and joy that derives from human-system interaction thatgoes far beyond basic usability [77]. UX can be considered as the users ’ realization of a system, once interaction with it has taken place that isaffected by three factors: system in question, the user and the context ofuse (ISO 9241
–210, 2010) [28]. User experience in Smart Tourismrelated applications is quite crucial too. Being able to positively affectusers’evaluation of a tourism system and maintain a great enthusiasm forit, may lead to the creation of a long lasting bond with the app in questionas well as recommend it to other potential users [ 28,77]. Based on this fact, the undeniable need arises to thoroughly comprehend travelers ’ needs as well as their way of interaction and communication with others[4] so as to offer personalized services that shall enrich the quality oftheir travel and cultural experience [ 22,31]. To exemplify, so as to enhance visitors ’user experience of a cultural heritage point of interest via personalization, authors in Ref. [ 42] pro- pose a multilayer framework that supports personalization by combiningthe physical and the digital world. The “personalization”term contains three types of system behavior; adaptability so as to adjust to each visitorbased on their preferences, visit motivation and expectations;context-awareness that empowers the sensing of the current state of anenvironment; adaptivity where a system dynamically changes so as toadapt to new circumstances. In particular, they attempt to create a cul-tural spaceﬁlled with smart objects, where each and every one of themcomes with a story which will be presented once conditions are right e.g.
Fig. 2.Papers included in the literature review per year.A. Kontogianni, E. Alepis Array 6 (2020) 100020
6visitors have picked up an object.In the tourism business sector, a potential way of how businessesshould take advantage of smart technologies, enhance tourism experi-ence and increase their competitive advantage is presented in Ref. [ 45]. Based on the fact that smart technologies via personalization may assisttourists to develope their own memorable experiences [ 78], Neuhofer et al. in their research attempt to present how smart mobile technologiescan lead to these personalized experiences in the tourism and hospitalityindustry. A case study of a hotel that exploits a unique platform thatoffers dynamically formed personalized experience between guests andemployees is presented.Another attempt to improve User Experience is presented in Ref. [ 55], where authors aim at resolving the usability problems in an AugmentedReality context. Though AR offers a great potential in the way informa-tion is delivered to users, it also comes with the risk to impose users withdata overload or result in a system with high usability issues [ 54,55]. In order to overcome that issue, authors developed through 4 rounds ofiterative development a tourism AR application named ToARist, which isbased on User-Centered design.3.7. Real TimeWhen discussing about“Smartness”in the tourism sector, beyond the individual technological advances some quite game changing factors arethe interconnection and synchronization of technologies [ 5,48] in com- bination with real-time data [79]. In other words, Smart Tourism can beconsidered to be a technological ecosystem rather than independentsystems where real-time connectedness, synchronization and awarenessof users’context hold a major role [5,7].That being the case, it comes as no surprise that the “real-time”term appears with high frequency in Smart Tourism related literature. Toexemplify, one of the biggest tracking studies in the tourism sector ispresented in Ref. [57], where tourists’movements have been recorded via a mobile and GPS technology in real-time mode. Speci ﬁcally, an app transmits both real-time location and survey data that is provided bytourists in each location and aims to capture their experiences, prefer-ences, etc. Another system based on real-time location is presented inRef. [38] that guides individuals to POIs based on their current locationas well as their previous evaluations. Moreover, authors in Ref. [ 64] present the development of a mobile application that integrates real-timedata and routing algorithms so as to enrich tourism experience whenvisiting the city of Avila, Spain.3.8. User modelingThe“User modeling”concept has been in the epicenter of many re-searches for years now. Three decades ago, twenty ﬁve prominent re- searchers discuss and present the developed user models at that point intime [80], paving the way for future research in the ﬁeld. In the related scientiﬁc literature, the“user modeling”
term is the thorough recording and categorization of the various aspects of users ’behaviors and interests [27,38]. Based on Gao et al. [81] and endorsed in Ref. [38], user proﬁling consists of behavior modeling, where user –devise interaction informa- tion is used to estimate future behavior, interest modeling and intentionmodeling which aims at locating users ’goals. In a Smart Tourism scenario, a quite important task is to offerpersonalized services to the user [27], offering the right information, at the right time, via the right channel [ 27,91]. For personalization pur- poses, a user model is required that can be developed via Feature-based,Content-based and Collaborativeﬁltering or other approaches [31]. What is deﬁnitely required, though, is the collection of individuals ’data and the effective use of them while preserving their privacy. Datacollected regarding users can be harnessed both implicitly and explicitly.Explicit user data are those directly submitted by the individual to thesystem while implicit user data can be gathered from a wide number ofsources like sensors, social media channels, smart devices etc. It seemsthat collecting data from variable sources regarding individuals and theirenvironment is a one-way path in order to achieve user modeling inadaptive, recommender systems.Many research papers in the Smart Tourism ﬁeld attempt to overcome issues that may arise in the aforementioned process, attempting to set theground for deeper research in user modeling in the Smart Tourism ﬁeld. Authors in Ref. [21] developed a mobile application that goes by thename MuseFy, which uses a double stereotype system for achieving usermodeling so as to adapt its UI and provide personalized assistance tousers. Moreover, the main objective of [ 27] is to present how user modeling could be accomplished in a Smart Tourism application scenariovia data originating from users ’social networks, as well as data collectedfrom their smartphones implicitly, requiring no user interaction.Amoretti et al. in Ref. [38] present a mobile app namely UTravel, whereuser proﬁling in combination with context based data are exploited in therecommendation production. The application in question guides in-dividuals to POIs based on their current location as well as their previousevaluations via the collaborativeﬁltering principles.3.9. Augmented realityAugmented reality is a concept that actually exists for over ﬁve de- cades now and refers to the “augmentation”of the real-world with computer-generated data, such as video, audio, graphics, GPS data aswell as other multimedia formats via the camera/speaker of a computer,smartphone or other devices [82]. In this way, AR can enrich ones ’ perception of a real world environment and his/her surroundings withvirtual objects [83]. In a typical AR system the user points their devicetowards an object and they are able to see/hear additional virtual in-formation superimposed on the real word [ 84]. As AR systems can assist tourism roaming in unknown environments and enhance the wholetouristic experience via an entertaining way of accessing additionalvaluable information [82], a number of mobile AR applications haveemerged in this sector. For example authors in Ref. [ 23] aim at creating location adaptive augmented reality application in the tourism context.In Ref. [54] a smartphone based Augmented Reality Tourism System ispresented that exploits 3D scans so as to offer interaction between urbanfabric, cultural heritage tourism and pedagogy. Ilhan et al. in their study[20] attempt to identify the potentials of AR systems in the tourism in-dustry as well as present a number of challenges for these systems.Moreover, authors present how AR could be utilized in the tourismmarketing industry and more speciﬁcally in museums, hotels, restaurantsas well as in the transportation sector.A highly promising concept in the augmented reality ﬁeld and the Smart Tourism sector in general is the one of image based localization.Image-based localization methods attempt to calculate the position fromwhich an image is taken, in terms of both location and orientation [ 85]. As these methods can be exploited in a plethora of application such astourism guides, robotics, augmented reality etc., they draw increasingattention [87,95]. Authors in Ref. [86], having located this academic and industrial interest, present an overview of image-based camera locali-zation approaches. Moreover, authors in Ref. [ 87], attempt to develop a faster localization method that could increase the performance ofaugmented reality applications as well as real-time navigation ones,amongst others that ultimately could facilitate the development of SmartTourism systems.Augmented reality offers a great potential in the way information isdelivered to users, but is also accompanied by the risk to impose userswith data overload, or result in systems with high usability issues [ 54, 55]. Aiming to resolve the usability problems in the AR context, theauthors of [55] developed through 4 rounds of iterative development atourism AR application named ToARist which is based on User-Centereddesign. Individuals taking part in the development of the aforementionedapp remarked it as simple and useable, nevertheless challenges still existthat need to be faced.Aiming to overcome the disadvantage of visual AR applications thatA. Kontogianni, E. Alepis Array 6 (2020) 100020
7may cause disorientation to users when both observing the environmentand interacting with the device [88], the authors of [58] present how audio augmented reality systems could be integrated in an urban SmartTourism scenario. In particular, a prototype has been developed, namelyAudioNear, which is designed to enrich users ’experience when visiting open urban environments by providing speech-based assistanceregarding his/hers surroundings. More speci ﬁcally, users launch an audio tour guide mobile app which gets their location via GPS and trig-gers an audio track with information regarding a sight that is placedwithin a certain radius.3.10. Big dataIn theﬁrst decade of the 21st century the concept of Big Data sud-denly gained attention [89]. The Big Data term stands for the productiveexploitation of data [90] in units of measure way greater than megabytesand gigabytes [91], with huge variety and velocity, that has a number ofattributes like“too large, too unstructured, and too fast-moving ”[89]. In the Smart Tourism sector, there is a massive size of heterogeneousdata deriving from social networks, apps, sensors, etc. waiting to beproperly mined and exploited [10]. This abundance of free information[5], that derives from users’actions (voluntarily offered, observed orinferred [10]), combined with interconnectivity, analysis, real-timesynchronization and meaningful use of data [ 5,98], has grown to be a fountain for value creation that can lead to the delivery of a smart travelexperience [89]. That being the case, a number of Smart Tourism con-cerned papers focus on Big Data. Particularly, the goal is to determinehow Big Data can be most effectively exploited in the Smart Tourismsector as well as the challenges arise when it comes to big data exploi-tation in the aforementioned sector. Some challenges, for example,would be how to transform a plethora of variables like physical, bio-logical and social into a single meaningful electrical signal [ 30] or how to ensure the preservation of users ’privacy. Indicatively, some studies inthe Big Data and Smart Tourism sector are presented below.Vecchio et al. in Ref. [33] aim to show how Social Big Data can beexploited in Smart Tourism Destinations scenarios. A plethora of studiespresented in this research in combination with a multiple case studymethodology consisted of a number of digital tourism initiatives that takeplace in Apulia Italy, demonstrate how Big Data generated from tourists ’ social media are capable of creating value for STDs and allow organizersto predict tourists’behavior and needs. An exploratory study that at-tempts to predict tourists’response to a certain attraction via open dataanalysis is presented in Ref. [40]. In order to achieve this goal, authorsimplement the random decision forest algorithm approach on dataderiving from tripadvisor.3.11. Cultural heritageWith the Heritage term, we are referring to two major categories,namely both cultural and natural heritage. When referring to culturalheritage elements as tradition, history, language and folklore areincluded [30]. Cultural Heritage and tourism are two concepts highlyconnected, with cultural tourism being a powerful tool for economic andsocial change [
92], leading to a wide number of cultural-based regen-eration policies being developed in several regions [ 93]. When combined with technology, cultural heritage attractions can bedelivered in a new, more engaging, activating and exciting way totourists. An undeniable fact is that for more than two decades now cul-tural heritage is a widely researchedﬁeld in terms of user personalization and once mobile technology appeared, many researchers and practi-tioners focused on how to offer context-aware cultural heritage data toindividuals [94]. Thus, it was a natural consequence a substantial num-ber of Smart Tourism related papers to focus on the cultural heritagesector.Authors in Ref. [49] for example focus on“cultural tourism”and attempt to provide tourist with some useful information related to theirtrip, recommending some famous places around them. In order to ach-ieve that, theyﬁrstly attempt to spot cultural heritage resources ongeotagged social media data based on users ’location and secondly rank them based on the aforementioned user context.3.12. Privacy and data protectionA major challenge in the Smart Tourism sector is de ﬁnitely the preservation of the users’privacy. An undeniable fact that derives fromthe literature review in this research area is that tourist related data likegeographical locations, academic and professional background, interests,preferences, likes, opinions etc. is huge. This data can be voluntarilygiven, observed, gathered from digital data, or even implicitly inferredand mostly concern data of personal nature [ 95]. Even though the aforementioned data can be utilized to offer personalizedtechnology-empowered experiences through smart apps and services,they also come with the risk of building accurate tourist pro ﬁles which inevitably lead to data privacy concerns [ 8,26,66]. Based on [95], pri- vacy objectives can be divided to preserving user anonymity andavoiding the disclosure of private user information. Given the fact that allsystems must comply with the EU General Data Protection Regulation(GDPR), one of the most important changes in data privacy regulation thelast 20 years, a fundamental reshape is expected in how data is handled inthe Smart Tourism too [96].With data lying at the core of all Smart Tourism systems, legal con-sequences of unsuccessful data protection and how potential risks shouldbe avoided are yet to be explored [10]. With that being said, it comes as no surprise that a number of papers focus on the risks of Smart Tourismdestinations privacy and data protection [ 8,8,26]. Masseno et al. in their study [8] present a number of compliance tools that shall enable SmartTourism destination developers meet their data protection obligationssuch as privacy policies, anonymization techniques, data protectionimpact assessment (DPIA), algorithmic transparency and privacycertiﬁcation.A promising technology that can alter the way data is stored andpromote transparency and security is blockchain. Blockchain is one of thelatest technologies with various applications in most sectors and in-dustries likeﬁnance, healthcare, education and of course tourism [ 48, 97]. Based on this fact, a number of papers emerge that aim at eitherhighlighting existing applications of blockchain technology in thetourism industry or at proposing new frameworks that embed blockchainin Smart Tourism systems. For example, authors in Ref. [ 46] identify the importance of crowdsourcing in Smart Tourism systems and point out thesigniﬁcance of maintaining the quality of crowdsourced data. Thus, theypropose the use of blockchain technology so as to insure the trustwor-thiness of the aforementioned data. Aiming to maintain trust betweentravelers, tourism and hospitality stakeholders authors in Ref. [ 48] introduce BloHosT, a framework that offers tourists the ability to safelyinteract with stakeholders via a wallet identi ﬁer connected with a cryptocurrency server to initiate payments. This paper also provides in-sights regarding the signiﬁcance of embedding blockchain technology inSmart Tourism. Blockchain is also the subject of interest for authors inRef. [97] who aim at explaining the blockchain technology as well ashow blockchain/cryptocurrency can be used in the Smart Tourism/Citiessector.4. Smart tourism challengesBased on the presented analysis, there is a plethora of research effortsconducted during the last six years that focus on the Smart Tourismsector. As a result, there is a substantial number of challenges that need tobe addressed. While at the time of writing there is a signi ﬁcant amount of papers that propose systems and application in the Smart Tourism sector,still the evaluation of such systems with a wide number of actual touristsneeds to take place. It is of great importance in this multidimensionalsector, which attracts attention of researchers and practitioners in diverseA. Kontogianni, E. Alepis Array 6 (2020) 100020
8ﬁelds, to have concrete and as much objective as possible results aboutthe effectiveness of such systems. For example, as a number of the pro-posed applications are based on the power of the crowd, it is vital fortheir“survival”to be used from a wide range of individuals. Thereinafter,assessing them so as to verify their acceptance by users is essential.Another example where user evaluation is unavoidable is in systems thatuse social media data. Such systems, in order to be developed need tointegrate APIs that may change frequently, or meet strict regulationsintroduced by several“dynamic”platforms like Facebook. User privacy isanother issue that would be quite interesting to be practically dealt with.Moreover, the implementation of methods and proposed systems with alarge and diverse number of individuals may bring more challenges to thesurface, as well as viable solutions. In this section we present a number ofchallenges that need to be faced in the Smart Tourism ﬁeld, both via theoretical contributions but, mainly, with actual development, distri-bution to tourists and evaluation with more than one methods.A challenge that is highly related to the Smart Tourism ﬁeld is the fact that the data size is constantly increasing. As available information hasreached a point of being overwhelming [ 98], Smart Tourism systems need to successfully perform dataﬁltering and personalization. The goalis to exploit only useful information, get rid of the “noise”that occurs from data abundance [49] and dismiss irrelevant information [ 47]. At the same time, in cases where data is sparse or entirely missing for someusers, Smart Tourism systems must exploit mechanisms so as to still offerthe best possible services [6]. Moreover, a data overload related issue isthat storage should meet certain requirements while, at the same time,systems need to process properly and at a reasonable time, in some casesreal-time, the aforementioned information. It comes as no surprise that,as more and more data is collected, more space is needed in order to storeit and more sophisticated techniques to preserve, process and present it.Taking for example a system that exploits a map interface in order topresent Points of Interest to its users, in case where the number ofavailable points reaches large numbers, the time to load them and pre-sent them to users substantially also increases.Another high concern in the Smart Tourism sector is the preservationof users’privacy. As user modeling and personalization are basic com-ponents of a wide number of Smart Tourism systems, individuals handover data that cover many aspects like basic pro ﬁle information, photo- graphic identiﬁcation, habits, locations etc. At the same time, a numberof applications also automatically extract additional user related data,commonly known as“digital footprints”. As an example, the well-known accommodation reservation platform Airbnb collects pages viewed byusers, searches, location, ip address etc. from a plethora of other existingor proposed systems [99]. This huge chucks of information gathered via aplethora of sources like the ones mentioned above or others such as users ’ smartphones, social media channels, both implicitly and explicitlyinserted ones used to enhance the tourism experience need to be handledextremely carefully so as to preserve user anonymity and privacy ofpersonal information [5,8,26,66,95]. The new EU General Data Protec-tion Regulation (GDPR) makes the aforementioned need even morecompelling, as the way data is handled must meet some very strictstandards [
96]. It is critical to have privacy rules embedded in a systemand keep users fully informed about personal data provided [ 30,57]. Thus, researchers and practitioners need to “cut the Gordian knot”on the sensitive issue of privacy preservation while, at the same time, requireddata for user modeling and personalization is still collected.Another challenge highly connected with the privacy preservationneed mentioned above is that most social networks such as Facebook andInstagram have introduced some quite strict security mechanisms thatmay cause an issue to user data collection that can lead to ef ﬁcient user modeling [27,49]. Thus, researchers in this sector need to be constantlyinformed about the changing rules and follow instructions offered bydifferent social media so as to integrate the related APIs successfully intheir systems.Moreover, a number of applications and proposed services in theSmart Tourism sector require the collaboration and synchronization witha number of devices for sensing, data exchange, as well as connecting tosocial networks, internet and/or a network of things. A challenge heremust be faced so as to have all these heterogeneous devices and datasources work together efﬁciently [30]. Along with that, the rapidly changing technological environments along with the fast changing userattitudes should be considered in order to ensure the success and viabilityof Smart Tourism systems [57].Another issue that should be taken into account when dealing with aSmart Tourism destination is that users need enough both processing andbattery power in their mobile devices so as to use modern Smart Tourismapps, which, e.g., utilize GPS resource consuming components. In orderto offer a solution to this issue and support Smart Tourism, for example,Barcelona offers USB ports for charging mobile phones in bus shelters[100]. Finally, an issue that should be also taken seriously is that someSmart Tourism apps, like ones that include Augmented Reality, mayimpose users with data overload [5,54,55]. The challenge that arises here is to create systems that are worth the effort and time required to interactwith them and enhanced tourism experience [ 5].5. Discussion and conclusionsThe goal of this paper is to present and discuss the existing literaturein the Smart Tourism sector. In particular, this review has focused onresearches published from 2013 to 2019 although papers published at anearlier time were also reviewed. It is our belief that in order to developﬁrm foundations and contribute to the further advancement of a scien-tiﬁc area, a review of relevant literature is essential. A literature reviewleads to locating challenges and areas where further research is required,while uncovers others where no further progress can be accomplished[101]. Inspired by this fact, we attempted to locate the most popularapproaches and concepts in thisﬁeld and present them in detail. Ourreview has provided a quite thorough presentation of the analyzed keyconcepts as well as references to papers that focus on each one of them.Moreover, we focused on locating the major challenges in the SmartTourismﬁeld. After carefully reviewing the existing state of the art andstate of practise in this sector we have identi ﬁed a number of challenges that need to be addressed so as to have the proposed and expected resultsand realize a true Smart Tourism experience. These challenges presentedin Section4in detail along with the aforementioned concepts could be astarting place for researchers that either wish to contribute to this sectoror are already involved in thisﬁeld.The majority of research papers reviewed in this study are illustratedinTable 1which visualizes the approaches used in each one of them,which shall enable readers to locate researches per ﬁeld of interest. Moreover, we gathered all systems presented in papers reviewed inTable 2so as to facilitate readers locate Smart Tourism systems developedor proposed that may be an inspiration for further research. As presentedinFig. 2most papers in the Smart Tourism sector are placed in 2017 and2018. In particular, research papers in 2013 is only the 3.7% of the totalnumber of papers reviewed, while in 2017 and 2018 is 26% and 33.3%additionally, fact that proves that the interest in the Smart Tourism ﬁeld has escalated. At the time of writing, there is a number of attempts to movefrom traditional tourism to the Smart Tourism. Researchers and practi-tioners attempt to take advantage of the constantly emerging technologiesso as to enrich the tourism experience and lay the foundations for furtherdevelopment in this sector. The Smart Tourism ﬁeld, though, could be considered to be still at its infancy. Considering that all these technolo-gies/approaches currently linked with the Smart Tourism sector likeaugmented reality, social media, image recognition, wearables of allkinds, smart vehicles, sensors, big data etc are still under research andconstantly evolving, it would not be an exaggeration to say the SmartTourism sector has a long way to go before being characterized as asaturated researchﬁeld. It is of great importance for further researches intheﬁeld to implement and evaluate with a large scale of users the pro-posed systems so as have concrete results about the effectiveness, theacceptance of such systems, as well as what challenges in practise arise.A. Kontogianni, E. Alepis Array 6 (2020) 100020
9References
[1] Brandt T, Bendler J, Neumann D. Social media analytics and value creation inurban smart tourism ecosystems. Inf Manag 2017;54(6):703 –13.https://doi.org/ 10.1016/j.im.2017.01.004. [2] Figueredo M, Cacho N, Thome A, Cacho A, Lopes F, Araujo M. Using social mediaphotos to identify tourism preferences in smart tourism destination. In: 2017 IEEEinternational conference on big data. Big Data); 2017. p. 4068 –73.https:// doi.org/10.1109/BigData.2017.8258423 . [3] Statista. Travel and tourism total economic contribution worldwide. Available at:https://www.statista.com/topics/962/global-tourism/ . [Accessed 5 August 2019].[4] Figueredo M, Ribeiro JL, Cacho N, Thome A, Cacho A, Lopes F, Araujo V. Fromphotos to travel itinerary: a tourism recommender system for smart tourismdestination. In: Fourth IEEE international conference on big data computingservice and applications. Bamberg, Germany: BigDataService 2018; 2018.p. 85–92.https://doi.org/10.1109/BigDataService.2018.00021 . March 26-29, 2018.[5] Gretzel U, Sigala M, Xiang Z, Koo C. Smart tourism: foundations anddevelopments. Electron Mark 2015b;25(3):179 –88.https://doi.org/10.1007/ s12525-015-0196-8.[6] García LM, Aciar S, Mendoza R, Puello JJ. Smart tourism platform based onmicroservice architecture and recommender services. In: Mobile web andintelligent information systems - 15th international conference, MobiWIS 2018,Barcelona, Spain, august 6-8, 2018, proceedings; 2018. p. 167 –80.https:// doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-97163-6 \__14. 10.1007/978-3-319-97163-6 \_14. [7] Buhalis D, Amaranggana A. Smart tourism destinations enhancing tourismexperience through personalisation of services. In: Information andcommunication technologies in tourism 2015, ENTER 2015, proceedings of theinternational conference in lugano; 2015. p. 377 –89.https://doi.org/10.1007/ 978-3-319-14343-9/__28. 10.1007/978-3-319-14343-9 \_28 Switzerland, February 3 - 6, 2015.[8] Masseno MD, Santos C. Privacy and data protection issues on smart tourismdestinations - aﬁrst approach. In: Intelligent environments 2018 - workshopproceedings of the 14th international conference on intelligent environments,rome, Italy, 25-28 june 2018; 2018. p. 298 –307.https://doi.org/10.3233/978-1- 61499-874-7-298. 10.3233/978-1-61499-874-7-298.[9] Gavalas D, Konstantopoulos C, Mastakas K, Pantziou G. Mobile recommendersystems in tourism. J Netw Comput Appl 2014;39:319 –33.https://doi.org/ 10.1016/j.jnca.2013.04.006.http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/ S1084804513001094.[10]Masseno MD, SANTOS C. Smart tourism destinations privacy risks on dataprotection. Revista Eletr^onica Sapere Aude 2018b;1(1):125 –49. [11] Nitti M, Pilloni V, Giusto DD, Popescu V. Iot architecture for a sustainable tourismapplication in a smart city environment. Mobile Inf Syst 2017. https://doi.org/ 10.1155/2017/9201640. 10.1155/2017/9201640 2017:9201640:1 –9201640:9.
[12] DBLP. Dblp. Available at: https://dblp.uni-trier.de/. [Accessed 1 August 2019]. [13] Scholar G. Googlescholar. Available at: https://scholar.google.gr/. [Accessed 7 August 2019].[14] Scopus. Scopus. Available at: https://www.scopus.com/home.urivisited . [Accessed 7 August 2019].[15] Academia. Academia. Available at: https://www.academia.edu/. [Accessed 7 August 2019].[16] Researchgate. Researchgate. Available at: https://www.researchgate.net/ . [Accessed 7 August 2019].[17] DBLP. Dblp publications per year. Available at: https://dblp.uni-trier.de/statistics /publicationsperyear.html. [Accessed 7 August 2019]. [18] Gusenbauer M. Google scholar to overshadow them all? comparing the sizes of 12academic search engines and bibliographic databases. Scientometrics 2019;118(1):177–214.https://doi.org/10.1007/s11192-018-2958-5 . 10.1007/s11192- 018-2958-5.[19] Tripathy AK, Tripathy PK, Ray NK, Mohanty SP. itour: the future of smart tourism:an iot framework for the independent mobility of tourists in smart cities. IEEEConsumer Electronics Magazine 2018;7(3):32 –7.https://doi.org/10.1109/ MCE.2018.2797758. 10.1109/MCE.2018.2797758.[20] Ilhan I, Çeltek E. Mobile marketing: usage of augmented reality in tourism.Gaziantep University Journal of Social Sciences 2016;15:581 –99.https://doi.org/ 10.21547/jss.256721.[21]Alepis E, Kabassi K, Virvou M. Personalized museum exploration by mobiledevices. In: Auer ME, Tsiatsos T, editors. Interactive mobile communicationtechnologies and learning. Cham: Springer International Publishing; 2018.p. 353–60.[22] Battino S, Balletto G, Borruso G, Donato C. Internal areas and smart tourism.promoting territories in sardinia island. In: Computational science and itsapplications - ICCSA 2018 - 18th international conference, melbourne, VIC,Australia, july 2-5, 2018, proceedings, Part V; 2018. p. 44 –57.https://doi.org/ 10.1007/978-3-319-95174-4 “_4. 10.1007/978-3-319-95174-4 \_4. [23] N/C19obrega R, Jacob J, Coelho A, Ribeiro J, Weber J, Ferreira S. Leveraging pervasivegames for tourism: an augmented reality perspective. Int J Creativ InterfacComput Graph 2018;9(1):1 –14.https://doi.org/10.4018/IJCICG.2018010101 . 10.4018/IJCICG.2018010101.[24] Menk A, Sebastia L, Ferreira R. Curumim: a serendipitous recommender system fortourism based on human curiosity. In: 2017 IEEE 29th international conference ontools with artiﬁcial intelligence. ICTAI); 2017. p. 788 –95.https://doi.org/ 10.1109/ICTAI.2017.00124.[25] Tussyadiah IP, Jung TH, tom Dieck MC. Embodiment of wearable augmentedreality technology in tourism experiences. J Trav Res 2018;57(5):597 –611. https://doi.org/10.1177/0047287517709090 . 10.1177/0047287517709090. [26]Buhalis D, Amaranggana A. Smart tourism destinations. In: Xiang Z, Tussyadiah I,editors. Information and communication technologies in tourism 2014. Cham:Springer International Publishing; 2013. p. 553 –64. [27] Kontogianni A, Kabassi K, Alepis E. Designing a smart tourism mobile application:user modelling through social networks’user implicit data. In: Social informatics - 10th international conference. St. Petersburg, Russia: SocInfo 2018; 2018.p. 148–58.https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01159-8 \__14. 10.1007/978-3- 030-01159-8\_14-September 25-28, 2018 Proceedings, Part II.[28] Chang SE, Shen W. Exploring smartphone social networking services for mobiletourism. IJMC 2018;16(1):63 –81.https://doi.org/10.1504/ IJMC.2018.10007781.[29]Tsai TH, Chang HT, Lin YW, Yu MC, Lien PJ, Yan WC, Ho WL. Emerging socialmedia and social networks analysis transforms the tourism industry: living greensmart tourism ecosystem. In: Antona M, Stephanidis C, editors. Universal access inhuman-computer interaction. Virtual, augmented, and intelligent environments.Cham: Springer International Publishing; 2018. p. 583 –90. [30] Sun Y, Song H, Jara AJ, Bie R. Internet of things and big data analytics for smartand connected communities. IEEE Access 2016;4:766 –73.https://doi.org/ 10.1109/ACCESS.2016.2529723 . [31] Bue AL, Wecker AJ, Kuﬂik T, Machì A, Stock O. Providing personalized culturalheritage information for the smart region - a proposed methodology. In: Posters,demos, late-breaking results and workshop proceedings of the 23rd conference onuser modeling, adaptation, and personalization (UMAP 2015), dublin, Ireland,june 29 - july 3, 2015.; 2015. http://ceur-ws.org/Vol-1388/PEGOV2015-paper2.p df.[32] Jorro-Aragoneses JL, Agudo MBD, García JAR. Madrid live: a context-awarerecomendar system of leisure plans. In: 2017 IEEE 29th international conferenceon tools with artiﬁcial intelligence. ICTAI); 2017. p. 796 –801.https://doi.org/ 10.1109/ICTAI.2017.00125. [33] Vecchio PD, Mele G, Ndou V, Secundo G. Creating value from social big data:implications for smart tourism destinations. Inf Process Manag 2018;54(5):847–60.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ipm.2017.10.006 . 10.1016/ j.ipm.2017.10.006.[34] Koo C, Park J, Lee J. Smart tourism: traveler, business, and organizationalperspectives. Inf Manag 2017;54(6):683 –6.https://doi.org/10.1016/ j.im.2017.04.005. 10.1016/j.im.2017.04.005.[35] Atembe R. The use of smart technology in tourism: evidence from wearabledevices *. J Tourism Hospit Manag 2016;312:224 –34.https://doi.org/10.17265/ 2328-2169/2015.12.002. [36] Fuchs M, H€opken W, Lexhagen M. Big data analytics for knowledge generation intourism destinations–a case from Sweden. J Destination Market Manage 2014;3(4):198–209.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jdmm.2014.08.002 .http://www.scienc edirect.com/science/article/pii/S2212571X14000353 . [37] Khallouki H, Abatal A, Bahaj M. An ontology-based context awareness for smarttourism recommendation system. May 2-5, 2018. In: Proceedings of theinternational conference on learning and optimization algorithms: theory andapplications, LOPAL 2018, rabat, Morocco; 2018. 43:1 –43:5.https://doi.org/ 10.1145/3230905.3230935. , URL http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/
3230905.3230935.[38] Amoretti M, Belli L, Zanichelli F. Utravel: smart mobility with a novel userproﬁling and recommendation approach. Pervasive Mob Comput 2017;38:474–89.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pmcj.2016.08.008 . 10.1016/ j.pmcj.2016.08.008.[39]Gretzel U, Reino S, Kopera S, Koo C. Smart tourism challenges. J Tour 2015a;16(1):41–7.[40] Pantano E, Priporas CV, Stylos N. ‘you will like it!’using open data to predict tourists’response to a tourist attraction. Tourism Manag 2017;60:430 –8.https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.tourman.2016.12.020 .http://www.sciencedirect.com/scienc e/article/pii/S0261517716302680 . [41] Zhang L, Yang H, Zhang C, Li N. A new way of being smart? creative computingand its applications in tourism. In: 2018 IEEE 42nd annual computer software andapplications conference. Tokyo, Japan: COMPSAC 2018; 2018. p. 23 –7.https:// doi.org/10.1109/COMPSAC.2018.10201 . 10.1109/COMPSAC.2018.10201 July 2018, Volume 2, pp. 45 –50. [42] Not E, Petrelli D. Blending customisation, context-awareness and adaptivity forpersonalised tangible interaction in cultural heritage. Int J Hum Comput Stud2018;114:3–19.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhcs.2018.01.001 . 10.1016/ j.ijhcs.2018.01.001.[43] Wang D, Li X, li Y. China ’s“smart tourism destination ”initiative: a taste of the service-dominant logic. Journal of Destination Marketing &Management 2013;2: 59–61.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jdmm.2013.05.004 . [44] Alvarado-Uribe J, G /C19omez-Oliva A, Molina G, Gonz /C19alez-Mendoza M, Parra- Mero~no MC, Jara AJ. Towards the development of a smart tourism applicationbased on smart POI and recommendation algorithms: ceutí as a study case. In:Innovative mobile and internet services in ubiquitous computing - proceedings ofthe 11th international conference on innovative mobile and internet services inubiquitous computing (IMIS-2017), torino, Italy, vols. 10 –12; 2017. p. 904–16. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-61542-4 \__92. July 2017 10.1007/978-3-319- 61542-4\_92.[45] Neuhofer B, Buhalis D, Ladkin A. Smart technologies for personalized experiences:a case study in the hospitality domain. Electron Mark 2015;25(3):243 –54.https:// doi.org/10.1007/s12525-015-0182-1 . 10.1007/s12525-015-0182-1.A. Kontogianni, E. Alepis Array 6 (2020) 100020
10[46] Veloso B, Leal F, Malheiro B, Moreira F. Distributed trust &reputation models using blockchain technologies for tourism crowdsourcing platforms. In: The 10thinternational conference on emerging ubiquitous systems and pervasive networks(EUSPN 2019)/the 9th international conference on current and future trends ofinformation and communication technologies in healthcare (ICTH-2019)/afﬁliated workshops. Coimbra, Portugal; 2019. p. 457 –60.https://doi.org/ 10.1016/j.procs.2019.11.065 . 10.1016/j.procs.2019.11.065 November 4-7, 2019. [47] Braunhofer M, Ricci F. Selective contextual information acquisition in travelrecommender systems. Inf Technol Tourism 2017;17(1):5 –29.https://doi.org/ 10.1007/s40558-017-0075-6 . 10.1007/s40558-017-0075-6. [48] Bodkhe U, Bhattacharya P, Tanwar S, Tyagi S, Kumar N, Obaidat MS. Blohost:blockchain enabled smart tourism and hospitality management. In: 2019international conference on computer, information and telecommunicationsystems. Beijing, China: CITS 2019; 2019. p. 1 –5.https://doi.org/10.1109/ CITS.2019.8862001. August 28-31, 2019-10.1109/CITS.2019.8862001.[49] Nguyen TT, Camacho D, Jung JE. Identifying and ranking cultural heritageresources on geotagged social media for smart cultural tourism services. PersonalUbiquitous Comput 2017;21(2):267 –79.https://doi.org/10.1007/s00779-016- 0992-y. 10.1007/s00779-016-0992-y.[50] Lin C, Liu W, Lu Y. Three-dimensional internet-of-things deployment with optimalmanagement service beneﬁts for smart tourism services in forest recreation parks.IEEE Access 2019;7:182366 –80.https://doi.org/10.1109/ ACCESS.2019.2960212. 10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2960212. [51] Park JH, Lee C, Yoo C, Nam Y. An analysis of the utilization of facebook by localKorean governments for tourism development and the network of smart tourismecosystem. Int J Inf Manag 2016;36(6):1320 –7.https://doi.org/10.1016/ j.ijinfomgt.2016.05.027. 10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2016.05.027. [52]Smirnov A, Kashevnik A, Ponomarev A, Teslya N, Shchekotov M, Balandin SI.Smart space-based tourist recommendation system. In: Balandin S, Andreev S,Koucheryavy Y, editors. Internet of things, smart spaces, and next generationnetworks and systems. Cham: Springer International Publishing; 2014. p. 40 –51. [53]Jasrotia A, Gangotia AD. Smart cities to smart tourism destinations: a reviewpaper. JOURNAL OF TOURISM INTELLIGENCE AND SMARTNESS 2018;1:47 –56. [54] Shih N, Diao P, Chen Y. Arts, an AR tourism system, for the integration of 3dscanning and smartphone AR in cultural heritage tourism and pedagogy. Sensors2019;19(17):3725.https://doi.org/10.3390/s19173725 . 10.3390/s19173725. [55] Williams M, Yao KKK, Nurse JRC. Toarist: an augmented reality tourism appcreated through user-centred design. Proceedings of the 31st British computersociety human computer interaction conference. Swindon, UK: BCS Learning & Development Ltd.; 2017.https://doi.org/10.14236/ewic/HCI2017.1 . 10.14236/ ewic/HCI2017.1 HCI’17, pp 1:1–1:4. [56] Feng WL, Duan YC, Huang MX, Dong LF, Zhou XY, Hu T. A research on smarttourism service mechanism based on context awareness. In: Computer andinformation technology, trans tech publications, applied mechanics and materials.vol. 519; 2014. p. 752–8.https://doi.org/10.4028/www.scienti ﬁc.net/AMM.519- 520.752.[57] Hardy A, Hyslop S, Booth K, Robards B, Aryal J, Gretzel U, Eccleston R. Trackingtourists’travel with smartphone-based gps technology: a methodological
discussion. Inf Technol Tourism 2017;17(3):255 –74.https://doi.org/10.1007/ s40558-017-0086-3. 10.1007/s40558-017-0086-3.[58] Boletsis C, Chasanid D. Smart tourism in cities: exploring urban destinations withaudio augmented reality. In: Proceedings of the 11th PErvasive technologiesrelated to assistive environments conference, PETRA 2018, corfu, Greece, june 26-29, 2018; 2018. p. 515 –21.https://doi.org/10.1145/3197768.3201549 . 10.1145/3197768.3201549.[59] Calvaresi D, Leis M, Dubovitskaya A, Schegg R, Schumacher M. Trust in tourismvia blockchain technology: results from a systematic review. In: I. Nformation andcommunication technologies in tourism 2019, ENTER 2019, proceedings of theinternational conference in nicosia, Cyprus, january, vol. 30; 2019. p. 304 –17. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-05940-8 \__24. . [Accessed 1 February 2019]. 10.1007/978-3-030-05940-8 \_24. [60]Hunter WC, Chung N, Gretzel U, Koo C. Constructivist research in smart tourism.Asia Paciﬁc Journal of Information Systems 2015;25(1):105 –20. [61] Komninos A, Besharat J, Ferreira D, Garofalakis J, Kostakos V. Where ’s everybody? comparing the use of heatmaps to uncover cities ’tacit social context in smartphones and pervasive displays 2017;17(4):399 –427.https://doi.org/ 10.1007/s40558-017-0092-5 . exported from,https://app.dimensions.ai/details/p ublication/pub.1092982117.https://app.dimensions.aion2019/01/25 . [62] Siskos Y, Grigoroudis E, Matsatsinis NF. UTA methods. New York, NY: SpringerNew York; 2005. p. 297 –334.https://doi.org/10.1007/0-387-23081-5 __8. 10.1007/0-387-23081-5_8.[63] Smyth B. Case-based recommendation. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer BerlinHeidelberg; 2007. p. 342 –76.https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-72079-9 __11. 10.1007/978-3-540-72079-9_11.[64] Amorim M, Mar A, Monteiro F, Sylaiou S, Pereira P, Martins J. Smart tourismroutes based on real time data and evolutionary algorithms. In: Digital heritage.Progress in cultural heritage: documentation, preservation, and protection - 7thinternational conference, EuroMed 2018, nicosia, Cyprus, october 29 - november3, 2018, proceedings, Part I; 2018. p. 417 –26.https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3- 030-01762-0\__36. 10.1007/978-3-030-01762-0 \_36. [65]Whetten DA. What constitutes a theoretical contribution? Acad Manag Rev 1989;14(4):490–5.[66] GenZ. The generation z study of tech intimates. Available at: https://www.comm scope.com/Insights/. [Accessed 5 August 2019].[67] Yurur, Liu CH, Sheng Z, Leung VCM, Moreno W, Leung KK. Context-awareness formobile sensing: a survey and future directions. IEEE Communications SurveysTutorials 2016;18(1):68–93.https://doi.org/10.1109/COMST.2014.2381246 . [68] Yang Q. A novel recommendation system based on semantics and contextawareness. Computing 2018;100(8):809 –23.https://doi.org/10.1007/s00607- 018-0627-4. 10.1007/s00607-018-0627-4.[69] Ricci F, Rokach L, Shapira B. Recommender systems: introduction and challenges.Boston, MA: Springer US; 2015. p. 1 –34.https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4899- 7637-6__1. 10.1007/978-1-4899-7637-6_1.[70] Burke R. Hybrid web recommender systems. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer BerlinHeidelberg; 2007. p. 377 –408.https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-72079-9_12 . 10.1007/978-3-540-72079-9_12.[71] Bobadilla J, Ortega F, Hernando A, Guti /C19errez A. Recommender systems survey. Knowl Base Syst 2013;46:109 –32.https://doi.org/10.1016/ j.knosys.2013.03.012.http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0950705113001044.[72] Fan W, Gordon MD. The power of social media analytics. Commun ACM 2014;57(6):74–81.https://doi.org/10.1145/2602574 . http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/ 2602574.[73] Statista. All the facts you need in one place. Available at: https://www.statist a.com/. [Accessed 5 August 2019].[74] Gartner. Gartner says the internet of things installed base will grow to 26 billionunits by 2020. Available at:https://www.gartner.com/newsroom/id/2636073/ . [Accessed 7 August 2019].[75] Statista. Internet of things (iot) connected devices installed base worldwide from2015 to 2025 (in billions). Available at: https://www.statista.com/statistics/ 471264/iot-number-of-connected-devices-worldwide/ . [Accessed 3 August 2019]. [76] Want R, Schilit BN, Jenson S. Enabling the internet of things. Computer 2015;48(1):28–35.https://doi.org/10.1109/MC.2015.12 . [77]Kujala S, Roto V, V€a€an€anen-Vainio-Mattila K, Karapanos E, Sinnel €a A. Ux curve: a method for evaluating long-term user experience. Interact Comput 2011;23(5):473–83.[78] Tung V, Brent Ritchie J. Exploring the essence of memorable tourism experiences.Annals of Tourism Research - ANN TOURISM RES 2011;38:1367 –86.https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.annals.2011.03.009 . [79]Harrison C, Eckman B, Hamilton R, Hartswick P, Kalagnanam J, Paraszczak J,Williams P. Foundations for smarter cities. IBM J Res Dev 2010;54(4):1 –16. [80]Kobsa A, Wahlster W. User models in dialog systems. Springer; 1989 . [81] Gao M, Liu K, Wu Z. Personalisation in web computing and informatics: theories,techniques, applications, and future research. Inf Syst Front 2010;12(5):607 –29.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10796-009-9199-3 . 10.1007/s10796-009-9199-3. [82] Kounavis CD, Kasimati AE, Zamani ED. Enhancing the tourism experience throughmobile augmented reality: challenges and prospects. Int J Eng Bus Manag 2012;4:10.https://doi.org/10.5772/51644 . [83]Fritz F, Susperregui A, Linaza MT. Enhancing cultural tourism experiences withaugmented reality technologies. In: 6th international symposium on virtualreality, archaeology and cultural heritage (VAST). vol. 29; 2005 . [84]Yovcheva Z, Buhalis D, Gatzidis C. Overview of smartphone augmented realityapplications for tourism. In: ICIT 2012; 2012 . [85]Sattler T, Leibe B, Kobbelt L. Towards fast image-based localization on a city-scale.In: Dellaert F, Frahm JM, Pollefeys M, Leal-Taix /C19e L, Rosenhahn B, editors. Outdoor and large-scale real-world scene analysis. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer BerlinHeidelberg; 2012. p. 191 –211. [86] Wu Y, Tang F, Li H. Image-based camera localization: an overview. VisualComputing for Industry, Biomedicine, and Art 2018;1(1):8. https://doi.org/ 10.1186/s42492-018-0008-z. 10.1186/s42492-018-0008-z. [87] Feng Y, Fan L, Wu Y. Fast localization in large-scale environments usingsupervised indexing of binary features. IEEE Trans Image Process 2016;25(1):343–58.https://doi.org/10.1109/TIP.2015.2500030 . [88]Heller F, Borchers J. Audioscope: smartphones as directional microphones inmobile audio augmented reality systems. In: Proceedings of the 33rd annual ACMconference on human factors in computing systems. ACM; 2015. p. 949 –52. [89] Davenport TH. At the big data crossroads: turning towards a smarter travelexperience. Available at:http://amadeusblog.com/wp-content/uploads/Amadeus-Big-Data-Report.pdf. [Accessed 7 August 2019]. [90] Abdar M, Moghadam MZ, Das R, Ting I. Corrigendum to ”performance analysis of classiﬁcation algorithms on early detection of liver disease ”[expert systems with applications volume 67 (2017) 239-251]. Expert Syst Appl 2019;125:442 –3. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2019.02.029 . 10.1016/j.eswa.2019.02.029. [91] International S. Now arriving: big data in the hospitality, travel, and tourismsector. Available at:https://invattur.softvt.com/ﬁcheros/noticias/1231527175 3_2013_SOCAP_Big_Data_HTT.pdf . [Accessed 31 August 2019]. [92] Richards G. Tourism and culture. 2000. p. 165 –78.https://doi.org/10.1007/978- 94-015-9584-110.[93]Graziano T. Boosting innovation and development: the Italian smart tourism, acritical perspective. European Journal of Geography 2014;5(4):6 –18. [94] Ardissono L, Kuﬂik T, Petrelli D. Personalization in cultural heritage: the roadtravelled and the one ahead. User Model User-Adapted Interact 2012;22(1):73 –99. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11257-011-9104-x . 10.1007/s11257-011-9104-x. [95] Habegger B, Hasan O, Brunie L, Bennani N, Kosch H, Damiani E. Personalizationvs. Privacy in big data analysis. Int J Behav Dev 2014:25 –35.https://hal.arch ives-ouvertes.fr/hal-01270826 . [96] EU. Eu gdpr. Available at: https://eugdpr.org/. [Accessed 5 August 2019]. [97] Nam K, Dutt CS, Chathoth P, Khan MS. Blockchain technology for smart city and
smart tourism: latest trends and challenges. Asia Pac J Tourism Res 2019:1 –15.A. Kontogianni, E. Alepis Array 6 (2020) 100020
11https://doi.org/10.1080/10941665.2019.1585376 . 10.1080/ 10941665.2019.1585376 0(0).[98] Smirnov AV, Kashevnik AM, Shilov N, Mikhailov S, Gusikhin O, Martinez H.Intelligent content management system for tourism smart mobility: approach andcloud-based android application. In: Proceedings of the 5th internationalconference on vehicle technology and intelligent transport systems, VEHITS 2019,heraklion, crete, Greece, may 3-5, 2019; 2019. p. 426 –33.https://doi.org/ 10.5220/0007715304260433 . 10.5220/0007715304260433. [99] Newlands G, Lutz C, Fieseler C. Trading on the unknown: scenarios for the futurevalue of data. Law Ethics Hum Right 2019;13:97 –114.https://doi.org/10.1515/ lehr-2019-0004.[100] Lee C, Hsia T, Hsu H, Lin J. Ontology-based tourism recommendation system. In:2017 4th international conference on industrial engineering and applications.ICIEA); 2017. p. 376–9.https://doi.org/10.1109/IEA.2017.7939242 . [101]Webster J, Watson RT. Analyzing the past to prepare for the future: writing aliterature review. MIS quarterly pp xiii –xxiii 2002. [102] Mingjun W, Zhen Y, Wei Z, Xishang D, Xiaofei Y, Chenggang S, Xuhong L, Fang W,Jinghai H. A research on experimental system for internet of things major andapplication project. In: 2012 3rd international conference on system science,engineering design and manufacturing informatization. vol. 1; 2012. p. 261 –3. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICSSEM.2012.6340722 .A. Kontogianni, E. Alepis Array 6 (2020) 100020
12