Study on body temperature detection of pig based on infraredtechnology: A review
Zaiqin Zhang1,H a n gZ h a n g1, Tonghai Liu ⁎
School of Computer and Information Engineering, Tianjin Agricultural University, Tianjin 300384, China
abstract article info
Article history:Received 5 December 2018Received in revised form 28 January 2019Accepted 4 February 2019Available online 29 March 2019Body temperature is an important physiological indicator in the whole process of pig breeding. Temperaturemeasurement is also an effective means to assist in disease diagnosis and pig health monitoring. In the conven-tional method of measuring body temperature, a mercury column is used to obtain the rectal temperature. Theoperation of this method is complicated and requires a large amount of labor. This kind of temperature measure-ment method is contact and can make the pig stressed, which is disadvantageous for the healthy growth of pigs.Therefore, rectal temperature measurement no longer meets the needs of the large-scale pig industry in China'swelfare agriculture. In recent years, the emerging pig body temperature detection technologies are electronictemperature measurement technology, infrared temperature measurement technology and so on. Infrared tem-perature measurement technology has been the main means of measuring the temperature of pig body surfacewith its advantages of non-contact, long distance and real-time. At present, infrared temperature measurementtechnology and infrared image processing technology used in pig breeding are still in the exploration stage. Now-adays, the infrared temperature measurement equipment based on point-by-point analysis represented by infra-red thermometer and temperature measurement equipment based on full- ﬁeld analysis represented by infrared thermal imager have been applied to pig breeding industry. These types of temperature measurement are morein line with the needs of the pig breeding industry to transform and upgrade to the automation, in line with thedevelopment concept of welfare farming and smart agriculture, and its development prospects are veryimpressive.© 2019 The Authors. Publishing services by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of KeAi Communications Co. Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ ).
Keywords:Pig body temperature measurementNon-contactInfrared image processing
Contents1 . I n t r o d u c t i o n...............................................................1 42 . P r o g r e s s i n m e a s u r i n g b o d y t e m p e r a t u r e o f p i g...............................................1 52.1. The signiﬁc a n c e o f m e a s u r i n g b o d y t e m p e r a t u r e o f p i g .........................................1 52 . 2 . T r a d i t i o n a l p i g b o d y t e m p e r a t u r e m e a s u r e m e n t m e t h o d ........................................1 52 . 3 . E m e r g i n g t e m p e r a t u r e m e a s u r e m e n t m e t h o d o f l i v e s t o c k a n d p o u l t r y ..................................1 63 . R e s e a r c h s t a t u s o f i n f r a r e d t e c h n o l o g y i n t h e m e a s u r e m e n t o f b o d y t e m p e r a t u r e o f l i v e s t o c k a n d p o u l t r y.....................1 73 . 1 . I n f r a r e d t e m p e r a t u r e m e a s u r e m e n t t e c h n o l o g y a n d s e n s o r s y s t e m...................................1 73 . 2 . A p p l i c a t i o n o f i n f r a r e d t e c h n o l o g y i n b o d y t e m p e r a t u r e m e a s u r e m e n t o f l i v e s t o c k a n d p o u l t r y .......................1 93 . 3 . A p p l i c a t i o n a n d d e v e l o p m e n t o f i n f r a r e d i m a g e p r o c e s s i n g t e c h n o l o g y i n l i v e s t o c k a n d p o u l t r y b r e e d i n g i n d u s t r y ..............2 24 . C o n c l u s i o n a n d f u t u r e t r e n d s ........................................................2 4A c k n o w l e d g m e n t s ...............................................................2 5R e f e r e n c e s ...................................................................2 5
1. IntroductionThe pig industry has long been the backbone of China's livestock andpoultry farming. In recent years, China's pork production ranks ﬁrst inArtiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 1 (2019) 14 –26
⁎Corresponding author.E-mail address:tonghai_1227@163.com(T. Liu).
1These authors contributed equally to this work and should be considered co- ﬁrst authors.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aiia.2019.02.0022589-7217/© 2019 The Authors. Publishing services by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of KeAi Communications Co. Ltd. This is an open access article under the C C BY-NC-ND license (http:// creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ ).
Contents lists available atScienceDirect
Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture
journal homepage:http://www.keaipublishing.com/en/journals/artificial-intelligence-in-agriculture/the world, accounting for about 50% of the world's total production.About 700 million pigs are slaughtered each year. Pork production ac-counts for about 64% of all meat production ( Yuan and Yuanping, 2016;National Bureau of Statistics of the People's Republic of Chinawebsite, 2018). According to statistics, the annual output of pigs, cattle,sheep and poultry in 2017 was 84.31 million tons, of which pork pro-duction was 53.4 million tons. Therefore, pork industry is the absolutepillar of China's meat industry (China Government Network, 2018). Although the proportion of pigs in the livestock and poultry industryis in an absolute position, the China's pig industry is still lagging behind.The pig industry is dominated by decentralized farmers, and the indus-trialization and modernization of the aquaculture industry is relativelylow. In 2016, the contribution rate of pigs with a size of b500 to the mar- ket pork accounted for about 55%. More than half of them have prob-lems caused by poor farming environment, poor farming technology,suffering from various diseases, feed self-matching and managementdisorder (Guangan, 2017). The informal pig breeding model not onlyproduces a great waste of resources, but also causes frequent occurrenceof various pig diseases and increases the risk of pig breeding process.The industrial upgrading of the pig breeding industry from thedecentralized farming model to the intensive modernization is veryurgent.In recent years, the concept of welfare farming has been increasinglyvalued by the industry and the health of pigs has received increasing at-tention. However, due to various problems in resource management ofpig breeding enterprises, such as poor farming pig houses, poor breed-ing environment and non-standard farming techniques, they are com-mon in free-range farmers or small-scale pig farms, which have led toinsufﬁcient disease prevention and disease monitoring in pigs, the diag-nosis and treatment of diseases are not timely ( Jizhu et al., 2016). At this stage, effective prevention and diagnosis of pig disease is still a majorissue related to the economic beneﬁts of pig breeding enterprises. Timely access to body temperature data can help alert and diagnosepig disease, real-time and fast access to pig body temperature is ofgreat signiﬁcance to the stable and healthy development of pig breedingenterprises, which also could promote the development of welfarefarming concept in the pig breeding industry.With the progress of China's urbanization construction and the needfor environmental protection, the pig breeding model began to acceler-ate the evolution from individual decentralized farming to large-scalefarming, and pig breeding industry is beginning to enter a new trend(Zhenling, 2018). The development of the agricultural Internet of Things(IoT) has made it possible to perceive the body temperature informa-tion of pigs in real time. With the development of industrializationand intensive farming mode, the scale of breeding has been expandedcontinuously, and the problems of environmental pollution in pighouses have begun to become prominent. Severe environmental pollu-tion has a series of effects on the growth, development and reproduc-tion of pigs, and the deteriorating environment of pig breeding hasmade the health of pigs increasingly serious. In the high-density breed-ing environment with frequent diseases and frequent epidemics, mon-itoring the body temperature of pigs in real time is conducive tograsping the health status of pigs at any time. It is important to the pre-vention and diagnosis of pig diseases, which becomes a key task for in-tensive farming.2. Progress in measuring body temperature of pig2.1. The signiﬁcance of measuring body temperature of pigTemperature regulation is one of the most important mechanisms tomaintain the homeostasis of the whole organism. Body temperature isthe temperature of the deep part of the animal body ( Juxiong and Yang, 2011), which is an objective reﬂection of the activity in the animalbody, it is a physiological signals that is very pivotal to re ﬂect the health status of pig. The body temperature change can re ﬂect the health statuschange of the pig in time. A hugeﬂuctuation in the body temperature ofpigs may be caused by the physiology of pigs being disturbed, abnormalbody temperature indicates the occurrence of certain diseases, espe-cially infectious diseases in the incubation period ( Yufeng and Yanping, 2012). Body temperature information is very helpful for the di-agnosis and treatment of animal diseases, which helps to detect sick an-imals early, explore the extent of the disease, determine the severity of
the disease, etc. Therefore, if the physiological indicators of pig bodytemperature change are correctly recognized and rationally used,some pig diseases can be detected early, diagnosed early and treatedearly (Lu et al., 2015). On the other hand, the change in sow body tem-perature is an important condition for judging the estrus of sows. Theidentiﬁcation of sow estrus is essential for pig production ( Xudong et al., 2013). Accurate identiﬁcation of estrus sows by body temperaturemeasurement, which can achieve timely breeding to improve the con-ception rate of sows. Real-time control of temperature changes in preg-nant sows is also conducive to testing the health of sows, according tothe body temperature situation, the relevant breeding work can be ar-ranged to increase the sow's birth rate ( Weihan, 2017). With the devel- opment of agricultural IoT technology, timely and real-time access topig body temperature data has become a reality. In addition, the acqui-sition of real-time pig body temperature information can help monitorthe health of pigs. For group pigs, if early detection of abnormal pigswith infectious diseases can control the epidemic early and reduce eco-nomic losses. Real-time access to the body temperature information ofpigs has become an important part of the work of pig breeding.In the actual pig raising process, the rectal temperature is generallyused to represent the body temperature of the pig, the range for healthypigs is 38–40 °C and there are some gaps between different types of pigs(Yundong, 2012). There are many reasons for the abnormal high feverof pigs in the actual breeding process ( Hanchun, 2007). Among them, “high fever”is a general term for a series of diseases that can cause hy-perthermia in pigs. Clinically, 80% of cases are mainly fever, mainly viralhigh fever, and some bacterial hyperthermia. Under normal circum-stances, the sudden temperature rise of the pig's body to above 40 °Cis an early warning of certain diseases. Pigs are often accompanied bysome other complications when they are sick and hot. According tothe complications and the body temperature of the pigs, it can effec-tively diagnose the diseases of pigs. In the process of breeding, weshould pay attention to the abnormal changes of body temperature inpigs in real time, and refer to the high temperature complications tostrictly diagnose the disease and prescribe the right medicine. In addi-tion, the body temperature of sow will also change signi ﬁcantly in the estrus state, which can be identiﬁed according to the accompanying ab-normal behavior of the sow during estrus, so as to rationally arrange thebreeding production activities (Qiaoping, 2011).2.2. Traditional pig body temperature measurement methodTraditional pig body temperature measurement is manual. Lubricat-ing the mercury column before measurement, hold the end of the ther-mometer with a string of about 15 cm, attach a wire clip to the other endof the string. Insert the mercury column into the pig anus when measur-ing, the iron clip clamps the hair above the pig's tail for ﬁxing. Remove the thermometer after 5 min, wipe the mercury column and read thedata. It is necessary to appease the pigs of different temperaments be-fore measuring the rectal temperature of the pigs, which can reducethe strong stress of pigs, so as not to affect the healthy growth of pigs(Jiao, 2017).The method of manually measuring the rectal temperature of pigshas the advantage that the rectal temperature obtained in the absenceof stress of the pig can accurately reﬂect the body temperature informa-tion of the pig, but in general, contact-type manual measurements causeintense stress in pigs, resulting in rapid rise in rectal temperature, whichwill make measurement data inaccurate ( Godyn and Herbu, 2017). Moreover, measuring the rectal temperature of a pig usually requires15 Z. Zhang et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 1 (2019) 14 –262–3 workers to take about 6 min to complete ( Hanchun, 2007). This method consumes a large amount of labor in large-scale farming. More-over, in the process of contact measurement, there is a risk that the dis-ease crosses and touches between humans and animals. All show thatthe pig breeding industry needs more scienti ﬁca n de fﬁcient ways to ob- tain the body temperature of pigs and technologies based on remotemeasurements are the most needed for this ﬁeld.2.3. Emerging temperature measurement method of livestock and poultryCai et al. (Yong, 2015) developed a system for automaticallyobtaining the temperature of the cow's body surface using radio fre-quency technology and contact temperature sensing technology, realiz-ing automatic monitoring of the body surface temperature of the cowsfor 24 h. Through the statistical analysis and equalization of the data,the correction formula of the body surface temperature of the cowwasﬁtted, and the diurnal variation of the temperature of the cowbody surface was obtained, which had accumulated experience in scien-tiﬁcally measuring the body temperature of fur animals. After the pigswere anesthetized the measurement picture is shown in Fig. 1a. Krizanac et al. (2010)inserted a temperature measuring trachea with3 probes into the respiratory tract of the pig to measure the trachealtemperature, the measured temperature was almost the same as thelung tracheal temperature, the measuring device is shown in Fig. 1b. Zhang et al. (Ziyun, 2015) implanted the temperature measuring elec-tronic chip into the left side of the sow neck during the estrus to obtainthe subcutaneous temperature, and the rectal temperature was ob-tained by using a mercury column thermometer as a reference. The re-lationship between body temperature changes and estrus behavior wasfound: the body temperature of sows before and after estrus was ﬁrst increased then decreased, and then returned to normal. Therefore, itwas recommended to match the gestation status of sows according tobody temperature changes. Hentzen et al. ( Hentzen, 2012) invented a capsule-type wireless sensor that was implanted into the neck of a pig-let, which was then able to achieve a measurement that was consistentwith the manual measurement of the rectal temperature. The measure-ment accuracy was high, but the surgical injection of the capsule was re-quired for the piglet, the measuring device is shown in Fig. 1c. Jose M. (Requejo et al., 2018) used a button temperature collector (DS1923)to collect the skin temperature of the pig's ear, obtained the correlationbetween ear temperature and feed efﬁciency of the pig by phase space diagram, further discussed the body temperature regulation of the pigand energy conversion issues.Andersen et al. (2008)used ear tag tem- perature sensor (QSS2000) to measure the ear temperature of pigs andstudied the relationship between ear temperature and intensity of be-havioral activity. A diurnal rhythm in the ear skin temperature (EST)was found, with the EST being highest at night and lowest in theafternoon.About the implantable temperature measuring device, after the de-vice is implanted into the livestock and poultry body at one time, doesreduce the stress response of the livestock and poultry during the mea-surement, and is convenient for future experimental measurements.However, when the device is implanted into the target to be tested fortheﬁrst time, the animal need to be anesthetized and then implanted.Hentzen et al. (Hentzen, 2012) noted the disadvantages of such amethod, principally associated with the necessity of immobilising thepigs. It is easy to cause damage to animals and reduce animal welfare.Moreover, electronic implantable andﬁxed temperature measuring de- vices often need to be recalibrated after a period of use, and the opera-tion process is complicated.Godyn et al. (Godyn and Herbu, 2017) compared the invasive mea- suring techniques and the noninvasive measuring techniques. Various
continuous temperature measurements in the studies on pigs were an-alyzed. The advantages and the limitations of each method also havebeen showed. Invasive measuring techniques is contact, like using rectalthermometer to get the temperature, apart from the stress caused byholding, the result of the measurement can be disturbed by measure-ment process. In 1974, Bligh et al. (Bligh and Heal, 1974)ﬁrst proposed the application of wireless remote sensing technology to the surfacetemperature monitoring of animals, and discussed the feasibility ofusing wireless telemetry to obtain animal temperature and the hin-drances faced by practical applications. Bai et al. ( Guangyu, 2014)r e a l - ized temperature measurement for sows in real time by using wirelessradio frequency communication technology and infrared temperaturesensor technology. The MLX90614 infrared temperature sensor wasused to obtain the temperature of the sow buttocks. The measured tem-perature was sent to the server through the gateway node, and accord-ing to the relationship between the hip temperature and the rectaltemperature, the measured temperature of the node was compensatedto improve the temperature measurement accuracy. Chen et al. ( Li et al., 2017) designed a breeding monitoring system that monitors the physi-ological signs and environmental parameters of pigs using wireless sen-sor network technology. The resources such as single chipmicrocomputer, wireless sensor network, WIFI communication moduleand body temperature acquisition module are connected and integratedthrough the server. The Android mobile phone or PC were used to ob-tain the vital body parameters such as the body temperature of thepig, and the temperature and humidity data of the breeding environ-ment. The hardware design of the temperature measuring system isshown inFig. 2.Dewulf et al. (2003)evaluated the suitability of infrared thermome-try by an experiment, which was set up to assess whether it was possi-ble to predict the rectal temperature based on the body surfacetemperature of pig. The body surface temperatures of the ears, feet,sides and anus were measured in 12 weaned piglets for 45 consecutivedays. These temperatures were compared with daily rectal tempera-tures. The results clearly demonstrate that there was no reliable predic-tion of rectal temperatures from these temperatures, but most of themwere signiﬁcantly correlated with rectal temperatures. Libo et al. (2010)used a mercury column thermometer, an electronic thermome-ter, and an infrared thermometer to measure the temperature of 1000pigs respectively before slaughter in a slaughterhouse. It was foundthat the detection rate of the high-temperature pigs was about 93% bycomparing the rectal temperature obtained from the mercury column
a[17 18]b [ ] c [ 2 0 ]
Fig. 1.The contact type measuring devices.16 Z. Zhang et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 1 (2019) 14 –26with the surface temperature of the ear root obtained by the infraredthermometer.Berry et al. (2003)utilized infrared camera to detect thetemperature of the cow's breast, and established a model of cow's breasttemperature change based on the daily data of the cow's breast temper-ature. The temperature correlation between the ambient and the cow'srectum was obtained. The breast temperature and ambient temperatureparameters can successfully predict by the current breast temperature,which could achieve early detection of cow mastitis. Qin et al.(Yongxiao, 2015) combined infrared temperature measurement tech-nology with RFID technology to realize the intelligent detection for thetemperature of the group of pigs through the deployment of multipletemperature monitoring points, the system structure is shown in Fig. 3. Telemetry, wireless sensor network, infrared and other temperaturemeasurement methods, when the system is completed to measure tem-perature, almost no stress on livestock and poultry, which is in line withthe concept of welfare farming, less labor input during measurement,improving work efﬁciency and facilitating the development of large-scale intensive farming (Libo et al., 2010;Berry et al., 2003). However, the temperature measurement method using the telemetry and wire-less sensor network has high accuracy requirements for temperaturedata acquisition devices because it cannot directly contact the target.Moreover, in the process of data information transmission, there aresignal interference and other problems that will cause data loss ( Bligh and Heal, 1974).In general, most of the emerging methods for measuring body tem-perature are automatic or semi-automatic in the process of obtainingbody temperature data. Temperature collection equipment can con-tinue to use for a certain number of years. For large-scale pig breedingcompanies, emerging body temperature measurement methods areless economical in the face of increasing labor costs. It is in line withthe development concept of resource conservation and is increasinglyfavored by the breeding industry. Among them, the advantages of infra-red temperature measurement technology are more obvious. The tem-perature measurement accuracy is high, the temperature measurementsystem has strong stability, the temperature measurement mode is sim-ple, and real-time remote temperature measurement operation can berealized. It can complete the temperature data acquisition in the un-manned environment, does not make the pigs stress, and makes the ob-tained temperature data more accurate and effective. Compared withcontact, implantable and wireless sensor network temperature mea-surement methods, the development and application prospect of infra-red temperature measurement technology is better. Table 1shows the emerging temperature measurement technology mentioned.3. Research status of infrared technology in the measurement ofbody temperature of livestock and poultry3.1. Infrared temperature measurement technology and sensor systemInfrared technology was used in military surveillance, industrial in-spection, medical diagnosis and otherﬁeldsﬁrstly. In recent years, it has been applied in theﬁeld of agriculture, and has been continuouslyexplored and developed in theﬁelds of crop growth monitoring, agri-cultural product quality inspection, and livestock and poultry diseasedetection. According to different methods, infrared technology can bedivided into based on point temperature analysis and based on ﬁeld analysis. The point-based analysis system is represented by the infraredthermometer, and there are hand-held and ﬁxed temperature measur- ing devices. Theﬁeld-based temperature measurement system is repre-sented by infrared camera. The development of infrared camera beganin the late 1920s. Infrared imaging technology can break through theobstacles of the night environment and broaden the limitations ofhuman vision. It can provide real-time monitoring of all heat radiatingobjects. Infrared cameras have been widely used since their inceptionand continue to evolve. Using infrared camera to get pig body tempera-ture can reduce labor consumption, simple operation process, reducepig stress, avoid cross-infection of livestock, reduce farming costs, and
Fig. 2.Hardware design of the temperature measuring system ( National Bureau of Statistics of the People's Republic of China website, 2018 ).
Fig. 3.System structure (Dewulf et al., 2003).17 Z. Zhang et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 1 (2019) 14 –26Table 1Emerging livestock and poultry measurement technology application table
No. Method Technology Animal System or tool Measuring part Results or conclusions Insuf
ﬁcients or prospect Ref1 Contact Radio frequency
technology andelectronictechnology
Cow Cow body surfacetemperatureautomatic acquisitionsystem
Hind leg hoof 1. The average difference between body surface temperature
and actual rectal temperature is 0. 0260 ° C, the maximumdoes not exceed 0.2 ° C2. Reveal the diurnal variation of the bovine body surface: thelowest temperature occurs at 5-6 points, and the highesttemperature occurs at 13-14 points.
Day and night changes in cow temperature do not takeinto account seasonal factors
Yong, 20152 Contact Electronic
technology
Pig thermocouple Trachea, respiratory
tract
Respiratory tract temperature is an effective alternative totracheal temperature in the treatment of cardiac arrest in pigs
Only relevant to male pigs, the applicability of theconclusion is limited
Krizanac et al.,20103 Contact Electronic
technology
Pig Electronictemperaturemeasuring chip
Neck subcutaneous 1. There is a signi
ﬁcant difference between the subcutaneousbody temperature and the rectal temperature of Meishansow, but there is a signi
ﬁcant positive correlation.2. Sows are more active during estrus than during non-estrus
General anesthesia of sows when measuringtemperature electronic chip implantation, reducingthe welfare of sow breeding
Ziyun, 20154 Contact Electronic
technology, wirelesssensor networktechnology
Pig Wireless temperaturemeasurement system
Neck Capsule measurement temperature is consistent with rectal
temperature measurement
，the slope is very close to 1
1. Implantable device is not conducive to pig activity2. There are problems such as calibration and longtuning time during wireless measurement.3. There is signal interference in the radiationcommunication system.
Hentzen et al.,20125 Contact Electronic
technology
Pig Button temperaturecollector
Ear It is found that the temperature in the ear region of the pig is
more related to feed ef
ﬁciency and physical activity.
Helps estimate feed ef
ﬁciency during full growth of animals
Requejo et al.,20186 Contact Wireless sensor
network technology
Pig Ear tag temperaturesensor
Ear 1. The diurnal variation of the surface temperature of the ear:
the highest at night and the lowest in the afternoon2, the pig rests at a higher temperature than the ear surfacetemperature when the pig is active
According to the surface temperature of the ear, the thermalcomfort temperature of the pig can be explored to provide abasis for the welfare of pigs.
Andersen et al.,20087 Non-contact Remote Sensing
Technology
AllanimalTelemetry system Body surface 1. No stress in pigs during temperature measurement.
2. Achieve remote and natural animal measurement.
1. When sensors are implanted, they will cause damage toanimals.2. the development cost of the system is very high, and is limitedby transmissiondistance and transmitter battery life.
Bligh and Heal,
19748 Non-Contact Infrared technology,
wireless sensornetwork technology
Sow Wireless sensor nodesystem
Hip 1.System error is 0.21 °C
，the effective communicationdistance of the sensor network node is 30 m, and the sowbody temperature can be obtained in real time.
Data loss occurs when the node is
N10 m away from the gateway
Guangyu, 20149 Non-contact Wireless sensor
network technology
Pig Pig breedingmonitoring system
Rectum 1.The measured data is positively correlated with the rectal
temperature measured by the thermometer, coef
ﬁcientK=1，2. No stress in pigs during temperature measurement.3. The mobile terminal obtains temperature data in real time.
1. High performance dependence on nodes duringcommunication2. The system is limited by the node battery usage time
Li et al., 201710 Non-contact Infrared technology Piglets Infrared camera Ear, feet, sides, anus 1.there is no reliable prediction of rectal temperatures
2. most of the measured body surface temperatures aresigniﬁcantly correlated with rectal temperatures
Did notﬁnd a stable relationship between body temperature andrectal temperature and could not predict rectal temperature
directly from pig body temperature,
Dewulf et al., 200311 Non-contact Infrared technology Pig Infrared thermometer Ear 1. The coincidence rate between the detection results of the
infrared thermometer and the mercury thermometer is93.33%.2. Infrared thermometers are more suitable for pre-slaughterquarantine body temperature screening of larger scaleslaughterhouses.
Did not consider the in
ﬂuence of factors such as seasons andregions
Libo et al., 201012 Non-contact Infrared technology, Cow Infrared camera Breast 1. The circadian rhythm of the cow's breast temperature was
found.2.Highly accurate and accurate prediction of current breasttemperature based on daily breast temperature and ambienttemperature parameters
Predicting the difference between breast temperature and actualbreast temperature within the detectable range of in
ﬂammatoryresponse
Berry et al., 200313 Non-contact Infrared technology,
radio frequencytechnology
Pig Infrared sensor Body surface Quickly obtain information on the body temperature of a
group of pigs
Cannot achieve round-the-clock detection Qin et al., 201518 Z. Zhang et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 1 (2019) 14 –26improve aquaculture production efﬁciency. It is increasingly favored bythe pig breeding industry (Yuhong et al., 2018). Infrared camera is an imaging temperature measuring device. Theobject radiates energy outward in the form of electromagnetic waves,and the infrared radiation intensity of different objects is different. Theprinciple of infrared thermal imaging is to use the difference betweentemperature and emissivity between the target and the surrounding en-vironment to generate different thermal gradients, which shows the in-frared radiation energy density distribution map, that is the “thermal image”. Human vision is not sensitive to infrared light, the thermalimage seen by humans is that the infrared radiation emitted by the ob-ject is converted by the thermal imager. The different temperatures ofthe object are represented by different colors on the infrared image.The lighter the color, the higher the temperature of the surface of theobject, and the darker the color, the lower the temperature of the sur-face of the object. Infrared camera converts infrared radiation into visi-ble light image in two steps. The working principle of infrared camera isshown inFig. 4,t h eﬁrst step is to convert the infrared radiation into anelectrical signal through an infrared detector. The intensity of the infra-red radiation is reﬂected by the magnitude of the signal. The second stepis to display the distribution of the target infrared radiation on the dis-play through the display screen. The electrical signal completes thetransition from electricity to light, andﬁnally the visible image that re-ﬂects the target temperature distribution.3.2. Application of infrared technology in body temperature measurementof livestock and poultryMcManus et al. (2016)studied the application of infrared thermalimaging technology in animal metabolism, nutrition, in ﬂammation pro- cess, disease, ectoparasite detection and reproduction is described, re-sulted that infrared thermal imaging is innovative, low-cost, fast andeffective. It is sensitive to changes in animal heat patterns, but thismethod may not be sufﬁcient to determine the cause of animal fever.Soerensen et al. (Soerensen and Pedersen, 2015) evaluated the applica- tion of infrared temperature measurement technology in the measure-ment of pig body temperature, explored the relationship between skin,environment and body temperature. It had been found that the optimalskin position that is highly correlated between skin temperature andrectal temperature is likely to be hot windows (the commonly usedmeasuring hot window is shown in the Fig. 5) such as the ear, eyes and breasts, however, this relationship may vary with age, stress and bi-ological state, for example Childbirth may change the extent of this cor-relation, and analyzed the prospects for the development of infraredthermometers in the diagnosis of future pig diseases.Schaefer et al. (2004)applied infrared camera to the early detectionand prediction of animal diseases, and inoculating viral diarrhea strains(24515) to 10 calves, seting up an uninfected control group, collectingimages an infrared image is shownFig. 6)with infrared features (nose, ear, back) of infected calves and control groups. The blood and salivarycortisol was obtained and immunoglobulin A and other parameterswere analyzed to detect whether the cow is ill. The experiment con-cluded that the infrared facial scan can detect the temperature increaseof infected calves from 1.5 °C to 4 °C (P b0.01) before 1 week, the which shows that infrared heat measurement can be used for early detectionand prediction of burdock disease.Xie et al. (2004)used the rat breast adenocarcinoma 13762 MAT (atumor that has been used for the identi ﬁcation of anti-angiogenic drugs) as a research object, and explored the feasibility of infrared imag-ing technology for detecting angiogenesis of malignant tumors. Notumor surface temperature elevation associated with the tumor was ob-served in the experiment, but some constant and very signi ﬁcant tem- perature reductions were found to be produced by relatively smalltumors (N0.5 cm diameter), yielding a conclusion that temperaturechanges were independent of tumor size. It is speculated that this phe-
nomenon may be due to the poor vascularity of rapidly growing tumors.Analysis showed that elevated peripheral temperature of breasts re-ported in breast cancer patients is unlikely to be caused by tumorgrowth leading to angiogenesis, possibly due to chronic in ﬂammatory reactions around breast tumors, which means infrared imaging mayhave a considerable prognosis value. Liu et al. ( Jinqi, 2016) obtained clinical mastitis, recessive mastitis, and normal lactating cow breasttemperature through infrared camera, and found that the differencesin breast surface temperature of the three types of lactating cows
Fig. 5.The commonly used measuring hot window of animal.
Fig. 4.Principle of infrared camera working.19 Z. Zhang et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 1 (2019) 14 –26reached extremely signiﬁcant levels (Pb0.01). It provides a viable method for early diagnosis of lactating cow mastitis. Amezcua et al. (2014)described the use of infrared thermography to detect in ﬂamma- tion of sows' lower extremities to identify different degrees of lamenessin sows. The selected areas ranged from top to bottom: 1 - t bone, 2 -upper jaw bone, 3 - lower jaw bone, and 4 - phalanx ( Fig. 7). This shows that infrared thermography has become an effective methodfor diagnosing animal disease.Taeho et al. (2010)found that non-contact infrared thermometry(NIFT) could serve as a valid alternative to manual rectal thermometryin portable germ-free facility without disturbing experimental animals.The development of NIFT body temperature assessment without animalrestrictions is clinically beneﬁcial, especially in reproductive piglets, andmuch less stressful for laboratory procedures in aseptic facilities.Knizkova et al. (2007)discussed the use of thermal imaging camerasin theﬁeld of veterinary medicine as a diagnostic for orthopedic dis-eases in livestock and poultry, analyzed the signi ﬁcance of infraredthermal imaging as a breeding tool, which can participate in the ther-moregulation of the breeding process to increase animal welfare andparticipate in the process of assisting lactating milk. Schaefer et al. (2012)used an automated, RFID driven, noninvasive infrared thermog-raphy technology to determine bovine respiratory disease (BRD) in cat-tle. Routine parameters (core temperature, hematology, serum cortisol)and infrared image for 65 cattle of approximately 220 kg were obtained.The acquisition equipment located in a feedlot pen around a water sta-tion with RFID driven, non-invasive IRT scanning station was showed inFig. 8. The BRD positive and negative cattle were determined by routineparameters, and the peak temperature of the infrared images was com-pared. The positive average peak value was 35.7 ± 0.35 °C, and the neg-ative average peak value was 34.9 ± 0.22 °C. The study suggests thatinfrared imaging technology can be used to wirelessly collect biometricdata and help diagnose animal diseases.Rainwater-Lovett et al. (2009)studied the feasibility of using infra-red cameras to detect foot-and-mouth disease (FMD) virus of cattle.
Fig. 7.Infrared thermal images of the left and right hind legs of a sow at various anatomical areas when evaluating lameness in Amezcua et al. (2014).
Fig. 6.Infrared facial images of a calf before and following infection with virus in Schaefer et al. (2004).20 Z. Zhang et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 1 (2019) 14 –26Through analyzing the maximum foot temperatures of healthy, directlyinoculated, contact, and vaccine tria cattle were measured, the conclu-sion was that infrared thermography was a promising screening tech-nology that enabled rapid identiﬁcation of potentially infected animalsduring a FMD outbreak for conﬁrmatory diagnostic testing. Howeverthe technique needs to be further evaluated to determine the value ofIRT in detecting mild clinical symptoms or subclinically infectedanimals.Skykes et al. (Sykes et al., 2012) used digital infrared thermal imag-ing (DITI) equipment to obtain the temperature of the sow vulva, in-cluding the minimum (MIN), maximum (MAX), mean (AVG) andstandard deviation (SD) of temperature gradients, ambient (AMB) andrectal temperatures (RT). The blood samples were analyzed and theserum progesterone (P4) concentration was determined. The MIN,MAX and AVG of the pig vulva temperature in the thermal imagewere found to be positively correlated with each other (P b0.01), and positively correlated with the AMB (P b0.01). MAX and AVG were higher in estrus than in diestrus. There was no signi ﬁcant difference in MIN and SD between estrus and diestrus, and no difference in RT be-tween the stages (Pb0.05), and RT was not signiﬁcantly associated with vulvar thermal images. Vulva thermal images from de ﬁned regions of interest, as shown inFig. 9. It was indicated that digital infrared ther-mal imaging (DITI) can measure the genital surface temperature duringestrus and identify the estrus period of the sow.Meng et al. (Xiangxue, 2016) measured the epidermal temperatureof the buttocks, vulva and eyes of nearly 1000 normal pregnant sowsby infrared camera, and analyzed the correlation of skin temperatureof the three parts. It was concluded that the vulva of the estrus is higherand the estrus of the sow can be identiﬁed, so that the actual production can be guided through the temperature change.Health assessment of animal is getting more and more attention.Marcia et al. (Salles et al., 2016) tested 24 small cows in 35 days, usinginfrared cameras to capture infrared images of different areas of thecow, including the left and right eye areas, right and left eyes, left fore-l i m bt a i l ,l e f tf o r e l i m bs k u l l ,l e f ta n dr i g h t ﬂank and forehead. In all the body regions studied, the thermal imaging forehead temperature hasthe highest correlation with the rectal temperature. The forehead andleft and rightﬂanking temperatures are related to the ambient temper-ature and humidity closely, which could be used to studied the bodytemperature regulation and body heat generation in the future.LokeshBabu et al. (2018)used the thermal imaging camera to measurethe collateral-related cervical injury crown band and hoof skin temper-ature from the perspective of animal welfare and economic loss. It wasfound that when the hoof has a lesion, the surface temperature of thesquat leg will increase, and an early thermal detection of the lesioncan be performed using an infrared camera. S i e w e r te ta l .( 2 0 1 4 )mea- sured the temperature of the pig's head by a thermal imaging cameraand detected the early fever of the pig by differential ROI (region of
Fig. 8.Image of automated, RFID driven, non-invasive IRT scanning station located in a feedlot pen around a water station ( Schaefer et al., 2012).21 Z. Zhang et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 1 (2019) 14 –26interest). The speciﬁcity of the method in the experiment is about 85%and the sensitivity is 86%.Kammersgaard et al. (2013)evaluated the thermal status of newborn piglets by infrared thermal imaging. Aftercomparing 1695 infrared image data with 915 rectal temperaturedata, it was found that the maximum temperature (IRmax) of the infra-red image was highly correlated with rectal temperature. And theIRmax of the infrared thermogram is mainly located in the ear (27/50), the head area (12/50) and other parts of the armpit area (8/50).The IRmax of infrared thermal image can be used as a basis for evaluat-ing the thermal status of newborn piglets. The main applications of in-frared thermal imager in livestock and poultry breeding have beenshowed inFig. 10.Using infrared temperature measurement technology, under thepremise of no contact with pigs, the measurement temperature of pigunder non-stress condition is obtained, which is closer to the realbody temperature of pigs, and the data accuracy is high. Many studiesfound that the measurement results of infrared temperature measuringequipment are relatively stable within a certain distance range ( Yuhong et al., 2018). Therefore, the consistency of measurement distance shouldbe maintained when using infrared equipment to obtain temperaturedata multiple times. In addition, the temperature difference betweendifferent parts of the pig is very large, the temperature at the anus,eyes, ear roots, and armpits is signiﬁcantly higher than the temperatureat other parts of the body surface (McManus et al., 2016;Soerensen and Pedersen, 2015;Schaefer et al., 2004). This may be related to the emis-sivity of different parts of the pig.Soerensen et al. (2014)analyzed the best infrared measurement site of the pig by studying the emissivityof different parts of the sow to obtain an accurate infrared thermogra-phy. In the actual measurement, the same part of the pig is selectedfor measurement. Some scholars have found in the process of measur-ing the body temperature of pigs by infrared equipment: the tempera-ture of pig ear root (that is the junction between the ear and the back)is signiﬁcantly higher than other parts of the head. Moreover, there isa clear correlation between the temperature of the ear root and thebody temperature of the pig (Requejo et al., 2018;Andersen et al., 2008). So the body temperature status of pigs can be characterized bymeasuring the temperature of the pig ear roots. In livestock and poultryfarming and pig breeding, infrared technology can be used for non-contact body temperature measurement of animals, which could be ap-plied to health assessment and monitoring of pig, and animal diseasedetection. It has been a technology for disease prevention and treat-ment. It can also be used to guide breeding work, to predict and test es-trus, to improve the conception rate of sows. Details of infraredtemperature measurement technology are shown in Table 2.3.3. Application and development of infrared image processing technologyin livestock and poultry breeding industryWith the continuous exploration of the application of infrared tech-nology in the livestock and poultry breeding industry, the infraredimage processing technology based on livestock and poultry breedingindustry is also exploring and developing constantly. The image pro-cessing method based on active shape model proposed by Cootes et al.(Cootes, 2000) which is a method for searching for an object of a speci ﬁc type in an image.Wirthgen et al. (2011)applied this method to infrared image processing for theﬁrst time, expounded the comprehensive ap-plicability of thermal infrared image to this method, and proposed animproved algorithm. Through the image processing, landmark display,shape creation and initialization, 2 million infrared images of cows ishandled successfully, which revealed that the direction of further re-search is to process and analyze the infrared images of moving animaltargets. Liu et al. (Bo et al., 2013;Bo, 2014) used the infrared camera and visible light camera to obtain the target pig image at the sametime, and proposed an image registration algorithm based on ray con-tour feature points for multi-source images. Using the characteristics
Fig. 10.The main applications of infrared thermal imager in livestock and poultrybreeding.
Fig. 9.Vulva thermal images from deﬁned regions of interest (Sykes et al., 2012).22 Z. Zhang et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 1 (2019) 14 –26of the infrared image to get a clear outline of the pig's foreground ﬁrstly, the problem is transformed from image registration to parametermatching of the feature point set. 50 infrared and visible images hadbeen matched automatically with a registration rate of 94% and the av-erage registration error isb1 pixel, which is better than manual registra-tion. Based on this, a fusion method of visible image and infrared imageof pigs based on non-subsampled contour wave is proposed. Throughthe fusion application of infrared image and visible image, more surfaceand behavior data of pig are obtained, the body surface temperature ofpig ear root could be get in time,ﬂow chart of pig ear root areaextraction is showed inFig. 11. The monitoring of abnormal behaviorssuch as fever and surface ulceration of pigs was achieved, which laid afoundation for the monitoring of abnormal behavior of pigs and the ex-traction of characteristics of pigs based on multi-source images.Lu et al. (2018)evaluated the health status of piglets using an infra-red camera. An automatic extraction of the ear-based temperature algo-rithm based on the top view is proposed. Firstly, the head of the pigletwas identiﬁed by the training classiﬁer, and then the two ear base pointswere located based on the feature points of the head contour, and thehighest temperature in the circle centered on the ear base point wasTable 2Application of infrared camera in livestock and poultry breeding.No. Animal ApplicationﬁeldMeasuring part Results or conclusions Insuf ﬁcients or prospect Ref1 Beefcattle,pigs,chicks,dairycowsDiseasediagnosis,healthmonitoringEye, foot, Flank, rump,rear area, and foot,et al.Infrared thermal imaging is innovative,low-cost, fast and effective to obtain thetemperature of the animalInfrared thermal imaging could detect fever butcould not analyze the cause of fever McManus et al.(2016)
2 Pig Diseasediagnosis,healthmonitoringEar, eye, breast Further veri ﬁcation is required before thethermal imaging camera is used as a diagnostictoolMaking infrared thermography as an effectivemeans of detecting disease, requiring ametrological method for standard measurementSoerensen et al.(Soerensen andPedersen, 2015)2015 3 Cattle Diseasediagnosis,healthmonitoringNose, ear, back Thermal imaging camera can be used todevelop early prediction index of burdockinfectionThe use of infrared thermography may be animportant increase in current clinical evaluation Schaefer et al.(2004)4 Rat DiseasediagnosisBody surface Infrared imaging may have considerableprognostic value Temperature changes have nothing to do withtumor size and growth, probably due to chronicinﬂammatory reactions around the breast tumorcausing an increase in temperatureXie W et al. (Xieet al., 2004) 20035 LactatingcowDiseasediagnosis,healthmonitoringEye, breast, buttock The difference in surface temperature of bovinebreasts with different degrees of diseasereached a very signiﬁcant level (Pb0.01).Provides a viable method for early diagnosis oflactating cow mastitis Liu et al. (Jinqi,2016) 20166 Sow DiseasediagnosisFoot Identify different levels of sow foot Infrared thermography has become one of the effective methods for diagnosing animal diseasedamageAmezcua et al.(2014)7 Cow, pig,sheep,poultryDiseasediagnosisbreedingBody surface Thermal imaging cameras are tools that can beused for pig, cattle, sheep and poultry breedingresearch.When using IRT, must consider some limitingfactors (sunlight, moisture, dirt, weatherconditions, etc.)Knizkova et al.(2007)8 Cattle DiseasediagnosisBody surface Infrared imaging technology can be used to
wirelessly collect biometric data and helpdiagnose animal diseasesSuch a system would have clear utility inbio-surveillance and bio-security programs. Schaefer A L et al.(Schaefer et al.,2012) 2011 9 Cattle DiseasediagnosisFoot Infrared thermography is a promising screeningtechnology that enables rapid identi ﬁcation of potentially infected animals during a FMDoutbreak for conﬁrmatory diagnostic testinThe technique needs to be further evaluated Rainwater-Lovettet al. (2009)10 Sow Breeding Vulva 1. There is no signi ﬁcant correlation betweenvulvar temperature and rectal temperature.2. Infrared thermometer can measure thechange of surface temperature of gilt surface inestrus.Use the temperature change of the vulva toidentify the estrus in the sow and guide theproductionSkykes et al.(Sykes et al.,2012) 201211 PregnantsowBreeding Hip, vulva, eyes 1. Receptor temperature effects on the buttocks, vulva, and eye temperature of pregnant sows2. Changes in vulva and hip temperature can beused to identify the estrus of the sowTemperature change of vulva and hip can beused to identify the estrus of the sow Meng X et al.(Xiangxue, 2016)201612 Cow HealthmonitoringRight eye, left eye, leftforelimb, tail, leftforelimb skull, left andrightﬂank, forehead1. Infrared thermography has the highestcorrelation between forehead temperature andrectal temperature.2. Forehead and left and rightﬂanking temperatures are closely related toenvironmental temperature and humidity.The thermal state characteristics of differentparts can be used to regulate the bodytemperature and to study the body heatgeneration.Marcia et al.(Salles et al.,2016) 2016
13 Cattle HealthmonitoringdiseasediagnosisHoof injury crownband, hoof skin surfaceIt is found that when the hoof has a lesion, thesurface temperature of the squat leg willincrease.Early hoof lesions can be detected using aninfrared camera. LokeshBabu et al.(2018)14 Pig HealthmonitoringHead Infrared imaging and analysis with differentROI (region of interest) methods for earlydetection of elevated pig body temperature(N39.5 °C)Head temperature is used as an aid in thediagnosis of pig health Siewert et al.(Siewert et al.,2014) 201315 Piglet HealthmonitoringEar, head, armpit Infrared image maximum temperature IRmaxhas a great correlation with rectal temperature Infrared thermography IRmax can be used as abasis for evaluating the thermal status ofnewborn pigletsKammersgaardet al. (2013)23 Z. Zhang et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 1 (2019) 14–26extracted to represent the two ear bases temperature. 100 images wereprocessed by this method, and the extracted temperature was com-pared with the temperature obtained manually using Fluke SmartView 3.14. For the left and right ear bases, 97% and 98% of the test im-ages had errors in the range of 0.4 °C.Li et al. (2015)proposed a sow in- frared image segmentation algorithm based on improved geometricactive contour model. The point operation was used to enhance the con-trast, reduced the background interference, and the energy weightswere dynamically equalized by the weight function which can changewith the overall contrast of the image and the local contrast. Throughall of that the 300 thermal infrared images of sows were segmented.The average time of single infrared image segmentation was 49.67 s,and the correct segmentation rate is 98%. It provided the possibilityfor further application of infrared video monitoring. Leizi et al. (2016) proposed a method for measuring the surface temperature of animalsbased on Kinect sensor and infrared camera. The relationship betweentemperature and angle of view was analyzed, and the mathematicalmodel of compensating the angle of view was established. The correla-tion coefﬁcient was above 0.99. At the same time, the depth and infraredthermal image fusion method of the synchronized image wereestablished, and the angle of view of each pixel was calculated. By thismethod, the temperature measurement error caused by the angle ofview can be compensated, and the signiﬁcant inﬂuence of the measure- ment angle of view on the measured temperature was reduced.There is a certain correlation between temperature and body tem-perature in the ear region of pigs (Berry et al., 2003;Schaefer et al., 2012).Weixing et al. (2015)simultaneously acquired infrared and visi-ble light images, and proposed an improved active shape model for de-tecting pig ear regions based on image fusion. The feature region of theear root was extracted according to the shape feature, and the averageshape initial pose was improved in combination with the head skeletonmodel. After processing 50 images, comparing segmentation ear regionwith the manual segmentation ear region, the coincidence degreewhichN0.8 account for 84%, which showed the detection effect was sat-isﬁed. Zhou et al. (Liping et al., 2016) described a method based on theimproved Otsu algorithm for detecting the infrared image of pigs, usinga self-designed infrared image acquisition system to collect images ofpigs. Through the improved Otsu algorithm, the image of the ear rootsof piglets,ﬁnishing pigs and pregnant pigs could be detected. Thismethod can correctly detect pigs with complete ear root feature areas,and 23% of piglets with incomplete root characteristics can be foundcorrectly, 25% of fattening pig images can be detected correctly, 33% ofpregnant pig images could be found correctly. It is impossible to detectimages of pigs that do not have the characteristics of the ear roots. Usethis method to detect images with inaccurate focus or too few imagepixels during the acquisition process, the result is good, which avoid in-accurate detection areas due to relatively low resolution of acquiredimages.It is a very complicated process to process the infrared image and getthe body temperature information of the pig. Effective data acquisitionenables image processing to be more efﬁcient and faster. In the process of infrared image processing, some scholars have found that visible lighthas a greater impact on the quality of acquired infrared images. Infraredimages acquired in low illumination conditions are less noisy when seg-mented, as the illuminance increases, the noise increases, resulting inunsatisfactory target segmentation. Therefore, attention should bepaid to choose the appropriate illuminance when acquiring infrared im-ages. In addition, the ambient temperature also has a great in ﬂuence on the infrared image, higher noise at higher temperatures. Avoid hightemperature and hot weather when acquiring infrared images, and se-lect appropriate ambient temperature for data acquisition. In the pro-cess of data processing, the effective extraction of the target area ofthe infrared image is particularly important. Pigs have obvious shapefeatures, easy to detect feature points, and analyze feature areas. Pigbody extraction method based on feature points and feature regions isthe most widely used. Visible light images contain more detailed infor-mation than infrared images, which can compensate for the limitationsof infrared images. Register and combine infrared and visible images toget more informationﬁrstly, then processing fused images to obtaintemperature information, this method is also constantly being explored.4. Conclusion and future trendsBody temperature can be used as an important indicator to assessthe health status of pigs, diagnose pig diseases, and guide pig breeding.Emerging pig body temperature measurement techniques can be di-
vided into contact and non-contact. With the development of theconcept of welfare farming, non-contact infrared temperature measure-ment technology will be more and more recognized. At present, the ap-plication of infrared temperature measurement technology in the pigbreeding industry is still in the initial stage of development. The mea-suring equipment that has been introduced mainly includes infraredthermometers for point analysis and infrared cameras for ﬁeld analysis. People are still exploring new application modes of infrared technologyin measuring body temperature of pigs. However, based on the transfor-mation needs of the intensive pig breeding model, the need for welfare
Fig. 11.Flow chart of pig ear root area extraction.24 Z. Zhang et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 1 (2019) 14 –26farming, and the need for smart agriculture to actively explore, thetrend of infrared temperature measurement to replace traditional man-ual temperature measurement is becoming clearer.At the same time, infrared temperature measurement technology isincreasingly prominent in theﬁelds of health monitoring of pigs, diseasediagnosis, and identiﬁcation of sow estrus, and because of its real-time,efﬁcient, convenient and accurate advantages, it is more and more rec-ognized by the breeding industry. Compared with traditional mercurycolumn temperature measuring equipment or electronic temperaturemeasuring equipment, infrared equipment costs much more. It ismore difﬁcult to promote and apply in small farms or personal breeding.Some infrared equipment and temperature measuring system are com-plicated to install. Moreover, the data collection operation requiresmore professional workers and a higher level of knowledge. It is notconducive to the promotion in actual breeding.The development of infrared temperature measurement technologyin the pig breeding industry will continue to advance with the develop-ment of the information society. High-precision, high-stability, portable,easy-to-operate infrared equipment is currently the most needed forChinese pig breeding companies. The infrared temperature measuringequipment in actual production application is mainly an infrared ther-mometer based on point analysis, and the application of the infraredcamera is relatively small. However, the infrared camera based onﬁeld analysis has higher precision and more comprehensive tempera-ture information. How to reduce costs, improve stability and generateproduct promotion trends is the key to the future application of infraredcameras in the livestock industry.Many infrared image processing technologies used in other ﬁelds have begun to explore the applicability in the pig industry, which fur-ther promotes the development of infrared temperature measurement.However, infrared image processing technology generally has problemssuch as large imaging noise, low image contrast, and narrow gray scale.Infrared imaging is easily affected by non-uniformity and invalid pixels,resulting in low actual resolution. These image processing challengeswill still hinder the development of infrared temperature measurementtechnology in the pig breeding industry in the future. The enhancementof key technologies for infrared image processing will further promotethe application of infrared camera temperature measurement in thepig industry. The exploration of the applicability of infrared image pro-cessing technology in otherﬁelds in the pig breeding industry will fur-ther promote the achievement and product development of infraredtemperature measurement technology.Today, with the continuous development of Internet of Things agri-culture, the pig breeding industry is also changing in the direction ofinformationization and automation. The non-contact, real-time andlong-distance characteristics of infrared temperature measurementtechnology represented by infrared camera conform to the concept ofIoT agriculture. In the process of development, we continuously ex-plored the combination with other information management technolo-gies and emerging farming technologies, laying a foundation forbuilding a more efﬁcient farming model and breeding process, and itsfuture development prospects are very bright.AcknowledgmentsThis work was supported by National Key Research andDevelopment Program (2017YFD0701601-3), Research PlatformConstruction Project and Graduate Training Quality ImprovementProject (2017YAL009) of Tianjin Agricultural University.References
Amezcua, R., Walsh, S., Luimes, P.H., et al., 2014. Infrared thermography to evaluate lame- ness in pregnant sows.[J]. Canadian Veterinary Journal La Revue VétérinaireCanadienne 55 (3), 268–272.Andersen, M.L., Jørgensen, E., Dybkjær, L., et al., 2008. The ear skin temperature as an in- dicator of the thermal comfort of pigs[J]. Appl. Anim. Behav. Sci. 113 (1), 43 –56.Berry, R.J., Kennedy, A.D., Scott, S.L., et al., 2003. Daily variation in the udder surface tem- perature of dairy cows measured by infrared thermography: potential for mastitis de-tection[J]. Can. J. Anim. Sci. 83 (4), 687 –693. Bligh, J., Heal, J.W., 1974.The use of radio-telemetry in the study of animal physiology[J].Proc. Nutr. Soc. 33 (2), 173.Bo, Liu, 2014.Study of Pig Skin Temperature and Gait Features Extraction Method Basedon Multi-source Images[D]. Jiangsu University (in Chinese with English abstract).Bo, Liu, Weixing, Zhu, Bin, Ji, et al., 2013. Automatic registration of IR and optical pig im- ages based on contour match of radial line feature points[J]. Trans. Chinese Soc. Agric.Eng. 29 (2), 153–160 (in Chinese with English abstract).China Government Network, 2018. 2017 economic operation is stable and better than ex-pected.http://www.gov.cn/xinwen/2018-01/18/content_5257967.htm . Cootes, T., 2000.Model-based methods in analysis of biomedical images. Image Process-ing and Analysis. Oxford University Press, Oxford, pp. 223 –248. Dewulf, J., Koenen, F., Laevens, H., et al., 2003. Infrared thermometry is not suitable for the detection of fever in pigs[J]. Vlaams Diergeneeskundig Tijdschrift 72 (5), 373 –379. Godyn, Dorota, Herbu, Piotr, 2017. Applications of continuous body temperature mea- surements in pigs–a review. Anim. Sci. 56 (2), 209 –220. Guangan, Zhang, 2017.Status and development trend of China's pig industry [J]. Vet.Guid. 07, 19–20 (in Chinese).Guangyu, Bai, 2014.Design of Sow Body Temperature Monitoring Node Based on Wire-less Sensor Network. Nanjing Agricultural University (in Chinese with Englishabstract).Hanchun, Yang, 2007.Occurrence and prevalence of porcine hyperthermia syndrome[J].Pig Sci. (01), 78–80 (in Chinese).Hentzen, 2012.Design and Validation of a Wireless Temperature Measurement Systemfor Laboratory and Farm Animals Proceedings of Measuring Behavior (Utrecht, TheNetherlands, August 28–31, 2012).Jiao, Wang, 2017.How to check the body temperature of pigs [J]. Anim. Hus. Vet. Sci.Technol. Inf. 02, 5 (in Chinese).Jinqi, Liu, 2016.Application of Infrared Thermography in the Field Detection of DairyCow's Skin Temperature. Northeast Agricultural University (in Chinese with Englishabstract).Jizhu, Dong, Jinyuan, Zhao, Yanchun, Li, 2016. Current status and development prospects of China's pig industry[J]. South. Agric. Mach. 47 (01), 37 (in Chinese).Juxiong, Liu, Yang, Huanmin, 2011. Animal Physiology [M]. Higher Education Press, Bei- jing (in Chinese).Kammersgaard, T.S., Malmkvist, J., Pedersen, L.J., 2013. Infrared thermography—a non- invasive tool to evaluate thermal status of neonatal pigs based on surface tempera-ture.[J]. Animal 7 (12), 2026–2034. Knizkova, I., Kunc, P., Gurdil, G.A.K., et al., 2007. Applications of infrared thermography in animal production[J]. 22 (3), 329 –336. Krizanac, D., Haugk, M., Sterz, F., et al., 2010. Tracheal temperature for monitoring body temperature during mild hypothermia in pigs[J]. Resuscitation 81 (1), 87 –92.Leizi, Jiao, Daming, Dong, Xiande, Zhao, et al., 2016. Compensation method for the inﬂu- ence of angle of view on animal temperature measurement using thermal imagingcamera combined with depth image[J]. J. Therm. Biol. 62, 15 –19. Li, Ma, Yuyao, Duan, Ze, Zong, et al., 2015. Segmentation of thermal infrared image for sow based on improved convex active contours[J]. J. Agric. Mach. 46 (S1), 180 –186 (in Chinese with English abstract).Li, Chen, Tonghui, Qian, Shizhen, Zhang, et al., 2017. Design of pig signs and breeding en- vironment monitoring system based on wireless sensor network. Tech. Autom. Appl.36 (05), 61–64 (in Chinese with English abstract).Libo, Gao, Gang, Duan, Gefen, Yin, et al., 2010. Trial effect of infrared thermometer in body temperature screening of pig slaughterhouse[J]. China Anim. Hus. Vet. Med. 37 (09),235–237 (in Chinese).Liping, Zhou, Zhi, Chen, Da, Chen, et al., 2016. Pig ear root detection based on adapted Otsu[J]. J. Agric. Mach. 47 (04) (228-232+14. in Chinese with English abstract).LokeshBabu, D.S., Jeyakumar, S., Vasant, Patil Jitendra, et al., 2018. Monitoring foot surface temperature using infrared thermal imaging for assessment of hoof health status incattle: a review [J]. J. Therm. Biol. 78, 10 –21. Lu, Wang, Yonghua, Hui, Chunxiao, Wei, et al., 2015. Application of body temperature changes in the diagnosis and treatment of swine diseases[J]. Anhui Agric. Sci. Bull.21 (05), 108–110 (in Chinese).Lu, Mingzhou, Heb, Ju, Chen, Chao, et al., 2018. An automatic ear base temperature extrac- tion method for top view piglet thermal image[J]. Comput. Electron. Agric. 155,339–347.McManus, C., Tanure, C.B., Peripolli, V., et al., 2016. Infrared thermography in animal pro- duction: an overview.[J]. Comput. Electron. Agric. 123 (C), 10 –16. National Bureau of Statistics of the People's Republic of China website, 2018. http://data. stats.gov.cn/easyquery.htm?cn=C01 . Qiaoping, Zhang, 2011.Judging method of pig disease based on body temperature detec-tion[J]. Mod. Agric. Sci. Tech. (20) (352+354. in Chinese).Rainwater-Lovett, K., Pacheco, J.M., Packer, C., et al., 2009. Detection of foot-and-mouth disease virus infected cattle using infrared thermography[J]. Vet. J. 180 (3), 317 –324. Requejo, Jose M., Garrido-Izard, Miguel, Correa, Eva C., et al., 2018. Pig ear skin tempera- ture and feed efﬁciency: Using the phase space to estimate thermoregulatory effort.ScienceDirect 174, 80–88.Salles, Marcia Saladini Vieira, da Silva, Suelen Corrêa, Salles, Fernando André, et al., 2016.Mapping the body surface temperature of cattle by infrared thermography[J].J. Therm. Biol. 62 (Pt A), 63–69. Schaefer, A.L., Cook, N., Tessaro, S.V., et al., 2004. Early detection of inﬂammation and in- fection using infrared thermography[J]. Can. J. Anim. Sci. 84 (1), 73 –80. Schaefer, A.L., Cook, N.J., Bench, C., et al., 2012. The non-invasive and automated detection of bovine respiratory disease onset in receiver calves using infrared thermography[J].Res. Vet. Sci. 93 (2), 928–935.25 Z. Zhang et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 1 (2019) 14 –26Siewert, C., Dänicke, S., Kersten, S., et al., 2014. Difference method for analysing infrared images in pigs with elevated body temperatures[J]. Z. Med. Phys. 24 (1), 6 –15. Soerensen, D.D., Pedersen, L.J., 2015. Infrared skin temperature measurements for moni- toring health in pigs: a review[J]. Acta Vet. Scand. 57 (1), 5 1(2015-02-03).Soerensen, D.D., Clausen, S., Mercer, J.B., et al., 2014. Determining the emissivity of pig skin for accurate infrared thermography[J]. Comput. Electron. Agric. 109, 52 –58. Sykes, D.J., Couvillion, J.S., Cromiak, A., et al., 2012. The use of digital infrared thermal im- aging to detect estrus in gilts.[J]. Theriogenology 78 (1), 147 –152. Taeho, C., Woosung, J., Euihwa, N., et al., 2010. Comparison of rectal and infrared ther- mometry for obtaining body temperature of gnotobiotic piglets in conventional por-table germ free facility.[J]. Asian Australas. J. Anim. Sci. 23 (10), 1364 –1368. Weihan, Cai, 2017.Estrus identiﬁcation and sowing time of sows[J]. Chinese J. Anim. Hus.Vet. Med. 33 (10), 71 (in Chinese).Weixing, Zhu, Liu, Bo, Jianjun, Yang, et al., 2015. Pig ear area detection based on adapted active shape model[J]. J. Agric. Mach. 46 (03), 288 –295 (in Chinese with English abstract).Wirthgen, T., Zipser, S., Franze, U., et al., 2011. Automatic Segmentation of Veterinary In- frared Images With the Active Shape Approach[M] Image Analysi. Springer, BerlinHeidelberg.Xiangxue, Meng, 2016.Application of Infrared Thermography in the Field Detection ofSow's Skin Temperature [D]. Northeast Agricultural University (in Chinese with En-glish abstract).Xie, Wei, Mccahon, P., Jakobsen, K., et al., 2004. Evaluation of the ability of digital infrared imaging to detect vascular changes in experimental animal tumours.[J]. Int. J. Cancer108 (5), 790–794.Xudong, Shi, Yuling, Bai, Jinfang, Zhang, et al., 2013. Estrus and estrus identiﬁcation of sows[J]. Pig Sci. 30 (04), 56–58 (in Chinese).Yong, Cai, 2015.The Study on the Designing of the Automatical Acquisition System forCow Surface Temperature and the Fitting for Surface Temperature With Rectal Tem-perature [D]. Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences (in Chinese with Englishabstract).Yongxiao, Qin, 2015.Research on Pig Body Temperature Collection System Based on In-frared Temperature Measurement Equipment[A]. Information Technology Branch ofChina Animal Husbandry and Veterinary Society. Proceedings of the 10th Symposiumof Information Technology Branch of China Animal Husbandry and Veterinary Society[C]. 3. China Animal Husbandry and Veterinary Learning Information TechnologyBranch (in Chinese).Yuan, Liu, Yuanping, Zhang, 2016. National live pig production development regulations (2016–2020) [J]. China Anim. Hus. (10), 30 –40 (in Chinese). Yufeng, Yang, Yanping, Shao, 2012. Cause analysis and common diseases of pig body tem- perature rise [J]. Aquac. Technol. Consultant 05, 153 (in Chinese).Yuhong, Liu, Xiulin, Liu, Wang, Fujie, et al., 2018. Application of infrared thermal imaging technology in animal and poultry disease detection [J]. Chinese Poult. 40 (05), 70 –72 (in Chinese).Yundong, Zhao, 2012.Pig fever [J]. Aquac. Technol. Consultant 06, 172 (in Chinese).Zhenling, Zhang, 2018.Reﬂections on the“healthy farming”of pigs in China under the new situation and the prospect of “welfare farming”[J]. Pig Sci. 35 (01), 126–129 (in Chinese).Ziyun, Zhang, 2015.
Detected Onset of Estrus and Behavior in the Different Varieties ofGilts Using the New Electronic Chip. Sichuan Agricultural University (in Chinesewith English abstract).26 Z. Zhang et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 1 (2019) 14 –26