Array 14 (2022) 100178
Available online 10 May 2022
2590-0056/© 2022 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. This is an open access article under the CC BY license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ ).
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Array
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/array
The evolving roles and impacts of 5G enabled technologies in healthcare: The
world epidemic COVID-19 issues
Md Mijanur Rahmana,∗, Fatema Khatunb, Sadia Islam Samia, Ashik Uzzamana
aDepartment of Computer Science and Engineering, Jatiya Kabi Kazi Nazrul Islam University, Trishal, Mymensingh 2224, Bangladesh
bDepartment of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman Science and Technology University, Gopalganj 8100, Bangladesh
A R T I C L E I N F O
Keywords:
5G technology
COVID-19 pandemic
eHealth and mHealth platforms
Internet of medical things (IoMT)
Telemedicine and online consultation
Unmanned autonomous systems (UAS)A B S T R A C T
The latest 5G technology is being introduced the Internet of Things (IoT) Era. The study aims to focus
the 5G technology and the current healthcare challenges as well as to highlight 5G based solutions that
can handle the COVID-19 issues in different arenas. This paper provides a comprehensive review of 5G
technology with the integration of other digital technologies (like AI and machine learning, IoT objects,
big data analytics, cloud computing, robotic technology, and other digital platforms) in emerging healthcare
applications. From the literature, it is clear that the promising aspects of 5G (such as super-high speed, high
throughput, low latency) have a prospect in healthcare advancement. Now healthcare is being adopted 5G-
based technologies to aid improved health services, more effective medical research, enhanced quality of
life, better experiences of medical professionals and patients in anywhere–anytime. This paper emphasizes
the evolving roles of 5G technology for handling the epidemiological challenges. The study also discusses
various technological challenges and prospective for developing 5G powered healthcare solutions. Further
works will incorporate more studies on how to expand 5G-based digital society as well as to resolve the issues
of safety–security–privacy and availability–accessibility–integrity in future health crises.
1. Introduction
The latest wireless mobile phone technology, Fifth Generation (5G),
was first widely deployed in 2019. While 5G network is at developing
stage, some countries including China, South Korea, the UK and the
US commercially deployed 5G networks, and some other developed
countries are being expecting to put forward commercial 5G networks
by 2025 [ 1]. Comparing to the existing wireless networks, 5G provides
high data rate, lower latency, high volume of devices connectivity
with energy efficiency, high reliability and mobility support [ 2]. Thus,
the services offered by 5G mobile networks are generally categorized
into three group, namely (i) ‘‘enhanced mobile broadband (eMBB)’’,
(ii) ‘‘ultra-reliable low latency communications (URLLC)’’, and (iii)
‘‘massive machine-type communications (mMTC)’’ [ 3]. In 2019, 67% of
the world people have subscribed to cellar devices, of which 65% have
used smart phones [ 4], and 204 billion apps have been downloaded [ 5].
About 3.8 billion public have eagerly used social media reported in
January 2020 [ 6]. As the number of digital devices connectivity with
5G is dramatically increasing, the extent of variation in exposure to
radiofrequency arenas is still under investigation.
∗Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: mijan@jkkniu.edu.bd (M.M. Rahman), fatema_aece@yahoo.com (F. Khatun), samis6077@gmail.com (S.I. Sami),
ashikurzaman23@gmail.com (A. Uzzaman).In the meantime, the globe is now facing a public health disaster
caused by the novel ‘‘coronavirus disease (COVID-19)’’ [ 7]. China has
first identified the virus in December 2019 [ 8], and many scientists
investigated the genetic code of the COVID-19 [ 9] as well as trying to
combat the coronavirus pandemic health emergency. But the COVID-
19 outbreak is deadly affected 219 countries and territories with more
than 2.8 million deaths and about 132 millions infected cases in the
globe, reported on April 05, 2021 [ 10,11]. As 50 cities in China first
commercially deployed 5G wireless networks in October 2019, many
people trying to claim the 5G-coronavirus connectivity theory. The
pioneer of 5G technology is South Korea and they first offered com-
mercial 5G with mobile hotspot in December 2018 [ 12]. But the novel
coronavirus not get its first start in South Korea, and many countries
without having 5G networks, such as Malaysia, India, Bangladesh, Iran,
France, Singapore and Nigeria, etc., have been seriously affected by
the virus. Thus, it is false claim of the 5G-coronavirus theory, and the
novel coronavirus having nothing to do with 5G as well as there is no
scientific evidence [ 13–15]. Several studies have been done and stated
that 5G related telecommunications systems do not affect the human
immune system [ 16].
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.array.2022.100178
Received 4 March 2022; Accepted 25 April 2022Array 14 (2022) 100178
2M.M. Rahman et al.
Table 1
Key sectors in which 5G technology has the potential impacts to handle the epidemiological challenges.
5G applications to assist the COVID-19 impacted sectors
Healthcare [ 17] Education [ 18] Transportation [ 19] Industry [ 20] Agriculture [ 21]
Telemedicine, Remote surgery,
Remote health monitoring,
mHealth, Wearables, etc.Online class, Remote,
assessment, Remote
conferencing, Distance learning,
etc.Smart transport, Autonomous
vehicles, Intelligent maps, etc.Smart manufacturing, Industrial
Internet, Robot-control process,
Remote supply and delivery, etc.Smart agriculture, Smart
irrigation, Remote crop
monitoring, Farm data
acquisition, etc.
Fig. 1. Sectors that win the most from 5G technology [ 24].
Table 2
Impacts of 5G enabled digital technologies in healthcare.
5G enabled digital technologies in confronting the COVID-19 pandemic
AI [33] IoT [ 22] Big data [ 34] and Cloud
computing [ 35]Robots and Robotic technology
[36]AR and VR [ 37]
Analyzing real-time health data
and improving diagnosis
proceduresRapidly expanding the number
of connected devices and
providing a diversity of
healthcare solutionsAllowing more data to be
transmitted quickly and more
reliably to the cloudDeploying to limit human
resources, to relieve pressure,
and support effective careDeploying new consumer
devices that support more
advanced AR and VR apps
Moreover, 5G technology is anticipated to connect billions of de-
vices with improved performance, and 5G supported applications have
the potential to deliver transformative impacts in various sectors (see
Table 1), such as healthcare, education, resource management, trans-
portation, agriculture, etc. to handle the challenges caused the COVID-
19 pandemic [ 22,23]. It is estimated that 5G enabled digital market
revenues will be USD 1.3 trillion by 2026, and sectors that use most
5G technology is shown in Fig. 1 [24]. Since 2020 the world is the
COVID-19 related health crisis, the 5G combined with other advanced
digital technologies (see Table 2) can support to tackle the coron-
avirus challenges in healthcare [ 25]. These digital technologies includ-
ing the ‘‘internet of things (IoT)’’ [ 26,27], ‘‘big-data analytics’’ [ 28],
‘‘artificial intelligence (AI)’’ that uses ‘‘machine learning’’ and ‘‘deep
learning’’ [ 29,30], and ‘‘blockchain technology’’ [ 31], are highly inter-
related and will be more effective with 5G technology in healthcare
applications. This innovative 5G technology will transform together
speedy connectivity, cloud-based storage, billions of smart devices,
and enhanced medical services in healthcare sector. Thus, 5G will
transform the healthcare sector and enable more than USD 1.1 trillion
in economic output in 2035 [ 32].
The 5G enabled digital technology can aid more effective medi-
cal research, diagnose and treatment, as well as improved healthcare
services for both medical professionals and patients in anywhere–
anytime [ 38]. Fig. 2 illustrates a simple 5G based health platform
that assists both the patients and the medical professionals [ 39]. Since
5G promises super-speed (about 100Mbs) with high data bandwidth
and low latency, AI like advanced technologies implemented in 5G
networks can enable an intelligent and autonomous functionality tolimit the COVID-19 epidemic [ 40,41]. The IHS Market Ltd has reported
that 5G will facilitate more than USD 1.0 trillion in products and
services in the worldwide healthcare by 2020 [ 42]. Also, about 50
billion smart devices and about 212 billion sensors are expected to be
supported by the 5G network [ 43,44]. These health devices, medical
wearables, and remote sensors in 5G networks have effective contribu-
tion in healthcare to support the health emergency issues caused by the
COVID-19 epidemic [ 45]. Now healthcare is being adopted 5G enabled
developing technologies that can assist in health services, improving
quality of life, better medical stuffs and patient experiences [ 46]. It
also support the faster transmission of large volume of health data or
medical reports [ 17]. 5G enabled telemedicine is an emerging health
service, and it expected that the growth of this market will reach at a
‘‘compound annual growth rate (CAGR)’’ of 16.5% until 2023 [ 47–49].
The usage of 5G enabled technologies is expanding rapidly with its
potential impacts in many fields, and it provides a real-time services
more than our expectation [ 50]. The aim of this study is to focus the
5G technology and current healthcare issues as well as to highlight 5G
based solutions that can handle the COVID-19 issues in different arenas.
This paper emphasizes the evolving roles of 5G enabled technologies,
like AI and machine learning, IoT objects, big data analytics, cloud
computing and other digital platforms in emerging applications for han-
dling the current epidemiological challenges. Besides a comprehensive
review of 5G enable technologies to combat the coronavirus outbreak,
the study discusses various technological and healthcare challenges as
well as prospective for developing 5G powered healthcare solutions.Array 14 (2022) 100178
3M.M. Rahman et al.
Fig. 2. A simple 5G based health platform for remote patient monitoring and treatment [ 39].
2. Background
2.1. 5G-coronavirus false theory
Each generation of wireless network standard has introduced a new
era of telecommunication, and offered improved data-flow capability
and latency. The mobile network just began with first generation
(1G) in 1980s, 2G represented the digital transmission in 1991, 3G
introduced the mobile telephony world in 2000s, 4G introduced the
Streaming Era in 2009, and the latest 5G technology is being introduced
the Internet of Things Era [ 51]. But it was asserted that 3G was
deployed in 2003 as the year of the SARS epidemic, 4G was first
established in 2009 as the year of the swine flu pandemic, and finally,
5G network was introduced in 2019 that is the year of the COVID-19
outbreak [ 13,52]. But the truth is that 3G was first unrolled in Japan in
2001 and Japan was not affected at that time. According to the ‘‘World
Health Organization (WHO)’’ reports, in 2002 the SARS outbreak began
in China before unrolling 3G. In late 2009, 4G network first launched in
Sweden and Norway [ 53]. The Swine flu evolved by the H1N1 influenza
virus that was first identified in April 2009 in Mexico and the United
States before 4G deployment [ 54,55]. The first COVID-19 case was
identified in China on December 31, 2019, and the coronavirus has
rapidly spread around the world in 2020. But 5G was first launched
in South Korea on December 1, 2018 [ 56]. The emerged date of 5G-
coronavirus matching is coincidence. Many countries without having
5G networks have seriously affected by the coronavirus [ 57–59]. Al-
though 3G, 4G and 5G networks were unrolled at the same years to
the SARS, H1N1 influenza virus and novel coronavirus outbreaks, the
WHO reported that is no scientific study could link between the wireless
technology and the virus outbreak [ 60].
2.2. Impact of the COVID-19 epidemic
The world is still now a health emergency situation due to the
COVID-19 caused by the novel coronavirus, which was provisionally
named ‘‘2019 novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV)’’ by the WHO in Decem-
ber 2019. Several studies showed that the 2019-nCoV is considered a
new human-infecting betacoronavirus [ 61], and allied with mild clin-
ical symptoms of (i) ‘‘severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) coro-
navirus (SARS-CoV)’’ [ 62], a novel betacoronavirus that first emerged
in China in 2002 [ 63,64], and (ii) ‘‘middle east respiratory syndrome
(MERS) coronavirus (MERS-CoV)’’, was first identified in Saudi Arabia
in 2012 [ 65]. Till now (April 5, 2021) the 2019-nCoV has been reported
in 219 countries with 132 millions confirmed cases of ‘‘human-to-
human transmission’’ [ 66]. The outbreak of COVID-19 declared as a
pandemic that affected our socio-economic environments and all the
sectors of healthcare, tourism and hospitality, education, aviation and
transportation, manufacturing and distribution, agriculture and supply
chain, electronics and energy, financial markets, etc. It was estimatedthat the worldwide economy shrink by about 3% due to the COVID-19
pandemic [ 67]. Some of the COVID-19 affected sectors are highlighted
below:
I.Healthcare: The number of COVID-19 cases is increasing day by
day and this deadly disease cruelly affected the healthcare that
leads shortage of healthcare facilities and skilled professionals,
insufficient accommodation and hospitality, limited testing kits,
‘‘personal protective equipment (PPE)’’, medications, ventilators,
ICUs, etc.[ 68]. Due to the pressure of the coronavirus cases and
limited medical facilities, other non-COVID-19 patient’s treat-
ments have been disrupted in hospitals [ 69]. Also, the medical
services and treatment bills have suddenly increased in most of
the countries to fight the healthcare challenges.
II.Education: The pandemic severely affected on-site academic
activities, and about 153 countries around the world have closed
their educational institutes. It affected about 1.2 billion students
learning carriers, reported on May 2020 [ 70]. Due to the closing
of universities, millions of international students left foreign
countries that caused negative impacts on education.
III.Tour and Travel: Due to the enforcing of lockdown and ‘‘move-
ment control order (MCO)’’, tours and travel are the most badly
affected sectors [ 71]. Reducing the employment, losing jobs and
the cancellation of flights have led to billion-dollar loss of the
related industries [ 72].
IV.Industry: The stuffs and workers in the manufacturing industries
cannot work remotely, and many of the small industries are
being stopped their operations due to this pandemic [ 73]. It
is often difficult to implement standards of hygiene and social
distancing rules in the industrialized jobs and areas.
V.Agriculture and Food Supply Chain: Due to the restrictions
on many sectors (like restaurants and hospitality industry) and
the reducing of demand, the food supply chains have been
disrupted in this pandemic [ 74]. Especially in poor and develop-
ing countries where food preservation facilities are insufficient,
farmers are suffering the loss of income and it turned serious
impacts on agricultural economy by affecting the areas of food
production and supply, livestock production, farmers’ income
and employment, sales and trade [ 75].
VI.Online Platforms and Communication Networks: As most of
the countries in the world are imposing lockdown, the normal
operations have disrupted and people working from home using
online platforms. The utilization of communication networks is
increasing significantly. It is reported that the Internet traffic
is increased more than 25% on the typical usage [ 76]. Ta-
ble 3 highlights the impacts of the coronavirus pandemic on the
existing mobile networks [ 23].
Thus, the above impacts of the coronavirus outbreak are now af-
fecting the global economy. During this pandemic, losing jobs and
decreasing income, restrictions on movement, goods and services have
been declined in our social life and normal activities.Array 14 (2022) 100178
4M.M. Rahman et al.
Table 3
Impacts of the pandemic on the existing wireless networks.
Impact of COVID-19 on the usage of telecommunication networks
Capacity limitation [77] Service disruption [78] Energy wastage [79] Cell outages [23] Rural-connectivity limitation
[80]
Increasing network dependency
by many sectors, Surging traffic
demand and demand shift to
residential areasIncreasing demand for high
mobility support, Poor support
for high mobility broadband
services, Need for health
servicesIncreasing number of
underutilized base station due to
shifting traffic demand, Lack of
autonomous base station
switching mechanismsReducing the number of on-site
workers, Attack on telecom
engineers on-site, Damage to
base station equipmentLimiting in deployment of
network, Erratic electricity
supply, Low profit compared to
investment
2.3. Current healthcare system
The existing healthcare system is facing a number of challenges and
problems. Major global challenges include lack of healthcare services
and facilities, lack of digital resources and limited access, lack of
quality treatment and high costs, lack of digital devices and systems,
etc. [17,81].
I.Challenges with EHRs and Universal Access: The ‘‘Electronic
Health Record (EHR)’’ stores patient’s health information elec-
tronically that can be shared securely with multiple users to
provide quality service in integrated health from anywhere in
the world [82,83]. The main problem in the existing system is
that hospitals and medical staffs are not connected to the EHR
system, and thus, the patients‘‘ô record is constrained within
clinics and laboratories. In poor and developing countries, the
deployment of universal healthcare system is very challenging
due to several reasons such as limited medical equipment and
resources, lack of skilled professionals, as well as poor people
unable to afford medical services [84,85].
II.Limited Resources and Healthcare Facilities: Many countries
are now suffering the insufficient medical services in fighting
the COVID-19 outbreak due to shortage of hospitals and ac-
commodation, insufficient healthcare supplies and medications,
shortage of skilled staffs and digital systems. About 57 countries
are seriously facing the shortage of medical professionals [84,
86], and it is estimated that the world will have a lack of
12.9 million healthcare staffs by 2035 [87]. Thus, it requires
the deploying of telemedicine and e-Heath services to support
medical staffs as well as patients.
III.Challenges in Health Information Systems: As the existing
healthcare is suffering troubles in universal health information
systems, the development of ‘‘information communications tech-
nology (ICT)’’ tools will have a great transformation in the whole
healthcare system. It can connect multiple medical devices and
equipment, process heterogeneous health data, optimum allo-
cate available resources, automate financial transactions and
management to provide efficient healthcare services, like remote
surgery, wellness monitoring applications, etc. [88,89].
IV.Lacks in Developing Intelligent Healthcare Solutions: The
existing healthcare is suffering for poor data-driven practices
in patients assessment in which both patients and staffs are
restricted to utilize proper medication procedure and digital de-
vices [90]. It sometimes causes over-or under-estimated effects
of undesirable drug reaction. The development of intelligent
healthcare solutions can provide the best care to the patients as
well as to ensure safe and quality services.
2.4. 5G technology and health issues
5G follows the advancement of 2G, 3G and 4G wireless network
standards [91,92]. 2G was suitable for calls and text-messages with
very-low speed. Beside calls and messaging, 3G also supported data
and the Internet services with the speed over 5 Mbps. The existing
4G network supports faster connectivity with the speed over 10 Mbps,and allows multiple connections of digital devices. The latest 5G tech-
nology is expected to have three major features over the existing 4G
network [93], such as (i) super-fast connections and speeds (about 10 to
20 Gbps data upload/download speed), (ii) large capacity of users and
devices connectivity (up to 1 million devices per square-kilometer), and
(iii) very-low latency or very-fast responsiveness (about 1 mSec). Vari-
ous technologies, such as ‘‘Device-to-Device (D2D) communications’’,
IoT, ‘‘Massive Multiple Input-Multiple-Output (MIMO)’’, ‘‘millimetre-
wave communications’’, full-duplex transmissions, ‘‘Unmanned Aerial
Vehicles (UAV)’’ and drone communications are utilizing 5G networks
to provide coverage in urban and rural areas [94]. Healthcare, smart-
cities, transportation and manufacturing are the major application
areas, in which 5G has the potential to offer the more designated
services and advanced applications.
The US, China, Japan and South Korea are the leading countries
in 5G deployment and development [95], where 5G home-services
and some big applications have been developing in many cities [92].
South Korea has demonstrated 5G technology in February 2018 Winter
Olympics. They have been rising their 5G networks and expected 5G
deployment all over the country by 2022–2023. China has launched
commercial 5G networks in 2019, and is expanding 5G communication
as its ‘Made in China 2025’ plan in research and development strategies.
Japan has launched a commercial 5G network in 2020. Austria, Spain,
Switzerland, and some other European countries have been launched
5G services and planned to expand the networks. It is expected that
the 5G cloud will cover one-third of the world population with about
1.8 billion connections by 2025 [22,96].
5G is a radiofrequency (RF) based technology that uses electro-
magnetic spectrum (same as 4G spectrum) to transmit information
involving radiations (the emission of energy) [97]. Radiation is charac-
terized by the levels of power on the ‘‘electromagnetic fields (EMF)’’,
and separated into two groups, such as ionizing (or higher frequency
radiation) and non-ionizing (or lower frequency radiation) [98,99].
Ionizing radiation includes UV-rays, X-rays and gamma-rays, and the
excess energy emitted from this radiation damages cells (i.e., breaks
the chemical bonds in DNA) and causes cancer. 5G involves non-
ionizing radiation (microwave and millimeter wavelength radiation),
and this radiation does not emit enough energy that directly damages
cells [100].
The WHO deployed an international project on EMF in 1996 [101],
and the project investigated the health impacts of exposure to fre-
quency radiations in the range of 0 to 300 GHz [102]. Most of the
study did not find a link between RF signals from cellular towers or
phones and diseases. From some investigations in 2011, the WHO said
the radiation from cellular might cause some brain cancers [103]. But
radiation does not cause a virus. The international radiation watchdogs,
the`‘IEEE (Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers)’’ and the
‘‘ICNIRP (International Commission on Non-Ionizing Radiation Protec-
tion)’’ [99] have been conducted the research to set safety guidelines
for the usage of 5G frequency, and they confirmed that the frequencies
at which 5G will be deployed will be safe for human [97,104,105].
Moreover, the WHO is conducting a study on the health impacts of
exposure to RFs covering 5G. They will analyze technical facts related
to health risks from 5G radiation, and publish the review report by
2022 [106].Array 14 (2022) 100178
5M.M. Rahman et al.
2.5. 5G healthcare opportunities
5G connectivity is improving the healthcare services in different
ways [17] by enabling home healthcare, digitizing pathological anal-
ysis, handling patients’ information files, enabling remote surgery and
medications, enabling healthcare training and therapeutic, enabling
secure staff–patient communication and management, etc. [107,108].
The promising aspects of 5G will also have the strength in the future
of medicine and treatment advancement [109], and the utilization
of advanced technology in healthcare has been reviewed in several
studies [110–113]. A few aspects of the newly commercialized 5G tech-
nology relevant to healthcare services, that have potential influences in
limiting the COVID-19 pandemic, are highlighted below.
I.In-home Healthcare Services: Due to limited number of hospi-
tals, high costs and long waiting in the pandemic, the patients
want to be treated at home, if they are not seriously affected. 5G
is helping to improve the home healthcare services, like online
health consultancy, remote health monitoring via digital devices
over a secured 5G mobile network.
II.Digital Pathological Analysis: 5G is being supporting to de-
velop smart hospitals by improving digital pathology and di-
agnosis. The healthcare has already experienced the 5G pow-
ered computed tomography (CT) scanning remotely in real time
[114]. The medical specialists will be able to utilize 5G net-
works to access the large volume of health data obtained during
diagnosis or surgery from anywhere in any time.
III.Remote Surgery and Medications: The promising features of
5G will revolutionize on online treatments and surgery. The
5G healthcare innovations include telemedicine, tele-surgery or
robotic-surgery, remotely emergency care, etc. The 5G based
telemedicine provides a remote consultation platform, in which
the health professionals can treat the patients effectively. The
tele-surgery provides a real-time operation, and the surgeons
can perform remote surgery using surgical devices through 5G
networks [115]. 5G connected ambulances or mobile clinics in
rural areas could enable AR assisted operations to serve the
patients with appropriate critical care.
IV.Healthcare Training and VR Therapy 5G also augments the
prospect for distant training with audio–visual and real-time
communication. Virtual reality (VR) with 5G has already trans-
formed many aspects in healthcare industry. The medical profes-
sionals and students are using 5G enabled high-end VR to simu-
late operations, and clinics are using an innovative VR therapy
to assist patients, recover from chronic pain or injuries [116].
V.Healthcare Research and Education: The 5G technology rev-
olutionizes the link among researchers/scientists, patients, and
medical centers. It will be achieved by establishing the envi-
ronment with 5G based IoT and ICT tools, intelligent platforms,
multi-access edge computing (MEC), cloud computing and big-
data analytics to power the facility for research, treatment and
wellness education [117].
2.6. 5G enabled technologies in healthcare
Now-a-days, the advanced digital technologies are being trans-
formed in healthcare to handle the world epidemic COVID-19 [118].
The promising 5G enabled digital technologies, such as IoT, AI, Big Data
Analytics and Cloud Computing, Blockchain, etc. have been augmented
the public-health strategies [25] to fix the current healthcare limita-
tions and confront the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic [34].
I.IoT Aided Healthcare Advancement: We are observing the
growth of IoT aided systems, and it is projected that more
than 20 billion devices/sensors will be allied to the Internet by
2020 [119]. These devices can convey information to the cloudthat enables a uprising automation with resource utilization
and energy efficiency [120]. While the existing 4G networks
support only 4000 devices per square kilometer, 5G can con-
nect up to a million devices per kilometer. Thus, IoT with 5G
standards is revolutionizing the existing healthcare with a diver-
sity of solutions [121], such as remote health monitoring and
diagnostics, remote medications and treatment, telemedicine
and telesurgery, patient information management, emergency
caring, and much more.
II.Big Data for Healthcare: 5G digital world enables the connec-
tivity of billions of devices and expert systems. These digital
devices and technologies relevant to healthcare produce a va-
riety of ‘‘electronic health record (EHR)’’, referred to as big
data in healthcare [120]. These devices are being utilized in
monitoring our daily life, such as constant monitoring of heart-
beat and movement, blood-pressure, body-temperature, oxygen-
concentration in blood, glucose, human activities and emotions,
etc. This large volume of medical data can be used for in-
sights analysis in various aspects of human life, developing
a patient-centric personalized healthcare system, studying the
viral activity, as well as preparing health guidelines for public-
health policy and planning, monitoring and controlling the viral
outbreak in the pandemic [122,123].
III.AI in Healthcare: The real era of AI (machine learning and deep
learning) will arise with the deployment of 5G technology. It
would be more reliable to utilize machine learning techniques
and expert systems for analyzing real-time health data in could
platforms using 5G networks [124]. It is now emerging reality
that machine learning and deep learning approaches are being
developed in improving diagnostic procedures, especially for the
detection and diagnosis of COVID-19 cases [125–127].
IV.Robots and Robotic Process in Healthcare: The robots and
robotic automations are being developed to limit the human
resources, to relieve pressure of health professionals as well as to
enhance diagnostic capabilities with the help of 5G connectivity
in this pandemic situation [128]. We have already experienced
that 5G powered robots can deliver drugs and meals to patients,
inform patients to take medications, measure body temperature,
help to ensure social distancing, etc. 5G enabled unmanned
vehicles or drone can assist healthcare services in the critical
zones. The robot-assisted therapy and surgery with 5G networks
have great potentials in remote medications and surgery to treat
the patients [129–132].
V.Other Digital Technologies in Healthcare: Recent advance-
ments in sensing technologies (microelectronics and nanofabri-
cation) and wearable computing, bio-engineering and computer-
aided surgery, virtual reality (VR) and tactile Internet, smart
devices and digital platforms with 5G compatibility have en-
abled a dramatic development in the healthcare systems [109,
133]. Various social-media platforms, like Facebook, Twitter,
Youtube, WhatsApp, Instagram, are currently used by the public
to receive real-time updates as well as by the healthcare author-
ities to take initiatives and clarify uncertainties about COVID-19
pandemic [25,134,135]. Furthermore, some AI enabled systems,
like facial thermal imaging system, have been implemented
to detect high-temperature person at various screening points,
such as shopping malls, airports, train stations, bus terminals,
etc. [136–139].
3. 5G based solutions in limiting COVID-19 outbreak
3.1. Aspects of 5G technology in healthcare
A few aspects of 5G technology (see Fig. 3), those have great
potentials in healthcare advancements, are highlighted below:Array 14 (2022) 100178
6M.M. Rahman et al.
Fig. 3. Few aspects of 5G interconnected technologies in healthcare to tackle the pandemic [ 140].
I.Telemedicine: Telemedicine requires a reliable and faster net-
work connectivity that will offer quality video and real-time
communication. 5G standards can enable proper telemedicine
environment that augments online health consultancy [ 141].
It is estimated that the telemedicine market will raise yearly
growth of 16.5 percent from 2017 to 2023 in healthcare [ 47]. 5G
also meets the teleconferencing requirements to enable medical
experts to treat patients efficiently from anywhere in anytime.
II.Telesurgery: As 5G is a very-low latency and super-fast network,
it enables telesurgery or remote medical operation. A health
surgeon in China first performed a 5G-assisted remote surgery
using da Vinci surgical robots on animal in January 2019 [ 142].
In March 2019, a telesurgery using 5G mobile network was first
performed remotely on human brain in China [ 115]. Moreover,
5G capabilities can improve the surgical robots and robotic pro-
cess that can enhance the surgeon’s capabilities in the pandemic.
III.Internet of Medical Things (IoMT): 5G network infrastructure
is able to connect a billion of digital devices and wearable med-
ical equipments (i.e., IoMT objects) that allow a link between
physical and digital worlds, and facilitate real-time analytics to
improve health outcomes. It can gather a large volume of health
data and store on a cloud as well as assist online accessibility to
the users, medical professionals and researchers. The world has
already experienced a number of IoMTs and health applications
(for instant, 5G thermal imaging systems, smart diagnostic tools,
therapeutic kits, etc.) as a part of the emerging 5G innovations
in the pandemic [ 138,143,144].
IV.Remote Diagnosis and Treatment: 5G connectivity is rev-
olutionizing in continuous contagion monitoring and remote
diagnosis from anywhere in this pandemic [ 132,145]. It also
enables digital medicine that can share a high-volume of health
information across a worldwide network of health specialists for
caring patients. In January 2020, China has first developed 5G
remote diagnosis and treatment system [ 146] that can support
remote diagnosis and treat patients in this pandemic.
V.Digitized and Data-Driven Platforms: Many developed coun-
tries, like China, Japan, South Korea and the US, are rapidly
set up their specific 5G wireless networks for digitalized, data-
driven and Cloud-based emergency platforms that can assist the
COVID-19 treatment in hospitals [ 147,148]. These digital plat-
forms support the healthcare systems in the context of improved
response times, remote monitoring, data analysis and diagnosis,
resource allocation, etc.3.2. 5G powered major solutions
The emerging innovations using digital technologies rely on a re-
liable telecommunication infrastructure and high-speed Internet con-
nectivity. The integration of 5G enabled technologies is a transfor-
mation of the person-centered care models to the community-based
approaches [ 149,150]. It offers a real-time health solution for the whole
population [ 151]. Some of the pioneering healthcare solutions using 5G
enabled digital technologies in response to the COVID-19 pandemic are
highlighted in the following sub-sections.
3.2.1. 5G-powered ehealth approach
An innovative eHealth approach [ 45] has been developed using 5G
communication technologies. The mechanisms implemented in eHealth
are used for acquiring health data from a variety of sources through
IoMTs, processing data, and storing the processed data to the cloud
through eHealth 5G platform. As shown in Fig. 4, the eHealth model
comprises of the three main modules, such as (i) Data acquisition from
heterogeneous sources including IoMT devices, (ii) 5G virtual platform
including data management mechanisms and data storage, and (iii)
5G communication and integration allowing a connection between
the physical systems and the 5G virtual platforms. This 5G-powered
eHealth system can support to improve the real-time healthcare services
in this pandemic.
Step 1. Data Acquisition from Heterogeneous Sources: A variety of
IoMT devices are connected together through the established
5G network. The first step involves the gathering of data
from heterogeneous sources via these devices with appro-
priate specifications (hardware and software). The composed
data from different systems and devices are utilized by either
(i) the patients for in-home monitoring, or (ii) the health
specialists for analyzing and assessing the patient’s health
status in laboratories and hospitals, or (iii) the patients for
outdoor activities.
Step 2. 5G Communication and Integration: The 5G infrastructure
development of the eHealth system comprises of two steps, the
5G communication and integration, which allow the connec-
tion between the real world and the virtual world. The data
gathered from digital devices takes place at high reliable edge-
nodes in the physical systems. These edge-nodes in the phys-
ical systems are being connected via a ‘‘5G radio access net-
work (5G-RAN)’’ [ 152]. This network enables the data analy-
sis inside the eHealth platforms. Thus, the 5G based eHealthArray 14 (2022) 100178
7M.M. Rahman et al.
Fig. 4. A typical architecture of 5G enabled eHealth Platform [ 45].
platform has been developed using an appropriate integra-
tion of ‘‘virtual network functions (VNFs)’’ [ 153,154] and
‘‘software defined network (SDN)’’ [ 155] technologies. This
platform is able to offer network virtualization, automation
and creation of new services over virtual resources.
Step 3. Data Management Mechanisms and Storage: The 5G SDN
with virtual networking platform provides all the data man-
agement mechanisms, such as data integration, data anonym-
ization, data interoperability etc. All the gathered data after
transformations (such as, data integration [ 156], anonymiza-
tion [ 157], cleaning [ 158], source reliability [ 159], and data
interoperability [ 160] procedures) is transfigured to a com-
mon format, and reserved into the eHealth database. This
transformation is a prerequisite for the effective Health plat-
form, which can support the virtualization of different eHealth
platforms running in different entities, such as in-home, hos-
pitals, clinics, laboratories, etc.
3.2.2. Real-time mobile health (mHealth) platforms
It is very important to know about the public-health related in-
formation to forecast the outbreak during the different phases of the
epidemic. Mobile technology can assist the estimation of the viral
outbreak, and provide emergency treatment during the pandemic. A
eHealth platform using mobile technology is referred to as mHealth
(mobile health) system. A simple mHealth system is graphically pre-
sented in Fig. 5 [159] that enables to connect a variety of digital
devices, such as smartphone, tablet, iPad, smartwatch, wearable, etc.
It can share the health information and applications to treat the pa-
tients in the emergency situations. These devices are generally con-
nected through Wi-Fi, ‘‘global positioning system (GPS)’’, and high-
speed telecommunication networks (5G networks).
Thus, the mHealth system using 5G wireless network and cloud-
based technologies can support to enhance the emergency treatment,
health research activities, and other healthcare services in the COVID-
19 pandemic [ 161,162]. Some of the potential services of the mHealth
platforms are highlighted below:
(i) Video conferencing and text messaging, through which a patient
can consult a doctor to get precise guidance for the distant
treatment.
(ii) Contract tracing, through which the patient database can be used
for tracing infected patient’s location in case of communal spread
of the coronavirus disease.(iii) Telemedicine offers the health consultation to treat the patient
remotely. Thus, it facilitates both the health professionals and
patients to prevent the transmission of infectious diseases.
(iv) Health apps provide the self-monitoring of individual’s health
status using wearable devices that can be securely shared with
the health professional for proper medications and treatments
during the outbreak.
The healthcare agencies and governments in different countries are
being used this type of real-time mHealth platform using 5G mobile
technologies for controlling the spread of COVID-19 epidemic [ 163].
Another mobile technology based system is presented in Fig. 6 [159].
The designated system assists in tracking and monitoring of COVID-19
infectious people and giving alerts to the public, as follows:
Step 1. The system collects the information from the network tower to
which user smartphone is joined. The apps use this informa-
tion in tracking and monitoring the individual’s movement,
and aware the emergency situations. The apps also assist
the users in better understanding of the COVID-19 spread-
ing [164].
Step 2. Using the mHealth database, the healthcare agency announces
for infected people and their family to take the isolation, and
do the testing procedures at the earlier stage of the COVID-
19 infection. The database of the identified COVID-19 cases
can help in contract-tracing during future outbreaks. It can
help to inhibit the social interventions by restricting the social
contact, outdoor movement, public gathering, etc.
Step 3. The real-time data from the mHealth system can help to
estimate the infected cases and death as well as to under-
stand the nature of infection. The chance of future outbreaks
depends on this estimation. The major affected areas are
declared as red zones, and it can assist to declare the full
restrictions on movement and public gathering, the closing of
offices/institutions, etc., in the red zones [ 165,166].
3.2.3. 5G enabled telemedicine and virtual health environment
Telemedicine supports long distance healthcare services using ICT
tools and high-speed Internet connectivity (5G networks). It can adopt
the existing health systems and infrastructure [ 167] to enhance the
treatment procedures in hospitals [ 168]. 5G also helps to entail durable
health education and training, consultancy, and managerial meetingsArray 14 (2022) 100178
8M.M. Rahman et al.
Fig. 5. mHealth in various application domains.
Fig. 6. Illustration of mobile technology based COVID-19 tracking system.
using virtual platforms [ 169]. Fig. 7 illustrates a typical telemedicine
process lifecycle that starting with reading telemedicine information
and patient registration, and ending with the future follow-up appoint-
ment for monitoring patient’s health [ 141].
Though the doctors utilize virtual platform during online consulta-
tion, they try to create the almost real environment as much possible,
and maintain confidentiality patient’s privacy and agreement [ 170].
During online session, they must keep professionality in nature and
build a patient–physician relationship [ 170–172]. They also ensure the
telemedicine service within the patient’s health coverage. The patients
also will be notified if they use any third-party application during vir-
tual consultation regarding the privacy or cyber security issues. Beside
high-speed network, the system requires better supporting tools, like
smart devices with camera and microphones, proper lighting, noise-free
environment, etc., for virtual examination at the both ends [ 172,173].
Telemedicine ensures a user-friendly and comfortable virtual platform
for both the patients and the doctors as well as provides an improved
virtual treatment process.
Fig. 7. Structure of a typical telemedicine process lifecycle [ 141].
3.2.4. 5G enabled unmanned autonomous systems
The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic presents itself as a critical chal-
lenge for the ICT industries. The autonomous or semi-autonomous
systems, like unmanned vehicles, drones, robots, etc., are being de-
veloped to assist the controlling of COVID-19 crisis by minimizing
the social contact [ 112]. This ‘‘unmanned autonomous system (UAS)’’
involves a 5G wireless network that connects the system automaton
to the cloud, and a management module for the operations [ 174],
as shown in Fig. 8 [112]. Limiting the pandemic, these 5G enabled
autonomous systems are being utilizing mainly for two purposes, such
as (i) limiting the COVID-19 outbreak, by measuring body temperature,
sterilizing the infected areas, delivering and communication remotely,
(ii) security patrol, by facial recognition and other object detection.
A.Epidemic Prevention Robots: 5G-powered smart robots using
thermal imaging technique are being employed to control the
spread of the virus in many countries [ 175]. These robots were
developed by integrating 5G technology, cloud computing and
computer vision to accomplish the emergency tasks, like face
recognition, temperature screening, etc. in the pandemic [ 176].Array 14 (2022) 100178
9M.M. Rahman et al.
Fig. 8. 5G Enabled Unmanned-Vehicle Automation System [ 112].
The 5G-enabled robots and drones with smart vision sensors
have been utilized to patrol the risks zones. They have the ability
to track multiple target objects simultaneously while patrolling.
They can also monitor the spread of sickness, notify public to
wash their hands, detect and notify for wearing masks, etc.
B.Unmanned Cars: The self-driving vehicles or unmanned cars
are being employed to avoid contact between individuals at
infected areas, which greatly reduces the risk of infection. In-
tegrating 5G and autonomous driving technology, the cars can
perform fully automated and contact-free tasks with improved
efficiency [ 177]. This vehicle is connected to the remote server
through 5G network, and used as an intelligent system for dis-
infection, transportation, patrolling, epidemic prevention broad-
casting, etc.
C.5G Intelligent Robots: Another type of intelligent robot by
integrating 5G and AI technology assists medical professionals
to conduct consultations, disinfection, cleaning, and deliver-
ies [178]. The usage of these smart robots can effectively relieve
shortages of staffs, which reduce the risks of cross-infection and
improve the quarantine-control in the medical centers.
D.5G-powered Disinfection Robots: The 5G-powered disinfec-
tion robot is designed with a spray sterilization system that
can effectively disinfect the contagious area [ 179]. It can effort
autonomously in accordance with a settled disinfection route,
setting time, fixed-points, multi-track mobile disinfection and
sterilization in the contagious world [ 180]. Thus, robots are
increasingly being deployed at the front lines against the COVID-
19 pandemic in order to reduce cross-infection risks and improve
work efficiency and quality [ 181].
E.5G-powered Intelligent Drones: 5G-powered drones with AI
technology are being utilized for drugs delivery and aerial spray-
ing for disinfection in the virus affected areas [ 182]. They are
being also used to transport samples from patients to medical
workers, thus reducing the COVID-19 contagion risks.
4. Challenges and prospective
The real-time super-speed and very-low latency aspects of 5G net-
work offers a variety of new opportunities that support to expand
healthcare applications. The literature shows that 5G enabled tech-
nologies have the incredible potentials in healthcare to confront thecoronavirus pandemic. But it will not be sufficiently transportable
geographically to achieve the desired services in some cases [ 183].
In the context of healthcare services in the current epidemic, the
key challenges and the prospective of 5G enabled technologies are
described in the following sub-sections.
4.1. Key challenges
I.Health Risks: There is a confusion about suspected health risks
due to 5G radio frequency [ 184]. Public in rural areas are being
expressing esthetic concerns and worries about super-speedy net-
work’s effect. But many organizations, like NIH, FDA, National
Cancer Society, WHO, FCC agreed that there is no validity to the
worries about it.
II.5G’s Range and Coverage: Occurring obstructions in 5G net-
work interrupts its range. Thus, 5G networks require more small
devices or antennas in short distance apart to get better 5G
signal. It is difficult to deploy 5G network in rural areas that
remains the most underserved by healthcare institutions.
III.Deployment Costs: The effective development of 5G enabled
health solutions require availability of good infrastructure for
the patients, physicians and clinics. Thus, the costs of 5G estab-
lishment, related devices and infrastructure improvements plus
increased maintenance costs are a big issue in 5G healthcare
applications. It is logically expected that customers will bear
a part of those costs, and hence, the patient will be paid the
increased cost for their treatment.
IV.Training and Adaptation of New Technology: The 5G based
health system is gradually delivered through virtually using
smart devices and technologies. Both medical staffs and patients
require knowledge and skills to adopt new technologies and sys-
tems. Thus, proper training is needed to the patients and medical
staffs in learning how to use theses new platforms [ 185]. Many
developing countries may not be able to implement a complete
5G-based innovative healthcare solution, specifically in remote
and rural areas where the expansion of 4G/5G networks is more
difficult [ 173].
V.Security Challenges: Since 5G is capable of fastest data transfer
and other healthcare services remotely, security and privacy
risks are being increasing day by day. Hence, it requires to
give extra attention in 5G security concerns [ 183] that includeArray 14 (2022) 100178
10M.M. Rahman et al.
data and device protection, data filtering and digital rights man-
agement, patient’s data confidentiality, infrastructure and na-
tional security, network security, cybercrime and cyber-security,
etc. [186,187].
4.2. Prospective
I.Super-Fast and Accurate Health Services: The super-fast 5G
network can provide quick and reliable transport of large med-
ical data. Low latency feature of 5G technology can provide
faster and reliable treatment to the patients remotely, and help
surgeons for conducting remote robotic-surgery.
II.Advancements in Healthcare: 5G technology can improve per-
sonalized and preventive care. 5G powered telemedicine en-
ables real-time health consultancy and emergency treatment.
Moreover, a fully-implemented 5G network will enhance med-
ical operations and management as well as quality treatment
experiences for both the patients and medical staffs.
III.Integration of Advanced Technologies: 5G is being given us
the opportunity to utilize ‘‘artificial intelligence (AI)’’, ‘‘Internet
of medical things (IoMT)’’, ‘‘augmented reality (AR)’’, ‘‘virtual
reality (VR)’’ in healthcare applications. They have the potentials
to offer innovative and transformative health facilities as well as
enhance real-time treatment and diagnosis procedures.
IV.Cost Optimization and Safeguard Quality: The use of 5G-
powered technologies, like mHealth technology, telemedicine,
IoMTs and wearable devices, or digital health platforms [188]
can help patient’s living in urban and rural areas by gain-
ing remote access to medical assistance [189]. It will obvi-
ously save money by avoiding expensive hospital visit without
compromising quality-treatment [190]. It will also offer distant
doctor-assistance on diagnosis, and will fulfill the desired service
standards for a complete medicinal examination [191].
V.Advancements in Intervention Management and Adminis-
trative Operations: The new insights of 5G-powered healthcare
solutions will provide continuity of health caring without having
interrupt in data entry and querying tasks, thus, it is a disruptive
process in recording medical information [192,193]. It enables
improvements in intervention management by facilitating valu-
able healthcare resources, like operating theaters, electrocardio-
gram monitors, and other medical equipments. These valuable
assets enable better management as well as ensure safe and
efficient administrative operations.
5. Conclusion
The use of 5G network in integrating other digital technologies (like
AI and machine learning, IoMTs, big data analytics, cloud computing,
etc.) is now a reality in healthcare. From the literature, it is clear that
5G enabled technologies as well as intelligent systems have a prospect
to improve healthcare services, such as medical diagnosis, health mon-
itoring, treatment, management, etc. As the 5G poses non-ionizing
radiation, there is no significant health risk of 5G RF wave below the
recommended safety level. There is no evidence that 5G signal causes
the spread of the coronavirus. Moreover, 5G enabled digital technolo-
gies have been used for limiting the COVID-19 outbreak, and enhancing
the public-health strategies in 2020. Some advanced technology giants
are conducting their researches on 5G related applications that will
combat against the health risks of any undesirable epidemics. The
successful utilization of 5G technology to tackle healthcare challenges
will enhance the acceptance of such technologies for other sectors in
the future.
As it is a new field of research, some issues are to be considered
in deployment of 5G network in healthcare including infrastructure
development, technical standards, effective regulations and policy, pri-
vacy protection and security, as well as availability of research data.Further works will incorporate more study on how to expand 5G based
digital society as well as to resolve some issues, such as safety–security–
privacy, availability–accessibility–integrity, and to augment resilience
to future health crises. It is also required to compile laws and prepare
proper guidelines to deal with ethical and legal counteractions in
managing the online services during the emergency situations. With
the new technological innovations, 5G network will provide a com-
plete pathway for a smart society with various promising healthcare
applications.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing finan-
cial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to
influence the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgment
The authors wish to acknowledge the research & extension cell
of Jatiya Kabi Kazi Nazrul Islam University, Bangladesh for financial
support and cooperation in conducting this research work.
References
[1] Bass B. GSMA: Asia Set to become world’s largest 5G region by 2025.
2018, Online; GSMA Newsroom, https://www.gsma.com/newsroom/press-
release/gsma-asia-set-to-become-worlds-largest-5g-region-by-2025/. [Accessed
10 March 2021].
[2] Agiwal M, Roy A, Saxena N. Next generation 5G wireless networks: A
comprehensive survey. IEEE Commun Surv Tutor 2016;18(3):1617–55.
[3] Andrews JG, Buzzi S, Choi W, Hanly SV, Lozano A, Soong AC, et al. What will
5G be? IEEE J Sel Areas Commun 2014;32(6):1065–82.
[4] GSM Association. The mobile economy 2020. 2020, Online; GSMA Documents,
https://www.gsma.com/mobileeconomy/. [Accessed 29 March 2021].
[5] Perez S. App stores saw record 204 billion app downloads in 2019, consumer
spend of $120 billion. 2020, Techcrunch.Com, Verizon Media, Online; [Accessed
3 April 2021].
[6] Kemp S. Digital 2020: Global digital overview. 2020, Datareportal,
Online; https://datareportal.com/reports/digital-2020-global-digital-overview.
[Accessed 29 January 2021].
[7] Huang C, Wang Y, Li X, Ren L, Zhao J, Hu Y, et al. Clinical features
of patients infected with 2019 novel coronavirus in wuhan, China. Lancet
2020;395(10223):497–506.
[8] Ji W, Wang W, Zhao X, Zai J, Li X. Cross-species transmission of the newly
identified coronavirus 2019-nCoV. J Med Virol 2020;92(4):433–40.
[9] Zhou P, Yang X-L, Wang X-G, Hu B, Zhang L, Zhang W, et al. A pneumonia
outbreak associated with a new coronavirus of probable bat origin. Nature
2020;579(7798):270–3.
[10] worldometer. COVID-19 CORONAVIRUS PANDEMIC. 2021, Online; https://
www.worldometers.info/coronavirus/. [Accessed 5 April 2021].
[11] Wikipedia. Template:COVID-19 pandemic data. 2021, Online; https://
en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Template:COVID-19_pandemic_data. [Accessed 5 April
2021].
[12] Samsung. 5G launches in Korea get a taste of the future. White-Paper
(Images.Samsung.Com), 2019, Online; [Accessed 4 April 2021].
[13] Ahmed W, Vidal-Alaball J, Downing J, Seguí FL. COVID-19 and the 5G
conspiracy theory: social network analysis of Twitter data. J Med Internet Res
2020;22(5):e19458.
[14] Amgain K, Neupane S, Panthi L, Thapaliya P. Myths versus truths regarding
the novel coronavirus disease (COVID-2019) outbreak. J Karnali Acad Health
Sci 2020;3(1).
[15] WHO. Coronavirus disease (COVID-19) advice for the public: Mythbusters.
2021, Online; https://www.who.int/emergencies/diseases/novel-coronavirus-
2019/advice-for-public/myth-busters. [Accessed 2 April 2021].
[16] Kostoff RN, Heroux P, Aschner M, Tsatsakis A. Adverse health effects of
5G mobile networking technology under real-life conditions. Toxicol Lett
2020;323:35–40.
[17] Latif S, Qadir J, Farooq S, Imran MA. How 5G wireless (and concomitant
technologies) will revolutionize healthcare? Future Internet 2017;9(4):93.
[18] Lu X, Sun Y. Application of 5g technology in education informatization. Strateg
Study Chin Acad Eng 2020;21(6):120–8.
[19] Guevara L, Auat Cheein F. The role of 5G technologies: Challenges in smart
cities and intelligent transportation systems. Sustainability 2020;12(16):6469.
[20] Rao SK, Prasad R. Impact of 5G technologies on industry 4.0. Wirel Pers
Commun 2018;100(1):145–59.Array 14 (2022) 100178
11M.M. Rahman et al.
[21] Tang Y, Dananjayan S, Hou C, Guo Q, Luo S, He Y. A survey on the 5G network
and its impact on agriculture: Challenges and opportunities. Comput Electron
Agric 2021;180:105895.
[22] West DM. How 5G technology enables the health internet of things. 2016, p.
1–20, Brookings Center for Technology Innovation, 3.
[23] Abubakar AI, Omeke KG, Öztürk M, Hussain S, Imran MA. The role of
artificial intelligence driven 5G networks in COVID-19 outbreak: opportunities,
challenges, and future outlook. Front Commun Netw 2020;1. http://dx.doi.org/
10.3389/frcmn.2020.575065.
[24] Martynova O. Top uses of 5G in the energy sector. 2019, Online; https://www.
intellias.com/top-uses-of-5g-in-the-energy-sector/. [Accessed 2 April 2021].
[25] Ting DSW, Carin L, Dzau V, Wong TY. Digital technology and COVID-19. Nat
Med 2020;26(4):459–61.
[26] Mohammed IB, Isa SM. The role of internet of things (IoT) in the containment
and spread of the novel COVID-19 pandemic. In: Computational intelligence
methods in COVID-19: surveillance, prevention, prediction and diagnosis.
Springer; p. 109–19.
[27] Perkel JM. The Internet of Things comes to the lab. Nature
2017;542(7639):125–6.
[28] Shilo S, Rossman H, Segal E. Axes of a revolution: challenges and promises of
big data in healthcare. Nat Med 2020;26(1):29–38.
[29] LeCun Y, Bengio Y, Hinton G. Deep learning. Nature 2015;521(7553):436–44.
[30] Ting DS, Liu Y, Burlina P, Xu X, Bressler NM, Wong TY. AI for medical imaging
goes deep. Nat Med 2018;24(5):539–40.
[31] Heaven D. Bitcoin for the biological literature. Nature 2019;566(7742):141.
[32] Valencia R. Previewing 5G’s effect on the health care industry. 2017, Online;
https://www.qualcomm.com/news/onq/2017/10/30/previewing-5gs-effect-
health-care-industry. [Accessed 4 April 2021].
[33] Shi F, Wang J, Shi J, Wu Z, Wang Q, Tang Z, et al. Review of artificial
intelligence techniques in imaging data acquisition, segmentation and diagnosis
for covid-19. IEEE Rev Biomed Eng 2020.
[34] Soldani D. Fighting pandemics by exploiting 5G, AI and bigdata enabled
technologies: How 5G can help contain the spread of COVID-19. J Telecommun
Digit Econ 2020;8(2):146.
[35] Chettri S, Debnath D, Devi P. Leveraging digital tools and technologies to
alleviate COVID-19 pandemic. 2020, Available At SSRN: http://dx.doi.org/10.
2139/ssrn.3626092.
[36] Zemmar A, Lozano AM, Nelson BJ. The rise of robots in surgical environments
during COVID-19. Nat Mach Intell 2020;2(10):566–72.
[37] Agarwal S, Punn NS, Sonbhadra SK, Nagabhushan P, Pandian K, Saxena P.
Unleashing the power of disruptive and emerging technologies amid covid 2019:
a detailed review. 2020, arXiv preprintarXiv:2005.11507.
[38] Angelucci A, Kuller D, Aliverti A. A home telemedicine system for continuous
respiratory monitoring. IEEE J Biomed Health Inform 2020.
[39] STLPartners. 10 5G Healthcare use cases transforming digital health. 2020,
Online; https://stlpartners.com/digital-health-telecoms/10-5g-healthcare-use-
cases/. [Accessed 4 April 2021].
[40] Klaine PV, Imran MA, Onireti O, Souza RD, Tutorials. A survey of machine
learning techniques applied to self-organizing cellular networks. IEEE Commun
Surv 2017;19(4):2392–431.
[41] Letaief KB, Chen W, Shi Y, Zhang J, Zhang Y-JA. The roadmap to 6G: AI
empowered wireless networks. IEEE Commun Mag 2019;57(8):84–90.
[42] Baskaran A. How will 5G impact different industries?. 2018, Online;
PreScouter Newsletter, https://www.prescouter.com/2018/01/5g-impact-
different-industries/#:~:text=According%20to%20a%20report%20by,of%
20traffic%20and%20reducing%20collisions. [Accessed 12 March 2021].
[43] Chang LF. Journey to 5G. In: 2019 international symposium on VLSI technology,
systems and application. IEEE; p. 11.
[44] Verizon. The journey to 5G. 2018, Online; https://www.healthcareitnews.com/
news/journey-5g. [Accessed 17 August 2020].
[45] Mavrogiorgou A, Kiourtis A, Touloupou M, Kapassa E, Kyriazis D, Themis-
tocleous M. The road to the future of healthcare: transmitting interoperable
healthcare data through a 5G based communication platform. In: Euro-
pean, Mediterranean, and Middle Eastern conference on information systems.
Springer; p. 383–401.
[46] Yuehong Y, Zeng Y, Chen X, Fan Y. The internet of things in healthcare: An
overview. J Ind Inf Integr 2016;1:3–13.
[47] Bekaroo G, Santokhee A, Augusto JC. 5G smart and innovative healthcare
services: Opportunities, challenges, and prospective solutions. 5G Multimed
Commun: Technol Multiserv Deployment 2020;279.
[48] Moayedi G, Davis C. Insights in public health: Equitable access to abortion
care in Hawai ‘I: Identifying gaps and solutions. Hawai’I J Med Public Health
2018;77(7):169.
[49] Rivezzi M, Tricase C, Rana RL. The telemedicine and ICT as tool to improve
the local healthcare. In: New trends in sustainable business and consumption.
Editura ASE; p. 1195–202.
[50] West DM, Miller EA. Digital medicine: health care in the internet era. Brookings
Institution Press; 2009.
[51] Salih AA, Zeebaree SR, Abdulraheem AS, Zebari RR, Sadeeq MA, Ahmed OM.
Evolution of mobile wireless communication to 5G revolution. Technol Rep
Kansai Univ 2020;62(5):2139–51.[52] Staff R. False claim: 3g, 4G and 5G caused SARS, swine flu and the new
coronavirus. 2020, Reuters Newletters, Reuters.Com., Online; [Accessed 18
January 2021].
[53] Jansson K. First in the world with 4G. 2015, Online; TeliaSonera,
https://www.teliacompany.com/en/about-the-company/history/first-in-the-
world-with-4g/#:~:text=TeliaSonera%20was%20the%20first%20operator,4G%
20services%20in%2010%20countries. [Accessed 29 October 2020].
[54] Begley S. Swine flu outbreak was 15 times deadlier: Study. Reuters. June
2009;26:2012.
[55] WHO. Influenza a (H1N1) 2009 virus: current situation and post-pandemic rec-
ommendations. Wkly Epidemiol Record=Relevé Épidémiologique Hebdomadaire
2011;86(08):61–6.
[56] Mourad A, Yang R, Lehne PH, De La Oliva A. A baseline roadmap for advanced
wireless research beyond 5G. Electronics 2020;9(2):351.
[57] Bhardwaj A. 5G for military communications. Procedia Comput Sci
2020;171:2665–74.
[58] Shahsavari S, Holur P, Wang T, Tangherlini TR, Roychowdhury V. Conspiracy
in the time of corona: Automatic detection of emerging COVID-19 conspiracy
theories in social media and the news. J Comput Soc Sci 2020;1–39.
[59] Shaw R, Kim Y-k, Hua J. Governance, technology and citizen behavior in
pandemic: Lessons from COVID-19 in east Asia. Prog Disaster Sci 2020;100090.
[60] Hardell L, Carlberg M. [Comment] health risks from radiofrequency radiation,
including 5G, should be assessed by experts with no conflicts of interest. Oncol
Lett 2020;20(4):1.
[61] Lu R, Zhao X, Li J, Niu P, Yang B, Wu H, et al. Genomic characterisation
and epidemiology of 2019 novel coronavirus: implications for virus origins and
receptor binding. Lancet 2020;395(10224):565–74.
[62] Smith RD. Responding to global infectious disease outbreaks: lessons from SARS
on the role of risk perception, communication and management. Soc Sci Med
2006;63(12):3113–23.
[63] Chan-Yeung M, Xu R-H. SARS: Epidemiology. Respirology 2003;8:S9–14.
[64] Peiris J, Guan Y, Yuen K. Severe acute respiratory syndrome. Nat Med
2004;10(12):S88–97.
[65] Zaki AM, Van Boheemen S, Bestebroer TM, Osterhaus AD, Fouchier RA.
Isolation of a novel coronavirus from a man with pneumonia in Saudi Arabia.
N Engl J Med 2012;367(19):1814–20.
[66] Chan JF-W, Yuan S, Kok K-H, To KK-W, Chu H, Yang J, et al. A fa-
milial cluster of pneumonia associated with the 2019 novel coronavirus
indicating person-to-person transmission: A study of a family cluster. Lancet
2020;395(10223):514–23.
[67] Fernandes N. Economic Effects of Coronavirus Outbreak (COVID-19) on the
World Economy. Working Paper No. WP-1240-E, IESE Business School; 2020,
Available At SSRN 3557504.
[68] Emanuel EJ, Persad G, Upshur R, Thome B, Parker M, Glickman A, et
al. Fair allocation of scarce medical resources in the time of Covid-19. N
Engl J Med 2020;382:2049–55, URL https://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/
NEJMsb2005114.
[69] Radi G, Diotallevi F, Campanati A, Offidani A. Global coronavirus pandemic
(2019-nCOV): implication for an Italian medium size dermatological clinic of a
II level hospital. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol 2020;34(5):e213–4.
[70] UNESCO. Education: From disruption to recovery. 2020, Online; https://en.
unesco.org/covid19/educationresponse. [Accessed 15 January 2021].
[71] UNWTO. 100% Of global destinations now have COVID-19 travel restrictions,
UNWTO reports. 2020, Online; https://www.unwto.org/news/covid-19-travel-
restrictions. [Accessed 20 January 2021].
[72] Iacus SM, Natale F, Santamaria C, Spyratos S, Vespe M. Estimating and
projecting air passenger traffic during the COVID-19 coronavirus outbreak and
its socio-economic impact. Saf Sci 2020;104791.
[73] Baldwin R, Tomiura E. Thinking ahead about the trade impact of COVID-19.
2020, Economics in the Time of COVID-19, 59.
[74] Aday S, Aday MS. Impact of COVID-19 on the food supply chain. Food Qual
Saf Sci 2020;4(4):167–80.
[75] Pan D, Yang J, Zhou G, Kong F. The influence of COVID-19 on agricultural
economy and emergency mitigation measures in China: A text mining analysis.
PLoS One 2020;15(10):e0241167.
[76] Branscombe M. The network impact of the global COVID-19 pandemic.
2020, Online; The New Stack, https://thenewstack.io/the-network-impact-of-
the-global-covid-19-pandemic/. [Accessed 30 March 2021].
[77] Saeed N, Bader A, Al-Naffouri TY, Alouini M-S. When wireless communication
faces COVID-19: Combating the pandemic and saving the economy. 2020, arXiv
preprint arXiv:2005.06637.
[78] Favale T, Soro F, Trevisan M, Drago I, Mellia M. Campus traffic and e-Learning
during COVID-19 pandemic. Comput Netw 2020;176:107290.
[79] Klemeš JJ, Van Fan Y, Jiang P. COVID-19 pandemic facilitating energy
transition opportunities. Int J Energy Res 2020;45(3):3457–63.
[80] Mbunge E. Integrating emerging technologies into COVID-19 contact tracing:
Opportunities, challenges and pitfalls. Diabetes Metab Syndrome: Clin Res Rev
2020;14(6):1631–6.Array 14 (2022) 100178
12M.M. Rahman et al.
[81] Deloitte. 2017 Global health care sector outlook: Making progress
against persistent challenges. 2017, Online; Deloitte Report, https:
//www2.deloitte.com/tr/en/pages/life-sciences-and-healthcare/articles/2017-
global-health-care-sector-outlook.html. [Accessed 30 November 2020].
[82] Häyrinen K, Saranto K, Nykänen P. Definition, structure, content, use and
impacts of electronic health records: a review of the research literature. Int
J Med Inf 2008;77(5):291–304.
[83] Agarwal D. Universal access to health care for all: Exploring road map. Indian
J Commun Med: Off Publ Indian Assoc Prevent Soc Med 2012;37(2):69.
[84] Latif S, Rana R, Qadir J, Ali A, Imran MA, Younis MS. Mobile health in the
developing world: Review of literature and lessons from a case study. IEEE
Access 2017;5:11540–56.
[85] Savedoff WD. A moving target: universal access to healthcare services in Latin
America and the Caribbean. Working Paper, 2009.
[86] Naicker S, Plange-Rhule J, Tutt RC, Eastwood JB. Shortage of healthcare
workers in developing countries–Africa. Ethn Dis 2009;19(1):60.
[87] Organization WH. Global health workforce shortage to reach 12.9 million
in coming decades. 2013, Online; https://www.who.int/mediacentre/news/
releases/2013/health-workforce-shortage/en/. [Accessed 11 January 2021].
[88] Aceto G, Persico V, Pescapé A. The role of information and communication
technologies in healthcare: taxonomies, perspectives, and challenges. J Netw
Comput Appl 2018;107:125–54.
[89] Istepanian RS, Woodward B. M-health: fundamentals and applications. John
Wiley & Sons; 2016.
[90] Brook RH. Possible outcomes of comparative effectiveness research. JAMA
2009;302(2):194–5.
[91] Ofcom. Connected Nations 2018, UK report. 2018, Online; [Accessed 12
February 2021].
[92] Segan S. What is 5G?. 2020, Online; https://sea.pcmag.com/cell-phone-service-
providers-products/15385/what-is-5g. [Accessed 30 March 2021].
[93] Cooper M. 5G technology briefing. Itnow 2018;60(3).
[94] GSA – Global mobile Suppliers Association. The road to 5G: Drivers, ap-
plications, requirements and technical development. 2014, Online; www.
gsacom. com, https://www.huawei.com/minisite/5g/img/GSA_the_Road_to_5G.
pdf. [Accessed 12 December 2020].
[95] Christie L. 5G technology. 2019, UK Parliament POST, POSTbrief 32.
[96] Ghosh I. Visualizing the state of 5G networks worldwide, Visual Capitalist,
Technology.
[97] Bushberg J, Chou C, Foster K, Kavet R, Maxson D, Tell R, et al. IEEE
committee on man and radiation—COMAR technical information statement:
Health and safety issues concerning exposure of the general public to elec-
tromagnetic energy from 5G wireless communications networks. Health Phys
2020;119(2):236.
[98] Talty JT. 1 - Principles of nonionizing radiation. In: Industrial hygiene engi-
neering. 2nd ed.. William Andrew Publishing; 1998, p. 564–97. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/B978-081551175-5.50045-5.
[99] ICNIRP. ICNIRP statement on the ‘‘guidelines for limiting exposure to time-
varying electric, magnetic, and electromagnetic fields (up to 300 GHz)’’. Health
Phys 2009;97(3):257–8.
[100] WHO. Non-ionizing radiation, vol. 80. World Health Organization; 2002.
[101] Repacholi MH. WHO’s international EMF project. Radiat Prot Dosim
1999;83(1–2):1–4.
[102] ICNIRP. Guidelines for limiting exposure to electromagnetic fields (100 kHz to
300 GHz). Health Phys 2020;118(5):483–524.
[103] WHO. Electromagnetic fields and public health: mobile phones. 2014, Online;
https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/electromagnetic-fields-
and-public-health-mobile-phones. [Accessed 2 December 2020].
[104] Croft R. ICNIRP radiofrequency guidelines public consultation version. In: 2018
GLORE meeting. 2018.
[105] Hern A. 5G confirmed safe by radiation watchdog. Guardian 2020;10:2020,
Retrieved May.
[106] WHO. WHO research agenda for radiofrequency fields. 2010, p. 38, Office of
Press and Public Relations, World Health Organization, URL https://apps.who.
int/iris/handle/10665/44396.
[107] 5G Infrastructure Association. 5G-PPP white paper on eHealth vertical sector.
2015, Online; https://5g-ppp.eu/white-papers/. [Accessed 28 March 2021].
[108] Sarda B. Vision from orange healthcare on 5G. 2017, Orange Healthcare.
[109] Aijaz A, Dohler M, Aghvami AH, Friderikos V, Frodigh M. Realizing the tactile
internet: Haptic communications over next generation 5G cellular networks.
IEEE Wirel Commun 2016;24(2):82–9.
[110] Khoumbati K, Dwivedi YK, Srivastava A, Lal B. Handbook of research on
advances in health informatics and electronic healthcare applications: global
adoption and impact of information communication technologies. Medical
Information Science Reference; 2010.
[111] Lazakidou AA, Siassiakos KM, Ioannou KG. Wireless technologies for ambient
assisted living and healthcare: Systems and applications. Medical Information
Science Reference; 2011.
[112] Soldani D. Fighting COVID-19 with 5G enabled technologies. White Paper,
Huawei Technologies; 2020.[113] NGMN Alliance. 5G White paper-executive version, 1.0. 2014,
Online; NGMN Ltd., https://cdn3.scrvt.com/fokus/4e60fae4cbe2fea0/
2fc1cf8cd1e9ad0c4c3f883ed9f181ad/141222_NGMN-Executive_Version_of_
the_5G_White_Paper_v1_0.pdf. [Accessed 30 December 2020].
[114] Huawei. National telemedicine center of China: Reaching out with fast
medical services. 2020, Huawei Health, Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd., URL
https://www.huawei.com/minisite/tech4all/en/Nationaltelemedicinecenter.
html?utm_medium=psm&utm_source=corp_twitter&utm_campaign=TECH4ALL.
[115] CGTN. China Performs first 5G-based remote surgery on human brain. 2019,
Online; ChinaDaily.com.cn, http://www.chinadaily.com.cn/a/201903/18/
WS5c8f0528a3106c65c34ef2b6.html#:~:text=A%20patient%20suffering%
20from%20Parkinson%27s,out%20the%20operation%20on%20Saturday.
[Accessed 30 March 2021].
[116] Mishkind MC, Norr AM, Katz AC, Reger GM. Review of virtual reality treatment
in psychiatry: evidence versus current diffusion and use. Curr Psych Rep
2017;19(11):1–8.
[117] Ever YK, Rajan AV. The role of 5G networks in the field of medical sciences ed-
ucation. In: 2018 IEEE 43rd conference on local computer networks workshops.
IEEE; 2018, p. 59–63.
[118] Budd J, Miller BS, Manning EM, Lampos V, Zhuang M, Edelstein M, et
al. Digital technologies in the public-health response to COVID-19. Nat Med
2020;26(8):1183–92.
[119] Bahga A, Madisetti V. Internet of things: a hands-on approach. Vpt; 2014.
[120] Aloi G, Caliciuri G, Fortino G, Gravina R, Pace P, Russo W, et al. A mobile
multi-technology gateway to enable IoT interoperability. In: 2016 IEEE first
international conference on internet-of-things design and implementation. IEEE;
p. 259–64.
[121] Islam SR, Kwak D, Kabir MH, Hossain M, Kwak K-S. The internet of things for
health care: A comprehensive survey. IEEE Access 2015;3:678–708.
[122] Gilbert M, Pullano G, Pinotti F, Valdano E, Poletto C, Boëlle P-Y, et al.
Preparedness and vulnerability of African countries against importations of
COVID-19: a modelling study. Lancet 2020;395(10227):871–7.
[123] Wu JT, Leung K, Leung GM. Nowcasting and forecasting the potential domestic
and international spread of the 2019-nCoV outbreak originating in wuhan,
China: A modelling study. Lancet 2020;395(10225):689–97.
[124] Khosla V. ‘‘20 Percent Doctor Included’’ & Dr. Algorithm: Speculations and
musings of a technology optimist. 2016, Online; https://www.khoslaventures.
com/wp-content/uploads/20_percent_doctor.pdf. [Accessed 23 August 2020].
[125] Bullock J, Luccioni A, Pham KH, Lam CSN, Luengo-Oroz M. Mapping the
landscape of artificial intelligence applications against COVID-19. J Artificial
Intelligence Res 2020;69:807–45.
[126] Maghded HS, Ghafoor KZ, Sadiq AS, Curran K, Rawat DB, Rabie K. A novel
AI-enabled framework to diagnose coronavirus COVID-19 using smartphone
embedded sensors: Design study. In: 2020 IEEE 21st international conference
on information reuse and integration for data science. IEEE; p. 180–7.
[127] Rao ASS, Vazquez JA. Identification of COVID-19 can be quicker through artifi-
cial intelligence framework using a mobile phone–based survey when cities and
towns are under quarantine. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2020;41(7):826–30.
[128] CGTN. Fighting COVID-19 with cutting-edge technologies. 2020, On-
line; CGTN Technology, https://news.cgtn.com/news/2020-03-19/Fighting-
COVID-19-with-cutting-edge-technologies-OZCrnKSW4g/index.html. [Accessed
30 March 2021].
[129] Ding J, Lim Y-J, Solano M, Shadle K, Park C, Lin C, et al. Giving patients a
lift-the robotic nursing assistant (RoNA). In: 2014 IEEE international conference
on technologies for practical robot applications. IEEE; p. 1–5.
[130] Lawrie TA, Liu H, Lu D, Dowswell T, Song H, Wang L, et al. Robot-assisted
surgery in gynaecology. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2019;(4).
[131] Taylor RH, Menciassi A, Fichtinger G, Fiorini P, Dario P. Medical robotics and
computer-integrated surgery. In: Springer handbook of robotics. Springer; 2016,
p. 1657–84.
[132] Ye R, Zhou X, Shao F, Xiong L, Hong J, Huang H, et al. Feasibility of a 5G-
based robot-assisted remote ultrasound system for cardiopulmonary assessment
of patients with coronavirus disease 2019. Chest 2021;159(1):270–81.
[133] Andreu-Perez J, Leff DR, Ip HM, Yang G-Z. From wearable sensors to smart
implants—toward pervasive and personalized healthcare. IEEE Trans Biomed
Eng 2015;62(12):2750–62.
[134] Cinelli M, Quattrociocchi W, Galeazzi A, Valensise CM, Brugnoli E, Schmidt AL,
et al. The COVID-19 social media infodemic. Sci Rep 2020;10(1):1–10.
[135] Saud M, Mashud M, Ida R. Usage of social media during the pandemic: Seeking
support and awareness about COVID-19 through social media platforms. J
Public Aff 2020;20(4):e2417.
[136] Krišto M, Ivasic-Kos M. An overview of thermal face recognition methods.
In: 2018 41st international convention on information and communication
technology, electronics and microelectronics. IEEE; p. 1098–103.
[137] Bhowmik MK, Saha K, Majumder S, Majumder G, Saha A, Sarma AN,
Bhattacharjee o. Thermal infrared face recognition—A biometric identification
technique for robust security system. In: Reviews, refinements new ideas in face
recognition, vol. 7. 2011.
[138] Scimeca D. AI Assistant uses face recognition and thermal scanning to screen
for COVID-19. 2020, Vision Systems Design, URL https://www.vision-systems.
com/print/content/14183233.Array 14 (2022) 100178
13M.M. Rahman et al.
[139] Newswire P. Optoelectronic technologies assisting in the fight against
COVID-19. 2020, Online; https://apnews.com/press-release/pr-prnewswire/
354aae0738073bc95331ee72a458cb50. [Accessed 30 March 2021].
[140] Dananjayan S, Raj GM. 5G in healthcare: how fast will be the
transformation? Irish J Med Sci 2020;1–5.
[141] Jnr BA. Use of telemedicine and virtual care for remote treatment in response
to COVID-19 pandemic. J Med Syst 2020;44(7):1–9.
[142] Cuthbertson A. Surgeon performs world’s first remote operation using ‘5G
surgery’on animal in China. The Independent 2019.
[143] Singh RP, Javaid M, Haleem A, Vaishya R, Al S. Internet of medical
things (IoMT) for orthopaedic in COVID-19 pandemic: Roles, challenges, and
applications. J Clin Orthopaed Trauma 2020.
[144] Devi MP, Raja GB, Gowrishankar V, Sathya T. IoMT-based smart diagnos-
tic/therapeutic kit for pandemic patients. In: Internet of medical things for
smart healthcare. Springer; 2020, p. 141–65.
[145] Liu L, Gu J, Shao F, Liang X, Yue L, Cheng Q, et al. Application and preliminary
outcomes of remote diagnosis and treatment during the COVID-19 outbreak:
retrospective cohort study. JMIR MHealth UHealth 2020;8(7):e19417.
[146] Vidal-Alaball J, Acosta-Roja R, Hernández NP, Luque US, Morrison D, Pérez SN,
et al. Telemedicine in the face of the COVID-19 pandemic. Aten Primaria
2020;52(6):418.
[147] Wills J. 5G technology: Which country will be the first to adapt?. 2020,
Online; https://www.investopedia.com/articles/markets-economy/090916/5g-
technology-which-country-will-be-first-adapt.asp. [Accessed 30 March 2021].
[148] Ho CW-L, Caals K, Zhang H. Heralding the digitalization of life in post-pandemic
East Asian societies. J Bioethic Inq 2020;17(4):657–61.
[149] Ahmed S. A community-based approach is key to truly person-
centred care. 2018, Online; The Health Policy Partnership Ltd.,
https://www.healthpolicypartnership.com/a-community-based-approach-is-
key-to-truly-person-centred-care/. [Accessed 30 December 2020].
[150] Franz BA, Murphy JW. The patient-centered medical home as a community-
based strategy. Permanente J 2017;21.
[151] Pisano GP, Sadun R, Zanini M. Lessons from Italy’s response to coronavirus.
Harv Bus Rev 2020.
[152] Marsch P, Da Silva I, Bulakci O, Tesanovic M, El Ayoubi SE, Rosowski T, et al.
5G radio access network architecture: Design guidelines and key considerations.
IEEE Commun Mag 2016;54(11):24–32.
[153] Abdelwahab S, Hamdaoui B, Guizani M, Znati T. Network function
virtualization in 5G. IEEE Commun Mag 2016;54(4):84–91.
[154] Naik P, Kanase A, Patel T, Vutukuru M. LibVNF: building virtual network func-
tions made easy. In: Proceedings of the ACM symposium on cloud computing.
p. 212–24.
[155] Cho H-H, Lai C-F, Shih TK, Chao H-C. Integration of SDR and SDN for 5G. IEEE
Access 2014;2:1196–204.
[156] Leventer-Roberts M, Balicer R. Data integration in health care. In: Handbook
integrated care. Springer; 2017, p. 121–9.
[157] El Emam K. Data anonymization practices in clinical research: a descriptive
study. CHEO Research Institute; 2011.
[158] Rahm E, Do HH. Data cleaning: Problems and current approaches. IEEE Data
Eng Bull 2000;23(4):3–13.
[159] Ahmad M. Reliability models for the internet of things: A paradigm shift.
In: 2014 IEEE international symposium on software reliability engineering
workshops. IEEE; p. 52–9.
[160] Ryan A, Eklund P. A framework for semantic interoperability in healthcare: A
service oriented architecture based on health informatics standards. Stud Health
Technol Inf 2008;136:759.
[161] Abeler J, Bäcker M, Buermeyer U, Zillessen H. COVID-19 contact tracing and
data protection can go together. JMIR MHealth UHealth 2020;8(4):e19359.
[162] Alam MZ, Hoque MR, Hu W, Barua Z. Factors influencing the adoption of
mhealth services in a developing country: A patient-centric study. Int J Inf
Manage 2020;50:128–43.
[163] Anderson RM, Heesterbeek H, Klinkenberg D, Hollingsworth TD. How will
country-based mitigation measures influence the course of the COVID-19
epidemic? Lancet 2020;395(10228):931–4.
[164] Verity R, Okell LC, Dorigatti I, Winskill P, Whittaker C, Imai N, et al. Estimates
of the severity of coronavirus disease 2019: A model-based analysis. Lancet
Infect Dis 2020.
[165] Walker PG, Whittaker C, Watson OJ, Baguelin M, Winskill P, Hamlet A, et
al. The impact of COVID-19 and strategies for mitigation and suppression in
low-and middle-income countries. Science 2020;369(6502):413–22.
[166] Walker PG, Whittaker C, Watson OJ, Baguelin M, Winskill P, Hamlet A, et
al. The impact of COVID-19 and strategies for mitigation and suppression in
low-and middle-income countries. Science 2020.[167] Tanaka MJ, Oh LS, Martin SD, Berkson EM. Telemedicine in the era of COVID-
19: the virtual orthopaedic examination. J Bone Joint Surg 2020;American
Volume.
[168] Lee I, Kovarik C, Tejasvi T, Pizarro M, Lipoff JB. Telehealth: Helping your
patients and practice survive and thrive during the COVID-19 crisis with rapid
quality implementation. J Am Acad Dermatol 2020;82(5):1213.
[169] Pollock K, Setzen M, Svider PF. Embracing telemedicine into your otolaryn-
gology practice amid the COVID-19 crisis: an invited commentary. Am J
Otolaryngol 2020;102490.
[170] Claypool B. Telemedicine and COVID-19: 6 tips to ace your first visit. Ment
Health Wkly 2020;30(17):5–6.
[171] Contreras CM, Metzger GA, Beane JD, Dedhia PH, Ejaz A, Pawlik TM.
Telemedicine: Patient-provider clinical engagement during the COVID-19
pandemic and beyond. J Gastrointest Surg 2020;1.
[172] Prasad A, Brewster R, Newman JG, Rajasekaran K. Optimizing your
telemedicine visit during the COVID-19 pandemic: Practice guidelines for
patients with head and neck cancer. Head Neck 2020;42(6):1317–21.
[173] Loeb AE, Rao SS, Ficke JR, Morris CD, Riley III LH, Levin AS. Departmental
experience and lessons learned with accelerated introduction of telemedicine
during the COVID-19 crisis. J Am Acad Orthop Surg 2020.
[174] Soldani D, Innocenti M, Imran M, Sambo Y, Abbasi Q. 5G communication
systems and connected healthcare. In: Enabling 5G communication systems to
support vertical industries. Wiley; 2019, p. 149–77.
[175] Chen B, Marvin S, While A. Containing COVID-19 in China: AI and the robotic
restructuring of future cities. Dialogues Hum Geogr 2020;10(2):238–41.
[176] Xinhua. Xinhua headlines: China goes high-tech in fight against coronavirus.
2020, Online; http://www.xinhuanet.com/english/2020-03/14/c_138877590.
htm. [Accessed 17 February 2021].
[177] Chamola V, Hassija V, Gupta V, Guizani M. A comprehensive review of the
COVID-19 pandemic and the role of IoT, drones, AI, blockchain, and 5G in
managing its impact. IEEE Access 2020;8:90225–65.
[178] Sun S, Yu K, Xie Z, Pan X. China empowers internet hospital to fight against
COVID-19. J Infect 2020;81(1):e67–8.
[179] Bogue R. Robots in a contagious world. Ind Robot: Int J Robot Res Appl 2020.
[180] Wang XV, Wang L. A literature survey of the robotic technologies during the
COVID-19 pandemic. J Manuf Syst 2021.
[181] Xinhua. Disinfection robots deployed on frontlines to combat
coronavirus. 2020, Online; https://global.chinadaily.com.cn/a/202002/07/
WS5e3cfe0fa310128217275cd2.html. [Accessed 2 April 2021].
[182] Yang J, Reuter T. 3 ways China is using drones to fight coronavirus. 2020,
Online; https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2020/03/three-ways-china-is-using-
drones-to-fight-coronavirus/. [Accessed 20 February 2021].
[183] Gue D. 5G in healthcare: 7 advantages & disadvantages for providers to
know. 2019, HIT Consultant Media, URL https://hitconsultant.net/2019/07/18/
#.YHH-COgzZnI. Online; [Accessed 20 October 2020].
[184] Melnick RL. Commentary on the utility of the national toxicology program
study on cell phone radiofrequency radiation data for assessing human health
risks despite unfounded criticisms aimed at minimizing the findings of adverse
health effects. Environ Res 2019;168:1–6.
[185] Li P, Liu X, Mason E, Hu G, Yongzhao Z, Li W, et al. How telemedicine
integrated into China’s anti-COVID-19 strategies: Case from a National Referral
Center. BMJ Health Care Inf 2020;27(3).
[186] Ahmad I, Kumar T, Liyanage M, Okwuibe J, Ylianttila M, Gurtov A.
Overview of 5G security challenges and solutions. IEEE Commun Stand Mag
2018;2(1):36–43.
[187] Ji X, Huang K, Jin L, Tang H, Liu C, Zhong Z, et al. Overview of 5G security
technology. Sci China Inf Sci 2018;61(8):081301.
[188] Darkins A, Ryan P, Kobb R, Foster L, Edmonson E, Wakefield B, et al. Care
coordination/home telehealth: the systematic implementation of health infor-
matics, home telehealth, and disease management to support the care of veteran
patients with chronic conditions. Telemed E-Health 2008;14(10):1118–26.
[189] Snell A, Smalley J. Beacon community research study: Reducing hospital
readmissions via remote patient management. 2013, Indiana Health Information
Exchange.
[190] Vashist SK, Luppa PB, Yeo LY, Ozcan A, Luong JH. Emerging technologies for
next-generation point-of-care testing. Trends Biotechnol 2015;33(11):692–705.
[191] Chou E, Hsieh Y-L, Wolfshohl J, Green F, Bhakta T. Onsite telemedicine strategy
for coronavirus (COVID-19) screening to limit exposure in ED. Emerg Med J
2020;37(6):335–7.
[192] Triantafillou V, Rajasekaran K. A commentary on the challenges of telemedicine
for head and neck oncologic patients during COVID-19. Otolaryngol Head Neck
Surg 2020;0194599820923622.
[193] Uddin MM, Huynh N, Vidal JM, Taaffe KM, Fredendall LD, Greenstein JS.
Evaluation of Google’s voice recognition and sentence classification for health
care applications. Eng Manag J 2015;27(3):152–62.