The role of AI in capital structure to enhance corporate funding strategies
Ashkan Eliasya,*, Justyna Przychodzenb
aSchool of Engineering, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, L69 3GH, UK
bUniversity of Liverpool, Management Online Programme, Laureate Online Education, Haarlebergweg 23C, 1101 BH, Amsterdam, Netherlands
ARTICLE INFO
Keywords:Artiﬁcial intelligenceCapital structureInvestmentCAPM (expected returns)Neural networkCost of capitalABSTRACT
The purpose of this study was to assess if Arti ﬁcial Intelligence (AI) could be used in the Capital Asset Pricing Model (CAPM) and whether the use of AI could bring a more accurate estimation of expected returns. Cost ofcapital deﬁnes the minimum return expected from any investment made by a ﬁrm. Hence for managers to maximise the value of the corporation, it is essential to have an accurate estimation of the cost of capital.For the purpose of analysing securities, the adjusted closing stock prices of 10 high-tech public companies werestudied from January 2013 to January 2019. This research assumed that there is a need to predict returns for thenext year. Hence one year of historical data was used to calculate traditional CAPM value and also train theRecurrent Neural Networks (RNN) to predict stock prices of the upcoming year. A generic deep learning networkarchitecture was developed with the use of Long Short Term Memory (LSTM) and dropout layers. After calculatingthe returns using traditional and AI approaches, two methods for calculation of CAPM were proposed andcompared.Following the analysis, it was found that the use of AI improved the accuracy of cost of equity estimations byover 60%. The strong ability of the selected deep learning neural network to predict stock prices, increased theaccuracy of estimating returns by at least 18%. This study concluded that AI has signi ﬁcant potentials to replace traditional asset pricing models in the near future.
1. Introduction1.1. Cost of CapitalCorporate investment decisions are made based on two rationals;maximising proﬁt and/or maximising market value. For clari ﬁcation, proﬁt maximisation rationale implies that an asset should only be ac-quired if it increases shareholders ’net proﬁt[1]. This happens when the expected rate of return exceeds the interest rate. On the other hand,market value maximisation rationale claims that an asset should only beacquired if it has a positive effect on shareholders ’equity which means the cost of acquiring should be less than the value it adds to the marketvalue of the corporation [2]. Hence to be able to make the best invest-ment decisions, the calculation of the cost of capital becomes essential.Capital structure is deﬁned as the sources of funds toﬁnance growth and operations [3]. The sum of the debt and equity, which forms thecapital structure bears a cost to theﬁrm and is deﬁned as the cost of capital. All investments made by theﬁrm should be higher than the cost of capital to satisfy shareholders. Moreover, managers should try tomaintain an optimum rate for the cost of capital that balances bene ﬁtsand costs and maximises proﬁts and value of theﬁrm [4]. However recent volatilities in the market, for instance, the ﬁnancial crises, has made this decision challenging as estimating cost of equity capitalbecame more difﬁcult which inﬂuences the overall cost of capital [5]. The importance of accurate estimation of the cost of capital is high-lighted in an example. In the early 1980s, the U.S. has started to losecompetitiveness against international competitors. A study conducted byPoterba [6] demonstrated that U.S. companies had a much higher cost ofcapital than, for instance, Japaneseﬁrms. As a result of this high rate, thelong-term decisions that were made by U.S. managers were very differentfrom Japanese managers and this helped the Japanese to gain competi-tiveness. The article concluded that this was because the Japanese had alow cost of debt which was combined with debt-equity ratios muchhigher than the U.S. and resulted in an advantage [ 6]. This, however, has changed, and today the cost of equity is the most critical playing factor inthe overall cost of capital as discussed in this section.Some factors inﬂuence the accuracy of the cost of capital calculations.One of these parameters is the risk-free rate of return which is de ﬁned as the return available on risk-free security. In U.S. analyst use yield tomaturity on government securities to estimate the cost of equity capital.
* Corresponding author.E-mail address:eliasy.ashkan@gmail.com(A. Eliasy).
Contents lists available atScienceDirect
Array
journal homepage:www.elsevier.com/journals/array/2590-0056/open-access-journal
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.array.2020.100017Received 17 June 2019; Received in revised form 2 December 2019; Accepted 13 January 2020Available online 17 January 20202590-0056/©2020 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. This is an open access article under the CC BY license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ ).Array 6 (2020) 100017Since most investments made by a business have a long-term outcome,theﬁnancial analyst uses the average of yield to maturity of default-freesecurities over many years (between 10 to 30 years in the U.S.) as thebenchmark of the risk-free rate [4]. Hence sudden drops and rises inthese securities can inﬂuence the cost of capital but using the averagevalue will eliminate the sensitivity to these critical ﬂuctuations. This was particularly important inﬁnancial crises that happened in 2008.Another parameter to consider is the equity risk premium that is theexcess of a return over the risk-free rate which is obtained from the stockmarket. This volatile value is dependent on the period under consider-ation and many assumptions made to make it a rough estimation for usein the calculation. The volatility of prices or risk associated with in-vestments in securities resulted in the development of a parameter calledbeta. The benchmark for the beta is the market value which is unstable atany point in time. Beta is essentially showing the volatility of a com-pany’s stock relative to the market for a deﬁned duration of time which varies between analysts [7]. Similarly, simpliﬁcations had to be made to estimate beta for use in asset pricing models which introduces furthererrors in the cost of capital calculations [ 8]. Time and risk pose signiﬁcant challenges in the estimation of cost ofcapital. Analyst simpliﬁed these calculations and used average valuesover a more extended period for some critical parameters to assist withestimation of cost of capital [9]. This study identiﬁed these simpliﬁca- tions associated with time and risk in calculation of cost of equity as themain problem and aims to explore more advanced techniques to enablemore accurate estimation of expected returns. Arti ﬁcial Intelligence (AI) has gained tremendous momentum in various ﬁelds due to its ability to ﬁnd intricate patterns and forecast future events more accurately [ 10]. Many scholars have introduced many different equations that help toimprove the estimation of returns [11–14] and the use of neural networks in theﬁnancial domain has been proven by others [ 15]. However, to the authors’knowledge, no one has used AI in the calculation of the cost ofcapital to improve the accuracy of estimations.1.2. Artiﬁcial IntelligenceArtiﬁcial intelligence (AI) is broadly deﬁned as an algorithm that is capable of learning and thinking. Learning is de ﬁned as the ability to update coefﬁcients and parameters of an algorithm to enable it torecognise the pattern between input and output data. AI Algorithm isdeﬁned in a variety of mathematical models, namely deep learning,neural networks, image recognition, etc. [ 16]. Deep learning is a form of
machine learning that passes the learnings from the input through mul-tiple layers (typically three or more) to gain a better understanding ofoutputs. One of the most signiﬁcant applications of AI that perhapsthreatened employments is the ability to analyse information, ﬁnd pat- terns and make better decisions than humans while being empowered toexecute activities in many cases [17]. A well-known example of job susceptibility to AI is the driverless cars that have the potential to elim-inate many jobs [18]. In the context ofﬁnance, AI has been extensively used for pattern recognition and prediction of future events.For instance, calculation ofﬁnancial distress traditionally was donethrough the utilisation of a simple equation that utilises ﬁnancial ratios to evaluate the likelihood of this event empirically. Considering the vola-tility of the market, these simpliﬁed calculations are associated with ahigh degree of errors. To calculate distress more accurately, Bae [ 19] proposed the use of radial basis function support vector machines(RSVM) and compared hisﬁndings with other AI algorithms. The studyargued that a more accurate prediction of ﬁnancial distress can assist with the better decision making of CFO and boardroom. It continued thatthis new information can assist with the better evaluation of ﬁrms and will beneﬁt investors.Stock market prices can provide valuable information about theeconomy of a country as well as the performance of corporations; hence,accurate prediction of stocks is extremely valuable to several ﬁnancially related decision makings including cost of capital. Liu and Wang [ 20]also appreciated the nonlinearity and complexity of ﬁnancial information and tried to use AI to predict stock values. They concluded that theirmethod was highly accurate and had the ability to bene ﬁt corporate governance, prevent crises, improve performance and attract investors.A review of more than 60 articles published from 1990 to 1996showed that the Artiﬁcial neural networks (ANN) were mostly applied tobankruptcy and stock price predictions [ 21]. It is generally discussed that ANN requires the availability of data, and ﬁnance is one of the most promising areas that ANN can be used effectively [ 22]. A more recent study reviewed articles published between 1994 and 2015 to identify theapplication of neural networks in business [ 23]. They concluded that most applications of neural networks were still in bankruptcy and stockprice predictions, but also in decision making and classi ﬁcation of tasks. The use of AI inﬁnancial analysis was considered to be less signi ﬁcant than other business-relatedﬁelds [24].1.2.1. ANNArtiﬁcial neural networks (ANN) are being used to ﬁnd non-linear and complex regularities inﬁnancial data, including stock prices [ 25]. Although it has been shown that ANN works quite well in mature marketsreturn price predictions, other researchers explained that in emergingmarkets where there are more inefﬁciencies, ANN can still function better than traditional methods of calculations [ 26]. ANN is designed to function similarly to the human brain to organise and accumulateknowledge and identify patterns between them on an ongoing basis. Thisability has proven ANN as to be a suitable tool for managers to makebetter decisions while selecting stocks [ 27]; hence, time series fore- casting and linear approach to these analyses have proven to be lessefﬁcient than ANN [28,29].The extensive use of ANN in various business-related areas from ac-counting and economics to marketing and information management hasproven its success in forecasting future events [ 30–34]. In multiple studies the power of ANN to outperform statistical methods like regres-sion analysis has been proven [35,36]. Macroeconomic variables andﬁnancial ratios including market to book ratio and price-earnings areused as inputs to predict outperforming stocks [ 37–39]. McNelis [40] tried using stock market of Chile to predict Brazilian stock prices. Thesestudies demonstrate the importance of information availability in theimprovement of prediction results in training algorithms including ANN.1.2.2. AI valuesMany other researchers have demonstrated that AI has much betterpotentials in prediction, pattern recognition and decision making in theeconomic context [41–43]. In a report published recently by Accenture[44] they identiﬁedﬁve areas that AI has added value in the context ofcapital market. These include (1) automation in a way that is intelligentand enables self-learning, (2) improved decision making beyond thecapabilities of humans, (3) curation of real-time information and cus-tomisation, (4) ability to tap into new markets by introducing newproducts and (5) in building trust inside and outside the company.1.2.3. AI algorithmsAs it was shown in this section, AI is capable of providing more ac-curate estimations in theﬁnancial context. However, the main challengeis determining the best algorithm and method of training the AI engines.For every problem, scholars have tried numerous different algorithms toimprove the accuracy and efﬁciency of the AI. For instance, G €oçken, €Ozçalıcıet al. [45] used AI to predict stock prices in conjunction withoptimisation algorithms to identify the best parameters for a neuralnetwork model. Ballings, Van den Poel et al. [ 46] explored a variety of different models including Random Forest, Kernel Factory, AdaBoost,Logistic Regression, Neural Networks, K-Nearest Neighbor and SupportVector Machines. They concluded that the Random Forest model out-performed others in the prediction of stock prices.The performance of neural networks can be improved by the additionof neurons, layers, data normalisation and replacement of hyperbolicA. Eliasy, J. Przychodzen Array 6 (2020) 100017
2tangent with the function for logistic activation [ 47–51]. This disserta- tion will not go into details of deﬁning various algorithm and techniquesin implementing AI as it is outside the scope of this study. Instead, it willpick an AI learning algorithm that is proven in literature to work effec-tively and will use it to estimate the required parameters for calculationof the cost of capital. For the purpose of capital structure performance,generalised regression networks have been used in the literature [ 52]. In terms of neural networks, Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN) are provento perform exceptionally well in the prediction of stock prices [ 53]. This will be discussed in more details in the methodology chapter.1.2.4. CAPM and ANNAs it was described in this chapter, CAPM is relying on the linearprediction of asset returns in comparison to the market. It was arguedthat the beta parameter is able to measure market risk for a particularsecurity. Due to the inaccuracies associated with the traditional betameasurement as described in section 2.5.1.1, other alternative modelswere introduced that considered different factors while estimating beta(section 2.5.1.3). A study done by Cao, Leggio et al. [ 26] showed that the use of traditional univariate and 3-factor model in ANN would improvethe accuracy of forecasting return prices. They demonstrated that uni-variable CAPM performed better in ANN than the 3-factor model inpredicting stock prices. What this study has not looked at is whether thenon-linear ANN method can be used for the calculation of beta instead ofthe traditional linear regression method. They simply used the existingformula and Inputted it into the ANN.1.2.5. Capital structure and General Regression Neural NetworksPao [54] showed that neural networks are able to capture non-lineareffects when modelling a capital structure that stays hidden in regressionalgorithms. General Regression Neural Networks (GRNN) was used toevaluate the capital structure of 163 UK retail companies [ 52]. In this study, they collect variousﬁnancial ratios (including growth in assets, netproﬁtability, market to book value, etc.) to predict the debt ratio of retailﬁrms in 2006. They trained the network using the ﬁnancial data collected from 2002 to 2005, and their objective was to determine which factorshave the highest inﬂuence on capital structure. They concluded that netproﬁtability and depreciation to sale ratio are the most important com-pounding factors for measurements of capital structure. Their ﬁndings were compatible with pecking order theory and they showed that neuralnetworks are able to tolerate noise in data.1.2.6. Novelty and motivationThis study contributes to academic discussion on the role of AI in theestimation of cost of capital. In particular, it is attempted to assess if AIcould be used in CAPM and whether the use of AI could bring a moreaccurate estimation of expected returns. The motivation behind thisresearch is to provide a more accurate estimation of the cost of capitaland expected returns for business in comparison to traditional methods.Hence, this study contributes to discussion among business practitionerson the best investment decisions and ways of optimising their capitalstructure towards a better conﬁguration that maximises both proﬁts and market value.2. MethodsThe previous section discussed the importance of capital structure. Itthen explained that the errors associated with calculations of capitalstructure using WACC is mostly associated with the equity part. This isbecause of the need to estimate the expected return on equity using thecapital asset pricing model (CAPM) calculation. In this paper, it isattempted to assess if AI could be used in CAPM and whether the use of AIcould bring a more accurate estimation of expected returns. As describedin the previous section, beta is a measure of the volatility of a securityover a deﬁned period and concerning the market benchmark. Any valueabove 1 shows high volatility; any value below 1 indicates low volatilityand one itself indicates a good match between market and securityvolatility. The calculation of beta is relatively simple, and these valuesare available from online sources that report beta of various security.Howeverﬁ
nancial analysts require to calculate the beta based on theportfolio that they are designing. For instance, a short-term trader mayrequire a beta that is computed using quarterly historical data. On theother hand, those who are planning for long-term investment, calculatedbeta overﬁve or even ten years of historical data. The value of beta is anessential requirement of CAPM calculation.Similarly, when the management of organisations is estimating theircost of capital to formulate a capital structure strategy, historical valueshave been considered for CAPM calculation. CAPM is calculating theexpected return, which is an event in the future as ﬁnancial data is considered not reliable to be predicted. In this study, the AI predictedstock prices will be inserted to the CAPM formula. To do this, theequation for CAPM will not be modiﬁed, only instead of using historical data, predictions will be used to estimate risk and market returns. Also,since future stock prices are predicted, a return can be calculated directlyfrom theseﬁndings.In this section, both the traditional method of calculating CAPM andthe newly proposed methods will be compared. To do this, ﬁrst analysis for calculating CAPM will be performed. It will be followed by thedevelopment of a neural network to predict stock prices. Then a newCAPM will be calculated using predicted data. This will be followed bythe calculation of return directly from the predicted data. Finally all theseﬁndings will be compared with the actual returns.Theﬂowchart (Fig. 1) explains the methodology that will be followedin this study. It starts by data acquisition and development of Pythoncode. Using current year data, beta and CAPM will be calculated. Usingnext year data, the actual return in that year will be calculated. Arecurrent neural network will be developed to calculate both CAPM andreturn using predicted stock prices. Allﬁndings are compared at the end.2.1. SoftwareAll the calculations in this paper in terms of both analysis of ﬁnancial data and the development of a neural network is done in Python (3.7),which is a popular programming language. Microsoft Excel (2019) isused to organise and manage data that are generated using the Pythoncode.2.2. DataFor this study, the data of the top 10 US-based tech companies (basedon their stock performance) that are listed in the S&P 500 are being used (Standard&Poor’s 500). Theﬁnancial data that are used in this paper areexported from“Yahoo! Finance”. Theﬁnancial data that are required to be extracted in this paper include the adjusted closing stock prices. Therange deﬁned for these data includes January 1, 2013 to January 1, 2019.The adjusted price of the S&P 500 is also exported for the same range tocalculate market performance. This is needed for CAPM calculation as itcompares the return of the security with the market as described in theprevious section.Ten tech companies are selected for this research as they areconsidered well-performing companies in terms of their share prices.Tech companies experienced huge investments in past decades and areregarded as fast-growing and highly volatile in the stock market [ 73]. Also, the technology industry is considered to be relying heavily on debt.Brounen, De Jong et al. [74] reported that more than 70% of tech com-panies have a debt ratio of more than 50%. Moreover, this study showedthat different industries have different capital structures; hence, thepublic companies selected for this research are considered to be from thetech industry, to have high volatility, and also have debt in their capitalstructure as an indicator of theirﬁnancial health. However, to maintain adiverse range of tech companies, selected companies have different levels
of debt-equity ratio that is calculated over 10 years ending DecemberA. Eliasy, J. Przychodzen Array 6 (2020) 100017
32018. These data are collected from www.macrotrends.net. The companies that will be studied in this research include:
Company Name Ticker Debt to Equity Ratio (10 year)Apple Inc. AAPL 0.73Microsoft Corp. MSFT 0.93Amazon.com Inc. AMZN 0.78Facebook Inc. FB 0.01Netﬂix, Inc. NFLX 1.86Alphabet Inc A GOOGL 0.02TripAdvisor TRIP 0.06Autodesk, Inc. ADSK /C04.69 Advanced Micro Devices, Inc. AMD 6.04Cisco Systems, Inc. CSCO 0.44S&P500 ^GSPC
2.3. Calculating Annual Average returnsThe method used to calculate the return is the logarithmic rate ofreturn which is the logarithm value of ending price divided by thebeginning price. This can be calculated using Equation (1):Rlog¼log/C18P1
P2/C19¼logP
1/C0logP 2 (1)where Rlog is the logarithmic rate of return, P1 is the adjusted closingprice of the previous day and P2 is the adjusted closing price of today.Financial analysts rely on logarithmic return when they calculate thereturn of a single security. Although there is not an of ﬁcial rule for this calculation, it has been a common practice. It is important to note thatsince the stock market is open only 5 days every week, in this study forconsistency the average daily return is multiplied by 250 to obtain theannual average return.2.4. Calculating riskFinancial analysts rely on variance to measure the dispersion of dataaround their means. Variance (S2) is deﬁned in Equation(2).S
2¼X/C0X–X
avg/C12ðN/C01Þ (2)To calculate the risk of a security, the variance of its returns that wereobtained in the previous section should be calculated. Once it is obtained,the value should be multiplied by 250 to obtain the annual variance of
Fig. 1.: Research framework is demonstrated in the ﬂowchart for better understanding of the process. It highlights the traditional and AI approaches while demonstrating which outcomes were compared to satisfy research hypothesis.A. Eliasy, J. Przychodzen Array 6 (2020) 100017
4security.2.5. BetaBeta is a measure that shows which stock is safer and which one isriskier. To do this calculation equation (3)should be used. B¼Covðr
x;rmÞ/C14std m2 (3)where rx is covariance of stock return and rm is covariance of marketreturn, and stdm is the standard deviation of the market; hence, calcu-lation of beta is an estimate of its riskiness in comparison to the rest of themarket.2.6. CAPMNow that the beta is calculated, CAPM can be used to calculate ex-pected return of security using equation (4). r
i¼rfþβim/C0r
m/C0rf/C1 (4)where ri is the expected return,βim beta between market and stock, rfrisk-free rate of return and rm is the market risk. The part in the bracket isalso called risk premium. The risk-free value in this study is obtainedfrom theﬁve-year US government bond yield which is approximately2.5%. Market risk is calculated using the logarithmic estimation ofreturns using the S&P500 index. This value should be calculated for thetime span that is considered for prediction, in this paper it will be oneyear. Subtracting the market risk from risk free rate would result in a riskpremium. Historically a value between 4.5% and 5.5% is used, and forconsistency in this study the value of 5% will be used in CAPMcalculation.2.7. Neural NetworkNeural networks are used to predict the future performance of stocks.Once this is predicted, the data can be used in two possible manners.First, using the predicted AI stock prices an annual return on the securitywill be calculated using the logarithmic method. Second, using the pre-dicted stock prices, the calculation of the CAPM will be repeated. In thesecond method, instead of using historical data, the predicted data is usedfor calculation. In this section, only the information that is required forthe understanding of the algorithms are provided to enable a ﬁnancial analyst to replicate the process. The details on how the equations wereobtained and the mathematical concepts will not be discussed as they areoutside of the scope of this study.2.8. Recurrent Neural NetworksThe recurrent neural network (AI algorithm) will be used to predictstock prices which later will be used in the calculation of expectedreturns. Stock prices are known as sequential data in the ﬁeld ofﬁnance. Sequential data is deﬁned as the data that follows a unique order, andeach new data comes at a speciﬁc stage and cannot be randomly placed,for instance, due to being time-dependent. The most advanced andpowerful AI that can process these data is called Recurrent NeuralNetwork (RNN). Most major tech companies, including Google andApple, are using this algorithm for various reasons including translations,voice recognition, adding subtitles and even stock price predictions[75–77].In standard feedforward neural networks (FFNN), there is only onedirection for the data to move. Because of this forward-moving pattern,the data of previous layers will be lost, and essentially there cannot beany internal state or memory. However, in RNN the data goes through aloop which means it can remember the past as well as the new data, (seeFig. 2). As an example, forﬁnancial data, it is required to be aware of theprices in the previous day to predict the next day prices. If FFNN is used,it would not matter in which order the data are entered, and the pre-diction would not consider the sequence of data. However, in RNN and interms of stock prices, the prediction will be dependent on the price of theprevious day(s); hence, RNN is able to identify the differences betweenthe prices and can predict the future with reasonable accuracy.RNN has one major problem, and that is an issue which is termed asVanishing Gradient. This occurs when the gradient (partial derivativewith consideration of inputs) becomes so small that essentially preventsweights from having any effect. To overcome this problem, a new methodhas been proposed by Ref. [78] that is called Long Short Term Memory(LSTM). This method is brieﬂy described next as it is used in this study toincrease the accuracy of the predictions.For calculations of RNN, the network is essentially unrolled over time(seeFig. 3), This technique is used to be able to go through the back-propagation for optimising the parameters of the neural network. Eachoutput is essentially fed back into the calculation and this process enablesthe ability to memorise parameters over time.2.9. Long Short Term Memory (LSTM)LSTM has three main components that are called input, output andforget gates. The trick that is used in this method is that the cell as showninFig. 4, can remember data for a random duration of time and the threemain components that act as regulators of information into this cell andout of this cell. Because of this unique structure of the system, thenetwork will not have the vanishing problem and essentially will notforget the parameters. For this reason, LSTM is the best RNN algorithmfor application to time series sequential data.
2.10. Dense layerIn neural networks, high dimensions of vectors are being used. Tochange a vector from“n”dimensions to“m”dimensions, a dense layer should be employed (seeFig. 5). In this study, theﬁnal layer is deﬁned as a dense layer to reduce the number of outputs to 1 unit. In mathematicalterms, matrix manipulation techniques including scaling, translation androtation are being applied to achieve the desired output.2.11. TensorFlow and Cost functionHigh-performance computations are commonly done through readilydeveloped packages. TensorFlow is an open-source package developedby Google for developing machine learning and deep learning programswith various architectures [79]. The advantage of using such a platformis that the basic equations and rules are pre-de ﬁned in the library and the user can access and reach a solution in a much quicker manner. In thisresearch, TensorFlow is imported in Python 3 for development of LSTMthat predicts stock prices.The cost function is deﬁned as the mean squared error (MSE) as inEquation(5).MSE¼
1nXni¼1ðyi/C0/C20yiÞ2(5)where n is the number of data, y is the predicted value and /C20yis the actual value. Once the error was calculated, an optimisation method was used tominimise this value. The optimisation method that is used in this study isone that has proven to work well in deep learning problems and is calledAdam optimisation. Due to the complexity of the mathematical conceptbehind this method, no further explanation is given about this algorithm.However, readers are encouraged to learn more about it from Kingmaand Ba [80].A. Eliasy, J. Przychodzen Array 6 (2020) 100017
52.12. Testing and trainingThe data is split into 90% training and 10% test sets. The input of thedata is one-year stock prices starting and ending on the 1st of January.The reason 90% of data is utilised is that in one year there areapproximately 250 days that the stock market is open and the LSTMrequires as many data as possible to predict them with good accuracy.Theﬁrst 50 days are used as the features, and the subsequent prices areused as the label. Test and validation in this data set are not the same. Thenetwork was tested using 10% of the data obtained from the sameﬁnancial year; however it is validated using the application of network tothe upcoming year as shown inFigs. 6 and 7. It is important to note that the data are normalised between 0 and 1 using the training dataset. Thenthe same normalisation is applied to test data to maintain the consistencybut reduce the biases associated with normalisation. This is because thetest data is assumed to be unknown.2.13. Network architectureThe network has LSTM layers that allow for a return sequence fol-lowed by one dropout layer. This is repeated three times and followed byaﬁnal LSTM layer where the return sequence is not allowed and anotherdropout layer. Finally, there is one dense layer that predicts one value forthe output. Each layer has 40 neurons and the dropout rate is set to 20%.The batch size is set to 40 and epoch is set to 200, Fig. 5. Batch size is referring to the total number of training in each iteration. Each epoch isdeﬁned as one complete iteration that leads to the prediction of valuesand calculation of analysis cost. These parameters can be optimised for
Fig. 2.The comparison between Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) and Feed-Forward Neural Network (FFNN). It demonstrates in FFNN there is only one direction fo r the data to move, whereas in RNN there is a loop.
Fig. 3.The unrolled Recurrent Neural Network that is used in forward, and backward calculation is described over time as shown on the right side of the ﬁgure.
Fig. 4.LSTM unit architecture with three gates and the Cell. The gates can becompared with the neurons of FFNN. Further explanation is provided by Greff,Srivastava et al. [78].A. Eliasy, J. Przychodzen Array 6 (2020) 100017
6each dataset to improve the performance of the network. However, forconsistency and feasibility of this study, these parameters are kept asconstants.In this study,ﬁnancial data of 10 companies were extracted. Thesedata are extracted over six years among which ﬁve years are used for AI development. Data are entered year by year which means for eachcompany the neural network should be trained ﬁve times. Also, this analysis should be repeated for the S&P 500 to predict the market per- formance as they are required in CAPM calculations.2.14. OutputsFor clarity, in this section the outputs of the study should be describedto enable the reader to make sense of the data that are producedfollowing the procedures described in methodology section. First, usinghistorical data of the past one year, CAPM (expected return) is calculated.Second, using the same data that are used to calculated CAPM, the LSTMwas trained. Upon completion of this training, the network predicts theprices in the upcoming year from which a return is calculated. Third, theestimated returns that are obtained from prediction of stock prices fromthe AI, are used in calculation of CAPM. At the same time, the actualreturn in the upcoming year was calculated from available data. Finally,the three return values that are obtained for the upcoming year arecompared to the actual returns. This process repeated for all ten com-panies and for the period of six years. At the end to demonstrate theresults,ﬁgures and tables are generated to enable a quick comparison oftheseﬁnding.2.14.1. Theoretical framework and development of hypothesesScholars have viewed capital structure as either the leverage orownership structure of theﬁrm. The modern theory of capital structurewas established by Modigliani and Miller [ 55]; and it is around the fact thatﬁnancial decisions will come either with costs or bene ﬁts and the challenge is to estimate and maintain an optimum capital structure. In-vestors require to estimate the risk associated with every investment todetermine the expected return [56]. The minimum return that is ex-pected from the capital structure is calculated through the cost of capitaltheories; hence, estimation of the cost of capital will require to rely on
Fig. 5.A deep learning architecture where each hidden layer has 128 neurons and followed by a dropout layer. The ﬁnal layer has changed dimension to only one neuron for the output through a dense layer. This is the network architecture used in this study.
Fig. 6.The actual stock prices that are used to train the network are 90% of the data. 10% remaining of the data were used to test the network and is presented in th e blue line.A. Eliasy, J. Przychodzen Array 6 (2020) 100017
7both risk and future return on investments. It has, however, been arguedthat forecasting the return is perhaps the most problematic part ofportfolio management models for investors [ 57]. It is argued that the efﬁcient market will quickly reﬂect on the availability of information and prices will adjust accordingly (Fama andMakiel, 1970, Fama, 1991). This theory which is called the Ef ﬁcient Market Hypothesis (EMH) has generated many arguments regardingpredictive models. For instance, random walk theory implies that stockprices follow a random path and predicting them would not be possible[58]. Another theory attempted to estimate the expected return inregards to market risk which is called Capital Assets Pricing Model(CAPM) [59,60]. Many researchers have argued that EMH does not standtrue [58]. For example, it was shown that weekly US stock prices arereasonably predictable through the use of pattern recognition tools [ 61, 62]; hence, this resulted in the development of a new theory called theAdaptive Market Hypothesis (AMH) that claims upon the availability ofpredictive information, the market will adjust itself [ 63]. As a result, only short-term predictability may be possible, but in long-term it will beself-destructive; hence, the research in predicting ﬁnancial information may remain hidden to the public and be sold privately to investors ororganisations [64].Artiﬁcial intelligence and the use of learning algorithms and inparticular neural network have gained substantial momentum in the ﬁeld ofﬁnance [35]. It is believed that these algorithms are able to functionbetter than both linear and non-linear regression analysis for a number ofreasons including the ability to compensate for noise, react to changes indata [65], making no initial assumptions [66] and are able toﬁnd the best patterns between input and output data [ 67]. This leads to theﬁrst hypothesis of this research:Hypothesis 1. Artiﬁcial Intelligence can be used in the cost of capitalcalculation to improve predictabilityMultiple researchers have concluded that stock prices are following anon-linear pattern and traditional methods of statistics may not provideaccurate predictions [35]. The successful usage of neural networks in theﬁnancial domain has been proven by many researchers [ 15]. Weighted Average Cost of Capital (WACC) is commonly used to determine theminimum return that should be earned by a business based on theircapital structure [68]. This calculation relies on CAPM to estimate thecost of equity capital [69]. Although CAPM is still widely used, there area number of limitations associated with its calculations. Since CAMPrelies on the estimation of risk (beta), it is crucial to have an accurateestimation of this value. Beta is calculated through linear regressionanalysis over a long period of historical data. As discussed earlier, themarket is not behaving linearly and the usage of long-term historical datato linearly estimate risk will not be accurate [ 70–72
]. This leads to the second hypothesis of this research.Hypothesis 2. Artiﬁcial Intelligence can be used for a more accurateestimation of returns in comparison to the traditional method.3. ResultsThis section contains all the data generated from this study. It isimportant to note that six years of adjusted closing stock prices werecollected for ten high-tech companies as well as S &P500. These ten companies rely on equityﬁnancing with various portions as described inthe methodology section. All neural network con ﬁgurations remained the same, after an initial preliminary study on a few companies thatshowed the network is able to predict the prices reliably. Due to thesubstantial size of analysis performed, the graphs related to the perfor-mance of prediction of stock prices are brie ﬂy discussed, and an example is presented.3.1. AI performanceThe RNN was designed as described in the methodology section. Toverify the performance of the network, various plots were produced foreach time that the network was trained. Initially, the selected year datawas split into two groups of training and testing sets. After the networkwas trained, a plot was provided to evaluate the performance of thenetwork on the test set. This is only to demonstrate that the networkparameters are able to predict reasonable results as it was necessary to beused as part of algorithm development and during programming stage.However, these data by no means are used as validation of the perfor-mance of the network. The network parameters were optimised until theerror calculated using the objective function (Equation (5)) was found to be the lowest. To validate the performance, network parameters weredeployed for analysis of the following year ’s data. Again, to evaluate the performance of the network, another plot was provided where the actualdata and predictions are compared.Due to a large size of analysis in this section, the ﬁgures for only one company and only for one year is provided in this section as examples.The selected company is Autodesk, Inc. (ADSK) and the data of 2015 –16
Fig. 7.The prediction of stock prices for the following year in comparison to the predicted values. The plot is showing two years of stock prices from theselected company.A. Eliasy, J. Przychodzen Array 6 (2020) 100017
8was used to predict 2016–17 prices. As shown inFig. 6, the network was able to accurately predict the test data, which included the last 25 days ofthe year. The numerical values of the errors obtained from each case isarbitrary and varies from one case to another and since they would notadd any information, are not presented.Now that the network was trained, theﬁnancial data of the next year (2016) was extracted to compare them with the network predictions. TheAI algorithm was able to predict the stock prices during this year quiteaccurately, as shown inFig. 7. The prices of 2015 in conjunction of theactual and predicted prices on 2016 demonstrate that recurrent neuralnetwork is a suitable choice for prediction of stock prices and the networkwas able to establish an intricate pattern between dates and prices for thiscompany that led to high accuracy prediction of the upcoming yearprices,Fig. 8. Hence, this method of analysis is considered as reliable tobe used on other datasets.The network hyperparameters are kept constant in this study due thelimitation in time and computational cost of the project. Hence, the re-sults of the AI algorithm on other companies or other years may be betteror worse than the example provided in this section. However, the per-formance of the network is not the objective of this research. The aim ofthis section of the study was to demonstrate the selected network ar-chitecture is capable of predicting stock prices with reasonable accuracy.This would be enough to carry on with the rest of the study and satisfyresearch hypothesis. Hence readers should be aware that the perfor-mance of the network can certainly be improved if the target is to predictthe future data more accurately.3.2. Comparison ofﬁndingsAn overall comparison is provided in this section, Table 1. The AI was able to accurately predict the stock prices in most cases, and this enabledAI to predict the most accurate returns in 9 out of 10 companies. The AImethod used to calculate CAPM enabled a more accurate estimation ofreturns for 7 out of 10 companies in comparison to the traditionalmethod. In 9 out of 10 companies AI was able to predict stock prices withless volatility (standard deviation) than the traditional method. Thecomparison between AI predicted CAPM and AI predicted return, AIpredicted return was more reliable, less volatile and more accurate.The traditional method of CAPM on average for all companies, usingthe values presented inTable 1, had an error of 102% and under-estimated the returns. This value (average values of all companies) for AIpredicted CAPM was reduced by 18%, but still, returns wereunderestimated. The overall error of AI predicted returns was 40% withthe lowest standard deviation,Fig. 9. These results provide a clear and consistent message that enables to draw a conclusion on the use of AI inthe estimation of returns that can be used to improve the cost of equitycalculations. Based on theseﬁnding with the use of AI, cost of equityestimation can be improved over 60% which will in ﬂuence WACC calculation signiﬁcantly and improve the accuracy to a much higherdegree. The results presented in this part were concerned with the ab-solute error to enable this comparison.4. DiscussionIt was discussed by Markowitz [56] that investors require to estimate the risk associated with any investments and this was re ﬂected in the cost of capital calculations. Brock and De Lima [ 57] argued that forecasting returns are the most problematic part of designing a portfolio. One of themain reasons was that the market would quickly adjust itself as the newinformation became available. Although this argument formed the Ef ﬁ- cient Market Hypothesis (EMH) [58], this was criticised by many otherauthors that predictive algorithms can forecast the return on securityinvestments in short-term [61,62]. Compatible to theﬁndings of these studies, it was clearly demonstrated in this research that up to one year ofstock prices could be predicted with the least amount of informationavailable for each of ten companies. This
ﬁnding is contrary to Random Walk Theory which claims that prediction of market prices is not possible[58].Two signiﬁcant factors require an in-depth investigation based onthese literature arguments. First, the estimation of risk or beta parametermay not be needed any more with its current de ﬁnition. This is because market volatility is not playing a signiﬁcant role when stock prices can be predicted accurately which also impacts capital asset pricing models;hence, risk should be deﬁned in a new manner that relates to the un-certainty associated with the prediction of stock prices using AI. Twopossible methods could be suggested. One approach is to introduce a newalgorithm that can incorporate uncertainty (probability of its occur-rences) as a multiplier to the predicted returns on security. Anothermethod would be to evaluate the reliability of predictions on historicaldata and incorporate the standard deviation as the uncertainty associatedwith predictions.Second, the argument provided in regards to market adjustmentsupon the availability of information or Adaptive Market Hypothesis(AMH) [63] may not stand valid anymore. This is true that the market
Fig. 8.The stock prices that are predicted for the upcoming year against the actual values. The plot is showing the ability of AI to predicted stock pricesquite accurately.A. Eliasy, J. Przychodzen Array 6 (2020) 100017
9will adjust itself upon the availability of new information. However, as itwas demonstrated in this research, AI algorithms including RecurrentNeural Networks (RNN) can adjust themselves in real-time. Hence thisproblem becomes an inﬁnite loop of adjustments through both themarket and algorithms to make the prices more volatile. Considering thenature of the stock market and the enormous number of available AIalgorithms with various capabilities, it would be unrealistic for themarket to be able to maintain this adjustment in a way that it competeswith all predictive algorithms; hence, if these algorithms become publiclyavailable and are used on a daily basis by most investors, the impact onthe market would be extremely complicated to forecast at this stage.However, there is a good chance that AI can adapt and maintain areasonably good accuracy of predictions.A twenty years review on AI algorithms and their application inﬁnance demonstrated that very few studies had used RNN [ 23]. The application of RNN on the prediction of inﬂation data was evaluated in a previous study that demonstrated the ability of these algorithms indealing with non-linear data [81]. RNN was also applied to the predictionof foreign exchange rates and considered to be successful for imple-mentation in real-time prediction platforms [ 82]. More advanced RNN algorithms such as LSTM which was used in this study demonstrated amuch better ability to predict stock prices in the Chinese market [ 53]. Heaton, Polson et al. [83] concluded that deep learning can detect be-haviours that are not visible toﬁnancial theories that currently exist.Compatible to literature, this study found that stock prices can be accu-rately predicted using deep learning recurrent neural networks thatincorporated LSTM algorithms.Direct application of AI to cost of capital could not be found in theliterature. However, Nelson, Pereira et al. [ 84] showed that RNN could accurately predict the trend in the data. This is compatible with theconcept of beta that is used as a risk factor in CAPM that attempts to usehistorical data to predict security trend in comparison to market [ 85].This thesis combined the use of RNN with CAPM calculation anddemonstrated that indeed it improves the accuracy of predictionscompatible withﬁndings of other scholars. Hsia, Fuller et al. [ 86] con- ducted a study and concluded that traditional beta might not be accurateand moving-average beta is able to predict the risk much more accu-rately. The use of beta in CAPM was only needed to estimate the expectedreturn [87]. This research suggests that the cost of equity should not beestimated using asset pricing models such as CAPM anymore as the futurecan be predicted with reasonable accuracy. This goes beyond the debatedin the literature on the topic that claims, “beta is dead”[86]. There are a number of limitations to this study. The data collected forthis study considered onlyﬁve years of historical data in ten high-techpublic companies. This study used only one year of historical data totrain the network and kept all hyperparameters and network architecturethe same for various stocks. Optimising these parameters or using a largerdataset to train the network is very time consuming and requires uniquecustomisation through trials and errors. Also the method selected for AIrelied on literature, and comparison was not conducted betweendifferent algorithms. These issues were considered not timely andcomputationally feasible to be performed in this study; nevertheless theystand for interesting area for further research. This study focused on theUS market which is considered a mature market. Researchers have shownthat the artiﬁcial neural network (ANN) works quite well in these mar-kets [26]. Hence the application ofﬁndings in this study to emerging markets may result in a different outcome.This study argued that the use of AI could provide better estimationsof cost of capital and expected returns in comparison with traditionalmethods. Currently, application of AI requires knowledge of neural net-works and programming languages which may be considered complex to
manyﬁnancial analysts. The complexity of this problem is not associatedwith the use of the AI program. The complexity is in development ofsoftware that is capable of utilising the required (company-speci ﬁc)Table 1Summary ofﬁndings using three proposed methods for all 10 companies on average for ﬁve years.
APPL MSFT AMZN FB NFLXAvg. SD Avg. SD Avg. SD Avg. SD Avg. SDCAPM Error /C01.700 1.603/C00.606 0.137/C00.833 0.331/C00.821 0.334/C00.998 0.831 AI Predicted CAPM Error /C01.008 0.342/C00.696 0.207/C01.128 0.278/C00.377 1.247/C00.873 0.169 AI Predicted Return Error 0.436 1.718 /C00.347 0.349/C00.295 0.442 0.039 0.878 /C00.678 0.600 TRIP ADSK AMD GOOGL CSCO CAPM Error /C01.063 0.774/C00.433 0.261/C00.991 0.876/C01.469 1.933 1.297 4.202 AI Predicted CAPM Error /C00.562 1.405/C00.412 1.357/C00.745 0.750/C00.737 0.911/C01.895 2.608 AI Predicted Return Error 0.239 0.467 /C00.700 1.003/C00.262 0.637/C00.184 0.440/C00.801 0.744
Fig. 9.Plot is demonstrating the mean (red line), standard deviation (blue box) and minimum and maximum value of the error using three methods. The error in th is section presents the absolute value in percentage.A. Eliasy, J. Przychodzen Array 6 (2020) 100017
10information with the critically selected algorithm to provide accurateestimations. The development of this software requires programming,mathematical andﬁnancial knowledge. With the availability of onlinetutorials, this challenge has become much more straightforward totackle. Also once an AI engineer designs the network, optimisation ofparameters is an easy job and can be done by anyone in the ﬁrm.5. ConclusionThe focus of this study was to evaluate if AI could improve the ac-curacies associated with the estimation of cost of capital and expectedreturns. To do this, data of 10 public tech companies were collected, andtraditional CAPM values were calculated every year for ﬁve years. The actual returns were also calculated using historical data. Then twomethods of using AI was proposed that included estimation of returnsdirectly from the predicted values, or calculation of CAPM using pre-dicted values.Many scholars have introduced many different equations that help toimprove the estimation of returns [ 11–14]. However, to the authors’ knowledge, no one has used AI in the calculation of the cost of capital toimprove the accuracy of estimations. In this study, AI was used to predictfuture stock prices, and the algorithm used for this purpose was Recur-rent Neural Networks (RNNs). RNNs, which is a deep learning algorithm,showed an outstanding ability toﬁnd intricate patterns between sequential data [84]. The RNN used in this study utilised a recentlydeveloped algorithm proposed by Greff, Srivastava et al. [ 78] that has not been applied to prediction of cost of capital. The performance of thisalgorithm is further reinforced when the stock prices were predicted inthis study to estimate returns.Two possible methods were considered that would enable theimplementation of AI in the cost of equity calculation. First, to predictfuture stock prices and calculate the returns directly from the predictions.Second, to predict the stock prices and market behaviour and thencalculate CAPM using forecasted data. Lastly, to be able to compare theAI method and traditional CAPM calculations and ﬁnd the one that provides the most accurate prediction of returns, the true value wasneeded. For this reason, the true value of return was calculated usingactual stock prices in the following year.For the purpose of analysing securities, the adjusted closing stockprices of 10 public tech companies were exported. These prices werecollected for the past six years, starting from January 1, 2019. Thisresearch assumed that there is a need to predict returns for the next year.Hence one year of historical data was used to calculate traditional CAPMvalue and also train the RNN to predict stock prices of the upcoming year.As it is known from the nature of AI algorithms, the more data provided,the more accurate the network will become. However, in terms of CAPMcalculation, the more data that provided, the less reliable the predictionmay become [88]. This is because the future may not reﬂect historical patterns. For consistency in this study, only one year of historical datawas used in both traditional and AI methods.In regard to the use of AI algorithms, three critical aspects should beconsidered. These include the cleaning of the dataset, optimisation ofhyperparameters and network architecture. In this study, the dataset wascollected from“Yahoo Finance!”which was already clean and ready to beused in the network. A generic deep learning network architecture wasdeveloped with the use of LSTM and dropout layers. This network wastested on stock prices of a few companies and showed a reasonably strongability to predict future prices. Also, hyperparameters were tuned for alimited number of data to achieve reasonable accuracy. Tuning thehyperparameters or optimising the architecture of the network is verytime-consuming. This is because there is no correct formula for selectingthem and they must be achieved through trial and error.The difﬁculty of training and using AI algorithms may be a reason thatthe use of AI in the cost of equity was not explored before. It is natural fora Chief Financial Ofﬁcer (CFO) to rely on simple equations that cancalculate returns very quickly instead of learning how to deal withsophisticated AI methods. In this study, to overcome this bias of variationin AI algorithms and networks, once the network was optimised on alimited number of data, all the parameters and architecture were kept thesame. Of course, in ideal circumstances, these parameters should beoptimised. However, the selected method would show whether the use ofa generic neural network, designed and developed by an AI engineer,would be superior to traditional methods or not. This would simulate the
situation thatﬁnancial analysts only uses the algorithm without havingany prior knowledge of AI or programming to predict stock prices. As aresult of this issue, the network may not have performed ﬂawlessly on some of the datasets.By studying the results, in most cases when traditional CAPM iscompared to the actual returns, it was found that the traditional valuewas consistently underestimating the returns in all ten companies and allﬁve years. In many cases, AI predicted CAPM followed the same pattern.On average, the AI predicted CAPM was able to predict a more accuratereturn in comparison to the traditional method. This accuracy on averagewas 18% closer to the actual value. So by replacing this new method intothe cost of capital calculation, the results of WACC can be improved by18%.When comparing AI predicted returns with traditional CAPM, it wasnoticed that consistently AI predicted returns were closer to the actualreturns. Quantitatively on average AI was calculated to be 60% moreaccurate. Also, the AI predicted returns had the smallest standard devi-ation, which means there was a reasonably good consistency in theprediction of future returns. The implementation of this method in WACCwould signiﬁcantly increase the accuracy of the cost of capital calcula-tion. It should be noted that if the network parameters and architectureare optimised, these values are likely to improve and get closer to actualreturns.One major challenge was identiﬁed from the outcome of this study. Itwas demonstrated that the cost of equity is signi ﬁcantly underestimated due to the use of CAPM in calculations; hence, using the newly proposedmethod, the cost of equity capital should increase using the WACC for-mula. This means that the balance for the optimum capital structure willbe disturbed if the new method is used and corporations may ﬁnd that a new balance is required to maximise the value of the ﬁrm for share- holders [1,89]. If the same cost of capital is to be maintained, an increasein the debt portion of capital structure would be needed otherwise ﬁrms will increase their overall cost of capital. This may limit investment op-tions as higher rates should be considered [ 6]. As discussed by many researchers [90–93] capital structure cannot be modiﬁed instantly; hence,ﬁrms try to maintain a balance over time, andthere is always a delay in response to the market changes. One signi ﬁ- cantly positive advantage of using AI in the cost of capital calculationsthat is found in this study would be the ability to estimate this valueaccurately and at any point in time; hence, ﬁrms can more accurately plan ahead to optimise their capital structure for achieving a particularcost of capital. This could be an essential asset to guide ﬁnancial decision made by Chief Financial Ofﬁcers (CFOs).The main disadvantage would be the challenges that may arise uponthe availability of this information to the public. It was also discussed thatdue to the ability of AI algorithms to accurately predict stock prices, theuse of asset pricing models or estimation of risk (beta) may not be neededanymore; hence, it was proposed that a new parameter should be createdto enable estimation of uncertainties related to predicted values. To theauthor’s knowledge, this is theﬁrst time that AI was applied in theestimation of the cost of equity; hence, this study has the potential todisturb the research in the cost of equity estimation to an entirely new eraof artiﬁcial intelligence that linear or simplistic approaches are no longera solution. This can only happen if these algorithms are commonly beingused and empirical studies to be performed on their ability and impact onﬁnancial decisions made by corporations and investors.There are some suggestions for future research in this
ﬁeld. This study demonstrated that CAPM is consistently underestimating the expectedreturns. This was concluded based on the data collected from 10 highA. Eliasy, J. Przychodzen Array 6 (2020) 100017
11tech companies during the period of January 1, 2013 to January 1, 2019;hence, there may be a need to add an offset to CAPM estimation to adjustits value to be closer to the actual returns. The network architecture andhyperparameters should be optimised for each case to improve the ac-curacy of predictions. This can be enhanced by training the networkusing a much larger dataset. A perfect prediction of stock prices couldalmost completely eliminate the need to using any asset pricing modelsor estimation of risk (beta). This study predicted the returns for the up-coming year on any selected security. To design a portfolio, ﬁnancial analysts may require predicting returns on shorter terms (quarterly) orlonger-term (5–10 years); hence, evaluation of AI performance would benecessary for these periods.As the community starts to trust the prediction of stock prices usingAI, there will be a need to develop a new parameter that can evaluate theuncertainties associated with predictions. This could serve as a replace-ment to the beta which measures the risk in any investment. Thisresearch focused on the application of AI in one industry (high-tech) thatis based in the US market. Future research should evaluate the outcomeof this analysis in other markets and industries to increase the reliabilityof theseﬁndings. Since CAPM is used in portfolio planning, futureresearch should explore the impact of using AI in designing portfolios incomparison to traditional CAPM method.Financial Disclosure(s)This research did not receive any speciﬁc grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-proﬁt sectors.ContributionsAE conceptualised and designed the project, conducted the research,performed analysis and data interpretation and drafted the manuscript.JP supervised the project, assisted with data interpretation and reviewedthe manuscript.Declaration of competing interestThe authors report no conﬂicts of interest. The authors alone areresponsible for the content and writing of the paper.References
[1]Abor J. The effect of capital structure on pro ﬁtability: an empirical analysis of listed ﬁrms in Ghana. J Risk Financ 2005;6(5):438 –45. [2]Trombley TE, Haddad KM. Cost of capital techniques used by Chinese ﬁrms: a survey of practice. Quarterly Journal of Finance &Accounting 2018;56. [3]Harris M, Raviv A. The theory of capital structure. J Financ 1991;46(1):297 –355. [4]Fama EF. Risk, return and equilibrium: some clarifying comments. J Financ 1968;23(1):29–40.[5]Febrian E, Herwany A. CAPM and APT validation test before, during, and afterﬁnancial crisis in emerging market: evidence from Indonesia. Int J Business FinanceRes 2010;10(1).[6]Poterba JM. Comparing the cost of capital in the United States and Japan: a surveyof methods. Fed Reserve Bank N Y Q Rev 1991;15(3 –4):20–32. [7]Campbell JY, Vuolteenaho T. Bad beta, good beta. Am Econ Rev 2004;94(5):1249–75.[8]Brealey RA, et al. Principles of corporate ﬁnance. Tata McGraw-Hill Education; 2012.[9]Lakonishok J, Shapiro AC. Stock returns, beta, variance and size: an empiricalanalysis. Financ Anal J 1984;40(4):36 –41. [10]LeBaron B, et al. Time series properties of an arti ﬁcial stock market. J Econ Dyn Control 1999;23(9–10):1487–516. [11]Shanken J. Multi-beta CAPM or equilibrium-APT?: a reply. J Financ 1985;40(4):1189–96.[12]Eun CS. The benchmark beta, CAPM, and pricing anomalies. Oxf Econ Pap 1994:330–43.[13]Adrian T, Franzoni F. Learning about beta: time-varying factor loadings, expectedreturns, and the conditional CAPM. J Empir Financ 2009;16(4):537 –56. [14]Abbas Q, et al. From regular-beta CAPM to downside-beta CAPM. Eur J Soc Sci2011;21(2):189–203.[15]Enke D, Thawornwong S. The use of data mining and neural networks forforecasting stock market returns. Expert Syst Appl 2005;29(4):927 –40.[16]Jarrahi MH. Artiﬁcial intelligence and the future of work: human-AI symbiosis inorganizational decision making. Bus Horiz 2018;61(4):577 –86. [17]Davenport TH. Rise of the strategy machines. MIT Sloan Manag Rev 2016;58(1):29 . [18]Frey CB, Osborne MA. The future of employment: how susceptible are jobs tocomputerisation? Technol Forecast Soc Chang 2017;114:254 –80. [19]Bae JK. Predictingﬁnancial distress of the South Korean manufacturing industries.Expert Syst Appl 2012;39(10):9159 –65. [20]Liu L, Wang Y. Radial basis function support vector machine based soft-magneticring core inspection. In: International conference on computational and informationscience. Springer; 2005. [21]Wong BK, Selvi Y. Neural network applications in ﬁnance: a review and analysis of literature (1990–1996). Inf Manag 1998;34(3):129 –39. [22]Wong BK, et al. A bibliography of neural network business applications research:1994–1998. Comput Oper Res 2000;27(11 –12):1045–76. [23]Tk/C19a/C20c M, Verner R. Artiﬁcial neural networks in business: two decades of research.Appl Soft Comput 2016;38:788 –804. [24]Mohamad H, et al. Assessment of the expected construction company ’s net proﬁt using neural network and multiple regression models. Ain Shams Eng J 2013;4(3):375–85.[25]White H. Neural-network learning and statistics. AI Expet 1989:48 –52. [26]Cao Q, et al. A comparison between Fama and French ’s model and artiﬁcial neural networks in predicting the Chinese stock market. Comput Oper Res 2005;32(10):2499–512.[27]Kryzanowski L, et al. Using artiﬁcial neural networks to pick stocks. Financ Anal J 1993;49(4):21–7.[28]Sharda R, Patil RB. Connectionist approach to time series prediction: an empiricaltest. J Intell Manuf 1992;3(5):317 –23.
[29]Qi M, Maddala G. Economic factors and the stock market: a new perspective.J Forecast 1999;18(3):151 –66. [30]Lenard MJ, et al. The application of neural networks and a qualitative responsemodel to the auditor’s going concern uncertainty decision. Decis Sci J 1995;26(2):209–27.[31]Turban E, Trippi R. Neural Networks in Finance and Investing. Using arti ﬁcial neural intelligence to improve real-world performance. Chicago Illinois,Cambridge, England: Probus Publishing Company; 1996 . [32]Hu MY, et al. A cross-validation analysis of neural network out-of-sampleperformance in exchange rate forecasting. Decis Sci J 1999;30(1):197 –216. [33]Zhu D, et al. Data mining for network intrusion detection: a comparison ofalternative methods. Decis Sci J 2001;32(4):635 –60. [34]Papatla P, et al. Leveraging the strengths of choice models and neural networks: amultiproduct comparative analysis. Decis Sci J 2002;33(3):433 –61. [35]Zhang G, et al. Forecasting with arti ﬁcial neural networks:: the state of the art. Int J Forecast 1998;14(1):35 –62. [36]Fadlalla A, Lin C-H. An analysis of the applications of neural networks in ﬁnance. Interfaces 2001;31(4):112 –22. [37]Kimoto T, et al. Stock market prediction system with modular neural networks.Neural Networks. 1990. In: 1990 IJCNN international joint conference on. IEEE;1990.[38]Ferson WE, Harvey CR. The risk and predictability of international equity returns.Rev Financ Stud 1993;6(3):527 –66. [39]McGrath C. Terminator portfolio. Kiplinger ’s Personal Finance 2002;56(7). 56-56 . [40]McNelis PD. A neural network analysis of Brazilian stock price dynamics: tequilaeffects vs. Pisco sour effects. Georgetown University; 1996 . [41]Coakley JR, Brown CE. Artiﬁcial neural networks in accounting and ﬁnance: modeling issues. Intell Syst Account Financ Manag 2000;9(2):119 –44. [42]Adnan Aziz M, Dar H As. Predicting corporate bankruptcy: where we stand? CorpGovern: Int J business in Soc 2006;6(1):18 –33. [43]Yu L, et al. An intelligent-agent-based fuzzy group decision making model forﬁnancial multicriteria decision support: the case of credit scoring. Eur J Oper Res2009;195(3):942–59.[44] Accenture. AI in capital market. 2017. 2019, from, https://www.accenture
.com/gb-en/insight-artiﬁcial-intelligence-capital-markets . [Accessed 24 January 2019].[45]G€oçken M, et al. Integrating metaheuristics and arti ﬁcial neural networks for improved stock price prediction. Expert Syst Appl 2016;44:320 –31. [46]Ballings M, et al. Evaluating multiple classi ﬁers for stock price direction prediction. Expert Syst Appl 2015;42(20):7046 –56. [47]Brownstone D. Using percentage accuracy to measure neural network predictions instock market movements. Neurocomputing 1996;10(3):237 –50. [48]Wittkemper H-G, Steiner M. Using neural networks to forecast the systematic risk ofstocks. Eur J Oper Res 1996;90(3):577 –88. [49]Zhang Y, Wu L. Stock market prediction of S &P 500 via combination of improved BCO approach and BP neural network. Expert Syst Appl 2009;36(5):8849 –54. [50]Guresen E, et al. Using artiﬁcial neural network models in stock market indexprediction. Expert Syst Appl 2011;38(8):10389 –97. [51]Dai W, et al. Combining nonlinear independent component analysis and neuralnetwork for the prediction of Asian stock market indexes. Expert Syst Appl 2012;39(4):4444–52.[52]Abdou HA, et al. Determinants of capital structure in the UK retail industry: acomparison of multiple regression and generalized regression neural network. IntellSyst Account Financ Manag 2012;19(3):151 –69. [53]Chen K, et al. A LSTM-based method for stock returns prediction: a case study ofChina stock market. In: 2015 IEEE international conference on big data (big data).IEEE; 2015.[54]Pao H-T. A comparison of neural network and multiple regression analysis inmodeling capital structure. Expert Syst Appl 2008;35(3):720 –7.A. Eliasy, J. Przychodzen Array 6 (2020) 100017
12[55]Modigliani F, Miller MH. The cost of capital, corporation ﬁnance and the theory of investment. Am Econ Rev 1958;48(3):261 –97. [56]Markowitz H. Portfolio selection. J Financ 1952;7(1):77 –91. [57]Brock WA, De Lima PJ. 11 Nonlinear time series, complexity theory, and ﬁnance. Handbook of statistics, vol. 14; 1996. p. 317 –61. [58]Malkiel BG. A random walk down wall street [by] burton G. Malkiel. Norton; 1973 . [59]Sharpe WF. Capital asset prices: a theory of market equilibrium under conditions ofrisk. J Financ 1964;19(3):425 –42. [60]Lintner J. The valuation of risk assets and the selection of risky investments in stockportfolios and capital budgets. Stochastic Optimization Models in Finance. Elsevier;1975. p. 131–55.[61]Lo AW, MacKinlay AC. Stock market prices do not follow random walks: evidencefrom a simple speciﬁcation test. Rev Financ Stud 1988;1(1):41 –66. [62]Lo AW, et al. Foundations of technical analysis: computational algorithms,statistical inference, and empirical implementation. J Financ 2000;55(4):1705 –65. [63]Lo AW. The adaptive markets hypothesis: market ef ﬁciency from an evolutionary perspective. 2004.[64]Timmermann A, Granger CW. Efﬁcient market hypothesis and forecasting. Int J Forecast 2004;20(1):15 –27. [65]Sz/C19eliga MI, et al. Artiﬁcial neural network learning of nonstationary behavior intime series. Int J Neural Syst 2003;13(2):103 –9. [66]Qi M, Zhang GP. An investigation of model selection criteria for neural networktime series forecasting. Eur J Oper Res 2001;132(3):666 –80. [67]Haykin S. Neural networks and learning machines. PearsonEducation. 2009 [UpperSaddle River, NJ].[68]Miles JA, Ezzell JR. The weighted average cost of capital, perfect capital markets,and project life: a clariﬁcation. J Financ Quant Anal 1980;15(3):719 –30. [69]Da Z, et al. CAPM for estimating the cost of equity capital: interpreting the empiricalevidence. J Financ Econ 2012;103(1):204 –20. [70]Fama EF, French KR. Common risk factors in the returns on stocks and bonds.
J Financ Econ 1993;33(1):3 –56. [71]Ferson WE, Harvey CR. Economic, ﬁnancial, and fundamental global risk in and out of the EMU. National bureau of economic research; 1999 . [72]Fraser P, et al. Time-varying betas and the cross-sectional return –risk relation: evidence from the UK. Eur J Financ 2004;10(4):255 –76. [73]Singh A, et al. Shareholder value maximisation, stock market and new technology:should the US corporate model be the universal standard? Int Rev Appl Econ 2005;19(4):419–37.[74]Brounen D, et al. Capital structure policies in Europe: survey evidence. J BankFinanc 2006;30(5):1409 –42.[75]Graves A, et al. A novel connectionist system for unconstrained handwritingrecognition. IEEE Trans Pattern Anal Mach Intell 2008;31(5):855 –68. [76]Sak H, et al. Long short-term memory recurrent neural network architectures forlarge scale acoustic modeling. In: Fifteenth annual conference of the internationalspeech communication association; 2014 . [77]Li X, Wu X. Constructing long short-term memory based deep recurrent neuralnetworks for large vocabulary speech recognition. In: 2015 IEEE internationalconference on acoustics, speech and signal processing (ICASSP). IEEE; 2015 . [78]Greff K, et al. LSTM: a search space odyssey. IEEE transactions on neural networksand learning systems 2017;28(10):2222 –32. [79]Abadi M, et al. Tensorﬂow: a system for large-scale machine learning. 12th{USENIX} symposium on operating systems design and implementation. 2016({OSDI} 16).[80]Kingma DP, Ba J. Adam: a method for stochastic optimization. 2014. arXiv preprintarXiv:1412.6980.[81]Binner JM, et al. Predictable non-linearities in US in ﬂation. Econ Lett 2006;93(3): 323–8.[82]Tenti P. Forecasting foreign exchange rates using recurrent neural networks. ApplArtif Intell 1996;10(6):567 –82. [83]Heaton J, et al. Deep learning in ﬁnance. 2016. arXiv preprint arXiv:1602.06561 . [84]Nelson DM, et al. Stock market ’s price movement prediction with LSTM neural networks. In: 2017 international joint conference on neural networks (IJCNN).IEEE; 2017.[85]Black F. Beta and return. J Portfolio Manag 1992;1 . [86]Hsia CC, et al. Is beta dead or alive? J Bus Financ Account 2000;27(3-4):283 –311. [87]Jagannathan R, Wang Z. The conditional CAPM and the cross-section of expectedreturns. J Financ 1996;51(1):3–53. [88]Ward M, Muller C. Empirical testing of the CAPM on the JSE. Invest Anal J 2012;41(76):1–12.[89]Masulis RW. The impact of capital structure change on ﬁrm value: some estimates. J Financ 1983;38(1):107 –26. [90]Fama EF, French KR. The equity premium. J Financ 2002;57(2):637 –59. [91]Welch E. The relationship between ownership structure and performance in listedAustralian companies, vol. 287. Australia: AUSTRALIAN GRADUATE SCHOOL OFMANAGEMENT; 2003.[92]Kayhan A, Titman S. Firms ’histories and their capital structures. Switzerland:Elsevier Science B.V.; 2007. p. 1. Amsterdam . [93]Lemmon ML, Zender JF. Debt capacity and tests of capital structure theories.J Financ Quant Anal 2010;45(5):1161 –87.A. Eliasy, J. Przychodzen Array 6 (2020) 100017
13