The Digitisation of Agriculture: a Survey of Research Activities onSmart Farming
Manlio Baccoa,*, Paolo Barsocchia, Erina Ferroa, Alberto Gottaa, Massimiliano Ruggerib
aCNR, Institute of Information Science and Technologies, Pisa, Italy
bCNR, Institute for Agricultural and Earthmoving Machines, Ferrara, Italy
ARTICLE INFO
Keywords:Smart farmingPrecision farmingMECCloud computingEdge computing5GSatelliteUAVABSTRACT
The impulse towards a larger introduction of Information and Communication Technology (ICT) in the agricul-turalﬁeld is currently experiencing its momentum, as digitisation has large potentialities to provide bene ﬁts for both producers and consumers; on the other hand, pushing technological solutions into a rural context encountersseveral challenges. In this work, we provide a survey of the most recent research activities, in the form of bothresearch projects and scientiﬁc literature, with the objective of showing the already achieved results, the currentinvestigations, and the still open challenges, both technical and non technical. We mainly focus on the EU ter-ritory, identifying threats and concerns, and then looking at existing and upcoming solutions to overcome thosebarriers.
1. IntroductionSmart Farming (SF) refers to the application of ICT to agriculture.Data collected and analysed through ICT techniques support ef ﬁcient production processes [1], thus motivating scientists, practitioners, pri-vate and public companies to work towards the goal of developing andencouraging the use of innovative technologies to support farmers on theground. According to the European Union (EU), the most relevant tech-nologies and techniques to be fully exploited are the satellite imagery, theuse of agricultural robots, a larger use of sensor nodes to collect data, andthe potentialities of Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) for aerial imageryand actuation. Those indications are contained into the declaration ofcooperation onA smart and sustainable digital future for European agricul-ture and rural areas
1signed on April 2019 by 24 EU countries.According to the aforementioned declaration, the ﬁrst obstacle to- wards a full implementation of SF in rural areas is the lack of connec-tivity, i.e.,digital divide. The advent of 5G is promising to improve such asituation in rural and low-income areas [ 2], but scattered coverage must be still taken into account, as highlighted in recent surveys in the EUterritory [3]. Rural areas remain challenging, not being covered by anyNext Generation Access network: up to 53% at the end of 2017 in EU [ 3]. Putting this issue aside, a plethora of initiatives can be identi ﬁed towardsthe objective of the digitisation of agriculture. As an exemplary case,Smart AKIS, an EU-funded thematic network promoted by the Agricultural European Innovation Partnership(EIP-AGRI) established in 2016, aims toclose the gap between scientiﬁc knowledge and practitioners, in order topromote concrete solutions to be implemented. A solution can be de ﬁned as anything that makes the farming practice more controlled and accu-rate through ICT, reducing both the costs and the environmental impact,while also increasing the production. SF has the potential to also improvework safety, contributing to the sustainability of agriculture [ 1], but its socio-economic implications are debated [ 4]. In this innovative approach of farm management, a key component isthe use of hardware and software technologies, like the deploying ofsensor nodes, control systems, robotics, satellites for imagery and posi-tioning, data storage and analysis, advisory systems, and terrestrial andaerial drones. However, the aim of SF should not be justin industrializing agriculture, but in making the whole process more ef ﬁcient, sustainable, and of high quality, while respecting farmers ’needs. SF dates back to the middle of the 80 ’s, but it has been practiced commercially only since the 90 ’s[5]. However, many farmers are still skeptical about the actual advantages it can offer. This can be explainedby considering the proﬁt and the direct beneﬁts for the farm. In fact, it is not straightforward to identify those [ 6], for instance when considering
* Corresponding author.E-mail addresses:manlio.bacco@isti.cnr.it(M. Bacco),paolo.barsocchi@isti.cnr.it(P. Barsocchi),erina.ferro@isti.cnr.it(E. Ferro),alberto.gotta@isti.cnr.it (A. Gotta),m.ruggeri@imamoter.cnr.it(M. Ruggeri).
1available here:https://ec.europa.eu/digital-single-market/en/news/eu-member-states-join-forces-digitalisation-european-agriculture-and-rural-a reas.
Contents lists available atScienceDirect
Array
journal homepage:www.elsevier.com/journals/array/2590-0056/open-access-journal
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.array.2019.100009Received 28 August 2019; Received in revised form 7 October 2019; Accepted 8 October 2019Available online 5 November 20192590-0056/©2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. This is an open access article under the CC BY license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ ).Array 3-4 (2019) 100009Capital Expenditures (CAPEX) and Operating Expenditures (OPEX) forsoftware, machinery, and data. Farmers generally tend to identify SF as aset of tools that beneﬁts only large holdings, both in crop and livestockproduction. This is linked to the perception of high costs and complexityof the involved technologies. What is lacking from this image is thepossibility that innovative technologies might not be only large-scale andthus costly, but rather alsoslow and precise, plus small and cheap [7]. Nowadays, SF is rapidly taking advantage of recent technologicaladvancements for improving agricultural practices [ 8], further than business models for lowering adoption costs. For instance, rental pro-grams for farming equipment, like Trringoin India, make possible farm mechanization processes with affordable costs for farmers, also providingsupport services. Such an initiative can be categorised as cooperative farming, potentially increasing the penetration of SF in low-income areas.Karnott, a French company, is pushing both web services and hardwaresolutions to transform legacy equipment into SF-ready one. Karnott sellsa control unit to be installed on agricultural machines, offering severalservices through a battery-powered device, collecting and exchangingreal-time data, as well as geolocation. Then, collected data can beexploited through on-line services, like those provided by api-agro,a secure platform to share data. Available data can be accessed and fed todifferent management systems, thus offering a valuable repository forfarms.Taranisoffers a platform using aerial and satellite imagery jointwith Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) techniques to provide a Decision SupportSystem (DSS) for Precision Farming (PF) applications. AgriOpenData provides a DSS as well, exploiting blockchain, UAVs, and adding supportservices on top of it. When considering fully autonomous solutions, Iron Oxoffers a complete robotic solution to grow plants, from seeds to har-vest, with a hydroponic system able to strongly reduce the water con-sumption. At last, traceability is experiencing a revolution thanks todigital ledgers. Even if it cannot be considered immediately within theumbrella of SF, still the origin and the quality of agricultural productsremains a central issue.Carrefour, a French multinational retailer, isbetting on blockchain as a solution to provide trustable data to consumersand intermediate actors. Blockchain is used by Hectare Agritechin a farm trading platform as well, highlighting how innovative paradigms can beadapted to different use cases in the agricultural ﬁeld. The aim of this work is to survey both research initiatives and sci-entiﬁc literature on the topic of SF, looking at recent technologies andtechniques being used or being actively pushed for adoption. In addition,we discuss still open challenges hampering such an objective. The rest ofthis work is structured as follows: Section 2surveys research and inno- vation projects covering SF activities in the EU territory, then the scope ofthe survey is enlarged by taking into account the state of the art in thescientiﬁc literature. Section3discusses the open challenges at today,considering both technical and non-technical factors. Finally, Section 4 draws the conclusions and opens to future directions.2. State of the artThis section provides two main contributions. The ﬁrst one is in Section2.1, surveying relevant research projects recently funded by theEU in theﬁeld of SF; the aim is to highlight the increasing attention to-wards those activities, and then to identify the involved technologies.Table 1provides an overview of surveyed R&I projects. Furthermore, Fig. 1depicts relevant agricultural operations as faced by the describedresearch projects, and the technological solutions exploited in the latter
ones. The second contribution is in Section 2.2, surveying the scientiﬁc works that propose solutions for the implementation of SF. Table 2 provides an overview of surveyed literature, then a keyword analysis isproposed inFig. 2.2.1. EU research projectsIn last years, the EU has been actively undertaking R &I activities laying the ground for the digitisation of agriculture by exploiting data-
Table 1The most relevant EU-funded R
&I projects towards increasing digitisation in the farming sector. The second part of the table is related to dissemination, engagement activities, a
nd thematic networks.
Marketplacesare hereintended as virtual places where existing solutions can be publicly browsed. More details on each project are available on the EU CORDIS portal (
https://cordis.europa.eu
), searching for the grant agreement ID, oralternatively on the website.
project/initiative(EU grant agr. ID/website)
start dateended (yes/no)
goal(s) cloud/
edgecomputing
data services andinformationsystems
sensing unmanned vehicles data analysis software
platformsterrestrial aerospace aerial terrestrial big
data
machinelearningMistrale (641606) January 2015 (y) Water Use X web-basedSweeper (644313) February 2015 (y) Harvesting Robot X XFlourish (644227) March 2015 (y) Crop Monitoring X X X X X multi-platformAuditor (687367) January 2016 (y) Satellite Imagery XApollo (687412) May 2016 (y) Crop Monitoring
Water UseEngagement
X web-based/mobileAgriCloud P2 (720176) May 2016 (y) Crop Monitoring X X XRUC-APS (691249) October 2016 (n) Management
Optimisation
XXSensagri (730074) November 2016
(n)
Crop Monitoring X X XIoF2020 (731884) January 2017 (n) Crop Monitoring
Livestock FarmingDairy Monitoring
X X X X X X multi-platformDataBio (732064) January 2017 (n) Crop Monitoring
ForestryFishery
X X X X X web-basedAgroradar (761481) February 2017 (y) Satellite Imagery X
(continued on next page
)M. Bacco et al. Array 3-4 (2019) 100009
2Table 1(continued)project/initiative(EU grant agr. ID/website)
start dateended (yes/no)
goal(s) cloud/
edgecomputing
data services andinformationsystems
sensing unmanned vehicles data analysis software
platformsterrestrial aerospace aerial terrestrial big
data
machinelearningApmav (763132) March 2017 (y) Crop Monitoring X X X X XWater4Agri (783989) October 2017 (y) Water Use XRomi (773875) November 2017
(n)
Crop Monitoring X X XPantheon (774571) November 2017
(n)
OrchardMonitoringWater Use
XX X XSwamp (777112) November 2017
(n)
Water Use X X X X XAfriCultuReS (774652) November 2017
(n)
Food Security X X X X X multi-platformGreenPatrol-Robot (776324) November 2017
(n)
Crop Monitoring X X XBigDataGrapes (780751) January 2018 (n) Crop Monitoring X X X X X XAfarCloud (783221) September 2018
(n)
Crop MonitoringLivestock Farming
XX XDragon (810775) October 2018 (n) Crop monitoring
Skill Acquisition
XX X X X X XFarmingBySatellite(farmingbysatellite.eu)
2012 (n) Challenge
web-basedICT-Agri-2 (618123) May 2014 (y) Marketplace
web-basedSmart-Akis (696294) March 2016 (y) Marketplace
web-based4D4F (696367) March 2016 (y) Marketplace
web-basedNefertiti (772705) January 2018 (n) Thematic Network
web-based platformincluding knowledge tanksSmartAgriHubs (818182) February 2019 (n) Marketplace
web-basedFAIRshare (818488) November 2018
(n)
Thematic NetworkEngagement
data sharing and digital toolspromotingEuraknos (817863) January 2019 (n) Thematic Network
e-Knowledge ReservoirDesira (818194) June 2019 (n) Marketplace
Engagment
web-based platformM. Bacco et al. Array 3-4 (2019) 100009
3empowered strategies; strategic interventions have been funded to sup-port the uptake of digital technologies, to develop new digital solutionsand to sustain the crucial assessment of the socio-economic impacts ofdigitisation. InTable 1, 30 recent EU projects closely related to SF arepresented: theﬁrst 21 projects, spanning from 2015 to 2019, propose,develop, and test the use of digital technologies in this ﬁeld; the 9 pro- jects in the last rows, spanning from 2012 to 2019, have the comple-mentary objective of strengthen or evaluate the use of ICT in agriculture,for instance through challenge-based strategies, or by setting up mar-ketplaces to browse existing solutions ready for use. Most projects jointlyexploit multiple techniques and technologies; here, we highlight only themost prominent ones.2.1.1. Cloud/edge-based systemsCloud platforms are mainly exploited in projects that are related tomonitoring activities, like growth of plants, water availability, soilmoisture maps, and so on. There is a clear dominance of cloud solutionswith respect to those based on edge solutions, because the former is amore established option than the latter. The AgriCloud P2project pro- posed a cloud-based PF management system for a sustainable andintensive agriculture to secure long-term food supply in Europe. TheAPMAVproject consists of an intuitive solution for agricultural man-agement based on UAV technology and an intelligent cloud-based plat-form that provides farmers valuable, actionable and real-timerecommendations for driving down costs and improving crop perfor-mance. TheFlourishproject leverages UAVs as well, aiming at surveying aﬁeld from the air, then at performing a targeted intervention on theground with an Unmanned Terrestrial Vehicle (UTV). The idea is toprovide a DSS requiring minimal user intervention to target PF applica-tions. TheSWAMPproject develops Internet of Things (IoT)-basedmethods and approaches for smart water management in the precisionirrigation domain, in order to utilize water more ef ﬁciently and effec- tively, avoiding both under- and over-irrigation. The AfriCultuReSproj- ect, beyond the use of cloud-based technology, also exploits the data
Fig. 1.Most relevant agricultural operations under consideration in the ICT-based R &D projects described inTable 1, and exploited technological paradigms. Both operations and paradigms are ranked according to the number of links.M. Bacco et al. Array 3-4 (2019) 100009
4collected from different sources (e.g. service providers, weather services)to develop an integrated agricultural monitoring and early warningsystem, based on remote sensing, to support decision making. TheDataBioproject makes intensive use of big data techniques related to theraw material production from agriculture, forestry, ﬁshery and aqua- culture for the production of food, energy, and biomaterials in a sus-tainable way, by means of a software platform integrating big data andEarth Observation (EO) methods. Data-driven activities are also proposedin the just startedDragonproject, whose main efforts are directed to-wards skill transfers to ease PF adoption. Large heterogeneous datasources are considered and analysed to offer agricultural knowledge andinformation systems by ambitiously leveraging several techniques. TheBigDataGrapesproject makes use of big data techniques in the context ofviticulture, supporting decisions by exploiting real-time analysis of large,diverse and multimodal data sources. It has been exploiting the use ofUAVs as well in vineyards. Last but not least, the IoF2020project is one of the most comprehensive projects from the point of view of SF digitaltechnologies: in particular, this project accelerates the adoption of IoT, inorder to secure sufﬁcient, safe and healthy food and at strengtheningcompetitiveness of farming and food chains in Europe. A large scale pilotprogramme has been started in IoF2020 to develop and test speci ﬁc technological solutions in the following sectors: arable, dairy, fruits,vegetables, and meat.2.1.2. Unmanned vehiclesThe use of unmanned vehicles is another trend of great interest.Beyond the aforementioned Flourish, APMAV, BigDataGrapes, andDragon projects, thePANTHEONproject, by taking advantage of thetechnological advancements in theﬁelds of robotics, remote sensing andbig data management, aims at designing an integrated system whereheterogeneous unmanned robotic components (terrestrial and aerial ro-bots) move within the orchards to collect data and perform commonfarming operations. TheSWEEPERproject has proposed a robotic systemto harvest sweet peppers in greenhouses, leveraging on machine visiontechniques to acquire both colour and distance information, and thenstoring collected peppers in an on-board container. Another roboticplatform has been developed in the ROMIproject to assist in weed reduction and crop monitoring, reducing manual labour. Land robots alsoacquire detailed information on sample plants, and an UAV assists byproviding information at crop level. The GreenPatrol-Robotproject designed and built a satellite-guided autonomous robot for pest control ingreenhouses. It exploits Galileo satellite services to navigate, achievinggood positioning accuracy inside greenhouses. The AFarCloudproject aims at the agricultural productivity increase via PF techniques. Theproposed solution is a distributed platform for autonomous farming ro-bots that allows the integration and real-time cooperation of agriculturalsystems to increase efﬁciency, productivity, and food quality. This plat-form is integrated with a Farm Management System (FMS) to supportmonitoring and decision-making solutions based on real-time dataTable 2Relevant scientiﬁc literature on SF. Theﬁrst two blocks are related to sensing techniques and FMS/FMIS systems connected to robotic solutions to support autonomous operations; the two blocks below cover software systems designed to support agricultural production through IoT-based monitoring and/or leveragi ng DSSs.
category works main objective(s)Sensing Techniques and ManagementSystems [5] local and remote sensing techniques for PF, highlighting the need for higherspatial/spectral resolution[12] survey on data collection protocols, prototypes, and types of sensor nodesin agricultural scenarios[13] Farm Management Information System (FMIS) and FMS survey, proposing an architecture for cloud-enabled FMSs[14] underground and terrestrial network architectures for several different SF scenarios Unmanned Vehicles [ 15] use of an UAV to estimate the plowing depth with anRed Green Blue (RGB)-D sensor[16] use of an UAV to distinguish sugar beets from close weeds[17] use of an UAV and terrestrial sensing to measure leaf temperaturewith infrared thermometers[18] use of an UAV for precision spraying of pesticides in infected areas[19,20]802.15.4 channel modeling for bidirectional ground-to-air UAVs communications in agriculture[21] UAV with multispectral, thermal, and RGB cameras to discover missing plants in viticulture[22,23]use of aerial and terrestrial robots (RHEA ﬂeet): weed management in agriculture and forestry; greenhouse management[24] commercial UAVs platforms, both multirotors and ﬁxed wings, for use in SF [25] spectral/imaging sensors review, and guidelines for machine vision systemson board autonomous agricultural vehicles[26] automatic operations: guidance; headland and turn; vision and sensing for variable rate; machinery coordination IoT Platforms [ 27] IoT platform for greenhouses using low-cost MICAz motes monitoring temperature, humidity, light level, and atmosphericpressure[28] energy-efﬁcient FIWARE-based platform collecting soil data via ZigBee[29] FIWARE-based system (Agricolus) for SF applications, like tobacco crops[30] platform for climate, irrigation, and nutrition control in a greenhousewith tomato plants based on cloud/edge computing[31] transpiration-driven irrigation for greenhouses by an event-basedpredictive controller[32] garden greenhouse exploiting Arduino for irrigation control[33] survey of IoT use in PF with a focus on both communication protocolsand technologies in use[34] scalable platform (SmartFarmNet) based on RDF semantics and IoT[35] semantic framework (Agri-IoT) providing data analysis and reasoning[36] SF platform for irrigation relying on the OGC SensorML standard in a semantic web stack Decision Support Systems [ 37] DSS to control climate conditions in greenhouses, monitoring temperature, humidity, photosynthetic active and globalradiation,
CO2concentration[38] DSS based on semantic web technologies to handle cattle and monitor soil[39] DSS pushing suggestions generated by an arti ﬁcial neural network trained on data collected from sensor nodes via LoRa connection[40] REST-based DSS for PF performing data mining to monitor pests in orchards and ﬁelds [41] DSS for selecting appropriate alternative cropsM. Bacco et al. Array 3-4 (2019) 100009
5mining techniques. TheRUC-APSproject is centered on managementapproaches aiming at enhancing SF solutions in agriculture systems,applying operational research to optimise farm production.2.1.3. Satellite-based activitiesSeveral projects are mainly based on improving the informationderived from satellite optical data. The AGRORADARproject aims at delivering innovative algorithms and data models that can processCopernicus EO Syntethic Aperture Radar (SAR) data to achieve preciseand detailed information. TheAUDITORproject develops an improved Global Navigation Satellite System (GNSS) augmentation system forservices in PF applications. The project enables cost-effective PF servicesto farmers, like recommendations regarding site-speci ﬁc application ofwater, fertilizer and pesticides. The WATER4AGRIproject combines microwave data obtained from different satellites to provide datasets forretrieving key information about water availability for crops at ﬁeld level. TheSENSAGRIproject combines optical and radar measurementsto develop three prototype services for near real-time operations: surfacesoil moisture, green and brown Leaf Area Index (LAI), and crop typemapping. TheMISTRALEproject provides soil moisture maps to decisionmakers in water management using GNSS re ﬂectometry (GNSS-R) via satellites and UAVs. The project has developed a prototype sensorembedded on a dedicated software platform. The APOLLOproject brings PF closer to farmers through affordable information services, makingextensive use of free and open EO data. The proposed services helpfarmers to make better decisions by monitoring the growth and health ofFig. 2.Number of occurrences of relevant keywords (at least 50) as they appear in the surveyed literature: the 4 categories, as proposed in Table 2, can be read internally, and each keyword is weighted (circle radius) in the cluster it belongs to.M. Bacco et al. Array 3-4 (2019) 100009
6crops, providing advice on when to irrigate and till their ﬁelds, and estimating the size of their harvest. The services are designed to be al-ways available thanks to a web platform and a mobile application.2.1.4. Mitigating digital divideOther research projects are mainly focused on bringing the advan-tages of SF to farmers in a way compatible with their needs and digitalskills, thus reducing digital divide. The SMART-AKISinitiative sets up a self-sustainable thematic network on SF technologies designed for theeffective exchange of knowledge among research, industry, and thefarming community, disseminating direct applicable research and com-mercial solutions, and capturing grassroots level needs and innovativeideas. The4D4Fproject (Data Driven Dairy Decision For Farmers) focuseson the beneﬁts provided by sensors in monitoring animals and environ-ment, supporting informed decisions. The project hosts a large repositoryof ICT solutions freely browseable by farmers. The SmartAgriHubsproject brings together 164 partners in the European agri-food sector, carryingout 28ﬂagship innovation experiments for digitisation in ﬁve agri-food sectors: arable farming, livestock, vegetable, fruits, and aquaculture.The overall goal ofICT-AGRI-2is to strengthen the research within thearea of PF and to develop a common research agenda concerning ICT androbotics in agriculture in Europe. Its main objectives are: mapping andanalysis of existing research and future needs; development of in-struments and procedures for transnational funding activities; develop-ment of strategic research agenda and programmes; and establishment ofinternational collaborations and networks. Other projects, like Nefertiti, Euraknos, andDesiraare setting up thematic networks with the objectiveof promote networking activities, data sharing and knowledge exchange.They leverage the vast set of already available ICT tools to promote theiruse in SF contexts and to foster their adaption to practitioners ’needs. The DESIRAproject, started at June 2019, intends to collect practitioners ’ needs through 20 nationalliving labsin EU and then to design ICT use cases to meet those demands in a Responsible Research and Innovation(RRI) fashion. TheFairshareproject has data collecting and sharing asforemost objectives, in order to build a network able to reduce theagricultural digital divide. Finally, FarmingBySatelliteis an initiative to promote the use of Galileo as GNSS and EO services. It launches abiyearly challenge to identify promising ideas using satellite technologiesfor SF purposes.2.1.5. ConsiderationsSumming up, some considerations can be made: monitoring ﬁelds and crops is quite diffused at today, leveraging local and remote sensing so-lutions, i.e., in-ﬁeld sensors, UAVs, up to satellites. Another major chal-lenge is the optimisation of water use. Unmanned vehicles enable semi-and full-autonomous scenarios, currently representing a major objectivefor both research institutes and private companies. Anyway, almost allsurveyed projects aim at providing DSSs instead of autonomous solu-tions; in fact, there is still wide scepticism on them by practitioners asviable alternatives to human decisions. To feed DSSs, data analysistechniques are used, also supporting automatic actions based on feed-back, and farmers’decisions. Machine learning techniques are typicallyexploited for dedicated applications in the projects we considered, suchas prediction and estimation of farming parameters to optimise livestockproduction or crop monitoring.2.2. Scientiﬁc literatureSF represents the evolution of agriculture driven by ICT technologies.ICT provides tools, methods, and techniques with the potential toimprove both the modeling and the practice in this sector. SF is intrin-sically tied to large-scale heterogeneous sensing [ 9], involving different hardware, algorithms, and protocols, thus too focused approaches havegained little traction at now. In what follows, we survey a very recent and
exemplary subset of the scientiﬁc literature on such a topic, then sche-matised inTable 2. To further highlight what is currently trending inrecent scientiﬁc literature, we show the most used keywords in Fig. 2, according to the four thematic clusters we de ﬁne inTable 2. Each keyword is presented weighted in its cluster according to the number ofoccurrences. Finally,Table 3maps typical application scenarios and datatypes to commonly used sensing solutions [ 10,11].2.2.1. Sensing techniques and management systemsSF makes large use of sensor nodes to collect data on the environmentand the phenomenon under observation. For instance, in the case ofagriculture, soil sensors, placed at different depths, complement datacollected from EO satellites, providing enriched information. Moregenerally, indoor and outdoor Wireless Sensor Networks (WSNs), bothmobile andﬁxed, are used to collect heterogeneous data [ 14] for eval- uating different indexes, such as the Normalized Difference VegetationIndex (NDVI), the excess green index, the LAI, and so on. Given thefundamental role played by data and data sources in this context [ 12], the historical evolution of sensing for PF in Ref. [ 5] offers a valuable perspective. At the beginning, three methodological approaches wereconsidered: theﬁrst two ones, namelyfarming by soilandsite-speciﬁc crop management, were contrasting because the former promoted soil map-ping, while the latter promoted homogeneous actions in sub-units of farmﬁelds, i.e., a punctual approach versus a clustered one. The thirdapproach, namelyproximal soil sensing, came later, consisting in contin- uous real-time sensing by sensors mounted on tractors. It can beconsidered the father of the PF approaches in use nowadays. Thanks tosatellites, proximal soil sensing evolved into remote soil sensing, intro- ducing spectral analyses. To allow farm managers to exploit all thoseheterogeneous data sources, increasing complex software platforms wereintroduced to take advantage of raw data and of subsequent elaboration:they are referred to as FMIS [13].2.2.2. Unmanned vehiclesReal-time stream processing, analysis, and reasoning are key conceptstowards automation in the agriculturalﬁeld [22], i.e., towards a larger use of robots that can adapt to space- and time-varying conditions withminimal delay. Robots can perform very precise operations, and canoperate inﬂeets, as proposed in Ref. [23], which considers both UTVs and UAVs. Moving systems rely on GNSS techniques for precise posi-tioning, and PF applications need large accuracy. Several commercialsystems integrate a GNSS receiver and use one or more ﬁxed Real-Time Kinematic (RTK) reference base stations [ 26] for providing accuracy up to centimeters. Further than precise positioning, robots depend onmachine-vision systems to navigate the environment [ 25]; according to the technology and the scenario under consideration, speci ﬁc spectral signatures are of interest, as for instance hyperspectral imagery in bothlocal and remote sensing. Commercial devices, to be used on board,already capture both RGB and Near Infrared Imagery (NIR) bands, andstereovision systems are used for 3D maps [ 25]. Further than terrestrial vehicles, aerial ones have been revolutionis-ing the practices in this sector. PF is taking large advantage of UAVs, withTable 3Relevant agricultural applications and local or remote sensing systems commonlyused [10,11].
application scenarios sensing solutionsweeds mapping RGB images, NIRsoil organic carbon NIRyield prediction NIR, NDVI, 3D imagesplants growth NIR, NDVIcrop water stress thermal imagesplant height ultrasonic, multi/hyper-spectral data, NIR, NDVI crop cover RGB images, multispectral camera, spectrographreal-timecrop conditions multi/hyper-spectral camera,RGB, NIRphenotyping 3D, colour digital, spectral imageschlorophyll measurement spectrometer, satelliteM. Bacco et al. Array 3-4 (2019) 100009
7several commercial systems able toﬂy at different speeds and altitudes [24], ranging fromﬁxed to rotary wing machines. UAVs are used formonitoring scenarios, further than pesticide spraying, which is a keyapplication for PF [18]. Heavy and large UAVs can be used for such apurpose in the case of largeﬁelds, jointly with multispectral techniquesto generate NDVI maps to be used for spraying pesticides and fertilizerswhere needed. Such a potential has been subject to increasing attentionin the last years. For instance, UAVs can be used to assess if an area hasbeen subject to plowing, and the plowing depths. The authors in Ref. [ 15] consider the use of UAVs for such a purpose as an alternative to the use ofsatellites. In fact, according to the authors, even high-resolution satellitescannot classify the roughness of the terrain, thus motivating the use ofUAVs. A RGB camera has been used for data collection and a visualassessment, and collected georeferenced data are analysed to assess theplowing depths. RGB and NIR are collected by means of an UAV also inRef. [16], with the aim of classifying plants and weeds. The proposedsystem makes use of the Excess Green Index (ExG) [ 16] in the case of RGB-only; if NIR is exploited as well, NDVI can be estimated and usedbecause of the richer information it provides. By combining these resultswith geometric features, sugar beets can be recognised even in the case ofoverlapping plants. NDVI has been used in viticulture for precision ap-plications [21] as well: in fact, using an UAV to collect detailed images ina vineyard, plant rows can be discriminated from inter-rows, identifyingmissing plants with good precision.UAVs can be seen as part of a WSN, acting as mobile nodes [ 17], thus the analytical characterisation of the channel model between a movingUAV andﬁxed terrestrial nodes becomes of interest [ 20]. Low-power 802.15.4-based solutions have been investigated in rural contexts,using UAVs as data mules [19].2.2.3. IoT platformsAs aforementioned in Section1, Internet connectivity is a key requirement for SF. In fact, its availability allows IoT-based scenarios toemerge [33], increasing the degree of remote control and automation.This is well supported by IoT features, such as interoperability andeasiness of integration [36]. Anyway, in rural contexts, terrestrial con-nectivity may be lacking. Because of this, aerospace solutions for con-nectivity are a viable option [8].Looking at the literature, reference [30] proposes an IoT platform for PF based on FIWARE.
2It considers the case of a greenhouse, whereInternet connectivity is likely available, thus opening to data exchangesvia protocol stacks relying on common IoT protocols, like CoAP andMQTT. In greenhouses, the main objectives are typically climate controland soil monitoring. The Agricolus software platform, which is aFIWARE-based DSS for tobacco crops, is described in Ref. [ 29], designed to collect soil data via 802.15.4-based WSNs. The FIWARE middleware isa software enabler in very different scenarios [ 13,29]. Along to climate control systems, irrigation systems have been proposed to optimise wateruse. In Ref. [28], FIWARE cloud components are integrated in a PFapplication to reduce water use. In Ref. [ 31], tomatoes in a greenhouse are monitored, and the authors propose an analytical framework to assessthe performance of different tested conﬁgurations by relying on plant transpiration. The works in Refs. [27,32] consider the use of low-cost and general purpose sensor nodes, built upon the Arduino platform and uponMICAz Motes, respectively, as information sources in greenhouses. Beingable to deploy low-cost and easily replaceable sensor nodes is a priorityfor a larger adoption of SF techniques. A core demand is related to powerconsumption: battery-powered devices lasting several years, as forinstance ZigBee ones in Ref. [27], are fundamental in farm deployments.Apart from FIWARE, a plethora of different platforms can be identi-ﬁed as enablers for SF [34]. Those platforms aggregate heterogeneousdata, then analysed and interpreted in order to provide additional value.Here, semantic analyses have been proposed as well, like for instance thevaluable work in Ref. [35]. The Agri-IoT architecture, a layered andcomplex framework, provides additional value to DSSs because it furtherfacilitates informed and accurate decisions thanks to semantic web andreal-time reasoning.2.2.4. Decision Support SystemsDSSs are one of the most used solutions for SF because they providesupport to farmers, offering a point of access to useful information, ac-cording to the aim of the system, and suggesting a plausible course ofaction in a given context. Aims can be very different: minimising theimpact of diseases in tomatoes by applying automatic climate control[37];‘time-to-sow’alerts, and cattle monitoring [38]; anticipating po- tential crop dysfunctions in a proactive way [ 39]; pest control [40]; selecting appropriate alternative crops in a given area [ 41]. Those are just few examples of what can be offered by recent developments of DSSsin the agricultural sector.2.2.5. ConsiderationsSome considerations can be made also here: for instance, looking atFig. 2, it is visible howdatais a relevant keyword for all clusters. This is akey topic in the context of SF, thus deepened in Section 3. A notable exception is visible in the cluster Unmanned Vehicles, in whichsystem outnumbersdata: this can be explained by taking into account that un-manned vehicles are typically considered in an autonomous scenario, i.e.,within a system composed of several interacting parts. The keywordspertaining to the clusterUnmanned Vehiclestake the most part ofFig. 2, graphically highlighting the technological complexity of designed sys-tems, and the very large number of operations that can be performed bythose. Finally, what inFig. 1can be put in relation with what presented inFig. 2: as an example, in the former monitoring operations are practicallyubiquitous, and this is conﬁrmed by the large number of occurrences ofkeywords likething(as in smart thing or IoT) andsensorin the latter.3. Open challengesThis section brieﬂy discusses the open challenges hampering a largeradoption of SF, summarised inFig. 3as well. Several technologies pushing for a larger adoption of SF practices have already been citedwithin this work, such as fully autonomous ﬂight control, early identi- ﬁcation of plant diseases, and reliable virtual fences [ 1], as well as more general ones, as AI, robotics, high performance computing, IoT, and 5G,which are reported within the EU declaration cited in Section 1.A I probably represents the largest challenge at now and, at the same time,opportunity in several sectors, including the agricultural one. The EU islargely investing on it because convinced it will be the upcomingdisruptive game changer. In fact, the AI4EU initiative, started at thebeginning of 2019, aims at the transformation of AI into a compellingsolution in several application scenarios.3.1. Technical challengesLooking at sensor nodes and sensor networks, we refer to the valuableworks in Refs. [14,42], which survey the use ofﬁxed and mobile solu- tions. According to the authors, advances are needed to further lowercosts and to design speciﬁc solutions for the agricultural context, whichrequires solutions able to resist to difﬁcult conditions (e.g., speciﬁc soil properties, exposition to high/low temperature, water resistance, ﬁne dusts, and so on). Further than costs, solutions are needed toward largerenergy efﬁciency, including energy harvesting techniques, and reliabilityin data collection and transmission, in order to minimize the need ofmaintenance for the deployed solutions. Speci ﬁc issues of the agricultural domain need targeted answers, in particular the deployment strategies,to be designed according toﬁelds segmentation and to farmers ’ requirements.One of the main drivers of the diffusion of WSN in agriculture has
2The FIWARE platform encompasses open source components for developingsmart solutions.M. Bacco et al. Array 3-4 (2019) 100009
8been IoT: it has marked the transition from closed-source systems anddisconnected software solutions towards connected systems built uponinteroperable solutions. Those characteristics are favorable to costreduction and to easiness of integration. Challenges here are overallrelated to network capabilities, data security, and data privacy [ 33]. Data is one of the most critical topic in the agricultural sector. Data ownership,protection, and security are perceived as not suf ﬁciently close to farmers’ needs, thus becoming threats to be mitigated, if not completely avoided.In more words, nowadays, digital solutions for SF are under-utilisedbecause practitioners fear data misuse and the loss of control over theirbusiness. Data protection must be enhanced to transform into a trans-parent operation, keeping in mind that agriculture is typically a privatebusiness activity (i.e., a not transparent activity), and data transfers toexternal systems (e.g. cloud) must be controllable and well described toincrease acceptance. An option towards larger acceptance comes fromthe possibility for farmers to beneﬁt from business with their data, and tobeneﬁt from public and ofﬁcial data released in an open fashion. On this,the valuable work of the EU with the Galileo services is a notable exampleof good practice, collecting and releasing data through application pro-gramming interfaces [43]. Further from data, open and used standardsfor data handling is compelling to move towards horizontal solutionsinstead of vertical ones [44].Large IoT platforms generate huge amounts of data to be analysed,thus calling for data analytic techniques able to extract meaningful in-formation. Nowadays, big data immediately come to mind [ 45] as a set of strategies towards this objective, but it must be noted that its applicationto agriculture is recent. Generally speaking, the big data paradigm goes inan opposite direction with respect to acquiring more control over owndata by farmers. To counteract that, the possibility for farmers toeconomically gain from sharing and accessing large volumes of dataworks as an incentive [46]. In Ref. [47], the authors underline the dif-ﬁculties in discovering and combining large heterogeneous datasets inthe agro-environmentalﬁeld, often complicated by lacking of metadata.Furthermore, the need for semantic analyses and interoperability ishighlighted in Ref. [47]. Natural language processing and machinelearning techniques play a role here, facilitated by existing initiatives forbuilding and maintaining open large repositories for training purposes,like CINERGI by Earthcube.Once meaningful information is available thanks to raw data sourcesand to analytics techniques,decision makingis performed. This is where machine learning techniques and, more generally, AI can be fullyexploited toward autonomous systems. To this aim, a fundamentalchallenge is moving intelligence from cloud platforms to closer compu-tation platforms, such as edge solutions, handling and processing dataclose to the source, thus reducing delays. Multi-Access Edge Computing(MEC), jointly with 5G, is expected to play a role here. In the case ofagricultural autonomous systems, real-time constraints are more easilysatisﬁed by edge solutions than remote centralised systems. According toRef. [48], in order to build sustainable infrastructure, the severalemerging architecture paradigms (with different degrees of centralisedand distributed entities) must comply to open standards for both easinessof implementation and cost reduction. Environmental monitoring andreal-time agricultural data analytics and control can bene ﬁt from those paradigms, for instance by providing localized information about pollu-tion and pests in the vicinity of edge servers [ 49].3.2. Socio-economic and other non-technical challengesThis section discusses non-technical issues still holding back a largerdiffusion of SF, at least in the EU. In fact, uptake in EU is rather low ifcompared to what expected [50]. Incentives and policies play a largerole, considering national and EU rules, economical and skills perspec-tives. In Ref. [50], the authors show howﬁ
nancial and government in- centives are the most inﬂuential solution, followed by training and othernon-ﬁnancial support. Farmers’concerns are related to the time torecover the investment, and to the difﬁculties in evaluating the advan- tages; small farms have almost no adoption at all, also because the ma-chinery has no support for more advanced technology. Sole farmers showa large interest in SF tools, which may come as unexpected, because itreduces exposure to occupational accidents and injuries; anyway, thosebarriers still hold back its use [51]. Because of those reasons, initiativeslike those presented in Section1have a signiﬁcant socio-economic value: cooperative farming with support services for a better handling of costsand needed investments; hardware solutions to transform legacy equip-ment into SF-ready machinery to avoid too high initial costs and to havetime to familiarise with new technology; secure and open platforms forsharing data and getting back useful information, helping in assessingpotential advantages. Research activities aiming at reducing the agri-cultural digital divide have an impact as well, helping farmers with newICT-based tools in their daily work; on the other hand, different strategiesin designing innovative ICT tools must be considered, like using naturallanguage [52] to explicitly take into account potentially low-literatespeakers.Nowadays, the right to access and use the collected data is at thecenter of the discussion: COPA-COGECA, an European farming repre-sentative organisation, in cooperation with CEMA, the European agri-cultural machinery association, has recently released a code of conduct to
Figure 3.Overview of open challenges in the SF ﬁeld: technical challenges (on the right) are discussed in Section 3.1, non-technical challenges (on the left) are discussed in Section3.2.M. Bacco et al. Array 3-4 (2019) 100009
9grant the data originator (i.e., the farmer) a leading role in controlling theaccess to and the use of data.
3The concerns on data use and access havebeen explored also in Ref. [4], highlighting existing scepticism byAustralian farmers and divergence of expectations between involvedactors. On the one hand, marketers and traders expect that big datatechniques increase the reliability of predictions in the market dynamics;on the other hand, farmers are convinced that power asymmetries willincrease, thus acting as a brake. Similar considerations are in Ref. [ 53], when looking to Ireland: whilst recognizing that SF is a real opportunityfor the farming context, potential challenges and risks should be carefullyconsidered to anticipate and reduce the gap among winners and losers.4. Conclusions and future directionsIn this work, we surveyed the most relevant research activities aimingat improving and encouraging the adoption of SF techniques in agricul-tural contexts. Large efforts are currently poured to boost ICT use, at leastin the EU, where this analysis is focused. On the one hand, the alreadyestablished use of sensor nodes and heterogeneous data sources, as wellas simple analytic techniques, is pushing DSSs in the farms; on the otherhand, a growing need is there for ever advancing technology and openstandards to consolidate existing scenarios in an interoperable and low-cost manner, as well as programmes to help ICT diffusion in areassuffering from digital divide.In the future, technology will have a growing role in agriculture [ 6]. Several operations will be automatised, from planting to harvesting,thanks to increased robotisation, both terrestrial and aerial one. Soil in-formation will be readily available, thus allowing for e.g. a ﬁner control of pests and pesticides, combining local information with other datasources, like weather and pollution data. In the end, an increase in pro-duction is expected, joint with a reduction in chemicals today in use, thusreducing pressure on soil. SF has the potential for a rapid and ef ﬁcient growth in coming years, supported by policies that can fuel both R &D efforts and farmers’adoption through investments. Anyway, the mainbarriers at today, i.e., vertical solutions, reduced digital skills and highcosts for farmers, poor telecommunication infrastructures, and concernson data ownership and use must be carefully addressed by technical andnon-technical actors to facilitate SF adoption.Declaration of Competing InterestThe authors declare no conﬂict of interest.AcknowledgmentThis work has received funding from the European Union ’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under grant agreement no.818194.References
[1]Walter A, Finger R, Huber R, Buchmann N. Opinion: smart farming is key todeveloping sustainable agriculture. Proc Natl Acad Sci 2017;114(24):6148 –50. [2]Chiaraviglio L, Blefari-Melazzi N, Liu W, Guti /C19errez JA, van de Beek J, Birke R, Chen L, Idzikowski F, Kilper D, Monti P, et al. Bringing 5G into rural and low-income areas: is it feasible? IEEE Commun. Stand. Mag. 2017;1(3):50 –7. [3] Eurostat. Study on broadband coverage in Europe. Tech. rep., EU commission (June2018). URL,https://ec.europa.eu/digital-single-market/en/news/study-broadband-coverage-europe-2017; 2017. [4]Jakku E, Taylor B, Fleming A, Mason C, Fielke S, Sounness C, Thorburn P. If theydon’t tell us what they do with it, why would we trust them? Trust, transparencyand beneﬁt-sharing in smart farming. NJAS-Wageningen Journal of Life Sciences;2018.[5]Mulla DJ. Twenty-ﬁve years of remote sensing in precision agriculture: keyadvances and remaining knowledge gaps. Biosyst Eng 2013;114(4):358 –71. [6]King A. Technology: the future of agriculture. Nat. Outlook 2017;544(7651):21 –3. [7]Schrijver R, Poppe K, Daheim C. Precision agriculture and the future of farming inEurope: scientiﬁc foresight study. Brussels: European Parliament Research Service;2016.[8]Bacco M, Berton A, Ferro E, Gennaro C, Gotta A, Matteoli S, Paonessa F, Ruggeri M,Virone G, Zanella A. Smart farming: opportunities, challenges and technologyenablers. In: IoT vertical and topical summit on agriculture-Tuscany (IOT Tuscany).IEEE; 2018. p. 1–6.[9]O’Grady MJ, O’Hare GM. Modelling the smart farm. Info. Process. Agri. 2017;4(3):179–87.[10]Kamilaris A, Kartakoullis A, Prenafeta-Boldú FX. A review on the practice of bigdata analysis in agriculture. Comput Electron Agric 2017;143:23 –37. [11]Pallottino F, Antonucci F, Costa C, Bisaglia C, Figorilli S, Menesatti P.Optoelectronic proximal sensing vehicle-mounted technologies in precisionagriculture: a review. Comput Electron Agric 2019;162:859 –73. [12]Uddin MA, Ayaz M, Mansour A, Le Jeune D, Aggoune EHM. Wireless sensors formodern agriculture in KSA: a survey. In: 7th international conference on computerscience and information technology (CSIT). IEEE; 2016. p. 1 –7. [13]Kaloxylos A, Eigenmann R, Teye F, Politopoulou Z, Wolfert S, Shrank C, Dillinger M,Lampropoulou I, Antoniou E, Pesonen L, Nicole H. Farm management systems andthe future Internet era. Comput Electron Agric 2012;89:130 –44. [14]Ojha T, Misra S, Raghuwanshi NS. Wireless sensor networks for agriculture: thestate-of-the-art in practice and future challenges. Comput Electron Agric 2015;118:66–84.[15]Tripicchio P, Satler M, Dabisias G, Ruffaldi E, Avizzano CA. Towards smart farmingand sustainable agriculture with drones. In: Intelligent environments (IE),international conference on. IEEE; 2015. p. 140 –3. [16]Lottes P, Khanna R, Pfeifer J, Siegwart R, Stachniss C. UAV-based crop and weedclassiﬁcation for smart farming. In: International conference on robotics andautomation (ICRA). IEEE; 2017. p. 3024 –31. [17]Moribe T, Okada H, Kobayashl K, Katayama M. Combination of a wireless sensornetwork and drone using infrared thermometers for smart agriculture. In: 15thannual consumer communications&networking conference (CCNC). IEEE; 2018. p. 1–2.[18]Mogili UR, Deepak B. Review on application of drone systems in precisionagriculture. Procedia comput. Sci. 2018;133:502 –9. [19]Bacco M, Ferro E, Gotta A. UAVs in WSNs for agricultural applications: an analysisof the two-ray radio propagation model. In: SENSORS conference. IEEE; 2014.p. 130–3.[20]Bacco M, Berton A, Gotta A, Caviglione L. IEEE 802.15. 4 air-ground UAVcommunications in smart farming scenarios. IEEE Commun Lett 2018;22(9):1910–3.[21]Matese A, Di Gennaro SF. Practical applications of a multisensor UAV platformbased on multispectral, thermal and rgb high resolution images in precisionviticulture. Agriculture 2018;8(7) . [22]Rold/C19an JJ, del Cerro J, Garz/C19on-Ramos D, Garcia-Aunon P, Garz /C19on M, de Le/C19on J, Barrientos A. In: Robots in agriculture: state of art and practical experiences.IntechOpen: Service Robots; 2017 . [23]Gonzalez-de Santos P, Ribeiro A, Fernandez-Quintanilla C, Lopez-Granados F,Brandstoetter M, Tomic S, Pedrazzi S, Peruzzi A, Pajares G, Kaplanis G, et al. Fleetsof robots for environmentally-safe pest control in agriculture. Precis Agric 2017;18(4):574–614.[24]Puri V, Nayyar A, Raja L. Agriculture drones: a modern breakthrough in precisionagriculture. J Stat Manag Syst 2017;20(4):507 –18. [25]Pajares G, García-Santill/C19an I, Campos Y, Montalvo M, Guerrero J, Emmi L, Romeo J,Guijarro M, Gonzalez-de Santos P. Machine-vision systems selection for agriculturalvehicles: a guide. J. Imag. 2016;2(4):34 . [26]Thomasson JA, Baillie CP, Antille DL, Lobsey CR, McCarthy CL. Autonomoustechnologies in agricultural equipment: a review of the state of the art. AmericanSociety of Agricultural and Biological Engineers; 2019 . [27]Akkas¸MA, Sokullu R. An IoT-based greenhouse monitoring system with micazmotes. Procedia comput. Sci. 2017;113:603 –8. [28]L
/C19opez-Riquelme J, Pav/C19on-Pulido N, Navarro-Hellín H, Soto-Valles F, Torres-S/C19anchez R. A software architecture based on FIWARE cloud for precisionagriculture. Agric Water Manag 2017;183:123 –35. [29]Rodriguez MA, Cuenca L, Ortiz A. FIWARE open source standard platform in smartfarming - a review. In: Working conference on virtual enterprises. Springer; 2018.p. 581–9.[30]Zamora-Izquierdo MA, Santa J, Martínez JA, Martínez V, Skarmeta A. Smartfarming IoT platform based on edge and cloud computing. Biosyst Eng 2019;177:4–17.[31]Pawlowski A, S/C19anchez-Molina J, Guzm/C19an J, Rodríguez F, Dormido S. Evaluation of event-based irrigation system control scheme for tomato crops in greenhouses.Agric Water Manag 2017;183:16 –25. [32]Bajer L, Krejcar O. Design and realization of low cost control for greenhouseenvironment with remote control. IFAC. Pap. OnLine 2015;48(4):368 –73. [33]Khanna A, Kaur S. Evolution of Internet of things (IoT) and its signi ﬁcant impact in theﬁeld of precision agriculture. Comput Electron Agric 2019;157:218 –31. [34]Jayaraman PP, Yavari A, Georgakopoulos D, Morshed A, Zaslavsky A. Internet ofthings platform for smart farming: experiences and lessons learnt. Sensors 2016;16(11):1884.[35]Kamilaris A, Gao F, Prenafeta-Boldú FX, Ali MI. Agri-IoT: a semantic framework forInternet of things-enabled smart farming applications. In: Internet of things (WF-IoT), 3rd world forum on; 2016. p. 442 –7. IEEE.
3More details on the so-calledCode of Conduct on Agricultural Data Sharing can be found at https://ec.europa.eu/eip/agriculture/en/ ﬁnd-connect/online-re- sources/code-conduct-developed-copa-cogeca-cema.M. Bacco et al. Array 3-4 (2019) 100009
10[36]Gao H, Shi H, Hou K, Jian D, Peng Z, Connier J, Pinet F, Zhou H, Diao X, De Vaulx C,et al. Interoperability and sensor integration for smart farming. In: New and smartinformation communication science and technology to support sustainabledevelopment; 2018.[37]Ca~nadas J, S/C19anchez-Molina JA, Rodríguez F, del /C19Aguila IM. Improving automatic climate control with decision support techniques to minimize disease effects ingreenhouse tomatoes. Info. Process. Agric. 2017;4(1):50 –63. [38]Taylor K, Grifﬁth C, Lefort L, Gaire R, Compton M, Wark T, Lamb D, Falzon G,Trotter M. Farming the web of things. IEEE Intell Syst 2013;28(6):12 –9. [39]dos Santos UJL, Pessin G, da Costa CA, da Rosa Righi R. AgriPrediction: a proactiveInternet of things model to anticipate problems and improve production inagricultural crops. Comput Electron Agric 2019;161:202 –13. [40]Kukar M, Vra/C20car P, Ko/C20sir D, Pevec D, Bosni/C19c Z, et al. AgroDSS: a decision support system for agriculture and farming. Comput Electron Agric 2019;161:260 –71. [41]Antonopoulou E, Karetsos S, Maliappis M, Sideridis A. Web and mobile technologiesin a prototype DSS for majorﬁeld crops. Comput Electron Agric 2010;70(2): 292–301.[42]Yue Y-G, He P. A comprehensive survey on the reliability of mobile wireless sensornetworks: taxonomy, challenges, and future directions. Inf Fusion 2018;44:188–204.[43]V/C19azquez J, Lacarra E, Mor/C19an J, S/C19anchez M, Gonz/C19alez A, Bruzual J. EDAS (EGNOS data access service) differential GNSS corrections: a reliable free-of-chargealternative for precision farming in Europe. Annu Navig 2019;26(1):46 –58. [44]Bacco M, Boero L, Cassara P, Colucci M, Gotta A, Marchese M, Patrone F. IoTapplications and services in space information networks. IEEE Wirel. Commun.2019;26(2):31–7.[45]Boubiche S, Boubiche DE, Bilami A, Toral-Cruz H. Big data challenges and dataaggregation strategies in wireless sensor networks. IEEE Access 2018;6:20558 –71. [46]Wolfert S, Ge L, Verdouw C, Bogaardt M-J. Big data in smart farming - a review.Agric Syst 2017;153:69 –80. [47]Lokers R, Knapen R, Janssen S, van Randen Y, Jansen J. Analysis of big datatechnologies for use in agro-environmental science. Environ Model Softw 2016;84:494–504.[48]
Varghese B, Buyya R. Next generation cloud computing: new trends and researchdirections. Future Gener Comput Syst 2018;79:849 –61. [49]Munir A, Kansakar P, Khan SU. IFCIoT: integrated fog cloud IoT: a novelarchitectural paradigm for the future Internet of things. IEEE Consum. Electron.Mag. 2017;6(3):74–82.[50]Soto I, Barnes A, Eory V, Beck B, Balafoutis A, Sanchez B, Vangeyte J, Fountas S,Van Der Wall T, Gomez-Barbero M. Which factors and incentives in ﬂuence the intention to adopt precision agricultural technologies?. In: Research in agricultural&applied economics. University of Minnesota; 2018 . [51]Caffaro F, Cavallo E. The effects of individual variables, farming systemcharacteristics and perceived barriers on actual use of smart farming technologies:evidence from the piedmont region. Northwest. Italy, Agric. 2019;9(5):111 . [52]Jain M, Kumar P, Bhansali I, Liao QV, Truong K, Patel S. FarmChat: a conversationalagent to answer farmer queries. Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable UbiquitousTechnol. 2018;2(4):170. [53]Regan A, Green S, Maher P, et al. Smart farming in Ireland: anticipating positive andnegative impacts through a qualitative study of risk and bene ﬁt perceptions amongst expert actors in the Irish agri-food sector. In: 13th EU farm systemsassociation symposium; 2018. p. 1 –5.M. Bacco et al. Array 3-4 (2019) 100009
11