Towards a fully data-driven prospectivity mapping methodology: A casestudy of the Southeastern Churchill Province, Qu/C19ebec and Labrador
Steven E. Zhanga, Julie E. Bourdeaub, Glen T. Nwailac,*, David Corrigand
aSmartMin Limited, 39 Kiewiet Street, Helikon Park, 1759, South Africa
bGeological Survey of Canada, 601 Booth Street, Ottawa, Ontario, K1A 0E8, Canada
cSchool of Geosciences, University of the Witwatersrand, 1 Jan Smuts Ave, Johannesburg, 2000, South Africa
d79 Lynn Street, Gatineau, Qu /C19ebec, J9H 1B5, Canada
ARTICLE INFO
Keywords:MLMineral prospectivity mappingPrincipal component analysisGeochemical anomalyREEsABSTRACT
Mineral exploration campaigns areﬁnancially risky. Several state-of-the-art methods have been developed to mitigate the risk, including predictive modelling of mineral prospectivity using principal component analysis(PCA) and geographic information systems (GIS). The PCA and GIS approach is currently considered acceptablefor generating mineral exploration targets. However, some of its limitations are the dependence on samplestoichiometry (e.g., the existence of minerals), the necessity of log-ratio transformations when dealing withcompositional data, and manual interpretation and use of principal components to enhance potential geochemicalanomalies for prospectivity mapping. In this study, we generalize the fundamental ideas behind the PCA and GISapproach by developing a new data-driven approach using ML. We showcase a new work ﬂow capable of generating either intermediate evidence layers or ﬁnal prospectivity maps that depict major regional geochemical anomalies using multi-element geochemical data from Southeastern Churchill Province (Qu /C19ebec and Labrador), Canada. The region is known for its REEs endowment and the data were gathered for prospectivity mapping. Acomparison with the established multivariate hybrid data- and knowledge-based approach revealed that on aroughly comparable basis of the amount of manual effort, our new data-driven procedure can much moreaccurately identify geochemical anomalies in both univariate and multivariate applications. The results of ourprospectivity mapping corroborate with the ground truth or known geological anomalies in the studied region.Theseﬁndings have potentially wider implications on exploration target generation, where project risks ( ﬁnan- cial, environmental, political, etc.) and geochemical anomalies must be quanti ﬁed using robust and effective data- driven approaches. In addition, our methodology is more replicable and objective, as manual geoscienti ﬁc interpretation is not required during the detection of geochemical anomalies.
1. IntroductionProspectivity mapping transforms geoscienti ﬁc data into maps that depict regional potential or favourability of deposits or their proxies (e.g.,indicator elements) using some combination of knowledge- and data-driven methods (e.g.,Chung and Agterberg, 1980;Bonham-Carter, 1994;Harris and Pan, 1999;Wright and Bonham-Carter, 1996;Brown et al., 2000;Carranza et al., 2008;Harris et al., 2015;Grunsky and de Caritat, 2019). A key outcome is to delineate interesting regions (e.g.,anomalies) that can be preferentially targeted for further investigationand interpretation. Knowledge-driven approaches use heuristic models ofdiscipline-speciﬁc knowledge, such as characteristics of a deposit beingsought to guide the use of data (e.g., geochemical and geophysical maps).Data-driven approaches often makes use of existing ground truth to trainexploration models (Bonham-Carter, 1994;Wright and Bonham-Carter, 1996;Carranza, 2008, 2009a, b), which renders such methods moresuitable for brownﬁeld than greenﬁeld exploration. However, the dis- covery of spatially-coherent geochemical anomalies is a type of anomalydetection task that can occur in some combination of the variable and thespatial space using unsupervised machine learning, which does notrequire ground truth. A data-driven technique based on multivariatestatistical methods to discover anomalous processes exists (e.g., Carra- nza, 2008;Grunsky and de Caritat, 2019). However, it requires manual interpretation and therefore relies on some discipline knowledge. This
Abbreviations:ML, Machine Learning; REEs, Rare Earth Elements.* Corresponding author.E-mail address:glen.nwaila@wits.ac.za(G.T. Nwaila).
Contents lists available atScienceDirect
Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Geosciences
journal homepage:www.keaipublishing.com/en/journals/artiﬁcial-intelligence-in-geosciences
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aiig.2022.02.002Received 8 December 2021; Received in revised form 16 February 2022; Accepted 17 February 2022Available online 1 March 20222666-5441/©2022 The Authors. Publishing Services by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of KeAi Communications Co. Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-NDlicense (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ ).Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Geosciences 2 (2021) 128 –147method (“the multivariate method”, e.g.,Carranza, 2008;Grunsky and de Caritat, 2019) may be generalized using machine learning methodsthat weakens the technique's reliance on geoscienti ﬁc knowledge and manual interpretation. In this paper, we demonstrate a generalization ofthe variable- and geospatial-space based anomaly detection usingcompositional geochemical data that removes some key weaknesses ofthe multivariate method and does not require ground truth (of anoma-lies). Therefore, our technique could be used for either green ﬁeld or brownﬁeld exploration.Exploration geochemical data contains spatial information and sam-ple chemistry (e.g., of bedrock, glacial till, water, soil, stream and lakesediment) and is intended to capture the effects of geological processesthat may control elemental distribution, such as lithological variability,metamorphic or hydrothermal overprinting and other secondary pro-cesses. Some processes may be responsible for chemical anomalies thatare associated with the presence of mineral deposits ( Grunsky and de Caritat, 2019). Where sample chemistry is multivariate in the form ofcompositional data, concentrations are reported as relative proportions.A data-driven technique can identify geochemical anomalies usingcompositional data (Harris et al., 2015;Chen et al., 2018;Grunsky and de Caritat, 2019;Grunsky and Arne, 2020). However, the method as sum- marized byGrunsky and de Caritat (2019)exhibits some key weaknesses. Theﬁrst is the assumption of geochemistry as a proxy for mineralogythrough elemental stoichiometry, which may be unmet in some cases(e.g., volcanic or clay-rich rocks and/or in highly altered areas, see Zhang et al., 2021). As the strength of mineralogy-controlled variabilityweakens, the ability to produce useful and interpretable multivariateelemental associations is gradually lost. Although this does not nullify thetechnique in such situations, it does increase the burden of manualinterpretation and validation. The second is the use of manual geologicaland geochemical interpretation of key stoichiometries, which increasesmapping subjectivity and renders this method more knowledge-driven(Carranza, 2008;Harris et al., 2015,Chen et al., 2018;Grunsky and de Caritat, 2019). This results from a reliance on principal componentanalysis (PCA), in a manner that is more resemblant of multivariatestatistical analysis than machine learning (ML; e.g., Carranza, 2008;Zuo, 2011;Harris et al., 2015;Grunsky and de Caritat, 2019). For data-driven approaches, PCA serves two main purposes: (1) a reduction of featurespace dimensionality, and (2) an automation of the extraction of multi-variate relationships. Where PCA is applied to geochemical data toextract multivariate relationships, the interpretation of principal com-ponents is unavoidable, in order to discriminate between backgroundprocesses and anomalous (e.g., deposit-forming) processes ( Carranza, 2008;Zuo, 2011;Grunsky et al., 2014;Harris et al., 2015;Grunsky and de Caritat, 2019). In contrast to this method (e.g.,
Grunsky and de Car- itat., 2019), there exists a collection of deep learning-based approaches tothe generation of prospectivity maps ( Zuo et al., 2019and references therein). Such methods use highly abstract and powerful neural networksto extract patterns that may be indicative of relevant geological pro-cesses. These approaches are perhaps the highest in performance(exceeding human performance,Zuo et al., 2019) and as such, are at the leading-edge of data-driven applications in many ﬁelds (e.g.,He et al., 2015andLundervold and Lundervold, 2019). However, they produce models that are inherently complex and dif ﬁcult to interpret (Zuo et al., 2019) and in response to this, an entireﬁeld of explainable artiﬁcial intelligence exists and is driven by the need to be able to understanddecisions (e.g.,Linardatos et al., 2021). For exploration, the uncertainty of prospectivity maps is generally an unsolved problem, which can becompounded by the lack of explain-ability of complex ML models (e.g.,neural networks and ensembles). However, it is possible to simulta-neously leverage desirable aspects of algorithmically simpler approachesthat invoke some in-discipline knowledge ( Grunsky and de Caritat, 2019), while accommodating complex and powerful algorithms (e.g.,Luo et al., 2020andZuo et al., 2019and references therein). To this effect, we develop and generalize the Grunsky and de Caritat (2019) technique using ML to automatically delineate geochemical anomalies ina manner that both overcomes the method's major weaknesses andexplicitly make provisions for the use of many ML algorithms. The latter
Fig. 1.Location of and simpliﬁed geological map of the Southeastern Churchill Province. Abbreviations: New Qu /C19ebec Orogen (NQO); Torngat Orogen (TO). Location and extent of the study area (Fig. 2) is shown by the box. Image modiﬁed afterJames and Dunning (2000), andCorrigan et al. (2018).S.E. Zhang et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Geosciences 2 (2021) 128 –147
129improvement allows our technique to offer a choice of explain-ability andperformance. To demonstrate the beneﬁts of our technique relative to a control method, we provide a qualitative comparison betweengeochemical maps that are produced using our method and the Grunsky and de Caritat (2019)multivariate approach. In addition to our techniquegenerating more selective and less noisy prospectivity maps, we alsodemonstrate that our approach is more data-driven, more automatable, isextensible to complex geological environments, does not require datatransformations and imputation and can be implemented fornon-stoichiometric compositions.2. Background and regional geologyOur data resulted from lake sediment sampling of the Southeastern
Fig. 2.Simpliﬁed bedrock geology map of the study area (UTM Zone 20, NAD 83). Lake sediment samples used in this study are all located in Labrador (NTS 13-L, 13-M, 14-D, 23-I and 23-J). The Mistastin Batholith (labelled MB) is located at the provincial boundary between Qu /C19ebec and Labrador (near center of the map).S.E. Zhang et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Geosciences 2 (2021) 128 –147
130Churchill Province, which is at the border between northern Qu /C19ebec and Labrador (Fig. 1). It is a glaciated landscape that is under exploration forrare earth elements (REEs), which centers around the Strange Lake per-alkaline complex (Fig. 2). Anomalies in lake sediments and lake waters aswell as gamma-ray spectrometry led to the discovery of the Strange Lakedeposit in 1980 (Friske et al., 1996a,b;Zajac, 2015), which is one of the world's largest deposits of Zr, Y and heavy REEs ( Zajac, 2015). REEs are critical to modern societies due to their role in the high-tech, trans-portation and energy sectors (Balaram, 2019), and the need to diversify supply chains to mitigate geopolitical instability ( Balaram, 2019;Over- land, 2019). For these reasons, the European Union, United States ofAmerica, Australia, People's Republic of China and Canada have enactedlegislation and policies to secure their supply chains of REEs ( European Commission, 2011,2014,2017a,2017b,2020;Ghorbani, 2018;U.S. Geological Survey, 2018;Rizzo et al., 2020;Natural Resources Canada, 2021). Prior knowledge of the Strange Lake deposit provides thenecessary, albeit qualitative ground truth for the veri ﬁcation of geochemical anomaly maps.The Southeastern Churchill Province is an elongated sliver of Archeanto early-Paleoproterozoic continental crust that was accreted during thePaleoproterozoic, through collision of the Superior (to the west) andNorth Atlantic (to the east) cratons (Fig. 1;James et al., 1996;James and Dunning, 2000;Wardle et al., 2002;Hammouche et al., 2012;Corrigan et al., 2018). To the west, the southeastern Churchill Province is ﬂanked by the New Qu/C19ebec Orogen (1.83–1.80 Ga;Hoffman, 1988;Perreault and Hynes, 1990;Moorhead and Hynes, 1990) and to the east by the Torngat Orogen (1.87–1.86 Ga;Wardle et al., 2002). The extent to which these orogens affected the Core Zone (Fig. 1) is relatively unknown, although the New Qu/C19ebec Orogen overprint appears to be more widespread(Corrigan et al., 2018). As a result of the accretion, numerous folds andlarge shear zones transect the region ( Fig. 1). Rocks in the area consist mostly of paragneiss, orthogneiss, migmatite and low-to medium--metamorphic grade supracrustal and plutonic rocks that were intrudedby post-orogen, Mesoproterozoic-age intrusions ( Hammouche et al., 2012;Corrigan et al., 2018).The Mistastin Batholith (C27 inFig. 2; 1400 Ga), which outcrops as two semi-circular intrusions covering an area of 5600 km
2, is of partic- ular importance in the study area (Hammouche et al., 2012). The largest of the intrusions by planar dimensions (to the south) is ellipsoid-shaped(long axis striking at N20E) and measures approximately 144 by 65 km.To the north is a smaller, circularly-shaped intrusion, measuringapproximately 26 by 27 km. The Mistastin Batholith is chie ﬂy composed of intermediate potassic intrusive rocks with lesser amounts of monzo-nite, quartz syenite, granite, anorthosite, leucogabbronorite and leuco-gabbro (Van der Leeden, 1995). Notably, this batholith is locally highlyenriched in REEs, Zr, Y,/C6Be, Nb, U and Th (Hammouche et al., 2012). One of these zones of enrichment is hosted by the Misery LakeTable 1Model parameters used in the grid search.
Algorithm Parameter GridkNNk¼{1, 3, 5, 7, 9, 11}SVMC¼{10, 100, 250, 500, 750, 1000},
ε¼{0.01, 0.1, 0.5, 1.0}, kernel ¼{linear, RBF}Elastic net
ρ¼{0.1, 0.25, 0.5, 0.75, 1.0}RandomforestEnsemble size¼500; maximum depth¼{5, 4, 3, 2, 1, unlimited}, maximum number of features¼{1, 2, 3, 4, 5}, minimum number of samples for a split¼{2, 3, 4}, minimum number of samples for a leaf¼{1, 2, 3}AdaBoostNumber of classiﬁers¼{50, 250, 500}, base algorithm¼decision tree with the same parameter grid as the random forest algorithmANN
α¼{0.001, 0.01, 0.1, 1.0}, activation¼{identity, logistic, tanh, relu}, learning rate¼{constant, inverse scaling, adaptive}
Fig. 3.Comparison of prediction performance using the CoD metric for all elements.S.E. Zhang et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Geosciences 2 (2021) 128 –147
131peralkaline syenite (C27a inFig. 2; 1409.7/C61.2 Ma), located in the southern portion of the largest intrusion ( David et al., 2012). The most notable deposit known is hosted by the Strange Lake peralkaline complex(C27b inFig. 2; 1240/C62Ma) with indicated mineral resources of 278 Mtat 0.93% total REE oxide (Miller, 1990;Gowans et al., 2014;Zajac, 2015).The batholith is highly weathered, likely due to intensive hydro-thermal alteration in zones associated with REE-mineralization prior toQuaternary glaciation events. Glacial erosion by the Laurentide Ice Sheetthroughout the Wisconsin glaciation remobilized the hydrothermallyaltered bedrocks and along with it, large volumes of REE-rich debristowards the northeast. Lake sediment and lake water geochemistry,boulder mapping, matrix till geochemistry, indicator minerals andairborne gamma-ray spectroscopy data reveal that the dispersal trend canbe detected in excess of 50 km down ice ( Geological Survey of Canada, 1980;Batterson, 1989;Zajac, 2015;Paulen et al., 2017;McClenaghan et al., 2017, 2019).3. Methods3.1. Source dataThe lake sediment geochemical data used for this study, the samplingprotocol, analytical methodology, quality control and quality assuranceprocedures are documented inMcCurdy et al. (2016). The survey consists of 3441 samples, includingﬁeld duplicates, and was sampled at a reso-lution of about one sample per 13 km2. The data used in this study is from a campaign to re-analyze lake sediment samples using modern analyticalmethods as part of the Geological Survey of Canada's GEM program(GEM, 2019). Geochemical analyses were conducted at Bureau Veritas inVancouver, Canada. A total of 65 elements were analyzed: Ag, Al, As, Au,B, Ba, Be, Bi, Ca, Cd, Ce, Co, Cr, Cs, Cu, Dy, Er, Eu, Fe, Ga, Gd, Ge, Hf, Hg,Ho, In, K, La, Li, Lu, Mg, Mn, Mo, Na, Nb, Nd, Ni, P, Pb, Pd, Pr, Pt, Rb, Re,S, Sb, Sc, Se, Sm, Sn, Sr, Ta, Tb, Te, Th, Ti, Tl, Tm, U, V, W, Y, Yb, Zn andZr. All trace elements are presented in parts per million (ppm) and majorelements in weight percent (wt %). Pulped samples were digested using amodiﬁed aqua regia solution (an equiproportional mixture of HCl, HNO
3
and H 2O) for 1 h in a hot water bath (95/C14C). After cooling, the solution was made up to aﬁnal volume with 5% HCl and analyzed using anICP-mass spectrometer (McCurdy et al., 2016). Reliability as assessed by accuracy and precision of the data was determined using ﬁeld duplicates, analytical duplicates and certiﬁed reference materials. Field duplicateswere further used to determine the suitability of the data for regionalmapping on a per-element basis through an application of Analysis ofVariance (ANOVA). The lake sediment geochemical data are intended tocapture lithological variation, secondary processes such as alteration andgeochemical anomalies related to bedrock mineralization. For one of ourworkﬂows, the data was transformed using centered log-ratio (CLR)(Aitchison, 1982). Censored data were replaced with half the detectionlimit. For a discussion on the appropriateness of the application and ef-fect of log-ratio transformations, particularly as it pertains to dataembedding (e.g., feature space geometry), algorithm selection and per-formance impacts for our intended ML task of geochemical anomalydetection, seeZhang et al. (2021).3.2. Predictive modelling and mappingWithin the explainable data-driven prospectivity mapping methods,PCA is a common algorithm, since it re-coordinates data along directionsof variability, and reduces the dimensionality of chemical coordinates(Carranza, 2008;Zuo, 2011;Grunsky et al., 2014;Harris et al., 2015; Grunsky and de Caritat., 2019). For samples that are mostly composed ofminerals, the inter-sample chemical variability is dominated by thevariability of mineral composition and chemistry. Hence, the regionalgeochemical variability can be captured by principal components, whichessentially describe key combinations of sample stoichiometries. Thesemultivariate relationships are likely to be reliable for further use, if theyare spatially coherent (Grunsky, 2010). Major components may capture regional lithological variability, alteration and mineralization (Grunskyand Smee, 1999; Grunsky, 2010), whereas lesser components likelycapture under-sampled or random processes. Eigenvectors are typicallymanually interpreted (e.g.,Grunsky et al., 2014). Thereafter, models can be built for exploration purposes, such as regression residual maps of anelement of interest against the components (e.g., Harris et al., 2015;Arne et al., 2018;Grunsky and de Caritat, 2019).Table 2Selected best hyperparameters for the elements Y and Rb for all algorithms. Raw¼non-transformed data; CLR¼CLR-transformed data.
Element DatatypeMethod CoD ParametersY Raw kNN 0.358 k¼11 Y Raw Elastic net 0.303
ρ¼1.0 Y Raw SVM 0.373 C¼1000,
ε: 1.0, kernel¼RBF Y Raw Randomforest0.455 Maximum depth¼0, maximumnumber of features¼4, minimumnumber of samples for a leaf¼2, minimum number of samples for asplit¼3 Y Raw AdaBoost 0.419 Maximum depth ¼unlimited,minimum number of samples persplit¼2, minimum number ofsamples for a leaf¼1, number ofclassiﬁers¼250 Y Raw ANN 0.433 Activation ¼tanh,
α¼0.01, learningrate: constant Y CLR kNN 0.419 k¼11 Y CLR Elastic net 0.346
ρ¼0.75 Y CLR SVM 0.429 C¼500,
ε: 1.0, kernel: RBF Y CLR Randomforest0.453 Maximum depth¼0, maximumnumber of features¼3, minimumnumber of samples for a leaf¼3, minimum number of samples for asplit¼2 Y CLR AdaBoost 0.393 Maximum depth ¼unlimited,maximum number of features persplit¼3, minimum number ofsamples for a leaf¼3, minimumnumber of classiﬁers¼250 Y CLR ANN 0.441 Activation ¼tanh,
α¼0.01, learningrate: constant Rb Raw kNN 0.933 k¼5 Rb Raw Elastic net 0.971
ρ¼1.0 Rb Raw SVM 0.975 C¼1000,
ε: 0.1, kernel: RBF Rb Raw Randomforest0.962 Maximum depth¼0, maximumnumber of features¼4, minimumnumber of samples for a leaf¼2, minimum number of samples for asplit¼4 Rb Raw AdaBoost 0.969 Maximum depth ¼unlimited,maximum number of features persplit¼4, minimum number ofsamples for a leaf¼2, minimumnumber of classiﬁers¼250 Rb Raw ANN 0.971 Activation ¼tanh,
α¼0.001,learning rate: constant Rb CLR kNN 0.834 k¼5 Rb CLR Elastic net 0.664
ρ¼0.75 Rb CLR SVM 0.894 C¼1000,
ε: 0.5, kernel: RBF Rb CLR Randomforest0.875 Maximum depth¼0, maximumnumber of features¼4, minimumnumber of samples for a leaf¼2, minimum number of samples for asplit¼2 Rb CLR AdaBoost 0.869 Maximum depth ¼unlimited,maximum number of features persplit¼4, minimum number ofsamples for a leaf¼2, minimumnumber of classiﬁers¼250 Rb CLR ANN 0.871 Activation ¼tanh,
α¼0.001,learning rate: constantS.E. Zhang et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Geosciences 2 (2021) 128 –147
132For our purpose, we showcase the effectiveness of a ML-based tech-nique for prospectivity mapping as developed by Zhang et al. (2021), which makes use of ML to predict trace elemental concentrations usingmajor and minor elemental concentrations. They observed that thetrained models effectively serve as geochemical baselines, such that therelative size of geochemical anomalies are proportional to the predictionresiduals (predicted minus actual). Maps produced using the predictionresiduals demonstrated selectively altered geochemical contrast,
Fig. 4.Results of the algorithm selection and performance assessment using (a) CLR-transformed data, and (b) raw data, as measured using the coef ﬁcient of determination (CoD). The top three performing algorithms are shown for each element.
Fig. 5.Scatter plots of prediction results for (a) Th, (b) La, (c) Y and (d) Tm. The best algorithm per element was used. Shown on the graphs are the coef ﬁcient of determination (CoD) and median absolute prediction error (MAPE) for each element. Underprediction at high elemental concentrations can be seen.S.E. Zhang et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Geosciences 2 (2021) 128 –147
133suppressing large regional variability and increasing contrast betweengeochemical anomalies and the background ( Zhang et al., 2021). A key discipline-speciﬁc recognition made byZhang et al. (2021)was that different elements carried different classes of geoscienti ﬁc information– major and minor elements carry the rock-forming information of sam-ples, whereas trace elements carry information regarding geological andgeochemical processes that may not be related to rock-forming (or evensecondary) processes. Therefore, using rock-forming elements as MLfeatures (predictors) and trace elements as targets effectively automatesthe building of geochemical baselines that are capable of suppression oflarge-scaled (e.g., lithological) variability in the trace element data. Thiscan be considered a form of discipline-speci ﬁc feature engineering in the ML context or knowledge application in the prospectivity mappingcontext. In our observation, this application of discipline-speci ﬁc knowledge effectively removes the requirement to manually delineatepervasive background processes and targeted anomalies (e.g., usingeigenvector interpretation).FollowingZhang et al. (2021), we use major and minor elementalconcentrations to predict the concentrations of the trace elements undersimilar assumptions asGrunsky and de Caritat (2019), in that regional lithology and secondary processes have high explanatory power for amajority of the observed geochemical variability. In this manner, weassume that the key variabilities in lithology, alteration and minerali-zation are captured by the data of major and minor elemental concen-trations. Hence, anomalies that by deﬁnition, cannot be explained by the rock-forming elements must constitute either noise or additionalgeological or geochemical processes, some of which are probably asso-ciated with mineralization processes that are of further exploration in-terest. In our technique, the trained ML models serve as implicit anddynamic (they are capable of predicting trace elemental concentrationsacross many lithologies or rock types, see Zhang et al., 2021) regional geochemical baselines and the prediction residuals are the deviations inelemental concentrations. Although supervised methods are used, theyare strictly used to build geochemical baselines and are not used to train
Fig. 6.(a) Stacked elemental concentration maps of most of the chalcophile elements in the dataset, and (b) a corresponding prediction residuals map. Both s tacked maps use uniform weights and normalized layers.
Fig. 7.(a) Stacked elemental concentration maps of most of the REEs in the dataset, and (b) a corresponding prediction residuals map. Both stacked maps use un iform weights and normalized layers.S.E. Zhang et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Geosciences 2 (2021) 128 –147
134ML algorithms to recognize anomalies by example. Hence, our anomalydetection method is unsupervised, as anomalies in the area are known toexist (and have been studied extensively) but the data is unlabelled.Against the baselines on a per-element basis, negative prediction re-siduals (prediction is less than actual) implies that there is an excessconcentration above the regional baseline that by de ﬁnition, cannot be explained by one or more models. The choice of the sign of predictionresiduals is arbitrary and depends on how the residuals are calculated(actual minus predicted or predicted minus actual). The quality of themodel would be maximized through algorithm selection and parametertuning, to minimize the prediction residuals using a metric. A moreexplanatory model better suppresses the large-scale variability in thedata compared to less explanatory models. As such, the more explanatorypower of the model, the more selective the resulting anomalies ingeographical space. Furthermore, the explain-ability of the models can beexplicitly balanced against model performance on a per-applicationbasis. This implies that the regional geochemical baseline can be tunedthrough model selection and model tuning. In our approach, more thanone algorithm is used to predict a single element, the best performingalgorithm and model can be used for each element (alternatively, aone-algorithm-ﬁts-all approach is feasible to reduce computational re-quirements). Univariate maps of prediction residuals for each traceelement can be produced for direct use as anomaly maps or as interme-diate evidence layers for other methods that follow this stage. To producemultivariate anomaly maps, an algorithm such as PCA can be used tosummarize the major anomalies in the region. In this case, a multivariatemap that is produced from the best performing combination of models isa stacked output of multiple algorithms over multiple elements. Spatiallycoherent areas of negative prediction residuals are regions of anomalouselemental enrichment, which are worthy of further investigation.Detection of depletion processes are also theoretically possible, althoughthis aspect is unexplored in this paper. Since qualitative ground truthexists in the area (e.g., known targets are REEs and a dispersal trend iswell-documented), it is possible to understand the validity of our results.We created a ML workﬂow that implements data preprocessing,predictive modelling and visualization. For the purpose of this study, thefeatures were all the major and minor elements (Fe, Mg, Al, Ca, Na, K, Ti,P, S). For our ML task, it is not important whether the features are CLR-transformed or not as part of feature engineering ( Hastie et al., 2009; Domingos, 2012), since it is not expected to signiﬁcantly alter the pre- dictive modelling performance across a range of ML algorithms (studiedin more detail inZhang et al., 2021). However, for one of our workﬂows, we utilized the CLR transformation to enable a parallel multivariatemodelling approach for comparison purposes and also to compare theresults between the uses of raw and CLR-transformed ML features. Afterthe CLR transformation, the features were rescaled, such that eachfeature spans an equal numerical range. During the predictive modellingstage, the features were used to train regression algorithms ( Russell and Norvig, 2010). The regression algorithms used in this study include:k-nearest neighbors (Cover and Hart, 1967;Fix and Hodges, 1951;Kot- siantis et al., 2007;Witten and Frank, 2005), random forests (Ho, 1995; Breiman, 1996a,1996b;Kotsiantis, 2014;Freund and Schapire, 1995; Sagi and Rokach, 2018), elastic net (Santosa and William, 1986;Tib- shirani, 1996;Tikhonov, 1943;Zou and Hastie, 2005), support vector machine (SVM;Vapnik, 1998;Hsu and Lin, 2002;
Karatzoglou et al., 2006), adaptive boosting of decision trees (AdaBoost; Freund and Scha-pire, 1995) and artiﬁcial neural networks (neuronet;Hastie et al., 2009; Curry, 1944;Lemar/C19echal, 2012;Rosenblatt, 1961;Rumelhart et al., 1986;Cybenko, 1989). For a detailed description of these algorithms,their assumptions on the feature space properties (e.g., Euclidean ge-ometry and its associated metric) and their parameters, see Zhang et al. (2021).For model selection and tuning, we employed cross-validation. Todetect anomalies in our technique, cross-validation is not strictlyrequired as mathematical induction would not occur and instead ageochemical baseline (aﬁtted model) is required. Deviations from thebaseline can be measured through a metric, e.g., prediction residuals.However, to understand the prediction performance, model generaliz-ability and to prevent over-ﬁtting (exaggeration of the baselines), we usecross-validation to perform algorithm selection and model tuning. Weemploy the coefﬁcient of determination (CoD) metric to assess predictionaccuracy. The choice of the performance metric is important to anomalydetection, as the CoD metric is sensitive to outliers and therefore, opti-mizing the prediction performance using the CoD metric implies that thegeochemical baseline is tuned to suppress outliers and therefore, thisoptimization suppresses the models ’sensitivity to sparsely sampled
Fig. 8.Workﬂow comparison for the multivariate geochemical anomaly detection and mapping method versus our procedure.S.E. Zhang et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Geosciences 2 (2021) 128 –147
135anomalies. The median absolute prediction error (MAPE) is a measure ofmedian prediction error and here we use it as an additional metric toproﬁle prediction performance but not to perform algorithm selection ormodel tuning. We used an exhaustive grid search (see Table 1) combined with an n-fold cross validation (n¼4) to determine the rank-order of algorithms. Theﬁrst 3 top performing algorithms per element are thenused to produce prediction results using 10-fold cross-validation over100 runs. The results were thereafter averaged and the prediction re-siduals were calculated for each performance level, for each element.Subsequently, the prediction results were used in two ways to generategeochemical anomaly maps, theﬁrst uses either weighted evidencelayers of prediction residual maps or single element residual maps, whichsimulates a knowledge-based method to combine evidence layers totarget one or more speciﬁc indicator elements. The second uses a PCA-based method to generate a linear combination of prediction residuals(across all elements predicted and using a variety of algorithms for agiven performance level) to create maps of the most signi ﬁcantmultivariate geochemical anomalies.Our method further advances the data-driven aspect of prospectivitymapping using compositional geochemical data ( Grunsky and de Caritat, 2019), as it does not assume underlying stoichiometries nor requireprincipal component interpretation. In addition, our procedure allows forany regression algorithm to be used, and does not assume linearity ofelemental relationships, which means that our procedure can incorporatea range of parametric, non-parametric and linear-, nonlinear and neuralnetwork-based algorithms and the quality of the mapping would bedirectly linked to the performance of the algorithms and models, and isnot linked to the interpretability of eigenvectors, operator expertise ordiscipline-speciﬁc knowledge. Lastly, we demonstrate that theCLR-transformation is unnecessary for our technique.4. ResultsPrediction results indicate that Ta, Pd, Au, Pt and B are generally
Fig. 9.Regional prospectivity map of Y using the multivariate method. Included in the regional prospectivity map are the lithological boundaries ( Fig. 2) and glacial dispersion trends (black arrows). Abbreviations: Strange Lake intrusion (SL); Mistastin Batholith (MB). The glacial dispersal trend from the REE- bearing Strange Lake peralkaline intrusion is visible and extends approximately 100 km to the northeast.S.E. Zhang et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Geosciences 2 (2021) 128 –147
136unpredictable (CoD<0.1) due to pervasive data censoring. Hence, theywere excluded from further analyses and mapping. Comparison of resultsbetween those using the raw versus the CLR-transformed data demon-strate that on average, the raw data produces more accurate predictions(Fig. 3). The best algorithm and its optimal hyperparameters depend onthe target element and the type of data used ( Fig. 4, see alsoTable 2). However, within the parameter grid, the random forest regressor isgenerally the best using either CLR-transformed or raw data ( Fig. 4). This is interesting, since the random forest algorithm is not spatially aware inthe feature space and therefore, there is no heuristic to suggest anyspeciﬁc embedding geometry. No obvious trends exist for second- andthird-best algorithms. However, SVM, Neuronet and AdaBoost tends toperform better than k-nearest neighbors and elastic net, although theperformance differential between all algorithms is typically a few percentand sometimes identical to two decimal places. Therefore, complexmodels can be substituted by simpler and more explainable models withminor losses of anomaly selectivity. The use of the CoD metric impliesthat the prediction performance is heavily affected by outliers. However,this is desirable if the prediction residuals would be used to detectanomalies, in which case, it is less risky to suppress large anomalies thanto generate more false positives. The prediction results show a systematicunder-prediction at higher concentrations for REE indicator elements inthe region (as identiﬁed inMcClenaghan et al., 2017), such as Th, La, Tm and Y (Fig. 5). This implies that rock-forming elements are insuf ﬁcient to explain higher concentrations of REE indicator elements, which likelycontain true regional geochemical anomalies, if they are also spatiallycoherent. Hence, there are likely less well-sampled geological andgeochemical processes operating in the region that enriched some sam-ples with REEs relative to the geochemical baseline. Moreover, there is ageneral consensus between various algorithms and their best models onthe relative size of the geochemical anomalies (the prediction residualsare often statistically similar).
Fig. 10.Regional prospectivity map of Y using our ML-based procedure. Included in the regional prospectivity map are the lithological boundaries ( Fig. 2) and glacial dispersion trends (black arrows). Abbreviations: Strange Lake peralkaline intrusion (SL); Mistastin Batholith (MB). The glacial dispersal trend from the REE-bearing Strange Lake intrusion is visible and extends approximately 100 km to the northeast. Furthermore, another glacial dispersal trend is visible extend ing 140 km northeast from the southern portion of the Mistastin Batholith.S.E. Zhang et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Geosciences 2 (2021) 128 –147
137For process validation and to demonstrate an integration of ourtechnique with knowledge-driven methods, we created maps of theoriginal concentrations and the prediction residuals for two groups ofelements–REEs (Sc, Y, La, Ce, Pr, Nd, Sm, Eu, Gd, Tb, Dy, Ho, Er, Tm, Yband Lu) and chalcophiles (Cu, Zn, Ga, As, Se, Sn, Sb, Te, Bi, Tl, Pb, In, Hg,Cd, Ge and Ag). For mapping, only elements that exhibited reliabledirectional semivariograms that can beﬁtted with spherical models were used. The extent of the maps was chosen to contain the west-to-eastglacial dispersal trend (Geological Survey of Canada, 1980;Batterson, 1989;Zajac, 2015;Paulen et al., 2017;McClenaghan et al., 2017, 2019). Element maps were stacked using per-layer normalization and uniformweighting, to give each element an equal in ﬂuence on theﬁnal map. Final maps of the prediction residuals and the elemental concentrationsshow similar patterns; however, the residual map is less noisy and moreselective, which results in higher visible contrast ( Figs. 6 and 7). The dispersal trend is not visible for the chalcophile elemental maps, but isvisible in the REE-maps (Fig. 7).There are other methods to create anomaly maps, depending on thenature of the exploration (greenﬁeld or brownﬁeld). In a brownﬁeld setting (or e.g., where there are known target elements), anomalies ofindicator or deposit-vectoring elements can be mapped, e.g., univariateprediction residual maps. For greenﬁeld exploration, an additional step isrequired to automatically extract the most prominent regionalgeochemical anomalies. For this purpose, many algorithms are available,such as PCA. However, unlike the application of PCA in multivariategeochemical process discovery (e.g., Carranza, 2008;Grunsky and de Caritat, 2019), the principal components of prediction residuals are onlyexpected to contain geochemical anomalies at the scale of the survey. Towithin model capability, regional variability for all trace elements thatcan be modelled by multivariate elemental associations using major andminor elements have been removed. Therefore, there is no need tointerpret eigenvectors for mapping, beyond an understanding thecomposition of anomalies. We produced two sets of maps using amultivariate method (e.g.,Grunsky and de Caritat, 2019) and our tech- nique. The steps to accomplish both are summarized in Fig. 8. For a univariate comparison, we chose to compare maps of Y anom-alies produced from the multivariate and our methods. For the formermethod we constructed principal components from CLR-transformeddata and veriﬁed that theﬁrst few principal components capture large-scaled geochemical variation. Subsequently, we used a multilinearregression of the Y concentration against the ﬁrst few principalcomponents to produce regression residuals that were mapped ( Fig. 9). Maps produced using this method, up to principal component 3 arequalitatively identical with the contrast maximized using principalcomponent 1. For our method, the Y prediction residuals were directlymapped (Fig. 10). A comparison of the two maps shows that the mapproduced using our method captures the glacial dispersal trendemanating from the Strange Lake peralkaline intrusion and correspondsto the pattern previously identiﬁed using gamma-ray spectrometry, lakesediments and lake waters. In comparison, the multivariate methodyields a Y-enrichment pattern that is similar to the glacial dispersal trendin the west, but connects to a large body to the east. This large body is
unobserved using our technique and undocumented in previous studiesof the glacial dispersal trend using boulder mapping, matrix tillgeochemistry, indicator minerals and airborne gamma-ray spectroscopydata (Geological Survey of Canada, 1980;Batterson, 1989;Zajac, 2015; Paulen et al., 2017;McClenaghan et al., 2017,2019). For a multivariate comparison, it is impossible to compare maps ofprincipal components of anomalies against those produced by themultivariate method, since these sets of principal components havedifferent meanings. Instead, we make a comparison between the twogroups on a basis of roughly the same amount of manual effort (which wedeem a fair criterion, as methods that are less data-driven can be arbi-trarily reﬁned using better knowledge). For both methods, one or more ofthe principal components should contain known regional geochemicalanomalies–the REE dispersal trend. Hence, we chose maps produced byall methods that exhibited the highest resemblance of the dispersal trend.For our method, the highest performing algorithms produced results that(seeFig. 4) feature a single dominant principal component (principalcomponent 1), which captures approximately 24.74% of the region'sanomalies. For the multivariate method, principal component 1 explains32.42% of the data's variability (Fig. 11). The highest resemblance be- tween the principal component maps occurred for principal components1 of both methods (with a manual examination of the multivariatemethod's principal components up to number 6) ( Figs. 12 and 13). It is clear that the map of principal component 1, derived from the multi-variate method reﬂects regional geochemical variability ( Fig. 12). Prin- cipal component-1 map using the multivariate method is insuf ﬁcient for further exploration targeting and typically, additional procedures, suchas a linear discriminant analysis or elemental regressions against aprincipal component(s), would be used to further re ﬁne desirable exploration targets (e.g., desirable lithologies). In comparison, our
Fig. 11.Scree plot of the principal components using the multivariate prospectivity mapping method and our procedure.S.E. Zhang et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Geosciences 2 (2021) 128 –147
138method yields a regional anomaly map that is suf ﬁciently selective to be used for further exploration targeting, especially if combined withglaciation striation directions (Fig. 13).Anomaly maps that are produced using the raw data, using ourmethod, generally exhibit an increase in overall contrast and particularlyin the intensity of the anomalies in the Strange Lake and Mistastin vi-cinity relative to those produced using the CLR-transformed data,although the differences are unsubstantial (results of the best combina-tions of algorithms visualized inFigs. 13 and 14). Based on the perfor- mance comparison between the two workﬂows (Fig. 3), this is expected, since the models using the raw data are generally higher performing.There is a trend of a loss of anomaly selectivity (e.g., anomalous regionsbecome larger) with the use of lower performance algorithms(Figs. 13–18) across the three best combinations (as depicted in Fig. 4). The loss in selectivity appears to be somewhat less pronounced for CLR-transformed data using the third-best combination of algorithms, how-ever the contrast remains greater for the map that was derived from theworkﬂow using raw data (Figs. 17 and 18).5. Discussion5.1. Geological interpretation and validity of the observed trendsThe glacial dispersal trend associated with REE-enriched Strange Lakeperalkaline complex is well known and has been extensively documented(Geological Survey of Canada, 1980 ;Batterson, 1989;Zajac, 2015; Paulen et al., 2017;McClenaghan et al., 2017,2019). Both univariate prospectivity maps of Y (and similarly for other indicator elements) usingthe multivariate method (i.e.,Grunsky and de Caritat, 2019) and our procedure (Figs. 9 and 10, respectively) clearly demonstrate that aconsistent and cohesive pattern is detectable in the lake sedimentgeochemical data. Lake sediment geochemical data elemental distribu-tion patterns are known to mimic those of glacial till, as indicator min-erals and fragments of mineralization found in glacial till inevitablymigrate into local drainage systems where they settle/precipitate intolakes (McConnell and Batterson 1987;Cameron, 1994). In prospectivity maps produced using our technique, the dispersal trend can be traced for
Fig. 12.Map of principal component 1, using the multivariate method. Included in the regional prospectivity map are the lithological boundaries ( Fig. 2) and glacial dispersion trends (black arrows). Abbreviations: Strange Lake peralkaline intrusion (SL); Mistastin Batholith (MB). The glacial dispersal trend from the REE-bearing Strange Lake intrusion is poorly distinguishable from the background.S.E. Zhang et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Geosciences 2 (2021) 128 –147
139approximately 100 km to the northeast. This distance is in agreementwith that of previous studies. However, compared to the multivariatemethod, both our univariate and multivariate prospectivity maps clearlyhighlight another previously undocumented dispersal trend originatingfrom the southern portion of the Mistastin Batholith ( Figs. 10 and 13). Recent mapping and exploration of the southern portions of the MistastinBatholith in 2010 by Quest Rare Minerals and Midland Exploration havefound a number REE-bearing deposits that also contain Zr, Y, U, Th, Be,Pb and Nb (Hammouche et al., 2012). Glacial erosion features in the southern portions of the Mistastin Batholith strike N65E, which corre-sponds to the glacial dispersion trend emanating from the batholith. Ittherefore appears that the dispersal train originating from the southernportion of the Mistastin Batholith is also detectable in the lake sedimentgeochemical data. However, the composition of the dispersal trends isdifferent between the southern and the northern dispersal trends. A fullinterpretation of the region's geochemical anomalies is out of the scope ofthis paper. Lastly, another less-prominent anomaly can be seen southwestof the Mistastin Batholith (Figs. 10 and 13). A geological investigation in the area does not reveal any known deposits or lithologies that could beassociated with REE, Zr, Y,/C6Be, Nb, U, Th deposits. Furthermore, theanomaly is not associated with the local glacial dispersal trend (towardsthe southeast). Therefore, further work in the area would be required toidentify the nature of this anomaly.5.2. Anomaly detection-based prospectivity mappingThere have been many approaches to using geochemical composi-tional data, much of it within the multivariate domain. For the purpose ofprospectivity mapping, the key goal is to produce maps that correctlyidentify, with as high selectivity as possible, true geochemical anomaliesthat are invariably indicative of the locations of mineral occurrences.Although the deﬁnition of geochemical anomaly has not changed, themethods used to delineate baselines from anomalies have continued toevolve and improve. There has been a general trend of further adoption
Fig. 13.Map of principal component 1 using the best combination of ML algorithms on raw data, following our procedure. Included in the regional prospectivity map are the lithological boundaries (Fig. 2) and glacial dispersion trends (black arrows). Abbreviations: Strange Lake peralkaline intrusion (SL); Mistastin Batholith (MB). The glacial dispersal trend from the REE-bearing Strange Lake intrusion is visible and extends approximately 100 km to the northeast. Furthermore, a nother glacial dispersal trend is visible extending 140 km northeast from the southern portion of the Mistastin Batholith.S.E. Zhang et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Geosciences 2 (2021) 128 –147
140of data-driven techniques, which can complement or replace knowledge-driven techniques, and especially in brown ﬁeld exploration, because the existence of at least partial ground truth allows for model validation. Ageneral change in the discipline of geochemical exploration has beentowards larger regional surveys, higher quality data and more capableand sometimes more complex data modelling methods. Consistent withthis trend, in this study, we build upon the multivariate modellingapproach as demonstrated inGrunsky and de Caritat (2019)by gener- alizing the idea of geochemical anomaly detection, automating much ofthe data analytics and modelling using a modern ML-based pipeline andremoving the intermediary steps that require traditional geological andgeochemical interpretation (i.e., of the principal components). Conse-quently, as a product of our approach:(a) we do not require log-ratio transformations for geochemicalanomaly detection, although they facilitate a parallel work ﬂow that uses multivariate modelling methods for comparison;(b) we do not assume the existence of minerals or stoichiometry in thedata, which implies that our technique is more broadly applicableand does not require interpretation of stoichiometries (asdemonstrated using volcanic rock geochemical data in Zhang et al., 2021);(c) we are able to directly map prediction residuals of any combina-tion of elements to produce prospectivity maps that are more se-lective and less noisy than that of the multivariate approach;(d) we are able to produce multivariate prospectivity maps that do notrequire extensive manual interpretation and the resulting mapsare substantially more selective and reﬂective of the‘ground truth’;(e) we do not require log-ratio feature transformations and thereforeremove the necessity for data imputation.A key functional difference in our approach compared to the multi-variate method is that we utilize ML extensively and designed our
Fig. 14.Map of principal component 1 using the best combination of ML algorithms on CLR-transformed data, following our procedure. Included in the regionalprospectivity map are the lithological boundaries ( Fig. 2) and glacial dispersion trends (black arrows). Abbreviations: Strange Lake peralkaline intrusion (SL); Mistastin Batholith (MB). The glacial dispersal trend from the REE-bearing Strange Lake intrusion is visible and extends approximately 100 km to the northeast . Furthermore, another glacial dispersal trend is visible extending 140 km northeast from the southern portion of the Mistastin Batholith.S.E. Zhang et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Geosciences 2 (2021) 128 –147
141workﬂow to be agnostic of speciﬁc algorithms. The function of the MLalgorithms as a data pre-processor for multivariate modelling is toautomate the construction of a regional geochemical baseline, againstwhich, all anomalies are measured. The choice of algorithm and modelare entirely automated, and the best algorithm and model parameters arebuilt without manual interpretation of regional geology (e.g., lithology oralteration) or knowledge of the type of mineral deposit being sought. Inaddition, ground truth is not required to train the models (as the anomalydetection method is unsupervised). This means that the quality of thegeochemical baseline, and therefore the value of the detectedgeochemical anomalies is dependent on the quality of the predictivemodelling. Models with high explanatory powers (e.g., a high CoD)translate to reliable regional geochemical baselines. As such, a weaknessof our approach lies in that most of the data should capture non-anomalous regional geochemistry. Since the baselines and anomaliesare determined through the data using ML algorithms, the de ﬁnition of anomaly is not a knowledge-driven one and changes depending on thedata used to train the models. This is unavoidable and delegates theinterpretation of the nature of the anomalies (what elements are in them)to the users of the prospectivity maps, where anomalous compositionswould have to be understood regardless of the method of discovery. Ourresults show that a single principal component of the prediction residualsimmediately produces a map that qualitatively agrees with the regionalground truth (the Strange Lake peralkaline intrusion REE glacialdispersal trend). Compared to a similar application of PCA in the multi-variate method, we do not require additional principal components to bemapped, interpreted, or further manipulated, at least for this dataset.This is because the ML algorithm training that occurred during the pre-dictive modelling stage already accounted for typical regionalgeochemical variability in the trace elements, and as such, a singledominant principal component captures the most important regionalgeochemical anomalies (compareFigs. 12 and 13). Therefore, our method is expected to be more objective and produce more consistentand replicable prospectivity maps than the multivariate method, as
Fig. 15.Map of principal component 1 using the second-best combination of ML algorithms on raw data, following our procedure. Included in the regional pro-spectivity map are the lithological boundaries ( Fig. 2) and glacial dispersion trends (black arrows). Abbreviations: Strange Lake peralkaline intrusion (SL); Mistastin Batholith (MB). The glacial dispersal trend from the REE-bearing Strange Lake intrusion is visible and extends approximately 100 km to the northeast . Furthermore, another glacial dispersal trend is visible extending 140 km northeast from the southern portion of the Mistastin Batholith.S.E. Zhang et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Geosciences 2 (2021) 128 –147
142manual interpretation is not utilized in intermediary steps. When ourapproach is used in the univariate application to generate elementalanomaly maps, it is clear that our approach is superior to the multivariatemethod, which requires a convoluted approach to ﬁrst identify key stoichiometries in the area that vary, then regress a target elementagainst the main principal components to determine the regression re-siduals, which are used to produce anomaly-type of prospectivity maps.In addition, we show that we do not require log-ratio data trans-formations and show that if data transformations such as log-ratiotransformations are to be applied to a work ﬂow, then their effects should be quantitatively measured against a baseline (e.g., using rawdata). Where it can be shown that they improve the predictive modellingperformance, then we anticipate that the application of those trans-formations can similarly result in a higher contrast in resultinggeochemical anomaly maps. For these types of comparisons, performanceresulting from a workﬂow using raw data should be used as a baseline ordefault, since any transformation must be demonstrably performance-enhancing. In our approach, since we do not assume the existence ofstoichiometry in the data, nor do we require extensive manual inter-pretation, our method is more data driven and more ﬂexible. However, as our approach is data driven, the quality of baselines depends on thequality of the data, in the same sense as for multivariate modelling, inthat the data needs to capture a substantial geochemical baseline. This isnot a drawback that is unique to our approach, but is general to all data-driven approaches, since anomalies can only be contextualized against alarge backdrop of non-anomalous data. Lastly, our method is designed tobe able to accommodate a range of ML algorithms, such that we leave thechoice between complex and powerful, and simple and highly explain-able algorithms to the user through an informed knowledge of theirperformance differences.
Fig. 16.Map of principal component 1 using the second-best combination of ML algorithms on CLR-transformed data, following our machine procedure. Included in the regional prospectivity map are the lithological boundaries ( Fig. 2) and glacial dispersion trends (black arrows). Abbreviations: Strange Lake peralkaline intrusion (SL); Mistastin Batholith (MB). The glacial dispersal trend from the REE-bearing Strange Lake intrusion is visible and extends approximately 100 km to the northeast. Furthermore, another glacial dispersal trend is visible extending 140 km northeast from the southern portion of the Mistastin Batholith.S.E. Zhang et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Geosciences 2 (2021) 128 –147
1436. ConclusionThe use of geochemical data continues to evolve and prospectivitymapping has always greatly beneﬁtted by developments in data analysis,modelling and mapping methods. With the proliferation of data-drivenmethods such as ML, it is possible to simultaneously improve uponexisting approaches, while generating entirely new approaches. In thisstudy, we demonstrated a technique to leverage compositional data byusing ML methods to improve upon the existing multivariate approachand as a substitute for it in some applications. In comparison with themultivariate method, our technique does not assume stoichiometricvariability of elements, does not require geoscienti ﬁc knowledge-based process discovery and interpretation, does not require data imputationand isﬂexible with respect to the choice of algorithm to balance the needfor performance with the need for model explain-ability. Therefore, ourapproach is more data-driven and the work ﬂow itself is almost entirely automatable, which requires little manual interaction. This facilitates theadoption of our technique, especially where the amount of data or pro-jects exceeds the amount of manual labour. For its application in lakesediment geochemistry and for the exploration of REEs in the southeastChurchill Province, our procedure is both more accurate and more se-lective than the multivariate method, to within a comparable amount ofmanual labour. We expect that our approach would generalize well toother types of exploration geochemical data.Declaration of conﬂicting interestThe authors declare that they have no known competing ﬁnancial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to in ﬂuence the work reported in this paper.
Fig. 17.Map of principal component 1 using the third-best combination of ML algorithms on raw data, following our procedure. Included in the regional prospec tivity map are the lithological boundaries ( Fig. 2) and glacial dispersion trends (black arrows). Abbreviations: Strange Lake peralkaline intrusion (SL); Mistastin Batholith (MB). The glacial dispersal trend from the REE-bearing Strange Lake intrusion is visible and extends approximately 100 km to the northeast. Furtherm ore, another glacial dispersal trend is visible extending 140 km northeast from the southern portion of the Mistastin Batholith.S.E. Zhang et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Geosciences 2 (2021) 128 –147
144AcknowledgementsThe authors would like to thank Annick Morin (GSC) for providinggeological mapping support for the study area. We would also like tothank Beth McClenaghan (GSC) and Dr. Robert F. Garrett (GSC, Emeritusscientist) and three anonymous reviewers for providing insightful com-ments that have greatly improved the readability and scope of thismanuscript. The authors thank Dr. Hua Wang for editorial handling. Dataused in this study is open access and can also be found at the NaturalResources Canada (NRCan) publication database (GEOSCAN) under OF8026 or ID 298834.Appendix A. Supplementary dataSupplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.o rg/10.1016/j.aiig.2022.02.002. This dataset is published under the OpenGovernment License (https://open.canada.ca/en/open-government-licence-canada).References
Aitchison, J., 1982. The statistical analysis of compositional data. J. R. Stat. Soc. Series B.44 (2), 139–160.https://doi.org/10.1111/j.2517-6161.1982.tb01195.x . Arne, D., Mackie, R., Pennimpede, C., 2018. Catchment analysis of re-analyzed regionalstream sediment geochemical data from the Yukon. Explore 179, 1 –30. Balaram, V., 2019. REEs: a review of applications, occurrence, exploration, analysis,recycling, and environmental impact. Geosci. Front. 10, 1285 –1303.https://doi.org/ 10.1016/j.gsf.2018.12.005. Batterson, M.J., 1989. Glacial dispersal from the Strange Lake alkalic complex, northernLabrador. In: DiLabio, R.N.W., Coker, W.B. (Eds.), Drift Prospecting. GeologicalSurvey of Canada, pp. 31 –40.https://doi.org/10.4095/127362 . Paper 89-20. Bonham-Carter, G.F., 1994. Geographic Information Systems for Geoscientists: Modelingwith GIS. Pergamon, Elsevier Science, New York . Breiman, L., 1996a. Bagging predictors. Mach. Learn. 24 (2), 123 –140.https://doi.org/ 10.1007/BF00058655.
Fig. 18.Map of principal component 1 using the third-best combination of ML algorithms on CLR-transformed data, following our procedure. Included in the reg ional prospectivity map are the lithological boundaries ( Fig. 2) and glacial dispersion trends (black arrows). Abbreviations: Strange Lake peralkaline intrusion (SL); Mistastin Batholith (MB). The glacial dispersal trend from the REE-bearing Strange Lake intrusion is visible and extends approximately 100 km to the northeast . Furthermore, another glacial dispersal trend is visible extending 140 km northeast from the southern portion of the Mistastin Batholith.S.E. Zhang et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Geosciences 2 (2021) 128 –147
145Breiman, L., 1996b. Stacked regressions. Mach. Learn. 24 (1), 49 –64.https://doi.org/ 10.1007/BF00117832.Brown, W.M., Gedeon, T.D., Groves, D.L., Barnes, R.G., 2000. Arti ﬁcial neural networks; a new method for mineral prospectivity mapping. Aust. J. Earth Sci. 47 (4), 757 –770. https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1440-0952.2000.00807.x . Cameron, I., 1994. Lake sediment sampling in mineral exploration. In: Govett, G.J.S.(Ed.), Handbook of Exploration Geochemistry. Elsevier, pp. 227 –267.https:// doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-444-81854-6.50013-4 . Carranza, E.J.M., 2008. Geochemical Anomaly and Mineral Prospectivity Mapping in GIS.Elsevier.Carranza, E.J.M., Hale, M., Faassen, C., 2008. Selection of coherent deposit-type locationsand their application in data-driven mineral prospectivity mapping. Ore Geol. Rev.33, 536–558.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.oregeorev.2007.07.001 . Chen, S., Hattori, K., Grunsky, E.C., 2018. Identi ﬁcation of sandstones above blind uranium deposits using multivariate statistical assessment of compositional data,Athabasca Basin, Canada. J. Geochem. Explor. 188, 229 –239.https://doi.org/ 10.1016/j.gexplo.2018.01.026 . Chung, C.F., Agterberg, F.P., 1980. Regression models for estimating mineral resourcesfrom geological map data. Math. Geol. 12, 473 –488.https://doi.org/10.1007/ BF01028881.Corrigan, D., Wodicka, N., McFarlane, C., Lafrance, I., Rooyen, D.V., Bandyayera, D.,Bilodeau, C., 2018. Lithotectonic framework of the Core zone, southeastern Churchillprovince, Canada. Geosci. Can. 45 (1), 1 –24.https://doi.org/10.12789/ geocanj.2018.45.128.Cover, T., Hart, P., 1967. Nearest Neighbor Pattern Classi ﬁcation, 13. IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, pp. 21–27.https://doi.org/10.1109/TIT.1967.1053964 . Curry, H.B., 1944. The method of steepest descent for non-linear minimization problems.Q. Appl. Math. 2, 258–261.https://doi.org/10.1090/qam/10667 . Cybenko, G., 1989. Approximation by superpositions of a sigmoidal function. Math.Control. Signals, Syst. 2 (4), 303 –314.https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02551274 . David, J., Simard, M., Bandyayera, D., Goutier, J., Hammouche, H., Pilote, P., Leclerc, F.,Dion, C., 2012. Datations U-Pb effectu /C19ees dans les provinces du Sup /C19erieur et de Churchill en 2010-2011. Minist /C18ere des Ressources Naturelles. Qu /C19ebec, RP, p. 33, 2012-01.European Commission, 2011. Tackling the challenges in commodity markets and on rawmaterials. Communication from the commission to the European parliament, Europ.eco. soc. comm. comm. reg.https://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri¼COM:2011:0025:FIN:en:PDF. (Accessed 5 January 2021). Domingos, P., 2012. A few useful things to know about machine learning. Commun. ACM55 (10), 78–87.
https://doi.org/10.1145/2347736.2347755 . European Commission, 2014. On the review of the list of critical raw materials for the EUand the implementation of the raw materials initiative. Communication from thecommission to the European parliament, the council. the Europ. eco. soc. comm.comm. reg. Retrieved January 5, 2021, from https://ec.europa.eu/growth/sectors/r aw-materials/speciﬁc-interest/critical_en. European Commission, 2017a. On the 2017 list of Critical Raw Materials for the EU,2017. Communication from the commission to the European parliament, the council.the Europ. eco. soc. comm. comm. reg. https://ec.europa.eu/transparency/regdoc/re p/1/2017/EN/COM-2017-490-F1-EN-MAIN-PART-1.PDF . (Accessed 5 January 2021).European Commission, 2017b. Study on the review of the list of critical raw materials,criticality assessments. Retrieved January 5, 2021, from. https://op.europa.eu/en/p ublication-detail/-/publication/08fdab5f-9766-11e7-b92d-01aa75ed71a1 . European Commission, 2020. Critical raw materials resilience: charting a path towardsgreater security and sustainability. Communication from the commission to theEuropean parliament. Europ. eco. soc. comm. comm. reg. Retrieved January 5, 2021,fromhttps://ec.europa.eu/docsroom/documents/42849 . Fix, E., Hodges, J.L., 1951. An important contribution to nonparametric discriminantanalysis and density estimation. Int. Stat. Ins. 57, 233 –238.https://doi.org/10.2307/ 1403796.Freund, Y., Schapire, R.E., 1995. A decision-theoretic generalization of on-line learningand an application to boosting. In: Vit /C19anyi, P. (Ed.), Second European Conference on Computational Learning Theory. Sprigner . Friske, P.W.B., McCurdy, M.W., Day, S.J.A., 1996a. National GeochemicalReconnaissance, Labrador Compilation: Distribution of Fluoride in 18,839 LakeSediment Samples and 1,162 Stream Sediment Samples, Newfoundland (Labrador).Geological Survey of Canada. https://doi.org/10.4095/208315 . Open File 3260d. Friske, P.W.B., McCurdy, M.W., Day, S.J.A., 1996b. National GeochemicalReconnaissance, Labrador Compilation: Distribution of Lead in 18,839 Lake SedimentSamples and 1,162 Stream Sediment Samples, Newfoundland (Labrador). GeologicalSurvey of Canada.https://doi.org/10.4095/208317 . Open File 3260f. GEM, 2019. Evaluation of the Geo-Mapping for Energy and Minerals (GEM-2) Program.Government of Canada, Natural Resources Canada. https://www.nrcan.gc.ca/transpa rency/reporting-and-accountability/plans-and-performance-reports/strategic-evaluation-division/reports-and-plans-year/evaluation-the-geo-mapping-for-energy-and-minerals-gem-2-program/evaluation . (Accessed 25 August 2021). Geological Survey of Canada, 1980. Airborne Gamma Ray Spectrometric Map, DihourseLake Quebec–Newfoundland. Geological Survey of Canada, Geophysical Series.https://doi.org/10.4095/124881 . Map 35124(08)G. Ghorbani, Y., 2018. Gaining access to high-tech and critical raw materials: a drivingfactor in developing future concept and methods in mineral processing and extractivemetallurgy. In: III Congress of Industrial Engineering of the North of Chile, 22-24thAugust, 2018, Antofagasta-Chile . Gowans, R.M., Lewis, W.J., Shoemaker, S., Spooner, J., Zalnieriunas, R.V., 2014. NI-43-101 Technical Report on the Preliminary Economic Assessment (PEA) for the StrangeLake Property, Quebec, Canada. Micron International Limited for Quest RareMinerals Ltd, p. 258.Grunsky, E.C., Mueller, U.A., Corrigan, D., 2014. A study of the lake sedimentgeochemistry of the Melville Peninsula using multivariate methods: application forpredictive geological mapping. J. Geochem. Explor. 141, 15 –41.https://doi.org/ 10.1016/j.gexplo.2013.07.013 . Grunsky, E.C., de Caritat, P., 2019. State-of-the-art analysis of geochemical data formineral exploration. Geochem. Explor. Environ. Anal. 20, 217 –232.https://doi.org/ 10.1144/geochem2019-031. Grunsky, E.C., 2010. The interpretation of geochemical survey data. Geochem. Explor.Environ. Anal. 10, 27–74.https://doi.org/10.1144/1467-7873/09-210 . Grunsky, E.C., Arne, D., 2020. Mineral-resource prediction using advanced data analyticsand ML of the QUEST-South stream-sediment geochemical data, Southwestern BritishColumbia, Canada. Geochem. Explor. Environ. Anal. 23 (1). https://doi.org/ 10.1144/geochem2020-054geochem2020-g2054. Hammouche, H., Legouix, C., Goutier, J., Dion, C., 2012. G /C19eologie de la r/C19egion du lac Zeni. Minist/C18ere des Ressources Naturelles. Qu /C19ebec, RG 2012-02, p. 35. Harris, D.A., Pan, R., 1999. Mineral favourability mapping: a comparison of arti ﬁcial networks, logistic regression and discriminant analysis. Nat. Resour. Res. 8, 93 –109. https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1021886501912 . Harris, J.R., Grunsky, E., Behnia, P., Corrigan, D., 2015. Data-and knowledge-drivenmineral prospectivity maps for Canada's North. Ore Geol. Rev. 71, 788 –803.https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.oregeorev.2015.01.004 . Hastie, T., Tibshirani, R., Friedman, J., 2009. The Elements of Statistical Learning: DataMining, Inference, and Prediction. Springer Science &Business Media. He, K., Zhang, X., Ren, S., Sun, J., 2015. Delving deep into recti ﬁers: surpassing human- level performance on ImageNet classi ﬁcation. In: 2015 IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), pp. 1026 –1034.https://doi.org/10.1109/ ICCV.2015.123. Santiago.Ho, T.K., 1995. Random decision forests. In: Proceedings of the 3rd InternationalConference on Document Analysis and Recognition. Montr /C19eal, pp. 278–282.https:// doi.org/10.1109/ICDAR.1995.598994 . Canada. Hoffman, P.F., 1988. United plates of America, the birth of a craton: early Proterozoicassembly and growth of Laurentia. Annu. Rev. Earth Planet. Sci. Lett. 16, 543 –603. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.ea.16.050188.002551 . Hsu, C.W., Lin, C.J., 2002. A comparison of methods for multiclass support vectormachines. IEEE Trans. Neural Network. 13, 415 –425.https://doi.org/10.1109/ 72.991427.James, D.T., Connelly, J.N., Wasteneys, H.A., Kilfoil, G.J., 1996. Paleoproterozoiclithotectonic divisions of the southeastern Churchill Province, western Labrador. Can.J. Earth Sci. 33, 216–230.https://doi.org/10.1139/e96-019 . James, D.T., Dunning, G.R., 2000. U –Pb geochronological constraints for paleoproterozoic evolution of the Core zone, southeastern Churchill province,northeastern laurentia. Precambrian Res. 103, 31 –54.https://doi.org/10.1016/ S0301-9268(00)00074-7.Karatzoglou, A., Meyer, D., Hornik, K., 2006. Support Vector Machines in R. J. Stat. Softw,pp. 1–28.https://doi.org/10.18637/jss.v015.i09 , 15. Kotsiantis, S.B., 2014. Integrating global and local application of naive bayes classi ﬁer. Int. Arab J. Inf. Technol. 11 (3), 300 –307. Kotsiantis, S.B., Zaharakis, I., Pintelas, P., 2007. Supervised ML: a review of classi ﬁcation techniques. Emerg. artif. intell. appl. comp. eng. 160 (1), 3 –
24. Lemar/C19echal, C., 2012. Cauchy and the gradient method. Doc. Math. Extra 251 (254), 10 . Linardatos, P., Papastefanopoulos, V., Kotsiantis, S., 2021. Explainable AI: a review of MLinterpretability methods. Entropy 23 (1), 1 –18.https://doi.org/10.3390/e23010018 . Lundervold, A.S., Lundervold, A., 2019. An overview of deep learning in medical imagingfocusing on MRI. Z. Med. Phys. 29, 102 –127.https://doi.org/10.1016/ j.zemedi.2018.11.002.Luo, Z., Xiong, Y., Zuo, R., 2020. Recognition of geochemical anomalies using a deepvariational autoencoder network. Appl. Geochem. 122, 104710. https://doi.org/ 10.1016/j.apgeochem.2020.104710 . McClenaghan, M.B., Paulen, R.C., Kjarsgaard, I.M., Averill, S.A., Fortin, R., 2017.Indicator Mineral Signature of the Strange Lake REE Deposit, Quebec andNewfoundland and Labrador. Geological Survey of Canada, p. 50. https://doi.org/ 10.4095/306239. Open File 8240.McClenaghan, M.B., Paulen, R.C., Kjarsgaard, I.M., 2019. Rare metal indicator minerals inbedrock and till at the Strange Lake peralkaline complex, Quebec and Labrador,Canada. Can. J. Earth Sci. 56 (8), 857 –869.https://doi.org/10.1139/cjes-2018-0299 . McConnell, J.W., Batterson, M.J., 1987. The Strange Lake Zr-Y-Nb-Be-REE deposit,Labrador: a geochemical proﬁle in till, lake and stream sediment, and water. J. Geochem. Explor. 29, 105 –127.https://doi.org/10.1016/0375-6742(87)90073-2 . McCurdy, M.W., Amor, S.D., Finch, C., 2016. Regional Lake Sediment and WaterGeochemical Data, Western and Central Labrador (NTS 13-L, 13-M, 14-D, 23-I and23-J). Geological Survey of Canada, p. 14. https://doi.org/10.4095/298834 . Open File 8026.Miller, R.R., 1990. The Strange Lake pegmatite –aplite-hosted rare-metal deposit, Labrador. In: Current Research. Newfoundland Department of Mines and Energy,pp. 171–182. Report 90-1. Moorhead, J., Hynes, A., 1990. Nappes in the internal zone of the Labrador Trough:evidence for major, early NW-vergent basement transport. Geosci. Can. 17 (4),241–244.Natural Resources Canada, 2021. Critical Minerals. Government of Canada. Retrieved. htt ps://www.nrcan.gc.ca/our-natural-resources/minerals-mining/critical-minerals/23414. (Accessed 24 August 2021).Overland, I., 2019. The geopolitics of renewable energy: debunking four emerging myths.Energy Res. Social Sci. 49, 36 –40.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.erss.2018.10.018 .S.E. Zhang et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Geosciences 2 (2021) 128 –147
146Paulen, R.C., Stokes, C.R., Fortin, R., Rice, J.M., Dub /C19e-Loubert, H., McClenaghan, M.B., 2017. Dispersal trains produced by ice streams: an example from Strange Lake,Labrador, Canada. In: Tschirhart, V., Thomas, M.D. (Eds.), Proceedings of Exploration‘17: Sixth Decennial International Conference on Mineral Exploration, pp. 871 –875. Toronto.Perreault, S., Hynes, A., 1990. Tectonic evolution of the kuujjuaq terrane, new Qu /C19ebec orogen. Geosci. Can. 17 (4), 238 –240. Rizzo, A., Goel, S., Grilli, M.L., Iglesias, R., Jaworska, L., Lapkovskis, V., Novak, P.,Postolnyi, B.O., Valerini, D., 2020. The Critical Raw Materials in cutting tools formachining applications. A rev. Mat. 13 (6), 1377. https://doi.org/10.3390/ ma13061377.Rosenblatt, F., 1961. Principles of Neurodynamics: Perceptrons and the Theory of BrainMechanisms. Spartan Books, Washington DC. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642- 70911-1_20.Rumelhart, D.E., Hinton, G.E., Williams, R.J., 1986. Learning internal representations byerror propagation. In: Rumelhart, D.E., McClelland, J.L., PDP research group (Eds.),Parallel Distributed Processing: Explorations in the Microstructure of Cognition:Foundation, ume 1. MIT Press . Russell, S., Norvig, P., 2010. Artiﬁcial Intelligence: A Modern Approach, 3rd. Prentice- Hall, New Jersey, pp. 1 –1151. Sagi, O., Rokach, L., 2018. Ensemble learning: a survey. Wiley Interdiscip. Rev.-Data Min.Knowl. Discov. 8 (4), e1249. https://doi.org/10.1002/widm.1249 . Santosa, F., William, W.S., 1986. Linear inversion of band-limited re ﬂection seismograms. J. Sci. Stat. Comput. 7, 1307 –1330.https://doi.org/10.1137/0907087 . Tibshirani, R., 1996. Regression shrinkage and selection via the lasso. J. R. Stat. Soc.Series B. 58, 267–288.https://doi.org/10.1111/j.2517-6161.1996.tb02080.x . Tikhonov, A.N., 1943. On the stability of inverse problems. Dokl. Akad. Nauk SSSR 39,195–198.U.S. Geological Survey, 2018. Draft critical mineral list –summary of methodology and background information. In: U.S. Geological Survey Technical Input Document inResponse to Secretarial Order No. 3359. Retrieved January 5, 2021, from.https://pubs.usgs.gov/of/2018/1021/ofr20181021.pdf .Van der Leeden, J., 1995. G /C19eologie de la r/C19egion du lac Mistinibi, Territoire du Nouveau- Qu/C19ebec. Minist/C18ere des Ressources naturelles. Qu /C19ebec, Rep. MB 95–45, 107. Vapnik, V., 1998. Statistical Learning Theory. Springer, New York . Wardle, R.J., James, D.T., Scott, D.J., Hall, J., 2002. The southeastern Churchill Province:synthesis of a Paleoproterozoic transpressional orogeny. Can. J. Earth Sci. 39,639–663.https://doi.org/10.1139/e02-004 . Witten, I.H., Frank, E., 2005. Data Mining: Practical ML Tools and Techniques, second ed.Morgan Kaufman, San Francisco . Wright, D.F., Bonham-Carter, G.F., 1996. VHMS favourability mapping with GIS-basedintegration models, chisel lake –anderson lake area. In: Bonham-Carter, G.F.,
Galley, A.G., Hall, G.E.M. (Eds.), EXTECH I: A Multidisciplinary Approach to MassiveSulphide Research in the Rusty Lake –Snow Lake Greenstone Belts, Manitoba, 426. Geological Survey of Canada, Bulletin, pp. 339 –376. Zajac, I.S., 2015. John jambor's contributions to the mineralogy of the Strange Lakeperalkaline complex, quebec –labrador, Canada. Can. Mineral. 53, 885 –894.https:// doi.org/10.3749/canmin.1400051 . Zhang, S.E., Nwaila, G.T., Bourdeau, J.E., Ashwal, L.D., 2021. Machine-learning-basedprediction of trace element concentrations using data from the Karoo large igneousprovince and its application in prospectivity mapping. Artif. Intell. Geosci. https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.aiig.2021.11.002 accepted. Zou, H., Hastie, T., 2005. Regularisation and variable selection via the elastic net. J. R.Stat. Soc. Series B 67 (2), 301 –320.https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467- 9868.2005.00503.x.Zuo, R., 2011. Identifying geochemical anomalies associated with Cu and Pb –Zn skarn mineralization using principal component analysis and spectrum –area fractal modeling in the Gangdese Belt, Tibet (China). J. Geochem. Explor. 111 (1 –2), 13–22. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gexplo.2011.06.012 . Zuo, R., Xiong, Y., Wang, J., Carranza, E.J.M., 2019. Deep learning and its application ingeochemical mapping. Earth Sci. Rev. 192, 1 –14.https://doi.org/10.1016/ j.earscirev.2019.02.023.S.E. Zhang et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Geosciences 2 (2021) 128 –147
147