Will digital solution transform Sub-Sahara African agriculture?
Gezahagn Kudamaa,⁎, Mabiratu Dangiab, Hika Wanaa,B o n aT a d e s ea
aWollega University, Shambu Campus, Department of Agricultural Economics, Shambu, Ethiopia
bGambella University, Department of Agricultural Economics, Gambella, Ethiopia
abstract article info
Article history:Received 24 October 2021Received in revised form 28 November 2021Accepted 4 December 2021Available online 9 December 2021Given its superior importance of digital agricultural solutions to overcome challenges in agricultural activities,many of the solutions are in face of challenges to scale in Sub-Saharan Africa (SSA). On the other hand, the impactof digitalization on economic development in developing countries is documented in several literatures but dig-ital technologies have lately touched the agricultural sector in SSA. The objective of this study was to brie ﬂyr e - view the impact of digital solution on smallholder farmers agriculture transformation, and the key and challengesinﬂuencing of agricultural digitalization in SSA. We used all-inclusive approach comprising original research ar-ticles, peer-reviewed articles, working papers, conference papers, book chapters, database, guide book, and in-dexes from 60 recent empirical academic studies conducted on impacts on digital solution in the region toproduce a broad review. Results show that digital solution, when effectively used in SSA, has enabled smallholderfarmers to gain a wide range of beneﬁts involving access to real timely price, market, and farming information and safeﬁnancial transactions, alternative value chain linkages, multifaceted knowledge, better earning andyield, reduce costs, social well-being and risk minimization, women empowerment bene ﬁts. In contrast, fail to use adaptable tools, unaffordability, digital illiterateness, low participation of women and old smallholderfarmers due to their low income and education status, are main barriers to digitalization in agriculture. Accord-ingly, it essential to the SSA countries to invest on technologies that is adaptable their target population, ensurebalancing regulatory and delivery approaches that permit equal involvement of women, old age category, and re-mote areas, realize affordable access to digital services through reducing data costs and tax cuts on digital agri-cultural tools, and offering digital skill training for farmers by segmenting them into their gender, age, andeducation to fully harness the opportunities of digitalization in agriculture.© 2021 The Authors. Publishing servic es by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of KeAi Communications Co., Ltd. This is an openaccess article under the CC BY-NC-ND license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ ).
Keywords:AgricultureDigital solution and serviceDigitalizationTransformation
Contents1 . I n t r o d u c t i o n ............................................................... 2 9 32 . M e t h o d o l o g y.............................................................. 2 9 32 . 1 . L i t e r a t u r e s e a r c h......................................................... 2 9 33 . F i n d i n g s ................................................................ 2 9 43 . 1 . F a c i l i t a t i n g m a r k e t i n f o r m a t i o n a n d v a l u e c h a i n l i n k a g e s....................................... 2 9 43 . 2 . F a r m p r o d u c t i v i t y a n d i n c o m e................................................... 2 9 43 . 3 . F i n a n c i a l s e r v i c e s ......................................................... 2 9 53 . 4 . S o c i a l w e l l - b e i n g a n d r i s k s h a r i n g .................................................. 2 9 63 . 5 . W o m e n e m p o w e r i n g a n d i n c l u s i v e ................................................. 2 9 63.6. Risks and challenges inﬂu e n c i n g o f a g r i c u l t u r a l d i g i t a l i z a t i o n i n S S A.................................. 2 9 6 4 . C o n c l u s i o n s a n d p o l i c y i m p l i c a t i o n s .................................................... 2 9 8D e c l a r a t i o n o f C o m p e t i n g I n t e r e s t....................................................... 2 9 9A c k n o w l e d g e m e n t s .............................................................. 2 9 9R e f e r e n c e s .................................................................. 2 9 9Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 5 (2021) 292 –300
⁎Corresponding author.E-mail address:gkudhama@gmail.com(G. Kudama).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aiia.2021.12.0012589-7217/© 2021 The Authors. Publishing services by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of KeAi Communications Co., Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http:// creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ ).
Contents lists available atScienceDirect
Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture
journal homepage:http://www.keaipublishing.com/en/journals/artificial-intelligence-in-agriculture/1. IntroductionAgriculture is the mainstay for several Low and Middle-IncomeCountries (LMICs), where 54% of labor force in Sub-Saharan Africa areactively engaged in it and rely on the sector for their livelihoods(GSMA, 2020a). On the other hand, Africa need to increase more thandouble the current status of agricultural production over the next30 years so as to meet the growing demand of food and nutrition secu-rity (Tsan et al., 2019). Specially, Sub-Saharan Africa (SSA) has been fac-ing the highest food security problem than any other region. Thegreatest growth in food demand will call for considerably outperformrate of agricultural productivity and yield increases than the usual inthe region (Tsan et al., 2019). Furthermore, high input costs, poor accessto information and credit, and deteriorating productivity are worseningAfrican farmers' potentials to boom agricultural yield and sustainabilityof farming business (Abell et al., 2019). Consequently, it calls for agricul-tural transformation a state in which agriculture become vibrant, andmodern that generates value for farmers, entrepreneurs, youth andwomen, and produces affordable, nutritious and healthy food for allon continuous basis (Tsan et al., 2019).Despite the improvement and decision making in agriculture is notan easy task (Tamene et al., 2021), digital breakthroughs have thepower to transform the sectors (Goedde et al., 2021). Utilization of dig- ital technologies is helpful in providing the right solutions to few of themost burning issues of our time, comprising climate variability, food in-security and malnutrition, and environmental degradation ( Abell et al., 2019). Digital technologies enhance user beneﬁts via facilitating instan- taneous information exchange, and access to new information amongpeople (Deichmann et al., 2016).Historically, agriculture has experienced a number of dramaticalchange that involves digital agricultural breakthroughs. The digital agri-cultural revolution becomes the latest change which could help realizesagriculture meets the food demand of the world in the future ( Trendov et al., 2019). The introduction of digital solutions like machine learning,drone technology, robotics and related technologies in agriculture arepaving the way towards agricultural sector advancement ( Tamene et al., 2021). Digitalization will highly optimize agricultural resourcesmanagement and allocation to the best of their own optimal recom-mendations through facilitating access of information in real time in asuper-connected means (Trendov et al., 2019). Moreover, digital agriculture will generate means that are extremely productive, andadaptable to changes such as those associated to climate change. Conse-quently, it can ensure higher food security, pro ﬁtability and sustainabil- ity (Trendov et al., 2019).Digitalization for agriculture (D4Ag), the application of digital break-throughs in the whole ranges agricultural value chains, overcomes chal-lenges in agricultural activities and helps better earning for smallholderfarmers, food and nutrition security, climate change adaptation and ex-tends the involvement of youth and women ( Tsan et al., 2019). D4Ag contributes to a structural transformation of the agri-food sector via ac-celerating the information to smallholder farmers or to other agricul-tural value chains actors, involving extension agents, agri-inputsdealers, agribusinesses,ﬁnancial service providers and policymakersby using digital tools, and channels ( Tsan et al., 2019;Muyiramye and Addom, 2020). These solutions comprise mobile-accessible apps andtools that rise access to timely market price data, ﬁnancial services, weather predictions, pest outbreaks, and more ( Thompson and Gyatso, 2020). The variety of digital tools in agriculture is wide-ranging from low-tech solutions disseminating voice and text-based ad-visory on feature phones, to advanced holistic tools including satellites,sensors and big data analytics (
GSMA, 2020a). Digital solutions have risen steeply inﬁgure. About 60% (227 out of 390 active solutions) have begun to provide services over last threeyears in Africa (Tsan et al., 2019). Digital agriculture solutions in useprovideﬁve primary services involving, advisory and information ser-vices, market linkage,ﬁnancial services, supply chain management,and business intelligence in the continent ( Tsan et al., 2019;Goedde et al., 2021).In the last decade, among many of different digital solutions trials,some have got satisfactory measure to attract viable investment. A fewof such successful digital services have changed the lives of severalsmallholder farmers and have led them to larger productivity and in-comes (Tsan et al., 2019). Digital agriculture is growing rapidly and13% of Africa's smallholder farmers have accessed the digital solutionsand yield up to ~€144 million revenue per year, with growing evidenceof the sector's positive effect on smallholder farmers. The recent revolu-tion of digital agriculture, therefore, will be the good news to SSA thathelp address their key challenges currently facing the region ( GSMA, 2020a).Despite their clear beneﬁts, numerous digital solutions struggle toexpand and some of them fail to advance the lives of farmers andother end users. In SSA, for instance, most applications possess beneath30% active users (Goedde et al., 2021). On the other hand, the under de-veloped status of enabling environment, including policies, institutions,infrastructure, and other conditions required to use the digital solutionsare also key barriers to the expansion of digital agriculture in the conti-nent. Furthermore, poor technological infrastructure, high costs of tech-nology, low levels of e-literacy and digital skills, poor governingframework and limit the access to facilities are challenges hinderingthe use agricultural digital solution in developing counties ( Trendov et al., 2019). Rural areas also have less established digital ecosystems(resources, skills, networks) when compared with urban areas. Whensuch limitations combined with global movements of urbanizationand middle and rich classes subsiding in cities, digitalization is capableto aggravate existing rural-urban disparities ( UN DESA, 2018;Trendov et al., 2019) which can lead to fall behind in the progression of a digitalrevolution in agriculture (Trendov et al., 2019). The impact of digitalization on economic development in developingcountries is documented in several literatures but digital technologieshave lately touched the agricultural sector in SSA ( Thompson and Gyatso, 2020). Consequently, literatures are scare on the role that digitalsolution can play on agriculture transformation in the region.Drawing on the lessons from the forementioned discussions andhigh research gap currently observed on the role of digitalization on ag-riculture in Sub Sahara African, this article provides a brief review of theimpact of digital solutions on smallholder farmers agriculture transfor-mation in Sub Sahara African. Moreover, this review paper aims to in-vestigate the following research questions: Will digital solutiontransform smallholder farmers agriculture? Does digital technology inagriculture inclusive? what are the main challenges faced by ﬁrms within the agri-food value chains in the adoption of digital break-throughs?2. Methodology2.1. Literature searchwe used all-inclusive approach comprising original research articles,peer-reviewed articles, working papers, conference papers, book chap-ters, database, guide book, and indexes from different sources to pro-duce a broad review. The literature was collected via, Web of science,and Google scholar and so forth, largely focusing on recent studies.The key words used were: impact of digitalization on smallholderfarmers agricultural transformation, inﬂuence of digitalization on facili- tating market information and agricultural value chain linkages, impactof digitalization on farm yield and income improvement, the effect ofdigitalization on social well-being and risk minimization, digital inclu-sive and divide in agriculture, effects of digitalization on access to
ﬁnan- cial services, and challenges inﬂuencing of agricultural digitalizationin SSA.We reviewed 29 peer reviewed journals, 2 books, 2 book chapters, 1,manual guide, 2 workshop papers, 17 reports, 4 working papers, 1G. Kudama, M. Dangia, H. Wana et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 5 (2021) 292 –300
293conference papers, and 2 facts andﬁgures. Among the 29 peer reviewedjournals, 23 are empirical studies, and 6 are literature reviews papers.There has been plenty of evidence on the ways in which digital solutionshelp improve the lives of smallholder farmers. A summary of the reviewresults given inTable 1below. The subsequent sections brieﬂyr e v i e w this evidence as well as challenges inﬂuencing agricultural digitalization.3. FindingsBased on the relations of the topics the review results were catego-rized into digitalization on (1) facilitating market information and agri-cultural value chain linkages, (2) farm productivity and income,(3) access toﬁnancial services, (4) social well-being and risk minimiza-tion, (5) women empowering and inclusive, and (6) risks and chal-lenges of agricultural digitalization in SSA.3.1. Facilitating market information and value chain linkagesThe proportions of the agribusiness sector development is low whencompared to that of farming size in most of SSA ( World Bank, 2013). Many of these countries (such as Ethiopia, Malawi, Burundi) remain todepend on the export of agricultural commodities. The agriculturalcommodities export of them accounts for about 75% of their exportswith very slight or no processing included ( UNIDO, 2011). Furthermore, the majority of African farmers still face challenges to access real-timemarketing and price information that help them to make sound deci-sions on time and market and at what price to sell their produces.Digital solutions are potential to enhance farmers' negotiatingpower and reduce the risk of selling produce at low prices via facilitatingprice and marketing information access to farmers ( Malabo Montpellier Panel, 2019). For example, in the rural areas of Niger, the use mobilephones reduced farmers' search cost on agricultural price informationby 50% when related with personal travel ( Aker and Mbiti, 2010). In responds to quick changes in the agri-food sector over the previ-ous two decades, smallholders' involvement in global value chains(GVCs) arose as a new approach towards poverty mitigation ( Ruben, 2017). However, the involvement of small farmers agricultural valuechains is low in SSA (Deutsche Bank Research, 2014). Some of the vital value chain challenges in the sub-region involves, output markets(like price risk, lack of regional integration, quality issues, policiesdistorting markets, food safety, social and environmental issues), accessto inputs and technology, infrastructure,ﬁnance, inadequate skills and issues with engaging smallholders (World Bank, 2013). On the other hand, it is commonly accepted that digital connectivityis becoming a crucial aspect in facilitating more discrete, standardizedagri-food value chains in SSA value chain in recent years. Digitizationof value chains supports these trends, since legible information lets im-proved management and monitoring of GVCs. The use of digitally-enabled solutions is potential to reduce the problems of smallholderfarmers in agri-food value chain through linking them to high-qualityfarm inputs (such as seeds, fertilizers, herbicides/pesticides), produc-tion and post-harvest machinery and mechanization services, off-takemarkets, or even to the end -consumer ( Tsan et al., 2019). For instance, Twiga Foods, a company began in 2014 to link small fruit and vegetablefarmers in rural Kenya with small and medium-sized sellers in cities(Malabo Montpellier Panel, 2019;Thompson and Gyatso, 2020)h a s been able to provide higher prices and a guaranteed market to morethan 17,000 farmers in the country in 2019. The high price obtainedby farmers is due to avoiding the inclusion of intermediaries in whole-sale markets (Thompson and Gyatso, 2020). With regard to opportunities of digital connectivity, the InformationCommunication Technology (ICT) innovations rise ef ﬁciency gains due to the minimized need for physical journeys between value chain ac-tors. Furthermore, ICT enabled information permit ﬁrms the capability to improve monitor and manage vital resources and employees(Esselaar et al., 2007;
Donner and Escobari, 2010). Higher information ﬂows help build stronger networks between ﬁrms. As a result, ICTs en- able new creative and innovative activities between groups of ﬁrms (Foster and Heeks, 2013). Moreover, digital technologies and market-places might potentially alter the interaction of small ﬁrms with mar- kets, and enable new types of business model and innovation at scaleonline (World Bank, 2016). The researchﬁnding byHartmann et al. (2020)in Kenya indicates that the adoption of smartphone increasedmultifaceted knowledge (vertical knowledge ﬂows, and horizontal knowledge networks), options to navigate the variety of chain alterna-tives (domestic production, informal export production), and emergingdigital markets among horticultural smallholder farmers.3.2. Farm productivity and incomeSSA remains the most important sector for economic growth, pov-erty reduction and food security (Asfaw et al., 2012;Deutsche BankTable 1Effect of digital solution interventions on agriculture outcomes.Main Finding Location Product or servicesTechnology StudyFacilitating market information and VCAIncrease multifaceted, options to navigate the variety of chain alternatives,and emerging digital markets among smallholder farmers Mt Kenya Horticulture Smartphone adoption(Hartmann et al., 2020)Reduce farmers' search cost Niger Agricultural product Mobile phone ( Aker and Mbiti, 2010) Productivity and proﬁtIncrease farm productivity Kaduna State, NigeriaAgricultural product SMS text reminders ( Sennuga et al., 2020)Has positive association with maize productivity and increase pro ﬁt Iringa, Tanzania Maize Mobile phone Quandt et al. (2020) Facilitates the adoption of legume based sustainable agriculturalintensiﬁcation practices and increases knowledge on new practices Tanzania Legume Radio and SMS Silvestri et al. (2020)Facilitates the groundnut farmers services and reduced the workload ofextension workers South-East Tanzania Groundnut Interactive voice MessageOrtiz-Crespo et al.(2020) Increases farmers' use of seeds and fertilizers as well as land and laborproductivity Kenya Seeds and fertilizers ICT Ochieng et al. (2013)Increased yield and proﬁt Nigeria Rice Mobile application Arouna et al. (2020) Financial servicesIncrease access to loan Malawi Loan Mobile phone Montfaucon (2020) Increase money transmissions, the nonfarm employment, and the portion ofhouseholds food security Northern Uganda Money transactions Mobile money Wieser et al. (2019)Women empowering and inclusiveEnhance women empowerment, household income, food security, anddietary quality Central Uganda Mobile service Mobile phone ( Sekabira and Qaim,2017)G. Kudama, M. Dangia, H. Wana et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 5 (2021) 292 –300
294Research, 2014). The region has huge amounts of uncultivated land(nearly the half of world availability), unused water resources andgreater possibility for improvements in inputs to rise agricultural pro-ductivity. Consequently, advancing African agriculture is considered asa way to achieve the growing global food demand. However, agricul-tural productivity in SSA remains low compared with other areas(Bjornlund et al., 2020), due to numerous reasons involving under-investment, poor infrastructure, insecure land tenure, unfavorableprice policies and weak institutions ( Deutsche Bank Research, 2014). Many other factors, including climate, soil quality, slavery and disease(Bjornlund et al., 2020).In addition, food production in the region has not kept pace withpopulation growth (Tittonell and Giller, 2013;Deutsche Bank Research, 2014), due to lowest land and labor productivity rates of theregion in the world (Tittonell and Giller, 2013). However, there is no single solution for agricultural productivity improvement in SSA. Conse-quently, it necessitates improved access to numerous inputs, enablingpolicies, and a good-operational supply and value chains ( Thompson and Gyatso, 2020). Furthermore, attaining agricultural productiongrowth will be unthinkable unless developing and disseminatingyield-enhancing technologies since it is no longer possible to meet thegrowing food demand along with the increasing population throughthe enlargement of cultivable area (Asfaw et al., 2012). Previous studies witnessed that information asymmetry has con-ventionally inhibited smallholder farmers' access to markets, which inturns limited the adoption of modern technologies that could haveboosted their farm productivities (Ochieng et al., 2013). Often extension agents have traditionally been the primary means of reducing the infor-mation asymmetries related to technology adoption and provider advi-sory services to farmers in SSA (Davis, 2008). Despite the role of extension workers is mainly crucial when it comes to promoting mod-ern agricultural technologies, their capacity to provide updated and ac-tionable information might be limited by the low ratio extension agentto farmer, under developed infrastructure, together with low incentiveand responsibility (Aker, 2011). The comprehensive advice on recom-mendable fertilizer application rates has failed to realize attainableyield improvements for crop production in several SSA ( Arouna et al., 2020).Farmers need lifelong learning and continuous access to diverse sus-tainable yield improvement technology-related information, to care on-going,ﬂexible adaptation to varying burdens and opportunities ( Pretty and Bharucha, 2014;Brown et al., 2017). As a result, farmers tend to be more interested to information that is easier to access than conventionalextension services, and more personalized to their speci ﬁc situation. Which suggests the need to access efﬁciently information delivery means in the context of the adoption technology to the target farmers'speciﬁcs i t u a t i o n s(Davis and Sulaiman, 2014). The use of ICT platforms have a potential to shift the traditional extension scenario ( Ochieng et al., 2013) by accelerating and offering more information for farmers(Thompson and Gyatso, 2020).Unlike traditional extension approaches, e-extension advisory allowto reach more farmers, often with updated information and cost-effective way (Davis, 2008). Moreover, the digital technology nowa-days, makes it easy access to offer individualized extension services tofarmers at a much lesser expense (Arouna et al., 2020). The study con-
ducted in rural Tanzania, bySilvestri et al. (2020)shows that informa- tion provided through radio and SMS to farmers boosted theiradoption in legume based sustainable agricultural intensi ﬁcation prac- tices and knowledge on something new practices such as planting,seeds, fertilizers and soil fertility, pests and diseases control, weeding,harvesting, and storage. The sameﬁnding displays that both awarenessand adoption are boosted if SMS supports radio campaigns. The studyfurther demonstrated that radio alone was the most cost-effective ap-proach; each dollar spent on the radio campaign results in 2.1 farmersthat have adopted at least one new practice, compared with 0.5 farmersfor SMS and 0.4 farmers for radio and SMS jointed ( Silvestri et al., 2020).In case it might be challenging toﬁt the broadcasts with farmers on regular procedures due to the high labor load of farming and related ac-tivities, user-centered interactive voice response can also be alternativemeans of digital agricultural advice. For example, the research ﬁndings ofOrtiz-Crespo et al. (2020)display that groundnut farmers dynami-cally engaged with user-centered interactive voice message responseto agricultural advice in Tanzania. Furthermore, the study illustratesthat user-centered interactive voice message minimized the workloadof extension workers compared to traditional communication channelsvia sharing automated push-calls responses to a group of farmers atonce for questions seeking similar answering raised from differentfarmers.In the same analogous, the study results by Ochieng et al. (2013)in Kenya shows that participation in ICT relied market information ser-vices (MIS) project increased farmers' use of seeds and fertilizers signif-icantly and enhanced land and labor productivity. Similarly, the studyresults byArouna et al. (2020)in Nigeria show that use of mobile appli-cation personalized advice on rice nutrient management enhancedfarmers' rice yield and proﬁt by 7% and 10% respectively with thesame average amount of fertilizer application. Likewise, Sennuga et al. (2020)show that in Kaduna State, Nigeria, information provided viamobile phones (SMS text reminders) to farmers increased their farmproductivity. Similarly,Quandt et al. (2020)in Iringa rural district, Tanzania indicates that the use of mobile phone for agricultural opera-tions by smallholder farmer has positive association with maize produc-tivity and increased the proﬁt of the smallholder farmers obtained frommaize production.3.3. Financial servicesThe 2017 After Access survey shows that only 29% have access to for-malﬁnancial services among 10 surveyed countries in SSA ( Gillwald and Mothobi, 2019). Moreover, among surveyed countries, mobilemoney services are merely fruitful in Kenya (85%), Ghana (55%) andTanzania (45%), whereas very low in Nigeria (4%) and South Africa(8%). The low performance of mobile money in countries such asNigeria is largely due to lack a good partnership among mobile phoneservice providers and banks. Despite their uneven adoption and use,mobile money services have had a positive effect on ﬁnancial inclusion in Africa (Gillwald and Mothobi, 2019;Research ICT Africa, 2019). Theﬁnancial service has a crucial role in permitting agricultureto contribute to economic advancement and poverty alleviation(Mcintosh and Mansini, 2018). In particular, agriculture plays the signif-icant role in economic growth, poverty reduction and food security inSSA since the sector generates about 25% of GDP on average in thesub-region (Deutsche Bank Research, 2014). Despite agriculture offer employments for more than of half the population in SSA, the largemass of farmers still not have access to formal ﬁnancial institutions and relinquish access to basic banking services, loans and pensions(Malabo Montpellier Panel, 2019;The World Bank Group, 2020). This in turns, affects farmers' working decisions, such as devoting inseeds and other inputs, choice of crop, timing of harvest and sales aswell as it limits their longer-period decisions on the management andimplementation of production approaches ( Deutsche Bank Research, 2014;Malabo Montpellier Panel, 2019).On the other hand, digitalﬁnancial service (DFS) offers a hopeful op-portunity to address some of these persistent desires ( Martin and Harihareswara, 2016), and facilitates easier access to banking, savingand transaction roles (Malabo Montpellier Panel, 2019). Digitalﬁnancial service is a wide-ranging sort that incorporates Mobile Financial Ser-vices (MFS) and all branchless banking facilities that are empoweredthrough automated channels (Martin and Harihareswara, 2016). In addition to its a role to increasing agricultural productivity, digiti-zation can guarantee timely and safe payments, and enhance savings(The World Bank Group, 2020).Wieser et al. (2019)in rural Northern Uganda shows that mobile money transactions enhanced moneyG. Kudama, M. Dangia, H. Wana et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 5 (2021) 292 –300
295transmissions. Another study investigated the access to ﬁnancial ser- vices through mobile technology on agricultural income in Malawi(Montfaucon, 2020). According to the author, a higher number of mo-bile phones in a household signiﬁcantly and positively affects the prob-ability of the household's access toﬁnancial capitals. Another similar study,Suri and Jack (2016)reveals that M-PESA (mobile money in Swa-hili), helped households to develop the habit of ﬁnancial management and increased their savings particularly for female-headed households(Suri and Jack, 2016).3.4. Social well-being and risk sharingDigital payments are also potential to improve customer well-beingboth directly or indirectly (Karlan et al., 2016). For instance, M-PESA (mobile money in Swahili) improved per capita consumption levelsand lifted 194,000 households out of poverty in Kenya ( Suri and Jack, 2016). In addition, it provided alternative jobs, mostly for women,who engaged into business from agriculture ( Suri and Jack, 2016). In addition to its beneﬁt to lowering transaction costs, increasingavailability of credit and savings DFS is capable to reduce risk for farmers(Martin and Harihareswara, 2016). Likewise, the studyﬁnding in Kenya shows that M-PESA improved households' respond to shocks by bor-rowing or receiving gifts from friends and relatives through strengthen-ing their informal risk-sharing networks ( Jack and Suri, 2014). Consequently, the M-PESA users are more likely to take a larger numberand higher value of remittances from long distances and greater net-works, upon they face unforeseen negative shocks. The study result fur-ther indicates that while M-PESA user households' consumption wasindifferent to negative income shocks, such as illness or drought, non-user households' consumption was reduced by 7% ( Jack and Suri, 2014). Furthermore,Wieser et al. (2019)in rural Northern Uganda shows that mobile money transactions enhanced money transmissions, thenonfarm self-employment rate by two-fold (from 3.4 to 6.4%), and re-duced the portion of households with very low food security from62.9 to 47.2%, in distant areas from a bank service.3.5. Women empowering and inclusiveIn numerous developing countries, agricultural extension servicesare largely delivered in favor of men, with information focused mostlyto male members of a farming household and in arrangements thatare hardly adapted for women (Lecoutere et al., 2019). Moreover, in de- veloping countries, women have been inconclusive to the access anduse of digital information and communication technologies so far(Hilbert, 2011).On the other hand, it is well documented in literature that the use ofdigital solutions has improved smallholder farmers' market access andincome. Beyond these, digital technologies can possibly in ﬂuence other extents of social welfare, such as gender equality and women em-powerment. A study in 12 Latin American and 13 African countries bycontrolling women's unfavorable conditions (such as employment, ed-ucation and income) revealed that women become more active usersof digital tools as compared to men (Hilbert, 2011). Similarly, the exper- imental study conducted by viewing videos on improved maize man-agement practices to both men and women maize-farminghouseholds in eastern Uganda showed that the video-enabled exten-sion increases women involvement in productive decision-making pro-cesses (Lecoutere et al., 2019). The same source, further assured thatvideo-mediated agricultural extension enhances women's knowledgeabout improved maize management practices, role in agriculturaldecision-making, up taking of the recommended practices and inputsuse, increases the quantity of maize supply to the market andproduction-related outcomes on women-managed maize plots(
Lecoutere et al., 2019).The study conducted in Masaka and Luwero districts, central Ugandashow that the use of mobile phone has positive association withhousehold income, women empowerment, food security, and dietaryquality (Sekabira and Qaim, 2017). The same study revealed that thatfemale possessing mobile phones, increased household incomes and so-cial welfare in excess of male mobile phone users ( Sekabira and Qaim, 2017). Thus, provided that women were capacitated to use mobilephones, they would be more beneﬁted than men (Aker and Ksoll, 2016;Sekabira and Qaim, 2017).In addition to its advantage of technology uptake, the new digital fa-cilities can also deliver speciﬁc advice to women engaged in agribusi-nesses and advance their links to markets ( Malabo Montpellier Panel, 2019). For example, enhancing women's access to international mar-kets and links to buyers via mobile breakthroughs in the shea nut buttersector decreased the interferences of middlemen and tend to increasetheir proﬁts by 82% in Ghana (Braun von, 2019) as cited in ( Malabo Montpellier Panel, 2019).3.6. Risks and challenges inﬂuencing of agricultural digitalization in SSADespite digital breakthrough can play a crucial role in supporting ag-ricultural transformation in Africa, the introduction of new technologiesalso involves challenges, limitations and risks, especially for smallholderfarming and women (Malabo Montpellier Panel, 2019). The critics to digital connectivity in the region, suggest that connec-tivity may not beneﬁt all, rather it leads to power and control among dif-ferent types ofﬁrms. Moreover, connectivity might empower strongerﬁrms at the expense of weaker ones ( Foster and Graham, 2017; Murphy et al., 2014). For instance,Foster et al. (2018)show that in Kenya and Rwanda, digital connectivity shifted modes of value chaingovernance, led to control of leadﬁrms and data standards are leadingto new challenges forﬁrms looking to digitally integrate in tea and tour-ism GVC sub sectors. Theirﬁnding further indicates that Digital connec-tivity has mostly led to shrill integration, through which small ﬁrms be able to make little communication and productivity enhancementswithout more considerable advancement with exception to somesmallﬁrms who are able to supply to emerging niche customers, andlocal or regional markets. However, their ﬁndings show nothing about the effect of digital connectivity on tea producers ( Hartmann et al., 2020).Despite affordable internet is a requirement for smallholder farmersto fully harness the opportunities of digitalization in agriculture, theprices for internet use in the region is still the world leading priceswith wide-ranging prices across the region ( Malabo Montpellier Panel, 2019). In addition, in numerous African countries, mobile-data baskets(voice, mobile data andﬁxed broadband) are still beyond reach for abig portion of the population, costing higher than 10% of GNI (Gross Na-tional Income) per capita, in conditions where incomes are already in-adequate (ITU, 2021). Besides, given the superior importance ofsmartphone for accessing the internet and use of digital technologiesand services, affordability and prices of handsets are a major limitationfor smartphone ownership, especially in rural SSA ( Malabo Montpellier Panel, 2019). In several African countries, regressive taxes on digital de-vices and services are one the factors that escalate the cost of communi-cation and undermine the use digital technologies. Moreover, excessiveincreases can lead to counterproductive and generate disincentives forinvestment, but the reduction of direct and indirect taxes from feeswill separate one of the foremost cost ampli ﬁers. Reducing the cost of communication become successful in countries like Namibia tend to in-crease use of digital technologies, economies of scale, and increase taxesderived from proﬁts. Accordingly, it needs the region to review taxationsystem on the sector (Research ICT Africa, 2019). Moreover, the propor- tion of people using the Internet remains low as compared to the otherregion in the world. Whilst the percentage of individuals using the In-ternet in 2019 totaled 28.6% in Africa, it accounts for 51.4% globally(ITU, 2021).Despite its paramount prerequisite for enabling digital technologies,lack of infrastructure is not the vital cause for the relatively smallG. Kudama, M. Dangia, H. Wana et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 5 (2021) 292 –300
296numbers of people using the Internet in SSA ( GSMA, 2020b;ITU, 2021). For instance, at the end of 2019, about 49% of people across Sub-SaharanAfrica were connected to the mobile Internet, but not using the Internet.Unaffordability (high cost of smartphones, relative to average incomelevels), and low digital skills are the key barriers to mobile internetadoption in the region (GSMA, 2020b;ITU, 2021). Moreover, After Ac- cess Survey, carried out in 10 SSA countries –Ghana, Kenya, Lesotho, Mozambique, Nigeria, Rwanda, Senegal, South Africa, Tanzania andUganda indicates that the key barriers to Internet use for those whodo not use the Internet are the lack of Internet-enabled devices (23%)and lack of digital literacy (16%) (Gillwald and Mothobi, 2019). The same study result further indicates that the main barriers to Internetuse for those who use the Internet is the cost of data (36%) ( Gillwald and Mothobi, 2019).Likewise, many of digital agriculture solutions are in face of chal-lenges to scale. In sub-Saharan Africa alone, in excess of 400 digital ag-riculture solutions are in use, but numerous of them struggle to scaleand fail to advance the lives of farmers and other end users. Most plat-forms have below 30% active users and merely 5% of them have morethan 80% of user farmers and achieved scale of more than one millionfarmers. (Goedde et al., 2021).Digital literateness also remains low in SSA ( Kim et al., 2020). A re- view research conducted byAnnosi et al. (2020)on digitalization and agri-food sector found that the use of information and communicationtechnologies is reliant on the literateness of the people. Thus, skills forhandling, browsing, and evaluating data as well as digital know howare supreme (Baumüller and Addom, 2020). Having alone digital devise and traditional literacy (able to read or write), is not enough to use dig-ital breakthroughs. Information and data literateness are crucial for dig-ital technology users like smallholder farmers, researchers, traders,extension agents, and policymakers ( Baumüller and Addom, 2020). In contrast, the size of uneducated people who possess digital devisescomprise considerable share in several African countries ( Gillwald and Mothobi, 2019). For example,Gillwald and Mothobi (2019)in their sur- vey found that merely around 30% of smartphone handlers replying tothe survey in Ghana and Nigeria had ever deployed an application ontheir phone. Thisﬁgure largely cut with an increasing reliance on agri-culture as a means of livelihood (Baumüller and Addom, 2020). Despite digital literacy and skills are desirable for the scaling up andthe use digital solutions in agriculture, digital literacy still a major block-ade in the continent (Trendov et al., 2019;Baumüller and Addom, 2020). For example, the study byFoster et al. (2018)show that digital skill incapacities, and lack ofﬁnance is the main exclusionary digital bar-riers for smallﬁrms in tea and tourism GVC sub sectors. Moreover,farmers throughout Africa are mainly low-income earner and olderthat often less technologically skillful than the younger and urban pop-ulation (Malabo Montpellier Panel, 2019). Consequently, the low digital skill and knowledge status of rural community, continue to hinder theadoption of digital solutions for agriculture ( Gillwald and Mothobi, 2019;Kim et al., 2020).The digital divide, unevenly distribution of digital technologies be-tween rural and urban areas, gender, and youth population still a com-mon problem in transforming agriculture in SSA ( World Bank, 2016
; Trendov et al., 2019;Tsan et al., 2019). It is mainly affected by restrictedor no access to electricity, weak networks, meagre basic connectivityand low digital knowledge, which cause considerable differences intelephone and internet penetration ( Malabo Montpellier Panel, 2019). The percentage of individuals using the Internet and digital adoptionrate greatly varies across the SSA region. For example, the adoptionindex and share of individuals using internet is large between SSA forwhich consistent data are existing (Figs. 1 and 2). In 2016, the Digital adoption index is as high as 0.64 in South Africa, and as low as 0.27 inEthiopia. The percentage of individuals using internet is 56.17% and15.37%, respectively, in the same two countries. The disparities aremuch greater than those between women and men, between the oldand the youth or among rural and urban areas. This severely in turns,limits access to information on farm-related activities, nutrition andhealth,ﬁnancial support, market access, bargaining power, decision-making power as well as thickening their dependency of women inthe sub-region (Malabo Montpellier Panel, 2019). In contrast to the developed economies, the digital gender gap trendin Africa has been increasing over time. While the Internet user gendergap has increased from 20.7 to 33% in between 2013 and 2019 in Africa,it has declined from 9.4 to 5.3% for the same period in Europe ( ITU, 2019). On the other hand, the gender inequality is also high in mobilephone use with wide range among the countries ( Gillwald and Mothobi, 2019). Whilst disparity in mobile phone use between menand women is as low as−5% in South Africa, it is as high as 42% inRwanda (Fig. 3). Moreover, on average 14% women less probable topossess a mobile phone than men, and 25% less likely to have internetaccess than men in SSA (Gillwald and Mothobi, 2019). Like other digital technologies, women smallholder farmers areunderrepresented among digital agricultural solution users in SSA.While share of women smallholder farmers in SSA is estimated to40–50%, only 25% of registered users of digital agricultural solutionsare women (Tsan et al., 2019;Thompson and Gyatso, 2020). The D4Ag solution gender divide is also large between 5 SSA for which reliabledata are available (Fig. 4). Whilst gender disparity in using D4Ag solu-tion is highest with 90% in Senegal, relatively the lowest gap hasbeen recorded, 70% in Ghana (Tsan et al., 2019). Numerous empirical evidences suggest that digital gender dispar-ities associate with years of education and income ( Gillwald and Mothobi, 2019). Similarly,Deen-Swarray et al. (2013)found that a pos- itive and signiﬁcant correlation between use of the Internet and level ofeducation and income (more signiﬁcantly, use of the Internet and yearsof education and income in Africa. By the same token, Deen-Swarray
0.270.350.420.430.450.450.64
0.000.100.200.300.400.500.600.70
Ethiopia Senegal Nigeria Rwanda Kenya Ghana South Africa
Fig. 1.Digital Adoption Index in 2016.Source:World Bank (2016).
15.3716.6020.0025.6625.6734.6756.17
0.0010.0020.0030.0040.0050.0060.00
Ethiopia Kenya Rwanda Senegal Nigeria Ghana South AfricaPercentage of internet users
Countries
Fig. 2.Percentage of individuals using internet in 2016.Source:World Bank (2016).G. Kudama, M. Dangia, H. Wana et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 5 (2021) 292 –300
297et al. (2012)found that education and income were the foremost deter-minants of gender inequalities in ICT access and use, rather than genderper se. Likewise, the low level of women's mobile phone ownership inthe region might be determined by low level of women in terms of in-come and education when compared to men ( Gillwald, 2017;Gillwald and Mothobi, 2019).Similarly, the urban–rural gap in mobile use in Africa increased from34% in 2007 to 61% in 2017 (Gillwald and Mothobi, 2019). The substan- tial urban–rural divide is mainly due to lack of coverage in the ruralareas, since mobile operators consider rural areas unpro ﬁtable (Gillwald and Mothobi, 2019). There is also evidence that the digital di-vide continuously tracks historical social inequalities, in such a way thatit further broadening the difference among the poor and the rich. Digitalexclusion is mainly a matter of poverty, with those at the bottom of thepyramid (women and the poor) being the most disregarded ( Research ICT Africa, 2019). Consequently, the effect digital divide is triple that ofits gender inequality for poor women farm households residing inrural areas and severely affects their digital uptake in agriculture.On the other hand, the D4Ag solutions largely succeed in attractingyouth but the average age of farmers in Africa exceeds 50 ( Tsan et al., 2019). For example, in 2018, the share of youth (under 35 age) userswas 65% (Tsan et al., 2019). The big portion of youth show that difﬁcult of the solutions for old-aged group and a vital age divide that must beoverwhelmed so as to involve the important share of farmers fromolder groups.In addition, the expansion of D4Ag solutions with digital adoptionindex and services don't coincide in most countries of SSA. While Kenyahas lower percentage of individuals internet user when compared coun-tries like South Africa, the country has succeeded in D4Ag among therest Sub-Sahara African countries for which real data existing ( Figs. 2 and 3). Moreover, the country has extra D4Ag enterprises and usersthan any other SSA (Tsan et al., 2019). The success behind in Kenya might be linked with better collaboration between D4Ag stakeholdersand encouraging policy support currently observed in the country.Even Ethiopia, which has the lowest value for digital adoption index(0.27) and percentage of individuals using internet (15.37%) has excessnumber of D4Ag solution users when compared to country like, Senegal,which has higher share of internet users (26.6%) with digital adoptionindex value of 0.35 (Figs. 1, 2 and 5). The number of the solution usersin Ethiopia exceeds that of Senegal by more than 12 folds ( Fig. 5). There- fore, such big disparity among the two countries is not due to thedifference in digital facilities, rather due to the policy strategy and gov-ernment policy stand on D4Ag expansion.In Ethiopia, a state-led development model for D4Ag has shownrapid scaling, despite digital literacy among farmers is nominal and fa-cilities for digital services (such as access to the internet) is lower inthe country (Tsan et al., 2019). To address these challenges the countryhas developed effective ways to work around the limitations via heavilyinvesting on 8028 Farmer Hotline deployment and agents who can ad-dress smallholder farmers' queries. The platform provides free advisoryservices via interactive voice response (IVR)/short message service(SMS) for about 5 million farmers (Fig. 5). The service offers a much wider reach than internet-based solutions and odd from countries likeSenegal, where the government policy fails to fully support D4Ag(Tsan et al., 2019).Finally, there exists numerous encounters to accelerating digitiza-tion of agribusiness payments to farmers. These involves, restricted con-nectivity, poor digital literacy, and a weak regulatory ecosystem fordigital payments, limited availability of cash-in, and cash-out pointsand opportunities to use e-money (The World Bank Group, 2020).4. Conclusions and policy implicationsIn Africa, the growing demand of food and nutrition security strive to
increase more than double the current status of agricultural productionover the next 30 years. The problem will be more worsen SSA, that has al-ready been facing the highest food insecurity than any other regions. Therecent revolution of digital agriculture, therefore, will be the good news toSSA that help address their key challenges currently facing the region. Nu-merous studies have revealed that a few of successful digital services havechanged the lives of several smallholder farmers in SSA.By harnessing disruptive agricultural technology innovations viadigital solutions, smallholder farmers in SSA have recognized the advan-tages to be gained, with the top expected bene ﬁts including reduce their
7072808390
0102030405060708090100
Ghana Kenya Nigeria Ethiopia SenegalPercentage of Gender disparity
Countries
Fig. 4.Gender gap in D4Ag solutions use data, 2018.Source: Based onTsan et al. (2019).
400,00016000003500000500000075000009000000
01,000,0002,000,0003,000,0004,000,0005,000,0006,000,0007,000,0008,000,0009,000,00010,000,000
Senegal Ghana Rwanda Ethiopia Nigeria KenyaNumber of users
Countries
Fig. 5.D4Ag solutions by number users in 2018.Source:Tsan et al. (2019).
-5.0%9%10%16%18%42%
-10.0%0.0%10.0%20.0%30.0%40.0%50.0%SouthAfricaSenegal Kenya Ghana Nigeria RwandaPercentage geder disparity
Countries
Fig. 3.Gender disparity in mobile phone use.Source: RIA After Access Survey data, 2017.G. Kudama, M. Dangia, H. Wana et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 5 (2021) 292 –300
298search cost; guaranteed real timely access to safe ﬁnancial transactions, increased options to navigate the variety of domestic and internationalchain alternatives; increased multifaceted knowledge and adoption ofnew sustainable practices; accessed to individualized extension servicesat a much lesser expense, increased productivity and incomes, en-hanced self-employment rate, improved per capita consumption levelsand, women empowerment, food security and dietary quality; faster ac-cess to price, market, and farming information; reduced the risk of in-come shocks and poverty incidence and increased adaptability tosituational changes.Despite its clear beneﬁts of digital breakthrough in supporting agri-cultural transformation there is also evidence that these innovationsoften fail to adopt and attain broader acceptance. Primarily, the digitaltechnology scale-up remains low, and most of digital agricultural solu-tions have succeeded below 30% and struggle to scale in the region. Inspite of the fact that low status of digital infrastructure in SSA, is notthe vital cause for the relatively small numbers of people using digitalsolutions. For instance, at the end of 2019, about 49% of people acrossSub-Saharan Africa were connected to the mobile Internet, but notusing the Internet. The failure of policy strategy to create simpleworkarounds and universal-access mechanisms -that can circumventdigital barriers to D4Ag scale-up are only two of many constraintsfarmers face. For example, Ethiopia, which has lowest access to the in-ternet and nominal digital literacy among farmers relatively withother SSA, has addressed these challenges via heavily investing on8028 Farmer Hotline deployment and agents who can address small-holder farmers' queries. The service offers a much wider reach thaninternet-based solutions, has shown rapid scaling in D4Ag, and oddfrom countries like Senegal, where the government policy fails to fullysupport D4Ag.Others include unaffordability for digital enabling tools and dataprices. For most SSA, price for mobile-data baskets and cost ofsmartphones are still beyond reach for a big portion of the population,in conditions where incomes are already inadequate. In severalAfrican countries, regressive taxes on digital devices and services areone the factors that escalate the cost of communication and underminethe use digital technologies. When the challenges of unaffordability sumup with higher digital illiterateness conditions of the region, the prob-lems become more sever for poor smallholder farmers. Consequently,they jointly together lead to low digital scale up among smallholderfarmers in agriculture. Accordingly, it needs the region to review taxa-tion system on the sector.The Digital divide also seems to intensifying existing inequalities inSSA. Unlike, developed economies, the digital gender gap in region hasbeen persistently increasing over time. The disparities are much greaterthan those between women and men, between the old and the youth oramong rural and urban areas, between poor and rich.Like other digital technologies, women and old smallholder farmersare underrepresented among digital agricultural solution users in SSA.Merely a fourth of registered users of digital agricultural solutionswere women among 40–50% women smallholder farmers in 2018.This is mainly due to the low level of their education and income status.Digital exclusion is mainly a matter of poverty, with those at the bottomof the pyramid (women and the poor) being the most disregarded.Moreover, Africa's urban–rural disparity is triple that of its gender in-equality. On the other hand, the D4Ag solutions largely succeed inattracting youth regardless of old-aged farmers in the region. For exam-ple, in 2018, the share of youth (under 35 age) users was 65%. The bigportion of youth show that difﬁcult of the solutions for old-aged group.Finally, there exists numerous encounters to accelerating digitiza-tion of agribusiness payments to farmers. These involves, restricted con-nectivity, poor digital literacy, and a weak regulatory ecosystem fordigital payments, limited availability of cash-in, and cash-out pointsand opportunities to use e-money. Therefore, a rapid growth of digitiza-tion of agricultural payments would call for establishment of founda-tional drivers and the ecosystem for rural DFS.Accordingly, one strategy to realize their potential the SSA countriesneed to work to digitize their own systems or replicate and adopt suc-cessful interventions that match with their target populations' digitalskill and infrastructure to fully harness the opportunities of digitaliza-tion in agriculture. Moreover, to address the problem of digital divide,balancing regulatory and delivery approaches will be essential to permitdifferent categories of services to be offered by different kinds of opera-tors. Likewise, to ease and enhance the use of digital agricultural solu-tion and service, it is essential to ensure affordable access to digitaltools for agriculture along with fair price for mobile-data baskets partic-ularly for the poor and women smallholder farmers. These may be real-ized via reducing data costs, and tax cuts or totally removing customsduty and exoneration of VAT on digital agriculture enabling tools. Sim-ilarly, countrywide allocated range not in use in remote areas must bemade accessible via low-cost or license-exempt spectrum for communi-ties, non-proﬁt providers or micro-networks.To tackle the problem of digital skills, capacity building training onthe use digital solutions should be offered persistently to the target pop-ulation by segmenting them via their gender, age, and education.Declaration of Competing InterestNone.AcknowledgementsNone.References
Abell, T., Ambrosius, M., van den Berg, J., van den Broek, T., van Hooff, H., Tolsma, A.M.,2019.Accelerating CGIAR’S Digital Transformation. Aker, J., 2011. Dial“A”for agriculture: using ICTs for agricultural extension in developingcountries. Agric. Econ. 42 (6), 631 –647.https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1574-0862.2011. 00545.Aker, J.C., Ksoll, C., 2016.Can mobile phones improve agricultural outcomes? Evidencefrom a randomized experiment in Niger. Food Policy 60, 44 –51. Aker, Jenny C., Mbiti, I.M., 2010. Mobile phones and economic development in Africa.J. Econ. Perspect. 24 (3), 207 –232.https://doi.org/10.1257/jep.24.3.207 . Annosi, M.C., Brunetta, F., Capo, F., Heideveld, L., 2020. Digitalization in the Agri-foodindustry: the relationship between technology and sustainable development.Manag. Decis. 58 (8), 1737 –1757.https://doi.org/10.1108/MD-09-2019-1328 . Arouna, A., Michler, J.D., Yergo, W.G., Saito, K., 2020. One size ﬁts all? Experimental evi- dence on the digital delivery of personalized extension advice in Nigeria. Am.J. Agric. Econ. 103 (2), 596 –619.https://doi.org/10.1111/ajae.12151 . Asfaw, S., Shiferaw, B., Simtowe, F., Lipper, L., 2012. Impact of modern agricultural tech- nologies on smallholder welfare: evidence from Tanzania and Ethiopia. Food Policy37, 283–295.Baumüller, H., Addom, B.K., 2020. The enabling environments for the digitalization ofAfrican agriculture. In: Resnick, D., Diao, X., Tadesse, G. (Eds.), Sustaining Africa ’s Agrifood System Transformation: The Role of Public Policies. International Food Pol-icy Research Institute (IFPRI), pp. 159 –173.https://doi.org/10.2499/9780896293946 . Bjornlund, Vibeke, Bjornlund, Henning, Van Rooyen, Andre F, 2020. Why agricultural pro-duction in sub-Saharan Africa remains low compared to the rest of the world –ah i s - torical perspective. International Journal of Water Resources Development 36 (sup1),S20–S53.https://doi.org/10.1080/07900627.2020.1739512 S1, In this issue. Brown, B., Nuberg, I., Llewellyn, R., 2017. Stepwise frameworks for understanding the utilisation of conservation agriculture in Africa. Agric. Syst. 153, 11 –22. Davis, K., 2008. Extension in sub-Saharan Africa: overview and assessment of past andcurrent models and future prospects. J. Int. Agric. Ext. Educ. 15 (3), 15 –28.https:// doi.org/10.5191/jiaee.2008.15302 . Davis, K., Sulaiman, R., 2014. The new extensionist: roles and capacities to strengthenextension and advisory services. J. Int. Agric. Ext. Educ. 21 (3), 341 –355. Deen-Swarray, M., Gillwald, A., Morrell, A., Khan, S., 2012. Lifting the Veil on ICTGender Indicators in Africa (No. 13). www.researchictafrica.net/publications/E vidence_for_ICT_Policy_Action/Policy_Paper_13_-_Lifting_the_veil_on_gender_ICT_indicators_in_Africa.pdf. Deen-Swarray, M., Moyo, M., Stork, C., 2013. ICT access and usage among informal busi- nesses in Africa. Info J. 15 (5), 52 –68. Deichmann, U., Goyal, A., Mishra, D., 2016. Will digital technologies transform agriculture in developing countries ? Agric. Econ. 47, 21 –
3 3( d o i : D 4 0 ,I 3 1 ,O 1 3 ,O 3 3 ) . Deutsche Bank Research, 2014. Agricultural Value Chains in Sub-Saharan Africa. Donner, J., Escobari, M., 2010. A review of evidence on mobile use by micro and small en-terprises in developing countries. J. Int. Dev. 22 (5), 641 –658.https://doi.org/10. 1002/jid.v22:5.G. Kudama, M. Dangia, H. Wana et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 5 (2021) 292 –300
299Esselaar, S., Stork, C., Ndiwalana, A., Deen-Swarray, M., 2007. ICT usage and its impact onproﬁtability of SMEs in 13 African countries. Inf. Technol. Int. Dev. 4 (1), 87 –100. https://doi.org/10.1162/itid.2007.4.issue-1 . Foster, C., Graham, M., 2017. Reconsidering the role of the digital in global production net-works. GlobalNetworks 17 (1), 66 –88.https://doi.org/10.1111/glob.12142 . Foster, C.G., Heeks, R.B., 2013. Conceptualising inclusive innovation: modifying systems ofinnovation frameworks to understand diffusion of new technology to low-incomeconsumers. Eur. J. Dev. Res. 25 (3), 333 –355.https://doi.org/10.1057/ejdr.2013.7 . Foster, Christopher, Graham, M., Mann, L., Waema, T., Mann, L., 2018. Digital control invalue chains: challenges of connectivity for east African ﬁrms. Econ. Geogr. 94 (1), 68–86.https://doi.org/10.1080/00130095.2017.1350104 . Gillwald, A., 2017.Beyond Access: Addressing Digital Inequality in Africa (48). Gillwald, A., Mothobi, O., 2019. After Access 2018: A Demand-Side View of Mobile Inter-net from 10 African Countries. https://researchictafrica.net/2019_after-access_africa- comparative-report/.Goedde, L., McCullough, R., Ooko-Ombaka, A., Pais, G., 2021. How Digital Tools Can Help Transform African Agri-Food Systems (Issue January, pp. 1–9). McKinsey & Company. GSMA, 2020a.Digital Agriculture Maps 2020 State of the Sector in Low and Middle-Income Countries.GSMA, 2020b. The Mobile Economy Sub-Saharan Africa 2020 Nearly.www.gsma.com. Hartmann, G., Nduru, G., Dannenberg, P., 2020. Digital connectivity at the upstream endo fv a l u ec h a i n s :ad y n a m i cp e r s p e c t i v eo ns m a r t p h o n ea d o p t i o na m o n g s th o r t i -cultural smallholders in Kenya. Compet. Chang., 1 –23.https://doi.org/10.1177/ 1024529420914483.Hilbert, M., 2011. Digital gender divide or technologically empowered women in develop-ing countries ? A typical case of lies, damned lies, and statistics. Women ’s Stud. Int. Forum 34 (6), 479–489.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wsif.2011.07.001 . ITU, 2019. Measuring Digital Development Facts and Figures. https://SAP id 43255. ITU, 2021. Digital Trends in Africa 2021. ITU (International Telecommunication Union).https://creativecommons.org/%0Alicenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/igo/ . Jack, William, Suri, Tavneet, 2014. Risk Sharing and Transactions Costs: Evidence from Kenya’s Mobile Money Revolution. American Economic Review 104, 183 –223 1. Karlan, D., Kendall, J., Mann, R., Pande, R., Suri, T., Zinman, J., 2016. Research and Impacts of Digital Financial Services (No. 22633).Kim, J., Shah, P., Gaskell, J.C., Prasann, A., Luthra, A., 2020. Scaling Up Disruptive Agricul-tural Technologies in Africa. 1818. International Bank for Reconstruction and Devel-opment / The World Bank.https://doi.org/10.1596/978-1-4648-1522-5 . Lecoutere, E., Spielman, D.J., Van Campenhout, B., 2019. Empowering women with digital extension in Uganda: Effects of information and role models. 6th African Conferenceof Agricultural Economists, pp. 1 –21. Malabo Montpellier Panel, 2019. Byte by Byte: Policy Innovation for Transforming Africa ’s Food System with Digital Technologies. https://doi.org/10.2499/9780896296848
. Martin, C., Harihareswara, N., 2016. Guide to the Use of Digital Financial Services in Agri- culture. United States Agency for International Development (USAID).Mcintosh, C., Mansini, C.S., 2018. The Use of Financial Technology in the Agriculture Sector (No.872).https://www.adb.org/publications/use- ﬁnancial-technology-agriculture-sector . Montfaucon, A.F., 2020. Increasing agricultural income and access to ﬁnancial services through mobile technology in Africa: Evidence from Malawi. In: Osabuohien, E.S.(Ed.), The Palgrave Handbook of Agricultural and Rural Development in Africa. Pal-grave Macmillan, pp. 247 –262.https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-41513-6_12 . Murphy, J., Carmody, P., Surborg, B., 2014. Industrial transformation or business as usual?Information and communication technologies and Africa ’s place in the global infor- mation economy. Rev. Afr. Polit. Econ. 41 (140), 264 –283.https://doi.org/10.1080/ 03056244.2013.873024.Muyiramye, D., Addom, B.K., 2020. COVID-19 and Agriculture in Africa: Implications for Digitalisation (Issue August).Ochieng, S.O., Okello, J.J., Otieno, D.J., 2013. Impact of information and communication technology-based market information services on smallholder farm input use andproductivity.The Case of Kenya(4th International Conference of the African Associa- tion of Agricultural Economists (ICAAAE)).Ortiz-crespo, B., Steinke, J., Quirós, C.F., Van De Gevel, J., Daudi, H., Mgimiloko, M.G., VanEtten, J., 2020. User-centred design of a digital advisory service: enhancing public ag-ricultural extension for sustainable intensi ﬁcation in Tanzania. Int. J. Agric. Sustain. 1–17.https://doi.org/10.1080/14735903.2020.1720474 . Pretty, J., Bharucha, Z.P., 2014. Sustainable intensiﬁcation in agricultural systems. Ann. Bot. 114 (8), 1571–1596.Quandt, A., Salerno, J.D., Neff, J.C., Baird, T.D., Herrick, J.E., McCabe, J.T., Xu, E., Hartter, J.,2020. Mobile phone use is associated with higher smallholder agricultural productiv-ity in Tanzania, East Africa. PLoS One 15 (8), 1 –16.https://doi.org/10.1371/journal. pone.0237337.Research ICT Africa, 2019.Understanding Digital Access and Use in the Global South.Ruben, R., 2017.Impact assessment of commodity standards: towards inclusive valuechains. Enterp. Dev. Microﬁnance 28, 82–97. Sekabira, H., Qaim, M., 2017. Can mobile phones improve gender equality and nutrition?Panel data evidence from farm households in Uganda. Food Policy 73, 95 –103. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodpoI.2017.10.004 . Sennuga, S.O., Conway, J.S., Sennuga, M.A., 2020. Technology adoption for improving ag- ricultural productivity in sub-Saharan Africa. Int. J. Agric. Ext. Rural Dev. Stud. 7 (1),27–43.Silvestri, S., Richard, M., Edward, B., Dharmesh, G., 2020. Going digital in agriculture: howradio and SMS can scale-up smallholder participation in legume based sustainableagricultural intensiﬁcation practices and technologies in Tanzania. Int. J. Agric.Sustain. 0 (0), 1–12.https://doi.org/10.1080/14735903.2020.1750796 . Suri, T., Jack, W., 2016. The long-run poverty and gender impacts of mobile money.Science354(6317).https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aah5309 1288 LP–1292. Tamene, L., Abera, W., Erkossa, T., 2021. Digital Solutions to Transform Agriculture: Lessons and Experiences in Ethiopia.The World Bank Group, 2020. Digitization of Agribusiness Payments in Africa. Thompson, T., Gyatso, T., 2020. Technology Adoption for Improving Agricultural Produc-tivity in Sub-Saharan Afric.www.globalagriculturalproductivity.org . Tittonell, P., Giller, K.E., 2013.When yield gaps are poverty traps: the paradigm of ecolog-ical intensifcation in African smallholder agriculture. Field Crop Res. 143, 76 –90. Trendov, N.M., Varas, S., Zeng, M., 2019. Digital Technologies in Agriculture and Rural Areas - Brieﬁng Paper.Tsan, M., Totapally, S., Hailu, M., Addom, B.K., 2019. The Digitalisation of African Agricul- ture Report.UN DESA, 2018.United Nation e-Government Survey 2018.UNIDO, 2011.Agribusiness for Africa’s Prosperity. United Nations Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO).Wieser, C., Bruhn, M., Kinzinger, J., Ruckteschler, C., Heitmann, S., 2019. The Impact of Mo- bile Money on Poor Rural Households Experimental Evidence from Uganda (No.8913; Issue June).World Bank, 2013.Growing Africa: Unlocking the Potential of Agribusiness.World Bank, 2016.World Development Report 2016. Digital Dividends.G. Kudama, M. Dangia, H. Wana et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 5 (2021) 292 –300
300