In this paper we summarize some observations about the advantages of using hexag- onal grids in raster graphics. We initiate a study of honeycomb graphics, whose 2D version is based on a hexagonal grid, while in its 3D counterpart the voxels are hexagonal prisms. We design an analytical honeycomb geometry of linear objects, which parallels similar developments already known in classical raster graphics [6]. We also demonstrate certain advantages of honeycomb graphics, in particular that it provides a better tunnel-free approximation to continuous objects.

Square and cubic models in R2 and R3 are widely used in image processing and computer graphics. The raster computer graphics is modeled upon a square grid, where the square tiles are usually called pixels. Square grids are physically implemented in the computer screen. In dimension three, the graphical models are based on cubic grids, in which the cubes are called voxels. Comparatively less attention has been paid to hexagonal grids and graph- ical models based on them. In the present note we attempt to show that this is, to a certain extent, undeserved. What is more, we will show that graphical models using hexagonal grid tiles (called 2-hexels) have some advantages over the traditional ones. Similar conclusions hold for the 3D space, where instead of cubes, one can use voxels, which are hexagonal prisms (called 3-hexels). Graphical models based upon hexels will be called honeycomb models. The basic aim of this work is to provide motivation and theoretical grounds for developing honeycomb graphics. Note that the proposed models are realistic and admit an easy hardware implementation. In fact, hexagonal rasters are

A source for such sort of troubles is the topology of the square grid. Still in dimension 2, there are three possibilities for connectivity of two pixels, and thus for the tunnel structure of a set of two pixels. In dimension 3, the corresponding number of cases is four (0, 1, 2-tunnel, and tunnel-freedom). This variety of possibilities may cause certain theoretical difficulties when con- structing k-tunnel-free discretizations of more complex objects. In Sections 3 and 4 we will show how one can overcome this problem by using honeycomb models. Before this, we recall some basic concepts of the analytical discrete geometry.

A novel approach in raster graphics is the one based on analytical discrete geometry [6]. The main objective here is to obtain simple analytical definitions of the basic Euclidean primitives, such as lines and line segments, triangles, circles, planes, spheres, etc., and, on this basis, to create tools for efficient modeling of more sophisticated objects composed by these primitives. Next, we recall some basic definitions.

The coordinate axes Ob1 and Ob2 divide the plane into four quadrants, denoted Quad I, Quad II, Quad III, and Quad IV . The origin O is common for Quad II and Quad IV . The positive part of Ob1 and the negative part of Ob2 belong to Quad IV , while the positive part of Ob2 and the negative part of Ob1 belong to Quad II. With respect to the coordinate system Ob1b2, one can build an analog of the Cartesian analytical geometry.

In the discrete coordinate plane Oe1e2 one can consider the four quadrants QuadI, QuadII, QuadIII, and QuadIV , determined by the coordinate axes. By construction, the centers of the 3-hexels form a lattice H in R3. Note that every two neighboring 3-hexels are 2-adjacent. No 0- or 1-tunnels are

We conclude the discussion on 3D honeycomb models with one more remark. In Model I, every 3-hexel h of the 3D discrete space has fourteen 2-neighbors: one for the upper hexagonal face, one for the lower hexagonal face, and two for each one of the six side rectangular faces. In Model II, the structure of a 3-hexel neighborhood is completely different: there are four neighbors for every one of the two hexagonal faces and one for each of the six rectangular faces. Nevertheless, the overall number of neighboring 3-hexels is the same as in Model I, i.e., fourteen. It is not hard to show that the two neighborhood structures relative to Model I and Model II, respectively, are the only ones possible, under the condition that the tiling is uniform and any two adjacent tiles are 2-adjacent.

We have proposed honeycomb models for raster graphics based on a hexago- nal grid (resp. hexagonal prism tilings). We have shown how one can develop analytical discrete geometry within these models. In particular, we have de- fined lines (in the 2D space) and planes (in the 3D space). We have observed that the honeycomb models ensure discretizations, which are superior to the classical ones.

