a lack of trust due to no proper availability of documentation. Addi- tionally, the sector hires representatives who could not be deemed reli- able, wasting time and resources. Thus, making the loan-granting pro- cess time-consuming and untraceable. Blockchain technology has been taken as an approach to solving this problem. In addition to cryptocur- rencies, Blockchain is successfully employed in the financial, identity, supply chain, certification, etc. Traditional database systems cannot ac- curately deal with problems due to trust and security vulnerabilities. Ac- cording to research by Beck et al. [1], Blockchain is a trust-free system that also assures privacy and security. Therefore, a microfinance appli- cation framework (Micro chain) is suggested in this study. The frame- work uses blockchain technology to ensure trust, transparency, privacy, and security, reducing fraudulent activities and increasing productivity in the microfinance industry.

in chapter 2. It explains the concepts of Blockchain, Smart contracts, KYC, and Identities in Blockchain in detail. Further, it is followed by chapter 3, which explains the proposed design of the paper. Chapter 4 illustrates the implementation of the proposed design. The experiments and results are demonstrated in chapter 5. The conclusion of the article is described in chapter 6.

The proposed lending model eliminates the middle parties like banks in the loan management process. It decreases the time taken to a great extent. Using Blockchain will ensure that no one will default on their transaction. Lenders can gain more interest rates for their invested money than banks. Borrowers can gain low-interest rates for the money they borrow compared with banks.

In 1982 David Chum put forward a protocol similar to Blockchain. Stuart Haber and W. Scott Stornetta, two mathematicians in 1991, wanted to implement a system of non-tamperable document times- tamps, which provided further work for the chain. Merkle trees were integrated into the design by Haber, Stornetta and Dave Bayer in 1992. In 2008 Satoshi Nakamoto released a white paper describing the first decentralised Blockchain. It was later implemented in the same year.

exist for how smart contract programmes are created, distributed, man- aged, and updated. They can be kept as a part of a blockchain or other distributed ledger technology and used in various payment systems and digital exchanges, including those that accept Ethereum and other cryp- tocurrencies. Despite their name, smart contracts are not legally bind- ing agreements. Their primary responsibility is to carry out business logic programmatically, coded into them to perform particular tasks, processes, or transactions in response to a specific set of criteria. Legal action must be taken to link its execution to legally binding agreements between parties.

The main objective of the lending model is to establish a secure peer- to-peer connection between the money lender and borrower and to store the transactional data in the most secure storage platform. The lending model consists of two participants, one is Money Lender, and the other is Money Borrower. There will be a peer-to-peer connection developed between the lender and the borrower. Our lending model believes that anyone should be able to lend money to others or borrow money from others safely and securely. The transactions in this model are stored in a blockchain so that no record is manipulated or completely wiped out. Since Blockchain is said to be one of the most secure ways of storing information, our model uses Blockchain to keep the transactions.

In the present-day flow for document verification used for KYC veri- fication, many involved parties hold your documents, which has a high risk of misusing them. There are high chances of any party with com- promised ethics entering into this KYC network, getting your documents and misusing them. In other cases, there is also a high chance that any party with compromised security entering into this network of KYC can get their databases hacked, which can lead to a data breach.

This can lead to successful verification of the person by the company, but when there is some malpractice from the user side, there will be a wrong person whom the company will be getting to. In other cases, the user can disagree that he has made that verification and some other user has given their KYC ID. This leads to the failure of integrity. To overcome this drawback, we have come up with an improved model. So, we added an extra verification level from the company side to verify if the citizen linked to the respective KYC ID agrees to the verification.

ciples. Beyond cryptocurrencies, blockchain technology has proven its disruptive potential and is finding uses across industries. There are nu- merous use cases for Blockchain and smart contracts in the financial sec- tor. Blockchain-based transactions have attracted the attention of sev- eral solution providers due to their promising characteristics of low cost, high speed, transparency, and security, which have prompted them to develop Blockchain-based payment solutions.

