and is also less toxic, inexpensive and therefore safer to use than the Na2Se or H2Se [18]. Na2SeSO3 was prepared via microwave-enhanced method. A microwave-enhanced method, as opposed to conventional heating, has been proven to be an excellent technique for preparation of nanoparticles [18].A few of the advantages of microwave-enhanced reactions include: simple to control the properties of the products, high yields of products, easy to control the temperature and pressure profile, the products have high purity levels, short reaction time, and environmental friendliness (e.g., improved safety, repro- ducibility, and selective heating, energy savings, etc.) [18]. A low- temperature microemulsion [19,20] environment was introduced to protect the prepared Ag2Se nanoparticles from aggregation and to direct them into a relatively uniform size. The low tem- perature reaction conditions also helped the formation of nearly monodisperse Ag2Se nanoparticles by slowing the growth speed and decreasing the surface atom activity.

The synthesis of Ag2Se nanoparticles was done in three steps. First step, NaOH (0.12 g) and oleic acid (2 mL) were dissolved in the mixture of deionized water (15 mL), C2H5OH (15 mL), and n-hexane (1.5 mL) to form a transparent microemulsion. Second, AgNO3 (0.23 g) dissolved in deionized water (5 mL) was added to the solution (transparent microemulsion) under vigorous stir-

After the reaction, n-hexane (20 mL) was added to destroy the microemulsion and extract the oleic acid-coated Ag2Se nanoparticles into the oil phase, which was centrifuged to give Ag2Se nanoparticles by adding C2H5OH. Then, the samples were washed more than three times by dissolving n-hexane coupled with precipitation from ethanol to remove oleic acid residues on the particle surface. Finally, the as prepared Ag2Se nanoparticles were dispersed in n-hexane for storage. The fol- lowing chemical reaction describes the formation of Ag2Se nanoparticles with simple precipitation reactions.

In general, capping ligands could prevent the aggregation of small crystals and influence the morphology of the as- prepared nanoparticles. The dynamics of the surface ligands attached and detached could be varied by controlling the tem- perature and the nature of the ligand. Thus, the reaction temperature could be used to control the growth of nanocrystals.

