served at finer resolution, the residential area is mostly made of individual houses, roads and plants. With the development of new remote sensing systems, very-high spatial resolution images provide a set of continuous samples of the earth surface from local, to regional scales. The spatial resolution of various satellite sensors ranges from 0.5 to 25,000 m now. Further- more, high resolution airborne data acquisition technology has developed rapidly in recent years. As an increasing number of high resolution data sets become available, there is an increasing need for more efficient approaches to store, process, and analyze these data sets. The development of efficient anal- ysis methods of using these multiscale data to improve land

i.e. there exist a transformation so that every feature vector can be expressed in terms of the centroid and variance of all the image groups. The RBF is a nonlinear transform that pro- vides a set of functions, which constitute a basis for the input feature vector. This transform can be modified such that, each component represents the membership function of a subimage to a group.

The system correlation matrix saves updates, and correlates the subimage groups to make the system learn progressively with each new session and become less dependent on the initial settings. The cluster splitting and merging process eventually breaks the feature space into semantically related clusters. For non-neighboring clusters that contain semantically related subimages, the correlation weights between those clusters of subimages are large in value. Thus, the correlation matrix is

The multi-resolution framework proposed in this paper rec- ognizes that image classification procedure should account for image spatial structure to minimize errors, and increase effi- ciency and information extraction from the classification pro- cess. Selection of the training scheme and classification decision rules should be guided by specification of the type of scene model (high and low resolution) and level of spatial variance represented by the image to be classified. A Super Resolution approach has been used to generate a high resolu- tion image dataset. Different spatial analysis methods can pro- vides the above information to allow resolution effects on individual classes examined. Different strategies can be used to incorporate information from multiple resolutions.

