The current ACL proposals show some shortcomings with respect to the definition of their semantics. Our paper aims at tackling those issues by defining an ACL semantics as a specification of the analytical effects of agent communicative acts. We analyze agent communication in terms of concepts taken from Speech Act Theory, as several researchers have already done, but move away from the mainstream view of artificial agent research, as we define communicative acts in terms of changes at the level of social relationship between agents. We take commitment to be a primitive concept underlying the social dimension of multiagent systems, and define a basic artificial institution whose aim is to provide agents with the means to affect the commitment network that binds them to each other.

communication by representing the performance of basic communicative acts in a general form. Section 8 takes into account those communicative acts,like orders and declarations, that need further special institutions to be carried out successfully; we also illustrate how to execute all communicative acts in the form of a declaration. Finally, in Section 9 we draw our conclusions.

We now consider communicative acts, that is, actions that agents bring about to communicate with other agents. We regard them as institutional acts performed by way of exchanging messages. In particular, we focus our attention on those events that agents are authorized to perform by the Basic Institution.

In our treatment,both commitments and precommitments arise from the per- formance of communicative acts. More precisely, agents bring about com- municative events by exchanging messages; a communicative event, under given conditions,counts as a commitment manipulation action,which creates a new (pre)commitment or modifies the state of an existing one,thus affecting the relations between agents and, if we view commitment as a deontic state, their obligations towards each other. The core ontology of the Basic Insti- tution allows for five basic operations for commitment manipulation. Com- mitments can be made or cancelled, and precommitments can be made, can- celled,or accepted,that is, turned into actual commitments. Registered agents achieve these results by performing actions of the following types: make com- mitment (mc(x,y,s)), make precommitment (mp(x,y,s)), cancel commitment (cc(e,x,y,s)),cancel precommitment (cp(e,x,y,s)),and accept precommitment (ap(e,x,y,s)). Such action types are defined by axioms that describe their con- stitutive effects,that is, the state of affairs that necessarily hold after a token of the given action type is performed.

temporal reference by which we can evaluate the truth of s. We may then analyze the logic of CL-sentences, but the topic lies beyond the scope of this paper. The truth conditions of a CL sentence determine the fulfillment or the violation of the relevant commitment. More precisely, a commitment whose content is s is said to be fulfilled, violated, or pending respectively when s is true, false, or undefined according to the above definitions. The event with respect to which the truth conditions of the content are checked is the one that has brought about the commitment. Here are the axioms that formalize what stated above:

holds. This event, under given conditions, implies the performance of a com- mitment manipulation action. In other words, the meaning of the message is defined as the effect that exchanging such a message has on the network of commitments binding the sender and the receiver. The correspondence be- tween the message exchange event type and the commitment manipulation action type is defined by a convention of the relevant institution, and is for- mally stated by means of the formula

they are the debtor or the creditor. The body of a cancel message is supposed to be the same as that of an accept message,that is, a tuple which includes all the elements that uniquely identify the relevant (pre)commitment. To denote the event types corresponding to such message exchange we introduce the functor cancel (e,x,y,s),whose arguments are the same as those characterizing the (pre)commitment which is cancelled by the relevant message exchange. The conventions are then defined like this:

A cancel message exchange can count as different commitment manipulation actions (cp and cc), in accordance to what is being cancelled (a precommit- ment or a commitment, respectively). There is no ambiguity in an actual cancel message exchange, as there cannot exist both a precommitment and a commitment with the same arguments, and only an action that cancels an existing object can be successfully carried out, as stated by Axioms PCC and PCP in Section 3.3. These ontological presuppositions contribute to the general definition of institutional actions, as illustrated in the next section.

We are now ready to give a general definition of communicative acts. The con- ventions of the Basic Institution establish that exchanging a message of given type counts as a specific institutional action,provided certain conditions hold. These conditions can be classified in two categories: ontological presupposi- tions, defined by the core ontology, and authorizations. While authorizations deal with the institutionalized power of agents,ontological possibility concerns the state of affairs that must hold for a communicative act to be possible. All these points are formally expressed by the following axiom that gives a general definition of institutional actions: in Section 7. This means that messages of type inform are not strictly nec- essary, because the same result can be obtained by a declaration, performed in the context of the Basic Institution. Given that the same line of reasoning can be applied to all types of messages, it turns out that all communicative acts can be realized through the use of a single type of messages, namely declaration messages. Carrying out a communicative act by declaration cor- responds to the well-known performative execution of the communicative act [8]. In our communication framework, all communicative acts that boil down to commitment-manipulation action can be carried out in performative form, thanks to the authorizations granted by the Basic Institution. This fact has an important practical side: it is possible to define a full ACL starting from one single type of messages, that is, declaration messages; all other types of messages can then be regarded as useful abbreviations of declaration messages, but do not increase the expressive power of the ACL.

