Building Information Modeling (BIM) has revolutionized the construction industry as a platform for core integrated design, modeling, asset planning, and collaboration. Although BIM simplifies the retrieval and use of information in construction projects, BIM tools use native formats that pose challenges for data reuse and exchange. This article proposes a method for mapping BIM data into sets of concepts of a speci- fic domains, and the use of Semantic Web tools for the exchange of data and information. Domain ontolo- gies are a widely used tool for the formal definition of a field of knowledge, which facilitates the exchange of information in heterogeneous systems through technologies such as the Semantic Web. The proposed mapping can be used to enrich information and improve data integration in systems based on semantic tools that manage services or maintain facilities and building infrastructures. The article also presents a case study based on the management of airport facilities to illustrate the practical application of the method.

In recent years, the use of Semantic Web [8] technologies has increased notably in AEC/O areas, generally being considered com- plementary to BIM software [9]. Semantic Web comprises tools that codify knowledge for a true semantic interoperability in the exchange of information between computer applications. Among such tools, ontologies stand out. Ontologies are formal models that include the definition of the concepts and relationships for a domain. The utilities of ontologies include, among other applica- tions, the retrieval of information [10,11], the development of data models [12], and the implementation of search engines [13]. In the field of AEC/O, several contributions stand out in this research line: the semantic enrichment of IFC files [14], the exchange of BIM information through Semantic Web tools such as Linked Data [15], and the development of ontologies for the BIM domain such as IFC OntoStep [16,17] and ifcOWL [18]. Along these lines, we find a number of contributions that use ontologies to facilitate the interoperability and the mapping of information from BIM models into different business processes, such as: energy management [12,19], emergency management [20], indoor navigation [21], urban management [22], event management [23], and perfor- mance evaluation [24], among others. However, for many areas there is still no standard for information exchange between BIM and semantic tools, with the result that several AEC/O sectors are not exploiting the full potential of Semantic Web [25].

This article is positioned to leverage the strength and popularity of BIM information exchange methods and Semantic Web-based software applications. Hence, we propose a method to map BIM information into sets of concepts of a specific domain that can be reused by applications. This way, domain ontologies are enriched through the mapping of IFC entities and attributes to domain classes and properties. By means of this method, it is possible to give semantic meaning, within the domain context of a service or infrastructure to be managed, to the available BIM model and thus facilitate its retrieval, exchange and use within the application area. Although the proposed method is intended to be generally applicable, the authors highlight its usefulness in the area of Facil- ity Management (FM). Among the disciplines of AEC/O, FM is in charge of managing the operational phase of buildings or infras- tructures and their services to guarantee the functionality, safety, comfort and integration of people, places and technologies [26,27]. In this context, the use of semantic tools such as domain ontologies [28,29] and BIM is beneficial [30,31].

To illustrate the method, a case study based on the manage- ment of airport facilities is presented. Airports are large infrastruc- tures in continuous maintenance and growth. The use of the information contained in the BIM models could help us to enrich the domain ontologies for the management of airport operations such as arrivals, departures or the allocation of resources such as stands, boarding gates, etc., and, in turn, collaborate with the man- agement of the maintenance or remodeling activities of the facilities.

The benefits of using OWL formats have arisen the interest of multiple authors, who have contributed on the transformation of EXPRESS schemas to OWL formats [37], and on the definition of ontologies such as OntoStep [16,17] or ifcOWL [18]. OntoSteep pro- poses general conversion procedures for any EXPRESS schema into an OWL ontology [16,17]; whereas ifcOWL [18] is specific for IFC, and it is supported by BuildingSMART. Additionally, Pauwels and Terkaj propose a specific conversion procedure for IFC schemes, based on the ifcOWL ontology [36]. An implementation of their proposal is available in a public repository [38]. However, both OntoStep and ifcOWL schemes are still complex enough as to hin- der their direct usage by information systems of specific domains. An intermediate mapping mechanism (as it is proposed in this arti- cle) between the IFC file and the semantic data on the specific domain would contribute to simplify their interoperation, and enhance the extraction of knowledge.

[36] to obtain an instance of the ifcOWL [18] ontology from the IFC file. The last stage uses this ontology to perform a process of extracting the IFC elements and attributes associated with the domain ontology classes, based on the definition of the mapping file. The following subsections describe each stage in more detail, by paying special attention to the first and last ones.

The mapping file contains two different blocks: the first block includes the global parameters that define general aspects used in the mapping of all domain classes; the second block defines a set of specific parameters for each domain class. The specific parameters are divided into two groups, one that defines the map- ping between the domain class itself and the associated IFC entity by means of a regular expression, and another to define the map- ping of the properties of the domain class. The first group of parameters ensures a correct mapping between objects of the IFC entity and individuals of the domain class. The ifcAttributeMapping global parameter defines the IFC attribute used to match the regu- lar expression for all domain classes. The regular expression for each domain class is defined by using the patternMapping parameter.

The second stage of the method is developed within the frame- work of the BIM modeling software. We classify the elements that make up the construction project based on IFC entities and types. Additionally, we create custom IFC properties for those elements that do not have a defined BIM classification. The mapping file gen- erated in the previous stage drives this classification, which will be used to transfer BIM information to the domain ontology. The result of the classification is exported as a file in IFC format.

Moreover, we can enrich the management information used to provide the services of the infrastructure. For example, airports are very dynamic facilities that very often suffer from maintenance or expansion works. Within this context, our method would allow managers to dynamically incorporate into the information systems of the airport the details from the BIM projects that describe the modifications being performed. Hence, for instance, we could define an ApronAreaAvailability-operationalStatus property from the construction project for each stand or boarding gate. This prop- erty would be associated with the maintenance or remodeling tasks, and would indicate the operatibility of the stand or boarding gate in the ontology.

Properties of type customMappingProperties map custom attri- butes of IFC entities to properties of domain classes. These custom attributes are defined in the BIM model, and they allow the method to carry out simple property mappings that are not defined by default by the attributes of IFC entities. In our proposal, the value of the custom attributes is associated with an IfcPropertySin- gleValue entity, which will be part of an IfcPropertySet entity. IfcPropertySingleValue entities are related to values of simple type. Nevertheless, in case of having to relate the property with a value of a more complex type, the IfcPropertySingleValue entity can indi- cate the reference to the individual of the IFC entity that represents that type by means of the valueType parameter. The relationship between the mapping IFC entity and the IfcPropertySet is defined by means of a relationship entity IfcRelDefinesByProperties. In the mapping file, the customMappingProperties mappings include the base, valueType and functionName parameters (as defined for the IfcMappingProperties). Additionally, they define two extra parameters:

To validate the proposed method to map BIM data to domain ontologies, a case study based on the domain of airport operations was implemented. The implementation of this case study was developed in Java and the Apache Jena Semantic Web libraries [47], to facilitate integration with the EXPRESS to IfcOwl conver- sion tool by Pauwels and Terkaj [44]. The source code for this implementation is available in the open software repository [46]. The following sections comment on the mapping file and the RDF output file of the application of the method to the case study.

The case study is based on a subset of the Airm-mono ontology [48], developed in the BEST project within the framework of the SESAR macro-project funded by the EU [49], to which the IfcProject class has been incorporated. This class has an OwnerHistory attri- bute that contains information about an IFC project. The mapping file used in the case study is presented below. The complete map- ping file used in the implementation of the case study is presented in Listing 1.

European Commission., Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament, the Council, the European Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions - A Renovation Wave for Europe - greening our buildings, creating jobs, improving lives (2020). URL:https://eur-lex.europa.eu/ legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX%3A52020DC0662.

