random selection approach can be used to generate AES-like s-box structures. For example, chaos-based random selection designs are very popular approaches in this area. The focus of the study is to improve the nonlinearity value of s-box structures generated by random selection from an entropy source. It has been shown that nonlinearity measurement can be improved by applying the pro- posed post-processing technique.

The rest of the study is organized as follows. In the second sec- tion, the working logic of the proposed method is explained. In the third section, analysis results are given over three different scenar- ios. In the fourth section, a practical application of the obtained outputs is given. In the last section, the results are discussed and possible future studies are given.

The method suggested in this study has a simpler and faster structure than optimization algorithms. The method aims to increase the value of the nonlinearity criterion without sacrificing simplicity and speed. To achieve this aim, it is proposed to mix row, column, and both s-box structures. It has recently been shown that performance metrics can be improved by changing the posi- tions of s-box cells [25]. The post-processing technique suggested in this study is to be further improved through DES s-box struc- tures. In the method suggested previously, a new s-box structure is generated from each original s-box structure with the post- processing technique. The advantage of this work over than mise of cryptographic algorithms. However, advances in the cryptanalysis branch together with technological developments constantly threaten the security of modern encryption algo- rithms. Although modern encryption algorithms are mathemat- ically secure, application attacks have revealed that various weaknesses may exist. One of the cryptographic components affected by the application attacks has been s-box structures. The demonstration that s-box structures generated based on

It has been observed that the proposed method provides signif- icant performance improvements in s-box structures with below- average performance characteristics. It has been shown that derived s-box structures can be obtained from the original s-box structure for three different scenarios. It has been observed that design criteria can be improved by 81.25% in row transformations, 91.6% in column transformations, and 75% in row-column transfor- mations. Considering these results, mixing the columns has been particularly effective. These results indicate that the success of ran- dom selection-based approaches can be further improved by using different techniques and methods in future studies.

