The technique of information hiding is very important in achieving security of important and sensitive data, especially those that are transmitted through various digital communication channels because it has robust characteristics that distinguish it from encryption techniques, the most important of which is that it is not perceived by protrusive and hackers, as it is based on the principle of hiding those data inside other digital media as a carrier cover. On the other hand, with the development of hiding tech- niques, techniques developed to try extracting its hiding to hacking its contents, for this reason and to increase the efficiency of these methods, the encryption and hiding techniques was combined together. The proposed method depends on distributing secret data on several digital audio files of type WAV in random way depends on circular secret key values that is generated in random order that be agreed upon between the sender and the receiver. This technique has achieved high durability, and in the event of sus- picion of the existence of secret content within any WAV file, the multiplicity of carrier files and their dif- ferent length, as well as random distribution of data in them, all these characteristic eliminates the suspicion of any confidential content, as well as complicates the file retrieved process if the suspicion tant data in total secrecy via public channels in such a way that no one may know about the communication except the transfor- mation parties, namely the sender and receiver [3,5]. Basically, hid- ing information in audio files is a type of steganography that hides digital data into digital audio files as a carrier such WAV, MP3, and WMA files without damaging the contained of this uninteresting audio file, so that it cannot be seen by eavesdroppers [6,7,8]. An encrypted file would immediately imply a secret communication to a third party. A hidden file, on the other hand, would not attract attention and so would not arouse suspicions, nor would changing its size [9,10,11].

The insertion of confidential data into the cover file should not cause any visible modifications to the secret media, so that the authenticity of the file should not disturbed. The goal of the audio hiding view is to ingrain valuable secret information into an audio file in such a way that the human auditory system (HAS) is unable to identify the change caused by the data ingraining. In the audio hiding, Least Significant Bit (LSB), Echo and Spread spectrum hiding approaches along with other current applications that have been developed in recent years [14,15,16,17].

Sound files, like image files, can be modified in such a way that they contain hidden information, and those modifications must be done in such a way that it should be imperceptible from others. Therefore, the methods that embeds data in sound files must use the properties of the Human Auditory System (HAS). The HAS can identify disturbances in a sound file as well as additive random noise.

Audio files are competent to convey hidden information due of their popularity and abundance. As a result, several researchers have begun to look at how audio signals and properties might be exploited in the domain of information concealment [8]. Least Sig- nificant Bit [8,9], Echo concealing [14,15], Hiding in Silence Interval [21], Phase Coding [14,15], Amplitude Coding [15,17,18], Spread Spectrum [17,18], and Discrete Wave Transform [15,16] are some of the most prominent methods.

The proposed method is intended for use with 16-bit uncom- pressed digital audio files like WAV files. In a 16 bit WAV file, each sample is made up of two bytes that represent the amplitude of the audio sample [16]. The technique hides the secret data using two LSBs in each of these audio samples, resulting in a hiding capacity of two bits out of 16 bits. or 2/16 of the total size of the carrier audio file (2/16 = 0.125 = 12.5%).

