Cryptography is the technology that uses the mathematical algorithms to encrypt and decrypt information to keep messages secure by modifying plaintext form (intelligible data) to ciphertext form (unintelligible data). The cryptography allows store the sensi- tive data or transfer it across unsafe networks (like the Internet) to ensure that it cannot be identified by anyone except the desired receiver. Steganography is the technology of hiding a message within another message while not drawing any suspicion there is any secret information exist, while only the intended recipient can decode it and got the original message [1].

In this paper, we focused on strengthening the cryptosys- tem side of Secret Key Steganography approach. As in our previous works in [6] where combined text steganography with AES-HMAC cryptography, we designed a new method to increase the cryptographic strength (the cryptographic strength is measured according to the time and resources which are needing to retrieve the plaintext) via changed the value of ciphertext by used shifting algorithm that rearranged the ciphertext characters depending on key value. The result is very strong cryptography, where the ciphertext that gener- ated is very difficult to decipher without possession of the right decoding tool.

For hybrid cryptography and steganography technique, we have relied on our previous strategy in [6], which based on hybrid cryp- tography based on AES- HMAC method. The HMAC (keyed-hash message authentication code) represents a \ method utilized to cal- culate the combination of MAC and hash function type SHA256 with a secret cryptographic key. In another hand, we utilized AES (Advanced Encryption Standard) type AES-256. Then HMAC. The proposed method has advantages of improving security rather than common standard encryption methods. In this work, we used HMAC as an encryption method and we then applied the proposed shifting algorithm on the ciphertext resultant from the HMAC method.

a shifting algorithm. The ciphertext generated has passed to shift- ing algorithm to rearrange ciphertext and generate shifting chip- per. The shifted cipher then passes to stego part. several conclusions can be attracted to this work; the mainly important points are:

