Tele-monitoring using event-based data transfer provides a sophisticated method of data transmission within WSBN in real time constituting a significant advantage for the medical field and for the elderly [3]. But, the transmission of reliable and real- time data in this tele-monitoring technique is still the subject of research due to limitations created by data interference between sensors, data loss and due to the transmission of redundant data. Research is being carried out to overcome these issues. However,

This research focuses on data transmission issues during Tele- monitoring of the Elderly using WBSN. Different data transmission techniques and models are analysed for delivering sensor data with minimum latency, low energy consumption and with high reliability. Initially, this research identifies WBSN problems during tele-monitoring. This is followed by an analysis of algorithms, techniques, and frameworks from related research. Then, the best current solution for data transmission in WBSN is analysed and enhanced to overcome limitations. Mathematical and theoretical justifications for the proposed modifications are provided. Finally, the proposed solution is simulated to check health data transmit- ted within WBSN as part of an event-based scheme. These simula- tion processes are then analysed in terms of reliability, latency and energy consumption.

model. After the simulation, the overall system result is 0.056 s delay during transmission. This is an improvement over 0.059 s by considering hidden terminals like WIFI and ZigBee but does not provide the alternative backup path for packets that were interfered with or collided [7]. This paper focuses on improving end to end delay in WBSN, so it may be useful for the current pro- ject. Furthermore, the issue of delay during data transmission in WBSN was also solved by Alfa et al. [8] focused on data transmis- sion beyond Wireless body area networks. This was achieved by means of an incentive compatible technique by scheduling the transmission in electronic health networks so that they obtain

0.03 s delay sensitive medical packets (Queue Model). This is an improvement over the packet with 0.06 s waiting time for medical data and provides a guaranteed high service priority during emer- gencies conditions, but it fails to decrease the complexity of the network during network recoveries. This paper provides significant benefit to our proposed solution but cannot be considered as it causes complexity in the WBSN.

due to which the quality of links and congestion during data trans- mission in WSN was improved. This technique provides also an effective method of channel allocation for faulty links and offers an estimated link quality for all the links, which provides 20% improvement in the data delivery ratio when compared with the RTCS technique [14]. However, the movement of body sensor nodes was not considered by this system due to which the entire network and link quality might be changed. This Solution focuses on link quality and transmission of reliable data in WSN, so it is of high importance to the current project.

consumes significant amounts of energy by sensors. Furthermore, this continuous transmission causes data interference, which leads to delay in the overall system. These problems can be overcome by minimizing the reductant data bits during transmission over WBSN. The state of art solution of event-based data transfer mini- mizes end to end delay and provides reliable data transfer com- pared to that of traditional periodic or priority-based data transfer. Similarly, the number of bits data was minimized with the implementation of this model when sending them from local to remote site. However, this solution still causes data loss during transmission of data over WBSN due to the interference of multiple sensors due to the transfer of unused or redundant bits to the remote site. Minimizing this problem, would lead to an improve- ment in the reliability, interference and latency in WBSN. There- fore, it can be concluded that the current solution, though it has great benefits in WSBN has some limits when it comes to power consumption, processing time and reliability. Thus, these have been improved in the proposed solution.

Tele-monitoring using Wireless Body Sensor Networks (WBSN) during an event-based data transfer is a very important approach to measure the health of the elderly. This allows for the elderly to be regularly monitored by a doctor located in a remote medical facility. But the reliability of networks, end to end delay, power consumption, and interference among multiple sensors has always been a challenge. The use of traditional methods such as, periodic and priority-based data-transfer has provided sophisticated data transmission schemes for small WBSN. However, these methods failed in terms of end-to-end delay, latency, and reliability when data were transmitted over large networks. Similarly, the data tem is further compared to the threshold value. In this case if the value exceeds the threshold value, the data are directly sent from a sensor at the local site to the gateway and is further transmitted to the cloud at the remote site. On the other hand, if the value is below the threshold, the data obtained from the sensors are not sent because it consumes more time, more Bandwidth and adds to the complexity of the network. Hence, in cases where data is not sent, the Energy-saving mode can be activated.

This system minimizes the limitations caused by the state of art solution, where lots of bits were transmitted to the cloud, both during generation of changed values or unchanged values from sensors. Similarly, the main problem of interference due to multi- ple sensors in large networks was also minimized by this proposed solution. The Energy saving is a major factor in this proposed solu- tion where the power of the sensors is very important in this study.

capabilities to eliminate data loss, interference and reduce redun- dant bits, which improves the latency of transmitted data bits to doctor to 635 ~ 0.875 ms and reliability of 98 ~ 96%. Finally, the power consumption by the sensor is reduced to 315.638*10 3JS/ bits. Future research needs to focus on localization and remotely track the elderly people using a tele-monitoring process. This allows monitoring of behaviours and activities, such as walking, standing, lying down, etc. It can be important in emergency situa- tions to continuously track and monitor behaviours. Furthermore, this proposed solution only deals with body sensors which are worn on the body but does not take account of sensors that are implanted in the brain or in any other body part which would be better able to capture internal body workings for more accurate health results.

