However the searching complexity increases for this scheme with the increase in number of subcarriers. A tone reservation algorithm based on Cross-Entropy method for decreasing PAPR is proposed in [14]. Here Cross-Entropy method is introduced to determine the suboptimum values of the peak reduction carriers. But this scheme does not reduce PAPR and complexity at the same time. A non-linear optimization approach to search the optimal combination of peak reduction tone sets is presented in [15]. The authors of [16] proposed PAPR reduction techniques with low complexity for clipping and quantization noise cancellation in direct detection O-OFDM systems. But the searching complexity is not considered in this technique and it does not achieve signifi- cant reduction in PAPR. PAPR reduction using an optimization method based adaptive iterative clipping is proposed in [17] while PAPR reduction using pre-coding with clipping and filtering is sug- gested in [18]. Both of these schemes do not consider the complex- ity reduction. Even though clipping is easy to implement, it may result in-band and out-of-band interferences while eliminating the orthogonality among the subcarriers.

This paper is organized as follows: In Section 3, wireless OFDM system is characterized and PAPR, CCDF are formulated. The pro- posed PTS technique is discussed in Section 4 and in Section 5, the theoretical analyses are carried out by deriving the expressions for CCDF, number of subcarriers, subblocks and total computational complexity for the suggested scheme. Results and discussions are presented in Section 6 while Section 7 concludes the paper.

Here M values are computed U times periodically and the rows of modified phase matrix have distinct values. The values are cho- sen from the allowed phase factors in random manner. For the pro- posed technique, we follow different approach of finding the optimized phase factors. Let W be the number of phase factors that are allowed.

proposed method. The amplitude of an OFDM signal follows Ray- leigh distribution while the power has chi-square distribution hav- ing zero mean and two degrees of freedom. Let M be the number of subcarriers for the OFDM system. The cumulative distribution function (CDF) of the system expressed as

8.1 dB. We see that analytical results closely match with simula- tion results for both traditional PTS and proposed PTS techniques. The proposed method reduces PAPR effectively compared to that of traditional PTS and also reduction in PAPR is improved compared to that of T-PTS scheme.

It gives the reduction in percentage of complexity by employing the proposed scheme with respect to the traditional PTS scheme. Using CCRR we can estimate the performance of a system. Higher percentage of CCRR specifies good performance of the proposed scheme compared to the traditional scheme. It is also used to com- pare the complexity of the proposed scheme.

values are 56.25%, 50% and 37.48% for proposed PTS scheme with B = 0.5, 1, 2. For M = 128 and U = 2, the CCRR values are 56.89%, 50% and 36.21% respectively for the proposed scheme with B = 0.5, 1, 2. CCRR percentage is improved for lower values of the tradeoff factor and CCRR percentage is lower for higher values of B.

A novel low complexity optimized PTS technique with RPSM for reducing PAPR in wireless OFDM systems is proposed in this paper. By applying the proposed technique, simultaneously PAPR reduc- tion and computational complexity reduction are achieved com- pared to that of traditional PTS scheme. A favorable trade-off is obtained between reduction of PAPR and computational complex- ity by choosing the optimum value of the trade-off factor. PAPR reduces with the reduction in the number of subcarriers and increase in the number of subblocks. The analytical results closely matched with the simulation results. It is clear that our suggested PTS technique performs much better than traditional PTS tech- nique in reduction of PAPR and computational complexity. The proposed technique improves the efficiency of the power amplifier and can be applied to the current wireless systems such as WiMAX and LTE.

