Several research groups are working to optimize a generic algorithm which can be effectively used by the industry. On the other hand, the digital content, especially images and vid- eos are subject to vulnerable attacks. The attacker may want to eliminate watermark from the signed image. Due to this rea- son, the embedding algorithm must be robust against common image processing attacks.

Huang et al. [17] have proposed a novel blind watermarking technique based on BP neural network in wavelet domain. In this paper, with the aid of HVS characteristics, a scrambled watermark is embedded robustly and imperceptibly. They suc- cessfully apply a neural network to memorize the relation between the watermark and corresponding watermarked image. This way, the authors are successful to blindly recover the exact watermark from the signed image. Their experimen- tal results show that the proposed scheme has a good imper- ceptibility and high robustness to various image processing attacks.

Motwani et al. [20] have implemented a MAMDANI type Fuzzy Inference System (FIS) which uses as its input the HVS characteristics namely brightness, texture and edge sensi- tivities of the gray-scale image in question. The output of this inference system is successfully used to embed the watermark in the host image in the DWT domain. This FIS uses a set of 27 inference rules which are primarily based on the follow- ing facts: large, the training data are sufficiently large and they have to be chosen over the entire range where the variables are expected to change. On the other hand, although the Fuzzy logic addresses the imprecision of inputs and outputs defined by fuzzy sets and allows greater flexibility in formulating a detail system description, yet it lacks in adaptability. It is, therefore, advisable to integrate ANN with Fuzzy logic. The resultant Neuro-Fuzzy systems are expected to extend the capabilities of the systems beyond either of the two pure tech- niques as applied individually. The proposed watermarking scheme implements a hybrid Fuzzy-BPN system which maps the fuzzy inputs to crisp outputs without involving a large training data set. Therefore, the problem of lack of adaptabil- ity of a pure fuzzy rule based system is also expected to be resolved by using it.

The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 deals with the- ory of hybrid Fuzzy expert system based BPN proposed by Lee and Lu [32]. Section 3 described experimental details including embedding, extraction and robustness. Experimental results are discussed in Section 4 which finally concluded in Section 5. The list of references is given at the end.

this notation, p = 1, 2, 3, .. ., N being the pth pattern for a total of N input patterns that the Fuzzy-BPN needs to be trained. The bias value is taken as I0 = (1, 0, 0). Ipi is the ith input com-

