We present a technique for measuring the security of a system which relies on a probabilistic process algebraic formalisation of noninterference. We define a mathematical model for this technique which consists of a linear space of processes and linear transformations on them. In this model the measured quantity corresponds to the norm of a suitably defined linear operator associated to the system. The probabilistic model we adopt is reactive in the sense that processes can react to the environment with a probabilistic choice on a set of inputs; it is also generative in the sense that outputs autonomously chosen by the system are governed by a probability distribution. In this setting, noninterference is formulated in terms of a probabilistic notion of weak bisimulation. We show how the probabilistic information in this notion can be used to estimate the maximal information leakage, i.e. the security degree of a system against a most powerful attacker.

approximated version of noninterference can be formalised through the def- inition of a corresponding similarity relation. We define such a relation in terms of the observable difference between two processes, where observabil- ity is based on the weak probabilistic bisimulation semantics. The maximal observable difference between processes will give us a measure of their indis- tinguishability, that is in our formalisation of noninterferference a measure of the information leakage.

A formal justification of such quantity is given in a mathematical frame- work in which the operational semantics of the probabilistic calculus is defined in terms of linear operators on a vector space representing the state space. In this setting we show that the metric induced by a particular operator norm on the process terms corresponds to a notion of distance which coincides with the measure above. This result exploits techniques introduced in [13,11].

The probabilistic model we adopt was introduced in [5] and used in [1,2] to formalise the PNI property. This model includes both probabilities and nondeterminism. On the one hand, a probability distribution is used to gov- ern the choice among the various output actions that can be autonomously performed by the system. On the other hand, the choice among different types of input actions that can be accepted by the system depends on the environ- ment behaviour. Therefore, such choices are nondeterministic. More precisely, once the environment has decided which type of input will be activated, the system reacts according to a specified probability distribution associated with the input actions of that type. Thus, the model is a mixed generative-reactive model, where output operations follow the generative model of probabilities and input operations follow the reactive model of probabilities [16].

The semantics of the probabilistic process calculus is expressed in terms of mixed generative/reactive transition systems, which we now introduce. To this aim, we assume the following notation. Sets RAct and GAct denote the sets of input actions and of output and internal actions, respectively. We use

According to the standard definition of noninterference given by Goguen and Meseguer [17], a high-level user (High, for short) is said to interfere with a low-level user (Low, for short) if what High can do is reflected on what Low can observe. In this setting, High can perform high-level activities only and observe all the interactions between the system and the environment. Instead, Low can perform low-level activities only and is not allowed to directly observe the occurrence of high-level events. In spite of this, Low may succeed in de- tecting the High behaviour by simply interacting with the low-level interface of the system. In other words, even if there does not exist a direct communi- cation channel from High to Low, High may have the possibility of indirectly passing information to Low through interactions with the system. Noninter- ference analysis mainly aims at checking the presence of indirect information flows, called covert channels, from High to Low. In our probabilistic frame- work, what Low can see in order to infer the High behaviour is not only the logical low-level interface of the system interacting with the environment, but also the probability distribution of the events representing such interactions. In this section we describe a formalisation of the noninterference approach in the probabilistic process calculus surveyed in the previous section [1,2].

occur in the action prefix operators within P . Then, the application of the security check to P is as follows. The low-level view of P in the absence of high-level operations is obtained by preventing P from executing its high- level actions. This is carried out by applying the restriction operator to P , i.e.

In the absence of the adversary, Low can normally access and consume the resource. More formally, (LU Act Resource)\High does not enable the action low not available. On the other hand, if High tries to interfere, then Low may not be able to access the resource. In particular, we have that

In this section we show how to exploit the probabilistic information associ- ated with the behaviour of a system in order to give a quantitative estimate of possible information leakages. This gives us a means to evaluate the effective- ness of a covert channel that is responsible for an illegal information flow. As shown in [1], this is related to the number of tests (system executions) needed to an external observer for detecting such an information flow.

We now provide some intuitive examples that explain the role of our approxi- mation in estimating the security degree of systems and determining the worst case, i.e. the maximal information leakage that the class of adversaries defined by PNI may set up from high level to low level.

These linear operators are defined on the vector space V(G) containing all distributions over the set of states (processes) G, which is the space of all for- mal linear combinations of elements in G with coefficients in R. For the sake of simplicity we assume that the set G is finite so that we can restrict our- self, for the time being, to consider only finite-dimensional vector spaces and finite-dimensional linear operators. The results we present can nevertheless be extended to the general infinite case along the lines of [11].

