One problem when dealing with molecular biology is to extract a functional meaning out of the mass of current knowledge. This problem has pleaded for the development of specific tools that describe biology in a faithful way. Among these tools, process algebras have been proved powerful enough to formalise the interactions, to render in a natural way the massive parallelism and concurrency of interactions, and to analyse the overall behaviour.

Rules (com) and (dec) respectively define complexations and decomplexations capabilities of proteins by lifting these information to labels of transitions and, at the same time, updating the proteins. Rules (sol) and (mem) lift transitions to groups and membranes; it is crucial that edge names created or deleted do not occur elsewhere. Rule (nucleus) lift internal transitions of nuclei to the whole cell; as before, edge names created or deleted must not occur elsewhere. We observe that (nucleus) bans complexation or decomplexation between nuclei and the solution external to the cells. Rule (react) and (ms-react) define reactions, both com- plexations and decomplexations, in groups and cells. In particular (react) also accounts for reactions between membranes of different cells. It is worth to notice that the constraint a /= b allows reactions between different proteins only. This is for simplicity sake: in case reactants are proteins with a same name we need to carry more information on the labels to separate them.

The signal stimulus stems from the epidermal growth factor egf whose dimeric form (1) can bind to its associated receptor egfr (2), a transmembrane protein with an extracellular ligand-binding domain located on the plasmic membrane of some cells. This binding activates egfr by phosphorylating an internal domain of the protein (3 and 4). This activation leads to multiple interactions with cytoplasmic complexes of proteins by successive binding-phosphorylations, starting with the adapter protein shc (5). The cascade of interactions ends with the activation of the extracellular signal-regulated kinase erk. This phosphorylated protein can then translocate into the nucleus and modify the gene expression, stimulating cells to enter mitosis. This causes the cell to divide and proliferate.

The second problem is manifested at the end of the RTK-MAPK pathway. The pathway causes a phosphorylation of a particular protein (erk) that enters in the nucleus, which is represented as cell, as well. At this stage we have no mechanism that make entities enter in the cell. Such mechanisms will be discussed in detail in Section 4.

Rule (open) prepares a cell to be fused with an enclosing cell or with a peer cell; the precondition guarantees that the cell may participate to a fusion. Rule (grasp) lifts the fusion capability to groups by freezing them in a mreagent. Rules (fuse) and (fuse-i) define fusions between peer and nested cells, respectively. The new cell is created with the membrane name returned by the function F. Rule (mem-a) is a refinement of (mem). It models possible side-effects on the membrane name due to interactions between membrane proteins and proteins outside the cell. Such interactions may activate membranes by changing their fusion capability, which is encoded in our formalism by membrane names. In a similar way, rule (ms-areact) refines (ms-react).

We describe the last part of the infection pathway, assuming that the virus has already been engulfed in the host cell. We skip the first steps because we cannot express the phagocytosis of the virus. In Section 4 we will analyse the missing part.

the membrane transition becomes mx in the cellular transition. This exposes the phagocytosis to the label. Similarly for the rule (open-c). In (open-c) the material needed for the new membrane surrounding the phagocytosed cell is removed from the host cell membrane. This material is restored in the rule (phago).

