For any vertex x and all neighbours xj of x there exist paths connecting these neighbours which avoid x (Lemma 1.7). Therefore all these neighbours are in the same component of G\x, and it follows that G\x is connected. Hence G is bicon- nected.

Otherwise suppose u is isolated in K. Let L be any path joining H\K to K\H. By Lemma 1.12, every path connecting H\K to K\H contains a vertex, u or v, incident to edges from H and from K. By hypothesis, u is not; so every such path contains v. By Claim 1, at least one such path exists, so G\v is not connected, and G is not biconnected.

Claim 4. The vertices u and v share a face in common. Otherwise let x1,... , xk be the neighbours of u. We know (Lemma 1.7) that they are all connected by paths in B\u, where B is the union of boundaries of bounded faces incident to u. Assuming v is incident to none of these faces, these paths would also avoid v. This implies that all neighbours of u are in H or in K, contradicting Claim 3.

If all vertices on J belong to H, then all vertices outside J also belong to H, because for any vertex y outside J , one can choose a shortest path joining y to a vertex in J . Neither u nor v occur as internal vertices on this path, so all vertices on the path are in H or K (Lemma 1.12), i.e., H, since the last vertex is in H.

consecutive in cyclic order. Let u1 (respectively, u2) be the second vertex (following u) in Q1 (respectively, Q2). The only faces incident to u and to v are F and F ', so u1 and u2 differ from v and u1 and u2 are connected by a path which avoids u and v (Lemma 1.7). Therefore, by Lemma 1.12, u1 and u2 are both in H or in K, and so are all vertices on J . The same goes for all vertices outside J , so either H = G or H = Q is a path graph, a contradiction.

Let ui, i = 1, 2, be the second vertices on Qi. Again there is a path joining u1 to u2 which avoids u and v, and all vertices on J are in H or K, and the same holds for all vertices inside J . If they are all in H then H = G, and if they are all in K then H = Q, a simple path. This contradiction finishes the proof of Claim 7.

