The present study describes a novel application of Stochastic Automata Networks (SAN) [1,2,3] to model a specific type of geological phenomenon. This is a chal- lenging subject, provided that most of the natural phenomena depend on a great number of factors to explain their evolution. Due to such a large number of natural variables, one of the most important steps in the modeling activity is the selection, discretization and grouping of the most significant variables to the phenomenon considered.

A first step when using SAN as a modeling tool is to identify structures within the process. Each structure is treated as an automaton, composed of states and tran- sitions. Every single transition is ruled by one or more events, which are classified as local or synchronizing. A local event operates over only one automaton, chang- ing its state by triggering a transition without interfering on the other automata

Heads or Tails is a coin-tossing game with a series of known variations. The one presented here has one coin and one player. At each coin flip, the player must guess which side will come with the face up. The player wins whenever his expectation is confirmed, otherwise he loses.

As seen on Section 2, there are four types of deposit respectively associated to forced regression (FR), lowstand normal regression (LNR), highstand normal re- gression (HNR) and transgression (T ). The first one occurs whenever the relative sea level falls. The other three distinguish from one another by the relative con- tribution of relative sea level rise rate and sediment supply rate. Note that the relative sea level is a function of the global (eustatic) sea level and crustal vertical movement. In our study case, there is no uplift and all the vertical movement is downwards, i.e. subsidence.

in the set x = {1, 2, 3, 4}), which depend only on the Chronos current state. Some tests were executed in order to choose a rate for the up and down events and, as observed, setting these events rate to arround 1000 fits better to the results expected from Contreras et al. [4]. The transitions only cease when every M automaton reach state DM, disabling the up and down events and enabling once again the next event synchronizing a transition in Chronos witha transition in each of the M automata. Event rst, a short for reset, is the only one in the whole model that synchro- nizes transitions between all the automata, restoring the model to its starting point

This article presents a novel modeling case to represent specific geological phenom- ena. More precisely, this paper seeks for predicting generic types of stratal stacking patterns for Pelotas Basin. The major goal here is to illustrate a potentially use- ful and previously unknown prediction tool to estimate statistics about a natural phenomenon.

We believe that this paper research is valuable not only by the subject itself, but also by the challenge it represents. It is always difficult to work in a multidisciplinary endeavor, where collaborators must learn how to communicate. Thus, the natural next step in this research is to refine this model, enriching with data from alternative literature allied to the knowledge obtained from this preliminary work.

