in the presentation of counterfactual semantics. There, a neighborhood system for each world is meta-logically specified and a set of axioms is ruled out according the intended semantics. Precise notions of completeness and soundness for each derived counterfactual logic are stated in these cases.

Roughly speaking, a topos is a category provided with an internal logical theory that resembles Set Theory. Formally, a Topos is a finitely complete and cocomplete category with exponentials and subobject classifier. From these features it is pos- sible to define logic notions belonging to the Higher-Order (logic) setting. In [1] it some set-like notions intending to define heuristics and search based problems are described by means of the language of Local Set Theory. The present article follows this very approach towards the categorical definition of a topos, and, by means of Local Set Theory, basic notions aiming to define classes of neighborhood systems are also defined. Following the framework initiated by Lewis [5], a counterfactual conditional is defined in the internal logic of the topos. For each possible neighbor- hood system, the (internal) counterfactual logic can be analyzed and the inference system of Local Set Theory may be used to derive proper counterfactual axioms and to show that certain inference rules are derived rules inside LST.

In section 2 the basic categorical notions are defined for the sake of terminology definition. Section 3 defines the class of topos used in this article. Section 4 defines the main notion of neighborhood systems and some of their instances. Section 5 defines logically the counterfactuals involved and compares them to known logical systems existing in the literature on counterfactuals. Finally the conclusion follows.

In this paper we have treated the Counterfactual conditionals through logic notions belonging to the Higher-Order (logic) setting. To do so we have used a Higher- Order logic called Local Set Theory, which is able to derive propositions preserving truth under any topos interpretation. It gave us the possibility, using the Local Set Theory inference system, to derive any Topos-theoretic property at a linguistic level.

