For precise definitions of pseudo-monad, pseudo-algebra, etcetera, see [27]. The concepts are a little more complicated than those associated with 2-monads, which in turn are a little more complicated than those associated with ordinary monads, but only a little. Our two leading examples are as follows.

Example 3.1 Let Tfp denote the pseudo-monad on Cat for small categories with finite products. The 2-category Ps-Tfp-Alg has objects given by small categories with finite products, maps given by functors that preserve finite products in the usual sense, i.e., up to coherent isomorphism, and 2-cells given by all natural trans- formations. So Ps-Tfp-Alg is the 2-category FP and the category Tfp(C) is the free

Example 3.2 For size reasons, there is no interesting pseudo-monad on Cat for cocomplete categories: small cocomplete categories are necessarily preorders, and the free large cocomplete category on a small category does not lie in Cat . But there are well-studied techniques to deal with that concern [27], allowing us safely to ignore it here. Assuming we do that, there is a pseudo-monad Tcoc for cocomplete categories. For any small category C, the category Tcoc(C) is given by the presheaf category [Cop, Set ].

For a precise definition of a pseudo-distributive law between pseudo-monads, see [27]. Again, they are a little more complicated than ordinary distributive laws, but only a little, the only substantial complexity residing in coherence detail, i.e., a statement of exactly which two-dimensional diagrams must agree with each other. Brushing that aside, our leading example is as follows [27,28,29].

The signature in Example 3.11 does not seem to have computational significance. That does not unduly perturb us: our main theorem about signatures is a positive one, asserting that any signature yields initial algebra semantics, so including un- interesting examples within that result does not bother us.

account of binding being more subtle than that of Fiore et al. Specifically, their restriction from [Inj, Set ] to the full subcategory of those functors that preserve pullbacks allowed them to speak sensibly of the support of a bound term. One can analyse the idea in terms of the axiomatisation of Section 3.

