security personnel selection and training, and security awareness. Finally, the fourth check states the operational management pro- cesses. It consists of 25 processes such as inventory management, environment patching, security measures, change control, access control, information quality, compliance probing, forensics, etc.

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. An over- view of the existing security maturity models and a discussion of related work in Section 2. Section 3 discusses the proposed security maturity model. The proposed security maturity levels are applied on two case studies: retirement department and public telecom- munication corporation in Yemen in Section 4. Section 5 discusses the gaps in the existing models and frameworks in comparison to the proposed model. Finally, we conclude the paper in Section 6 with an outlook for the future work.

CHOISS presents the distinction between a variety of different organizations. To reach a high IS maturity level, an organization must address a tailored set of focus areas and capabilities. Another research considered only the data security associated with Confi- dential, Integrated, and Availability (CIA) [10]. They ignored digital security process of appraising risks and vulnerabilities for each level of Capability of Maturity Model (CMM).

Another study assessing the information security maturity for Malaysian public sectors in [4]. The authors compared three main models System Security Engineering-Capability Maturity Model (SSE-CMM) [14], Control Objectives for Information and related Technology (COBIT) [15], and the Information Security Manage- ment Maturity Model (ISM3) [16]. They clarified the relationship between these models. Then, they identified and tested their tech- nical factors.

The authors of COBIT 2019 framework explained the capability levels for processes [15]. These levels are based on process capabil- ity schemes ranging from 0 to 5. The capability level is a measure of how well a process is implemented and performing. COBIT framework focuses on the processes of the organization. It tracks these processes based on classifying the organizations into five levels.

In [17], the authors assess the master data to derive the main concepts and best practices which called a master data maturity assessment. This assessment uses the maturity matrix that relates to 13 areas. Also, it specified 65 capabilities and validated them. Moreover, the authors developed an assessment questionnaire to assess master data management maturity. They focused on the master data and ignored the security maturity over all the organi- zation. There are some security frameworks that perform the security controls for the organizations such as NIST and ISO (27001, 27002) [18,19].

ISM3 specifies the level of organizations based on the controls applied through daily operations. This ranges from lack of controls to fully automated controls. The supported controls reflect the level of security maturity in the organization. It ranges from the non-existent to optimized maturity. Cybersecurity auditors need to learn how to classify the organizations based on the security matu- rity model.

Cybersecurity auditors must specify the level of security in the organizations to complete the auditing processes. In Sections 4.1 and 4.2, we are studying how to realize and assess the security maturity levels into two types of organizations. The assessment is based on four categories which are general, operational, tactical, and strategy security maturity. Finally, Section 4.3 presents a dis- cussion about all the findings.

Retirement organization is a public service organization in Yemen. It serves more than 100 thousand people. It has four main departments. They are Information Technology, finance, control and audit, and pension administration departments. We studied the security level to fulfill the security gaps according to security maturity model control. It has a limited number of processes that perform the daily operations.

Public Telecommunication Corporation (PTC)1 is a Yemeni cor- poration. It works on telecommunication and executes a compli- cated process. PTC has 21 branches and more than 50 centers to serve million customers in Yemen. It is a government service provi- der for Internet and telecommunication to personal and business. Some of their services are pay-for-me (hatfie), internet services (ye- mennet), training services, information systems, and technology ser- vices. The number of internet users in Yemen at the end of the year (2019) has increased to 3 million users. This is in comparison to 2 million users at the previous year (2018) with an increase in the growth by 49.96%.

Retirement Organization is on an ad hoc level with no regular controls. It does not follow security control standard or framework. The output of security level which complies with ISM3 model is not enough to realize their security goals. It needs clear rules for the separation of duties. These rules can improve the resources usage and reduce the risk of security incidents. Thus, protect the organization from possible internal threats.

PTC corporation is on a defined level of maturity. This is a good security control. It begins to automate its processes inside the cor- poration and its branches. They apply the ISO 27001 standard in the payment card industry (PCI) for its processes and security con- trols. Thus, the output of their security level complies with ISM3 model. Yet, protecting physical and technical information need alignment with the existing standards.

