We also examine the algebras of two related monads, the simple valuation monad Vf and the point-continuous valuation monad Vp. In TOP0 their algebras are fully characterised as weakly locally convex topological cones and weakly locally convex sober topological cones, respectively. In both cases, the algebra morphisms are continuous linear maps between the corresponding algebras.

We are concerned about the algebras of the extended probabilistic powerdomain in the category of T0 topological spaces and continuous functions. We recall some known facts about the extended probabilistic powerdomain monad in Section 2, and on cones in Section 3. We prove in Section 4 that every algebra of this monad in the category of T0 spaces is a weakly locally convex sober topological cone, and algebra morphisms must be continuous linear maps. We then show the tight connection that there is between algebras of the extended probabilistic powerdomain monad and barycentres in a sense inspired from Choquet [3], and already used by Cohen,

Naturally, one wonders whether Vs is a monad on TOP. Unfortunately, this is not the case in general. The problem is that the topology OX is, in general, too sparse to sufficiently restrict the Scott topology on VX. Alternatively, one considers the weak topology on VX, and we will see this is the right topology on VX that gives rise to a monad structure.

From the basic theory of algebras of monads, we know that in particular the pair (T A, mA) is an algebra of T , where m is the multiplication of T . In our case, (VwX, mX ) is a Vw-algebra for every topological space X. In order to locate all the algebras, let us first examine the structure of VwX for an arbitrary topological space X. We will see that VwX is a topological cone as defined below.

Example 3.5 For any topological space X, LX is a cone with the pointwise addi- tion and multiplication. It is a semitopological cone with the Scott topology induced by the pointwise order. It is a topological cone if X is core-compact (i.e., if OX is a continuous lattice). Indeed, in that case LX is also a continuous lattice; this can be obtained from [7, Proposition II-4.6] and the fact that R+ is a continuous lattice. Every continuous dcpo is a c-space in its Scott topology, then we use [17, Corol- lary 6.9 (c)], which says that every semitopological cone with a c-space topology is topological.

Besides the space VwX of continuous valuations on any topological space X, Heck- mann also considered its subspaces Vf X of simple valuations and VpX of point- continuous valuations on X [11]. In the same paper he showed that VpX is the sobrification of Vf X [11, Theorem 5.5]. We will see that Vf and Vp can also be extended to monads on the category TOP0.

