The article can be understood as a proposed methodology to make the information contained in an IFC file useful for navigation purposes. This methodology, which includes some extensions on the ifcOWL ontology, allows matching the possible actions desired by a user with the different types of room. These two objectives are achieved, as will be seen below, in a reasonable processing time.

The World Wide Web contains a large and growing amount of information that is mainly encoded using HTML. This language is based on tags intended mainly to instruct a web browser how the information should be displayed, and not on the rational orga- nization of the information. This implies that the power of its use is conditioned by the ability of users to navigate between heteroge- neous sources of information and avoid saturation and data over- load. The Semantic Web concept [22,23] implies the goal of encoding information in a way that is understandable to both humans and computer systems. This goal has involved the devel- opment of new and increasingly complex forms of knowledge expression for true semantic interoperability.

In the literature, there are several works in this regard that doc- ument some problems with the IFC-OWL conversion. These prob- lems focus especially on those structures allowed in EXPRESS that are shared differently in OWL. One example is the ordered lists in EXPRESS, where each item represents a concept according to its position in the list. In OWL, it would be translated by a succession of rdf:list-rdf:first-rdf:rest items, which is considered in depth in Ref. [3]. This makes it difficult to enjoy the full semantic power of the resulting ontologies. Despite these problems, several conver- sions are available, since the transition from IFC to OWL is not unique and each author has adapted the conversion to the specific needs of the user [55]. Some of these proposals are analyzed and compared in Ref. [9], where the need for a standard for the effec- tive use of the ontology is also confirmed.

Focusing on the ifcOWL, Schevers and Drogemuller [57] develop a primitive (and incomplete) version of a unidirectional conversion of an IFC schema to an OWL ontology for research purposes. Later, Pauwels and Terkaj, based on several previous studies such as [6], propose a conversion procedure from EXPRESS schema to OWL ontology [9]. That work can be regarded as the basis of the ifcOWL ontology. In Ref. [5], a semi-automatic method is proposed for gen- erating an ontology called IfcWoD to yield a better ontology for linking IFC data in the field of the Semantic Web. This ontology uses terms included in the ifcOWL. The authors show that the two ontologies together (ifcOWL and ifcWoD) simplify the syntax and response time when searching. Terkaj and Sojic [11] propose improving the ifcOWL ontology by including new classes that explain the relationships between existing classes, especially those relationships between IFC object occurrences, object type and pre- defined property sets. In Ref. [13], the authors analyze three approaches to reference checking for AEC to obtain a benchmark performance.

In Ref. [16], a BIM-based model (called BO-IDM) is defined that provides highly detailed semantic information. This model repre- sents a building using 18 classes. In Ref. [58], the authors detail a Semantic Web-based approach to defining building views from the ifcOWL ontology. This ontology, expressed in the OWL/RDF serialization, is combined with SWRL logical rules. The use of these logical rules makes it possible to outline the definition of new con- cepts (ExternalDoor, BuildingEnvelope, etc.) and thus increase the expressiveness of the models, while at the same time extracting subgraphs from the ontology for processing as building views. These building views contain the necessary and sufficient informa- tion needed to properly execute a building process. Pauwels et al.

[8] propose an improvement of the ifcOWL ontology through an alternative representation for geometric data. This representation relies on the inclusion of a WKT (Well-Known Text) serialization. Another improvement proposed by Pauwels and Roxin [12] is Sim- pleBIM, a simplification of building models defined in ifcOWL graphs that removes the geometry part and reuses new properties defined by ifcWoD.

In this section, the authors will describe the system implemen- tation process, which includes the use of ifcOWL to support well- known techniques in indoor navigation. This description also includes a brief analysis of the software tools used in the process. Before starting with this description, it is important to empha- size that, in the context of this project, the IFC files can be used as a source model that will be complemented with the information provided by the different sensors included in the navigation sys- tem. In this sense, some recent works already propose extracting the information contained in an IFC file to determine evacuation routes for people with mobility problems [61] or support for robot navigation [62,63]. An interesting work in this regard is that of Taneja et al. [64], who describe a series of algorithms for automat- ically generating indoor navigation models from BIM. However, the scarcity of references in the literature shows that the benefits of this application have not been sufficiently exploited, especially as more and more BIM models become available (especially in public buildings). In the context of this work, the information contained in the IFC file can be used to support the construction of a Robot intention to carry out one of the anticipated actions through the corresponding adapted interface, a query will be made to the ontology module, which will respond with a list with the locations of possible destinations. The authors will describe the system in greater detail in what remains of the section. As we can see, this method seeks an improved representation of the navigation envi- ronment. In this way, strictly geometrical data is included, as well as high-level qualitative information and relationships with other objects in the environment, as indicated in Ref. [68]. Thanks to this approach, semantic maps can be used as an element to improve the navigation and as a basis for decision-making. The ontology will be nourished both by the information contained in the IFC file and by the information collected by the different sensors available after the recognition algorithms are applied to the data provided. Once this information is stored, the ontology can interact with the semantic map to make navigation decisions. This proposal differs from the references mentioned above, which are more oriented toward improving searches within IFC files and toward static ontologies in terms of their content.

To simplify the management of the ontology, we followed a strategy similar to that posed in [8], in particular in terms of the Cartesian coordinates and rotation angles in the relative direction of the axes. As mentioned above, the ifcOWL ontology makes use of an intricate system based on RDF lists. In this work, these lists are converted to a WKT in the IFC2RDF translator runtime. That WKT is accessed for each instance through a data property called inst:hasValueAsWKT, defined ad hoc for this work. Although there are specific programs and other ways of calculating the global posi- tion of the elements, the authors have opted for the way described so as to achieve a more direct integration with the rest of the ele- ments and at the same time show the potential of the ontology. However, by their nature, ontologies can be rapidly integrated with other elements with which they share the knowledge domain.

The data property inst:hasGlobalPosition indicates the global position of each instance of a subclass of IfcProduct with respect to the instance taken as origin in the navigation map. This position is stored as a string, similar to a WKT. The second property, inst: hasNoPlacementRelTo, has a Boolean value as range that indicates if it is the element without relative reference.

instance has not explicitly defined a value for a property, it can be for two reasons: because it really has no value for that property or because that information is missing in the ontology. In other words, every individual in the ontology is supposed to have a cer- tain value for a property, unless explicitly stated otherwise. As for monotonic inference, it implies that the retraction or modification of statements is not supported [72].

To improve indoor navigation, it would be useful to know the location of the different types of rooms in the environment: kitchen, bedroom, toilet, and so on. This information is not explic- itly defined in the IFC files, and thus not in the ifcOWL ontology either. However, the scheme allows for the inclusion of character- istic elements of some rooms: microwave, refrigerator, dishwasher, toilet tank, etc. By determining the global position of each element, it would be possible to locate the probable global position of each

There are currently four room types implemented (inst:BATH- ROOM, inst:BEDROOM, inst:KITCHEN and inst:OTHER_ROOM), although it is easily expandable to other types. For proper perfor- mance, these individuals must be explicitly declared as different from each other by means of the built-in differentFrom. This type of room can be linked to the instances of its characteristic elements by means of a new object property defined in the ontology: inst: hasUsualLocation.

For the operational extension of the ifcOWL, it is possible to resort to existing ontologies or resources (precisely one of the strengths in the field of ontologies is that they can be reused and integrated into systems). In this sense, a complementary element is the topological vision of the indoorGML, a standard proposed by the Open Geospatial Consortium (OGC) aimed at facilitating indoor navigation. Teo and Yu [80] provided an important relation- ship between IFC and indoorGML, adapting the previous work described in Ref. [81]. The IFC entities involved in this case are IfcS- pace, IfcOpeningElement, IfcDoor, IfcOpeningElement, IfcWindow, IfcRelSpaceBoundary, IfcWall and IfcWallStandardCase. This list could serve as a starting point for better optimizing the subset of

This paper presents an approach based on the ifcOWL ontology as a support for indoor navigation. Its aim is to try to take advan- tage of the increasing use of BIM files for application to indoor nav- igation, since this kind of file contains useful information in that context. This information should be complemented by data from sensors included in the navigation system. To this end, a series of modifications of this ontology have been proposed that include new items, SWRL ontological deduction rules and SQWRL searches. These extensions can be used to calculate the absolute position of the different elements of the ontology with respect to a global coordinate system, to deduce the possible location of different room types and to process orders for setting navigation destinations.

