Inter-Cell Interference (ICI) will be one of main problems for degrading the performance of future wireless networks at the cell edge. This adverse situation will become worst in the presence of dense deployment of micro and macro cells. In this context, the Coordinated Muli-Point (CoMP) technique was introduced to mitigate ICI in evolving wireless networks and increase their network performance at the cell edge. Even though the CoMP technique provides satisfactory solutions of various problems at the cell edge, nevertheless existing CoMP handover schemes do not prevent unnecessary handover initialisation decisions. In this paper, a new CoMP-based handover scheme is proposed in order to minimise unnecessary handover decisions at the cell edge in conjunction with signal measurements such as Reference Signal Received Power (RSRP) and

Received Signal Received Quality (RSRQ). A combination of calculations of RSRP and RSRQ facilitate a credible decision making process of CoMP mode and handover mode at the cell edge. Typical numerical experiments indicate that by triggering the CoMP mode, the overall network performance is constantly increase as the number of unnecessary handovers is progressively reduced.

Coordinated Multipoint (CoMP) is an advanced technology of Long Term Evolution-Advance (LTE-A), which comprises many solutions such as Inter-Cell Interference and Intra-Cell Interference [6] [21] [15]. Moreover, it helps to mitigate the aforementioned interferences and increase the cell edge performance. To this end, the CoMP technique plays a vital role in current research towards the reduction of decisions for unnecessary handovers at the cell edge and the follow up improve- ment of network performance [14] [11]. User Mobility is playing an important role in wireless networks because the network performance is highly depending on it. It became more challenging task for wireless networks when they handle users are moving in fast vehicles or they are present in congested places such as shopping malls and stadiums. For handling mobility problems, cellular technologies intro- duced handover mechanism. Handover is a process in which the control of UE is transferring from one cell to another cell or one sector to another sector[14]. The main purpose of handover is to minimise the disturbance and provide session conti- nuity to UE [16]. Moreover, the handover schemes are more critical and challenging for cell edge users because at the cell edge the reception UE received by serving enhanced NodeB (eNB) is very poor [18]. The main reasons of poor receptions are; UE has long distance from serving eNB and the interference level is very high because of neighbouring cell [6]

In wireless networks the values of handover hysteresis and handover margin (HOM) (i.e., two of handover triggers at the UE defined by the network) are mainly con- sidered to reduce the number of unnecessary handovers. Therefore, in LTE-A these values are also widely used in handover algorithms and proposed schemes [14] [12]. In [9] authors presented the grouping algorithm based on adaptive hysteresis value (i.e., based on actual hysteresis value but changing with time). This algorithm consists of two steps, where the predefined threshold are defined for each step to move into next step. To avoid the unnecessary handovers, the algorithm is imple-

In [2], authors have proposed method to control unnecessary handovers in het- erogeneous network with dense deployment of small cells. In this method, a short- ened candidate (UE) list is introduced on basis of UE actual distance and angle of movement from base station. The simulations results showed that when speed is considered, the proposed method has low probability of unnecessary handover as compare with conventional handover algorithms. Although authors discussed and presented good research work but they have ignored main issues such as load on the serving eNB and interference level at the cell edge in his results. These are main issues of future networks during handover decisions.

Another handover scheme for microcell is presented in [4] based on hysteresis margin value to overcome the redundant handovers. For this purpose they calcu- lated the position of UE to set the hysteresis margin value. Although, the algorithm is much closed to traditional and conventional algorithms but it used good channel quality indicators values to defined the decision parameters. This algorithm is much closed to present research with addition of RSRP and RSRQ.

The main aim of proposed handover scheme is to reduce the number of unnecessary handovers and improve performance of users at the cell edge. For this purpose pro- posed handover scheme is divided into two mode; CoMP mode and handover mode. In CoMP mode, UE receives RSRP from the serving eNB below than threshold level (a value set by network operator) but the level of RSRQ is not bad or dropped from certain level. In such situation, conventional and existing handover schemes, they triggered handover mode, but in proposed scheme CoMP mode is triggered instead of handover initialisation decisions. By triggering CoMP mode, the UE start re- ceiving data from multiple eNBs on basis of CoMP types such as Joint transmission (i.e., UE received data from all nodes in coordinated way) or Beam forming (i.e., the eNBs are coordinated to each other, but UE receive data only from single eNB). On the other hand, when UE receives RSRP below than threshold level from the eNB and RSRQ level is also bad, than handover mode is triggered and handover process will initiate.  Mathematically and logically the triggering of CoMP and maximum to -120dBm (approximately). This is happened because as UEs distance increased from eNB, he experienced less power and high distortion thats why the received power is reduced at the cell edge. The main reason of decreasing RSRP is large fading (i.e., factor such as multipath, speed of surrounding objects, transmission bandwidth etc.) affecting receiving power [20].

