Abstract For efficient running of wireless sensor network applications, energy conservation of the sensors becomes a prime paradigm for prolonging lifetime of the network. Taking this aspect into consideration, a cluster head weight selection method called Cluster Chain Weight Metrics approach (CCWM) has been discussed that takes service parameters for enhancing performance of the overall network. In a clustering based approach one of the main concerns is selection of appropriate cluster heads in the network and the formation of balanced clusters. Cluster heads are selected first in a network based on weight metric and then cluster formation takes place. This approach not only aims to conserve energy of sensors but also balances load. A local clustering mechanism is adopted within the cluster to reduce computation and communication cost. Also, a new technique for data transmission is explored. The results of the proposed approach are com- pared through simulation with LEACH, WCA and IWCA. The proposed approach shows an improvement on an average over rounds by 51% over LEACH, 27% from WCA and 18.8% from IWCA in terms of lifetime and energy consumption.

environmental monitoring. In these, sensors are deployed ran- domly or uniformly to collect data from the environment and pass on the data to the base station. The unique network char- acteristics present several challenges in the design of sensor networks which involves limited battery capacity, limited hard- ware resources, massive and random deployment and dynamic and unreliable environment. Recent advances in WSNs have led to many new protocols specifically designed for sensor net- works where energy awareness is an essential consideration. Most of the attention, however, has been given to the routing protocols as they might differ depending on the application and network architecture. At the network layer, the main aim is to find ways for energy efficient route setup and reliable

LEACH is the first cluster based routing protocol that selects CHs based on threshold criteria [3]. In this protocol, CHs are rotated in a cluster with an objective to reduce energy consumption and to distribute load evenly among the nodes. CHs aggregate data from their member nodes in a cluster and pass on the aggregated data to the base station.

An optimized clustering algorithm (OWCA) [7] is proposed based on WCA with additional constraints on CHs selection in mobile WSNs. It takes into account node degree, transmission power, mobility, cumulative time, initial energies and distance from base station to each sensor node. This algorithm behaves better as compare to WCA but overhead involved in CH selec- tion is more. It even ignores interferences in the network.

To distribute load evenly among the clusters, CHs are selected and rotated within the cluster [8]. The relationship between the CHs and the routing techniques is considered. An integrated approach of CH selection and routing in two tier WSN (WSN) is adopted. Genetic Algorithm is used for CH selection and A-Star algorithm is used for routing to extend life of WSN. This approach can lead to significant improvements in the network lifetime over other techniques.

residual energy into consideration. A node having the highest weight value is selected as CH. The algorithm is executed on demand, i.e., when a node is not able to attach itself to any of the existing CHs. The algorithm tries to distribute the load as much as possible. This approach considers realistic param- eters and has the flexibility of adjusting the weight factors based on the application needs.

Choosing an optimal number of CHs that yields high through- put and low latency in a network is still a challenging problem. More CHs add extra number of hops since the packets have to be routed through number of CHs before reaching destined node. It results an increase in latency, more power consump- tion and processing cost. Thus, to maximize resource utiliza- tion, minimum number of CHs should be selected that can cover up the whole geographical area.

Considering all the above issues, CH selection method has been devised that limits the cluster size and selects the best can- didate node as CH based on the rank metric. A mechanism has been devised that selects CH based upon network service parameters such as residual energy, path loss factor and node degree. The overhead involved in CH rotation is less as the process is called again when the same condition is met. The various assumptions that have been taken for implementation are as follows:

There can be a possibility that the nodes with higher energy are far away from other nodes whereas the nodes with low energy are near to each other. The optimal CH position is at the center of the cluster, however, it is not always possi- ble to achieve such position. One solution for optimal selec- tion is to calculate the average energy of the nodes and then select those nodes as CH candidates which have their energy greater than average energy (EAVG).

1. CH election procedure is not invoked until existing CH residual energy is more than 75% of its member nodes residual energy in its cluster. This has been found out through simulation by varying rounds against energy con- sumption pattern. The CH selection procedure is called when existing CH residual energy becomes less than 1%

Based upon the preceding discussion, a Clustered Chain Weight Metrics (CCWM) approach is designed that combines each of the system parameters discussed above with certain weighing factors chosen according to the system needs. The flexibility of changing the weight factor helps us to apply this algorithm to various networks. The output of cluster head selection procedure will be the set of nodes having higher cal- culated value of position metrics (POS). Only one node within its transmission range will be selected as CH i.e. no two CHs are immediate neighbors. There might be a situation when two CHs results in same calculated value of the POS. In such decrease. This is due to the fact that nodes with large transmis- sion range will cover larger area. As a result, the number of disjoint clusters formed will be less. The cluster formation is non-uniform and the maximum nodes that can be accommo- dated by any cluster in CCWM is 20. This shows the number of clusters formed in CCWM is less as compared to the clusters formed in WCA and IWCA.

clusters results in more consumption of energy. In WCA and IWCA, with low transmission range energy consumption is more whereas CCWM consumes energy in a more balanced way. The consumption of energy in WCA and IWCA is more as more CHs will try to send data to the base station using direct link. As link distances increase, energy consumption also increases. In CCWM, data are sent to the base station through short parallel chains.

A cluster head selection technique is proposed by limiting the node degree. This method not only reduces energy consump- tion but also balances load by selecting the cluster head nodes first and then forming the well distributed clusters. This approach can be applied to variety of applications by varying performance parameters as per the application environment. Adaptation of local clustering mechanism results in an improvement of 14% as compared to when no such mecha- nism is used. This not only reduces the overhead of the net- work but also reduces the communication cost. The simulation result shows CCWM outperforms LEACH, WCA and IWCA by achieving higher energy efficiency, better load distribution and extending network lifetime. This can be used for real time traffic.

