Recently, studies on social network have attracted a lot of attention from sociology, informatics and computer science [1,2]. A social network is a social structure made up of a set of social actors (such as individuals or organizations) and a set of the dyadic ties between these actors. A huge amount of data and resources make it critical to analyze social network related problems. A series of research on social network have been done in many aspects of sociology, such as social influence, specific origin to a specified destination in a given network while minimizing the total cost associated with the path. SP is a fundamental problem in social network. In a graph, finding the path with the minimum cost from a source node s to a destination node d is called the point-to-point (P2P) problem, but a common variant fixes a single node as the source node and finds shortest paths from the source to all other nodes in the graph. In addition to P2P problem, other shortest path problem, such as single-destination, all-pairs and so on, could be converted to single-source shortest path. The single-source problem with non-negative arc lengths has been studied most extensively [4]. For a general network, traditional dijkstra's

weighted or non-weighted networks without any domain- specific information. Though it is a single-source algorithm, we can transform it to a P2P algorithm by terminating at destination node. But it has high time complexity of O(n2), so it might not work well on the SP in social network, especially in large-scale social network. The time complexity of modified standard breadth-first is O(n), but it is suited to non-weighted network [5]. With the increase of network scale, authors used domain-specific information about the network to deal with it. In traffic networks, researchers have adopted the natural hi- erarchies to speed up a shortest path algorithm significantly [6e10], and more algorithm are given in [11]. It is obvious that these algorithms could not be applied to social network. From the same point of view in traffic networks, the feature of social network can be utilized to the SP problem. Community feature is one of the most important characteristics of social network.

The paper is organized as follows. Section2 describes the proposed SPCD algorithm in detail. Section3 is experiment in five datasets. This subsection analyses accuracy and efficiency. Moreover the influence of community path number and community detection method to SPCD is discussed. We conclude the paper is Section4 and point out the future work.

In this section, the proposed algorithm is described in detail. First, the community definition and detection is intro- duced, and then the method of constructing community graph is described. The k shortest community paths are given in subsection2.3. Finally, the shortest path in sub-graph is given.

that case, we can pay our attention to the large edges and find out the communities including the SP, and then searching the SP in these communities. As far as we know, there is no method using community information to solve P2P problem in weighted social network. In this paper, we propose a new shortest path algorithm based on community detection (SPCD). Using community information, SPCD can narrow

Xie J. et al. [2] suggest a general framework that uses Speaker-listener Label Propagation Algorithm (SLPA) to detect communities and it clusters the bigger edges into a community for weighted network. In this case, we cannot use Xie's method directly. We reverse the target network before

Compared with the edges between communities, the cost of edges in the community is smaller and ignored temporarily, so we treat all the nodes in the community as one node, that is to say, the community these nodes located is the node of com- munity graph. There might be more than one edge between communities and we choose the minimum cost edge as the connection of community graph between corresponding community nodes. The aim of SP problem is searching the smallest path, so we select the minimum cost edge in this step. After that we model the original network to a new weighted community graph.

There is a situation that the SP is not included in the shortest community path but in the second shortest or k-th shortest community path, so the next step is calculate the k shortest community paths. K shortest paths problem means finding the top k paths from source node to destination node in order of increasing cost. If the number of paths from source community to destination community is less than k in our community graph, all the paths are selected.

Original network was modeled to community graph by our method. The real shortest path in the original network is included in the community graph. Moreover, there is a high probability that the actual shortest path can be found in the shortest community path. However, we cannot ignore the situation that the real shortest path is not concluded in the shortest community path, but in another path among the k shortest community paths. Based on the above analysis, we calculate the k shortest community paths

Coauthorships in network science: coauthorship network of scientists (net-science) working on network theory and experiment including publications up until early 2006, as compiled by M. Newman in May 2006 [23]. The network has a total of 1589 scientists in it, from a broad variety of fields [23].

Datasets of nuclear experiment (nucl-ex): published in Los Alamos e-Print Archive [27] from December 1994 to the present. We construct the network of every year from 1994 to 2014 and make some statistics. The authors (i.e. vertices) that identify each author by his or her surname and first initial only [3] and weight [5] are defined by M. Newman.

networks demonstrated the efficiency and approximation error. For given limit, our algorithm has excellent performance. In particular, various community detection methods could be used in this algorithm. In the future, we will focus on the development of a heuristic method for combining social network community information for SP problem in weighted social networks. Otherwise, it will be interesting to study the community detection algorithm suited to the social network.

J. Huang, H. Sun, J. Han, H. Deng, Y. Sun, Y. Liu, Shrink: A structural clustering algorithm for detecting hierarchical communities in networks, in: Proceedings of the 19th ACM International Conference on Informa- tion and Knowledge Management, ACM, 2010, pp. 219e228.

