the current state of the art of educational VR, focusing then on its use in the cultural heritage field and introducing the concept of Sense of Pres- ence. In Section 3, we present our experience, starting from the re- quirements we identified, its overall structure, its main components, and the control conditions. In Section 4, we discuss the questionnaire we designed to evaluate our experience, its main modules, how we carried out the experimentation, and the feedback we received. In Section 5, we discuss the results of our experiments. In Section 6, we draw some con- clusions and outline future research directions.

The Embodied Cognition Theory is similar to but different from the previous one. It bases on two main concepts: cognition is not abstract and amodal and is not just about thinking but also involves perceiving and acting in the real world (Ionescu & Vasc, 2014). The critical point of this theory is the role of the body: learning does not involve only the mind, but there is a substantial contribution from our physical being. For instance, some studies demonstrate that hand movements play a role in solving or learning to solve different problems (Ionescu & Vasc, 2014).

Constructivism points attention to the sensory feedback we receive, while Embodied Cognition Theory focuses more on the body. However, they both agree that a practical interaction with the world can improve knowledge. For this reason, VR can strongly support learning activities, thanks to the interactivity it can bring. In this work, we based mainly on the Constructivist Theory: we strongly relied on the sensory feedback the user received from our experience (namely, the visual feedback of the reconstructed environment and the auditory feedback from the ambient sounds and the lecture contents).

et al., 2021), we decided to focus our efforts in this direction. Moreover, they tested the user experience and sense of presence on very few items, and they did not include an evaluation of the level of cybersickness in their final questionnaire.

As one of the aims of this work was to investigate whether the increased immersion of a VR experience can affect its learning outcome, we first need to clarify what we refer to by this term and the relationship between immersion and Sense of Presence. In this subsection, we will provide two main definitions of these concepts, one by Witmer and Singer (WS) and the other by Slater. Furthermore, we will present some of the most common methods used to measure the Sense of Presence in VR experiences.

The main difference between these two perspectives lies in their definitions of Immersion and its relationship to Presence. According to WS, the two concepts are closely related and cannot be easily differen- tiated. Slater, however, clearly separates the two and defines them as distinct yet related concepts.

(Grassini & Laumann, 2020) analysed several literature works to compare the different techniques used to measure the Sense of Presence. Even if there seems to be no standard method for measuring Presence, the most used technique involves post-immersion questionnaires. Among them, the most popular is the WS one (Witmer et al., 2005; Witmer & Singer, 1998). We also chose to use the WS questionnaire, as it had more technical factors, useful for our multidisciplinary team.

In terms of learning outcomes, we expect our VR application to be at least as effective as the two control conditions, if not more effective, due to its immersive nature and the users being guided along a specific path; in particular, this last attention should limit potential distractions. Additionally, we anticipate that our VR application will be particularly effective in conveying spatial information about the Domus, thanks to the high level of immersion provided by the VR environment. These ad- vantages should limit potential distractions and enhance learning outcomes.

All the historical contents of the experience have been taken from Marco Vitruvio Pollione, 15 B.C.; Angela, 2007; Paoli, 1982; Flocchini et al., 2017, and reworked with the support of an expert in this field: a former history teacher that helped us also in designing the lecture structure. We kept the whole experience, as well as the questionnaire, in our language in order to reduce the cognitive load associated with the need to process a foreign language (differently from other works in literature, like Makransky et al., 2019) and not to add any linguistic bias to the results.

The Multi-media Presentation Experience (MPE) is built using Microsoft PowerPoint. Its slides contain images taken from the VRE, brief textual descriptions, and audio tracks. The structure of the slides is made to reflect the design of the digital lectures thoroughly: the contents and the explanation audios are the same. Moreover, we kept the number and contents of written elements as limited as possible to not distract the users during the lecture audios execution and not add more information concerning the other two experiences.

As discussed in subsection 2.2, preventing Cybersickness is essential for providing a positive VR experience. In our application, this was a key consideration, given that studies have suggested a correlation between the realism of the simulation and the severity of sickness experienced by users (Chang et al., 2020). Realistic environments can create higher immersion, leading to an expectation of vestibular feedback closer to real-world ones. As we aimed to have a representation of the environ- ment near to reality as much as possible, we were mindful of this issue throughout the development of our VR application and incorporated well-known strategies to minimize this unwanted effect. Firstly, we limited movement to teleportation, a commonly used technique to pre- vent mismatches between the visual feedback of the VR experience and the steady vestibular feedback of the user's body (Chang et al., 2020; Clifton & Palmisano, 2020).

Finally, the potential impact of extended VR exposure on users is worth considering. Research has shown that experiences lasting more than 10 min can increase cybersickness and negative outcomes (Chang et al., 2020; Saredakis et al., 2020). Therefore, we deliberately decided to limit the overall duration of our VR experience to approximately 10 min to minimize the risk of negative effects on users. By taking these pre- cautions, we aim to reduce as much as possible the level of cybersickness and achieve our goal as stated in hypothesis 3.

To test our application's efficiency, we went for a three-conditions between-subject design. Participants have been randomly assigned to one of the three previously-described conditions: VRE, FPE, or MPE. The participants should first take part the respective experience and then complete our survey, realized on Qualtrics.1 The complete duration of the experiment was between 30 and 45 min. Initially, we intended to conduct the entire experiment and collect data in our laboratory. However, due to COVID-19 pandemic regulations, we needed to find an alternative solu- tion that would allow us to gather a sufficient number of participants without putting them in danger. As a result, we opted for a hybrid approach, where participants assigned to the VRE condition were asked to visit our laboratory. In contrast, the FPE application and MPE pre- sentation were distributed remotely to participants assigned to these conditions.

tool), and this can be considered a relevant outcome (Pellas et al., 2021). Surprisingly, in contrast with our initial hypothesis, MPE participants outperformed VRE participants in the Spatial Reconstruction task when participants were asked to name each room on a map. At the same time, we note that in MPE, each room was introduced with a slide specifying the room name; however, this was infeasible in the VRE and FPE expe- riences due to the limitations of the first-person view perspective. Indeed, we introduced signs with the room names nearby each lecture point; however, the solution could not solve the issue. Furthermore, 2D maps are more familiar tools to navigate environments; accordingly, we believe that a more familiar interaction favored participants in MPE compared to VRE and MPE participants who only interacted with 3D

Regarding UX, our results show that the PQ score is significantly higher for VRE than FPE; however, we recorded no significant difference for MPE. As PQ sustains the do-goals of the individual in using a product/ technology (Hassenzahl, 2008), our results suggest that VRE might be considered more efficient in explaining the structure of an Ancient Roman Domus than a desktop experience. Still, this difference could not be detected for a more familiar educational tool like MPE. Our results show significant differences in the HQ score between all the conditions.

Regarding the sense of presence, VRE participants outperformed FPE participants, which aligns with our initial hypothesis 4. Furthermore, the VRE group scored higher in Involvement and Immersion, suggesting that VRE participants felt more engaged and immersed than FPE participants. Combined with the analysis of the General Learning variable, these results are promising as they suggest that the increased level of sense of presence provided by VR technology did not hurt the learning outcome, as we also hypothesized (4). While this does not definitively establish the effec- tiveness of VR as a learning tool, it provides a solid starting point for further investigation.

Our work seems to be not exempt from limitations. One of the problems involves both our sample size and its age range. Regarding the first issue, we managed to test our work with a limited amount of par- ticipants due to current regulations related to the COVID-19 pandemic that prevented us from making more people access the laboratory. Moreover, we had an unbalanced testing group: the MPE was tested by almost ten participants more than the other two conditions. This issue, caused by the regulations related to the COVID-19 pandemic too, impacted the types of analyses we could perform: having unbalanced samples limited our choices for the statistical analyses.

applications for cultural heritage. Future research directions should include better control of the sample size (both in the number of partici- pants and the age range) and more attention to some design issues we identified. Moreover, to further increase the users' immersion in the experience and test the modality of Exploration in both the VRE and the FPE, we aim to add the implementation of the VRE on the Cyberith's Virtualizer.4 We would also like to assess the value of our application in a more ecological setting, like inside a museum exhibit or a classroom, to check to a greater extent its educational value. Finally, we would like to test also the Exploration Mode, adding more interaction and simple tasks to complete, to test if the integration between movement freedom, knowledge points, and interactive elements could increase the results, leading to better and more performant learning experiences.

