ing service. In this case, even in out-of-service region, the IoT devices can still maintain instant data sharing with the remote cloud server. Meanwhile, all the nearby IoT devices are capable of constructing the randomized data forwarding and delivering networks if necessary.

User Anonymity: Normally, messages originated from the same TU carry identical or regular patterns, which is likely to expose the link- ability. Hence, by analyzing large quantities of eavesdropped mes- sages, the non-negligible details can be deduced, which seriously compromise the user privacy. Therefore, anonymous message deliv- ery is utterly necessary for all the participating TUs.

In our design, the edge infrastructure (EI) is the essential part of the Internet of Things (IoT) system. EI is in charge of significant processes such as system setup, user registration, key management, and verifica- tion, among others. EI is assumed to be robust to all types of attacks and to remain authentic at all times in our design [27]. Because the role of EI is undertaken by commercial groups in the proposed plan, it cannot be entirely trusted. We regard the EI to be a trustworthy but suspicious

Furthermore, user unlinkability for all participating TUs should be assured, so that the adversary cannot link messages sent by the same TU. The suggested authentication system ensures that TUs are unlinkable and resistant to illicit tracing. That is, the attacker will be unable to track down specific TUs by examining the featured identity in transmitted messages.

The conditional privacy preservation property is supplied for all le- gitimate TUs during the whole authenticated key management and data transfer process. If necessary, the central system can reveal the true iden- tify of hostile or compromised entities while maintaining the anonymous identity. In the suggested technique, the anonymous session identities are used in each session, but the confidential original TU identities are kept secret at all times.

Furthermore, as a partial key, the TU chooses a random integer that is only valid and effective for the duration of the current session. On a certain TU, impersonation and forgery will fail the final validation. As a result, the privacy of users is safeguarded. Meanwhile, message retrieval and identity tracking for the selected suspicious TUs can be ac- complished, revealing the malicious user behaviors and patterns. Over- all, a quite effective authentication and key management system is used to maximize the privacy-preserving property.

