Second, decompose IMFs component and detail coefficient of Pan image using Curvelet Transform (CT), which are directional. Then, we use linear dependency to decide which detail coef- ficient of Pan should be injected into MS coefficient. Finally, we perform the inverse curvelet and inverse of BEMD to get high-resolution MS image.

In experiments with IKONOS, Quick Bird and GeoEye satellite data, we demonstrated that our scheme has good spectral quality and efficiency. Spectral and spatial quality metrics in terms of SAM, RASE, RMSE, CC, ERGAS and QNR are used in our experiments. We compared our scheme with the state-of-the-art pan-sharpening techniques and found that our new scheme improved quantitative and qualitative results.

Main objective of pan-sharpening is containing spatial infor- mation from a high-resolution image, e.g. Pan or Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR) image to a low-resolution image, e.g., MS image, while remaining spectral characteristics of MS image. In addition, registration should be done before pan- sharpening to avoid artifacts of the output image and, MS image should be resampled into the similar spatial reference

CS-based methods such as intensity hue saturation (IHS) [1,2] have widely used due to the high sharpening capability. Since the intensity component of MS image substituted with the Pan image. In addition, other CS-based methods such as Principle component analysis (PCA) [3], Brovey transform and Gram-Schmidt (GS) [4] provide superior visual high- resolution multispectral images, but have a limitation of high- quality spectral information. Although a variety of modified methods [5,6] have proposed to recompense for such distor- tion, the limitation of CS-based methods does not fully overcome.

This paper is structured as follows: In Section 2, we briefly describe BEMD and curvelet transform. Section 3 describes the proposed pan-sharpening scheme in detail. Section 4 gives Quantitative Quality Assessment that used in evaluation. Section 5 presents different results and the comparisons with other methods. Finally, we draw the conclusion in Section 6.

tral distortion, but it also gives a flexibility to describe how the HP coefficients of Pan are injected into the LP sub-band of MS. Initial mechanism recommended directly inserting the HP coefficients into the LP sub-band of MS. However, differ- ent techniques using the ARSIS concept [14,15] bend the coef- ficients based on specified algorithms [16]. Regularly, these algorithms feature in modified injection of information accord- ing to the local correlation between Pan and MS images, and do better than the directly injecting method.

changed. With the GS method, the colors are preserved, but the spatial details from the Pan image did not appropriately transfer to the pan-sharpening image. The curvelet method results are good in spatial quality in the pan-sharpening image, and detail information from the pan image appropriately saved, while the spectral from the low-resolution MS image has changed to some extent. The result of the proposed scheme visually shows good spatial quality and the colors well pre- served from the low-resolution MS image, since combination of curvelet that enhances spatial resolution and spatial similar- ity property of IMFs to remove large amounts of redundancies helps to get a good spatial quality results.

We have compared the scheme with different state-of-the-art pan-sharpening methods. We have used GS spectral sharpen- ing [24], adaptive IHS, Brovey, PCA method and curvelet as pan-sharpening methods for validation. The cause for this choice is that, between the most extensively used CS methods that considered producing the finest results, and adaptive IHS is the fastest.

high-resolution Pan Image of the same scene in order to obtain high-resolution MS output image. BEMD is used for decom- posing low-resolution MS into IMF and the residue compo- nents, while CT is used for decomposing IMF components, which one has the better spatial and spectral responses at a given pixel position and Pan Image into coarse coefficients and details coefficients. Then, the details coefficients of Pan Image and IMF components are fused by linear dependency rule to obtain high-resolution MS output image.

The proposed scheme has compared with other methods both in synthetic and real images and its performance has assessed both numerically and visually. Experiments achieved on very-high-resolution Quick Bird, IKONOS and GeoEye images have demonstrated that the proposed scheme is quan- titatively comparable with state-of-the art pan-sharpening techniques. Depending on the datasets, conversely, the perfor- mance ranking of pan-sharpening methods may be different. In particular, on the Quick Bird dataset our scheme outper- forms the Gram-Schmidt spectral sharpening method that is applied in the software package ENVI and other methods as PCA, adaptive-IHS, Curvelet and Brovey that is saleable Pan-sharpened products are achieved.

