In the recent past much work has been devoted to the automated construction of finite models of first order formulas. Such models may bring much help either in automated reasoning (in semantic strategies) or for interactive use, for instance for debugging purposes, or simply for refuting a conjecture. Many systems have been developed, and many efforts devoted to reducing the huge search spaces involved. The most successful methods are those able to derive as much information as possible from the given formula.

Example 2.6 Following Example 2.4, a is not defined in I0 (though it is definable, as any constant), hence f (a) is not definable in I0. However, if we take I1 = I0  [a, 1], then a is clearly defined in I1, hence f (a) is definable, and cellI1 (f (a)) = f [1]. The literal f (a)= a is also definable in I1. Hence the clause f (a)= a is unit in I1.

This last fact however suggests that a restricted form of local confluence may hold. This is indeed the case, as we now prove. Since we have to consider all five rules of Definition 2.7 the proof is somewhat tedious, though not very difficult, so we give it in the Appendix.

It should first be mentioned that the very simple description of SEM given above misses an important source of efficiency, obtained by a complex back- track mechanism. But since we are going to replace the enumeration provided by the algorithm SEM above by a rather different algorithm, it is not possible to recover this backtracking as such. We rather focus on propagation, which is probably the most important feature of SEM.

It is however not necessary to generate all isomorphism classes of partial in- terpretations, and we may restrict the search to those interpretations which are logically meaningful, i.e., the interpretations that can be obtained by se- quences of assignments and propagations from f0.

which proves that L = L'. We now have to consider the case where one of C, C' is not unit in a corresponding interpretation. Since C and C' are unit in f, and we consider refinements of f, these clauses may no longer be unit only by becoming true or false.

