We propose String MultiSet Rewriting (SMSR) as an intermediate language for simulation of biomolecular systems. Higher level formalisms for biological systems description can be translated into SMSR and SMSR descriptions can be simulated by adapting an existing simulator. In this paper we show the translation of one of these formalisms, CLS+, into SMSR, and we prove correctness and completeness of the translation.

SMSR can be used as an intermediate language for simulation. On the one end, it is easy to develop simulators for SMSR, for instance by extending the GBS simulator [9]. On the other hand, the maximal matching operator facilitates the translation of higher level languages, in particular those based on term rewriting. The idea is that a term can be seen as a tree, a tree can be seen as a set of strings representing all paths from root to leaves and the replacement of a subtree becomes the replacement of a set of strings having a common prefix. As an example we show how a formalism based on term rewriting, CLS+ [11,2] can be translated into SMSR, proving translation correctness and completeness.

In this section we introduce the String MultiSet Rewriting formalism. It is based on term rewriting: we will define the syntax of terms and a structural congruence relation on them. Then we will introduce rewrite rules and define an operational semantics describing the evolution of terms by means of rewrite rules application.

Patterns are used to define rewrite rules of SMSR. A rewrite rule is essentially a pair of patterns in which the first element describes the term that is modified by an application of the rule and the second describes how the term changes after the application. Variables in patterns allow a rewrite rule to be applicable to any term that can be obtained by replacing such variables with proper elements or strings. The maximal matching operator {|SP |} represents a multiset of strings which have as prefix the same instantiation of the string pattern SP .

We have proposed String MultiSet Rewriting (SMSR) as an intermediate language for the simulation of biomolecular systems. SMSR is an extension of multiset rewrit- ing with strings as multiset elements and with a maximal matching operator. Higher level formalisms for biological systems descriptions can be translated into SMSR and SMSR descriptions can be simulated by adapting an existing simulator. We have shown the translation of one of these formalisms, CLS+, into SMSR, and we have proven correctness and completeness of the translation.

