Abstract Congested roads, high traffic, and parking problems are major concerns for any modern city planning. Congestion of on-street spaces in official neighborhoods may give rise to inappropri- ate parking areas in office and shopping mall complex during the peak time of official transactions. This paper proposes an intelligent and optimized scheme to solve parking space problem for a small city (e.g., Mauritius) using a reactive search technique (named as Tabu Search) assisted by rough set. Rough set is being used for the extraction of uncertain rules that exist in the databases of park- ing situations. The inclusion of rough set theory depicts the accuracy and roughness, which are used to characterize uncertainty of the parking lot. Approximation accuracy is employed to depict accu- racy of a rough classification [1] according to different dynamic parking scenarios. And as such, the hybrid metaphor proposed comprising of Tabu Search and rough set could provide substantial research directions for other similar hard optimization problems.

The significant and dramatic increase in demand for parking spaces due to the increase of on the road vehicles in cities and urban areas around the world on one hand and the signif- icant shortage of these parking spaces created a challenging problem for managing these spaces. Although on the road parking spaces in most of the cities are metered, which should reduce the demand, the demand is still significantly high lead- ing also to congested roads and overcrowded transit lines as well as increase in travel time and costs. This demand also leads to economic, social, and environmental losses. And with the continuous increase in the population, the problem be- comes more critical. As such parking space optimization and [9] to estimate the supply of parking spaces to potential de- mand. Using a fuzzy knowledge-based Decision Making, Leephakpreeda [10] presented a car-parking guidance. Arnott and Rowse [11] developed an integrated model for curbside parking and traffic congestion control in a downtown area.

Initially proposed by Glover in 1989 [3], the Tabu Search meth- od as a technique used in combinatorial optimization problems was adopted later in his work in 1997 [4]. Tabu Search can be de- fined as a meta-heuristic procedure, which uses a local search subroutine in order to find local optima. Unlike other local search approaches, Tabu Search stores information on the paths that have been previously visited (previous solutions) by using memory structures known as tabu lists, thereby preventing the search from cycling and becoming trapped in a local search. Since the tabu list is a short-term memory of previously visited solutions in the search, its size greatly determines how many iter- ations cannot be called again in the search (commonly referred to as tabu). This suffices to be one of the limitations of this tech- nique as it may restrict the search too much, thus preventing some promising moves to the most probable solution in the search space. Tabu Search has been applied to a wide range of optimization problems that involve various classes of integer problems.

There are two general kinds of decisional rules in classic rough set theory [25]. The first is the exact decisional rule, named also deterministic, where the decisional set (the cost) contains the conditional attributes (area or other features). The second is the approximate decisional rule in which only some conditional attributes (area or other features) are in- cluded in the decisional set (price) [5,26]. In this case of park- ing function, the causal relationships between the property features and its value are appraised without any uncertainty. The logical prepositions if.. .then allow the user to create a set of U. Due to the granularity of knowledge, rough sets can- not be characterized by using available knowledge. Therefore, for every rough set X, we associate two crisp sets, called lower and upper approximation. Intuitively, the lower approximation of X consists of all elements that surely belong to X, the upper approximation of X consists of all elements that possibly

the Tabu lists, respectively. The parameter t specifies the min- imum Euclidean distance that must exist between each random point and Tabu points. It is important to note that using this scheme, the size of the Tabu list dynamically changes based on the distribution of the uncertain and the Tabu points in the parking solution space [24].

fined as the total number of vehicle multiplied by a coeffi- cient. In the research documented here, a coefficient has been selected based on empirical tests [29]. The upper bound and lower bound of the tenure is set to the maximum of ini- tial tabu space and has been further tuned with rough set rule set. Thus, the upper bound and the lower bound are proportional to the problem size and stay within a reason- able range [29].

In contrast to conventional optimization of Tabu Search, in the proposed hybrid intelligent scheme of car parking a rough set methodology is incorporated to tackle the uncertainty pre- vailing in parking function. The asymptotic enumeration behavior of parking function is also studied and most impor- tantly, the nature of traffic for the development of the model has been considered as bi-directional (whereas mostly it refers to unidirectional in recent literature [20]). The intelligent scheme proposed could provide substantial research directions for other similar hard optimization problems.

