Although wireless sensor networks (WSNs) have been utilized for over one decade, it is now heavily used by many modern applications such as medical observance, disaster management and environmental monitoring. This type of network suffers from limited energy and a short lifetime in addition to the low channel bandwidth. Bandwidth represents the major challenges of such systems due to the great impact of communication cost on the consumption of nodes power. Clustering has been proven to be one of the best techniques to conserve the energy of WSNs. LEACH (low energy adaptive clustering hier- archy) protocol is one of the most fundamental works of WSN clustering. However, this protocol suffers from some drawbacks, especially in the setup phase where CH is selected randomly. This work aims to enhance LEACH by identifying a cluster head according to the lowest degree of consuming energy. The results clarify the ability of this work to enhance LEACH while prolonging the lifetime and improving the performance of WSN.

CONTINUOUS technological progress works to convert the dis- tributed systems from large to small and tiny scales are known as Wireless Sensor Networks (WSNs) [1]. WSNs are gigantic sys- tems composed of a large number of miniaturized, distributed and limited-energy sensor nodes. These nodes are usually spread over a certain region in order to collect various types of environ- mental data [2]. Many recent applications depend on WSN such as medical observance, disaster management and environmental monitoring. The collected data are always sent to a base station (called sink) for processing and analysis. This type of network suf- fers from limited energy and a short lifetime due to the limited non-rechargeable power of the small batteries in sensor nodes. The network lifetime is defined by the round when all nodes have died, and the sensor node is defined as dead when its energy is out [1]. The limited lifetime and low channel bandwidth are the major challenges of such systems due to the great impact of communica-

Clustering as a reduction technique has been proven to be one of the good techniques to conserve the energy of WSNs. With clus- tering, sensor nodes are grouped into an optimized number of clus- ters with a lower number of nodes. As such, each cluster must have at least one node acting as a cluster header, which is often abbre- viated as CH, which is responsible for receiving and aggregating the sensed data, then forwarding them to the base station. Conse- quently, the packets sent to the base station are reduced and the communication bandwidth is conserved as a result. The most important target is to reduce the energy used to receive and send more sensed data [4].

The communication cost is the major consumer of WSN energy. There are many factors other than distance that can affect the com- munication cost as stated by [14].; the present work decides to use the communication cost as the main criteria in the election of CHs instead of using any indirect factors that impact the communica- tion cost.

On the other hand, LEACH suffers from many defects due to the random selection of CHs. First, a low powered node has the same chance to be a CH as a high powered node, which can be the main source of energy depletion. Second, LEACH was not clear enough about any constraint on the number of CHs in the network. Finally, although all CHs must have the ability to immediately link to the base station (BS), LEACH did not consider any clustering features such as location, energy, communication cost, etc. between itself and the BS [6].

the memetic algorithm [16] to define vices set for each header. The presence of the defined vices of the cluster header (candi- date headers) drives this work to the third contribution of the scheduling mechanism to arrange the defined CH with its vices in the correct order. This work tries to achieve an efficient energy consumption of WSNs using the waking-sleeping scheduling mechanism for managing which head must wake- up to perform all tasks of receiving the collected data, aggregat- ing them and sending them to BS.

The remaining part of this paper is organized as follows: Sec- tion 2 briefly reviews the previous related works to the present work. The proposed IE2-LEACH protocol is presented in Section 3. In Section 4, the simulation results are revealed. Finally, Section 5 concludes the work and highlights future directions for other aspects of improvement in WSN.

The works of [20] and [21] both address the energy consump- tion problem and present clustering by considering the energy and distance. In order to select the CHs in the setup phase, the first work calculates the distances between all the nodes. A node with the minimal distance and higher residual energy is designated as CH. The node is considered as a high power node if the calculated residual energy is higher than the threshold. In the second work, the CH selection is based on the optimal number of clusters con- firmed by the lower energy dissipation.

In order to balance the energy consumption of WSN, the work by [16] introduced ESACC scheduling mechanism which monitors the network performance to ensure that only some redundant nodes are scheduled to work while the others sleep. Sleeping nodes are awakened to replace the dead nodes and maintain network performance. Their main objective is to find a minimum set of working nodes that succeed to reduce the consumption of power and maintain the coverage area.

The work of [22] is most related to the present work because of the common primary objective of improving the cluster head selec- tion of LEACH. They have introduced an Improved Energy Efficient Cluster Head Selection protocol (IEECHS-WSN) by selecting dual cluster heads in a separated cluster based on the distance. The first CH transfers the information to the sink node, and sink node then accepts the data and that sent via the second CH. As such, the energy usage for connection with the sink is distributed between the dual CHs.

The method of this work is the same as of LEACH, in that it con- sists of two phases: setup and steady state. The significant differ- ence from LEACH occurs at the setup phase as this work tries to face the problem of CHs selection randomly. In our setup phase, the CHs are selected and their vices are identified. In order to determine whether or not any sensor node can be a CH with min- imum threats on its lifetime, IE2-LEACH introduces a header selec- tion method that considers the impact of the transmission cost between that node and BS on its residual energy during the selec- tion decision.

The present approach is introduced mainly to enhance the LEACH protocol with three contributions. Since being a cluster- head drains the battery of that node [5], the first contribution is to introduce a novel selection method for the capable nodes (that can be CHs). In the second contribution, we proposed an efficient method to define the vices of each CH to avoid sending redundant information. The third contribution aims to balance the energy usage among the vices of each header. The objectives of these con- tributions are to prolong the lifetime of WSN, while improving its ability to transfer and extend.

