We assume the presence of appropriate protocols to avoid transmission collisions. The operational semantics of our calculus is given both in terms of a Reduction Semantics and in terms of a Labelled Transition Semantics, in the SOS style of Plotkin [18]. We prove that the two semantics coincide. Our Labelled Transition System (LTS) captures all the possible interactions of a term with its environment without using any auxiliary discard relation. We then define an appropriate notion of simulation and hence of bisimulation for MANETs. The concepts of simulation and bisimulation are widely used in the literature for verification purposes: they

We assume that there are no free variables in a network (in contrast, there can be free channels). The absence of free variables is trivially maintained as the network evolves. Moreover, as node identifiers denote device network addresses we assume that in any network each node identifier is unique.

Also this result can be generalised taking an arbitrary finite set V of messages. The next results are about range repeaters (or range extender), and make par- ticularly sense for stationary nodes, like access points. In general, a repeater simply regenerates a network signal in order to extend the range of the existing network infrastructure. In a wireless networks a range repeater does not physically connect by wire to any part of the network. Instead, it receives radio signals from an ac- cess point, end user device, or another repeater and retransmits the frames. This makes it possible for a repeater located in between an access point and a distant stationary user to act as a relay for frames travelling back and forth between the user and the access point. In this manner, using a range repeater, a distant user

Finally, notice that all the previous calculi abstract from interferences. Mezzetti and Sangiorgi [9] have instead proposed a lower level calculus in which a node can detect interferences when located in the intersection of the transmission range of two different nodes. While our syntax is inspired by that of [9], the reduction semantics and the corresponding LTS is quite different; this is because in our model we assume the absence of interferences.

A number of developments are possible. For instance, we could enrich the calculus with operators to model the concept of store as in [14]. We could try to extend the behavioural theory to deal with node failure. At this regards, the developments in [3,4] for wired networks could be a good starting point. Moreover, wireless systems have also features of synchrony that remind us of synchronous languages (e.g. Esterel [1], Statecharts [5], SCCS [10]). Indeed, in a single time unit of a wireless system multiple events can happen. It is our intention to investigate these aspects taking inspiration from [22]. Finally, as pointed out in [14], security is, of course, another important issue in MANETs that we would like to investigate.

