When dealing with biological systems that exhibit complex patterns of behav- ior, it may be difficult to check whether the dynamics of the system satisfies some interesting properties. One of such properties, quite often vaguely defined, is the oscillatory behavior that characterizes a variety of biological systems [4].Whereas it is comparatively easy to hypothesize the presence of oscillations through visual inspection of simulated time courses, another matter is to precisely verify whether the oscillations will continue forever or rather will definitely stop, either by being progressively damped down or abruptly interrupted. In this respect, the abstraction adopted by ODE models has some advantages, because the deterministic approach ensures that any periodic evolution will indefinitely repeat. However, as we will see in this paper, such properties may appear to hold only because of the contin- uous approximation. On the other hand, results obtained from discrete stochastic models can still provide clues about the existence of oscillatory behaviors, but the noise introduced by stochastic fluctuations may make them appear less pronounced. Furthermore, when oscillations do exist but their phase, period and amplitude is also varying stochastically, a multi-run analysis of simulation traces over the time domain does not help in characterizing the long-range behavior of the system.

In this paper we consider two examples of models of biochemical systems taken from the literature, which we use as case studies to demonstrate the advantages of a formal approach to the definition and verification of properties of biological sys- tems, including oscillatory behaviors. The major contribution of this paper is the definition of an approach to the formal specification of properties, based on Proba- bilistic Computation Tree Logic (PCTL, hereafter) [11] and Continuous Stochastic Logic (CSL) [1]. PCT/CSL formulas can be used to precisely define properties of system dynamics, such as convergence of a variable to a fixed value, bound oscil- lation around a fixed value, perpetual alternation of growth and decrease phases, relationships among multiple variables. Such formulas define a query-language in which a user can encode a property of the systems he intends to verify. Proba- bilistic model checkers that accept PCTL formulas defined over the variables of a discrete stochastic model can then be used to verify whether the property holds of the system. In this paper, we show how the PRISM [15] model checker can be used for this purpose. We apply our formal approach to the example models to show how system properties can be characterized and to demonstrate the insights that can be obtained into system dynamics with the verification with PRISM. We show the obvious advantages provided by the exact quantitative solutions returned by a model-checking tool. In contrast, simulation of stochastic models can only pro- vide statistically approximate solutions. Our proposed approach applies to general models of biological systems, its current limitation being the fact that only models having a bounded state space are amenable to analysis.

The rest of this paper is organized as follows: in Section 2 we introduce the basics about biochemical oscillators illustrating a specific system which will be used as the running example throughout the remainder of the paper. In Section 3 we investigate the use of temporal logic as a means to encode relevant features of oscillating systems. In Section 4 we briefly describe probabilistic model checking. In Section 5 we analyse the structural properties of the Markovian model of the our running example, the verification of which by means of the PRISM model checker is illustrated in Section 6. We summarise our contribution in the final section of the paper.

We observe that, although a useful method to gain insights about a system behaviour, continuous deterministic modeling has some downsides. For example, as we will see, oscillation for the system (2.1) is transient but such a fundamental characteristic cannot be evinced through ODEs analysis. Furthermore, the system of ODEs (2.2) allows for some trivial fixed points, such as a0 = b0 = c0 (given that ka = kb = kc). The solution of (2.2) for an initial condition corresponding to any such fixed point will indicate that the system does not evolve at all, whereas, in reality, the system will certainly evolve for any initial condition such that a0 > 0, and b0 > 0 and c0 > 0.

Alternative approaches to the simulation of discrete stochastic models, are given by Markovian analysis techniques [19] and/or probabilistic/stochastic model check- ing [11],[1]. In the following section we introduce the basics about temporal logic and model-checking and we will show how relevant properties of systems of bio- chemical reactions can be stated as (probabilistic) temporal logic queries which can be automatically verified against a discrete stochastic model. First, though, we introduce a permanent oscillation variant of our running example.

M. Kwiatkowska, G. Norman, and D. Parker. Probabilistic symbolic model checking with probabilistic symbolic model checking with Prism. In J. Katoen and P. Stevens, editors, Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Tools and Algorithms for Construction and Analysis of Systems (TACAS 2002), volume 2280 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 2002.

