Process calculi, originally designed for modeling distributed and mobile systems, are nowadays one of the most popular formalisms for the specification of biologi- cal systems. In this new application domain, a great effort has been devoted for adapting the traditional models to characterize the molecular and biochemical as- pects of biological systems. On one hand, the proposals, such as BioAmbients [33], Beta-Binders [31], and Brane calculi [3], aim at expressing the concepts of hier- archy, compartment and membrane, which play a key role in the organization of biomolecular systems. On the other hand, there is a new interest in the design of

Unfortunately, the practical application of automatic tools to biological systems revealed serious problems. One specific feature of biological processes is that they are composed by a huge number of processes with identical behavior, such as thou- sands of molecules of the same type. Thus, the state space of the transition system is often very large. Moreover, different scenarios have typically to be analyzed in or- der to infer interesting information from a biological point of view. For example, the hypotheses have to be tested several times just varying the initial concentrations.

Approximation techniques [6,11] preserving the validation of temporal proper- ties have been established to be one of the most effective ways for overcoming these limitations. In particular, static analysis techniques have been widely applied for computing safe approximations of the (run-time) behavior of a system, even for infi- nite systems, in the setting of purely qualitative process calculi. For distributed and mobile systems a variety of analyses [2,15,16,17,18,23,25,26,29] have been proposed, aimed at proving properties, such as invariance and even of more general temporal properties.

System (LTS) semantics, by calculating the rate of each move. The main difficulty of this translation is to be able to count the number of distinct reagents combinations described by the same transition. In the case of CGF, Cardelli [4] introduces a LTS semantics, where processes are represented by (ordered) multisets of reagents, and where transitions are identified by distinct labels and record the corresponding rate. As expected, the rate of each transition is calculated from the rate of the basic actions, that participate to the move, by taking into account the number of distinct combinations.

Our LTS semantics, however, supports a natural abstraction where the informa- tion about the multiplicities of reagents, present in each solution, is approximated by adopting the well-know domain of intervals of integers [7]. The abstraction of states, that can be formalized as a Galois connection [9], supports the definition of a corresponding abstract LTS semantics, where multiplicities are replaced by intervals of multiplicities both in states and in transitions. Thus, the abstract tran- sitions record information about the labels of the actions that participate to the move, about their rates, and about their possible number of occurrences.

Notice that we assume labeled basic actions in order to identify exactly the actions involved in interactions. For these purposes, however, we have to consider well-labeled environments; an environment E is well-labeled if the labels occurring in the definitions of E are all distinct. In the following, we assume that in a CGF (E, P ), E is well-labeled and each variable X occurring in E or in P has a corresponding definition in E.

In order to derive a DTMC from the LTS, we have to calculate, for each multiset M and M ', the probability of moving from M to M '. First, we extract the rate corresponding to the move from M to M ' (namely the rate of the corresponding CTMC) by exploiting the information reported by transition labels. Then, we achieve the related probability by considering as usual the constant proportional to the rate.

Example 3.5 We consider a simple chemical reaction formed by a complexation and a degradation, i.e. a reaction where two molecules X and Y may bind together to form a multimolecular complex XY but where molecule X may be degraded by molecule W . This situation can be formalized by the following environment,

A great advantage of our framework, based on abstract interpretation, is that new analyses could be designed by introducing new abstract LTS semantics. For example, the domain of intervals could be replaced with more precise numerical domains able to model also relational information, such as the domain of convex polyhedra. Moreover, we would like to investigate a parametric version of our framework where the partitioning of intervals, and thus of abstract states, could be realized in a coarser or finer way. This could give the possibility to find a trade-off between precision and complexity and also to study refinement techniques, guided by the formula .We also believe that the methodology proposed for CGF could be extended to the full calculus with communication [28].

