The multi-objective immune system algorithm (MISA) can be considered as the first real proposal of MOAIS in the liter- ature [2]. In the first proposal of the algorithm, authors at- tempted to follow the clonal selection principle very closely, then the algorithm performances have been improved in a suc- cessive version [4] sacrificing some of the biological metaphor. The population is encoded by binary strings and it is initialized randomly. The algorithm does not use explicitly a scalar index to define the avidity of a solution but some rules are defined for choosing the set of antibodies to be cloned. The ranking scheme uses the following criteria: (1) first feasible and non- dominated individuals, then (2) infeasible nondominated indi- viduals, finally (3) infeasible and dominated. The memory set (called secondary population) is updated by the nondominated feasible individuals. Because of this repository being limited in size, an adaptive grid is implemented to enforce a uniform dis- tribution of nondominated solutions [4,10].

A general methodology for solving multi-objective nonlinear programming (MONP) problems. In order to operationalize the concept of Pareto-optimal solution, we should relate it to a famil- iar concept. The most common strategy is to characterize Pareto- optimal solutions in terms of optimal solutions of appropriate nonlinear programming problems (NLPP). Among weighted aggregation (WA) technique we can characterize multi-objective programming problems (MOPs) into NLPPs [13,18].

Multi-objective optimization runs are conducted with dif- ferent weighting vector (W) in order to locate a set of points on the Pareto front. This method is the simplest and the most straight forward way of obtaining the Pareto-optimal front. However, this method is associated with some major draw- backs. Depending on the scaling of the different objectives and the shape of the Pareto front, it is hard to select the weighting. Another problem occurs when the solution space is non-convex. In that case not all the Pareto-optimal solutions can be obtained by solving the problem P(w). But in our study we concentrate on the Convex MOP problems to avoid this weakness of P(w) [6].

works. The approach is able to produce results similar or bet- ter than those generated by other evolutionary algorithms after determining the max and min values with NN and use it to ini- tialize population with at least feasible antibodies which help MISA to find the Pareto-optimal solution more accurate and more faster. Our approach uses an affinity measure to control the amount of mutation to be applied to the antibodies. Affin- ity in this case, is defined in terms of nondominance and feasi- bility. This affinity measure, combined with the secondary population are used to distribute nondominated solutions in a uniform way.

