Biomedical ontology is an important topic investigated by sev- eral researchers. It plays a fundamental role in the domain of med- ical informatics [6] by contributing, for instance, to knowledge management, data integration, and reasoning and decision support [7]. Biomedical ontologies can serve as a source of vocabulary to support various knowledge management tasks such as: annotating data and resources [8], accessing biomedical information [9], managing and extracting relevant information [10], and mapping across biomedical ontologies [11]. In addition, biomedical ontolo- gies are a crucial component in semantic interoperability and data exchange in medicine, along with standardizing clinical informa- tion [12]. Finally, they can help in reasoning through: data selec- tion, data aggregation, decision support [13], natural language processing applications, and knowledge discovery [7]. A few ontologies were developed in the autism domain for certain purposes.

Tu et al. [14] developed an autism ontology based on the Open Biomedical Ontologies Foundry (OBO) principles and which con- forms to the Basic Formal Ontology (BFO) [15]. The ontology sup- ports the integration and annotation of terminologies to enable users perform queries and inferences for autism phenotypes from the National Database for Autism Research (NDAR) repository. This ontology consists of 34 classes describing phenotypes, together with four classes representing autism diagnostic instruments: Aut- ism Diagnostic Interview-Revised (ADI-R) [16], and two out of four modules from the Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule (ADOS) [17]. Moreover, the ontology contains 15 Semantic Web Rule Lan- guage (SWRL) [18] giving the ontology the ability to infer pheno- types for the provided patient data. One year later, the same team built a project based on this ontology and the main goal was to assist researchers to access clinical data in NDAR [19].

McCray et al. created a phenotype ontology based on 24 instru- ments. The selected instruments are the most important and com- monly used ones, ranging in their structure and type between interviews, direct assessment, and questionnaires [20]. Their goal was building an ontology to help in accessing autism data, assess- ing ASD instruments and comparing these instruments for better evaluation. In order to define ontology concepts, various diagnosis instruments and tools have been collected and evaluated for phe- notype data. Various metrics were applied to build the phenotype ontology, for instance, existing metrics at the National Center for Biomedical Ontology (NCBO BioPortal) are used to find structural weaknesses, in addition, they developed further metrics in order to analyze ontology content and provide suggestions for additional ontology development, iteratively applying the metrics over the ontology to highlight structural imbalances, inconsistencies, and areas that need a review.

Finally, the data used in the machine learning model to generate SWRL rules are obtained from the NDAR repository, consist of Sub- ject Medical History (ace-subjmedhist)9 and Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule, 2nd Edition (ADOS-2) modules 1, 2, 3, and 410,11,12,13. Then records from those files are mapped to generate a new dataset which consists of both medical history features and diagnosis results for subjects. The mapping process was especially challenging since each subject can have multiple records in those files which occurred on different dates. The diagnosis column in the generated dataset will be used as a label in the decision tree model. The total number of subjects is 1534 (1316= Autism, 211= controls). Age ranges between 16 and 254 months. 1024 of the subjects are males, and 510 are females. The data attributes are categorized under 13 categories: Diagnostic History (1), Prena- tal/Early Postnatal History (2), Developmental History (3), Current Medications (4), Review of Systems (5), Pulmonary (6), Cardiovascu-

The terminologies and concepts of the ontology define the aut- ism domain knowledge. The data discussed in the Material section are organized in a hierarchical form to build a firm relation among main classes of Autism, and, at the same time, each class can be considered as a stand-alone ontology with its own subclasses; nev- ertheless, the object properties and relation within them is the coherence of the ontology, as ontology classes cannot provide enough information solitarily. There are two kinds of properties: object properties and datatype properties. Object properties point at a class of the ontology. The datatype properties contain a value and describe the relationships between instances (individuals) and data values.

SWRL is used to add rules into an ontology to provide an addi- tional layer of expressiveness. We write SWRL rules from valid relationships between AutismOnt ontology concepts to detect high presence of autism. Rules are generated from machine learning model and converted into SWRL format. The machine learning model used in this study is the decision tree algorithm, each path from node to leaf represent a single SWRL rule.

Treatments Class represents a list of treatments that can help autistic individuals throughout their life. The treatment becomes one of the important topics especially for the autistic patients and their family members because developing effective treatments will significantly reduce the disability and help enhance the quality of their lives. Various autism treatments are available with the aim of reducing disability symptoms such as: (1) Behavioral: for exam- ple, cognitive behavioral therapy and Applied Behavior Analysis (ABA). (2) Complementary and Dietary: for example, research on nutritional supplements, acupuncture, acupressure, cholesterol supplementation, antioxidants. (3) Educational: for example, spe- cial education programs, positive behavioral supports, math/read- ing training, and inclusive education programs.

Profile Class consists of age, blood type, gender, race, dietary restrictions, dietary supplements, vaccination, and medical history of the individuals. Medical history contains 61 related disease/co- morbidities sub-classes organized in tree hierarchy, such comor- bidities refer to related disorders and disabilities to ASD. Usually, comorbidity is two or more illnesses or disorders happening in the same individual at the same time interval or one after the other. In the AutismOnt Ontology comorbidities were linked to their related signs and symptoms, as signs and symptoms of some comorbidities may overlap with ASD, such as attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). It was estimated that 30% to 80% of autistic individuals meet the diagnostic criteria of ADHD. Such overlap had a great importance to capture while diagnosis, since they may have some biological roots that will affect the treatment prescribed for the subject.

(1). In addition, it enables, reuses, and benefits from the knowledge obtained from different studies (2). We focused on the diagnostic process, the constructed rules and patterns from machine learning model enable physicians and experts in their diagnosis. The limita- tions of this study are: the absence of the graphical user interface

Data used in the preparation of this manuscript were obtained from the NIH supported National Database for Autism Research (NDAR). NDAR is a collaborative informatics system created by the National Institutes of Health to provide a national resource to support and accelerate research in autism. This manuscript reflects the views of the authors and may not reflect the opinions or views of the NIH or of the Submitters submitting original data to NDAR.

