Note that for traditional Transition-System Specifications (TSSs) [9] the premises are defined as sets of atoms and negations of atoms. For practical cases these sets are easily represented by a formula using conjunctions (and universal quantifications over negations of atoms). When this is not the case one might desire the infinitary operators  and  , but we do not see any reasonable way of implementing this at this moment.

The reason we have chosen Isabelle/HOL is that it very closely matches our way of reasoning as described in Sect. 3. Especially the support for using meta-variables (or unknowns) is crucial.  The main difference is that it has a single formula as

To illustrate our proof of concept we show how our running example can be proven sound automatically. First we have a specification of the semantics and axioms. Here => represents the meta implication (i.e. the horizontal line in an SOS rule) and -> and && are the logical implication and conjunction, respectively. All unbound variables are considered universally quantified.

Running the Isabelle/HOL file typically gives one of three results. If everything is fine and soundness has been proven no errors are given. When there is a problem Isabelle/HOL will give errors indicating the proof could not be completed or it will keep running (possibly forever).

For the cases that we have tested so far, a successful result is given in less than a minute. Note that it takes this long because we combine all axioms in on relation. This results in many branches in the proof that are fully explored but do not lead to a positive result (e.g. trying to relate x+ x with (x+ y)+ z). With several smaller relations the performance increases significantly (i.e. to at most a few seconds).

It would be interesting to see if this method can also be used to solve problems other than soundness. We believe that proofs for commutativity, transitivity and congruence proofs should also be possible. Perhaps also settings outside of process theory can benifit from this method.

