Microorganisms have an effective capability to degrade synthetic dyestuff enzymatically. In this study, two 16S rRNA identified Pseudomonas aeruginosa bacterial isolates (ASU3 and ASU6) have been screened to enzymatically degrade both Disperse Blue 64 (DB64) and Acid Yellow 17 (AY17) which resembles 2 of the synthetic dyes that causes aquatic environmental pollution. The expression of the azoR1 gene has been detected in the strains, the degradation percentage of DB64 and AY17 by stain ASU6 was found to exceed the ASU3. This returned to the differences in the expression levels of azoR1 between the ASU6 and the ASU3 which was confirmed by RT-PCR. In addition, the specific activity (U/mg protein) of azoreductase in ASU6 was higher than ASU3 when MethylRed (MR), DB64 and AY17 were used as a substrate, separately. The azoreductase kinetics was studied to find the optimum condition for maintain- ing the stability of the enzyme. The degraded products separated by HPLC/MS were tested for their tox- icity on two crop plants and they were nontoxic to the plants.

The toxicity of the dyes and its metabolic products were deter- mined by acute toxicity test on 2 popular crop plants in Egypt; monocot seed (Triticum aestivum) and dicot seed (Vicia faba). Briefly, the dyes degraded broths were centrifuged at 10000 rpm for 20 min under cooling. The supernatant was collected and ster- ilized by filtering. About 10 plant seeds were germinated in steril-

The capacity of Pseudomonas strains for the decolorization of various dyes has been studied in detail [42] who reported that, the azo dyes (Acid Violet 7, Acid Red 151 and Reactive Black 5) were degraded at higher extent (>90%) than Indigo Carmin, Acid Red 183 (chromium complex) and anthraquinones (Reactive Blue 2 and Acid Green 27). Decolorization of waste waters containing reactive azo dyes was achieved by a culture of the bacteria P. lute- ola that reduced the azo bond in Red G [43].

To evaluate the effects of different substrate on the transcrip- tion of azoreductase gene, cells were cultured in media supple- mented with 100mg l-1of either DB64, AY17 or MR for 48 h. RNA was directly extracted from cultivated strains after the decoloriza- tion of dye using the SV total RNA Isolation system (Promega). The expression of azoR1 gene was used to detect the activity of the ASU3 and ASU6 strains on the azodyes.

In addition, the transcription of azoR1 seemed to be subjected to the type and chemistry of the dye. The results of gene expression were highly supported the results of azoreductase specific activity and the degradation percentage except with the degradation of DB64. When the DB64 was used as a substrate, the RNA expression of azoR1 gene in strain ASU6 was lower than ASU3. However, the enzyme specific activity and the degradation percentage were higher. The reason of this phenomena may be due to the presence of other co-enzymes or cofactors cooperated to enhance the activ- ity of azoreductase as well as the degradation of the DB64 in strain ASU6 rather than azoR1 encoding azoreductase as mentioned by (1).

was applied as a specific substrate (0.92 and 0.3 U/mg protein for ASU6 and ASU3, respectively). On the other hand, the specific activity of azoreductase enzyme was at the lowest value when the AY17 was used. It was observed that, the specific activity of azoreductase producing strain ASU6 higher than strain ASU3. Thus, it could be said that, the specific substrate that will be applied to find the enzyme kinetics was MR.

to higher value of Km and Vmax than MR [49]. The enzyme kinetics in two isolated strains indicated that the velocity Vmax and Km of the enzyme in ASU6 was higher than ASU3. Nevertheless, an enzyme has a low value of km it achieves its maximum catalytic efficiency at low substrate concentrations. ASU3 azoreductase was more effective as a catalyst than ASU6.

azoreductase enzyme. The percentage of dye degradation was vari- able within the two isolated strains why the strain ASU3 and ASU6 could degrade anthraquinone dye DB64 with higher efficiency than AY17. May be due to the anthraquinone dyes are easier to degrade than azodyes one or the presence complex structure of AY17 make obstacle its degradation. Other causes may be due to the bacterial azoR1gene expressions in the presence of DB64 was higher than AY17.

A great acknowledge to the Assiut University Mycological Center (AUMC) for helping in the identification and preservation of sam- ples in (AUMC) culture collection. Also, the authors thank Prof. Dr. Mostafa Fouad, and Dr. Usama Ramadan, Faculty of Pharmacy, El Minia University, Egypt for their help in the HPLC/MS analysis and identifications.

