properties. These properties include confidentiality (no unauthorised release of information) and integrity (no unauthorised modification of information). The study of integrity as a formal security property has received little attention within the research community; confidentiality has been extensively studied and is the better understood of the two properties.

These conventional security models describe controls for achieving integrity; they take an operational and/or implementation oriented approach by defining how to achieve integrity. No attempt is made to formalise a property that de- fines what is meant by integrity. For example, [8] recommends a combination of separation of duties, access-triples and auditing as a strategy for achieving integrity: it does it not attempt to address what is meant by integrity. Confi- dence is achieved to the extent that good design principles have been applied; there is no assurance that an integrity property is upheld. Thus, when we de- fine a complex separation of duty policy we do not know, for certain, whether a dishonest user can bypass the intent of the separation via some unexpected circuitous, but authorised, route.

We argue that the integrity-algebraic approach [14,15] does not scale well to large complex systems. In this paper we propose a logic-based approach: such an approach facilitates a high-level analysis of a system that is too complex to be amenable to algebraic analysis. The basis for this approach rests on our conjecture that belief logics [19] can be used to provide a complementary approach to integrity/external consistency analysis.

This deduction is possible because the ATM and customer are individually honest and competent. If the customer does not believe that the bank will honestly reconcile the amount in the envelope then it is not possible to deduce this account consistency. For example if the customer did not believe that A is honest (deletion of formula (3)) then the goal cannot be deduced. This result is as expected and it indicates that further operational checks and balances may be needed in the system, if account consistency is to be ensured in the presence of such infrastructure dishonesty.

