K. Martin and P. Panangaden [12] have made the interesting observation that the causal order in general relativity theory closely relates to domain theoretical notions. From the causal structure of models of space-time which are called strongly hyperbolic they extract the notion of a strongly hyperbolic poset. These are in particular bicontinuous, that is, continuous posets with the property that they are also continuous with respect to the opposite order. Not much is known about bicontinuous posets. In this paper we collect known results, we exhibit substantial examples, we show that these examples are connected with open problems in domain theory, and we indicate directions of research.

K. Martin and P. Panangaden [12] have made the interesting observation that the causal order in general relativity theory closely relates to domain theoretical notions. From the order theoretical structure of models of space- time which are called strongly hyperbolic they extract the notion of a strongly hyperbolic poset. In Section 3 this notion will be presented, although in a different terminology. It is the aim of this paper to exhibit a large range of examples, to illustrate that these examples are closely connected to open problems in domain theory and to indicate an interesting direction for research.

In section 4 we consider vector space orderings on Rn. These correspond bijectively to (convex, pointed) cones C in Rn. If these cones are closed and have inner points, then Rn becomes a strongly hyperbolic poset in the above sense. As there is nothing hyperbolic about these examples I prefer to adopt another terminology, although the term strongly hyperbolic sounds impressive. It seems worthwhile to investigate these orders on Rn from the point of view of domain theory. In fact, some old unsolved problems of domain theory

Every continuous poset can be embedded in a continuous dcpo via the round ideal completion. The round ideals of the vector space orderings on Rn depend essentially on the geometry of the positive cone. The same is true for the opposite notion of a round filter completion. It is desirable to combine these two completions. For this I propose a procedure extending a construction of Martin and Pananagaden. It would be nice to investigate whether this completion is a compactification of Rn and embeds Rn in a man- ifold with boundary. The same procedure might then be applied to strongly hyperbolic models of space-time, but the case of Rn maybe easier to manage before attacking the more general setting.

Proposition 3.3 Let C be a Scott-closed set in a continuous poset P and Q a Scott-compact subset of P disjoint from C. Then there is a Scott-open set U containing Q and a lower open set V containing C disjoint from U. In particular, P is an ordered space for the Lawson topology.

On every continuous poset, the Lawson topology is Hausdorff. On a bicon- tinuous poset it is coarser than the bi-Scott topology. Thus, on the bi-Scott compact subsets of a bicontinuous poset, both topologies agree. Thus, if a bi- continuous poset is locally compact for the bi-Scott topology, the latter agrees with the Lawson topology.

5 Interval-compact jointly bicontinuous posets have been called strongly hyperbolic posets by Martin and Panangaden [12]. The reason is that they made the interesting observation that they occur in general relativity theory in models of space-time called strongly hyper- bolic there. Although this terminology sounds great, we do not want to adopt it. In view

with the upper and the dual Scott topology with the lower topology (see [6, Lemma VII-2.7]). Thus, for complete lattices, both definitions of bicontinuity agree. The preceding proposition shows that in interval-compact bicontinuous poset is linked bicontinuous in the less restricted sense. In the next section we shall see that there are interval-compact bicontinuous posets that are not linked bicontinuous in our more restricted sense.

The kegelspitz S is no longer bicontinuous. Indeed the maximal elements of a dually continuous poset have to be dually compact. The maximal elements of S are those in K, but none of these elements is compact. The way-above relation in S is the restriction of the way-below relation on Rn to S. Thus, S is almost dually continuous in the sense that every non-maximal element is the inf of a filtered family of element way-above.

This leads us to the old problem raised by Jung [8] whether the class of FS-domains is strictly bigger than the class of retracts of bifinite domains. We conjecture that the answer is yes. But until now this question is open. There is hope that a counterexample can be found through cone orders.

a'  a and some b'  b. Identifying the elements x of M with the minimal intervals [x, x] we obtain a natural embedding of M onto a dense subset of the set Max(FBP ) of maximal elements of FBP . The bi-Scott topology on M corresponds to the topology on Max(FBP ) induced by the Scott topology on FBP . We summarize:

