Medicinal plants have extensively being used for human welfare since ancient period and also act as a major stockpile for pharmaceuticals [1]. There was a positive linear correlation between endophytes and medicinal plants, in metabolite produc- tion due to genetic recombination with the host over evolutionary time [2]. Endophytic fungi which indwell the healthy living tissues without causing side effects also yield certain biologically active secondary metabolites [3]. Endophytes must synthesize metabo- lites for the competence with co-occurring endophytes, host and pathogens in order to colonize the host, and as well as for the nutrition [4]. They act as major resources for structurally unique, bioactive natural metabolites such as alkaloids, benzopyranones, benzoquinones, flavonoids, phenols, steroids, terpenoids, tetra- lones and xanthones, with wide potential for the exploration of novel therapy [5]. They act as highly potent producers of antifun- gal, antiviral, antibacterial, cytotoxic and immunosuppressive 1 min. The reaction was terminated by adding 1 ml of 17.5% ice-cold trichloroacetic acid. Three ml of NASH reagent (75 g ammonium acetate, 3 ml glacial acetic acid and 2 ml acetyl acetone were mixed and water was added to a total volume of 1L) was added to each tube. The tubes were incubated at room temperature for 15 min. The intensity of the yellow color formed was measured at 412 nm against blank. Rutin was used as positive control.

The superoxide radical is a powerful oxidizing agent that can react with biological membranes and induce tissue damage. It also acts as precursor to form singlet oxygen, hydroxyl radical, or hydrogen peroxide. In the present study, extracts were investi- gated for superoxide radical scavenging activity. The PDB extract exhibited highest radical scavenging activity (36.158%) followed by M1D broth (29.237%). The inhibition percentage values range between 7.768% and 36.158%. The YES broth showed lowest super- oxide radical scavenging activity.

Hydroxyl radicals are the major active oxygen species that cause lipid peroxidation and enormous biological damage. The per- centage of hydroxyl scavenging activity ranges from 31.262% to 50%. The extract from PDB (50%) exhibits higher radical scavenging activity followed by YES broth (43.085%). The extract from MGYP broth exhibits comparatively low hydroxyl radical scavenging activity.

In addition to reactive oxygen species, nitric oxide is also impli- cated in inflammation, cancer and other pathological conditions. In this study, extracts were subjected to compete with oxygen lead- ing to reduce production of nitric oxide that can be measured by Greiss reagent. The extracts showed scavenging activity between 30.78% and 53.752%. The nitric oxide radical scavenging activity of the extracts decreased in the order of PDB > MGYP broth > M1 D broth > MEB > YES broth.

by measuring the formation of Prussian blue colour at 700 nm. Increasing absorbance at 700 nm indicates an increase in reducing ability. Reducing power of the extracts range from 17.5% to 74.81%. The PDB extract (74.81%) showed higher reducing power followed by M1D broth (52.3%) and the extract from YES broth exhibited comparatively low reducing power (17.5%).

is needed to determine whether the inhibitory effect of fungal extract on the growth of the cancer cells is due to the inhibition of cell proliferation or the induction of cell death. The mechanism behind the anti-proliferative effects of purified metabolite need to be studied. It has also been suggested that an in vivo study should be carried out in conjunction with the in vitro study, so that the results can be compared and more information regarding the anti-proliferative properties of the purified metabolite become clear.

