Bone tissue, forming the skeleton, is a remarkable material. Two macroscopically different types are distinguished. The first is cortical or compact bone, which is a rather dense tissue although it is penetrated by blood vessels through a network of canaliculi: it is primarily found in the shaft of long bones. The second type is trabecular or cancellous bone: it is porous and primarily found near joint surfaces, at the end of long bones and within vertebrae.

capacity without increasing mass, thus improving structural efficiency; mechanical stress also improves bone strength by influencing collagen alignment as new bone is being formed [17]. Cortical bone tissue located in regions subject to predominantly tensile stresses has a higher percentage of collagen fibers aligned along the bone long axis. In regions of predominant compressive stresses, fibers are more likely to be aligned transverse to the long axis.

Bone remodelling at cellular scale 4 . Two main kinds of cells, namely osteoclasts (Oc) and osteoblasts (Ob), closely collaborate in the remodelling process in what is called a Basic Multicellular Unit (BMU). The organization of the BMUs in cortical and trabecular bone differs, but these differences are mainly morphological rather than biological.

Briefly after this resorptive process stops, Obs appear at the same surface site, deposit osteoid and mineralize it. Some Obs are encapsulated in the osteoid matrix and differentiate to osteocytes (Oy). Remaining Obs continue to synthesize bone un- til they eventually stop and transform to quiescent lining cells (Lc) that completely cover the newly formed bone surface and connect with the Oys in the bone matrix through a network of canaliculi.

Bone remodelling was always subject of extensive studies in many fields of research. Much of this research to obtain insight in bone cell biology is based on reduction, i.e. isolating the various components to unravel their individual (and often very com- plex) behaviour, without taking into account how mechanical forces are translated to structural adaptation of the internal cellular architecture [6,18,29,25].

At inter-scale level, it is not so clear how mechanical forces can be expressed in cell activities and whether mechanical forces are enough to explain remodelling. The pathways by which mechanical forces are expressed in Ob and Oc activity is currently one of the main unresolved issues in bone mechanobiology. The current concept is that the bone architecture is controlled by a local regulatory mechanism by local regulators and hormones, such as insulin-like growth factors (IGFs), cytokines interleukin-1 (IL-1), interleukin-6 (IL-6) and RANKL (RANK- ligand). However, this theory does not specify the cellular level mechanisms behind the remodelling process. In other words, it does not describe how local mechanical signals are detected, nor how they are translated to bone formation and resorption.

To improve the predictiveness of the cellular and tissutal models we propose, we plan to tune and validate them taking into account experimental data as well as those produced by some available continuum-based descriptions of bone remod- elling [6,18,29,25,32,12,13,20]. We also plan to realize such tuning and validation procedures in the opposite direction, i.e. using the more detailed description level of our particle-based cellular model to validate only continuum-based tissutal models [32,12,13,20].

The BioShape software architecture has been engineered from the perspective of supporting cluster and distributed computational approaches, so that satisfying the great computational power demand in simulating complex systems in term of geometrical shapes and interactions. The current version is based on the UNICAM agent-based Java framework Hermes [11], a middleware supporting distributed ap- plications and mobile computing. Currently, a porting on a Multiple Instruction Multiple Data (MIMD) architecture with message passing is under development.

We show how a multiscale model of our case-study can be defined only using the primitive concepts embodied in the BioShape simulator, i.e. shapes, perception, movement, collision-driven interaction, communication, internal calculus, aggrega- tion of shapes and disaggregation of shapes, as well as shape formation and death.

Each void/full/surface shape in the model has a density (of mineralisation) asso- ciated. For each shape, a Meshless Cells Method-based system [15] calculates how a tensor field applied to the tissue modifies density over time. The density values are also modified according to those ones computed by a lower cellular model, which takes into account not only the mechanical stimulus but also internal systemic fac- tors, as osteoblastic and osteoclastic activity, grown factor values, apoptosis and replication ratio. The dynamics of each shape in the tissutal model (and, hence, of the whole grid) depends on the new density values, which trigger the replacement of each shape with another void/full/surface shape - that one associated with the new density value.

e.g. appearance of biochemical signals, occur. The signals can be released either by the surface Lcs (represented with crossed boxes) or by cells from the fluid section. They are treated in our model as a multi-scalar field overlapped to the fluid section. Every scalar value represents a concentration of a specific messenger, in the specific point at a given time. In the fluid section we can also find macrophage, water and

Differently from the above frameworks and similarly to BioShape, the particle- based and single-scale approaches proposed in Meredys 9 and in [5] also allow par- ticle geometric information to be incorporated. In detail, the mesoscopic simulator proposed in Meredys represents biological entities as single particles, spheres or cylinders, or as compound objects formed from the two. Every basic particle can have a number of binding sites associated with it. Particles and compound objects diffuse through the simulation volume using a 3D random walk algorithm. Bonds between particles are broken and created as determined by the user-defined rules. A collision detection algorithm establishes whether particles come sufficiently close to allow bond formation. The stochastic simulator in [5] handles spatial locality, very low particle concentrations and collision between particles using a discrete 3D grid. Particles move within discrete volumes in discrete time steps. An integer-addressed 3D grid avoids floating-point computation and distance calculations for enabling highly parallel, large-scale simulations using custom hardware.

