Traffic Light Control System (TLCS) is widely used in our daily life. It is of great importance to ensure the correctness of TLCS. In this paper, bounded model checking (BMC) is chosen to verify a simple but practical TLCS. To this end, Propositional Projection Temporal Logic (PPTL) used as the property specification language and the process of BMC for PPTL are briefly introduced. Then, a TLCS is described and its corresponding Kripke structure is given. Finally, two related properties specified by PPTL formulas are verified for the system using the BMC approach. The verification result using our bounded model checker, BMC4PPTL, shows that the behavior of TLCS is consistent with the specification.

Techniques for automatic formal verification of finite state transition systems have been studied in recent years. The most widely used approach is called Model Check- ing [4,6]. As a trusted, strong and automatic verification technique, model checking has been widely used in many fields such as verification of hardware, software and communication protocols. With model checking, the system to be verified is mod- eled as a finite state machine and the specification is formalized in terms of temporal logic formulas. In practice, linear-time temporal logic (LTL) [16] and branching- time temporal logic (CTL) [4] are popular.

1 This research is supported by the National Program on the Key Basic Research Project of China (973 Program) under Grant No. 2010CB328102, and the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant Nos. 61133001, 61272117, 61272118, 61202038, 91218301, 61322202 and 61373043. * Corresponding

With model checking and bounded model checking, the mostly used temporal logics are LTL, CTL and their variations. However, the expressiveness of LTL and CTL is not powerful enough, actually, not full regular. There are at least two types of properties in practice which cannot be specified by LTL and CTL: (1) some time duration related properties such as a property P holds after 100th time unit and before 200th time unit; (2) some periodically repeated properties P . Propositional Projection Temporal Logic (PPTL)[9,11] is a useful formalism for specification and verification of concurrent systems. The expressiveness of PPTL is full regular [17] which allows us to verify full regular properties and time duration related properties of systems in a convenient way.

specification language PPTL. In addition, the process of BMC for PPTL is intro- duced. In section 3, a simple but practical TLCS is described and its corresponding Kripke structure is given. In section 4, two related properties are verified using the BMC approach. The verification results using BMC4PPTL for checking these properties are shown. Finally, the conclusion is drawn in section 5.

means that every other state in which the green light of the east-west direction and the red light of the south-north direction are on appears can not be satisfied. This is a typical example for showing the limitation of the expressive power of LTL. This property cannot be described by an LTL formula since the property is full regular. Certainly, we can specify this property by a PPTL formula as follows:

