The effect of punicalagin on metabolic risks, oxidative stress, inflammation, cardiac apopto- sis and histopathological alterations in experimentally induced diabetes was addressed. Diabetes was induced in male rats by a single injection of streptozotocin (STZ; 40 mg/kg, i.p.), and then punicalagin (1 mg/kg) was i.p. administered every other day for 15 days. The diabetic rats treated

CAT in the heart; and improved serum markers of heart function including the levels of tro- ponin T level and CK-MB and LDH activities. Histopathological examinations of heart sections match these results, confirming the beneficial effect of punicalagin. It also modulated cardiomyocyte apoptosis via enhanced Bcl-2 expression; blocked the increases in P53, Bax and caspases-3, 8 and 9; and ameliorated DNA damage in the heart. The current results suggest that punicalagin protected the heart against apoptosis, necrosis, inflammation and DNA damage by improving the redox state, suppressing caspases and P53 and increasing Bcl-2. In conclu- sion, punicalagin possesses strong therapeutic potential in treating and regulating diabetes and attenuating its associated complications in the heart.

development and progression of complications associated with diabetes [1]. Apoptosis is a key process in diabetic cardiac dis- eases derived from poor glycemic control. A number of studies have documented an increased occurrence of apoptosis in the cardiomyocytes of diabetic patients and experimentally induced diabetic animals [2,3]. It is mediated, at least in part, by the ac- tivation of the mitochondrial pathway, which is often triggered by reactive oxygen species (ROS).

0.01 M citrate buffer, pH 4.5 [25]. The blood glucose level was assayed 48 h after STZ injection using a glucose monitor set (Elegance, CT-X10, Convergent Technologies GmbH & Co. KG, Marburg, Germany). The rats with a blood glucose level above 250 mg/dl were considered diabetic and were used for the experiments.

The administration of punicalagin alone every other day for two weeks did not affect the body weight, the concentration of glucose, insulin or the lipid profile. Similarly, punicalagin treatment did not affect the levels of IL-1b and IL-6. Further- more, the activities of SOD and CAT and the lipid peroxidation product (TBARS) in the heart did not change after punicalagin treatment. Conversely, significant increases were demon- strated in the HDL level in the serum and the GSH level in the heart.

Moreover, punicalagin administration significantly amelio- rated the elevated levels of troponin T levels and LDH and CK- MB activities toward normal levels, indicating that punicalagin is an efficient cardioprotectant in diabetic conditions and can protect cardiomyocyte membrane integrity. Histopathologi- cal examination of the heart confirmed this finding and showed that punicalagin effectively prevented STZ-induced cardiac damage. The current data coincide with the ability of the punicalagin-rich pomegranate to protect against I/R injury, doxo- rubicin and isoproterenol-induced cardiotoxicity in rats, likely because of its actions in enhancing oxygen free radical scav- enging activity and decreasing lipid peroxidative damage [10,44,45]. These results indicate that punicalagin can defend the heart against oxidative stress and the associated pathol- ogy and dysfunction.

extrinsic and intrinsic apoptotic cell death pathway in cardiac tissues. Flow cytometry analysis demonstrated that punicalagin treatment ameliorated STZ-induced programmed cell death in cardiac tissues by regulating pro-apoptotic proteins, such as CD95; caspases-3, 8, and 9; Bax; and P53, and anti-apoptotic proteins, such as Bcl-2. These results indicate a marked modu- lation of both mitochondrial and death receptor apoptotic pathways in the hearts of punicalagin-treated diabetic rats and provide evidence that punicalagin has the ability to modu- late apoptotic pathways in diabetes. Punicalagin significantly decreased trophoblast death as shown by the reduced levels of cleaved-PARP and LDH release [52]. Punicalagin-rich pome- granate peel extract protected the liver and kidneys by stimulating antioxidant activities and elevating the anti- apoptotic protein Bcl-2 [53]. Punicalagin reduced cerebral ischemia-reperfusion effects via attenuation of proinflammatory cytokines, up-regulation of Bcl-2 and down-regulation of Bax and caspase-3 [50]. In contrast to the induction of apoptosis

In addition, STZ-induced cardiac apoptosis was also evident from the DNA damage. A significant correlation between oxi- dative DNA damage and hyperglycemia was previously reported [55]. Punicalagin treatment protected cardiac tissue from STZ- induced DNA damage, as evidenced by the inhibition of the increase of comet parameters compared to the diabetic rats. This implies that punicalagin prevented DNA strand breaks and maintained its supercoiled loops in an appropriately firm status. The precise mechanism is unidentified. However, this may be attributed to the effective antioxidant capacity of punicalagin.

Significantly, the current results display, for the first time, that punicalagin has biological activities in addition to being an antioxidant in the diabetic heart. Punicalagin showed anti- apoptotic effects and protected DNA. It can trigger a variety of anti-apoptotic pathways due to its inherited antioxidant prop- erty. Punicalagin treatment effectively down-regulates P53 and hyperglycemia, leading to cardiomyocyte death [56]. It is re- ported that P53 has the ability to induce apoptosis by an ROS- dependent pathway [57,58]. In contrast, Bcl-2 exhibits an anti- apoptotic and anti-necrotic influence via its antioxidant effect on intracellular ROS [43,59]. Bcl-2 can decrease lipid peroxidation by increasing cell resistance to ROS and blocking ROS produc- tion [58]. Accordingly, it is suggested that the anti-apoptotic effect of punicalagin may occur via down-regulating P53

