The second category-theoretic formulation of universal algebra, which was in terms of monads, has a more complicated history and is much less accepted by universal algebraists. Monads typically arise from adjoint pairs of functors. The notion of monad (or triple or standard construction) arose in algebraic topology for reasons distinct from universal algebra, see for instance [6]. In 1965, Eilenberg and Moore noted that in case T is the free group monad, their category of T -algebras is the category of groups [5].

One approach to dualising the theory of Lawvere theories is by defining a co- model of a Lawvere theory L in Set to be a model of L in Setop. That line of thought has proved to be valuable for category theorists, for computer scientists, and for uni- versal algebraists [14,24,26]. The category of comodels induces a comonad and is the category of coalgebras for the induced comonad on Set. But this approach does not include transition systems.

There is a mild difference here between universal algebra and category theory traditions. Some universal algebraists only admit non-empty models [3]. So, for example, a category theorist would regard the empty set as a carrier for the struc- ture of a semigroup, whereas some universal algebraists would not. For a category theorist, the empty semigroup is important as it is the initial object in the category of semigroups.

This seems the most straightforward possible generalisation of a clone to abstract categories [14]. It is almost verbatim the definition in universal algebra [4] except that the composition under which the clones must be closed is written with the help of tuplings. In particular, putting C = Set, this is exactly the notion of a clone as studied in universal algebra [25,28,15].

The different range of generality of the ideas of monads and Lawvere theories extends to the connection between (generalised) Lawvere theories and monads. One can consider monads on any category, while Lawvere theories correspond to (fini- tary) monads on Set. On the other hand, a monad on a category C has algebras, i.e., models, only in C, while a Lawvere theory naturally has models in any cat- egory with products. So while monad maps between monads on Set (see [1] for this notion of monad map) correspond directly to maps of Lawvere theories, there is nothing in the world of monads (at least nothing to which one has immediate access) corresponding to the functoriality of Mod(L, C) in C.

