Differential Evolution (DE) algorithm is a powerful heuristic method for global optimization problems, was introduced by Storn and Price [31,32,37]. This population based heuristic optimization algorithm has drawn the interest of researchers in many scientific fields. The DE algorithm has happened to more popular step by step and it has been used in a lot of useful cases due to ease and the good convergence in the optimization problems [4].

to be similar or same values with each other. This is an undesirable situation because of reducing the diversity in the population. In this paper, the new methods based on the chaotic functions were proposed instead of the classic random procedure. Chaos functions have got applications, such as observing the weather in meteorol- ogy area [38], cryptography in computer science area [43], predict- ing gas solubility in chemical engineering [39], finance modeling in economics area [14] and hydrology in biology area [40]. Chaotic functions have the behavior of dynamic systems which are highly sensitive to initial conditions. Each point in a chaotic system is arbitrarily close to other points with different future trajectories. As a result, an small change in the existing trajectory can lead to considerably different behavior [11,12].

Differential evolution (DE) algorithm is a simple powerful and influential evolutionary algorithm for solution of the global opti- mization, introduced by Price and Storn [32]. On the contrary sim- ple genetic algorithm which uses binary coding to represent the individuals in the population, DE algorithm uses floating point cod- ing to stand for each individuals. The important idea of DE algo- rithm is based on generating trial parameter vectors. These vectors are obtained by adding the difference between two individ- uals to a third individual in population. Mutation and crossover operators are used to generate new individuals, and then selection operator determines which of the vectors will carry on into the next generation [31].

The structure of the DE algorithm resembles the structures of other population-based optimization algorithms. DE consists of three important parameters, such as scaling factor (SF), crossover constant (CR) and population size (PS). A population includes the PS individuals, each of which comprises the value of the variable in the feasible region of the optimization problem [44]. At the beginning of DE algorithm, PS is determined as depend on opti- mization parameters and it is not changed during the optimization the fluidized bed. The fluid bed consists of centrifugal fan to supply air flow from ambient air. There are two essential output parame- ters known as the moisture content and the product temperature in drying process [21]. In general, the drying process has got three phases. In the first phase is loaded with granulated material to be dried. Then drying temperature is increased to initiate constant drying phase. Third is reduced drying phase or called falling rate period. Finally dried material discharged from the dryer when the desired end dry matter was reached [22].

