The special class of irreversible cellular automaton (CA) with multiple attractors is of immense interest to the CA researchers. Characterization of such a CA is the necessity to devise CA based solutions for diverse applications. This work explores the essential properties of CA attractors towards characterization of the 1-dimensional cellular automata with point states (single length cycle attractors). The concept of Reachability Tree is introduced for such characterization. It enables identification of the pseudo-exhaustive bits (PE bits) of a CA defining its point states. A theoretical framework has been developed to devise schemes for synthesizing a single length cycle multiple attractor CA with the specific set of PE bits. It also results in a linear time solution while synthesizing a CA for the given set of attractors and its PE bits. The experimentation establishes that the proposed CA synthesis scheme is most effective in designing the efficient pattern classifiers for wide range of applications.

In the early 1980s, Stephen Wolfram [26] studied in detail a family of simple 1-dimensional cellular automata that could simulate complex behav- iors [15,22,23,24,25]. The CA structure was viewed as a discrete lattice of two- state per cell with 3-neighborhood dependency (self, left and right neighbors). This structure attracted a large section of researchers working in the diverse fields and a special class of 1-dimensional CA, called linear/additive CA, had gained the primary attention [3]. The theoretical framework developed in [3] targets characterization of non-uniform linear/additive CA.

While characterizing the CA state space, the researchers identified a set of CA states towards which neighboring states asymptotically approach in the course of dynamic evolution [27]. This set of states, referred to as the attractor of CA state space, forms a basin of attraction with its neighboring states. Such a CA with mul- tiple attractors in its state space were of primary interest in applications like pattern recognition, pattern classification, design of associative memory, query processing etc. [3,11,12,13,14].

Characterization of a CA with multiple single length cycle attractors (point states) received special attention for cost effective solutions of real life applications. The issues related to identification of such attractors in linear/additive CA, and synthesis of single length cycle multiple attractor linear/additive CA were addressed in [3,12,14]. A graph based solution for such identification was also proposed [16,19]. However, characterization of single length cycle attractors as well as the synthesis of a CA with specified set of single length cycle attractors are yet to be explored.

In this context, we concentrate on the characterization of single length cycle attractors in a specific class of 1-dimensional nonlinear cellular automata. We ex- plore the essential properties of CA attractors that enable such characterization. The introduction of Reachability tree provides the theoretical basis for identifica- tion of the attractors of a CA as well as its PE (pseudo-exhaustive) bits, defining the attractors. A theoretical framework has been developed that effectively been exploited to devise schemes for synthesizing a CA with the specific set of PE bits and having only single length cycle attractors. The proposed synthesis scheme is found to be effective while designing the CA based pattern classifier for standard applications.

The next section introduces the cellular automata preliminaries relevant for the current work. Section 3 introduces the concept of reachability tree and the theoret- ical basis of the proposed characterization of CA state space. A number of linear time algorithms/solutions, such as, computation of the number of attractors, iden- tification of PE-bits, etc. are also reported in this section. Synthesis of a single length cycle multiple attractor CA with the specific set of PE bits is reported in Section 4. In Section 5, we report the design of a pattern classifier following the synthesis scheme devised in Section 4.

Proof. Consider the reachability tree of a CA for m attractors. The first node, starting from the root, having both the left and right children, splits the set of attractors into two subsets. The bit corresponding to that node is the identification bit and can exhaustively identify two subtrees (subsets). Now, for each subtree, we can find another identification bit that splits the subtree into two subsubtrees and also can exhaustively identify the subsubtrees. This process is continued until we reach the leaves. Hence, each attractor can be identified by a set of identification

We next propose the following algorithm to find the K such identification bits of a CA. The algorithm implicitly constructs the reachability tree for attractors of the CA. If a node, having both the children, is found, the bit corresponding to that node is marked as an identification bit.

Complexity: Algorithm 3 uses a main loop in Step 3 that depends on n. The maximum number of sets is constant. That is, the execution time of Algorithm 2 is dependent only on n and the number of sets of RMT s. Therefore, the complexity of the above algorithm is clearly O(n).

Proof. Let us consider an n-cell CA. If the first bit is not the PE-bit, then either RMT s 0, 1 or RMT s 2, 3 follow Property 1, where the next bit is the PE-bit. As when the next bit is the PE-bit then either the RMT 0, 1, 2, 3 or the RMT 4, 5, 6, 7 are to be followed to restrict multi cycle formation. Therefore, the first rule must follow RMT either 0, 1 or 2, 3. If the second bit is not the PE-bit, only one RMT among 0, 1, 2, 3 follows Property 1 at the first rule.

To handle such real data, the dataset is suitably modified to fit the input char- acteristics of the proposed pattern classifier. Each categorical attribute is converted into binary form as per the Thermometer Code [10]. For continuous-valued at- tribute, it is transformed into a categorical attribute by calculating the Mean and Standard deviations for all instances of an attribute.

For large datasets, a test set is used to estimate the classification accuracy. The classifier is constructed considering the patterns in the training set and next its performance is evaluated based on the test set. For small datasets m-fold cross validation process is needed where the total dataset is divided into m subsets each containing approximately same number of records. For each subset, a classifier is constructed from the remaining (m-1) subsets.

This paper reports a detail characterization of single length cycle attractors in CA state space. Pseudo-exhaustive (PE) bits to identify the single length cycle attractors of a CA are identified. A theoretical framework has been proposed to synthesize a CA with the specified PE bits for a given set of attractors. The synthesized CA is effectively utilized to design efficient pattern classifier.

