Security of the data is of utmost importance, whenever the data flows on the network. In the current times and t[i]mes to come, cyber security is going to occupy the center stage in the lifecycle of any soft- ware. Security is an evergreen and everlasting area, because of the continuous threat from Hackers and Crackers. The proposed work focuses on the protection of the data in the area of Social Network. It has been achieved by the design and development of a new encryption technique called as PentaPlicative Cipher Technique. The PentaPlicative Cipher Technique makes use of multiple keys such as Latitude, Longitude, IP Address and MAC Address of node et al. to securely encrypt the message that needs to be transmitted through a non-secure channel. The paper concludes with an effective comparison in terms of space and time Complexity between Triplicative and PentaPlicative Cipher Technique.

destination node is found, a message is delivered to the destination node, else a next-hop node is selected. A node forwards a message only to that neighboring node whose delivery probability of mes- sage is higher than the node itself and is also more amongst all its neighboring nodes. Regularly, each node determines its proba- bility to deliver a message concerning each destination. The pro- posed approach aims to secure message transmission between a node to node as well as node to the base station.

The communication is happening in real-time, hence the cryp- tographic technique needs to be fast without compromising on security. For this purpose, symmetric-key cryptography [1] is cho- sen which would be prompt and would also be secure with its pri- vate keys. The process of encrypting the message at the sender side, as well as decrypting the message on the receiver side would employ the use of the same private keys which would be available to both sender and receiver. Since the keys are private so only the sender and receiver would know about them and any third party (such as the sniffer) would not have access to them. In a secure cryptosystem [2], it should not be possible to decrypt the message without the correct private keys.

The authors of [3] conducted a thorough review of the existing cloud-based security and privacy models for storing, processing, and accessing Electronic Health Records(EHR).The investigated lit- erature employs a variety of Attribute-Based Encryption (ABE) variants. It is indeed an excellent technique; however, excessive computations due to bi-linear operations affect its performance. The authors claim that looking for a solution to this problem would be a good research topic. In addition, the authors believe auditing may be quite beneficial. Further,the privacy of not only patients but of all stakeholders should be considered. They also proposed an architectural framework that is controlled only by the patient, wherein a patient obtains full authentication via hospital. He chooses his Medical Officer (MO), who accesses the records by using the Access Control List (ACL) security model, and the type of activity to be conducted is controlled by the Mandatory Access Control(MAC) model. In the event of an emergency, the architec- ture enables proxies to provide room for prompt assistance to any patient.

One of the greatest challenges in data exchange is ensuring the security of data transfer. The authors of [4] proposed a novel approach based on the combination of cryptography and steganog- raphy and aimed to make the cryptographic aspect of it even more impenetrable than before. The ciphertext generated using AES- HMAC is rearranged using a shifting algorithm and the resultant is a shifted ciphertext, which is then embedded into a stego cover for the transmission.

In[21], the authors presented SCENERY, a novel, lightweight block cipher based on feistel structure. SCENERY employs bit- slice techniques, enabling the use of inexpensive hardware and efficient software implementation. The algorithm uses a binary matrix and is able to reach full dependency after four cycles. The performance of SCENERY is optimized for both hardware and soft- ware when compared to other encryption techniques.

CRYPOMPK was suggested by the authors of [22] to offer gran- ular server application protection. The algorithm works in three parts; in the first part, the algorithm tracks and labels sensitive memory buffers and operations using information flow analysis. It then partitions the source code into crypto and non-crypto domains, and later it uses Memory Protection Keys (MPK) to safe- guard secret keys from memory disclosure attacks.

The PentaPlicative Cipher Technique [24] was first introduced as an enhanced successor of the Triplicative Cipher Technique [25]. The PentaPlicative Cipher Technique accepts a set of five pri- vate keys and using them performs a series of mathematical oper- ations on plain text and returns a cipher text as output which is then transmitted further to the receiver. The receiver then uses the reverse mathematical operations on the received text by mak- ing use of the same set of five private keys to obtain the intended plain text message.

cess should be seamless and must be robust enough to function independently without waiting for an input for the keys. Only the plain text to be transmitted should be provided as an input and the system should be intelligent enough to calculate the set of keys to be used automatically and must also share the same set of private keys with the receiver securely so that the process of decryption can be completed at the receiver end seamlessly. Keeping the same principle in light, the PentaPlicative Cipher tech- nique was enhanced, and this new modification was adapted for making the end-to-end message delivery system between node and base station and vice versa an automated and seamlessly inte- grated cryptosystem.

Upon successful application of the operations, the result obtained needs to be decoded from numbers back into the original ASCII character set from which it was earlier encoded. The functional integral values for C(y) is obtained individually as C0(y), C1(y), C2(y), C3(y).. . Cn(y) for n length; n belonging to Natural number set 1, 2.. N and spec- ified range 0 < C(y)<255. Conclusively, the numbers are

The encoded character set is treated with a special bit dis- persion operation wherein, the number of bits of each char- acter are mapped from eight bits to six bits of new character. The new characters are depicted as (l0 l1 l2.. ..ln*). h0 .. .h5 denote the 6 bit character value of each integer.

The key generation operations using the enhanced Diffie- Hellman approach may seem costly with many operations being run, however, all the operations are linear. The single key genera- tion test run of the Enhanced Diffie-Hellman code written in Java and executed on a Windows 10 machine running an Intel i5 pro- cessor with 8 GB RAM which hosted the JDK1.8 took an average of 1.3 ms. This run is for a single key generation and the same pro- cess would be repeated for five keys. The running time of PentaPlicative Cipher on the same machine (as mentioned above and full specifications briefed below) was calculated and the result reported in the original PentaPlicative Cipher Technique paper was

Harshit Bhatia Experienced Web and Mobile Applica- tion Developer with a demonstrated history of working in the computer software industry. Having a knack for research in cryptography demonstrated by multiple publications in international conferences and journals and a patent. Strong information technology profes- sional with a Master of Computer Applications (M.C.A.) focused in Computer Science from Guru Gobind Singh Indraprastha University.

Rahul Johari Dr. Rahul Johari is teaching at University School of Information and Communication Technology (USICT), Guru Gobind Singh Indraprastha University, Dwarka, Delhi, India. Presently, he is the Head of the Software Development Cell and Head and Founder of SWINGER [Security, Wireless, IoT Network Group of Engineering and Research] Lab.

Shrey Gupta Shrey Gupta is currently a student in fourth year pursuing his B.Tech. (Bachelor in Technol- ogy) in Electronics and Communication Engineering from University School of Information Communication and Technology (USICT), Guru Gobind Singh Indra- prastha University, Dwarka, Delhi, India. He is currently affiliated with SWINGER [Security, Wireless, IoT Net- work Group of Engineering and Research] Lab.

