[6]. AHO-nets can be considered as a special case of algebraic high-level (AHL) nets. The main topic of this paper is to present a high-level process semantics for AHL-nets in general, where the example in Section 2 is given as a manet and is modeled by an AHO-net.

The paper is organised as follows. In Section 2 we exemplarily explain the concepts and results of this paper using a mobile ad-hoc network in the area of a university campus. In Section 3 on the one hand we review the notions for high-level net processes and on the other hand we introduce the new notion of high-level net processes with instantiations. In Section 4 we present our main results concerning

In this section we introduce a simple example of a wireless network on a university campus and illustrate thereby the concepts in the following sections. As modeling technique we use algebraic higher-order (AHO) nets. AHO-nets are Petri nets with complex tokens, namely place/transition (P/T) nets and rules to support changes of the network topology. With the specific data type part in [10] they can be considered as a special case of algebraic high-level nets.

Now we introduce high-level occurrence nets and high-level net processes ac- cording to [2,5], called AHL-occurrence net and AHL-process respectively. The net structure of a high-level occurrence net has similar properties like a low-level oc- currence net. An AHL-occurrence net K is an AHL-net such that the pre- and post domain of its transitions are sets rather than multisets and the arc-inscriptions are unary. Moreover there are no forward and backward conflicts, the partial order given by the flow relation is irreflexive and for each element in the partial order the set of its predecessors is finite.

In the example of a wireless network on a university campus (see Section 2) the dynamicity of the communication structure is captured by net transformations, i.e. changes of the network topology are modeled by the application of corresponding rules. While these rules focus on modifications of the net structure, an interesting aspect of future work will be to investigate the concept of broad- and multicasting using rule-based transformations. For this reason rules to modify the marking of an AHO-net have to be introduced, so that a message can simultaneously be sent to a specific number of receivers.

