This paper presents a static analysis for investigating properties of biological systems specified in BioAm- bients. We exploit the control flow analysis to decode the bindings of variables induced by communications and to build a relation of the ambients that can interact with each other. We eventually apply our analysis to an example of gene regulation by positive feedback taken from the literature.

Modelling of biological systems is a challenge for computer science [27]. In fact the complexity of these systems is some order of magnitude larger than the computer systems ever built. Furthermore, the modelling of dynamical behaviour of biological systems is becoming an urgent need for biologists who are trying to coherently organize the huge amount of data available in the post-genomic era. This paper is a step towards the definition of modelling environments for biologists that can assist them in the definition and analysis of complex systems.

We introduce here a static approach for analysing molecular processes specified in BioAmbients. To the best of our knowledge this is the first attempt at exploiting static analysis in the biological application domain. The aim of the analysis is to keep track of the contents of the ambients and the bindings of the names that may vary when communications occur. In BioAmbients, the ambients are nameless and in order to talk about the contents of an ambient we need a way of referring to it; we shall therefore annotate the program so that we can distinguish between the various

This practical experiment shows how important static analysis is in the mod- elling phase of biological systems, when we have to write a specification that matches the experimental knowledge available from biological data. We are currently inves- tigating a methodology to code biological systems in BioAmbients to facilitate the usage of our machinery. Actually there are classifications of the kind of biological reactions that can occur within cells that could be compiled into ambients macros. Then the system specification would be the composition of these macros.

