Convolutional layer is the basis component in deep learning archi- tecture. The features of retinal image are extracted by a set of filters in convolutional layer. A filter represents as a weights matrix that slides over the input and computes a dot product, producing an output value. This creates a feature map that shows where the feature is detected in the input. A convolutional layer also uses multiple filters to detect dif- ferent features and change the size or resolution of the feature maps with padding, stride, dilation, or pooling. From the basis of convolu- tional layers, there are many blocks have been developed for different architectures of DL model as below.

Convolution block: main component of most DL models which named as convolutional neural network (CNN). Convolution block consists of multiple layers that perform convolution, pooling, acti- vation, and other operations on the input data. Convolution block is popular in image classification, object detection, and other com- puter vision tasks.

Reduction block: a type of CNN layer that reduces the spatial dimen- sions of the feature maps by using pooling or strided convolution. The idea is to decrease the computational cost and memory usage of the network while preserving the essential information. Reduc- tion blocks can also increase the receptive field of the network and improve its generalization ability. Reduction blocks are often used before or after inception or residual blocks [14].

InceptionV3 [31], NASNetLarge [32], and ResNet152V2 [12] in our study [33,34]. The training process of those DL models is based on the transfer learning technique using our retinal images of Chula-AMD dataset and an independent dataset for evaluating the generalization ability of trained DL models. Finally, our contribution is to provide a useful guideline for researchers about the most appropriate DL model and the Top-3 DL models, in termed of the accuracy and generalization, for AMD classification using retinal image.

The study is organized as follows. The review of using DL models for AMD detection is shown in Section 2. The material and research methodology in our study are given in Section 3. Section 4 shows the result experiments and discussion of trained DL models on 2-labels and 3-labels AMD classifications. Finally, Section 5 concludes our study.

Wet AMD disease is a rare and severe form of late AMD that damages the macular quickly. It occurs when abnormal blood vessels develop under the retina and macular, and leak fluid or blood. This makes the macular swell or detach, affecting central vision. Early treatment can improve the outcome of Wet AMD.

tor during the training process and to stop the training DL models. The early-stopping during training is allowed. The accuracy of the trained DL model on the validation dataset is the main criterion for stopping the transfer learning process. If the validating accuracy achieves a max- imum value, the transfer learning will be terminated. We also collect the values of precision and recall to measure the accuracy and F1-Score performance of seven DL models in our experiments.

This is a technique where a pre-trained DL model for one task is used for a different but related task. This technique is very common in computer vision [48]. It helps to achieve high performance in the case of small dataset as in Chula-AMD, by training a pre-trained model on similar images. It also saves time and computing resources than imple- menting a DL model from scratch.

For future work, we will conduct a dataset of 4-labels AMD clas- sification (e.g.: Normal vs. Early AMD vs. Intermediate AMD vs. Ad- vanced AMD) and train the DenseNet201 deep learning model using this dataset. Another research direction is the performance evaluation of us- ing DenseNet architecture for other eyes diseases classification such as diabetic retinal or glaucoma.

Ngoc Thien Le received the B.E. degree in electrical engi- neering from HCMC University of Technology and Education, Vietnam, in 2006, and the M.E. degree in telecommunication from Ho Chi Minh City University of Technology, Vietnam, in 2008. He got the Ph.D. degree at the Department of Electrical Engineering, Chulalongkorn University, Thailand in 2016. His re- search interests include data analysis for smart grid and smart grid communication.

Truong Thanh Le received the B. Eng. degree in Electrical and Electronic Engineering from the Ho Chi Minh City Univer- sity of Technology, Viet Nam, in 2020, and the M.Eng. degree in Electrical Engineering from Chulalongkorn University, Thailand, in 2022. His research interests are IoT, AI, embedded system, cloud/edge computing.

Pear Pongsachareonnont Ferreira is Assistant Professor of Ophthalmology at Chulalongkorn University. She is the head of the Research Unit, department of Ophthalmology, Chulalongkorn University. She graduated with her vitreoretinal fellowship from the University of Toronto, Canada, and MPH in Epidemiology from Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public health. Her main re- search area is retinal imaging, vitreoretinal surgery, and the qual- ity of life in visual impairment patients.

Rath Itthipanichpong received the Doctor of Medicine de- gree at Siriraj Hospital, Mahidol University, in 2006. He has completed his Ophthalmology Residency Training and Glaucoma Fellowship Training at King Chulalongkorn Memorial Hospital, in 2014 and 2015, respectively. He is currently an Instructor in oph- thalmology at the Department of Ophthalmology, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, Thailand. His work has been related to both glaucoma and low vision field. From his passion in technology and innovation, he is also developing new technology to help im- prove quality of care in ophthalmology patients.

