Actually, sensors are not the autonomous agents able to have opinions as we described so far. To manage sensors, we use a proprietary context-management framework [5]. Hiding the technical features of sensors, the context-management framework provides service developers with an abstract (from technological aspects) vision of the sensor network. Section 2 describes the context-management frame- work and its role in context-based authentication. Section 6 describes our experi- mental set-up. It illustrates and comments the results of the experiments that we have conducted to measure the reliability of our identification and authentication algorithm. Our test-case scenario has two identities, Bob and Alice, that move from one room to another. Section 7 comments some related work in context-aware authentication and location positioning systems. Section 8 concludes the paper addressing the future work.

The CMF facilitates context-based authentication. In fact, the sensor network is a versatile source of information that can be used to understand the relationship between context (here locations of ID-tokens) and the identity of a user standing at any location of interest (e.g., at a coffee corner). In a wider scenario than that considered in this paper, also the appointments in the MS outlook agenda of users are part of the context [16].

Bob). The context information that emerges from the sensor network (provided by the CMF) is used to evaluate an overall level of authentication of an identity. The higher the level (a real number between 0 and 1), the higher the trustworthiness that the emerging identity is authentic. Because context information is collected continuously (at a certain collecting rate) authentication is a continuous process as well. This means that the user, once authenticated, remains authenticated unless the context changes. A context change occurs, for example, when the user (or one of its ID-token) leaves the space, or when a context datum related to him becomes invalid; for example, the location information detected by a RFID reader becomes old soon because a user can move away after having waved his badge in front the reader. Therefore, our system supports an automatic log-off, which is a desirable characteristic in context-aware authentication solutions (e.g., see [2]).

passive objects and mostly without intelligent capabilities. In fact, it is the CMF that collects sensors data over time and calculates opinions on the sensors behalf. The CMF knows the technical features of the sensors and it has access to their logged data. In the following, we stick to considering our sensors as autonomous recommenders, but the reader must be aware that this useful interpretation in indeed justified by the existence of our CMF.

(3)) are uncertain about whether Bob is in room 1 or inside their controlled cell but not in room 1. Despite they can not disbelieve that Bob is in room 1 they cannot believe it either. This is consistent with what we expect from the Subjective Logic theory, where the conclusions more correctly reflect the ignorance and uncertainties about the input arguments [8].

First, when the cells are larger than the location of interest, the threshold for a positive authentication level must be around 0.45. There is no way of getting higher values. Moreover, the disposition of the sensor network must be carefully design so that to avoid sensor cells that intersect only very partially a space of interest (like sensor 2 in 4.C). In a real set-up, this means a time-consuming task in finding the right disposition of the sensors; in fact, sensor cells have not such a sharp geometry as we assumed in our scenarios and it is not easy to understand whether they intersect or not with the location of interest. For example, a Bluetooth dongle has usually a range of about 10mt with a grey zone, where ID-token may or may not be detected depending on external factors like the density of people, the presence of metal shelves or metal objects, and the weather. A good news, in this context, is that with Bluetooth 2.1 dongles is it possible to tune the power of the signal and thus the sensors cells can be adjusted by sofware instead of by positioning the dongles.

We are also considering to extend our framework with a reputation network of sensors. In this way, the opinions originating from sensors can be discounted, or even discarded, depending upon the reputation of the sensors in giving honest or accurate feedbacks. An algorithm that copes with sensors reputation can be easily obtained with the use of the discount operator of the Subjective Logic. The design of a sensors reputation management system and its integration in our CMF, instead, is left as future work.

The results of our experiments confirm what we were expecting from our context- based authentication solution: identities are correctly recognised and authenticated in a place, when they are actually in that place. The relative disposition of the sensors and the location where the proximity service is being offered have a visible impact on the maximal expectation of belief (a real number) we can obtain. This phenomenon is observed in most of our experiments. In words, if all the sensors intersect minimally with the location of the service, the opinions that those sen- sors can give on a user being in that location are mainly composed of uncertainty. Moreover, the use of opinions originating from the sensors that do not detect the presence of a user is critical. If not treated properly, the uncertainty brought by the opinions originating from those sensors can override the believes brought by the opinions of the sensors that, instead, have detected the user in the location of the service.

We have implemented our algorithm in the context management framework of our institute. A first run of tests has shown results that are consistent or identical to what we have obtained in the simplified experimental set-up described in this paper. We plan to integrate the implementation with our colleague radar application, and to have a demo where users are authenticated by using the theory presented in this paper.

