cation of this era. It is deemed to be an economical and stead- fast method of communication. Email messages can be sent to a single receiver or broadcasted to groups. An email message can reach to a number of receivers simultaneously and instantly. These days, the majority of individuals even cannot envisage the life exclusive of email. For these and countless other motives, email has also become a widely used medium for communication of the people having ill intentions [2].

The rapid growth of the internet has also significantly increased the number of email users. At the same time there is a noteworthy increase in spam emails rate. A recent statisti- cal report shows that the 70% of the email traffic during the second week of 2014 was spam1. As described earlier that fraudulent email detection is considered as classification prob- lem, the research on email focuses on categorization of emails in different classes. Emails can be categorized in many groups, based on the purpose for which email is intended. It can be cat- egorized as legitimate and illegitimate [3], spam and ham [4], suspicious and non-suspicious [2,5], fraudulent and normal, formal and informal which can further be classified as per- sonal, family, friends, business, work, etc. [3].

Related work discussed in connection with the present study is divided into categories. This study deals with the detection of the fraudulent emails, which are known as a kind of illicit emails, therefore, the related work is presented for various illicit emails detection including spam emails detection, suspi- cious emails detection and phishing emails detection. Also another dimension of research regarding illicit emails is consid- ered to be the authorship identification of anonymous emails. We also present some overview of the literature for email authorship identification.

In another study, Youn and McLeod [14] presented an ontology based spam filtering method. The authors used J48 algorithm in order to formulate rules to generate concepts of the ontology. The study by Renuka and Hamsapriya [15] adapted the use of word stemming instead of simply content based words for spam email detection. The authors showed that stemming based method is more efficient as compared to content based methods. It should be noted that Youn and McLeod [14] accentuated on the use of stemming based method, because the authors argued that the spammers use misspellings in order to deceive keyword based spam detection filters.

Suspicious emails are another category of illicit emails. Suspi- cious emails are those which contain some material which is doubtful. For instance, an email may contain some text regarding some illicit activity; a threatening email; or it may contain certain material which is worth analysis. Suspicious emails are deemed to be those which contain some clue regard- ing some illicit activities, which need to be further investigated by law enforcement agencies. There are some evidences regard- ing the exchange of suspicious emails before the events of 9/11 took place [23]. In the literature, the researchers also have

A study by Appavu et al. [5] applied the association rule mining for suspicious email detection task. In the article [5], the authors added a specialized class of suspicious emails as an alert or the information using verb. An email is considered suspicious if in addition to keywords it contains future tenses to consider it as an alarm for future suspicious activity. It should be noted that in the articles [2,5], the suspicious emails considered are the terrorism related emails which give some clue regarding future terrorist acts.

Phishing problem is believed to be a security and privacy concern [6]. Phishing problem is considered to be the hard problem, due to the fact that an attacker can easily make the replicated website which may resemble to the legal bank of a user [7]. Phishing emails are the emails which are planned to acquire crucial information from the receiver. The crucial information includes username, password, credit card details, bank account information, etc. These emails resemble to the emails from trustworthy websites. The emails contain such a text that the receivers immediately turn to respond the email by clicking on the links provided in the email or send the cru- cial information in reply.

It should be noted that in this paper, we consider detection of the fraudulent email as a classification problem. For any classification problem one needs a feature set and a classifica- tion algorithm. We have raw emails as input and in training each email is assigned a label/class fraud or normal.

Content extractor: This module of the architecture extracts the contents of the email, such as subject and body. The subject part of the email is extracted from the header of email, while the body is extracted as a whole. The reason for extracting only the subject and body is that, these two parts contain the text of the email, which often describes the characteristics of the fraudulent email. This module is implemented using Java code, which extracts the email con- tent from raw email and saves it into the comma separated values (CSV) file format.

Feature construction engine: Once the content of the emails are available, feature construction engine builds up various feature-sets which are designed according to the experience and are found in various kinds of the fraudulent emails. Feature sets are divided into different categories, depending on type of fraud being considered in the email. Although, in the current work we only classify emails into fraud or nor- mal but it is also possible to further classify fraud emails into different categories. Feature construction engine is implemented in Java.

Fraudulent email detector: This module applies the classifi- cation algorithms on features selected by the feature selec- tor module. Various algorithms which are used for classification are applied using the machine learning tool WEKA [24] which is an open source tool widely used by the research community in the area. The algorithms used for fraudulent email detection include: SVM [10], J48 [11], Naive Bayes [9] and CCM (cluster based classification model) [1].2

We consider the task of fraudulent email detection as a classi- fication task. Promising classification results can be achieved with the choice of representative features. In this section we discuss the classification algorithms we used for the detection of fraudulent emails.

Support Vector Machine (SVM) is widely used and considered as state-of-the-art classification method for text classification. It has an advantage over others that it can work well on high dimensional feature set. SVM has another advantage that it can transform non-linearly separable data to a new linearly separable data by using kernel trick [10].

For experiments, we used a dataset containing 8000 emails in total. Among 8000 emails half of the emails were fraudulent and half were normal. The fraudulent email dataset contained more than 2500 emails from Nigeria and are downloaded from the web site [22].

In order to conduct experiments, the emails are prepro- cessed and each email is represented as vector of features and an indicator of email type fraudulent or normal. A series of experiments have been performed using diverse feature sets and different classification methods. In the first set of experi- ments, we used features which are usually found in fraudulent emails and are intended to deceive the receiver by telling some family matters, and tempting them by offering some financial benefits in order to get some crucial information.

