Hayward and others [1] focused on the design, implementation and evaluation of an electronic integrated care pathway (eICP), within a Mother and Baby Unit. The eICP was developed using the Microsoft Access program. They reported op- erational effectiveness by questionnaire and discussion groups regarding the initial eICP development.

Step-1: First, the cause of variance category is determined from the content of a variance and its keyword. An example of variance categories are; A) Patient Condition (e.g., Patient refused other treatment), B) Hospital System (e.g., De- lay in tests), C) Caregiver Related (e.g., Discharge teaching not done), D) Family Placement (e.g., Family will not accept responsibility for the discharge plan), and

At Step-2: keywords are extracted from the sentence that refers to the actual cause of the variance inputted by the user. The extracted keywords are decomposed into the three factors of Subject, Object, and Predicate according to the case struc- ture of the sentence and on the described contents of the causes of the variance. Keywords to arise from our example might be that: Department is not open on the weekend; Delay in patient teaching; Family non-compliant; etc.

system which combined published thesaurus and small psychiatry thesaurus will be construct to process unknown words. Here, unknown words were not registered in variance database. We would evaluate the proposed method for variance analysis. Specifically, we will compare the proposed method and existing method (manually sorting). In this paper, we described the development of the psychiatric patient

Also, we proposed the automatic variance analysis based on VAKB (Variance Analysis Knowledge Base). Proposed variance analysis method will be able to complement analysis process which depended on experience (seat-of-the-pants ap- proach) of the analyst. However, we have to collect a large number of variance data in order to establish this analysis method. Therefore, it is the important subject for study that thesaurus development from accumulated variance data because this classification method depends on using the thesaurus. In the future, we collect the system error, bug and variance data for system improvement.

