One of novel natural precursor is dune sand (DS), which is infinitely provided in arid region. According to ASTM and AASHTO soil classifi- cation system, it is classified as SP, i.e., poorly graded sand. Classifica- tion is provided for different locations (13 locations) of the world and almost all types were SP [8]. Its fineness modulus value is low the fine aggregate of the structural concrete. However, for AABs, the high fineness of DS may pay vital importance in geopolymerization and strength development. Furthermore, the richness in silica of DS and high surface area may make it compatible for the development of tetra- hydron structure of one-part alkali activated components. There was an attempt to make a one-part geopolymer mixture using unique component [16], thus, more extensive study still needs for carbon neutral geopolymer cement.

[18,19]. A comprehensive summary has been prepared in which ther- mally insulated concrete performance has been reported [20]. Along with the reactivity of the precursors, the other factors that influence the mechanical strength of the two-part geopolymers are type of precursor, the alkaline to precursor ratio, ratio between alkaline activators (So- dium Silicate/Sodium Hydroxide (Na2SiO3/NaOH)), molarity of NaOH solution) and curing temperature etc. [21].

properties for the pavement and is capable to reduce the plasticity [28]. The FA was also used to enhance the performance of grout [29]. The FA was also activated by CaO and improvement in the compressive strength has been observed [30]. Along with that, it has been used with agri- cultural waste to produce construction material like brick [31]. The advantage of pressing on precast concrete bricks, pavers, and kerb stones is evident. By applying uniaxial pressure, air voids are removed, which renders the paste dense. In fact, this is the most important aspect in

For the development of AAB, the materials used in this study are fly ash (FA), ground granulated blast furnace slag (GGBS) and dune sand (DS), which were activated. FAs were obtained from three industrial sources. FA-1 was obtained from the paper industry, whereas FA-2 is from a coal power plant, which was designed solely for electricity of cement plant (DG Khan Cement Private Limited) in Pakistan. And FA-3 is also from another coal power plant where it has generated 1,300 MW further investigation. It was coupled with the GGBS to ensure the desired performance under ambient curing conditions. Furthermore, the amount of FA and activator was reduced by adding industrially dis- carded sand (DS), which may result in improved packing and activation of FA. Therefore, this work was divided into three groups and explained as follows.

process was completed within 7 d. For FA-1 and FA-3, the difference in the compressive strengths at 7 and 28 d was 25.7 % and 28.2 %, respectively. FA-based geopolymers exhibit early strength due to hot curing. However, their strength can be further improved over time by addressing the variation in particle size.

the lightweight property was demonstrated, and the difference in den- sity among the three types of FA was minimal. This implies that curing has been completed and all hydration products, either calcium-alumino- silicate-hydrate (C-A-S-H) or sodium-alumino-silicate-hydrate (N-A-S- H) gels, might have already formed due to hot curing. This is because the decrease in the water to solid (binders or sand) (w/s) ratio increased the bulk density, which in turn increased the reactivity of the AAB. As a result, the hydrated products became denser. However, the difference was marginal due to uniaxial pressure [50].

Thus, the results reconfirmed that the bulk density changed slightly from 7 to 28 d. Meanwhile, the specimens in Group-III, based on DS, indicated a significant improvement in strength, even though their bulk density was similar to that of the FA-based mixtures. Therefore, high- strength and lightweight materials can be achieved using AABs incor- porated with DS in arid regions. However, good decisions cannot be made based solely on the physico-mechanical performance. Hence, we will discuss the standards for bricks as well as their performance in the following Section 4.

For different scenario and different criteria make the system complex and for simplicity or automated selection, the MCDM technique is employed. Therefore, Technique for order preference by similarity to ideal solution (TOPSIS), widely opted for selection of sustainable con- struction materials [11,23,59] is utilized in this work. Followings are the processing steps of the TOPSIS.

the dead load of the structure. It is noted that achieving a decrease in bulk density without compromising mechanical strength is the ideal application for lightweight products made of AAB. Similarly, water ab- sorption is strongly related to mechanical strength. Higher water ab- sorption results in lower strength, and vice versa. However, high water absorption is strongly related to the high porosity of the microstructure of materials, which contributes to their good insulation properties in arid regions. A lot of efforts have been made to incorporate various fi-

The compressive strength was correlated with the FA type, and its values varied from 9.6 to 22.7 MPa. However, the difference in compressive strength between 7 and 28 d was marginal because of the early geopolymerization via hot curing. Furthermore, the SAI for the three types of FAs was calculated, and the FA with the highest SAI (1.86) was used to develop GGBS and DS based AAB mixtures.

Among all specimens, the DS incorporated AAB mixture exhibited the highest compressive strength (45.3 MPa). This was enabled by hot curing, which can significantly improve the reactivity of FA and DS (as precursors) during geopolymerization. Hence, high-strength materials based on DS for arid regions can be achieved.

