Clone theory (see [34] in this volume for an introduction) is a substantial part of the research in universal algebra. Its main object of study is the lattice of all clones on a given set A. While this lattice was completely described for |A| = 2 in the 1920s by Emil L. Post (published around 20 years later in [29]), all larger cases remain open. Investigating them is the focus of virtually all publications in the field [27,38,20,11]. In 1963, Bill Lawvere introduced what is nowadays known as a Lawvere theory;

After the introduction of some notation in Section 2, the work starts in Section 3, where we follow an approach suggested in [23] to explain how to treat clones more generally as models of Lawvere theories in arbitrary categories. We then show that many familiar notions (including the tremendously powerful Galois theory based on the notion of an operation preserving a relation) can be generalized to this setting, and we explain how these notions can be dualized. In Section 4, we use this framework to introduce the general duality theory for clones from [18], followed by a discussion in Section 5 of when this theory can best be applied.

Finally, in Section 6 and Section 7, we put the approach to work and explain its benefits for the study of the clone lattices. In Section 6, we pick an example and apply the duality theory to the centralizer clones of (not necessarily finite) distributive lattices. We dualize these clones into the category of Priestley spaces [30], which does not change them abstractly, but replaces them with a different set of morphisms. As we will see, investigating the latter is often easier. Hence, instead of dealing with the centralizer clones directly, we look at their duals in the category of Priestley spaces, collect results for the latter, and finally translate them back to the classical case. In the end, we obtain results about the centralizer clones and the lattice of their subclones, which have nothing to do with dualities or category theory, except that they were used to find and prove them.

We will assume that the reader is familiar with the basics of clone theory as intro- duced in [34]. As for category theory, we will almost exclusively use notions that are amongst the most elementary ones, see for instance [21]. The only purpose of this section is to introduce our notation, the notion of algebraic structure, and the concept of duality.

Note that the first condition has to be removed from this definition if we include nullary operations into OA. The local closure operators may not be defined here since they are not needed in the remainder of this paper. They are presented and studied in [17], where we can also find a characterization of the cases in which they are omissible (generalizing the case of the base set being finite). In other words, the power of the classical Galois theory still carries through. Even some of the more sophisticated results such as the Baker-Pixley Theorem [1] still hold [15].

We have not yet discussed how to apply all this for the classical case. This will be done in the next two sections. First, we outline how to apply this theory to the study of clones on sets. Afterwards, we put the approach to work, using it to produce a collection of concrete results.

However, the other way sounds more difficult. Given a clone C on a set A, there is no obvious way how to find this clone in category that can be dualized conveniently. Of course, one can hardly expect a recipe for this. However, at least for the case that A is finite, we can describe a universal way to obtain a scenario where C and X are categories of algebraic structures and their homomorphisms.

One particular important change between the scenario for bounded distributive lattices and that for regular distributive lattices is a change in the coproduct. While it is the disjoint union in the category of Priestley spaces, it is not the disjoint union in the category of bounded Priestley spaces. This causes, for instance, that the proof of Proposition 6.12 fails (h will not necessarily preserve the order).

Example 7.3 If X is an object in categories where the coproducts are given by disjoint union (Set , Top, the category of Priestley spaces, every quasivariety of rela- tional structures, every quasivariety of algebraic structures where every operation symbol is unary,...), then the all objects in the category have non-deformed copow- ers to the degree 1. This also applies to categories in which the coproducts are not the disjoint union but somewhat close to it (the category of pointed spaces, the category of bounded Priestley spaces, every quasivariety of algebraic structures where every operation symbol is unary or nullary,...).

It seems as if the copowers of some object, if there are non-deformed at all, are most likely to be non-deformed to the degree 1. Although this is true for many standard categories, it is not true in general. In fact, there are natural examples of categories where the copowers of some object are non-deformed to an arbitrarily large degree k > 1, but not k = 1, some of which are given in [14].

operations over A is bounded by a finite integer if and only if X has finitely many connected components. Indeed, provided that this is the case, the supremum of the essential arity of operations over A is the number of connected components of X. This, in turn, is the integer n such that there are precisely 2n idempotent elements in A.

