Abstract This paper addresses the problem of room pricing in hotels. We propose a hotel revenue management model based on dynamic pricing to provide hotel managers with a flexible and efficient decision support tool for room revenue maximization. The two pillars of the proposed framework are a novel optimization model, and a multi-class scheme similar to the one implemented in airlines. Our hypothesis is that this framework can overcome the limitations associated with the research gaps in pricing literature; and can also contribute significantly in increasing the revenue of hotels. We test this hypothesis on three different approaches, and the results show an increase in revenue compared to the classical model used in literature.

Finally, instead of using a dynamic programming formula- tion, we use a non-linear programming formulation that can solve realistically sized problems. The plan is to resolve the model every night, after midnight (for around half an hour) on the hotel server, in its idle time. Therefore there would be no significant overhead cost.

The output of this model is the optimal prices for each night to determine the pricing policy of the hotel. It can be noted that this resulting price can be continuous, similarly to the out- put of most online booking systems; therefore no further approximation will be needed. Nevertheless, the system can only present the average room price to the customer to avoid his dissatisfaction from changing the price daily.

In order to incorporate this dynamic pricing model into revenue management systems, several interviews have been conducted with domain experts to understand the most impor- tant features of hotel management. Managers mainly wanted to develop a multi-category mechanism like the one imple- mented in airlines. In this multi-category system, in each night, there will be different prices; where each price is associated with a certain category. To implement this, we conducted a parametric analysis on the proposed model to determine differ- ent rates for each category. The goal of this parametric analy- sis is to create a way to induce a dynamic change in the price as of these forecasted scenarios. Then use each percentile as the estimated demand to solve the dynamic model. The out- put of this approach is different prices for each day along the forecasted horizon; each price is related to the amount of demand, i.e. if the demand is low, so will be the price associated with it. The problem with this approach is that we must generate several demand forecasts from the simulator.

segments; and for each segment the proposed model is solved to obtain a different set of prices. So each price set is related to the occupancy level in the hotel, i.e. when the hotel is not fully occupied, the price will be low and it will increase as long as the number of available rooms in the hotel decreases.

In this section we present the results of our proposed model using the three approaches, described above. We assume a case where a hotel manager would like to know the optimal prices to set for each night 3 months ahead of the actual reservation. We use a hotel simulator to represent and generate the fore- casted demand that will be used as input to the optimization model. The simulator takes as an input the actual reservation scenarios, obtained from Plaza hotel in Alexandria, which took place in the past 3 years. The future generated reserva- tions are passed with all their attributes to the optimization module as an input. In particular, the optimization model uses the following attributes (available in each forward reservation record): Arrival Date, and Length of Stay.

In our particular case study, the future time horizon of the study is 90 nights, and the maximum length a guest can stay is 14 days. The hotel room capacity is 80 rooms with nominal price of $120. To mine the data to obtain the price elasticity parameter, we carried out numerous experiments on the avail- able data. For example, to calibrate the value of elasticity in the third approach we implemented the following algorithm:

It is quite clear that our proposed dynamic pricing model can contribute in increasing the total revenue of the hotel when compared to the former classical model. Note that both the simulator and the optimization model are designed to be gen- eric (i.e. there is no specific assumptions related to a certain class of hotels). For this reason, the proposed system can be applied to any class of hotels.

This paper addresses the problem of optimally setting the price of the hotel rooms in order to maximize revenue. It first pre- sents the classical model used in literature for solving room allocation problem. We then explain how to modify it based on a dynamic pricing approach.

The main idea is to reformulate the classical model in order to incorporate the price elasticity of demand. Furthermore, in order to integrate this dynamic pricing model into revenue management systems, we propose a novel multi-category idea. We postulate that our proposed revenue management frame- work overcomes the limitations associated with the research gaps in dynamic pricing literature and can contribute in increasing the revenue of a hotel.

