events exchanged between system abstractions and formally defined in [13] 2 . With the exception of real-time computer engineers, the majority of computer engineers do not accomplish the verification of the temporal properties of these diagrams, even if the diagrams express the intended behavior that will guide the rationale behind important design decisions that they will make. An im- portant fact contributing to this situation is that traditional verification and validation tools are not of much help when faced with the partial information available at these early stages [11]. How to rigorously verify the temporal properties of these intuitive diagrams?

[5] [3]. [3] defines an extension of basic MSCs to specify timing constraints, but the analysis of race conditions in MSCs, i.e. violations on the intended ordering of the events in MSCs due to their actual semantics - a qualitative analysis - is realized independently from the analysis of timing conflicts. This model originated versions of tool analyzers culminating in the UBET tool [18], which implements a rich set of features of basic MSCs complying with the ITU specification [12]. Unfortunately, UBET, and other popular tools that

A tuple x = (a1,... , an) is called a solution if the assignment (x1 = a1,... , xn = an) does not violate any constraint. A value v is a feasible value for a variable xi if there exists a solution in which xi = v. The set of all fea- sible values of a variable is called the minimal domain. A minimal constraint

It is known that the solutions for these problems are NP-hard [8]. However, the basic time labeled MSC does not represent metric temporal constraints as disjunctions, but single metric intervals between events. A network of binary metric temporal constraints in which all the constraints specify a single metric interval is called a simple temporal problem (STP) in the literature.

The visual order graph of a basic time labeled MSC with only their metric time labels is abstracted into a metric constraint graph in which the variables are the events of the corresponding MSC. Metric temporal relationships are denoted by the metric time labels. We define the Metric Interval Calculus Network (MICN) that allows the reasoning about the metric temporal infor- mation conveyed in a basic time labeled MSC.

(2) the managing of time labeled MSC composition (multiple MSCs) through High-Level MSCs [13], used to describe more complex behaviors. Acknowledgments. Thanks to Henry Kautz for making the MATS code avail- able [14] used in the experiments of this paper, and for allowing the changes in it.

