Abstract Ad hoc mobile networks are composed of mobile nodes communicating through wireless medium, without any fixed backbone infrastructure. In these networks, congestion occurs in any intermediate node when data packets travel from source to destination and they incur high packet loss and long delay, which cause the performance degradations of a network. This paper proposes an early congestion detection and adaptive routing in MANET called as EDAPR. Initially EDAPR constructs a NHN (non-congested neighbors) neighbors list and finds a route to a destination through an NHN node. All the primary path nodes periodically calculate its queue_status at node level. While using early congestion detection technique, node detects congestion that is likely to happen and sends warning message to NHN nodes. The ancestor NHN node is aware of this situ- ation and finds an alternate path to a destination immediately by applying adaptive path mecha- nism. Thus, EDAPR improves performance in terms of reducing delay, routing overhead and increases packet delivery ratio without incurring any significant additional cost. The performance of EDAPR was compared with EDAODV and EDCSCAODV using the Ns-2 simulator. The result reveals significant improvement over EDAODV and EDCSCAODV routing schemes.

Wireless is a new technology that allows users to access information and services regardless of the geographic position. People can utilize and surf the Internet with computers (e.g., laptop, palmtop, smart phone and PDA) whenever and wher- ever possible. In general, wireless network can be classified into two types: infrastructure network and ad hoc network. Mobile ad hoc network (MANET) is an autonomous group of mobile users who communicate through relatively bandwidth con- strained wireless links. Since the hosts are mobile, the network topology may change rapidly and unpredictably over time [1]. One of the fundamental tasks that an ad hoc network should perform is congestion control. The main objective of conges- tion control is to limit the delay and buffer overflow caused by network congestion and provide better performance of the network [2]. In wire line networks, congestion control is imple- mented at the transport layer and is often designed separately from functions of other layers. Since wired links have fixed capacities and are independent, this methodology is well justi- fied and has been extensively studied [2]. However, these results do not apply directly to ad hoc networks because the ad hoc networks result in large amount of packet loss, high delay, un- fair scenarios and low throughputs. In ad hoc networks each mobile node has limited transmission capacity and buffer and they mostly intercommunicate by multi-hop relay [2].

[4] [5], attempt to maintain consistent and up-to-date routing information from each node to every other node in the net- work. In the on-demand routing protocols, such as AODV [2,6] and DSR [8,10,11] routes are discovered only when they are needed. The hybrid routing protocols [2,10] combines the features of both proactive and on-demand protocols. In the case of hybrid routing protocols, each node maintains routing information about its zone using the proactive approach. It uses on-demand routing approach outside the zone. The peri- odic routing information updates due broken links that can lead to a large routing control overhead, when the network is scaled up such that the mobility of nodes is high.

Our motivation is to clear that congestion which is a domi- nant cause for packet loss in MANETs. Typically, reducing packet loss involves congestion control running on top of a mobility and failure adaptive routing protocol at the network layer [2,9]. A new perspective of this problem might be to real- ize congestion control in the MAC or network layer. After all, it might make sense to tackle the problem from where it emerges. An exceedingly high network load is a problem closely associ- ated with medium access and packet forwarding [2,9].

Congestion is a dominant reason for packet drops in ad hoc networks [15]. Lu et al. [15] found that AODV is ineffective under stressful network traffic situations. They proposed a modified version of AODV (called CADV) which favors nodes with short queuing delays in adding into the route to the destination. While this modification may improve the route quality, the issues of long delay and high overhead when a new route needs to be discovered remain unsolved. Further- more, CADV is not congestion adaptive. It offers no remedy when an existing route becomes heavily congested. A dynamic

In our previous work, EDAODV (early detection conges- tion and control routing) [17] techniques have been proposed to detect the congestion well in advance and find a non- congested alternate path bi-directionally. A technique for self curing the congestion was proposed in [18] and is called the EDCSCAODV (early detection congestion and self cure rout- ing). To utilize the concepts of EDAODV and EDCSCAODV, we propose the EDAPR routing protocol for mobile ad hoc networks. EDAPR detects congestion by using early conges- tion detection techniques (Section 2) and it can easily chose a non-congested alternate node from their two hop lists and establish as a route to destination immediately. The new pro- tocol can reduce broadcast packets and find a non-congested path. Our NS2 simulation results confirms (Section 5) that our proposed protocol has a higher packet delivery rate, lower control packets and reduced end to end delay. Section 3 discusses the related works. Section 4 presents a method for an Adaptive Routing to find an alternate path to control the congestion.

Congestion in a network may occur at any interval, when the number of packets coming to a node exceeds its buffer capac- ity, the node becomes congested and starts losing packets. We can use a variety of metrics at a node to monitor congestion status. For instance, we can be based on the percentage of all packets discarded for lack of buffer space and the average queue length. We use an early congestion detection technique at a node to detect the congestion well in advance. An early congestion detection technique is a queue management algo- rithm with an optimization of random early detection (RED) model that makes use of direct measurement congestion status well in advance in a network [10].

Early congestion detection and adaptive routing in MANET called EDAPR is a uni-cast routing protocol for MANET. It reduces network congestion, by minimizing the flooding of traffic, find a non-congested path between source and destina- tion. We present this as complete design with an in-depth eval- uation using EDAPR routing protocol. When the source host wants to transmit a data packet to a destination, EDAPR pro- tocol first constructs a NHN set (non-congested neighbors) which connects both one hop and two hop neighbors and ini- tiates the route discovery procedure by using NHN set to find a non-congested path to a destination [1,16]. After the route discovery, data packet is transmitted to the destination. Hence, the EDAPR can reduce the overhead and automatically finds

MAC layer was based on IEEE 802.11 DCF (distributed coor- dination function). The channel propagation model we used 2- ray ground reflection models. An interface queue at the MAC layer could hold 50 packets before they were sent out to the physical link. Link breakage was detected from MAC layer feedbacks. A routing buffer at the network layer could store up to 64 data packets. This buffer keeps data packets waiting for a route, such as packets for which route discovery had started but no reply arrived yet. The routing protocols we used EDAPR, EDAODV, and EDCSCAODV. The data flow used CBR which varies from 4 packets to 16 packets and flows var- ies from 10 to 50 flows. The Maximum speed of the node is 10 m/s and simulation time is 900 s.

