(0.228:0.378) and 0.161 (0.630:0.356) % were observed, after 24 h exposure. The first report of present investigation revealed that the rapid biological synthesis of silver nanoparticles using A. nilagirica leaf fil- trate would be an effective potential alternative green larvicide for the control of mosquitoes at the devel- opmental stages with eco-friendly approach.

Knema attenuata [5], Acalypha alnifolia and microbial insecticide Metarhizium anisopliae [6], essential oils [7], and nereistoxin from marine annelid Lumbriconereis heteropoda [8] have been reported against adult and developmental stages of Aedes, Anopheles and Culex. But these treatments exhibits its default like lower efficacy, development of resistance, chronic effects in non-target organisms and its long-term residual accumulation in the environment, thereby ecological imbalance through food chain and harm cattle and human beings. Hence, there is a constant need for developing biologically active larvicides from natural products which are biodegradable.

Vectors used in this study were reared according to Sundar- avadivelan et al. [3]. Briefly, they were collected from National Centre for Disease Control (NCDC), Mettupalayam, Coimbatore, and maintained in enamel trays containing distilled water in the laboratory at room temperature.

Fresh and healthy leaves of A. nilagirica were collected nearby UPASI Tea Research Institute, Valparai, Coimbatore and identified by Prof. R. Gopalan, Department of Botany, Karpagam University, Coimbatore. The collected leaves were washed with running tap water to remove dust materials and rinsed in large volumes of distilled water and left for 5 h without disturbance, then filtered through Whatman filter paper (No. 1). The filtrate (=aqueous leaf extract) was considered as 1% stock solution. From this stock solu- tion, concentrations were prepared ranging from 0.2, 0.4, 0.6, 0.8, and 1.0% for an effective bioassay.

% respectively, at 0.25% concentration which was the initial con- centration of aqueous leaf extract treatment alone, where only 52% (LC50 = 0.167%) pupa mortality was observed after 24 h expo- sure. On the other hand, no mortality was observed in control. The chi-square value was significant at p < 0.05.

Control of human vector populations have been studied by sev- eral researchers using botanicals which comprises of leaf extracts [31], essential oils [7], isolated compounds [32] and recently, syn- thesized silver nanoparticles [33]. In the present study the Ag NPs synthesized using aqueous leaf filtrate of A. nilagirica as a biopre- cursor was investigated in two cases: characterization of the syn- thesized Ag NPs, and its bioactivity towards lethal effect against larvae and pupae of two vector species, An. stephensi and Ae. aegypti. The rapid color change from pale yellow to brown within 60 min in the reaction mixture strongly indicates the formation of biosilver due to effective reduction with active compounds

With reference to Sintubin et al. [38], the synthesized Ag NPs from plants, algae, yeasts, fungi and bacteria posses varied size and shapes. Similarly, the morphology of phyto-synthesized Ag NPs was documented using scanning electron microscopy wherein the particles were relatively spherical to irregular shape which indicates that the Ag NPs were distributed uniformly in the col- loidal form.

