AR in education can be especially beneficial when learning abstract and invisible concepts since it allows the student to visualize and manipulate the material to learn (Chen, Chi, Hung, & Kang, 2011; Chiu, DeJaegher, & Chao, 2015). In addition, studies show that learning this type of concept through AR is more effective than using printed materials or desktop software (cf. Radu, 2014).

Several studies show that many students have difficulties under- standing abstract concepts in areas such as chemistry (Kozma & Russell, 1997; Mahaffy, 2015; Wu et al., 2013; Cardellini, 2012; Woldeamanuel, Atagana, & Engida, 2014; O'Dwyer & Childs, 2017). Some reasons for that could be that traditional materials have two dimensions to represent the chemical concepts, and the understanding of these concepts implies the 3D representation of the spatial structure of the molecules (Maier & Klinker, 2013). The use of AR technology for teaching chemistry can improve the understanding of the spatial structure of molecules (Maier,

Fixed technology refers to AR technology displayed on a computer screen. Although this technology has some disadvantages, such as a lack of portability, this type of AR display is an economically low-cost alternative. In addition, a fixed-screen display can be an ideal entry point to AR learning possibilities for the classroom by utilizing an existing computer monitor.

For example, Xiao, Xu, Yu, Cai, and Hansen (2016) present the Starry Sky Exploration AR system to teach astronomy to primary school stu- dents using AR technologies. The system has an observation module, where students use mobile devices to scan an AR identification card to view the distinguishing characteristics of the planets. Then, students see a 3D planet using the camera on a mobile device to capture the image on a symbol card. A pilot test of the system showed that students' attention indicators increased gradually, and follow-up student interviews revealed high student satisfaction (Xiao et al., 2016).

Singhal et al. (2012) developed an AR system to increase the under- standing of 3-D Chemistry modeling and spatial arrangement of molec- ular structures in space to school-level students. Based on observation during exhibitions, the authors reported that they could conclude that the students enjoy the system and gain more knowledge of molecular structures.

Cai, Wang, and Chiang (2014) examined the effect of an AR tool on the learning of chemistry of high school students. The authors conducted a pre-post-test design study. Participants answered a quiz on micropar- ticles before and after using the AR tool. The students' scores after using the AR tool were higher than those obtained before the learning activity. The author also measured the attitude toward the AR tool and found that students generally have positive attitudes.

application to promote acquiring the necessary skills to understand the basic concepts of the biochemistry of university students. The app has two modes: the Study and the Game modes. The authors presented results of the glycolysis study mode. The percentage of students who answered the test without mistakes was above 50 for 9 of 10 questions.

Wojciechowski and Cellary (2013) conducted a study with second-grade secondary school participants. Participants performed chemical experiments using an AR system. In addition, the authors explored the students' attitudes toward using the AR system. They found that perceived usefulness and enjoyment had a similar effect on attitudes toward using AR, and perceived enjoyment was a more significant factor than perceived usefulness regarding the intention to use the AR system. Crandall, Engler III, Beck, Killian, O'Bryan, Jarvis, and Clausen (2015) found similar results with students of a chemistry course at the senior level and faculty members. After a week of using an AR-based game, the participants completed a questionnaire on the game's usability and user experience. There was a preference for the game instead of the standard

Furthermore, the success of AR technology in a learning setting could be determined by the students' and teachers' acceptance and intention to use the technology. Although AR is not a new technology, it could be different from the materials commonly used by education professionals. Thus, one of the challenges related to using AR could be the resistance to change of teachers and staff (Kerawalla, Luckin, Seljeflot, & Woolard, 2006).

The different tests were developed in two phases. First, two professors created sixteen multiple-choice items on carbon bonds. Second, three chemistry experts reviewed the items. Based on the feedback, some questions were edited. Eight questions were included in test A, and the other eight were included in test B. Test scores ranged from 0 to 8 based on the number of correct answers.

The Technology Acceptance Model (TAM), developed by Davis (1989), is a standardized questionnaire commonly used in technology acceptance studies (Marangunic, N. & Granic, A., 2015; Sun & Cheng, 2009; Teo, 2009). The TAM suggests that the acceptance of a techno- logical system is related to the intention to use, determined by the evoked user's perceptions of the usefulness and ease of use of the technology and cognitive and emotional states. Perceived usefulness and ease of use impact the attitude, leading to technology adoption behavior (Davis, 1989). The TAM evaluates the technology's perceived usefulness and ease of use using a Likert scale from 1 to 7 (one is completely disagree and seven is completely agree). Higher scores reflect higher perceived use- fulness and ease of use (Appendix 1).

Chemical bond models were developed in Blender, a free and open- source 3D creation software for rendering, modeling, sculpting, anima- tion, and rigging. Those 3D models were exported from Blender to FBX format, an open, platform-independent 3D data file format, which is the most compatible format for Unity, a platform for creating cross-platform games and interactive experiences. 11 objects were modeled on the Blender platform. With these inputs, the construction stage of the AR scenario begins, linking QR codes with the models. An apk file was generated; this allows the installation of the app on a smartphone, allowing students to view each of the models in AR through the QR codes using the smartphone. The apk file was exported from Unity; the apk file contains everything related to the scene; it is compatible with Android systems, IOS, Tizen, PS4 PSVita, and Samsung TV, among others.

A quasi-experimental design was used with an experimental and a control group. Since the school administration had arranged the groups, the researchers randomly chose the experimental and control groups. Forty-eight students were assigned to the control group and 47 to the experimental group.

Before the experimental procedure, three universities in Colombia were selected, and the first author met with the school authorities to expose the study's objective and method. The permissions to implement the procedure were received. Two chemistry teachers agreed to partici- pate in the study, and the researchers explained to the teachers the research's purpose and process and answered all their questions. The app was shown to the teachers to familiarize themselves with it. To assure the fidelity of the intervention, the researcher and the teachers developed a class guide that consisted of step-by-step instructions to conduct the carbon bonds lesson. The guide included the instructions to apply the academic test A before the lecture, information related to the carbon bonds, instructions to perform the activities by students, which consisted of developing three models of carbon bonds using modeling clay, and instructions to apply the academic test B after the lecture.

Concerning university students' acceptance of the AR app, we found that the mean scores on the TAM questionnaire's perceived usefulness and ease of use dimensions were above average. The TAM postulates that technology usage is determined by the behavioral intention to use it. Therefore, perceived usefulness and perceived ease of use are predictors of intent to use technology (Davis, 1989; Marangunic & Granic, 2015; Pynoo et al., 2012; Smarkola, 2007; Wahid, 2007).

Previous research shows that technology acceptance and usage in distance education represented a significant challenge for teachers and educational institutions (Fraillon, Ainley, Schulz, Friedman, & Gebhardt, 2014; Straub, 2009). Besides, Davis (1993) found that the perceived usefulness was 50% more influential than ease of use in determining technology usage. Hence, it is essential to develop and provide training, support, and resources for students and teachers to increase the percep- tion of usefulness and the use of technology.

The use of AR in educational settings has pedagogical implications; AR can impact the learning process in three dimensions, physical, cognitive, and contextual. Physical refers to manipulating objects; physical control of the environment can lead to a better understanding of spatial concepts and better recall of the learning content. Cognitive refers to the spatiotemporal contiguity of information; AR could facilitate learning abstract information and symbolic associations because it pre- sents information associated with physical objects and locations. Finally, Contextual refers to three general factors: collaboration, contextual relevance, and personal relevance, which can improve the learning process (Bujak et al., 2013).

One limitation of the present study is that the school administration arranged the groups, so it was impossible to select participants for each group randomly. Another possible limitation is that the students' moti- vation could be due to the novelty of the AR technology. Finally, this study was conducted only during one class; maybe more long-term in- terventions could lead to a more positive effect.

