of the study. Group 2 (the toxic control) (n = 10) received 100 mg/kg/day of gentamicin i.p. for a week. Groups 3, 4, and 5 (n = 5) were pre-treated with gentamicin as the Group 2 rats, after which they received 100, 200 and 400 mg/kg/day each of AOGL p.o., respectively, for 14

further evident by a significant improvement or reversal of the histopathological alterations of kidney tissues in the groups treated with AOGL. The results of this study indicated that AOGL ameliorated the kidney injury caused by gentamicin in rats. Hence, the extracts have the potential of being used for the management of gentamicin-induced nephropathies.

The plant leaves were collected, washed, air dried under shade and ground into fine powder using a blender. The aqueous extract was obtained by extracting the powdered leaves (323 g) with 3 liters of distilled water in an electric shaker for 48 hours. The extract was filtered through Whatman No. 1 (Whatman International Ltd, Maidstone, UK) paper and evaporated under reduced pressure using a rotary evaporator. The residue (33.60 g) was kept in a bottle with a tight fitting cover until it was needed for the study.

The food consumption and water intake of the rats were de- termined by taking the difference between the previous weight and volumes respectively from the left over after 24 hours. The value obtained was taken as the daily food consumption and water intake of the group. The volumes of water consumed and urine produced by each rat were measured with a measuring cylinder and the food consumption by the digital weighing scale.

About 3 ml of whole blood collected into an EDTA tube was centrifuged at 4000 rpm for 15 min using a Cold Centrifuge (Centurium Scientific, Model 8881, UK). The plasma obtained was analyzed for creatinine, urea and total protein. Similar pro- cedure was applied to the urine sample.

The kidneys of the rats were carefully excised and weighed. One of the kidneys was homogenized with 10 ml of sucrose solution (0.25 M) using Electric Homogenizer (SI601001). The ho- mogenate was centrifuged at 3000 rpm for 20 minutes and the supernatant was collected for the assessment of glutathione and TBARS activities.

In this study, an insignificant increase in food consumption and body weight was observed in the gentamicin treated rats when compared with its pre-treatment values. This is in contrast with the findings of Erdem et al. [4] and El-Zawahry and Abu El Kheir [17], who reported that gentamicin administration caused re- duction in food intake and body weight.

Study has shown that administration of AOGL in rats caused significant histological changes in the intestines, revealing the presence of increased villi and larger goblets cells [21]. The in- crease in the numbers of villi in the intestine facilitates increase in nutrient absorption due to increase in the surface area of the intestine [22]. Furthermore, AOGL enhances anti-diarrhea effect by inhibiting intestinal motility, partly via muscarinic re- ceptor inhibition [23], thereby facilitating nutrient absorption in the intestine. The significant increase in body weight that was seen in the experimental groups treated with AOGL may be as a result of AOGL-induced inhibition of the intestinal mo- tility, together with increase in the number of villi of the intestine and larger goblets cells, which favor rapid absorp- tion of nutrient from the gastro-intestinal tract. However, this is not in agreement with the report of Ajibade et al. [24], who reported that AOGL administered at different doses caused a significant decrease in the body weight. This disparity may have resulted from the differences in the doses administered to the rats. While Ajibade et al. used 400, 800, 1600 and 3200 mg/kg/ bw, in this study 100, 200 and 400 mg/kg/bw were used. Another possible explanation for the significant increase in food con- sumption and body weight that was observed in the groups treated with AOGL could be due to its hypoglycemic property attributed to flavonoids and other phytochemical constitu- ents [25]. The extract also contains major mineral elements,

the urine reduced significantly in this group compared to the control. These observed changes are in accordance with the report of Pedrazha-Chaverri et al. [30], who reported that administration of gentamicin caused marked impairment in renal function. The decrease in urine creatinine is a further evidence of reduced ability of the renal tubules to extract and remove creatinine from the plasma of the toxic control rats. The elevated concentration of plasma urea observed may have resulted from the inability of the glomeruli to filter urea. A significant decrease toward normal plasma level of creatinine and urea that was observed in the toxic recovery group is an indication of tubular regeneration resulting from the release of reparative and prosurvival factors from the distal tubular cells [31]. The marked decrease in plasma cre- atinine and urea in AOGL treated groups is in conformity with report of other researchers, who reported that AOGL decreased serum urea, creatinine, uric acid, urine volume, urinary protein and increased urine creatinine level in cisplatin induced nephrotoxicity in rats [32,33].

A significant decrease in renal creatinine clearance that was observed in the toxic control and toxic recovery group is in agreement with the report of Raheem et al. [34] and Bibu et al. [35] that gentamicin administration to rats reduced their glomerular filtration rate and renal blood flow, resulting from a rise in renal vascular resistance or damage to the glomerular capillary endothelium leading to impairment in glomerular function. Similarly, a significant decrease in renal creatinine clearance was observed in rats treated with AOGL when compared to the control. However, the creatinine clear- ance of these rats increased when compared to the toxic control group. This is an indication of improved blood flow to the kidney as well as repair of kidney tissue damage caused by gentamicin.

A significant increase in the urinary total protein was ob- served in the toxic control group. It is an evidence of inflammation of the glomerular capillaries. This observed change is in accordance with the result of El-Zawahry and Abu El Kheir [17], who reported that gentamicin administration to rats induced proteinuria. In contrast, rats treated with AOGL showed a decrease in urine protein. This may be due to the antioxidant properties of AOGL since it has been found that reactive oxygen species (ROS) may be involved in the impair- ment of glomerular filtration [2].

A significant increase in the TBARS level and significant de- crease in GSH level that were observed in the toxic control group are evidence of increased lipid peroxidation, which is an in- dicator of oxidative stress. This observed change is in conformity with the report of Reddy et al. [36], who reported that genta- micin administration caused oxidative damage to the kidney. Also a significant decrease in the TBARS level and increase in GSH level were observed in the toxic recovery group when com- pared with the control group. This finding is an indication of the release of reparative and prosurvival factors from the distal tubular cells [37]. Furthermore, a significant decrease in the TBARS and increase in GSH level were observed in the AOGL treated group when compared with the control group. This is in agreement with Reddy et al. [36], who reported that simvastatin increased GSH and decreased TBARS in gentami- cin induced kidney injury. The change observed may be due to the anti-oxidant activities of AOGL.

This study demonstrated the nephron-restorative effect of O. gratissimum in gentamicin induced nephrotoxicity in rats. The ameliorative effect of O. gratissimum is evident by a remark- able restoration of markers of renal function such as protein, urea, creatinine levels, creatinine clearance and antioxidant enzymes in gentamicin treated rats.

