The well-known notion of critical pairs already allows a static conflict detection, which is important for all kinds of applications and already implemented in AGG. Unfortunately the standard construction is not very efficient. This paper introduces the new concept of essential critical pairs allowing a more efficient conflict detection. This is based on a new conflict characterization, which determines for each conflict occuring between the rules of the system the exact conflict reason. This new notion of conflict reason leads us to an optimization of conflict detection. Efficiency is obtained because the set of essential critical pairs is a proper subset of all critical pairs of the system and therefore the set of representative conflicts to be computed statically diminishes. It is shown that for each conflict in the system, there exists an essential critical pair representing it. Moreover each essential critical pair is unique with regard to its conflict reason and thus represents each conflict not only in a minimal, but also in a unique way. Main new results presented in this paper are a characterization of conflicts, completeness and uniqueness of essential critical pairs and a local confluence lemma based on essential critical pairs. The theory of essential critical pairs is the basis to develop and implement a more efficient conflict detection algorithm in the near future.

[12] and then for all kinds of transformation systems fitting into the framework of adhesive high-level replacement categories [6]. Usually a straightforward way (i.e. directly according to the definition) is used to compute the set of all critical pairs of a graph transformation system. This is very important for all kinds of applications like for example graph parsing [2], conflict detection in graph transformation based modeling [8] [1] and model transformation [3] [4], refactoring [11], etc. Up to now, however, there is almost no theory which allows an efficient implementation of conflict detection. Therefore our paper [9] and this paper concentrate on exactly this subject.

In [9] it was already explained which optimizations lead to a more efficient conflict detection in a graph transformation system. Unfortunately this efficiency could only be obtained for conflicts induced by a pair of rules with one of the rules non-deleting. This is quite a strong restriction, since in particular a lot of conflicts are induced by a pair of deleting rules. Therefore this paper formulates a characterization of conflicts, covering also these kind of conflicts. Moreover this conflict characterization leads us to the identification of the conflict reason of each conflict.

The notion of critical pair introduced in [12], [6] expresses each conflict in its minimal context. In some cases though two different critical pairs express the same kind of conflict. Therefore exploiting the uniqueness of each conflict reason men- tioned above, it is possible to further reduce the set of critical pairs to a subset of essential critical pairs. This subset expresses each kind of conflict which can occur in a graph transformation system in a minimal context and moreover in a unique way. This uniqueness property and the constructive conflict reason definition facilitates the optimization of detecting all conflicts of a graph transformation system.

with boundary Bi and context Ci, defining an inital pushout (1) over li (see [6]) and injective graph morphisms bi, ci, gi, li are given, i.e. bi, ci, gi, li in M (i = 1, 2), where M is the set of all injective graph morphisms.

At first, we demonstrate that each conflict, occuring in the system can be expressed by an essential critical pair (completeness). The second property says, that each essential critical pair is unique with regard to its conflict reason span. Finally we will prove a local confluence lemma based on essential critical pairs.

local confluence analysis than the standard techniques based on usual critical pairs. In a forthcoming paper we will give on this basis an efficient correct construction of all essential critical pairs for each pair of rules and a corresponding algorithm which will improve the current critical pair algorithm of AGG [13]. In addition we assume and will verify that an extension of this theory to graph transformation with non-injective matches is possible, provided that the conflict condition is slightly generalized. Moreover the following question in the context of conflict detection for graph transformation systems is subject of future work. What kind of new conflicts occur and which new critical pair notion is necessary to describe the conflicts in graph transformation systems with application conditions and constraints [5] and what about the more general case of typed, attributed graph transformation systems [7]?

