Given a quantified boolean formula (QBF) in prenex conjunctive normal form (PCNF), we consider the problem of identifying variable dependencies. In related work, a formal definition of dependencies has been suggested based on quantifier prefix reordering: two variables are independent if swapping them in the prefix does not change satisfiability of the formula. Instead of the general case, we focus on the sets of depending existential variables for all universal variables. This is relevant particularly for expansion-based QBF solvers. We present an approach for efficiently computing existential dependency sets by means of a directed connection relation over variables and demonstrate how this relation can be compactly represented as a tree using a union-find data structure. Experimental results show the effectiveness of our approach.

The logic of quantified boolean formulae (QBF) extends propositional logic (SAT) with universal quantification. Whereas QBF is not more expressive than SAT, relevant problems from model checking and verification [6,8,13,19] often can be encoded more compactly in QBF than in SAT. In the domain of SAT, encouraging progress has been made during the last years in the development of efficient decision procedures based on the DPLL-framework [12]. The success is due to advanced strategies for pruning the search space such as learning, backjumping or restarts. These techniques were successfully extended to DPLL-based algorithms for QBF [11,17,26] but, although still being important for performance, it turned out not to guarantee similar progress as for SAT.

There is strong indication [4,14,15,18] that the quantifier prefix of QBFs in prenex conjunctive normal form (PCNF) could be one reason for this phenomenon. In QBF the presence of different types of quantifiers introduces dependencies be- tween variables which have to be respected by QBF solvers. In many cases depen- dencies resulting from linear quantifier prefixes are too pessimistic and have negative influence on solver performance. In [23] a formal definition of dependencies has been suggested and it was shown that the problem of identifying the optimal (smallest) dependency set is, as the decision problem of QBF, PSPACE-complete [24]. Be- cause of this fact a compromise has to be found between efficiency and optimality. Various approaches have been suggested to identify dependencies and thus overcome the drawback of linear quantifier prefixes [2,4,7,9,15,18,20,23]. To our knowledge all of these approaches are based on analyzing the syntactic structure of a QBF.

For detailed information about expansion we refer to the aforementioned publica- tions. In this work we focus on efficient computation and representation of D(x) and |D(x)|, respectively. Duplicating variables is necessary in order to reflect the possibility of a depending existential variable to assume different values with respect to the value of the universal variable.

