To meet the performance and security challenges for users who have the same interests in the urban Peer-to-Peer VANET environment (UP2PVANET), the confidentiality & security scheme applied to the urban P2P VANET network (CSP2P) is introduced which helps maintain an effective certification frame- work. An intelligent cooperative detection system is also proposed, that uses homomorphic encryption to detect routing attacks. To validate the effectiveness of proposition CSP2P, it is integrated into the imple- mentation of the AODV routing protocol. Simulations results showed the efficiency of the CSP2P scheme in terms of black hole detection, in terms of transmission delay, thanks to the in-depth performance eval- uation in the UP2PVANET environment. The obtained results prove that the proposed scheme will allow an increase in system performance of nearly 10% under all load conditions.

Due to the mobility of the vehicle user, users can often commu- nicate with others on a VANET network or with the Peer-to-Peer (P2P) network exchange node [10]. It will be possible for several VUs to share their resources which are easily accessible via P2P or VANET or among themselves, provided that these VUs also share the same interests (such as multimedia data, e-books, etc.). The last communication type is called Urban P2P VANET networks (UP2PVANET).

This is why an effective certification scheme is proposed. Such that, the mobile proxy (MP) send to VUi node the certificate and private key. Based on the proxy re-signature cryptography technol- ogy [1112], the node VUi can re-sign the certificate and can also verify the certificate.

The rest of the article is organized as follows: Section 2 high- lights the existing that applies video streaming over Peer to Peer Network and VANET network, and privacy-preservation and secu- rity schemes to the VANET network in the literature. Section 3 describes the application of our CSP2P scheme video data replica- tion model and presents our replication algorithm. Section 4, pre- sents a security analysis of the proposed CSP2P scheme. Section 5 evaluates the solution based on simulation results analysis. Finally, Section 6 concludes the paper and recommends many guidelines for future analysis.

In [24], they proposed a method for selecting a group of Rebroadcasted (ReViV) strategic selective broadcast nodes for video streaming in VANETs. They introduced a new metric called diffusion capacity (DC) to classify vehicle nodes. In an environment of fully and intermittently connected networks [2526], ReViV was compared to other video streaming mechanisms and provided a lower end-to-end transmission delay, a lower frame loss rate, and a higher video transmission rate.

Many researchers aim to reduce the costs of attacks and secu- rity breaches in VANETs [272829]. The use of homomorphic encryption is quite low in VANETs [30]. A diagram relating to HE in VANET has been proposed in [31]. They used an algorithm adopted on an algebraic circuit with a low multiplicative degree

Other FHE techniques have been proposed such as FHE secured with two multi-key identities FHE [38], threshold FHEs with the monotonic Boolean formula [39], diagram, algebraic FFEs with multivariate polynomials [40], and FHEs with sorting on encrypted data without decryption [4142]. Wang et al. have used FHE in [43] with reduced time for encryption, decryption, and re-encryption with Fast Fourier Transform. In [44], challenges on integers have been implemented with a simple FHE to optimize complexity. Fan et al. have proposed an algorithm [45] which takes into account the FHE which uses the errors (LWE) for the practical adjustment with automatic learning. Operators of classical integer manipulation like bit shift, arithmetic, comparison, logic, etc. have been used on BGV-style cryptosystems in [4647].

In this section, the confidentiality & security scheme is applied to the urban P2P VANET network (CSP2P). However, everything concerns the state of the various components of the UP2PVANET network, especially the vehicle nodes. The application of our scheme varies according to attack types, authentication of vehicle nodes, and the integrity and confidentiality of the video data.

The identity chain ID to ID  t is only valid before the specified expiration date t for a VUi node. After the expiration of t, if a new certificate is not generated by MPi, the corresponding certifi- cate CertMPi ,VUi  t is revoked. For this, CSP2P uses proxy re- signature cryptography technology [54], to adopt an efficient recovery strategy.

The black hole attack results in a transmission delay. Also, the encryption and decryption operations cause the transmis- sion delay, although they can be reduced by the broadcast of the message MesDem. Consider p the probability of an invalid message MesDem arriving at the node due to the black hole attack. Studying now the average waiting time in the node buffer.

