Second Priority User (SPU) faced several new challenges. A Cogni- tive Radio User (CRU) or SPU has no licensed access to a specific channel, and it rather opportunistically accesses the temporally free channel of an FPU in order to perform its communication. The communication of an SPU can be interrupted by an FPU. New Spectrum Management (SM) challenges such as interference avoidance, QoS demands, and seamless communication is critical parameters for Cognitive Radio Networks (CRNs).

Spectrum sensing, spectrum management/decision, spectrum sharing, and spectrum mobility/sharing entirely depend on the CRN. Spectrum Sensing (SS) and Spectrum Decisions (SD) are key enabling functionalities for FPUs based on sensing results due to channel utilization and channel vacating decisions. The FPU and SPU in SS are constantly monitoring the spectrum, and it also mon- itors and identifies spectrum openings available for SPU communi- cation. The SS is classified into three types: cooperative detection, non-cooperative detection, and interference detection [3]. In Coop- erative Spectrum Sensing (CSS), many SPUs decided to sense the idle channels by sharing information about the available channels among all SPUs for better performance of the FPUs while also min- imizing the probability values [4].

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. The related work is presented in section 2. Section 3 designates the SPU transmission model, which begins with an architectural view of the CRN. The framework is then described in detail, followed by a model over- view. The framework is divided into three parts: sensing and trans- mission, mobility management, and handoff decision. An algorithm is comprehensively described at the end of this section. Section 4 discusses experiments and their outcomes. Finally, section 5 con- tains the conclusion and future work.

Generally, three methods are commonly used for primary trans- mitter detection: Energy Detection Method (ED), Cyclostationary Detection Method (CD), and Matched Filter Detection Method (MFD) [3,5]. Due to multipath fading, shadowing, and noise uncer- tainty, the execution of SS is limited because these are the basic attributes of wireless channels. In experiences of fading by obsta- cles, the power of FPUs signal received at SPUs will be profound and too weak to identify. The core purpose of cooperative sensing is to upgrade the sensing performance by combining the sensing results of all SPUs. Furthermore, to decide based on these results is more precise than the single user decision.

Non-cooperative methods are based on detecting signals trans- mitted from the main system. The non-cooperative techniques are often based on the hypothesis that the primary transmission area is known to the sensory devices. Therefore, the SPU should rely solely on detecting weak primary transmission signals and use only local detections to perform SS. The sensing device does not have complete spectrum retention information in its coverage area. As a result, it is impossible to avoid detrimental interference with the FPU altogether.

Three methods are commonly used for primary transmitter detection: According to the authors in [6,7], CSS has presented a precise solution for improving sensing achievements. Cognitive radio spectrum assignment is categorized into two schemes: cen- tralized and distributed. In a centralized scheme, the spectrum is sensed by a sensing controller (Base station), and the result is shared with all other neighbor nodes. In distributed, the SPUs sense the spectrum and avail the spectrum opportunity, SPUs can take the decision either (non-cooperative sensing) or on the bases of other SPUs sensing (distributed sensing).

In [30], the FC scheme is used where tricky (Single bit) and soft (multiple bits) decisions are used for sharing information. For the final decision, FC follows the K-out-of-N rule in hard decisions. In the soft decision, an optimal fusion rule is applied, which combines all information sent by SPUs in the presence of reporting channel error in a given quantization scheme. Soft decision-based CSS per- formance is considered more robust than the hard decision in terms of energy consumption, and it needs wider bandwidth for channel control, but there is no resulting energy efficiency.

Authors in [31], SPUs sensing at the initial stage is called coarse sensing and the sensing time is conceivable to deal with diminish- ing the energy consumption. The two-stage sensing is performed for the time saving with the one-bit decision (hard decision). Despite this fact, the two-stage sensing technique effectively miti- gates the sensing time. It causes additional energy utilization in the reporting stage and is repetitive twice. Additionally, the impact of holding up with the first result on the reachable throughput is not examined, which might degrade the energy efficiency.

In [34], the author described rapid and high performance based on SPU power harvest, sensitivity, and reporting qualities. In [35,36], two energy-saving schemes have been presented to reduce energy consumption. In a reduced power sensor and reporting sys- tem, power consumption is minimized by decreasing the sensing station and reducing the reporting stations in the FC.

This study anticipated an SPU transmission framework by incorporating the CSS technique to sense available channels in the spectrum. In the CSS, an energy detection technique is used to optimize the energy consumption in the sensing process, result- ing in energy efficiency. In addition, an arrival pattern-based spec- trum technique is presented for the handoff decision. To select the appropriate channel for SPU transmission, a hybrid handoff approach based on Dynamic Spectrum Aggregation (DSA) is also proposed. After describing the generalized CRN architecture and an overview of the proposed model, this section divides the frame- work into two sub-sections: model framework and algorithm framework (as the solution). Firstly, the framework is described by breaking down the CRN process into different steps. Secondly, as a solution domain, an algorithm for the components (energy detection, spectrum mobility, and hybrid handoff decision) is des- ignated and described in the algorithm section.

the CRN architecture are spectrum consumption and energy effi- ciency. The users can satisfy their needs anytime and anywhere using CRNs. The Service Providers (SP) can deliver better services to (mobile) users. The SPs allocate the CRN resources efficiently to transport additional packets per unit bandwidth.

The base stations of the FPN and SPN are fixed components and have the capabilities of the cognitive radios. The base stations rep- resent the groundwork side of the system and deliver the following services: i.e., mobility management, management of vacant chan- nels, and base station security management. It provides a gateway to access the Internet and form a wireless network by enabling wireless communications between users. In the SPN, some of the base stations may act as repeaters when those are connected to each other.

This step is divided into two processes: sensing and transmis- sion. The SPU continuously senses for the vacant channels to per- form transmission in the sensing process. The spectrum sensing process can be performed by using one of the currently available sensing techniques, i.e., Cooperative Spectrum Sensing (CSS) [17,13], Matched Filter Detection (MFD) [38], or Cyclo-Stationary Feature Detection (CFD). In this research, we have incorporated the Energy Detection Technique (EDT) [51,27,32] based CSS approach for sensing. The energy detection technique is used in spectrum sensing for its difficult nature and its lower computa- tional properties [26,24,49]. The SPU performs the actual transmis- sion on the currently occupied vacant channel in the transmission process. The occupied channel is dedicated to FPU and released when it becomes vacant. During transmission on the occupied channel, the movement of the FPU (owner of the channel) is con- tinuously monitored by the SPU. When FPU interrupts transmis- sion by occupying its dedicated channel again, the SPU, through mobility management, decides to either wait for the current chan- nel or perform handoff to occupy the new vacant channel. There- fore, the SPU continues its transmission on the newly occupied channel. In the proposed model, the EDT-based CSS approach plays a vital role in sensing and transmission and CSS is described in detail as below.

Cooperative spectrum sensing. CSS scheme is reliable in spectrum sensing and helpful in sensing vacant channels, monitor- ing the FPUs, sharing data (sensing choices) among all SPUs, and removing the intrusion, shadowing, and hidden problems. CSS is used in the sensing and transmission process to improve the sens- ing routines by the propagated sensing choices of all SPUs. The coordinated (agreed upon) decision is designated based on propa- gated sensing choices and is considered more precise than the sin- gle user decision. The local sensing information is transmitted to the base station (BS), known as a data Fusion Center (FC). The base station decides based on the data sent by the SPUs. Initially, SPU starts transmission on the occupied channel, and during transmis- sion, it also monitors the FPU activities. When the FPU takes con- trol of the occupied channel by SPU, the new target (vacant) channel is selected to continue transmission when the threshold value is not satisfactory for staying at the current channel.

Energy detection. The energy detection technique is consid- ered superior to other techniques, i.e., MFD and CFD. In the EDT approach, the energy is computed based on the signal established on a static bandwidth and time period. The energy signal is detected by associating the specified (detected) value with the threshold value set for the energy detector. A constant value can be considered; however, it depends on the FPU arrival pattern, and the value can be calculated dynamically. The apparent energy point is improved with the FPU arrival on its dedicated channel. As the value is calculated, the apparent energy point is verified several times, either during the existence or absence of FPU. When the energy level value calculated from the arrived pattern signal increases than the threshold value, the handoff process is executed to start the spectrum handoff.

Threshold optimization of energy activity. Spectrum and FPU interference depend on the probability values of miss-miss- detection (MD) and False Alarm (FA). Both probability values are contingent on the sensing time and detection threshold. The term FA is used when SPU detects an FPU; similarly, the term MD is used when the SPU mistakenly detects an FPU. The primary purpose of the threshold optimization (of the energy activity) is to reduce the probabilistic values of the MD and FA situations.

Spectrum management manages the SPU transmission on avail- able channels based on FPU arrival patterns. It helps achieve coor- dination access and prevent a collision on the selected channel. Different SPUs can try to access spectrum for communication at a time, and overlapping may occur. Spectrum sharing removes inter- ference among FPUs and SPUs by using the channel and power the list of FPUs with their arrivals patterns as input. The main driving function calls two sub-functions named as transmissionAndSensing() and mobilityManagement() for transmission and sensing, and mobil- ity management processes. The SPU transmission starts when a con- nection is established. In step 1, the setTransmitting() function is set either as true or false to set for transmission. In step 2, a variable cur- rentChannel is used to store the currently occupied channel by the SPU. The list of vacant channels is stored in the list vacantChan- nelList[ ] and initialized by the null value in step 3. In step 4, the firstVacantChannel() function selects the first vacant channel from the list of channels. In step 5, the while() loop is used to manage the transmission intervals and check by isTransmitting() function. The functions transmissionAndSensing() and mobilityManagement() are called in step 6 and step 7, respectively, to perform the transmis- sion and sensing, and the mobility management processes. Finally, in step 8, the while loop is closed.

The transmissionAndSensing() function performs the actual trans- mission and sensing dedicated to the specific intervals. This function takes channelsList[ ] and currentChannel as input and returns list of at most four vacant channels as output. Through this function the trans- mission of specific interval is also performed. The transmission and sensing process interval are divided into two time slots. The first time slot is used for transmission only while the second time slot is used for the sensing. The transmissionAndSensing() function starts by checking the time slot in step 1, if isTimeSlot1() is true then call the transmission() function for the actual transmission and returns the currentChannel (the occupied channel for transmission) in step 2. As the transmission ends, the step 4 is used to check for timeSlot2 by isTi- meSlot2() and performSensing() function is called to perform the sens- ing process in the step 5. The performSensing() function returns the list of at most four vacant channels.

The Sensing() function is used for sensing the vacant channels during transmission. The 3 or 4 vacant channels are added to the vacantChannelList[ ] as backup channels. This function takes chan- nelsList[ ] as input and returns 3 or 4 vacant channels in a list. The while() loop in step 1 used to check for the vacant channel using isDetectedVacantChannel() function. When the vacant chan- nel is detected by using the vacantChannel(channelsList[ ]) function in the step 2 and assign channel to the vacantChannel variable. In step 3, a condition is used to detect the energy level for the va- cantChannel and compare it with the energyLevelThreshold and monitor the vacantChannelList[ ] for its size. If both the conditions are satisfied, then in step 4, the detected vacantChannel is added to the vacantChannelList[ ]. In the step 6, the while() is ended.

As a proof of concept, the SPU transmission model is translated into a tool. The model is implemented using the Java programming language and is based on the algorithm described in Section 3.4. The synthetic data is used to validate the algorithm and test vari- ous important parameters during the transmission process. The model was executed several times (usually around 1000 times), and standard values were used to plot graphs differently.

The probabilistic values of false alarm and miss-detection are primary metrics for sensing channels and mainly affect the FPUs. On the one hand, when the sensing detection is weaker at a partic- ular channel during the FPU access, higher miss-detection is inferred, and the SPUs fail to vacate the channel. As a result, strin- gent conditions are forced to estimate probabilistic value for the miss-detection. On the other hand, when the probabilistic value for the false alarm increases in sensing, the occupation of white spaces will definitely decrease. Therefore, the adjustment of prob- abilistic values between a false alarm and miss-detection is essen- tial to observe.

The SPU leads to a broad position in energy efficiency in com- munication technologies, where the spectrum is shared rather than diminished. A CSS-based SPU transmission model for CRN is pre- sented in this paper. An energy detection technique has been developed to optimize energy consumption while sensing, result- ing in energy efficiency. To select the appropriate vacant channel for transmission, a DSA-based hybrid handoff scheme was repro- cessed. These approaches have been combined to improve the sensing routine and throughput while reducing energy consump- tion through the false alarm and miss-detection probabilistic val- ues. The results show that the presented model is robust in increasing energy efficiency by reducing energy consumption while improving throughput and sensing efficiency. The handoff scheme keeps the overall handoff delay to a bare minimum. The false alarm and miss-detection probabilistic values decrease as the number of SPUs increases, resulting in efficient CRN through- put. The proposed scheme is consistent in terms of (a) optimizing energy efficiency, (b) sensing performance, (c) throughput, and (d) minimizing handoff delay.

This research can be improved by considering the additional unoccupied spectrums available for transmission but are not used, resulting in extra energy consumption. In order to attain a high level of energy efficiency, it is necessary to suggest innovative ways in which users can employ multiple spectrums for their transmissions. In addition, a method is necessary to share or dis- tribute reliable information regarding channels between SPUs. Because malicious users can spread incorrect information about spectrum gaps and continues to exploit them, the other SPUs con- sume energy by repeatedly detecting the occupied channel.

