To face these challenges, a DT is used to digitalize the system and monitor the energy information in RT coming from the physi- cal assets through a dynamic model. The development of the energy efficiency model-based DT in the I4.0 context passes through the DS which consists in collecting real-time heteroge- neous energy data to be exploited in the model, hence improving the simulation of energy consumption for all the ecosystem of loads [7]. Nevertheless, the heterogeneity of energy data types and the lack of communication between entities are blocking the implementation of energy-based DT and DS in a real industry. Hence, to standardize data collection, the energy efficiency of each entity is used starting with a single machine.

ANFIS-based IM controller is presented in [13]. Furthermore, in [14], the authors describe the development of an ANFIS torque con- troller method, which is implemented in an induction motor drive through decoupling feedback linearization. The aim is to enhance both dynamic and steady-state performance. However, there have been efforts to apply the ANFIS algorithm for estimating the ECPs of IMs. For instance, in [15], two novel methods based on artificial neural networks (ANN) and ANFIS are proposed for predicting the induction motor parameters in the single-cage and double-cage models. In [16], the performance of ANFIS is compared to the feed- forward neural network (FFNN) and Elman neural network (ENN) for estimating the ECPs of the SCIM. Hence, in this study, the ANFIS algorithm is used for the RT estimation of the ECPs.

This paper is organized as follows. In section 2, the research sig- nificance and novelty of the work are highlighted. In section 3, a lit- erature review is carried out on induction motor DT implementation in I4.0, where the concept of DT and DS have been introduced, and the role of the dynamic model in DT development is discussed. In section 4, the development of the EE model for the DS application of induction motors is highlighted. In section 5, sim- ulation results are exposed where the development of the opti- mum ANFIS model is highlighted, and the energy efficiency is monitored using MATLAB/SIMULINK. In sections 6 and 7, a brief conclusion and a perspective idea for future works are proposed.

3 The resistance of the windings is calculated when the motor is cold (ambient temperature). the motor is then run to 100% of its operating load for 1 h, then the resistance of the stator windings is measured again under these conditions. The difference between the temperatures of each resistance during 1h represents the leading coefficient of the linear affine model of the temperature.

efficiency results obtained from the proposed model with those obtained from measurements of a 1.5 kW, 230/400 V 50 Hz motor. In addition, torque, and losses have been monitored during the simulation, and this section describes also the performance results obtained using optimal ANFIS algorithms. The experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed approach.

Neuro-Fuzzy Designer from MATLAB toolbox is used in a SIMU- LINK block function to estimate in RT the ECPs based on the training described in section 4.2.3. This algorithm is run by measuring voltage, current, and power factor as dynamic input, and also the normalized data from the motor manufacturer datasheet is considered as static input.

The simulation is run for 1 s, and the speed control is used as the mechanical input. The linear, and non-linear speeds are used, but only the EE for the linear speed and torque control are com- pared w.r.t the measured EE.

the HIL implementation on a laboratory scale, and finally, the deployment in a real-world industry for a proof of concept. The RT applications are generally used in industries for time-critical systems. The hardware used in RT applications is embedded devices with I/O ports that interface with the physical world and allow control. These systems are characterized by the pre-set time which is the time to read the input signals, make all the calcula- tions by using the model, and generate the corresponding outputs.

with a 3-degree polynomial to be compared w.r.t the predicted EE through simulation on the SIMULINK environment. The results of the simulations show that the estimated EE is in good agreement with the measured EE with an RMSE of 0.205 for linear speed input. The method gives better accuracy because of its capability to adapt to linear and non-linear control.

The simulation of the proposed model shows good results on the losses and EE estimation for the linear speed input, and they can be used for (1) a better design of the machine and (2) Energy efficiency-based predictive maintenance. However, the proposed model can include the following developments: The model cannot be implemented in certain industries because of the speed mea- surement. In this paper, we suggest the use of the stroboscopic- based method to measure the speed, but some industrial structures cannot allow using these techniques. Hence, to get a complete in- situ method, the model speed input can be predicted using speed estimation techniques such as sliding mode observer.

