Mobile ad hoc network (MANET) is an infrastructure-less, self-organized network in which a group of wireless devices (nodes) cooperate each other for its network operations. Unlike a wireless infrastructure network, an ad hoc network has certain characteristics such as lack of fixed infrastructure, self-organization, dynamic topology, multi-hop routing and energy constrained operation. An ad hoc network is a self- organized network because it does not involve any central authority or base station. Therefore, all ad hoc nodes need

These characteristics make the network complex compared to other infrastructure based networks. A lot of attack and misbehavior obstruct the growth and implementation. Existing models that guard on some threats still face other challenges. Designing a secure and reliable protocol that suits mass appli- cations is still a challenge. The fact is that the protocol not only secures the network but it should provide reliability and throughput for which the MANET was actually designed.

of the advertisement. The border node is a regular node with additional responsibility of passing the traffic to other neigh- borhood group. We have used the term neighborhood node to denote the regular or border node that belongs to a neigh- borhood group.

In the proposed NCS model nodes of the neighborhood group compress and forward the sparse data to the leader node. Finally, the leader node joins all neighborhood data and reconstructs the original data. The original data are broadcasted by the leader node in its neighborhood. This gives a reduction in resource consumption because major computa- tions are performed by the leader node and only limited com- putations are performed by neighborhood nodes. Thus, it saves battery power of low processing devices because it com- presses sparse data before transmission to reduce the amount of transmitting data. This gives a reduction in total energy con- sumption to prolong life of the network. It also prevents from attacks and misbehavior because individual nodes do not accept the advertisement and updates directly rather it uses leader node processed information.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 focuses on how compressive sensing is used for a mobile ad hoc network along with our motivation. In Section 3 we have discussed a detailed review on mitigation of misbehaving nodes, reduction in resource consumption to enhance cooperation and prior work on compressive sensing. Section 4 presents the pro- posed NCS model to enhance cooperation in MANET using compressive sensing (CS) technique. Experiments and result are given in Section 5. Finally, Section 6 concludes the paper.

Cande` s [1] and Donoho [2] proposed the new concept of signal sensing and compression called Compressive Sensing (CS). CS gained a wide acceptance in the recent years and applied in sig- nal and image processing, pattern recognition, wireless commu- nication, medical systems and analog-to-digital converters. In compressive sensing sampling and compression is done simulta- neously and accurately. It compresses directly without involv- ing intermediate steps of conventional compression techniques. In the field of ad hoc network a set of sparse data can be com- pressed and forwarded to the leader node. The leader node uses projection to recover the actual data which reduces the amount of transmitting data in the network. The neighborhood nodes simply use leader node advertisements; thus, the proposed model prevents networks from several attacks (such as black hole and replay attacks) because wrong advertisements are not considered. It also declines the power consumption of neighbor- hood nodes because major computations are performed at the leader end. When we compare it with conventional routing methods all nodes are responsible for calculations, updates and forwarding. Thus, the battery of neighborhood nodes drains

Lee et al. [52] proposed a combined compressed sensing. It incorporates routing design with compressive sensing for energy efficient data gathering in sensor networks. In the Sim- ulation results they have shown the effectiveness of the pro- posed combined technique in comparison with standard compressed sensing.

Feizi et al. [54] demonstrated some applications of compres- sive sensing over networks. They make connection between compressive sensing and traditional information theoretic techniques for source coding and channel coding. They show the explicit trade-off between the rate and the decoding complexity.

Zhang et al. [55] proposed compressed neighbor discovery protocol that allows all nodes to concurrently discover their neighborhoods with a single frame of transmission, which is normally of a few thousand symbol epochs. This scheme is more efficient than conventional random-access discovery, because nodes have to retransmit lots of frames with random delays to effectively discovered.

Recently, for improving the performance of routing in wire- less sensor network an adaptive and efficient technique based on compressive sensing (ECST) is proposed by Aziz et al. [57]. The proposed technique gives better results than the exist- ing protocol in terms of the network lifetime and energy con- sumption. This paper inspired us to use compressive sensing in MANET.

MANET is most susceptible to selfishness, that is why it needs some mechanisms to enhance cooperation [5]. Enforcing coop- eration using complex techniques protects the network from attacks and misbehavior but consumes more battery power and bandwidth thus, reduces the life of the network. Our pro- posed model protects the network from attacks and misbehav- ior because it consumes less energy and bandwidth. Let us take a look on the existing mechanisms for the mitigation of misbe- having or selfish nodes. These mechanisms are categorized into two types the incentive based mechanisms and the reputation based mechanisms [6].

The Packet Purse Model (PPM)/Packet Trade Model (PTM) [7] [8] is a two model concept. The first model (PPM) loads Nuglets for payment into the data packets before send- ing it to the intermediate nodes and intermediate nodes obtain more Nuglets than they deserve. In the PTM intermediate nodes trade packets are maintained on the basis of previous node, and finally the destination pays the price of the packets. The limitation of this model is that it needs a secure hardware to control nodes from tampering the amount of nuglets.

Anderegg and Eidenbenz proposed the ad hoc Vickrey- Clarke-Groves (VCG) [9] method in two phases. In the first Route Discovery phase destination nodes compute needed payments for intermediate nodes and intimate this to the source node or the central bank. The payment is performed in the second phase that is the Data Transmission phase. The limitation of ad hoc VCG is that nodes totally depend on the destination nodes report.

Mok et al. proposed the Fee Arbitrated Incentive Architec- ture (FAIR) [16]. In this method the benefits and contribution of a node are measured and feedback schemes dynamically adjust the FAIR performance. On the basis of nodes participa- tion in network activities benefits are decided. To send own packet nodes must cooperate in routing activities. This method uses energy, bandwidth and processor constraints for the opti- mization of performance.

Secure Incentive Protocol (SIP) [17] is a session-based approach proposed by Zhang et al. This method divides the function into three phases the Session initialization phase, the Data forwarding phase and the Rewarding phase. In this method a session initiator and a session responder are defined and they are charged for taking the services. All intermediate nodes gain credits on the basis of the number of packets suc- cessfully forwarded.

In the reputation-based mechanism some detection and pun- ishment strategy is used for the mitigation of selfish nodes. These mechanisms maintain some sort of reputation system to identify and punish selfish nodes. In a MANET a node acts as a trustor as well as trustee. Due to its self organization rep- utation is defined on the basis of network participation seen by others. It is defined on the basis of the packet delivery ratio and other metrics. Lots of works have been proposed in the lit- erature for the mitigation of misbehaving nodes using reputa- tion based mechanism.

Cooperation enhancement in MANETs (CineMA) [24] was presented in the literature that limits the number of packets forwarded by selfish nodes. The CineMA penalty scheme uses a similar penalty scheme as in CORE and CONFIDANT. It has three main modules the Watchdog module, a reputation system module, and an interface queue module. The Watchdog is responsible for system monitoring to collect information. A reputation system determines the level of cooperation on the basis of the number of packets received and the number of packets forwarded. Finally the interface queue module limits the amount of packets transmitted by selfish node. The key advantage of CineMA is that it degrades the sending rate of a selfish node.

Miranda and Rodrigues [27] proposed Friends & Foes to minimize misbehavior from a MANET. Friends receive ser- vices of the network and Foes are refused to serve by the nodes of MANET. The limitation of this method is that it has mem- ory and message overhead.

In a work Hu et al. [29] suggested that nodes have to peri- odically broadcast status information of neighboring nodes in which it has to show the refusal of selfish nodes. The limitation of this mechanism is the high communication overhead.

A classification algorithm was proposed for the intrusion detection in MANET [38]. This is an innovative approach but not validated by real world data. Detection of selfish nodes is proposed in these methods [39,40] but still these algorithms consume more energy. A secure routing protocol is suggested by Li et al. with nodes selfishness resistance in MANETs; how- ever, this protocol still consumes much energy [41].

Josang et al. [43,44] developed algebra in support of assess- ing trust relations by using a triplet of belief, disbelief, and uncertainty in every trust statement. The limitation of this approach is that it fails since a user cannot allocate consistent value in each case.

Reduction in resource consumption surely enhances coopera- tion and minimizes misbehavior [6]. The reduction is in terms of minimizing the routing activities that save battery life and bandwidth, so that misbehavior can be controlled up to the maximum extent. To understand the fact let us discuss the meaning of misbehavior and why nodes misbehave.

devices. That is why this model defines Neighborhood Com- pressive Sensing (NCS), so that the major computations are performed at leader end. Thus, it saves battery usage of low battery power devices as well as it prevents from attacks and misbehavior because all fake advertisements are identified using CS and correlated coefficients are treated. It identifies malicious attacks and misbehavior because the fake advertise- ment shows misclassified coefficients with abrupt and dissimi- lar values. In CS we check the sparse matrix in terms of zero and nonzero elements or in terms of similar and dissimilar coefficients. We have mostly zero elements and some are non- zero elements. Thus, the malicious advertisement can be easily identified using dissimilar coefficient or nonzero elements. But, the limitation of this technique is that if the network having a larger number of misbehaving nodes or attackers then it mis- classifies the identity because we have large number of mali- cious data. Thus, we take action on regular or honest nodes because they are less in number. To handle this point we have considered the leader node reputation value as the basis for classification and validity of zero elements or matching coeffi- cients. In this paper we are assuming mostly regular or honest

In this work a MANET is logically divided into several neigh- borhood groups (NGs) on the basis of one hop distance. A neighborhood group consists of a set of regular nodes, one or more border node(s) and one leader node. Regular nodes are responsible for compressing and forwarding their sparse data to the leader node. The leader node is responsible for the major computations. It joins all compressed data and reconstructs the original data as well as checks the validity of the advertisement. The border node is a regular node with additional responsibility of passing the traffic to other neigh- borhood group. We have used the term neighborhood node to denote a regular and border node that belongs to a neigh- borhood group. The leader node is taken to minimize battery usage of neighborhood nodes (low battery power devices) and to prevent a network from attacks and misbehavior. We have used DSR routing protocol [19] as the base protocol. Our model contains three phases i.e. the Neighborhood creation and leader selection phase, the Data compression and forward- ing phase and the Data gathering, reconstruction and adver- tisement phase.

The leader node receives all correlated data except the mali- cious nodes advertised fake or misclassified data. Thus, it iden- tifies that malicious nodes have broadcasted wrong advertisements in the neighborhood. Now, we can punish the malicious node by isolating misbehaving from the routing path and discarding its messages by sending an alarm message in the neighborhood.

