The overall objective of the research work is to improve the per- formance of the Greedy Web Proxy caching algorithms by aug- menting the Web user clustering and Data Mining Classifier model based on the random indexing methods and Weight assign- ment policy mechanism. Sections 2 address the work in Traditional Greedy Web Proxy Caching algorithms and Data Mining based Web caching Methods. Section 3 details the Overall working model for the Web Proxy caching system. Section 4 presents the Performance Evaluation Used in Clustering and Classification

KORA (Khalid Obaidat Replacement Algorithm) to enhance the Web cache performance [7] uses a neural network to identify tran- sient and shadow cache lines. The temporary lines are the new web object arrivals to the cache, whereas the shadow lines are the arri- vals of the Web object that were replaced recently from the cache in favor of some other lines. The KORA algorithm performs well compared to the conventional algorithm by having lower miss ratio. An adaptive web cache access predictor technique [8] uses Back-Propagation Neural Network (BPNN) to improve the perfor- mance of Web caching by predicting the most likely re-accessed objects. A non-linear model using object features [9] analyzes the Web cache optimization with Multilayer Perceptron (MLP) Net- work and predicts the value of the object based on the syntactic features of the HTML document. The Neural Network Proxy Cache Replacement (NNPCR) [10], uses the Back Propagation to adjust the weight factors in the network. Here, an object is selected for replacement based on the ratings returned by the Back Propagation Neural Network (BPNN).

K-Nearest Neighbor Classifier [28] is one of the supervised machine learning algorithms used in a variety of application. The K-Nearest Neighbor classifier is working under the principle of dis- tance measures. The KNN algorithm trains not only the data set but also the classification for each training example. This indicates that clean entries are extracted. In this, 800 Web pages were visited, and 600 were accessed more than ten times. Also, the total session identified as 24,000, from which the identified session reduced 12,000 with session duration threshold to limit as 30 min. Simi- larly, the page duration of the session is identified as 12,500 with page duration threshold limit set 10 min.

For the simulation of the Web Proxy cache algorithm, the win- dow based cache is simulator is used for the integration of Data Mining Classifier Model (KNN). Results obtained from the Classifier are taken as input to the Web Proxy cache simulator [33]. The experimental setup is carried out based on the following parame- ters like Trace file name, cache size, replacement scheme, the con- tent type used. The Trace file name includes the following attributes Timestamp, URL-ID, object size, etc. The cache size used in these experiments may vary in size from 5% to 45% (Maximal volume of the cached content) and the replacement scheme used are, GDS, GDSF, GD*.

