Platoon control in intelligent and connected vehicles (ICVs) has garnered significant attention owing to its potential to reduce fuel consumption and increase transportation system efficiency. Although several commendable platoon control strategies have emerged [1], practical challenges remain. Information communicated over public vehicle-to-vehicle (V2V) networks is susceptible to malicious intrusions and cyberattacks, rendering ICVs vulnerable. Traditional platoon control methods often fail in security-centric ICVs, especially for constraints demanding heightened security assurances.

Secure platoon control is crucial when malicious vehicles in the network disregard established communication protocols, thereby misleading their counterparts. Byzantine attacks manifest when one or several vehicles deliberately disseminate deceptive data within the ICV network, jeopardizing platoon coordination, and possibly leading to collisions. The urgency to devise innovative control algorithms and detection mechanisms capable of addressing this malicious behavior cannot be overstated; they are vital for the safety and security of platoon systems. Given the computational complexity and inherently

Conversely, distributed model predictive control (DMPC) has gained substantial attention owing to its exceptional capabilities in constraint management and computational resource optimization, as evidenced in Refs. [28,29]. DMPC approaches for tackling cooperative stabilization challenges in MASs were explored in Ref. [30], whereas solutions addressing consensus issues in cooperative systems appeared in Refs. [31,32]. Despite their merits, existing DMPC methodologies lack in the context of security-sensitive operations. This highlights the necessity for a unified and resilient DMPC-based strategy to safeguard ICVs against cyberattacks.

We develop a resilient distributed model predictive platoon control (RDMP2C) for constrained ICVs. This framework allows vehicles to detect and identify malicious information, thereby ensuring that they consistently meet the desired platoon control objectives. By integrating the predesigned optimal control with DMPC optimization, our approach ensures both superior control performance and constraint adherence.

We established sufficient conditions for the recursive feasibility of the RDMP2C algorithm and the stability of the closed-loop ICV system. Notably, our method is the first attempt to concurrently address the cybersecurity, constraints, and control performance of constrained ICVs under potential attacks. Even during Byzantine attacks, our method maintains closed-loop stability and security in ICVs with reduced reliance on network robustness.

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents some basic preliminaries and formulates the resilient platoon control problem. In section 3, we present the distributed detection algorithms for Byzantine attacks. In section 4, we propose the RDMP2C framework for constrained ICVs. In section 5, we prove the theoretical properties, including the recursive feasibility and closed-loop stability. Section 6 presents the simulation results and section 7 concludes the paper.

The detection and isolation mechanism (i.e., detecting attacks and isolating corrupted communication links/agents) for MAS under cyberattacks has recently gained attention [20,41]. In contrast to these existing attack detection methodologies, the proposed secondary verification algorithm enhances the resilience of the system to a higher number of Byzantine attacks without increasing the robustness threshold of the network.

Discussion on optimality and constraint satisfaction. For an unconstrained ICV, a predesigned platoon control law is optimal for a specific cost function [44]. By contrast, the proposed DMPC-based platoon control gradually converges to the optimal control input and achieves suboptimal platoon control performance. Therefore, the algorithm handles physical constraints and achieves a trade-off between optimality and constraint satisfaction.

Ensuring safety and rational driving exploration and exploitation are crucial for the online evolution of autonomous driving. These principles are the key factors affecting the safety, comfort, and trust of drivers and passengers in online autonomous driving. This section introduces the corresponding modeling methods for these two principles, including predictive safe- driving envelope modeling and a rational exploration and exploitation scheme.

This paper presented a resilient DMPC-based platoon control framework for constrained ICV under F-local Byzantine attacks. A distributed Byzantine attack detection mechanism was developed to enable each vehicle to detect a Byzantine attack by relying only on the (F +1)-robust graph. Communication among ICV was classified into different types based on the attack intensity: normal, recoverable, and adversarial communication. Based on the resilience set and parameters, we

This study suggests several directions for future research. This study examines longitudinal ICV under local Byzantine attacks. The proposed RDMP2C framework can be extended to handle constrained ICV in more complex environments such as time-varying communication networks [26]. Also, we expect that the proposed approach can be applied to address the flexible ICV platoon problem as demonstrated in Ref. [49]. Furthermore, advanced machine learning methods like graph neural networks [50] hold promise for detecting adversarial cyberattacks on ICVs in intricate real-world situations.

