Chromatin accessibility or open chromatin is a hallmark of active cis-regulatory elements that control spatial and temporal gene expression.7 Because ALL typically involves mutations (PAX5-altered), complex rearrangements (e.g., DUX4-rear- ranged, PAX5-altered, ZNF384-rearranged), and/or oncogenic gene fusions (e.g., ETV6::RUNX1, TCF3::PBX1, KMT2A-rear- ranged) of transcription factor (TF) genes, as well as disruptions of cis-regulatory elements,8 chromatin-accessibility maps can

FOSL2 CUT&RUN enrichment heatmaps at all B-ALL accessible chromatin sites (on left, N = 217,240 regions) and B-ALL-enriched DASs (on right, N = 23,273 regions) in SUPB15 (left enrichment heatmap) and 697 (right enrichment heatmap) cells. Total numbers of sites are shown below each heatmap. Rows in adjacent pairs of heatmaps are unaligned.

TF and target gene network of DASs with higher accessibility in B-ALL (B-ALL-enriched). Network is subset for top TF footprints across DASs ranked by the top mean log2-adjusted fold-change transcription factor footprint signal. Target genes determined with B-ALL patient origin promoter capture Hi-C are subset for a cancer-implicated gene set ranked by the top expressed genes. Network connections are colored as TFs (purple blocks) to target gene (green arrowheads) pairs. Select expansive and highly similar TF motif families are grouped (AP-1 and CEBP, AP1 family and CEBP family).

Top TF footprints at DASs that are enriched (top) or depleted (bottom) in KMT2A-rearranged (left) and DUX4-rearranged (right) B-ALL. Differential footprint score between merged subtype patient samples and non-subtype patient samples is provided on the x axis, and TF footprint significance is provided on they axis. Higher differential footprint scores indicate higher binding in the merged subtype group compared to all other merged non-subtype samples. TPM transcript abundance of associated TF transcript in the merged subtype group is shown as both color and size of points.

Extensive epigenomic reprogramming was uncovered be- tween B cell progenitors and B-ALL, and cell-of-origin analyses identified Pro-B cells as the most common cell of origin. Our comparison of B-ALL and Pro-B cell chromatin accessibility sug- gests epigenomic reprogramming that is, in part, associated with AP-1 TF occupancy. We further identify disruptions to normal B cell function through the activation of Toll-like receptor signaling and interleukin production. Acetyl-CoA synthesis was also iden- tified as an enriched gene ontology term when comparing B-ALL and Pro-B cells. Metabolic alterations in cancer are well known, particularly acetyl-CoA synthesis alterations, which have been previously reported in cancer.39

We further examined accessible chromatin landscapes among diverse molecular subtypes of B-ALL. Collectively, we identified 42,753 subtype-enriched DASs, which strikingly repre- sent 20% of analyzed accessible chromatin sites across a pan- subtype B-ALL genome. Subtype-enriched DASs were enriched near upregulated DEGs in the corresponding subtype, support- ing their role in gene activation. Moreover, comparisons between subtype-enriched DASs and chromatin-accessibility data from cell lines identified largely consistent patterns. We further identi- fied candidate TFs that exhibited strong subtype specificity through TF footprinting analyses and validated some of these findings using transcriptomic data from primary B-ALL cells. Collectively, these analyses highlighted a putative role for HOXA9 and MEIS1 in KMT2A-rearranged ALL, GATA3 in ZNF384-rearranged ALL, and RARA in PAX5-altered B-ALL.

In addition to key subtype-enriched TF footprints identified within accessible chromatin sites, we also assessed subtype- depleted DASs and identified numerous TFs that have been shown to act as repressors, such as ZNF135, ZNF263, ZEB1, and ZEB2. Intriguingly, several studies have supported a role for these repressors in cancers such as neuroblastoma and AML demonstrating enhanced tumorigenic phenotypes.50,51 Our observations support a more detailed examination of these repressive TFs in the occlusion of accessible chromatin sites in B-ALL.

Overall, our data support pronounced changes in chromatin accessibility between B-ALL and precursor B cells as well as among B-ALL subtypes. Our results further support the role of diverse TFs and inherited genetic variants in modulating and promoting differences in chromatin accessibility among B-ALL subtypes. Ultimately, these diverse chromatin architectures contribute to unique gene-regulatory networks and transcrip- tional programs. Our work therefore provides a valuable resource to the cancer genomics research community and can be further used to better understand biological as well as clinical differences among B-ALL subtypes.

For gene expression measurements, parental (WT) and cis-regulatory element-deleted cells (Del) were cultured in RPMI 1640 me- dia (supplemented with 10% FBS, 1% Penicillin/Streptomycin, and 1% L-Glutamine). Cells were collected and lysed with RLT/BME mixture (1000 mL:10 mL) and processed for total RNA extraction (Qiagen #74104). cDNA synthesis was done using the High-Capacity RNA-to-cDNA kit (Applied Biosystems #4387406). TaqMan Fast Advanced Master Mix (Applied Biosystems #4444557) and TaqMan Gene Expression Assays probe (Thermo) were used to prepare RT-PCR reactions. Taqman probes used include: Hs00944382_m1 (SH3BP5L), Hs01119178_m1 (SLC2A9), Hs00953418_m1 (CDK14) and Hs00427620_m1 (TBP, endogenous control). The recom- mended Taqman Fast Advanced Master Mix PCR conditions were used to run the samples and the samples were run on a QuantStudio3 Real-Time PCR system.

For cell proliferation analyses, parental (WT) and cis-regulatory element-deleted cells (Del) were cultured in RPMI 1640 media (sup- plemented with 10% FBS, 1% Penicillin/Streptomycin, and 1% L-Glutamine) and plated on a 96 well plate using 0.2 3 10^5 cells per well (n = 3 per group). Cells proliferation was measured for up to 17 days by adding fresh media and expanding cells when confluence was reached. Absolute cell count was done by Trypan blue method using TC20 automated cell counter (Bio-Rad, #1450102) at different time points.

CRISPRi-ready SEM and Nalm6 cell populations with dox-inducible dCas9-KRAB and a GFP reporter (i.e., CiG) were generated as follows. Cells were transduced with lentivirus produced from TRE3-KRABdCas9-IRES-GFP and pLVX-EF1alpha-Tet3G vectors. Cells were serially sorted for GFP+ cells after doxycycline induction, for GFP-negative cells without doxycycline induction, and again for GFP+ cells after doxycycline induction.

