One way to reduce overall energy consumption in data centres is Power Manage- ment (PM). PM allows to switch between power states of servers to reduce power consumption, while trying to keep the performance intact [5]. Power proportion- ality, i.e., power consumption is proportional to utilisation, has proven to be one of the three main areas of improvement on data centre energy-efficiency in the last years [4,14]. Since PM software and hardware has been improving, scaling back

Our new evaluation method is embedded in our recent work [13] that introduced a power management module and specification in a data centre simulation frame- work [12] using the multi-method simulation software AnyLogic [1]. The module extends power management functionality by proposing an interface to easily spec- ify multiple strategies. Moreover, such a specification allows to use many state information variables with regard to traffic, system service, power, performance and thermodynamics, to formulate all kinds of more advanced power management strategies/policies that could lead to significant improvements in energy-efficiency, while other Service-Level Agreement (SLAs) demands are met.

Our first step is attained with the aid of an existing data centre simulation frame- work [12]. Section 2.1 describes this framework and its features, followed by Section 2.2, that elaborates a dynamic PM extension for this framework that allows for control of power states of servers strategically using various observable quantities. Secondly, an existing specification of dynamic PM strategies using various state in- formation variables within this simulation framework, which is elaborated in Section

Efficiency in power management strategies addresses how well performance and energy goals are met. The goal of performance management is to obtain the lowest response time possible, while the goal of power management is to have the lowest power consumption possible. Since both values are relevant, efficiency is often expressed as the performance per Watt (PPW). However, many approaches like [2] struggle with expressing a combination of power consumption and performance in a meaningful way. Since in some cases a power and performance trade-off exists, as can be seen in earlier work [6,11,15], both power and performance are indicated.

A convenient method used to meet these SLA demands involves a response time threshold. Counting the number of violations and dividing this number over the total number of samples, estimates the percentage of jobs that violate the SLA (SLAv). This method is used in practice by one of our partners. Better power management strategies have a low number of SLA violations.

total number of power state switches during the entire simulation excluding the switches made during adaptation as a fraction of the time spent in a stabilised system ( n ti = t1 + t2 + ... + tn). We now express the PSSFA and a more detailed PSSF, as follows:

