recorded as VCO levels were elevated when fish were subjected to Streptococcus iniae infection while plasma metabolite indicators among treatments were not altered. The inclusion of VCO at 3% in the diet gave excellent performance, indicating that it could wholly replace FO and as such represents a better alternative lipid source for feeding O. niloticus.

Fish oil and fish meal is considered as the main protein compo- nents of feed [36,57] in the aquaculture sector and as such influ- ences the cost of production. It is therefore expected that, higher demand in these components will raise the cost of feed production and thereby affect production rate and the ability of the industry to maintain its pace and stability in growth. Also, the higher demand for fish oil has endangered some fish species (herring, sardine, anchovy, capelina, etc) which are considered to have low economic value and less for human consumption used in the production of the oil as they have been overexploited [10,17,49,58,75].

0.13 to 0.30 mg/l. Triplicate groups of fish per treatment were fed one of five experimental diets twice daily (008:30-009:00 and 16:00-16:30) to visual satiety with feed intake recorded by the dif- ference in weight prior to and after feeding. Fish in each group were batch-weighed and counted to monitor growth, feed utiliza- tion survival once every two weeks whiles tanks were cleaned. Diet

1.5VCO did not differ (P < 0.05) although a significant difference in 22:6(n-3) was observed. The N-3 series in all treatments was affected with the inclusion of VCO, decreasing from 12.37% (FO) to 4.42% (3VCO) although, treatments FO-1.5VCO and 2.25VCO- 3VCO  differed  statistically  in  comparison.  DHA  and  PUFA

patterns of FA profile of fish. This effect is characteristically referred to as the indirect effect of saturated FA intake on tissues FA profile [61,63]. N-6 FAs in the fish profile were higher than the n-3 FA, whereas a higher amount of EPA in the diet failed to be reflected in the fish FA profiles. However, DHA was observed to increase in tissue FA with similar trends in both whole body and liver FA profiles. It has been noted that tilapia has the ability to bio-convert EPA and most SFAs in an attempt to maintain LC- PUFAs [59]. Thus, increasing the intake of SFA results in a dispro- portionate increase of SFA content regardless of dietary intake. Similar reported results have been suggested to indicate a prefer- ence in fish for utilizing EPA as an energy source (b-oxidation) and/or in synthesis of DHA [56]. This hypothesis has been sug- gested to be a function of selectivity for specific FAs, including unsaturated FAs in their body lipid, unlike SFAs. The results obtained in this study with fish fed 3VCO support this although fish fed FO maintained the highest LC-PUFAs in muscle and whole body lipid.

However, it has been suggested that fish cannot effectively incorporate LC-PUFAs in muscle lipid because it cannot explicitly differentiate between LC-PUFAs, MUFAs, and MC-PUFAs [61,63]. Thus, less desirable unsaturated FAs may compete with MC- PUFAs and interfere with attempts to maximize tissue nutritional value. The results of this study showed good retention of LC- PUFAs, greater amounts of MUFAs and MC-PUFAs, which corre- spond with the performance of fish fed other diets rich in SFA and MC-PUFA [65]. It has also been noted that disproportionate enrichment of 18:2(n-6) in lean fleshed fish may be most directly related to preferential incorporation of this FA into polar lipids. This hypothesis also explains the lower LC-PUFAs content observed in this study [65].

Contradictory information on the effect of dietary essential fatty acids on immune response and disease has been reported in recent years. Abnormalities observed in Nile tilapia RBC and WBC counts were attributed to excessively high dietary preformed LC-PUFAs levels after feeding fish for 12 weeks with 7% menhaden oil as the sole lipid source unlike those fed other oils [71]. However, no significant effects were observed in the RBC and WBC when fish were fed menhaden oil, soybean oil, beef tallow, or corn oil, although those fed menhaden oil were lower than the others [28]. It has been documented that excessive levels of n-3 FAs decrease antibody titers [16] and increase mortality of fish [27]. No significant difference was observed in cumulative mortality against S. iniae 16-day post challenge in this study. However, it is worth noting that fish fed 3VCO had the lowest mortality.

The FA composition of virgin coconut oil demonstrated its antibacterial, antiprotozoal and antiviral properties [48] in the sur- vival of fish fed solely 3VCO. [14] indicated that monoglycerides and FAs ranging between C6 to C14 have the ability to inactivate all members of herpes simplex virus (HSV). Lauric acid has also been shown to destroy pathogenic gram-negative bacteria with an appropriate chelator. The results obtained in this study there- fore confirm that the possession of these active FAs components destroys pathogenic bacteria and therefore agrees with the report that indicated monolaurin as an additional property of VCO FA which enhances the destruction of gram-negative bacteria [32]. Thus, VCO demonstrates to have medicinal and therapeutic abili- ties to boost the immune system of fish fed VCO without compro- mising growth performance.

