The Mexican education system faces several challenges since the last decade, underscoring the need for changes and reforms to effectively improve the quality of education. Following the current standards pre- sented by the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Develop- ment (OECD), the competency-based educational (CBE) model has been gradually implemented in Mexico from basic to higher education in- stitutions since 2004 (Levano et al., 2019). According to the Programme of International Student Assessment (PISA), the CBE model is oriented

After recognizing the impending need to address motivation for STEM education in Mexico, we designed the present study to evaluate the implementation of XR technology and assess the effect of an immersive style (AR and VR) in terms of the motivation and learning performance of students during the learning process. The study was set in the context of a physics course, in order to showcase the visual and interactive capabilities of XR technology to support students in a subject traditionally perceived as difficult. Our approach uses a web-based XR learning application that presents learning content in virtual environ- ments for both AR and VR technologies. The content can be accessed using any device, from personal computers to mobile devices with web and internet capabilities and with compatible peripherals, making it a multiplatform application.

As many researchers and educators around the world are actively developing didactic applications in combination with digital content to enhance the quality of learning, the current literature on the use of immersive XR technologies in STEM education has become more comprehensive and mature. Recent precedents of implementations in STEM domains include mathematics (Ahmad & Junaini, 2020; Lai & Cheong, 2022a), physics (Alnagrat et al., 2021; Lai & Cheong, 2022b), and chemistry (Mazzuco et al., 2022; Reeves et al., 2021). Results from these previous studies generally show that XR strategies such as AR and VR can improve learning outcomes and motivation.

In a study conducted by Johnson-Glenberg et al. (2021), the authors analyze the effects of embodied learning in STEM experiences by comparing platforms with different levels of immersion and inter- activity, including a non-immersive VR environment and an immersive 3D environment. The results revealed that the effect of the platform was significantly mediated by presence, agency, and engagement. The au- thors underscore the importance of designing VR content with higher agency and interactive capabilities, and also advise to avoid passive learning.

Lee et al. (2022) investigated a XR classroom setup for STEM edu- cation among undergraduate aerospace and mechanical engineering students. The researchers designed AR and VR courses to analyze collaborative, interactive and immersive capabilities, and their effects on learning. In a quantitative survey, the results showed an increase in rooms have the potential to develop competencies in problem solving, as these present approaches based in exploration and interaction, while stimulating creativity and cognitive skills. The results also suggest that students and teachers are willing to use student-centered blended learning scenarios, as these present an innovative and active approach, befitting motivation, and engagement in STEM education for the in- dustry 4.0 era.

Additional examples include the work of Smith et al. (2023) who present a VR plotting system for STEM education, using examples from math, physics and chemistry to enable students, teachers, and re- searchers to create stereoscopic VR visualizations in a web-based application for smartphones. A pilot test indicated that students and teachers perceived the app as easy to use and engaging. Alkhabra et al. (2023) also presented a study using an experimental approach to enhance learning retention and critical thinking using AR. The authors analyze the interaction between AR design and the development of critical and practical skills on high school students. Results from this study revelated that AR implementation has a significant impact on overall critical thinking with a low cognitive load. The authors suggest that future research should be focused on quantifying learning outcomes by sociocultural context and on revealing the educational benefits of AR in active learning.

Despite the positive impact of XR integration in STEM curricula showcased in these previous studies, the use of XR technologies in teaching and learning still poses many significant challenges. Some of these are acknowledged in the current literature, and include: the availability and adoption of XR capable devices, the qualification of teachers in the use of techno-pedagogical approaches, and the specific development of digital learning content that could fully exploit the po- tential of XR (Luo et al., 2021). Likewise, it is understood that these shortcomings arise from the social, economic, and cultural context in which these approaches are applied, as well as generational differences in the perceptions and acceptance towards the use of technology for learning.

Still, there are recent attempts to apply XR technologies in the Mexican school curricula, which include the work of Olivas Castellanos et al., (2022) which presents a VR laboratory approach for remote ed- ucation. Similarly, Rocha Estrada et al., (2021) present an assessment of acceptance and user experience of a web-based virtual campus approach due to the COVID-19 policies introduced in Mexico. The implementation

To the best of our knowledge, there is currently no information regarding the motivational effects of using XR technologies among Mexican University-level students compared with traditional teaching methodologies. One key component in our study design is the imple- mentation of two distinct XR approaches, namely VR and AR, which should shed information regarding the student experience when using applications that vary in terms of presentation and interactivity. Through this approach, we aim to assess the overall experience of using AR and VR approaches, including the type of interactive interface (touchscreen gestures in AR, using a peripheric with buttons and joy- sticks in VR), the way the educational environment is presented (digital overlay on the real world in AR, a fully virtual environment in VR), and the type of device and platform on which the application runs (AR on mobile devices, VR on desktop devices). The information will help to thoroughly evaluate the experience of using XR for learning proposals and how these are perceived by Mexican school students.

PhysXR is a web-based learning application that provides interactive experiences in VR and AR environments. It uses a simulator for experi- ments of physical phenomena such as dynamics and kinematics. PhysXR shows students various topics related to physical phenomena through demonstrations and interactive exercises in XR.

One week following the initial preparation and assignment session, students undertook Session 2. In this session, students were divided based on the group (control or experimental). Students in the control group, attended a 10-min introductory lecture on the activities to be performed, while students allocated to the AR and VR groups received a 10-min introductory tutorial on how to use the PhysXR educational application on desktop and mobile devices. After the introduction, all groups continued with the 30-min intervention session. During the intervention process, students were presented with four topics related to kinematics and four topics on dynamics. In the AR and VR condition group, each topic offered a series of illustrative and interactive dem- onstrations implementing the physics simulator, to provide the student with an induction on the necessary concepts to perform a series of ac- tivities with questions at the end of each topic. Similarly, the didactic content was shown to the control group, but in the format of digital documents and slides.

In order to carry out the analysis of the results obtained in this study, a Shapiro-Wilk test was performed to confirm the assumption of normality from the data obtained in the pretest in the AR, VR, and control groups. The results obtained in the AR group (N = 33, w = 0.203, M = 6.575, SD = 2.136), VR group (N = 33, w = 0.091, M = 6.393, SD = parisons between conditions. Considering that the assumption of ho- mogeneity of variance has been met, the Tukey HSD test allows to perform pairwise comparisons between groups to find more individual details about the dependent variables, setting a studentized rank dis- tribution that stablishes a threshold. Differences above this threshold are considered significant differences. Those below are considered non- significant differences.

0.475 for the control group. The post hoc Tukey HSD tests showed sta- tistically significant differences between the AR condition when compared to the VR and control group (p-values <0.01). However, no statistically significant difference was found between the VR condition

Regarding our first research question (RQ1: Are there any signifi- cant differences in learning performance between each group (AR group, VR group, and control group) for learning physics?), the results indicate that students that used the AR capabilities of PhysXR presented the highest statistically significant increase on learning gains. The AR and VR experimental conditions showed more learning gains in comparison with the control group. This result is attributed to the in- fluence of XR technologies as a medium to tech and learn material related to Newtonian Mechanics. Several works in the past (Cai et al., 2013; Parong & Mayer, 2018; Pirker et al., 2017; Tsichouridis et al., 2020) presented similar results in their interventions, thus, proving that to methodologies that focus on learning only by reading or listening to instructions or lectures. An experiential methodology implies that the learner acquires knowledge and skills directly through active action, which involves sensory or kinesthetic contact with the learning envi- ronment. In an XR experience, the learner can surround him or herself with a variety of conditions that can set up appropriate scenarios for the exploration of a topic. Further, there are several motivation theories that consider the intrinsic and extrinsic factors that drive an individual to reach a goal or to fulfill an expectation in learning activities. Such the- ories state that an optimum level of arousal in emotions and cognitive state are prominent to enhance academic performance and motivation. In this study we present an XR environment that applied the ARCS model to assess motivation. According to Keller (1987), students can be moti- vated directly by grabbing their attention through a stimulating and attractive medium or didactic material, being important to sustaining their curiosity in the learning process, and results from our study indi- cate that XR might serve as this stimulating material.

We proposed a strong emphasis in AR for mobile devices using web- based technologies, where the user can interact with virtual elements in the real world regardless of the platform, being able to experiment with physics phenomena and the physical properties of objects, while also using easy and intuitive GUI elements to navigate through the learning content. Moreover, we presented an approach for the implementation of virtual environments in desktop devices, as these lack the portability and hardware standardization to execute AR content in comparison to their mobile counterpart. In this case scenario, we proposed to use VR- oriented peripherals but also, the use of more conventional human- machine interfaces, such as the keyboard and mouse to navigate web- based virtual learning environments.

However, there are some limitations that must be appraised when considering our approaches in Newtonian mechanics education. The first limitation is that the access to internet connection is necessary due the fact that PhysXR is a web-based learning tool. Devices with missing sensors or lacking compatibility due to obsolescence are also some limitations to take into consideration. Another limitation is that PhysXR covers limited topics of dynamic and kinematics. It is important to provide teachers with the technical knowledge to author and develop new learning content for Newtonian mechanics, as making the adapta- substantial time to master. Another limitation in this study stems from the lack of access to VR headsets since students did not have these at home. This implies that the VR condition group experienced PhysXR learning content in a virtual environment from a conventional display, thus, diminishing the immersive factor that VR offers when using VR headsets.

This work analyzed the impact of XR technologies in education, with a focus on Newtonian mechanics. A learning application called PhysXR has been developed as an alternative method to help to understand physical phenomena and its mathematical abstractions in an interactive environment with real-time physics simulation, including several multimedia contents for learning and 3D model demonstrations. This study carried out the use of statistical significance tests and correlations analysis, and it comprehensively validated the positive impact of the XR implementations presented in PhysXR within the Mexican educational context.

develop their self-learning skills and improve their understanding of the mathematical abstractions used in Newtonian mechanics topics such as kinematics and dynamics. These results are aligned with the findings of other studies which evaluate XR technologies such as AR and VR for educative and motivational purposes (Alkhabra et al., 2023; Johnson-- Glenberg et al., 2021; Lee et al., 2022; Midak et al., 2021; Mystakidis & Christopoulos, 2022; Smith et al., 2023).

