Plants as source of remedies are widely used for the treat- ment of almost 87% human diseases including bacterial and fungal infections, cancer and different disorders [1]. Most of the drugs commercially available currently for the treatment of curable and incurable diseases derive from plants [2]. About 3000 species reported worldwide have some medicinal use for curable and incurable diseases [3]. More than 80% of people in developed and undeveloped countries depend on herbal remedies for primary health care [3]. The Arabian Gulf is considered as the land of huge traditional medicine, and until recently herbal remedies have been the primary source of health care in urban areas in the Gulf region [4]. In Oman, there are about 1204 terrestrial plants, a large number of which is reported to be used in traditional medicine [5]. Ter- restrial plants have been recognized since ancient times as potential sources of human pharmacopoeia and until today compounds derived from botanicals play an important role as a source of new chemical entities entering the market or clinical trials annually [1]. There is now an urgent need for novel and effective ingredient to remedy incurable diseases without any side effect.

Different solvents, reagents and standards were used in this study. Most of solvents, especially dimethyl sulphoxide (DMSO), dichloromethane (DCM), acetone, hexane, chloroform, metha- nol and butanol were purchased from Fisher Scientific Company, UK. Sodium sulphate (Na2SO4) was obtained from Scharlau, Eu- ropean Union. Filter paper used as disc was purchased from Whatman (GE Healthcare Company, China, Catalogue 1001090). Artemia cysts, amoxicillin, sodium chloride, 1, 1-diphenyl-2- picrylhydrazyl (DPPH), petri dishes and other chemicals were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich Company, USA. The UV spec- troscopy system used to measure the absorbance of different concentrations of crude samples was procured from Japan (Model 1800 Shimadzu spectrophotometer, Japan).

Selected seed samples from A. majus of different sizes were collected from the Northern part of Salalah, Sultanate of Oman during the month of September, 2014. The collected samples were transported to the Natural Products Lab, University of Nizwa for further processing. Morphological features and database of this plant are present in the website (http:// www.uicnmed.org/nabp/database/HTM/PDF/p7.pdf).

The disc diffusion assay is one of the most popular, inexpen- sive, and easiest methods for determining antibacterial activity against pathogenic bacterial strains, but not without limita- tions. A significant zone of inhibition was displayed by the plant crude extract against all the tested culture bacterial strains. Most antimicrobially active components that have been iden- tified are not water soluble and thus organic solvent extracts proved to be more potent [17]. Therefore, it is impossible to de- termine the antibacterial activity of non-polar compounds

Our observations revealed that the chloroform crude extract of A. majus showed significant antioxidant activity among the six extracts by the DPPH method which indicates the pres- ence of polyphenolic compounds. All seed crude extracts at almost all concentration were found to inhibit the growth of several microbes in agar media with significant inhibition shown against E. coli and S. aureus. However, the chloroform and hexane crude extracts showed very good cytotoxic activity against Artemia cysts. The mortality rate was linearly correlated with the increase in concentrations. From this study, it is con- cluded that the screened plant has a potential antibacterial activity compared to the antibiotics which are commonly used. So, there is a possibility of generating new drugs from cheap and widely available source for the treatment of diseases.

The authors are grateful to Oman Research Council, Sultan- ate of Oman for providing fund through FURAP project (Call 2, 2015) to carry out the project. The authors are also grateful to University of Nizwa, Nizwa, Sultanate of Oman for provid- ing all laboratory and other facilities. The authors would like to thank the staff of Pharmaceutical Chemistry Laboratory, Phar- macognosy Laboratory and Organic Chemistry Laboratory for their assistance. The authors thank Dr. Ahmed Ibrahim Yagi, Associate Professor, College of Arts and Sciences, University of Nizwa, for editing the manuscript.

Throne JE, Weaver DK, Chew V, Baker JE. Probit analysis of correlated data: multiple observations overtime at one pesticide concentration. In: Caprio MA, editor. Resistant pest management, a biannual newsletter of the Pesticide Research Center (PRC) in cooperation with the Insecticide Resistance Action Committee (IRACT). 1995.

