Hapllophyllum tuberculatum (H. tuberculatum) is a folk medicine used traditionally in Oman for the treat- ment of arthritis, nausea, fever, gastric pains, intestinal worms and malaria. The design of this study is to prepare different polarity extracts of H. tuberculatum and to evaluate antioxidant and cytotoxic activities by using 2,2-diphenyl-1-picrylhydrazyl (DPPH) and brine shrimp lethality (BSL) methods. The coarse leave samples were extracted with methanol by using a Soxhlet method and the obtained methanol extract was defatted and fractionated by different polarity of solvents with increasing polarity to give hexane, chloroform, ethyl acetate, butanol, and water extracts, respectively. The high antioxidant activity was obtained in the ethyl acetate extract and the lowest was in the methanol extract and the order of activity was ethyl acetate > butanol > water > chloroform > hexane > methanol extract. The cytotoxic activity results showed that the hexane, chloroform and ethyl acetate extracts have killed all the shrimp lowest IC50 was found in the butanol extract and the order of activity was chloroform > ethyl acetate > hexane > water > methanol > butanol extract. Significant antioxidant and cytotoxic activities results were found first time of Omani H. tuberculatum species which is traditionally used as folk medi- cine all over the world, including Oman. Therefore, the highest activity ethyl acetate extract could be used as a natural antioxidant. The present study is the first report on the evaluation of antioxidant and cyto- toxic activities of different polarity extracts of Omani H. tuberculatum species.

tuberculatum are used traditionally for the treatment of fever, carminative and decongestant. The leaves and stems are externally applied for the treatment of ear and eye problems and the extract of the stem is rubbed onto the skin to protect animals from biting insects and flies. Also, it is used as an antispasmodic, antiflatulent and to treat allergic rhinitis [3]. In Oman, it is used traditionally for the treatment of fever, gastric pains, intestinal worms, malaria and fractures [7]. Due to its medical importance, now this plant is com- mercially cultivated worldwide. Several biological studies have been conducted on this plant worldwide [6,8]. However, there is not even single extensively research available on cytotoxic and antioxidant activities of the leaves of Omani H. tuberculatum spe- cies. Therefore, the major purpose of this present study is to pre- pare different polarities extracts of the leaves of selected plant and to evaluate their antioxidant, and cytotoxic activities by 2,2- diphenyl-1-picrylhydrazyl (DPPH) and brine shrimp lethality (BSL).

Several chemicals and glassware have been used to performed this study. The methanol solvent was obtained from Nalar Norma- pur, France. Chloroform was obtained from Daejung, Korea. DPPH (2, 2-diphynyl-1-picryl-hydrazyl), gallic acid, shrimp egg, butanol and ethyl acetate were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich Company, Germany. Dimethyl sulphoxide (DMSO, purity 99%) was obtained from Sigma, St. Louis, USA. Acetone obtained from Nalar Normapur, EC. Sodium chloride and other chemicals were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich Company, USA.

The separated leaves samples were washed with water and dried at room temperature under shade for several days until it completely dry. The dried samples were ground into coarse pow- der by using a kitchen blender machine. The dry coarse powder sample (134.43 gm) was extracted with methanol (550 gm) by using a Soxhlet extraction method for 72 h. Rotary evaporator was used for the evaporation of methanol solvent. After evapora- tion of methanol solvent, the extract (54.01 gm) was dissolved in 200 ml of water for fractionation. The dissolved extract was trans- ferred into a separatory funnel. Finally, it was fractionated by dif- ferent solvents with increasing polarities. The mother solvent

DPPH (2,2-diphenyl-1-picrylhydrazyl) solution to the same test tube and shaken vigorously by hand. Finally, all the test tubes were kept at room temperature in a dark place for 45 min for complete reaction. The gallic acid standard was prepared to follow the same procedure without adding any plant extract. After incubation, the absorbance was measured in all tested samples at a fixed wave- length 517 nm by using a UV spectrophotometer [10]. The EC50 value of each extract was calculated by log and antilog method.

The cytotoxic activity of each prepared extract of H. tubercula- tum was determined by the brine shrimp lethality method [14,15]. The brine shrimp eggs were hatched at the covered cham- ber of the duo compartment plastic container with sea water for 24 h. After hatching, the active nauplii were separated from the eggs, and used for cytotoxic activity. Six concentrations such as surviving nauplii in each test tube was counted using magnifying glass and recorded the surviving nauplii. The percentage of lethal- ity of brine shrimps was calculated for each concentration of the sample. The IC50 value of each extract was calculated by log and antilog method.

The selected plant species is used by Omani people for the treat- ment of different aliments. However, nobody works on antioxidant and cytotoxic activities of this Omani plant species. The cytotoxic activity of organic extracts was determined by brine shrimp larvae (BSL) method with modification [14]. In our experiment, the hex- ane, chloroform, ethyl acetate, butanol, methanol and water extracts of leaves of H. tuberculatum displayed significant cytotoxic activity against the brine shrimp larvae. The mortalities as a per-

In this study, the determination of antioxidant and cytotoxic activities of leaves extracts of H. tuberculatum by DPPH and brine shrimp method has been reported. All the extracts from the leaves showed significant antioxidant and cytotoxic activities. In our find- ings through this graduation project revealed that the leaves of H. tuberculatum species grown in Oman contain a significant number or amount of bioactive compounds which might be responsible for its biological activities. Further, more in vitro and in vivo studies are needed of the active selected extracts of leaves of H. tuberculatum to determine their potential for therapeutic uses of this plant to prevent some chronic diseases.

