Spatial data algoritms (SDA) are algorithms that work on location data, such as geographic data. These algorithms are an integral parth of geoinformatics, a branch of science where information technology is applied to cartography and geosciences. Since geoinformatics often uses illustrations, such as maps and other diagrams, the students are well acquainted with visualization. Thus, software visualization is a natural tool for teaching SDA and its applications to geoscientists.

of spatial data algorithms. However, it seems that the visualization of algorithms important for geoinformatics is currently not a very active area of research. A recent paper on the MAVIS algorithm visualization tool as one spatial algorithm as a case example [8], but we could not find other recent progress in the field.

The existing systems typically offered the users two types of interaction. First, the users could view the animations with different input. Sometimes the input could be freely defined by the user. Furthermore, the systems supported the creation of new algorithm animations by implementing your own algorithms and visualizing them with the system. These inteaction methods correspond to the viewing, chang- ing and constructing levels of the engagement taxonomy [14].

Tracing exercises are a teaching method employed by many instructors in which the students trace an algorithm by keeping track of the changes in data structures while stepping through the algorithm. In visual algorithm simulation exercises, this procedure is supported by a graphical learning environment that provides visual- izations, which eliminates the burden of drawing the same data structure over and over again. TRAKLA2 is a learning environment that utilizes visual algorithm sim- ulation to deliver tracing exercises to students [13]. The system can automatically assess the solutions and give feedback on the correctness of the simulation.

The primitives on which the spatial data structures and algorithms operate are geometric entities, such as points, lines, and polygons. This multidimensional data can be stored in the form of key values derived from their geometric properties. In this respect, a spatial data element is an ordered list of values, a tuple, which in the spatial context represents a specific geometric entity. For example, a polygon can be stored as an ordered list of the coordinates of its vertices.

A particular challenge with the SDA exercises is the generation of spatial data for use as input to the algorithms. For the visualization to contribute to learning, the generated data sets must be clear and visually pleasing. There has to be enough spacing between the geometric entities to distinguish and select them. Also, labels must not overlap too much. In addition, each exercise has very specific constraints for the data, which makes it hard to create a generic data source. Therefore, most exercises have their own mechanism for generating data such as simple polygons.

In open tracing exercises, the algorithm is not strictly specified and therefore the exercises are more exploratory in nature. The student is given a goal, such as creating the Delaunay triangulation [16] of a point set, and the means to achieve it, e.g., adding edges between vertices and to carry out the in-circle test. The student can then interactively explore the structures by making modifications to them and observing the changes. Finally, the correctness is assessed by comparing the final state with the expected outcome. The overall goal is not to teach some specific algorithm but a concept, such as the min-max-angle criterion related to Delaunay triangulations.

There was a significant change in the TRAKLA2 results between the years 2007 and 2008. The change, however, can be explained by the modifications made to TRAKLA2 exercises between the two courses. One exercise was removed, and two new ones were added. The exercise removed after 2007 course was one of the hardest exercises (average score 54%), while the exercises added to 2008 course were among the easiest (average score 98%). The exam results were similar in both years.

In spring 2008, we carried out interviews to learn about student experiences with the spatial exercises. We used the interview guide approach [17], where the interviewer has an outline of topics to be covered, but may vary the wording and order of the questions to some extent. We interviewed a total of 4 students (two males, and two females) with two different nationalities, thus two of the interviews were in Finnish and two in English. The age (22 to 28 years) and background of the interviewees varied as they had had their education in different countries and universities/high schools.

All interviewees found the system to be beneficial and also thought it was an important learning tool that should continue to be utilized on the course. Further- more, they felt that compared with the lectures, they had learned more details about the algorithms from the TRAKLA2 exercises, but lectures were still considered to be the most important learning method. Compared with reading algorithms from articles, they felt that it was faster to grasp the idea from TRAKLA2 exercises. Yet, before attempting the exercises, students thought they should have some basic knowledge of the algorithm first.

The time it takes for this to happen depends on the number of exercises and students on the course. In large courses (many students), this time limit is reached very soon (in a couple of years). For example, in a data stuctures and algorithms course, some 500 students make some 50.000 submissions with 40 exercises (ap-

The learning results show that the correlation between TRAKLA2 exercises and ex- ams on the spatial data algorithms course is strong and statistically significant. It is even stronger than the correlation in the basic data structures course [10]. However, this is likely to be an artefact of the small sample size on the SDA course. With the smallest sample being only 9 persons, the results of a single person are likely to affect the overall correlation quite a lot. Despite this, it seems that TRAKLA2 exercise results are a good indicator of exam results.

The results from the interviews indicate that the students feel that they benefit from the system, even if this is not obvious from the quantitative results. In fact, the overall attitude towards the system was very positive and when asked to give it a grade from 0 to 5, all interviewees rated the system at around 4. During the course of the interviews, most interviewees also asked for more exercises that could cover other algorithms discussed in the course. Nonetheless, lectures were still considered the most important teaching method while the exercises should be in a supporting role.

The interviewees also brought up the notion that this kind of more involved learning with interactive visualizations would lead to a more lasting effect than simply reading. Essentially, they felt that the exercises engaged them more effec- tively, and they would remember the lessons longer. Thus, the student opinions agree with the findings of [14].

