Note this paper does not concern itself with the reliability of the system (i.e. mean time between failure etc) but with possible resultant states of the system due to component failures. The safety of potentially dangerous or explosive industrial plant is far more important than its reliability. The overriding philosophy here is that a system should be able to detect that it has become faulty, and revert to a safe operational mode. Human intervention can then assess and repair faults.

Imagine a complicated system built from components combined to form mod- ules. The modules are combined to form sub-systems and the sub-systems combined to form the final system. If each module/sub-system is modelled and has a finite number of failure modes, the massive number of checks to be considered is reduced dramatically.

For instance the failure of a capacitor a the power supply producing a high ripple noise level does not need to be considered for every other component. Rather it has become another well defined failure mode of the power supply, which must be considered in relation to how that affects other modules. Most modules (say a heating element) would not consider this failure mode as a fault.

The use of predefined euler diagrams, used as templates to produce more complicated euler diagrams is discussed in [4]. The work described here ex- tends this concept to add an additional stage. That of converting a spider diagram into a new diagram where each spider is represented as a set. this new diagram is then taken for inclusion into higher level diagrams.

The facility of having a default spider will help in producing practical mod- els of modules. Imagine a power supply for instance. For most combinations of failure modes the power supply will simply not work, but for some selected combinations of failures it will behave in incorrect but well defined modes.

The next stage is to take a system which depends upon the power supply. The Microprocessor is the obvious choice. This will function correctly when given DC, and will be damaged by mains voltage. It will not care if the AC voltage (for the heater element via the relay) is present.

The Relay can fail in two modes, it can weld itself ON, or it can fail to respond to a TURN ON signal from the microprocessor IO line. The Heating element can go open circuit and thus stop functioning. The relay depends on both the Microprocessor and the power supply (the A.C. part anyway) to function correctly.

For double failure mode the same bottom up technique can be used but check- ing for double failures within the components. This will probably normally create some extra failure modes per module (i.e. the binary cross product of failure modes will generally be larger than the single failure modes).

