ordinary pullback is the limit of a cocone of just two arrows). Notice that in the special case of the Schanuel topos of [42], these diagrams are necessarily finite, and thus wide pullbacks are determined by the binary ones. From now on, we let SetC denote the wide-pullback-preserving full subcategory of SetC. Our theory can be instantiated under the following conditions.

We pursue our goal emplying Prop. 3.5 again. F being an embedding, and inde- composability of objects in its image are not affected by the additional hypothesis. However, we must prove that each presheaf in the image of F is pullback-preserving.

Lemma 4.5 Let x and y belong to the same orbit. Let n be the pullback object of Dx and m be the pullback object of Dy. There exists an isomorphism between n amd m making n a pullback of Dy.

Multi-(co)products are a specialisation of the notion of multi-(co)limit, studied in detail by Diers [16]. It is well known (see e.g. [14], remark 5) that Fam(C) has products whenever C has multi-products, and dually, Fam(Cop) has products if C has multi-coproducts. Here we provide a concrete characterization of the functor, that emphasizes the difference between global and local interfaces. The results presented here do not rely on arrows of C being mono.

determine the symmetry of elements of Tn1 for each n. Having an effective procedure to compute this symmetry depends on the chosen functor. In [44] it is shown how to do this for polynomials, name abstraction and subfunctors of the power set. We conjecture that these results generalise to other categories of finite structures.

Applications are of great interest in the area of service-oriented computing, where resource allocation in the presence of network topologies [11], or constraints [6] is an active field of research, and finite representations are of vital importance for the implementation of analysis algorithms. An efficient implementation of the generic symmetry reduction algorithm that we have presented should be studied. For that, one may take advantage of algorithms on permutation groups exploiting the generators [32]. Finally, similar consideration apply to model checking. The study of a Stone-type duality for coalgebras over families in a similar fashion to [5], and a corresponding model checking algorithm exploiting the cases where the representation is finite, are one of our most important long-term goals.

