Tourism demand forecasting has attracted substantial interest because of the significant economic contributions of the fast-growing tourism industry. Although various quantitative forecasting techniques have been widely studied, highly accurate and understandable forecasting models have not been developed. The present paper proposes a novel tourism demand forecasting method that extracts fuzzy TakagieSugeno (TeS) rules from trained SVMs. Unlike previous approaches, this study uses fuzzy TeS models extracted from the outputs of trained SVMs on tourism data. Owing to the symbolic fuzzy rules and the generalization ability of SVMs, the extracted fuzzy TeS rules exhibit high forecasting accuracy and include understandable pre-condition parts for practitioners. Based on the tourism demand forecasting problem in Hong Kong SAR, China as a case study, empirical findings on tourist arrivals from nine overseas origins reveal that the proposed approach performs comparably with SVMs and can achieve better prediction accuracy than other forecasting techniques for most origins. The findings demonstrated that decision makers can easily interpret fuzzy TeS rules extracted from SVMs. Thus, the approach is highly beneficial to tourism market management. This finding demonstrates the excellent scientific and practical values of the proposed approach in tourism demand forecasting.

China, a key travel destination in Asia with an economically significant tourism industry. This major industry underwent substantial changes in market segments for inbound tourists. These changes demonstrate the urgent need to develop accurate methods for forecasting international demand for travel to Hong Kong SAR, China, which can be quantified by the number of tourist arrivals. Thus, tourism researchers continue to develop various techniques to predict the future demand for tourism.

the increase or decrease in tourism demand from various re- gions. These practitioners can understand the underlying reg- ularities according to the comprehensibility of tourism forecasting models. Policy makers can also plan tourism projects and related infrastructure development activities accurately and reasonably.

To fill this research gap, a novel tourism demand fore- casting method is proposed in this paper, which is based on support vector machines with rule extraction (SVMRE). This method can extract fuzzy TeS rules from SVMs trained on tourism demand data. The aim of the present study is to incorporate extracted fuzzy rules from highly accurate SVMs into tourism demand forecasting. The fuzzy TeS rules generated from the outputs of SVMs can verify the informa- tion encoded in these models. Thus, the fuzzy rules for tourism demand extracted from SVM models exhibit high forecasting accuracy and easy comprehensibility to industry practitioners. The tourism demand forecasting problem in Hong Kong SAR, China was studied as an application case. It is demonstrated that that the proposed approach performs comparably with SVMs and can achieve better prediction accuracy than other forecasting techniques in most cases. In addition, decision makers can easily interpret the fuzzy TeS rules extracted from SVMs. Thus, the approach is highly beneficial to tourism market management. This finding shows the excellent scien- tific and practical values of the proposed approach in tourism demand forecasting.

The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, some research background is introduced. In Section 3, SVMRE approach is presented for Tourism Demand Fore- casting. In Section 4, the tourism demand forecasting problem in Hong Kong SAR is used as a case study and the perfor- mance of the SVMRE is evaluated and compared with other popular techniques for tourism demand forecasting.

Accurate forecasts are crucial because of the unique nature of the tourism industry [19,29,31,34]. Tourism demand fore- casting employs qualitative and quantitative approaches [20,28,48]. Qualitative approaches depend on substantial in- formation and human experiences. Walle [57] criticized these techniques for their lack of generalizability. As a result, tourism researchers do not primarily use qualitative fore- casting methods. Formal scientific techniques that unambigu- ously represent the relationship between demand for travel and its underlying factors are more useful than qualitative fore- casting methods in helping tourism decision makers under- stand the travel demand for a given destination.

Quantitative tourism demand forecasting models adopt mathematical functions to form the relationships of certain phenomena using numeric data [15,38]. These models are used to estimate future values based on past performance. Quanti- tative tourism forecasting approaches include causal relation- ship (regression) and time series techniques [1,26,30,50,58]. Although these approaches have achieved a certain degree of success, one fundamental problem is their inability to predict changes associated with other determining factors.

interpretability would be extracted. To facilitate the applica- bility of SVM rule extraction methods to large-scale problems, Barakat and Diederich [6] proposed a learning-based approach using two different datasets. The present study focuses on fuzzy rule extraction from SVM models for tourism demand analysis. In this paper, we provide innovations on new fuzzy rule extraction models for SVMs in tourism demand fore- casting. These models exhibit better generalization ability than other tourism demand analysis models and have the advantage of comprehensibility, which addresses the drawbacks of existing black-box models.

In this study, five time-series forecasting models and four causal relationship models were tested to forecast tourist ar- rivals from nine major tourist-generating origins for compar- ison. The former models include naive, moving average, single exponential smoothing, double exponential smoothing, and ARIMA models, which are some of the most commonly used models in tourism demand forecasting [48]. The latter models include multiple regression, ANN, SVM, and SVMRE. The operations of the selected models are briefly delineated as follows.

In the present study, a neural network-based model con- tained six input nodes, which were used to predict the tourist arrivals to the output node. Three sigmoid nodes existed in the hidden layer. The output nodes were non-threshold linear units because of the numeric nature of the class. The learning rate was set to 0.01, and the maximum number of iterations was set to 50,000 based on different trials. The momentum applied to

We also applied these models in our experiments because of the good performance of ARIMA models in time-series forecasting models. The ARIMA function in the SPSS trend module was used to forecast the arrival values in the desti- nation. The expert modeler in this module determines the best parameters in ARIMA models ( p,d,q) to obtain the best forecasting results.

In the second stage, the SVM model is adopted to generate new data samples for the training of fuzzy rules. The idea of data regeneration and symbolic rule learning based on trained ANNs was used by Zhou and Jiang [62], who proposed the NeC4.5 algorithm. In their algorithm, a neural network ensemble was initially trained on the original training set. The final output of the NeC4.5 is a C4.5 decision tree trained on the new training set. The comprehensibility of the NeC4.5 is better than that of the ANN ensemble because of the symbolic rules expressed by the decision tree.

The generation of the second subset aims to use the general- ization ability of trained SVMs to obtain predicted values on testing inputs. Then, the first and second subsets can be combined as an expanded training set to construct the fuzzy TeS model so that the prediction ability of the fuzzy TeS model can be improved. To further improve the generalization ability of the fuzzy rules, an additional subset can also be constructed by computing the predicted outputs of the SVM model on some randomly generated or selected input vectors.

numbers). Mkt is the promotional and marketing expenditure by the destination's tourism industry (measured in US$). GDE is the real gross domestic expenditure per capita in origini (measured in US$). AHR is the average hotel room rate in the destination (measured in US$).

Since the objective of forecasting models based on machine learning is to realize prediction abilities on new data, the data set is divided into two subsets. One is for training the fore- casting model and the other is for performance testing. The design of machine learning algorithms needs to improve the approximation precision both in the training set and in the testing set. In the experiments, to test the accuracy of these forecasting models, we divided the datasets into training sets (80%) and testing sets (20%). The training sets consisted of the arrival data from 1967 to 1999. The testing sets consisted of the arrival data from 2000 to 2007. The former was used to build the forecasting models, and the latter was intended to evaluate the accuracy of the various models. The forecasting quality of the nine forecasting approaches was measured in terms of the MAPE and mean absolute scaled error (MASE), which were calculated using the following formula: value implies increased forecasting accuracy. MASE is defined as the error scaled by the MAE from naive forecast method. Thus, the proposed forecasting methods produce smaller errors than that of the naive method when the value of MASE is less than 1. The results indicate that the forecasting output of the SVMRE model is accurate with a relatively small degree of error. Except for the result for Australia, the SVMRE models outperformed the other models in forecasting accuracy.

Once the TeS fuzzy rules were obtained, designing symbolic rules for the tourism demand forecasting problem was easy. The fuzzy membership functions were con- structed for the input variables. Thus, symbolic variables can be defined for these functions. During our imple- mentation, the fuzzy membership functions of each input

If (SP is large) and (FER is large) and (Pop is medium) and (Mkt is small) and (GDE is medium) and (AHR is large), then Arrival = 0.0928* SP + 0.04937* FER + 0.2057* Pop + 0.3252* Mkt + 0.1376* GDE + 0.2706* AHR -0.00365.

If (SP is small) and (FER is very large) and (Pop is small) and (Mkt is small) and (GDE is small) and (AHR is medium), then Arrival = 0.1642* SP + 0.03257* FER + 0.03902* Pop + 0.3137* Mkt + 0.1733* GDE + 0.166* AHR -0.01604.

the experiments, the proposed SVMRE method can achieve good prediction accuracy for almost the entire dataset by extracting a small number of fuzzy symbolic rules from the SVM model. The results indicate that the proposed method for symbolic rule extraction from SVMs not only exhibits a high level of prediction accuracy but also improves the compre- hensibility of the SVMs. In the following section, the mana- gerial implications of the extracted fuzzy rules from SVMs are analyzed and discussed.

industry. Based on the fuzzy rules in forecasting tourist ar- rivals, the main influential factors for the decision variables under different conditions can be determined. Policy makers can receive suggestions to observe or adjust the influential factors to effectively predict or control tourist arrivals. We adopt the fuzzy forecasting model for Canadian arrivals to illustrate the managerial implications of the proposed method. The understandability of the SVMRE model for other coun-

origini, as well as the average hotel room rate in the destina- tion. This step was adopted because the coefficients for the two factors or variables mentioned earlier were 0.1566 and 0.2463, which were significantly higher than those for other factors.

Based on the eight rules for predicting the Canadian ar- rivals, the main factors that influence tourist arrivals under eight different conditions can be determined. Several rules may be activated for a certain condition determined by the input variables. However, only a local rule is usually activated with the maximum firing strength. Thus, this rule can be employed as a symbolic rule for data analysis and policy making. Rule 1 is used for demonstration as follows: extracted from trained SVMs is appropriate and valuable for the tourism industry. Managers and policy makers could also choose the rules that are directly applicable to them because several fuzzy rules are generated from one SVM model. In other words, the failure of one rule does not necessarily lead to poor performance of the other rules, which is more meaningful than either success or failure results of traditional forecasting methods. Given the dynamic global environment at present,

