This paper proposes a novel nonlinear correlation filter for facial landmark localization. Firstly, we prove that SVM as a classifier can also be used for localization. Then, soft constrained Minimum Average Correlation Energy filter (soft constrained MACE) is proposed, which is more resistent to overfittings to training set than other variants of correlation filter. In order to improve the performance for the multi-mode of the targets, locally linear framework is introduced to our model, which results in Fourier Locally Linear Soft Constraint MACE (FL2 SC-MACE). Furthermore, we formulate the fast implementation and show that the time consumption in test process is independent of the number of training samples. The merits of our method include accurate localization performance, desiring generalization capability to the variance of objects, fast testing speed and insensitivity to parameter settings. We conduct the cross-set eye localization experiments on challenging FRGC, FERET and BioID datasets. Our method surpasses the state-of-arts especially in pixelwise accuracy.

The approaches for feature localization can be divided into two categories: 1) shape based methods and 2) statistics based methods. Shape based methods, which utilize special geo- metric characteristics of landmarks like pupils, have demon- strated good performance in the situation where the subject show front face and the feature points are visible [4,5]. However they may fail when the subjects show multiple head poses or the features are distorted by some expressions (e.g. closed eyes). Besides, its also hard to transit the method to negative ones). ($)H is conjugate transposition and ~xi is the inner product value (e.g. 1 for positive samples and 0 for S = X*Xi is the average energy diagonal matrix, where Xi DFT of the training sample re-ordered into a column vector.

conducted on spatial domain rather than Fourier domain. Be- sides, the testing speed is independent of the quantity of training samples. Our method has the merits of superior localization performance, the generalization to the variance of objects, fast testing speed and insensitivity to parameters. Validation experiments for eye localization are conducted on FRGC, BioID and FERET. To verify the generalization per- formance, we demonstrate cross-set results and show that FL2 SC-MACE outperforms the state-of-arts by a considerable margin.

is first projected on a local basis. Then a decision function is obtained by using stochastic gradient descent. Instead of using local coding scheme, Zhang et al. [30] coded samples by the singular vectors of the matrix composed by the vectorized

ratio, we will localize eyes in a rough region that is large enough to cover all kinds of extreme cases. Rationally, the negative samples are randomly selected in the same region. Also, they should keep away from the authentic positions at least about 0.1 times of d. Each image provides one positive feature and 20 negative features for two eyes respectively. All the feature

and fb) for our experiment. FRGC aims to provide sufficient data for researchers who are engaged in face recognition. It comprises six experiments. Among 50000 available images, some are collected in still controlled lighting condition and some are not. In all datasets, there are a number of images when the subjects either close their eyes or wear glasses.

on local appearance, while face alignment algorithms utilize the global face shape to rectify the results, and 2) our approach is compatible with many face alignments [16,17] by locally detecting candidate feature points. As can be seen, our algo- rithm outperforms the commonly used localizers. It means FL2 SC-MACE is still effective in complex situations such as multiple face poses, expressions, disturbance and so on.

This letter proposes a correlation filter referred to as FL2 SC-MACE. Soft constraint is imposed on the cost function of MACE to overcome the overfitting. Fourier local linear model is further introduced so that it could deal with multimode situations. We conducted cross-set eye localization experi- ments to demonstrate the superior performance and efficiency of our method. In future work we will seek an accurate and fast face alignment algorithm based on FL2 SC-MACE.

ing from Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China. From 2007 to 2009, He was a Post doctoral Fellow in Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University. Since 2013, He has been associate pro- fessor in Department of Electronic Engineering at Graduate School at Shenzhen, Tsinghua University.

Chengdu, China, in 1984, and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in signal processing and telecommunications from the University of Rennes 1, Rennes, France, in 1990 and 1994, respectively. Since 1995, he has been joining with Tsinghua university, Bei-jing, China. He became Professor in the Department of Electronic Engineering of Tsinghua University, in 2002. From 2001 to 2003, he served as the Invited Professor with a tri-year contract at the University of Caen, France. Since 2010, he has been Director of the Division of Information Science and Technology in the Graduate School at Shenzhen, Tsinghua University, Shenzhen, China. His research interests include image/video processing, transmission and analysis; biometrics; and their applications to teledetection, medicine, industry, and sports. He has published over 90 papers internationally.

