up-conversion (MC-FRUC) method. Generally, MC-FRUC is composed of two steps: motion estimation (ME) and motion- compensated frame interpolation (MCFI). It creates new frames by first estimating motion trajectories between adjacent frames and then interpolating new frames along the motion trajectories. The quality of the created frames depends on the accuracy of the motion trajectories and the performance of the MCFI algorithm.

In conventional MC-FRUC algorithms, block matching algorithm (BMA) [1] is typically applied to estimate motion vectors and the new frame is interpolated along the motion trajectories. However, there are at least two problems in these methods. The first problem is the holes and collisions caused by occlusions and motion estimation errors. The second is the blocking artifacts in the interpolated frame caused by block- level motion vectors.

To handle collisions, the depth order of objects are determined and used in [9] and [10]. To fill in holes, a median filter is employed in [9], spatial interpolation is used in [10,11], and image inpainting is utilized in [12e14], block- wise directional hole interpolation is proposed in [15,16]. These algorithms cannot handle holes well especially when the hole areas are large.

To reduce blocking artifacts, the overlapped block motion compensation (OBMC) [1,2] was proposed. However, if a block is on the boundary of an object, blocking artifacts could still occur. Another approach for alleviating blocking artifacts is to use pixel-level MV selection (MVS) [15,16]. Besides, Dikbas and Altunbasak [17] proposed the pixel-based bilateral MVF from unidirectional MVs to enhance the motion accu- racy. Although the above methods alleviate somewhat block- ing artifacts, the motion vector candidates for each pixel are still obtained from block motion estimation (BME). Since pixels in the same block may belong to different objects, the MVs obtained from BME are not robust enough.

[18]. Then we upsample the reference frames by a factor of 2 both in horizontal and vertical directions and double the float MVs. Motion postprocessing based on image segmentation is proposed to improve motion spatial consistency. The inter- mediate frame is interpolated based on the post-processed MVFs. At last, remaining holes in the intermediate frame is handled and the intermediate frame is down-sampled to original size.

Occlusion refers to the covered and uncovered areas only existing in one of the reference frames. The occluded regions in the intermediate frame should be generated from either the previous frame or the next frame. So it is important to detect occluded regions.

Step 1: Generating Ff and Fb is the overall block diagram of computing Fb. For each pixel to be warped, if its MV is not reliable and is not marked as occlusion, then drop the pixel and deal with the next pixel. If its MV is reliable or marked as occlusion, then determine whether collisions occur. If pixel P

The interpolated frames by MCFI methods have poor subjective quality mainly due to blocking artifacts and oc- clusions. The algorithm in [17,22] and the proposed method do not suffer from the blocking artifacts. So the proposed method is just compared to the algorithm in [17] and [22] for sub- jective quality.

