Image segmentation is a fundamental pre-processing technique in the field of machine vision. The purpose of image segmenta- tion is to subdivide an image into non-overlapping constituent regions that have the same features and to extract those of interest. Depending on the particular application, different techniques for image segmentation have been used, such as image thresholding, edge detection, region growing, stochastic models, ANN and clustering techniques [1]. Image thresholding is one of the well-known techniques for image segmentation inspired by the theory of the evolution of the universe, namely the Big Bang and Big Crunch Theory. The search mechanism of BBBCO generates random points in the Big Bang phase and shrinks those points to a single representative point via a cen- ter of mass or maximum cost approach in the Big Crunch phase. BBBCO algorithm has several advantages over other metaheuristic algorithms: the inherent numerical simplicity of the algorithm with relatively few control parameters, low com- putation cost, high convergence, and easy implementation [20]. For its simplicity, easy implementation, low time complexity, quick convergence, quality of solution, and robustness, recent- ly BBBCO algorithm has been successfully applied to a variety of optimization problems, such as parameter estimation in structural systems [20], design of steel frames [21], optimized echo state networks [22], and fuzzy controllers design [23,24]. Encouraged by these successful applications, the feasibility of BBBCO algorithm for searching an optimal combination of parameters of the fuzzy membership functions to find optimal threshold value in the image is investigated.

The aim of this paper was focused on the selection of opti- mal image threshold value by using fuzzy 2-partition entropy criterion. In this paper, BBBCO algorithm is used to select an optimal combination of parameters of the membership functions for maximizing the entropy of fuzzy 2-partition. The selected optimal parameters are used to find optimal image threshold value. The proposed thresholding approach is called the BBBCO-based fuzzy 2-partition entropy thresh- olding algorithm. The performance of proposed algorithm is tested on a number of standard test images. For comparison, three different algorithms included Genetic Algorithm (GA)- based, Biogeography-based Optimization (BBO)-based and recursion-based approaches are also implemented.

For partitioning an image into foreground (white) and back- ground (black) regions, two fuzzy membership functions (S- function and Z-function) [25] are used. S-fuzzy membership function is a membership function of the foreground region and Z-fuzzy membership function is a membership function of the background region. Such partitioning is called fuzzy 2-parti- tion of image. S-fuzzy membership function is defined as

The objective is to search an optimal combination of para- meters a, b and c such that H (a, b, c) is maximized. The opti- mal values of a, b and c that maximize H (a, b, c) are used to find optimal threshold for separating the foreground region from the image background [14] i.e.

2.2 GHz machine. The proposed algorithm, BBO-based fuzzy 2-partition entropy thresholding algorithm and GA-based fuzzy 2-partition entropy thresholding algorithm are meta- heuristic algorithms while recursion-based fuzzy 2-partition entropy thresholding algorithm is a recursive algorithm. The key parameters of meta-heuristic algorithms are listed below:

