In this paper I present a game model for the semantical analysis of handshake circuits. I show how the model captures effectively the composition of circuits in an associative way. Then I build a compact-closed category of handshake games and handshake strategies. I then consider the language Tangram and I define a semantics for this language simply by giving a denotation in the model to each handshake component that is used in the compilation of Tangram programs.

Play. As usual in games, player and opponent take turn to play the respective moves. Here though we liberalize things a little as we are working in a concurrent framework, we impose the turn alternation only on the threads of our play (look at it as if we were playing several games in parallel). Formally a play, on a game 7 Let me give one intuition here ... We may receive two inputs in any order and we may output two messages in any order. Also, an input may arrive before we output. The converse does not hold though, we may have to wait for an input before we can output.

instead it could continue to the infinite. The quiescent plays represent the finite points in which the player may stop to wait for the opponent to move. The passive plays represent those points at which the player has no other choice but to wait: they need to be quiescent. The notions of reorder-closedness and receptivity are inherited from the handshake circuits literature, but curiously I discovered then that they had already been introduced to the game semantics community. Ghica and Murawski in their works on concurrent games for model-checking consider O- complete (receptive) and saturated (reorder-closed) strategies (look for example at [11]). Also, Mimram and Melli`es [23] have an ongoing work on games in the more general context of diagrams and there they introduce a constraint called courtesy which seems to correspond to reorder-closedness.

Positionality. We need to focus on a subset of the set of prestrategies for which composition works. It seems natural then to start with deterministic prestrate- gies. However it turns out that determinism is preserved by composition only in presence of another very important property of concurrent strategies, positionality. Positionality is based on the relation of homotopy between plays.

The first two conditions are the usual conditions for determinism. Moreover a deterministic strategy that has engaged in an infinite chatter may not decide to quit anyhow. A malicious opponent could force a deterministic strategy to follow the course that he wants, even to diverge. If the opponent acts in this way there is no means for the deterministic strategy to escape the malicious design. The third condition tells exactly which are the infinite plays that a deterministic strategy must contain.

In general dr (u, v)= n > 0 if and only if u /= v and there are n + 1 (and no less) plays u0, u1,... un such that u = u0, un = v and dr (ui, ui+1)= 1.

The compact-closedness of H allows for the modeling of internal loops, which is already a good thing; however a finer characterization of this category can be given. One can take advantage from models of the Geometry Of Interaction [12][5][9] and make structural comparison. The aim is to provide a general framework which may contain larger classes of asynchronous circuits 14 : in this sense, the categorical way is an especially feasible one. As starting point we may take the family of process algebras developed by Mark Josephs [17][16][18] on one hand of the bridge, and the implementations of the geometry of interaction with circuits [20] on the other.

