The node that serves as an intermediate node is the gateway and the other members are the ordinary nodes. The non-ordinary nodes are considered as the dominant forwarding nodes. The CHs are responsible for holding the routing and the topology informa- tion. The three major types of clustering are active clustering, pas- sive clustering, and on-demand clustering. During active clustering, the mobile nodes elect the CH by periodically exchang- ing the information. The passive clustering suspends the clustering procedure until the data traffic starts and it eliminates the major control overhead of active clustering and it implies the larger setup latency. In the on-demand clustering, the cluster head is elected in an on-demand fashion. The dynamic election of the cluster head is used for minimizing the computation cost and the communication cost.

For minimizing the bandwidth and traffic in mobile nodes, the offloading concept plays a major role. The data offloading is used for allocating the load to several nodes. The mobile data offloading is often called as the Wi-Fi offload and is more similar to that of the 3G/4G offload. The mobile data offload through Wi-Fi (Wireless Fidelity) or the Wi-Fi offload is one of the implementations of using the small cell technologies like Wi-Fi. It offers services to the end users in an effective and economically best way. There are several reasons for using Wi-Fi offload and the following point justifies the reasons: it is useful for growing mobile data demand and the smart devices usage patterns having following characteristics such as short sessions, high throughput and low latency. It enhances the end-user experience by improving the service capacity and capa- bility. It reduces the operating expenditure of the service providers. In the existing works, some of the techniques are developed for data offloading in MANET, but it has some major drawbacks, such as:

This section briefly explains the existing works related to Clus- tering and data offloading in MANET. Kaur et al. [3] suggested a Weightage based Secure Energy Efficient Clustering (WSEEC) algo- rithmic approach for clustering and securing the nodes. When compared to the traditional WCA, the proposed WSEEC provided optimal network lifetime, energy consumption, delay, throughput and packet delivery ratio. Bokhari et al. [4] surveyed various clus- tering algorithms that were applied in MANET. Among several algorithms, the Max-Min D-Cluster was the best clustering algo- rithm with a good controlled message complexity. Wang et al.

Amani et al. [6] proposed an integrated Wi-Fi architecture with SDN. The offloading of Wi-Fi was considered as a vital approach for alleviating the mobile data traffic load. The main purpose of data offloading in MANET was to dynamically redirect the selected traffic towards the lower cost. Eom et al. [11] stud- ied the possibility of applying the machine learning techniques for  addressing  the  adaptive  scheduling  problem  in  mobile [16] explored three mechanisms such as, Wi-Fi offloading, Mobile Smart Loading (MSL) and smart cells. The service provi- ders effectively managed the growing demands in mobile data traffic. Budiyanto et al. [17] suggested a Novel Genetic Zone Routing Protocol (N-GZRP) for optimizing 3G-Wi-Fi offload and load balancing among the nodes. It was based on the combina-

Samani 1, Samani 2 and Samani 3 were utilized to analyze the evapotranspiration of Iran. Valipour [24] introduced a transfer based models for predicting the crop evapotranspiration under different weather conditions. The main intention of this paper was to select the best transfer based model to estimate the crop evapotranspiration in the areas of northern (near the Caspian Sea) and southern (near the Persian Gulf). Here, the measures such as mean, maximum and minimum temperature, wind speed and relative humidity were utilized to analyze the perfor- mance of the model.

After discovering the routes, the optimal path is selected by pre- dicting the faulty nodes. The optimal path is the best path from the source node to the destination node. In a network, there are several paths for forwarding the packets among the nodes. If the faulty nodes are predicted in the network then, the faulty nodes are removed from the network. If the optimal path is not selected then, it degrades the performance of the overall network. In order to detect the best optimal for data transmission, the end-to end delay across the network is computed. If the end-to-end delay is less then, a secure communication is established in the network. The behavior of the nodes is also considered to avoid the misbehaving

The nodes available in the best optimal path are authenticated to avoid the packet drops and malicious attacks in the network. During this stage, the nodes in the network are authenticated as faulty or normal. The node authentication scheme is usually done with an auxiliary key management scheme. In this work, the nodes are authenticated using the MD5 and SHA1 algorithm. This algo- rithm is discussed in our previous work.

