HIV/AIDS emerged in the early years of the 1980 s. Ever since it has affected millions of people. The cause of AIDS is HIV is a lent virus, which slowly attacks the immune system of the human body, affects all systems of the body, and eventually resulting in death [1]. The most advanced stage of HIV is Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS) [2]. Progression from HIV to AIDS [11] and COHORT [12] for behavioral risk assessment in core risk groups. Incidence and Prevalence are the two foremost measures for estimating the risk rate of HIV/AIDS [13]. HIV prevalence is the ratio of the population living with HIV infection, while inci- dence is the yearly or the quarterly number of new infections that arise in a population. The ratio of HIV incidence to the size of the uninfected population is the HIV incidence rate, which is the risk of being infected per unit time. Several approaches are currently used to obtain national statistics on HIV prevalence, including national surveys [11,14], sentinel surveillance data collected from patients under treatment at public health facilities [15], such as pregnant women receiving care at public antenatal clinics; special- ized surveys of selected high-risk subpopulations [11] (such as sex workers); and back-calculation methods that use data from national HIV/AIDS surveillance registries. The most challenging fact about collecting HIV/AIDS is the social stigma associated with HIV.

In this study, we used additional characteristics of the high-risk group (such as information of PWIDs along with the focused demography, sexual behavior, injecting, and biological features) along with existing literature features have been analyzed. Fur- thermore, we adopted more rigorous data processing and feature extraction techniques to predict the HIV risk scores accurately. The proposed model contributes to the existing research area by extending the standard models developed for HIV/AIDS prediction.

Machine Learning classifiers are most widely used for medical applications to predict various diseases [22,23]. This section emphasizes the feasibility of applying predictive techniques of machine learning for HIV/AIDS prediction and survival analysis for several regions such as Ethiopia [25], Nigeria [18,19], Por- tuguese [26], Malaysia [21], South Africa [27], and China [28]. Fur- thermore, this section also identifies the major risk factors that might spread HIV with respect to regions. Mainly this section is classified into two categories: classify the HIV status of individuals and their survival.

In [18], a predictive model based on Multilayer Perceptron (MLP) neural network is proposed. The genetic algorithm was used for classification and achieved an accuracy of 84.24 % [18]. How- ever, in this work, social parameters such as the financial status of individuals and inter-mobility are ignored, which could improve

The target population selected for experimentation purpose is PWIDs from 2012 to 2019, with 57 attributes, including demo- graphic, biological, and behavioral behaviors. Demographic attri- butes include age, education, and marital status. Behavioral attributes are further divided into a few categories, such as inject- ing behavior, which includes syringes/needle usage on daily basis. Sexual behavior attributes include sexual relationships and sexual practices (condom usage). The predictive class has two groups: Negative and Positive. Negative status indicates that a person is not exposed to HIV yet, and positive status indicates that a person is reactive and has HIV.

While analyzing the dataset records, it has been observed that there are missing values for a few features. In the HIV-model data imputation strategy to substitute, missing properties have been utilized. Since most of the attributes have over 50 % values, the modal value approach is used. This strategy allows the substitution of a missing value with a modal value after determining the attri- bute type. For instance, Professional Skill is an attribute consisting of 46,888 records containing 18,861 Yes, 27,827 No values. In this attribute, 200 records were missing, so a modal value of NA is used for substituting these empty cells. As for the numeric data, the sta- tistical measure of mean is used to eliminate missing values.

Automated machine learning-based attribute selection tech- nique Select-K-Best used where features are extracted on encoded and normalized data. Features selected from normalized data are more valuable along the expert opinion are higher in priority. Another feature selection technique, Extra Tree Classifier, is also used for attribute selection.

Several classification methods are test and train to predict HIV/ AIDS status. Selected attributes received from the previous step set as input to the classification models. The classifier will return the HIV status of each individual. Classifiers utilized for this study are Random Forest (RF), PART Rule induction, and SVM.

With the consent of NZ Trust [24], the dataset is used to conduct research for the prediction of HIV\AIDS. The data collection mech- anism used in NZ is Management Information System (MIS), which is used by 30 + CoPCs sites across Pakistan. These sites have their outreach worker who accessed PWID and provides services for pre- vention and treatment. Information is recorded on manual forms and later enter into MIS by Data Entry Operators via customized devices, these devices stores data in a real-time system.

