Abstract Human age estimation from facial images has a wide range of real-world applications in human computer interaction (HCI). In this paper, we use the bio-inspired features (BIF) to analyze different facial parts: (a) eye wrinkles, (b) whole internal face (without forehead area) and (c) whole face (with forehead area) using different feature shape points. The analysis shows that eye wrinkles which cover 30% of the facial area contain the most important aging features compared to internal face and whole face. Furthermore, more extensive experiments are made on FG-NET database by increasing the number of missing pictures in older age groups using MORPH database to enhance the results.

gender or expression easily. But in the case of estimating human ages, they may fail to guess intelligently the age due the wide de- gree of variation in both shape and texture. Facial appearances differ on individual bones and are affected by deformation changes in expression, speaking and age progression, as well as lighting variations. Due to its numerous challenges, there has been relatively little work, to date, concerning automatic age estimation, despite having potential useful applications like an electronic consumer relationship management and demo- graphic data collection. In this paper, age estimation frame- work is performed based on the biologically-inspired features (BIF) that showed promising results for age estimation prob- lem [1,2] as well as gender recognition [3] problem.

The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2; we present the related work. Section 3 gives an overview of bio-inspired model. Section 4 explains the proposed age estimation frame- work. Section 5 describes our results on the publicly available FG-NET [4]. Section 6 shows result of increasing older age groups in FG-NET aging database using MORPH [5] dataset. Finally, Section 7 draws some conclusions and discusses our future work.

In the second category of works, age estimation is viewed as a regression problem where facial features are extracted by the active appearance models (AAMs) [14] that incorporate shape and appearance information together. An input face image is then represented by a set of fitted model parameters. The regression coefficients are estimated from training data with an assumption of the regression function such as a quadratic model (QM) [9]. Yanet al. [12,13] also dealt with age uncer- tainty by formulating a semi-definite programming problem the area covering a fixed number of points generated from the ASM stage (several numbers of points were tested experimen- tally). Then, in the age estimation process, the cropped images undergo filtering by a family of Gabor functions at different orientations and scales using S1 block. The filtered outputs un- dergo a feature dimensionality reduction step by keeping the maximum (MAX) and standard deviations (STD) of the Gabor filtered outputs using c1 block. Finally, both classifica- tion-based and regression-based models were used in the train- ing phase (Support Vector Machine SVM and Support Vector Regression SVR in this case) to produce the final age model estimator.

landmark points for hundreds of images [18] in such a way that each landmark represents a distinguishable point presented on every example image. We aim at analyzing eye wrinkles using 20 points, internal face area using 58 points and whole face using 75 points which were provided by [18,19], respectively. The purpose of this analysis is to determine the locations of the most important aging features using eye wrinkles or inter- nal face only rather than using the whole face area. Finally, we build three separate statistical shape models (1) 75 points shape model; (2) 20 points shape model; and (3) 58 points shape model by ASM based on the annotated images. Where, the used points that describe each facial part are uncorrelated to each other.

Having built the shape models, points on the incoming face image are fitted. First, we detect the whole face, eye wrinkles and internal face in the input image using 75, 20 and 58 points shape models, respectively. Second, we initialize the shape points and align images to obtain automatically the detected shape features. Finally the input image is cropped to the area covered by the ASM fitted landmark points. The difference 3.71 and 3.69, respectively, where they are close to the MAE of whole face 3.17. So, if 75 points cover the whole face with 100% coverage, internal face (58 points) covers 70% of the face and eye wrinkles (20 points) covers 30% of the face. It is clear that, eye wrinkles contain the most important aging features compared to internal face and whole as shown also from the values of MAEs.

Finally, In the FG-NET database, our facial analysis has MAE of 3.17, 3.71 and 3.69 years for whole face, eye wrinkles and internal face respectively. These average errors are sub- stantially smaller than the RUN method [13] (5.78 years), BM [12] (5.33 years), LARR [10] (5.07 years), and even signif- icantly lower than the very recent RPK [1] (4.95 years) and BIF away the age almost as accurately as studying wrinkles in the whole face, which reflects positively on reducing the processing time. In addition, we enhanced the performance of our age estimator by increasing the number of missing images in FG- NET dataset age groups. From the extensive experiments, it is shown that the MAE of FG-NET + MORPH datasets was decreased by 20% compared to MAE of FG-NET only. As future work is concerned, we aim at exploring other more powerful modeling techniques that can statistically model the relation between numbers of variables such as Bayesians networks.

