We investigate the question of how much hybrid machinery can be added to the interval neighbourhood logic PNL and its metric extension MPNL without losing the decidability of their satisfiability problem in N. In particular, we consider the natural hybrid extension of MPNL obtained by adding binders on integer variables ranging over lengths of intervals, thus enabling storage of the length of the current interval and further references to it. We show that even a very weak natural fragment of such extensions becomes undecidable, which is somewhat surprising, being in contrast with the decidability of MPNL, which can be seen as a hybrid language with length constraints only involving constants over interval lengths. These results show that MPNL itself is, in this sense, a maximal decidable (weakly) hybrid extension of PNL.

Interval temporal logics are based on temporal structures over (usually) linearly ordered domains, where time intervals, rather than time instants, are the primitive ontological entities. The problem of representing and reasoning about time intervals arises naturally in various other fields of computer science, artificial intelligence, and temporal databases, such as theories of action and change, natural language processing, and constraint satisfaction problems. In particular, temporal logics with interval-based semantics have been proposed as a useful formalism for the specification and verification of hardware [22] and of real-time systems [12].

regards to decidability. However, it is very easy to see that adding binders over state variables immediately leads to undecidability. On the other hand, in the framework of Metric PNL it is quite natural to use binders not on state variables ranging over intervals, but on integer variables ranging over lengths of intervals, thus enabling storage of the length of the current interval and further references to it.

The main part of this paper is devoted to analyze extensions of PNL and MPNL with interval length variables and binders with respect to decidability. Eventually, we show that even very weak extensions become undecidable, which in some cases was not obvious at all, and even somewhat surprising, being in sharp contrast with the decidability of MPNL, which can be seen as a hybrid language only involving nominals over interval lengths. These results show that MPNL itself is, in this sense, a maximal decidable (weakly) hybrid extension of PNL. Finally, we also note the contrast between the strongly prevailing undecidability of hybrid interval logics with truly interval-based semantics, demonstrated here, and the much more robust decidability of even very expressive hybrid extensions of interval logics with essentially point-based semantics, incl. the hybrid DC mentioned above.

Here is a sketch of the encoding. First, we set our framework by forcing the existence of a unique finite chain of u-intervals on the linear ordering (u-chain, for short). The u-intervals are used as cells to arrange the tiling. Next, we define a chain of Id-intervals (Id-chain, for short), each of them representing a row of the rectangle; the additional propositional letters IdStart and IdStop are used to encode, chain of Id-intervals which must terminate, hence it must end with the only IdStop- interval, itself ending with the only Stop-interval. Furthermore, the first possible Id-interval starts with the first possible tile-interval, which is the only Start-interval. Thus, no other Id-intervals exist in M , but those of the type [b0, bh]. The rest of

In this paper we have demonstrated that extending (M)PNL with variables and binders over interval lengths is natural, but generally leads to undecidability even in very restricted fragments. While these results are somewhat disappointing, they show that strong restrictions must be imposed on the application of length binders in order to retain the decidability of the non-hybrid fragment. The restrictions pro- posed here render the resulting languages no more expressive than their non-hybrid fragments, so the question whether an essential gain of expressiveness can be ob- tained by adding some hybrid machinery to interval logic and retaining decidability remains open.

