delay seed germination and suppress its rate. Furthermore, water shortage can induce significant alterations in seedling physiology and biochemistry [5]. Nevertheless, certain plants exhibit a set of physiological adaptations that enable them to withstand water stress. Among these adaptive strategies, enhanced activity of antioxidant enzymes may induce plant tolerance by scavenging reactive oxygen species (ROS) [6]. Overproduction of ROS causes the damage of essential biomolecules present in cell compartments and/ or membranes [7]. Therefore, the status of cellular membranes also indicates the degree of plant acclimation to stress. The impact of water stress on antioxidant defense system and membrane features in wheat and other plants was intensively studied [8,9].

Screening drought-resistant plant genotypes is thus a funda- mental goal obviously targeted in arid and semi-arid regions. Nonetheless, drought cannot be easily controlled in the field because of rainfall that can impede water deficit [10]. Therefore, assessing plant response to drought at early seedling stage was commonly achieved using chemical desiccators such as polyethy- lene glycol (PEG). It was inferred that PEG can be employed to shift the water potential of nutrient media inducing plant-water deficit

Means of ten determinations for germination parameters and three for the other biochemical investigations were computed along with standard deviation. Obtained data were subjected to one way completely randomized ANOVA (analysis of variance) test at 5% probability level using CoHort/CoStat software. Accord- ing to the values of LSD (least significance difference), small let- ters were denoted with different letters referring to significant variation. For each criterion, the mean value was calculated for all genotypes under control as well as moderate and severe drought conditions. Thereafter, the individual % of difference between the values at each drought level and that at control was calculated so that the total % of difference between drought in general and control could be recorded as the average of the two individual percentages.

Water deficit is one of the most serious constraints to agricul- tural production retarding plant growth especially at its juvenile stage. Data recorded in the current study revealed that PEG- induced drought could negatively affect seedling morphological features of the different assessed wheat genotypes as pointed out by plumule and radicle length, seedling fresh mass and water con- tent, as well as the number of adventitious roots. Only in four genotypes, Sids 12, Sids 13, Sakha 94 and Giza 186, mild stress could increase the number of adventitious roots compared with their unstressed comparatives. At the same time, drought could induce seedling dry mass in all the tested genotypes. For all the scrutinized parameters, severe drought possessed more powerful

Water is a very critical factor during seed germination and early seedling differentiation. Germination begins with water absorption to allow seed coat rupture followed by emergence of radicle and plumule due to consumption of hydrolyzed stored food by the embryo. Therefore, it is logical that water shortage could suppress seed germination with retarded growth rate of the developed seed- ling. Supporting this assumption, plumule and radicle length in addition to seedling fresh mass and water content of the different wheat genotypes considered herein were all reduced when apply- ing PEG at various levels. On the contrary, the number of adventi- tious roots was found to upgrade in some genotypes perhaps as a trial to absorb more water from the surrounding medium. In accor- dance with this belief, the results obtained by Bassirou et al. [26] emphasized that the development of more adventitious roots is an adaptive mechanism exhibited by tolerant plant cultivars to acclimate water deficit circumstances.

Furthermore, the dry mass of water-unsatisfied wheat seedlings increased compared with their water-unstressed relatives probably because of the larger amount of unutilized stored food in the stressed seedlings. Less utilized nutrients in stressed seedling may accumulate due to little water available for its hydrolysis and/or little food consumption by the weakly- developed radicle and plumule. Matching our finding, a recent study by Mickky [14] recorded an increment in the dry mass of Vicia faba seedlings suffering from moderate water stress. Simi- larly, Guo et al. [27] recorded an increase in the dry mass of Lycium ruthenicum seedlings when droughted considering the boost in dry matter allocation as a morphological adaptation to water insufficiency.

In the current investigation, application of water stress inhib- ited CAT activity in all the studied genotypes except Masr 1 and Sids 13. GR was also inhibited in all the surveyed genotypes except in moderately-droughted Gimmaza 9 and 11 as well as stressed Sids 13, Sakha 94 and Giza 186. Reduction in CAT and GR activity in water-unsatisfied wheat was previously noted [28]. Suppressed activity of CAT and GR under stress may result from the reverse effect of stress on protein biosynthesis. Moreover, POX activity was induced by stress in Masr 1 and 2, Gimmaza 9 and Sids 13, while APX was activated in Masr1 and 2, Gimmaza 9, Shandawel 1 and Giza 186; otherwise these two enzymes were inhibited. Enhanced activity of POX and APX was reported in wheat seedlings as a stress acclimation strategy [40]. Similarly, the activity of PPO generally increased in stressed wheat genotypes except in Gim- maza 9, Sids 12, Sakha 93, Sakha 94 and Giza 186. PPO utilizes O2 to oxidize phenolics to their corresponding quinones, so higher

It would be of great prominence to numerically summarize the overall behavior of the surveyed wheat genotypes on the basis of the pooled data. For that, stress impact coefficient (SIF) was formu- lated as unitless virtual values that link the different criteria of each estimated trait. Moreover, stress impact index (SII) was intro- duced as a percent to indicate the effect of stress on the estimated parameters whether as positive effect causing an enhancement in the investigated parameter (positive SII values) or negative effect causing a general impairment in the estimated parameter (nega- tive SII values).

Chemical desiccation induced by PEG could suppress germina- tion and seedling growth of different wheat genotypes. Regardless of the genotype, stress impact on the estimated morphological traits of wheat seedlings was more vigorous than that on their membrane features and antioxidant enzymes. However, the ability to cope with drought showed significant variation among the con- sidered varieties. Generally, Sids 13 seemed to be the most tolerant variety followed by Masr 1, Masr 2, Gimmaza 9, Gimmaza 11, Sids 12, Sakha 93, Sakha 94, and Giza 186 and finally came Shandawel 1 with the maximum sensitivity.

