Patients with either diabetes or hypercholesterolemia develop atherosclerosis and impair healing of bone. In the present work we illustrated their role in limb ischemia during bone cells differentiation of Wistar rat fetuses. Pregnant Wistar rats (n = 20 each) were arranged in three groups: control, diabetic or hypercholesterolemic. Diabetes was induced at the fifth day of gestation using streptozotocin, and hypercholesterolemia was carried by feeding virgin rats a diet containing 3% cholesterol for 6 wks prior to the onset of conception. At 13, 15, 17, and 19 d prenatal, pregnant rats were sacrificed, dissected, and fetuses were removed. Hind limbs were separated and subjected to histological and transmission electron microscopic examination, ossification, total calcium content of fetuses, iso- enzymes alkaline and acid phosphatase and lactic dehydrogenase electrophoresis and DNA damage. Fetuses of diabetic or hypercholesterolemic mothers exhibited delayed

A very few number of studies have reported that type 1 diabetes altered bone remodeling by reducing the formation of new bone, leading to osteopenia in humans and animals [8,9]. Type 1 diabetes was found to cause a significant delay in fracture healing [10](Lu et al., 2003) through a reduction of bone mineral density as assessed in the lumbar spine and proximal femur [11] and a decrease of bone formation compared with normal individuals [8].

Experimental studies on diabetic mice and rats revealed that the disease was concerned with reduction of bone for- mation, expression of osteocalcin, collagen types and decrease in bone healing [10], as well as increasing apoptosis of bone- lining cells [11]. Kayal et al. [12] observed a decrease of carti- lage tissue and new bone area post 16 days of onset of diabetes in CD-1 mice. Won et al. [13] examined the inter-vertebral disk of OLETF (diabetic) rats at 6 and 12 months of age and detected increased incidence of apoptotic index of notochordal cells, which led to early intervertebral disc degeneration.

Atherosclerosis, like osteoporosis, is closely associated with each other [1]. The enhanced risk of bone fracture was the end result of accumulated damage [14]. Osteoclast for- mation and function were influenced by numerous inflam- matory factors mediated in atherogenesis such as tumor necrosis factor -a which activated osteoclasts formation [15]. In experimental rats, Funaba et al. [16] reported a reduction of bone formation in 10-week-old hypercholesterolemic rats, suggesting inhibiting factor(s) for bone growth.

Experimental diabetes mellitus was induced by a single intraperitoneal injection of streptozotocin (60 mg/kg) in the citrate buffer (pH 4.5) on the fifth day of gestation [17]. Control animals received physiologic saline as a vehicle. Hyperglyce- mia was verified by measuring the blood glucose at approxi- mately 350 mg/dL.

This study and all procedures were approved by the Animal Care and Bioethics of the Egyptian Committee, and the animal work was done at Faculty of Science, Mansoura University. Eighty fertile male and virgin female rats of Wistar strain (Rattus norvegicus) (at a ratio of 1 male to 3 females) weighing approximately 125 g body weight, were obtained from Hellwan Breeding Farm, Ministry of Health, Egypt and used for experi- mentation. They were housed in cages with good ventilation on a 12-h light and dark cycle. Females were mated (1 male/3 females) overnight, and zero dates of gestation were deter- mined the next morning by the presence of sperm in the vaginal smear. The pregnant rats were arranged into three plus 20 mL 2% sucrose were added and thirty mL of the mixture per gel slot was applied for each sample in enzyme electro- phoresis. Polyacrylamide gel electrophoretic profiles of LDH isoenzymes were utilized and software analysis of gel scans done. Electrophoresis was essentially carried out according to Lehnert and Berlet [20]. LDH enzyme bands were stained and visualized in the presence of L-lactate as the substrate ac- cording to the procedure of Shaw and Prasad [21]. Then, the stained gels were fixed in 7% acetic acid (v/v) and documented via scanning on HP Deskjet F370 All-in-One computer as- sembly. Limb ALP is separated by electrophoresis through alkaline buffered (pH 9.1) according to [22]. Electrophoresis was performed at a constant current at 2.5 mA per gel column

Specimens of both control and experimental diseased groups were homogenized in chilled homogenizer buffer (pH 7.5) containing 75 mM NaCl and 24 mM Na2EDTA (pH 13), to obtain a 10% tissue solution. Six mL of the homogenate was sus- pended on 0.5% low melting agarose and sandwiched between a layer of 0.6% normal-melting agarose and a top layer of 0.5% agarose on fully frosted slides. The slides were kept on ice during the polymerization of each gel layer. After solidifica- tion, the slides were immersed in a lysis solution (1% sodium slides were neutralized with Tris HCL buffer, pH 7.5, and stained with 20 mg/mL ethidium bromide. Each slide was analysed using a Leitz Orthoplan (Wetzlar, Germany) epi- fluorescence microscope. One hundred cells were analysed on each slide using the Comet assay II automatic digital analysis system [25].

Three bands of alkaline phosphatase isoenzymes are expressed in control bone specimens of 15,17 and 19 d-old fetuses. The rate of diffusion was markedly increased in fetuses of diabetic and hypercholesterolemic mothers, especially at 17 d-old. Isoenzyme fraction III appeared missing in 19 d-old diabetic and hypercholesterolemic fetuses. On the other hand, the intensity of acid phosphatase isoenzymes was markedly reduced. Separation of the isoenzyme and formation of the double band was cholesterol was synthesized by the liver and secreted as circulating lipoproteins and plays a role in osteoblast differ- entiation. Also, bone growth defects may be attributed to the pathogenesis of non-alcoholic steatohepatits induced by hy- percholesterolemia [7] as mentioned by Nakano et al. [40]. The liver represents the main target of conversion of cholecalcif- erol (vitamin D3) to 25-hydroxyvitamin D3 as well as 25- hydroxyvitamin D2 [41] which regulating the concentration of calcium and phosphate in the bloodstream and promoting remodeling of bone [42]. Liver damage may disrupt bone dif- ferention through reducing vitamin D synthesis.

From our findings, diabetes or hypercholesterolemia exhibited missing expression of lactic dehydrogenase isoen- zyme III in 15 d-old embryos. However, double bands of isoenzyme IV were clearly detected in hypercholesteromic- groups as well as increased intensities of the expression of fraction V. These alterations of the isoenzymes reflect alter- ations of their metabolic activities and may share in bone cell's damage. Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) has been used [43]. It is more active in osteocytes [44]. Also dehydrogenases except (glutamic dehydrogenase) were detected in osteocytes, osteoblasts and osteoclasts in mandible of 5 day old rat. The bone cells possess fully functional citric acid cycles, pentose cycles, and the capacity to metabolize fatty acids and carbo- hydrates [45]. Experimental diabetes was found to be associ- ated with alterations of oxidative and glycolytic enzymes, including lactic dehydrogenase [46].

Also, there was a marked alterations of bone alkaline and acid phosphatase isoenzymes. The isoenzyme fraction III of alkaline phosphase showed increased diffusion rates and missing in 19 day-old fetuses. Acid phosphatase isoenzymes showed marked reduction of their intensities and increase diffusion rate. Bone-alkaline phosphatase is a useful param- eter for monitoring changes in bone formation [47]. The dis- tribution of acid and alkaline phosphatase activity were identified in osteoclasts and adjacent osteocytes extracellu-

Enkhmaa B, Shiwaku K, Anuurad E, Nogi A, Kitajima K, Yamasaki M, et al. Prevalence of the metabolic syndrome using the third report of the national cholesterol educational program expert panel on detection, evaluation, and treatment of high blood cholesterol in adults (ATP III) and the modified ATP III definitions for Japanese and Mongolians. Clin Chim Acta 2005;352:105e13.

Tolosa MJ, Chuguransky SR, Sedlinsky C, Schurman L, McCarthy AD, Molinuevo MS, et al. Insulin-deficient diabetes-induced bone microarchitecture alterations are associated with a decrease in the osteogenic potential of bone marrow progenitor cells: preventive effects of metformin. Dib Res Clin Prac 2013:177e86.

