It is very important to note that in WSN both the network structure and the manner of communication between the nodes decide the energy expenditure. On the plain network, hierar- chical structures are generally preferred due to their reliability and improved energy conservation. Clustering is the promi- nent hierarchical architecture. Cluster formation is one of the early proposed methods for energy efficient operation in WSNs [12].

The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 deals with related works. Section 3 is reserved firstly to recall the interest of SGA algorithm in terms of joint minimization of mission and communication costs, secondly to explain and give more details concerning different phases of IMOWCA algorithm, and the final part of this section takes place to show the way to achieve the optimal position of BS using our algorithm BGA, to balance the consumed energy in formed clusters. The numerical result, the possible comparisons, the various analyses and the performances of proposed algorithms are provided in Section 4 which leads to the conclusion and per- spectives of our work.

In 2014, one of the most important surveys on WSN algo- rithms has been presented in [16] where the authors describe some important clustering approaches in WSNs. Some other hierarchical clustering protocols including LEACH, HEED, TEEN, APTEEN, and EECS are discussed in [24]. In [25] LEACH and its recent advances are studied. A neural network based clustering approaches are presented in [26] which focuses on five neural network based algorithms: ART, ART1, FUZZY ART, IVEBF, and EBCS. In [18], the transmission load assignment in WSNs is modeled as a game. This work focuses on a cluster-based and surveillance-oriented sensor network.

children are moved to a new population P' and replaced in whole or in part by the children of previous generations. The new population of individuals takes over from one generation to the next until reaching the stopping criterion. We note that after performing several simulations, we have chosen the value e = 0.0001 as stop criterion relatively to the evaluation step.

The performance of the BGA algorithm against SAA is jus- tified by the advanced techniques of genetic algorithms that have passed from the stage of basic research to applied research. Indeed, in terms of convergence, SAA is negatively influenced by the choice of the initial solution which is one of the most important criteria for SAA. So, to achieve the final solution, SAA searches only in the vicinity of the initial solu- tion. By cons, after coding the chromosomes, the BGA algo- rithm (Algorithm 2) can start with any initial population, and then performs a global search to reach the best solution. Thus, BGA evolves this population by selecting the best indi- viduals. Then, thanks to the operation of croissant, it evolves also these individuals with possible mutations.

On the one hand, the IMOWCA performance is justified by the fact of introducing the different metrics DDi, DCi and DMi (for each sensor i) in the function to be optimized. Indeed, the IMOWCA algorithm benefited greatly from the importance of multi-objective optimization used. This tech- nique allows IMOWCA to consider the different critical parameters in the network studied namely, the mission cost, the communication cost and also the distance between sensors and BS. On the other hand, thanks to the clustering performed by IMOWCA, only the best performing sensors in terms of power are selected to communicate with BS, which is advanta- geous as regards energy consumption in WSN.

