The design and evaluation of summarizing systems have to be related to the three classes of context factor namely input factors, purpose factors and output factors [9]. Most of the summarization systems available are designed for generic. There exist various specialized versions of summarization for the disabled, such as blind [14] deaf [15] and so on. The tar- geted audience and the purpose mainly determine the system design and evaluation [16]. Our targeted audiences are learners with reading difficulties those capable of decoding but find hard in understanding the content better. Many of these stu- dents have difficulty in finding main ideas and important sup- porting details. Failure to employ appropriate learning strategies is often a critical component of learning disabilities [17]. The purpose of assistive summary is to aid the reading dif- ficulties in improving text readability which in turn under- standing the content better. The major reason for difficulty in understanding the text for the target audience is due to working  memory  span.  Considering  the  features  like unfamiliar vocabulary [18], trigger words [11], polysyllabic words [19] and noun entity [20] for reducing the working mem- ory difficulty. Our approach delves into extracting sentences that are important as well as readable to the target audience. Our objective is to extract summary that contains important, readable sentences. To solve this problem, we proposed a set of learner dependent readability related features in combina- tion with set of existing features for extracting important sentences. Using Naive Bayes classifier the sentences are classified into summary or not a summary and the sentences are extracted based on the weighted score of individual fea- tures according to rate. We performed both type of evaluation to evaluate the performance of the summary and in particular extrinsic evaluation, the task of comprehension for reading difficulties.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we discuss the related works in text summarization. Section 3 describes proposed methodology for summary extraction. In Section 4, the results from the proposed approach are analyzed using both intrinsic and extrinsic evaluation.

Various researches on text summarization methods have been proposed and evaluated. There are two main approaches in the task of summarization namely extraction and abstraction [3]. Extraction involves concatenating extracts taken from the corpus into a summary, whereas abstraction involves generat- ing novel sentences from information extracted from the corpus.

Using trainable summarizer, the existing features such as sen- tence position, keywords, title similarity and centrality along with proposed features such as sentence length, trigger words, polysyllabic words and noun occurrences are extracted. The sentence score is calculated using the weighted combination of features, where the weights are calculated using genetic algorithm. The main objective of this work is to summarize the given text. Each sentence is represented by a set of prede-

F1-sentence position. Sentence position is an important factor to decide sentence importance in the document [25,26]. The significance of position of sentence plays a vital role in various domains accordingly. The important sentences to be included in the summary are usually located in a particular po- sition. In the case of educational text, boundaries carry impor- tant information.

In order to show that these features are contributing and are independent of each other. The correlation of individual feature in predicting the summary sentences is analyzed. In readability research, analysis focuses much on correlation. A correlation coefficient (r=) is a descriptive statistics that

F9-noun occurrences. The number of nouns introduced in a text, relates to the working memory burden on their tar- geted readers such as dyslexic [20]. The noun counts in individ- ual sentences also decide its easiness or difficult nature. Usually the sentence that contains more proper nouns is an important one and it is most probably included in the sum- mary. But for the readers with difficulty, more nouns create confusion.

The sentence score can be calculated by linear weighted com- bination of all features. In this work, Features are extracted from the text. The summary generation can be seen as a two-class classification problem using Naive Bayes classifier [21], where a sentence is labeled as summary if it belongs to the extractive reference summary or as not a summary otherwise.

The reference summaries of this text are created manually by three independent human annotators. One of them rank the sentences based on its importance and another rank the sentences based on its difficulty and the third scores whether it is easy, hard or average. The relative score is considered for classifying the reference summary. The significance of each sentences to be included in summary are ranked by the anno- tators. The sentences that score maximum rank are included in summary according to the.

The summary generated by proposed method is mostly the preference for both reading difficulties and non-difficult read- ers. However few of them also opted for lead due to its cohe- sive nature and random due to confusion in selecting the choice. Another type of extrinsic evaluation for summarization is the reading comprehension task [45,35]. In such an evalua- tion, a user is given a either full source or full text supple- mented with summary, along with multiple-choice questions relating to the full source information. A system can then cal- culate how well they perform on the test given the condition. This evaluation framework relies on the idea that truly infor- mative summaries should be able to act as assistive summary to the full source. We are considering this summary as assistive and not the replacement of the original text.

The direct way to measure comprehension of information from a text is through objective comprehension questions such as multiple choices or yes/no used in physiological studies of comprehension. Each text is evaluated using six questions, four of them are factual questions and two of them are inferential questions. The effects of assistive summary on reading difficulties in answering comprehension questions are measured. The learner (Reading Difficult and Non-Difficult Learner) response on with and without assistive summary (lead and proposed) are analyzed. The major questions under- lined are of learner F(1, 14) = 1.52, P = .004. This means summary have significant effect on reading difficulties than non-reading difficulties. It is clear that the proposed summary has signifi- cant effect on reading difficulties than existing methods due to the consideration of readability related features. When the text is hard, summary extracted from the text is also hard. So, the comprehension needs to improve through various sim- plification strategies.

