The objective of this paper was to introduce a new technique that can support decision makers in the call centers industry to evaluate, and analyze the performance of call centers. The technique pre- sented is derived from the research done on measuring the success or failure of information systems. Two models are mainly adopted namely: the Delone and Mclean model first introduced in 1992 and the Design Reality Gap model introduced by Heeks in 2002. Two indices are defined to calculate the performance of the call center; the success index and the Gap Index. An evaluation tool has been developed to allow call centers managers to evaluate the performance of their call centers in a sys- tematic analytical approach; the tool was applied on 4 call centers from different areas, simple applications such as food ordering, marketing, and sales, technical support systems, to more real time services such as the example of emergency control systems. Results showed the importance of using information systems models to evaluate complex systems as call centers. The models used allow identifying the dimensions for the call centers that are facing challenges, together with an

With the emergence of Information and Communication tech- nologies, and the relatively cheap cost of calls (voice and data), the use of call centers to provide new services to citizens has grown extensively [1]. Evolution in call centers technologies, systems and infrastructures allowed the transformation of industries and services in big enterprises and organizations, customer support services, marketing services and after sales support are examples of such transformations. Moreover, the use of call centers in real time critical services is growing.

In Egypt, call centers have been used to improve the service of emergency control systems. Call centers have been used for call taking, dispatching and tracking of emergency calls [2]. The system monitors the overall performance and response time to guarantee the quality of service provided to the citi- zens. The system has successfully proved the improvement in the services provided by the ambulance system during the cir- cumstances that Egypt has faced since the 25th of January rev- olution. An example of using specialized call centers in other countries is India, where first line health consultations have been provided by a specialized call center in order to reduce the referral of cases to primary care health units [3]. Outsourc- ing critical services to specialized call centers will definitely help in improving the quality of services provided by the gov- ernment, companies and organizations to the targeted customers.

Queuing theory approach is usually associated with assumptions in order to ease the modeling and the analytical complexity. These techniques do not reflect the reality due to the complexity of the system and the assumptions and the sim- plifications in the models proposed. The models are used to calculate the blocking rate, the average waiting time for the calls, the number of customer retrials [5]. A survey of the recent literature on call center operation management is pro- vided [6]. Special focus has been given to new management challenges that have been caused by emerging technologies, to behavioral issues associated with both call center agents and customers, and to the interface between call center opera- tions and sales and marketing.

The objective of this paper was to introduce a new tech- nique that can support decision makers in the call centers industry to evaluate, and analyze the performance of call cen- ters. The technique presented in this work is derived from the research done on measuring the success or failure of informa- tion systems. Two models are mainly adopted to measure the performance of success and failures of information systems namely: the Delone and Mclean model first introduced in 1992 [9] and the Design Reality Gap model introduced by Heeks in 2002, [10]. Applying the models to include Internet

This research has adopted the Delone and Mclean model to analyze the performance of the call centers [14]. A call center performance index reflecting the success index of the call center was proposed to measure the overall performance of the call center. A total of 43 indicators were proposed and mapped to the six dimensions of the Delone and Mclean model. The results obtained demonstrate that using multi-dimensional modeling for call centers gives the possibility of analyzing indi- vidual dimensions and identifying the impact of each dimen- sion on the overall performance [14]. Moreover, weighted dimensions indicators would reflect the priorities given by the top management for the calculation of the performance index.

The rest of the paper is described as follows: Section 2 describes the design-reality gap model as applied to call cen- ters, together with the mapping of the call centers indicators to the design-reality gap model dimensions. Section 3 presents the Call Center Gap Index. Section 4 presents the results of the proposed methodology, and the effect of proposed indicators on the performance assessment of the call centers under study. Finally, Section 5 concludes the paper and provides insights for future work.

proposed indicators were collected based on the type of indica- tor whether hard or soft indicator. Data for hard indicators (example: blockage rate) are collected using call centers man- agement systems, these systems generate reports that actually include a lot of data, the main challenge resides in the analysis of these reports and to make it easy for decision makers to identify whether a problem exists, and then to identify the source of the problem. The four call centers vary in their nature and location representing two different food sector, marketing, and IT support and a capital city and small city call location.

These methods are resource intensive, especially for test calling, silent monitoring and follow-up outbound calls where someone should actually do the monitoring of the outbound call. Moreover, the results of these methods are subjective and dependent on the interpretation of the person in charge of the monitoring and measurement process. With the evolu- tion of call centers and Interactive Voice Response (IVR) systems, automated feedback and surveys are done automati- cally by the system upon approval of the customer. Survey scripts (i.e. the questions asked to customers) can be created online over the Internet or through the IVR system. This means that customer satisfaction can be measured almost immediately. The results of these surveys are used for the soft indicators.

In recent years, Egypt has become one of the most prominent outsourcing countries, offering a large variety of products meeting the internal and external needs of customers. Existing call centers in Egypt vary in size, the number of clients served, the priority of services provided (real time service vs. nonreal time service, example emergency call centers) and the location of the call center (capital city, big cities, small cities). Four call centers in Egypt were studied during the work, data for the indices proposed are calculated, for example for dimension D1, GI for D1 is 18.67%, the overall Gap Index for call center 1 is 84.89%, while the success index for the same call center is 15.11%. it is clear from the data collected to this call center that the performance of the call center for all the dimensions of Heeks is poor, this means that the design of this call center from a technology and skills needed to operate the call center needs a serious revision.

As future work, a study for specific indicators related to specific verticals may enhance the analysis of the call centers specialized in specific field, for example includes financial sec- tors, or health sectors. This may result in adding a specific dimension that is a vertical specific to include indicators related to the vertical. Moreover, analyzing the association of different weights for the model is based on numerical anal- ysis, more research should be done in this area in order to iden- tify the proper weights for each dimension, and whether there is any correlation between these weights and the type of the product or service provided by the call center. Also, there is a need to develop an automated assessment tool that can be used by decision makers to evaluate and benchmark the call centers. One important characteristic of this tool is that it could be integrated to the existing call center monitoring sys- tems, allowing seamless communication and exchange of data between the tool developed (similar to CCPET) and the mon- itoring system in place.

