Wireless sensor networks (WSNs) are serene of many small sensor nodes with limited battery power. Routing techniques are the most important issue for networks to save the energy in [1,2]. Each sensor is limited in their energy level, by limit the processing power and sensing ability. Thus a network of these sensors gives rise to a more robust, reliable and accurate

An extravagant use of the available energy leads to poor performance the network. To this end, energy in these sensors is a rare resource and must be managed in an efficient manner. In this chapter, we proposed algorithm is implemented in homogeneous and heterogeneous system where merged layer technique (MLT) node deployment system of network helps to improve the power economy in WSN. In this case random deployment of nodes is deployed in two layers with same energy and same probability of head selection procedure. Two layer sensor nodes are belonging to same set but in differ- ent group. According to the LEACH principle the sensor nodes are transmitting their sensed data to CH and CH trans- mits aggregated data to base station (BS). The merged layer concept network has better results compared with LEACH protocol.

The formations of these chapters are as follows. We briefly review the related work in Section 2. Section 3 describes heterogeneous sensor network system. A sensor network model is analyzed in Section 4. In Section 5, we present MLT protocol. Simulation results of the proposed protocol are discussed in terms of energy consumption, num- ber of live nodes per round, separate base station location for two layer sensor nodes and comparative result graphs in Section 6. Finally, in Section 7 bring to an end of the pro- posed algorithm and future works.

A cluster head relay (CHR) routing protocol for heteroge- neous sensor networks in [17]. This protocol uses two types of sensors to form a heterogeneous network with a single sink: a large number of lower-energy sensors and a small number of higher-energy sensors. Both types of sensors are static and aware of their locations using some location service. More- over, both types are uniformly and randomly distributed in a defined area. The CHR protocol partitions the heterogeneous network into clusters, each being composed of both lower and higher energy sensors. Within a cluster, the lower energy sen- sors are in charge of sensing the environment and forwarding data packets originated by other lower energy sensors toward their cluster head in a multi-hop transmission. The higher energy sensors, on the other hand, are responsible for data fusion within their own clusters and forwarding aggregated data packets from other cluster heads toward the sink in a multi-hop transmission by only cluster heads.

nodes which would send directly to the base station, informa- tion aggregated from their cluster members. Energy Efficiency: The Innovative ways for Smart Energy consumption. Number of live nodes per round: This instantaneous measure reflects the total number of nodes and that of each type that has not yet expended all of their energy. Throughput: This includes the total rate of data sent over the network, the rate of data sent from cluster heads to the base station as well as the rate of data sent from the nodes to their cluster heads

are deployed in two layers with same energy and same proba- bility of head selection procedure. These two layers are sand- wiched and belonging to same set, but in different group. According to the LEACH formula the nodes are transmitting their data to the CH and CH transmits aggregated data to the BS. The merged layer concept network has better results com- pared with LEACH Protocol which is followed the same procedure.

deployment of defined area. Energy efficient cluster head elec- tion protocol for heterogeneous wireless sensor network is pro- posed by LI Han 2010. One of the improved algorithms to construct an inter cluster routing in wireless sensor networks. It considered three types of sensor nodes.

In order to reduce the energy consumption of the cluster heads which are far away from the base station and balance the energy consumption of the cluster heads which are close to the base station, a multi-hop routing algorithm of cluster head has been presented, which introduces into the restriction factor of remainder energy when selects the short-term nodes between cluster heads and base station, and also the minimum spanning tree algorithm has been included. The protocol can not only reduce the consumption of transmit energy of cluster head, but also the consumption of communication energy between non-cluster head and cluster head nodes. Simulation results show that this protocol performs better than LEACH in terms of network lifetime. For that our proposed algorithm also implements the heterogeneity properties to improve the lifetime of WSN. Such as in merged layer 10% of nodes are higher energy advanced nodes than the normal nodes deploy- ment in (100 m, 100 m) field. This made better performance than that of normal LEACH heterogeneity.

