Abstract We propose an intelligent and an efficient query processing approach for semantic medi- ation of information systems. We propose also a generic multi agent architecture that supports our approach. Our approach focuses on the exploitation of intelligent agents for query reformulation and the use of a new technology for the semantic representation. The algorithm is self-adapted to the changes of the environment, offers a wide aptitude and solves the various data conflicts in a dynamic way; it also reformulates the query using the schema mediation method for the discov- ered systems and the context mediation for the other systems.

In this paper; we propose an intelligent and an efficient query answering the approach for semantic mediation of infor- mation systems. We propose also a generic multi agent archi- tecture that supports our approach. Our approach focuses on the exploitation of intelligent agents for query reformulation and the use of a new technology for the semantic representa- tion. Our algorithm is self-adapted to the changes of the envi- ronment, offers a wide aptitude and solves the various data conflicts in a dynamic way. It reformulates the query using the schema mediation method for the discovered systems (described in Section 3) and the context mediation for the other systems.

In Section 2, we present a synthesis of the various existing approaches. Section 3 describe our approach. In Section 4 we present the basic concepts. Then Sections 5 and 6 describe the various types of agents and the query processing. Section 7 presents the technical aspects and prototype implementation.

possible to find analyses and comparisons of such systems in [18]. Several ontologies based approaches for integration of information were suggested [46]. In [4,20] survey of this subject is presented. Among the many drawbacks of these works is that they do not describe the integration process in a complete way; they always use assumptions like pre-existence mappings [23,33] from a part, and from another part, they provide meth- ods to calculate mappings between general or specific ontolo- gies [30] and they do not indicate how to really exploit it for automatic integration or for the query reformulation [22,33].

In [3,21] the authors have proposed an extended schema mediation named DILEMMA based on the static resolution of queries. The mediation is ensured by a couple mediator/wrap- per and a knowledge base associated with each system that takes part in the cooperation. The mediator comprises a queries pro- cessor and a facilitator. This approach provide a better transpar- ency and makes it possible to solve the semantic values conflicts, but in a priori manner. The automation degree of the resolution of the data conflicts is enhanced compared to the schema medi- ation. This later always involves the recourse of an expert of the domain. It has a low capacity to treat evolutionarity and the scalability.

[10] working on a single domain where all the contexts are defined by using a universal of consensual speech. The scalabil- ity and evolutionarity are respected but remains limited by the unicity of the domain. Multi-domains approaches Infosleuth [11], Observer [12] they use various means to represent and connect heterogeneous semantic domain: ontologies, hierarchy of ontologies and method of statistical analysis.

In the context mediation approach the data conflicts are dynamically solved during the execution of the queries (dynamic query resolution), allowing the best evolution of the local sources and the automation degree is enhanced com- pared to the schema mediation, this to the detriment of time response of the queries (it uses the semantic reconciliation). Concerning the semantic conflicts, the majority of the projects solve only the taxonomic conflicts (Coin [10]). The resolution of the values conflicts is either guided by the user (Infosleuth [11]), or unsolved in the majority of cases (Observer [12,28]).

In [25], the authors propose a multi-agent system to achieve semantic interoperability and to resolve semantic conflicts re- lated to evolutive ontologies domain. In this approach, the query processing and the validation of the mappings are completely related to the users [29]. They propose an agent based intelligent meta-search and recommendation system for products through consideration of multiple attributes by using ontology mapping and Web services. This framework is intended for an electronic commerce domain.

technologies for semantic representation, and by respecting a high automation degree of the query processing. The query processing algorithm reformulates the query by using the schema mediation method for the systems discovered and the context mediation for the other systems. So, our query processing approach is self-adapted to the changes of the environment.

Thus our approach is considerable as intelligent and as efficient. Our query processing approach is self-adapted to the changes of the environment; it is also focuses on the dynamic change of the mediation system, of the context medi- ation to the schema mediation. Indeed, the computational complexity of the scheme mediation approach is less complex than the computational complexity of the context mediation approach (described in Section 6).

The second agent level is designed on the top of existing physical systems. There are two types of agents: intelligent agents (IAs) and routing agents (RAs). An IA is an intermedi- ary between an information system and the semantic media- tion environment. An information system can play the role of information supplier and/or consumer. So an IA can play the role of IA supplier (IAS) and/or consumer (IAC). In other words, if the AI asks the query, so in this case is called AIC, if an another agent asked the IA to run a query in this case it is called AIF.

The routing agents play an important role in the GAACSM architecture. They assume context mediation, and organize intelligent agents in near domains semantically, it is ensured using a semantic proximity which allows to separate the semantic interoperable information systems in segments (or groups, or set of domains). The agents belonging to the same group are considered as near agents semantically (described in Section 5.2), we use this segmentation to avoid the useless communications between agents, and to improve our query processing approach.

The new IA integrated into the system of mediation applies the Contract Net protocol and sends an invitation describing its domain. The RAs receiving the call and provide their ability (semantic proximity rate, Algorithm 4). As soon as, the IA receives answers from all RAs, then it evaluates these rates, and makes its choice on a RA which is the nearest semantically (Algorithm 5). The chosen RA adds the previous IA to its net contacts.

At the beginning, the intelligent agent consuming (IAC) applies the dynamic query resolution protocol (context media- tion, Section 6.2) because it does not have information on the suppliers systems. This protocol is applied via the RA which is the nearest semantically with the IAC. During the dynamic evaluation of the query, the intelligent agent suppliers (IASs) update their histories and add information (mapping between terms of query ontology and their ontologies) to facilitate their dynamic integration with the IAC.

Each IAS replies with results, the RA updates its KB and reorders the list of IASs that are the most important to previ- ous IAC (in other words; the IASs which contain results are at the head of the list). If no IAS replies, the RA sends the query to other RAs. If there are replies, the RA adds the IASs of other RAs to its KB (autoreorganization).

During the operation of the mediation system, the IAC ap- plies the protocol to discover suppliers which are the nearest semantically to its domain, and to integrate them dynamically in order to use them in the schema mediation. For this aim, it cooperates with the RA. Indeed; the RA updates its KB during its communication with the other agents. Particularly, its KB contains for each IA an ordered list of its IASs which are not discovered yet. These IASs should be near semantically to it. The first IAS in the list is the one which has largest num- ber of responses of IA. After that the first IAS becomes the next supplier solicited to the following dynamic integration done by IA.

During the operation of the system, the IAC discovers some suppliers and adapts itself with the environment. So, to treat a query two protocols should be applied: the static query resolu- tion protocol (Section 6.1) is adopted for the discovered sys- tems and the dynamic query resolution (Section 6.2) for other systems (Algorithm 6).

Our approach uses the OWL DL [19] as common data model. The OWL DL enriches the RDF Schemas model by defining a rich vocabulary to the description of complex ontologies. So, it is more expressive than RDF and RDFS which have some insufficiency of expressivity because of their dependence only on the definition of the relations between objects by assertions. OWL DL brings also a better integration, evolution, division and easier inference of ontologies [19].

Definition 6. Context. It describes the assumptions, the explicit information of definition and use of a data. In our approach, the context is defined by (S, SCV, O, MSO) such as: S is a schema, SCV is a semantic conflicts of values, O defines an ontology and MSO is a schema-ontology mapping.

Definition 7. Query language. We adapted the language defined in [2] as a query language in our architecture. Given L the set of individuals and values belonging to OWL DL data types. Given V the set of variables disjoint from those of L. A account the various elements of the environment of a concept in its domain. The various adopted measures are: the termi- nology of the concept and environment in which the concept is located. These measurements are selected from a deep study of the various similarities measures [1,36,34] and from the definition of an ontology of schema in GAACSM architecture.

In the discovery of mappings between two agents (IAC and IAS), it is necessary to compare the ontology of the IAC with that of the IAS. The entities of two ontologies are compared using a semantic similarity. In this section, we define our semantic similarity. The definitions necessary for GAACSM architecture will be also presented.

Step 2: Query reformulation: the query is divided into a recombining query of the results and sub queries intended for the IAS which contain data necessary to the execution of the query. The decomposition of the query is done by the use of the mapping rules. The IAC applies the cooper- ation protocol of static query resolution.

Step 2: Transmission of the semantically enriched query. The IAC applies the cooperation protocol of dynamic query resolution. So it transmits the semantically enriched query to the routing agent which is nearest semantically. This latter sends it to all IASs of its net contacts.

