qualitative way with vague or imprecise knowledge. In such cases, ambiguity caused by vague or imprecise preference information is a big challenge for decision makers. This fact was a great motivation for researchers to extend MCDM tech- niques in fuzzy environment. Technique for order preference by similarity to an ideal solution (TOPSIS), one of the most known classical MCDM methods was developed by Hwang and Yoon [1] is based upon the concept that the chosen alternative should be the closest from the positive ideal solution and the farthest from the negative ideal solution.

In the present study, TOPSIS method proposed by [1] is ex- tended for intuitionistic fuzzy environment by using construc- tion theorem given by [22] and distance measure given by [23]. In order to see the relative importance of criteria, weights to each criterion have been given by using intuitionistic fuzzy en- tropy measure proposed by [24]. The proposed intuitionistic fuzzy TOPSIS method is applied to rank the four organiza- tions based on some important criteria. Further, the obtained ranking is implemented in portfolio selection problem to ana- lyze the risk and return in different portfolios.

In this section, step wise algorithm for proposed intuitionistic fuzzy TOPSIS method is presented. Let A = {A1, A2, ... , Am} be a set of m alternatives and decision maker will choose the best one from A according to a criterion set C = {C1, C2, C3,

The larger value of relative closeness coefficient indicates that an alternative is closer to IFPIS and farther from IFNIS simultaneously. Therefore, the ranking order of all the alterna- tives can be determined according to the descending order of relative coefficient values. The most preferred alternative is the one with the highest value.

Definition 9. Risk is defined as the degree of uncertainty of return on an asset. It signifies the possibility of loss in the investment. The risk can be either zero (risk free asset) or posi- tive (risky asset). There are two kinds of risk associated with risky asset (i) systematic risk which is concerned with money, capital market, credit and fiscal policy and economic policy which govern the market economy; (ii) unsystematic risk is concerned with outcome of unfavorable litigation, sudden dis- covery of deficiencies in a product of a company and natural catastrophe.

