This paper introduces a new variant implementation of Latency-Insensitive Design elements. It optimizes area footprint of so-called Shell-Wrappers being partially fused with their input Relay-Stations. The modi- fied Relay-Station is called a Retry Relay-Station. We show correctness of this implementation and provide comparative results between a regular implementation and our new one on both FPGA and ASIC.

Actually, the LID can be seen as a synchronous implementation of well-known asynchronous protocols [1]. The main difference with asynchronous design is that LID uses the classic synchronous design flow. It does not claim to solve the tim- ing closure issue; careful floor-planning/partitioning and interconnect planning are mandatory.

Area is of utter importance in implementation in VLSI. We are able to get an interesting area saving on the Shell-Wrapper on both data and control paths. That means a reduced overhead on each IP, and therefore allows a finer-grain design.

can see that the area gain in ASIC is in between 8.9 and 10.7 percent (there is about no slack on the biggest designs, needing a lot of buffers). Our new implementation scales in the same way as the regular one for the control part, with an interesting area save.

For the FPGA implementations, the results are not relevant enough. They depend too widely on the architecture and heuristic used. For the ASIC implemen- tation, we have an interesting power gain on both dynamic power with around 40 percent, and between 11 and 18 percent less on static power.

One of the main problems in LID is to insert Relay-Stations to reach timing closure, as described in the introduction. Most of the time, high latencies are due to lot of wire congestions in the routing channels. Adding Relay-Stations in such areas is problematic and make the placement-and-routing tougher to solve.

parts. This helps the placement and routing, minimizes area, while having also time-borrowing due to the use of latches instead of flip-flops. Despite the fact we have implemented our Retry Relay-Stations using flip-flops, one can implement them using latches, with certainly additional gain on area, power and clock speed for ASICs.

