Interaction systems were proposed and implemented by Sifakis et al. as a model for the design and study of component based systems. We investigate here the property of liveness in interaction systems where liveness of an action, a component or a set of components means that the action (component, set of components) will repeatedly participate in every run of the global system. We show that deciding liveness is NP-hard. Then we present a characterization of liveness. Finally, by exploiting local information, we establish a polynomial-time criterion that guarantees liveness. We combine the criterion with the characterization to obtain a test for liveness.

In the last decade a variety of formal approaches to the specification and analysis of component based systems at different levels and with different specific objectives have been proposed [1,2,9,33,3,34,38,35,7,21,5,23,10,16,15]. We investigate here the approach of interaction systems that was proposed and discussed by Sifakis et al. in [16,17,15,40,41,39] and in more detail in [18]. The model clearly separates the issues of 1. interfaces, 2. behavior of the components and 3. interaction between components. It has been implemented

In the framework of interaction systems properties such as local/global deadlock-freedom, progress of a component, availability of ports and robust- ness against failure of components have been discussed [18,14,24,25]. In gen- eral it is difficult to test these properties as they involve the exploration of the global state space. Indeed, it was shown that deciding deadlock-freedom in interaction systems is NP-hard [32]. Recently this result was strengthened by showing that deciding local and global deadlock-freedom is PSPACE-hard [26]. One way to proceed in such situations is to establish criteria that en- sure desired properties and can be tested more easily. In [25] for example we presented a condition that ensures deadlock-freedom and can be tested in polynomial time. In [24] we investigated criteria for robustness.

In this work we concentrate on liveness in interaction systems. A compo- nent is considered to be live if, no matter how the global system evolves and independently of the point of time we consider, it will repeatedly participate in some step of the system. We show first that deciding liveness of a set of components is NP-hard. Then we give a characterization of liveness of a set of components in an interaction system. Moreover, we establish a criterion that entails liveness and can be tested in polynomial time. We present a hy- brid algorithm for testing liveness that combines the characterization and the

The paper is structured as follows. Section 2 summarizes the basic def- initions. Section 3 contains the notions of deadlock-freedom and liveness. Liveness is investigated in Sections 4, 5 and 6 which are concerned with NP- hardness respectively present the characterization of, the criterion for liveness, and the hybrid algorithm.

An interaction model for a component system CS is defined by a connector set C together with a set Comp of interactions that are declared to be complete. If an interaction is declared complete it can be performed independently of the environment. Note that it is a design decision which interactions are chosen to be complete. This choice is not restricted in any way and only depends on the system one wishes to model.

any other components and can be performed immediately. Started in a global initial state a deadlock-free system may always proceed with some maximal or complete interaction. Thus cyclic waiting involving all components cannot occur, whereas two or more components may be engaged in a local deadlock.

Example 2.2 continued It is easy to see that Sys5 is deadlock-free. We have Q0 = Qi for all components which means that every global state is reachable. Therefore one has to show that every global state offers at least one maximal interaction which boils down to a simple case distinction.

This notion of liveness is different from the one introduced for Petri nets [8] that corresponds to our notion of local progress of a component i in interaction systems [14], which means that at any point in any run we may proceed in such a way that component i will participate. Clearly liveness of i implies local progress but not vice versa. A general form of liveness-properties for a component system as a whole is defined in [7]. The questions referring to single components that we are interested in cannot be directly formulated and investigated in [7] because the identity of a component may be lost in the system which means that it is not meaningful to consider liveness of a component.

The condition that has to be checked comes down to a reachability analy- sis in a graph where the components are the nodes. The graph is constructed by checking certain dependencies between pairs of components that can be checked by investigating the local transition systems only. Therefore the graph can be constructed in time polynomial in the number of components and the size of the local transition systems such that the criterion avoids the investi- gation of the global state space.

times. Note that the test for inevitability in Tj from line 9 only causes cost polynomial in |Tj|. It can be performed by checking whether the system T ' ob- tained by deleting all edges labeled with a port from Aj\ (excl (Reach (i)) [j]) does not contain a cycle. The cost of the else-block is dominated by the cost for the computation of Q and the search for a cycle in Q.

have been investigated although no procedures that can be used to test live- ness are provided. Moreover Petri-nets have been used for component-based modeling [3]. For Petri-nets a notion of liveness has been investigated in de- tail [8] and depending on the considered class of Petri-nets the complexity of deciding this property is presented. This notion of liveness corresponds to our notion of local progress [14]. Liveness has been also discussed in [12,30].

