The geometric structural complexity of spatial objects does not render an intuitive distance metric on the data space that measures spatial proximity. However, such a metric provides a formal basis for analytical work in transformation-based multidimensional spatial access methods, including locality preservation of the underlying transformation and distance-based spatial queries. We study the Hausdorff distance metric on the space of multidimensional polytopes, and prove a tight relationship between the metric on the original space of k-dimensional hyperrectangles and the standard p-normed metric on the transform space of 2k- dimensional points under the corner transformation, which justifies the effectiveness of the transformation- based technique in preserving spatial locality.

For managing spatial objects with simple geometric structure in a spatial data space, such as line segment, hyperrectangle, or hypersphere, a conceptually elegant object-mapping approach, such as the corner transformation [10], transforms the spatial characteristics of objects into points in higher-dimensional space, and cou- ples with an existing point access method. For examples in mapping rectangles in the 2-dimensional Euclidean space to 4-dimensional points, the corner transforma- tion is based on the coordinates of a pair of antipodal corners of the rectangle, while the center transformation is based on the coordinates of the centroid together with the measures of spatial extent of the rectangles in all dimensions. The transfor- mation of a database of spatial objects (original space) into a database of higher- dimensional points (transform space), when coupling with a point access method for the transform space, produces a spatial access method for the original space. The transformation technique focused in our study is the corner transformation. However, the notions developed for its analyses can be translated for other similar transformations.

Complications arise, when we attempt to analyze the locality preservation and clustering of a transformation-based spatial access methods, due to the absence of an intuitive metric that captures the spatial proximity on spatial objects in complex geometric structures. In fact, even with its presence, the locality analysis of a spatial access method modified from or coupled with a point access method is inherently limited by the locality knowledge of the point access method and constrained by the modification or transformation undertaken. Thus, the simple transformation techniques may suffer from several potential difficulties and disadvantages due to the presence or absence of: (1) metrics on multidimensional spatial objects, (2) locality preservation of transformations, (3) nonuniform distribution in the transform space, and (4) efficient support of complex spatial operations. The latter two have been overcome in recent studies in the literature, and the former two can be resolved by developing intuitive and flexible metrics for multidimensional spatial objects.

