Simulation has long seen its use in both academic and business applications for sys- tem performance modelling or evaluation, workflow analysis, process improvement, asset/personnel management, etc. Simulation software tools such as [10], [3], [9], and [4] are offered to help organisations identify their system bottlenecks and gain better insights into the implications of different resource or personnel investments on overall system performance. By using simulation software decision makers can rapidly experiment with different scenarios and compare them at a fraction of the cost of real implementation in the system. However, some simulation tools have

LocTrackJINQS inherits many features from JINQS. In both JINQS and LocTrackJINQS, there are two main Java packages: network and tools [5]. Classes in network are used to define the structure of queueing networks. Package tools provides utility classes for setting up simulations, defining common families of probability distributions and calculating performance metrics. The two packages have been designed to be easily extensible; developers can add on application-specific features only by subclassing those existing classes and overriding the inherited meth- ods [5].

Support for location-aware simulations. As mentioned earlier, JINQS can only be used for constructing high-level abstract simulations, where each entity has no physical geographical location in the system and entities travel from one server to another instantaneously. LocTrackJINQS introduces location-related features to support more realistic simulations of real-life customer processing systems. In particular, each entity in the queueing network is assigned a geographical location represented in a 2D Cartesian coordinate system; entity movements occur along user-defined paths at speeds sampled from a user-specified distribution.

TransportCustomersEvent class. The triggering of such an event invokes the moveCustomers() method of each TransportLink entity. By scheduling such an event to occur on a regular basis (e.g. every few milliseconds), we are able to simulate customer movement at a high resolution.

moving pilots and flight attendants, EU, and non-EU passengers respectively. In the same order as above, red, orange and pink colours are used to indicate that the entities are queueing. Three different shades of green are used to represent the customers from each class receiving service.

