ders is 30 dB. However, in order to reduce the mutual coupling, an extra isolation wall was introduced, thus increasing design com- plexities. Therefore, it can be found from the reported references that the isolation of the array is measured after the array is con- nected to the power divider. The resultant isolation depends on not only antenna array itself but also the power divider. In addi- tion, how to obtain both high polarization isolation and low side- lobe is still a challenging problem in the filtering antenna array design.

celled out in the y direction, thus achieving the x-polarization radi- ation. The opposite current distributions on the radiation patches and the driven patches are due to the capacitive coupling between them. However, the currents flowing on the driven patches are far weaker than those on the radiation patches. It means that the energy is well coupled from the driven patches to the radiation

(iv). It is worthwhile pointing out that the four ports different from the actual feeding ports are used to analyze the coupling effect in the parallel coupling lines. According to the even and odd analysis of the parallel coupling line in [25], when the port (i) is driven by an input voltage of 2 V0, the voltages of the ports (ii), (iii) and (iv), i.e., V2, V3 and V4, can be solved, respectively, as

In order to evaluate and measure the overall polarization isola- tion performance of the antenna itself, two kinds of the polariza- tion ports in the array are considered. Specifically, all x- polarization ports are denoted as the port V, and all y- polarization ports are denoted as the port H. Thus, SddHV is the dif- ferential S parameter from the port V to the port H, and SddVH rep- resents the differential S parameter from the port H to the port V, which distinguishes them from widely used polarization isolation of the antenna array with the power divider. The SddHV and SddVH the filtering antenna is fabricated, and the measured |Sdd21| is 41 dB with the peak gain of 10.5 dBi. With the designed filtering antenna element, a novel array is developed by sharing the radiating patches. The designed array with the same size as the conventional

1 2 array has a smaller element spacing, thus resulting in the lower sidelobe level. The array prototype is fabricated and measured. The overall isolation related to two kinds of the polarized ports in the array itself is proposed, and the measured SddVH of the improved fil- tering antenna array is 41.1 dB. As a result, the proposed filtering array is of good radiation and filtering performance, which is good candidate for the base station MIMO array in 5G applications.

