aspect when accessing programs available across different net- works. This task becomes more challenging in heterogeneous net- works due to fluctuating network traffic caused by real-time and general applications. To tackle this problem, the study proposes a machine-learning (ML) based plan that selects the best network among several coexisting networks at a specific location.

based data storage in 5G handover management. With the emergence of edge computing capabilities, it becomes possible to store and process data closer to the edge of the network, reducing latency and improving response times. By leveraging edge-based data storage, the handover management system can efficiently offload and retrieve relevant data during the han- dover process, ensuring seamless connectivity and reducing the impact of latency-sensitive applications.

These three contributions collectively contribute to advancing 5G handover management. By implementing proactive decision making, handover control parameters, and integrating edge- based data storage, the research aims to enhance the overall effi- ciency, reliability, and user experience of handover processes in 5G networks. Simulated trials are used to verify the efficiency of our suggested handoff technique. The numerical outcomes demon- strate that the suggested method can enable the EU to gain supe- rior transmission performance in comparison to the standard handoff technique in traditional networks.

For generations like 5G and 6G, and so on, machine learning will be a flexible technology. The survey provides the convenience of managing a variety of well-liked and unique ML approaches to carry out the HO procedure [3,4]. The primary objective of many academics is to bring everything under the control of ML technol- ogy, and ML principles are now being supported globally. They pro- vide an extensive tutorial on HO management in 5G networks accompanied by a discussion on machine learning (ML) applica- tions to HO management. future directions and challenges for 5G UDSC networks were concisely addressed.

The notion of adaptive pheromone evaporation is examined concerning ant colony optimization (ACO) for HO management [6]. The difficulty of this computation and implementation in the network selection procedure is a challenge. The primary driver behind the diverse study findings is the optimum cell selection procedure. The possibilities came when choosing an average per- former who will offer a medium-quality connection based on the optimal approach. The basic concept of an ACO-based vertical han- dover algorithm in heterogeneous wireless networks is used as in the new concept of adaptive pheromone evaporation rate.

50 and 100 Mbps and 40% between 100 and 150 Mbps. Different from C1 is C2. 40% of the data points on C2 are between 50 and 100 Mbps, while 60% are between 100 and 150 Mbps. These two cells will have the same priority when we use fuzzy approaches for the cell selection process. Therefore, this incorrect prediction made by fuzzy-based approaches may result in improper cell selection.

Reinforcement learning with a Markov Decision Process model is suggested [16] for the HO management problem of a slice- based mobile network. The EU is in charge of selecting the optimal slice of connectivity based on the number of slices. Experience replay training is a technique used by DQN to improve learning.

The study summarizes how current research efforts approach the issues that characterize drones, with a special focus on the han- dover process. This work also provides a general concept of drone integration in heterogeneous networks and discusses specific solu- tions for addressing possible problems[21]. With a particular emphasis on the HO process, the report explains how current research efforts are defining drones. A brief discussion and recom- mendations for future research paths on connected drones in future heterogeneous networks are also provided by this survey.

The working model for simulation makes use of a HetNets de- sign that consists of several macro cells, micro cells, pico cells, and femtocells that are evenly distributed over the entire system following the needs of the user. EUs are generated at random throughout all locations, with random mobility models across all cells, and they are free to go anywhere in the geographic region throughout time t. We determine the EU as E = {e1, e2	ep}.

The devices will reinforce the connection through the initiation of the HO process when they venture beyond the transmission range of the current cell. As the devices move away from the cur- rent cell, the detected signal strength may weaken, potentially impacting the ongoing data delivery process. In such cases, a stron- ger signal strength is necessary to ensure efficient data transfer. Thus, HO becomes essential to prevent a decline in performance. The threshold value acts as an indicator to anticipate a connection with lower quality. If the signal strength reading falls below the designated threshold, the device will promptly activate HO management.

the network selection algorithm can take into account the avail- ability of edge servers and their capacity for storing and pro- cessing data. When selecting a network, the algorithm can prioritize networks with nearby edge servers capable of offload- ing data from the EU. This can reduce latency and improve over- all network performance.

techniques like polynomial regression can be used to analyze it. This can give insights into the connections between handover control settings and network performance and assist in identi- fying patterns and trends in the data. The dataset predicts that the NDR will determine network efficiency. Polynomial Regres- sion is the technique employed for the forecast procedure. The independent value is ASU, and the dependent value is NDR. The NDR will be predicted for all values of ASU. Finally, the average of the predicted NDR will be used as the HCP value, and the network selection procedure will be completed based on these values.

The cell reselection process is triggered when the EU changes its position. The neighboring cells of the EU can provide HCP values. Based on this value, the EU selects the best service provider as the target cell for handover management. Proactively, the EU chooses the top cell from all the available cells to establish han- dover management. According to the proposed strategy, the best cells are selected prior to the activation of handover. After han- dover triggers, the identified cell becomes the target cell, and han- dover management is conducted following the established procedures.

When the simulation starts, the EU can rottenly change its posi- tion by applying a random mobility model. The EU can roam in the same cell or between different cells. The time duration is fixed for the minimum and maximum velocity of the EU. The RSRP mea- surement of the source cell from the EU side is applied every sec- ond. Before the HO trigger occurs, the EU will collect the HCP values of all neighbours to choose the target cell. The top-scoring HCP provider will be selected by the EU, and it will be considered as the target cell when HO triggers.The information along with a measurement report regarding the target cell is forwarded to the source cell and the source can process the HO management.

The lack of target resource availability is one of the reasons for HOF. When the HO process is initiated, the EU will search the neighbours for target cell selection. There can be a chance that insufficient resource availability will lead to the HOF. Another rea- son for HOF is that the EU can move out of the network coverage area of the target cell before completely establishing the HO pro- cess. Reducing handover failure is important in mobile networking because it can impact network performance, user experience, and network capacity. Handover failure refers to a situation where a mobile device fails to complete a handover to a neighboring cell, which can result in dropped calls, poor call quality, and reduced network capacity.

The length of time it takes to establish a connection between the old cell and the new cell is considered as a delay in the HO pro- cess. The process must only take a short amount of time to choose a cell, or else the delay will be huge. In comparison to the current work, the suggested technique performs the HO process in some kind of a relatively short amount of time. Handover delays can decrease network bandwidth and efficiency due to higher signaling

Automation will probably become more prevalent in transfer administration in the future. With the use of AI and machine learn- ing, networks will be able to identify anomalies and possible issues autonomously and take corrective action without the need for human involvement. Developing more sophisticated ML models, such as deep learning or ensemble learning, to improve decision accuracy and adaptability and to address privacy and security con- cerns using techniques like privacy-preserving ML or secure feder- ated learning will be the scope.

