The original notion of projections was proposed in [9], and developed in [10] and [11]. The notation grew from a desire to limit the congestion that besets Euler diagrams as more sets are considered. Informally, a projection is a set represented within a context (a sub-domain of the universe of discourse). Outside of its context the projection does not assert anything. A projection may be represented in one or many ways by curves called projected contours. First we outline the system of Euler diagrams that we will augment with projections and detail two of its weaknesses.

A concrete Euler diagram with projections consists of given contours which have unique labels and projected contours, drawn here with dashed iconog- raphy, which may not have unique labels. All contours are properly contained within a boundary rectangle. The intersection, containment or exclusion of the contours partitions the area within the boundary rectangle into unique zones which may be shaded. A non-empty set of zones is a region.

Diagrammatic systems usually have a two-tiered syntax [12], a diagrammatic representation in some media (concrete syntax) and an abstraction, which forgets the geometric information and retains only the essential relationships (abstract syntax). The notation of projections suits a three-tiered syntax, splitting the abstract syntax into a fine-grained and coarse-grained levels. The fine-grained abstract syntax has the detail for applying reasoning rules while the coarse-grained abstract syntax gathers together many fine-grained types that share the same interpretation.

The fine-grained abstract syntax records how a diagram uses projected con- tours to represent a projection. The fine-grained abstract syntax includes a set of underlying zones (an underlying zone is a zone defined in terms of given contour labels only). A projected contour in the fine-grained abstract syntax is a pair, the first element being the label and the second being the set of underlying zones (an underlying region) which the projected contour intersects. This region is called the context of the projected contours. Any two projected contours sharing a label will have disjoint contexts.

We have argued that the three relations between contours in a diagram con- tribute different quantities of clutter to the components of a diagram. How- ever, we are still left with a lengthy task to extract this information from the diagram. In addition to the task of identifying the components in a dia- gram and the relations within them, we then need to calculate the variation in clutter between components, by extending the argument (from contours to components) that contained components will contribute more to the clutter of a diagram than those that are disjoint.

To contour score these diagrams we simply count the number of zones within each contour and sum. For the LHS diagram there are six zones inside the contour labelled A, five inside the contour labelled B and three and two zones inside the contours labelled C and D respectively. Therefore the contour score for the LHS diagram is 16. A similar calculation yields a contour score for the RHS diagram of 15. Therefore, by the measure of contour scoring these two

The contour scoring mirrors the factors identified earlier and their respective contribution to clutter. If two contours are disjoint there is no overlap and no zones within these contours will contribute to the contour score of the other. If a contour has degree of containment n then all the zones within it will be counted n times in the contour score. Furthermore if two contours inter- sect they produce an extra zone within each contour. The relations between components is also reflected by this method of scoring.

