Construction of Covering Arrays (CA) with minimum possible number of rows is challenging. Often the available CA have redundant combinatorial interaction that could be removed to reduce the number of rows. This paper addresses the problem of removing redundancy of CA using a metaheuristic post- optimization (MPO) approach. Our approach consists of three main components: a redundancy detec- tor (RD); a row reducer (RR); and a missing-combinations reducer (MCR). The MCR is a metaheuristic component implemented using a simulated annealing algorithm. MPO was instantiated with 21, 964 CA taken from the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) repository. It is a remarkable result that this instantiation of MPO has delivered 349 new upper bounds for these CA.

testing are Covering Arrays (CA) and Mixed Covering Arrays (MCA). CA and MCA are combinatorial structures that have been used successfully in various areas. The most reported application of CA and MCA is in the design of test suites for software combinatorial interaction testing [7,8] which is based on the concept that software faults are caused by unexpected combinatorial interactions of certain size between components. Another application is found in the field of parameter fine-tuning of metaheuristic algorithms

When we have non-optimal CA (i.e. a CA with N > CAN(t,k,v)), it usually has many t-tuples that are covered more than once. This fact presents the opportunity to reduce number of rows of CA, given that it may then be possible to identify redundant rows [18] that a) a redundancy detector (RD); a row reducer (RR); and a missing- combination reducer (MCR) implemented using a simulated annealing algorithm (the metaheuristic component of our approach). MPO was extensively tested using 21, 964 CA (taken from the CA NIST repository). We have improved almost all 21, 964 CA, but the most remarkable result is that MPO has set 349 new upper bounds for these CA.

The remaining of the paper is structured in three sections. In section 2 we present in detail MPO approach giving details of the redundancy detector, row reducer and missing-combination reducer components. In section 3 we present the results of instantiating the MPO with the whole National Institute of Stan- dards and Technology repository of covering arrays. Finally in

The Row Reducer algorithm receives as input a CA and works in a greedy manner searching for a row i such that its removal mini- mizes missing combinations. In the worst case RR tests all rows of CA, but when a row with no missing t-wise combinations is found RR ends. If this is not the case the row removed is the one that gives the fewest number of missing t-wise combinations.

The MCR component of MPO is in charge of reducing to zero the number of missing t-tuples of the input parameter (a matrix with missing combinations). We decided to implement MCR using a simulated annealing (SA) algorithm given that SA has been applied successfully for solving related problems [3,6,20,24]. The core ele- ments of the SA are: the neighbourhood functions F F ; and the cooling schedule.

initial temperature (temp0); (b) a decreasing function to reduce the temperature value; (c) an ending temperature (tempf ); and (d) a finite number of iterations of the local search at the same tem- perature (L) (L size of a Markov chain [5]. The parameters of the cooling schedule control the behaviour of the algorithm and therefore affect drastically the quality of the final solution. We selected static geometric cooling schedule controlled by a param- eter a. The parameter L is static during execution of the algorithm [3,20]. Also a parameter called frozen factor (ff ) was added to control number of temperature reductions without improvement towards solution, which works as an alternative termination cri- terion that is triggered when search stagnates.

We have conducted big-scale experimentation through instan- tiation of MPO with the whole NIST repository of CA. NIST re- pository consists of 21, 964 CA, and while improving almost all CA in repository, the most remarkable result is that we have set 349 new upper bounds for these CA. All CA are available at http://www. tamps.cinvestav.mx/~oc/.

Simulated annealing for constructing mixed covering arrays, in: Proceedings of the 9th International Symposium on Distributed Computing and Artificial Intelligence - DCAI. Vol. 151 of Advances in Intelligent and Soft Computing. Springer Berlin/Heidelberg, Salamanca, Spain, from 28th to 30th March, 2012, and algorithm fine-tuning - a case of study using bridge club and simulated annealing, in: A. Dourado, A.C. Rosa, K. Madani (Eds.), IJCCI. IJCCI 2009-Pro- ceedings of the International Joint Conference on Computational Intelligence, Funchal, Madeira, Portugal, October 5-7, 2009, INSTICC Press, 2009, pp.

