User-perceived software quality is subjective, and thus difficult to be measured. Its importance however in user-centric, web-based systems such as e-commerce systems is huge. How can one measure the subjective? Metrics are one of the most powerful weapons in the arsenal for measuring quality. For such a weapon to be put in good use, guidelines for use should be available. In this paper we present a model based on meta- metrics that suggests what metrics should be used in what way and how, when evaluating an e-commerce system.

In this paper we extend the model presented in [8] to provide a set of meta- metrics for evaluating metrics used in e-commerce system evaluation. Meta-metric values constitute a framework for using these metrics properly when evaluating such software increasing the reliability and accuracy of the evaluation process and decreasing costs and measurement bias. The goal of the framework is not to provide a tool for the assessment of the metrics per se (which metric is the best) but rather a guideline on which metrics to use to validate which part of an e-commerce system. The contribution of this research lays in the uniqueness of the framework that although theoretical, it constitutes a step towards a better understanding of the proper use of external metrics.

Measuring metrics for B2C e-commerce is important. Especially in e-commerce systems where the high quality of services is one way to keep users revisiting the web site; this can be assured when quality is definable and measurable. Different pro- cesses and metrics have been proposed in order to measure the quality of e-commerce systems. By measuring the performance of E-commerce system processes it is pos- sible to implement different business policies and tactics. Web site design strategies and models propose different metrics to support e-commerce system success and assess the quality of e-commerce systems.

assigned to it. In this work we refer to metrics applied to an e-commerce system as seen from the end-user point of view; for example number of colours used or number of clicks needed to reach the description of a product. Since the interface of the application at hand is based on World Wide Web technology, we call these metrics, web metrics.

There is a breadth of different categories of web metrics but none of them besides the ones in [4] are e-commerce specific. Some relevant proposals (in the sense that they address web systems measurement) are those addressing web usability [10, 11] and usability guidelines [12]. In the metrics arena, a wide range of general web metrics has been proposed; the characteristic works of Mendes et al. [13-17] and Olsina et al. [18] total over than 250 web metrics. Dhyani [19] has also proposed a web classification framework for determining how the classified metrics can be applied in the improvement web information access and use.

Usually, metrics are evaluated using measurement theory and/or empirical data. These methods however are best suited for internal metrics. The use of meta-metrics for the evaluation of metrics is a novel method. A similar method was introduced by Weyuker in [21] where nine properties (or meta-metrics) were introduced and used for evaluating popular internal metrics of software. This method was used in a number of works for assessing newly introduced internal metrics in the following years. Kitchenham et al. [22] and Schneidewind in [23] propose metric-evaluation frameworks to validate software metrics. Although they address Object-Oriented internal metrics their approach is interesting because the validation process inte- grates quality factors, metrics and quality functions. To the best of our knowledge, besides [8] there are no other works that use meta-metrics to measure external metrics of software and in particular web applications.

The proposed meta-metrics are used for evaluating the e-commerce application based on specific performance characteristics of the metrics themselves. These char- acteristics are divided into ten categories (the actual meta-metrics). Although the meta-metrics categorization provides an evaluation of metrics, the goal of this eval- uation is not to criticize the actual usefulness of the metrics. This would be highly

An important part of the question is linked to the perception of quality by the users. Subjectivity is inevitably present in various forms in the vast majority of external metrics. Different users may assign different values to a metric not because they are wrong but because the metric has different interpretations or its measurement scale favours variations.

The framework uses ten different meta-metrics that cover different aspects of the measurement procedure. The first five have already been proposed in [8]. The rest are newly introduced. In the rest of this section we are going to describe these metrics. We use capital letters in parenthesis to ease future reference to the corresponding meta-metrics.

Measurement Independence (MI). This is a measure of the ability of a metric to offer the same result (measurement) when measured by different types of users. Some metrics may be interpreted differently by the evaluators or the target group that participates in the evaluation process. For example, a metric that counts the links in a page has a high degree of independence while a metric that uses a Likert scale may have significant variations. This meta-metric is related to the MS meta-metric since the measurement scale affects independence. But there are other parameters that affect it as well such as the clarity of definition of the metric, the degree of its applicability to the specific component/service of the system etc.

Accuracy (AC). Does the metric actually measure what is supposed to be mea- sured? and how the metric is related to the abstract software characteristics or factors to be measured. These meta-metrics have already been proposed in [8]. We add the following meta-metrics in the framework:

Cost (CO). It refers to the cost of using the metrics for evaluation. Some metrics are easy to measure so the cost in effort is small. Others are more costly since they involve many parameters that must be combined to extract the value of the metric. This meta-metric is associated to the AU meta-metric since theoretically automated metrics are less costly to calculate.

Evaluation (EVAL). This meta-metric is associated with the type of the measure- ment process: user related metrics are calculated using a corpus of users that are providing their input either during a laboratory experiment (controlled environ- ment) or at home (uncontrolled environment). Ideally the measurements should not differ, but they usually do. This is due to the psychological parameters that affect the users mainly in a controlled environment (e.g. the feeling of being watched).

Target (TA). A metric may measure either data (data metric) or a process within an e-commerce system (process metric). Most metrics belong to one of these categories but there are some metrics (e.g. those that are associated with the web structure of the system) that belong to both categories.

It must be noted that the values assumed for these meta-metrics are represen- tative. It is possible to use more detailed scales that are much more close to reality. For the shake of simplicity and in order to demonstrate the use of our method, we choose the simplest possible values.

It is obvious that in each mode, only a sub-set of the available metrics is chosen for the evaluation. What happens to the rest of them? If they are no to be used then possibly valuable information may be lost. In Mode 1, this is a price that must be paid for the shake of speed. In Mode-3, it is possible to include more metrics perhaps for cross-checking the results.

The results of our work is a step towards understanding on how e-commerce systems can be measured qualitatively by metrics. It provides an extendable tool useful for evaluation experts and developers alike. We believe that this is a step towards more effective measurements of e-commerce systems quality.

