The higher demand of plastics for manufacturing of millions of applications such as packaging, building materials and com- modities, as well as hygiene products can lead to waste disposal problems. These traditional petroleum-derived plastics are made from crude oil which is considered as a nonrenewable re- source. Although the used plastic could be recycled, the amount of solid waste generated by plastic became a serious problem as its accumulation and degradation resistance lead to serious hazards on the environment. These considerations had a great effect on focusing on the industrial scale production of bio- degradable polymers. The major difference between oil based polymers and biodegradable polymers is the ability of the latter to be biodegraded by soil microorganisms. Biopolymers contain carbon and nitrogen, which permit the microbial growth leading to a final conversion to carbon dioxide and water vapor via en- zymatic action [1,2].

concentration values of each studied factor [13]. RSM was found to be effective in processes optimization for a vast number of industrial products including paints and coatings, foods and beverages, and pharmaceuticals [14]. RSM is able to capture the main effect of each factor and the interactions between them. In the present study, a local isolated bacterial strain pre-

Fructose was used as a carbon source in a concentration of 40 g/L for PHB production media and 10 g/L for inoculum de- velopment. Fructose was sterilized separately via filtration and then aseptically reconstituted at room temperature prior to in- oculation. The pH of the resulting broth was adjusted to 7.0 with 2N NaOH/2N HCl.

Two separate designs each with 12 trials were formulated for nine different carbon sources screening and ten different nitrogen sources screening using Minitab 16 software. The ex- periments were done in Erlenmeyer flasks containing 100 mL of basal media at 150 rpm for 72 h. Responses were mea- sured in terms of OD600 and PHB production (mg/L).

Depending on the previously performed CCD experiment (section 2.3), the suggested production medium was found to be 6.06 g/L, 1.09 g/L, 12.12 g/L and 4 g/L for maltose, ammo- nium sulfate, fructose and ammonium chloride respectively. Seed culture was prepared as 300 mL medium with nutrient concentrations similar to that of the production medium in addition to the minimal medium components and trace metal is known for A. latus, Methylobacterium sp. ZP24 [24], Bacillus mycoides RLJ B-017 [25] and recombinant E. coli [26]. Microbac- terium sp. WA81 was no exception; it did accumulate PHB as cell growth progressed and the final amount of polymer ob- tained depended on the maximum biomass produced.

Several studies were carried out to investigate the most sig- nificant amino acids as nitrogen sources that enhanced the microbial biomass accumulation and the microbial biopoly- mer production. Hamieh et al. have reported for Lactobacillus acidophilus that PHB production increased with high levels of glycine [28]. Mercan et al. was reported in two strains of Rhi- zobium sp.; the highest level of PHB accumulation was observed in the medium with L-cysteine and L-glycine [29]. By using COBRA toolbox analysis for metabolic modeling and simula- tion, L-arginine was found to be the most significant nitrogen source on PHB production by recombinant E. coli K-12 MG1655 as reported by Heshiki [30], which showed an agreement with the result of our experiment.

the concentration changes [31]. Moreover, the halotolerant photosynthetic bacterium Rhodobacter sphaeroides grown under aerobic and dark conditions showed the highest PHB accu- mulation in the presence of ammonium sulfate [32]. Nutrient limitation is necessary to achieve the highest PHB produc- tion, and generally, ammonia is used as the critical regulator for uncoupling of the microbial growth and PHA production [33].

In conclusion, fructose, ammonium chloride, maltose and arginine were the most significant factors for the bacterial growth and microbial biopolymer accumulation. To reduce the production cost, arginine was substituted by ammonium sulfate as potential nitrogen source for PHB production. These factors were chosen to generate a chemically defined production medium.

Using the generated mathematical models, the optimum condition for PHB production was estimated. According to the model predictions, the maximum PHB production and optical density could be achieved by using different combinations of different concentrations of maltose, ammonium sulfate, fruc- tose and ammonium chloride. This prediction was verified experimentally and the maximum PHB production was achieved when maltose, ammonium sulfate, fructose and ammonium chloride are 6.06 g/L, 1.09 g/L, 12.12 g/L and 4 g/L, respec- tively. The predicted value was 6 mg/L of PHB but the actual concentration obtained was slightly less than the expected value (actual value was 5.4 mg/L).

and flux to the TCA cycle should be shut down. These two pathways affect the availability of two substrates for poly(3HB) synthesis, NADPH and acetyl-CoA [36]. Depending on the generated mathematical model, the optimum combination of factors for maximum production was estimated as 6.06 g/L,

After a lag phase of approximately 20 h, the bacterial growth increased and OD600 reached 2.343 after 56 h during which the maximum PHB accumulation reached 1.42 g/L. In the same growth phase, 1.2 g/L of nitrogen was consumed out of an initial value of 1.6 g/L, whereas approximately 13.5 g/L of the supple- mented sugars were metabolized. Then, the bacterial growth continued slowly by feeding on the residual sugar and the amount of the accumulated PHB was decreased. In most mi- croorganisms, PHB is a food reserve that is degraded to provide carbon and energy when an external carbon source is ex- hausted [31,40].

In the present study, the biodegradable polymer PHB was tar- geted for enhancing its productivity from the local Egyptian isolate Microbacterium sp. WA81 using DOE tools. Due to the importance of carbon and nitrogen sources on the bioaccu- mulation, this study was conducted by screening different sources via two separate PBD experiments, and it was found that maltose and arginine had the most positive significant effect on the PHB accumulation, and fructose and ammo- nium chloride on the bacterial growth.

highest yield of PHB was achieved at C/N ratio of 8.2/1. The op- timized medium was eventually used to test the growth and PHB accumulation in a bioreactor (5 L) under pH-stat condi- tions to investigate the improvement in growth and production of PHB by the isolate under investigation. In the batch culti- vation, the produced PHB amount was extraordinarily increased

to be 1.5 g/L with a 78 fold increase of the production. This value was obtained even prior to optimizing the cultivation condi- tions at the bioreactor level, which indicates that optimizing the bioreactor condition could lead to increased PHB productivity making our isolate a potential high producer for industrial scale production of such valuable biopolymer.

