sues. The histopathological analysis confirmed these results. All the previous alterations in the liver and kidney could be ameliorated when BPA-treated rats were co-administrated either with GBE, mela- tonin or their combination. These natural substances could exhibit protective effects against BPA- induced hepato- and nephrotoxicity owing to their antioxidative and anti-inflammatory potentials.

This study was intended to examine the antioxidative effect of GBE and/or Mel against BPA-induced oxidative damage in the liver and kidney tissues of adult male rats. The present data showed that BPA caused significant increases in the plasma AST and ALT activ- ities indicating liver damage. These two enzymes are the most indicative markers of hepatocellular damage [37]. The enhanced activities of the plasma liver markers point out the cellular leakage and the loss of the functional integrity of membrane architecture [38]. The BPA-induced hepatotoxicity was ameliorated after the administration of Mel and/or GBE as indicated from the significant decreases in the hepatic activities of both AST and ALT as shown in. It was reported that GBE ameliorated the toxic effect of CCL4 [39]. Pre-treatment with Mel prior to thioacetamide induction in rats

TBARS, GSH, GST, CAT, SOD and GPx are important biomarkers of oxidative damage [41]. Our results indicated the increase in the level of TBARS and the decrease in the GSH level in the BPA- treated rats. The significant increase in the levels of hepatic TBARS was concomitant with significant decrease in the GSH level at a dose of 50 mg/kg BPA [42].

cantly attenuated the decreased level of GSH by BPA [43]. GSH is an essential intracellular hydrophilic antioxidant that participates in the catalytic cycles of many antioxidant enzymes such as glu- tathione peroxidase, glutathione reductase and glutathione-S- transferase [44,45]. The decreases in the specific activities of GPx and SOD in the liver of BPA-treated rats were recorded [42]. Glu- tathione peroxidase catalyzes the dismutation of the superoxide

from the attack of superoxide [47]. However, the treatments of the BPA-intoxicated rats with GBE and/or melatonin ameliorated the oxidative stress. Thus, the hepatic activities of SOD and GPx were significantly increased after GBE or Mel co-treatment with BPA. Previous findings indicated significant increases in the hepatic SOD and GPx activities after administration of either GBE or mela- tonin [48,45]. Our results showed significant increases in the activ-

enzymes in BPA + Mel-treated rats. Mel attenuated the hepatic increase in CAT induced by gamma-irradiation in adult male rats [53]. Regarding the BPA induction of renal toxicity, our study showed significant increase in the urea and creatinine levels in BPA-treated group. The accumulation of BPA-toxic metabolites and the inability of the kidney to eliminate them resulted in nephrotoxicity [54]. However, our study revealed that the treat- ment with BPA + GBE, BPA + Mel and BPA + GBE + Mel caused sig- nificant decrease in the urea and creatinine levels as compared with the BPA-treated group. These results are supported by previ- ous studies that showed the ameliorative role of GBE against nephrotoxicity [56]. Also, Mel prohibited acetaminophen-induced nephrotoxicity in adult male rats [55]. Our study revealed that

In conclusion, the wide use of BPA in the different plasticizers and other industries has a hazard effects on human today. Thus, we should limit the consumption of its products. GBE and Mel were observed as potent natural antioxidants. Owing to their antioxidant capacities; GBE, Mel and their combination exhibited protective effect on liver and kidney tissues against BPA-induced injury in rats. They could restore the liver and kidney functions, enzymatic and nonenzymatic antioxidants to control values. They also attenuated the lipid peroxidation and the proinflammatory status in livers and kidneys which was evidently appeared in the histopathological investigations. Thus, consumption of GBE and Mel could introduce health benefits to human against the hazards of BPA.

H2O and O2 [49]. However, the renal activities of GST, SOD and CAT were significantly increased in BPA + GBE-treated group com- pared to BPA-treated one. There was an increase in the renal SOD activity when adult male rats were administered with GBE plus gentamycin compared with gentamycin-administration [56]. Also, the current study showed that there were significant increases in the activities of the renal GST, SOD and CAT in the BPA + Mel- treated group compared with BPA-treated one. Furthermore, it has been indicated that these renal antioxidant enzymes were sig- nificantly increased in CCl4 plus melatonin treated-rats [57].

