blockchains, which are like computer programs but are stored and executed by everyone in the network autonomously. Blockchain oracles are entities what blockchain external systems, thereby permitting smart contracts to implement depending upon the inputs and outputs from the real world. These smart contracts can read and write data from the Blockchain and other sources utilizing oracles, process information, record transaction results, startup actions in systems off-chain, and more. All transactions are tamperproof and stored on the Blockchain to build trust [5]. This paper develops a blockchain-enabled node authentication scheme in an education system, which utilizes a new approach for the hash function.

Blockchain technology completely resolves the problems thanks to its distinctive technological advantages, such as decentralization, secu- rity, transparency, immutability, trust, efficiency, and accessibility [6]. Some blockchain-based education programs exist, although most exclusively address data integrity. Blockchain technology can be employed in the educational sector to secure educational records in a distributed environment [7].

The organization of the paper is as follows. Section II gives an overview of different solutions used in the proposed system; section III discusses the architecture of the proposed secure learning system. Finally, section IV illustrated the experiment and discussed the results.

Islam et al. suggest and evaluate a project to distribute test questions while guarding against leak [10] On the Blockchain, questionnaires are securely encrypted with a timestamp and stored using a smart contract that controls access times. This study has some limitations naming, What kind of blockchain technology will be used is not yet known. Addi- tionally, the authors provide a technique for selecting a test at random. With blockchain technology and smart contracts, the interaction be- tween students and professors is supported. Ledger is the only blockchain-based technology identified as having a use case for aca- demic publishing [11]. Smart contracts control the procedure of sharing

To manage and share multimedia material in online education, Guo et al. [13] create a public and private blockchain-based infrastructure mix targeting a new application sector. It enables students to generate lifelong academic credentials of credibility, helps protect the digital copyrights of works of multimedia provided by educational institutions, and promotes the growth of a worldwide community for the sharing of educational multimedia recourses. Additionally, there have been cases of fraud using several transactions.

concatenation and hashing of all the parameters that make up it. Existing blockchains (such as Bitcoin, Ethereum, and others) are distributed, manage their structure via tokens, and employ stack-based programming languages. By merging two successive hashes from the Merkle leaf from the bottom up and continuing the procedure on each tree level until the root was obtained, whereas the final hash was stored, Merkle trees are balanced binary hash trees. Merkle trees are balanced binary trees with data at the bottom of the tree and leaf-generated hashes as parent nodes. The first publication provides further informa- tion about the Merkle tree [17].

Blockchain in Security and Privacy. Ali et al. [21] presented a new group theory (GT)-based binary spring search (BSS) technique that comprises of hybrid deep neural network (DNN) system. The presented technique effectually identifies the intrusion in the IoT network. Pri- marily, the privacy-preserving technology can be executed utilizing a blockchain-based technique. The security of patient health records (PHR) is one of the important features of cryptography on the Internet because of their value and significance, preferably from the Internet of Medical Things (IoMT).One of a drawback this work suffers from over- head for using DNN.

Mondal et al. [24] introduce an EHR management method by combining a Blockchain multisignature stamp with a private channel structure. Multi-signature stamps tackle the question of data ownership and authority. A channel assurances that every party follow a general principle for preserving the Blockchain ledger. In this case, this work needs more development in data storage.

be based on chaotic systems whose extreme sensitivity to beginning circumstances and parameters makes the cryptosystem incredibly secure and resistant to cryptanalysis. Although chaos is an irregular motion, it is a deterministic phenomenon, and therefore the plaintext can be recovered entirely if the secret keys are precisely known. Additionally, Encrypt, Digest and Tag (EDT) should be brief, allowing for real-time application; this necessitates that the ciphertext length is the same as that of the plaintext. The area of chaotic cryptography has made great

rithm. Finally, Dynamic DNA HASH is done for all students in Score Rows and the hash is extracted and called ProfHas1. All students represent the professor for this subject and with the same steps that are built for all the satin that represents ProfHas1 n. After extracting the transition for all the ProfHas Professor, we do the Collection Transition Process of Operation M. Finally, connect blockchain is done for the hash of the extruder from the Merkle tree.

The 256-bit cryptosystem is secure against brute-force assaults. There have been numerous positive aspects of DNA computing discov- ered by later studies [28]. These include massive parallelism, large storage, and ultra-low power consumption. DNA cryptography is a relatively young subfield of cryptography that sprang out of the study of DNA computing; it uses DNA as an information carrier and contempo- rary biological technology as an implementation tool. The tremendous information density of DNA suggests it can efficiently address the one- time pad storage problem. Our method uses a chaotic map and a DNA grouped into four groups, 20 rounds each. Every round operates on five 32 bits hashing words (H0 to H4) with A to E as their temporary ver- sions. Functions and constants can be basic operations of all the rounds. Those constants are round (Kt) and message word constants (Wt.).

message modifications, confusion and diffusion qualities, resilience against birthday attacks, keyspace analysis, collision resistance, effi- ciency, and flexibility were all considered throughout the study. The results reveal that the presented function has virtually effective statis- tical features compared to prior chaotic hash methods. In future, the authors plan to test the proposed techniques utilizing the smart contracts and the Ethereum network dependent upon activating the verification, authentication, and transparency of marks. In addition, there is a need for a professional platform to deploy, schedule, and manage smart contracts.

