Recently, formal system description techniques, such as process algebras and petri nets, originating in computer science, have been applied to the modelling of complex biological systems [22,23,7,17,2,11,18,16]. These approaches offer facilities to reason about molecular networks in a compositional way such that models re- main open and allow an incremental description. Hence, it is possible to add data to an existing model without the need of building a completely new one. Various techniques are provided in this area to consider the model on different abstrac- tion levels reducing its size (possibly on cost of loosing information). According to the given semantics the corresponding low-level descriptions are generated au- tomatically (e.g. [6]) mostly in form of transition systems or stochastic simulation techniques are applied directly to the high-level language representations (e.g. [20]). In addition, high-level languages offer the possibility to exploit the regular structure of biological systems during analysis.

In process calculi the usual way of decomposing a network of biochemical reac- tions into components is such that each molecule corresponds to a process that is basically a finite state machine describing the possible behaviours and conforma- tions of the molecule. For example, an enzyme molecule can be free, i.e. able to bind to a certain substrate molecule, or bound to a complex capable of dissociation. The molecule can also degenerate meaning that its state machine moves to a deadlock state. Interactions between molecules are modelled via parallel synchronisation of processes (with respect to certain behaviours) or channels are used for communica- tion between processes. Information about the current population of a species are encoded only indirectly leading to difficulties in the quantitative analysis especially if reaction rates, determining the speed of the reactions and depending on substrate populations, come into play.

The paper is organised as follows. In Section 2 we give some preliminary defini- tions related to the tensor product and Section 3 formally describes the underlying model. The SAN representation is derived in Section 4. Finally, Section 5 concludes the paper and gives directions of further research.

The system evolves from one state to another by a set of transitions that are related to the events, i.e. to the chemical reactions. We are interested in the tem- poral interaction amongst large numbers of molecules to understand the functional activity of the network. According to the common chemical kinetics, we associate a rate with units of reciprocal time with each transition leading to a representation in terms of a CTMC, that is a stochastic process with discrete state space where the future evolution of the process depends only on the current state (and not on the process history or the current time instant).

The generator matrix Q for a network of biochemical reactions is always sparse since each state has at most only I transitions. All row sums are zero and the negative exit rates appear on the main diagonal. However, this representation yields to a mathematical treatment in terms of matrix operations which is advantageous for the realization of analysis algorithms and the definition of composition operations that match operators of a specific matrix algebra (cf. Section 4).

A SAN consists of a number of individual stochastic automata that operate more or less independently of each other. Our idea is to construct an automaton for each chemical species which counts the number of corresponding molecules. The rates at which each automaton increments its counter are local in the sense that they constitute the multiplicative factor the corresponding species contributes to the overall reaction rate.

on the main diagonal. Now, let R = {R1,... , RI } be a set of reactions such that Ri has the form (1) and {S1,... , SJ } are the different chemical species that are involved in R. The generator matrix Q of the underlying CTMC of R is given by

a stochastic automaton that counts the number of corresponding molecules. The rates at which each automaton increments its counter are local in the sense that they constitute the multiplicative factor the corresponding species contributes to the overall reaction rate. This ensures a modular design process similar as provided by processes calculi. The discrete quantities of interest (i.e. the respective populations of chemical species) can be directly retrieved from the local states of the automata. The transition matrix of the underlying stochastic model, that is a continuous-time Markov chain, is not generated but implicitly represented as a Kronecker product of (smaller) component matrices. The attraction of our framework lies in that the representation remains compact, even as the number of states of the underlying model begins to explode, and the structure of the network of biochemical reactions is reflected in the SAN description.

A large variety of numerical or simulative analysis algorithms for the solution of SANs exists. Of particular interest are techniques using decision diagrams (e.g. [8]) exploiting the fact that for systems, as considered in this paper, the component matrices are all sparse. As future research we plan case studies with tools supporting Kronecker based representations to analyse gene expression and cell signalling.

