3 Thanks to Jane Hillston, Stephen Gilmore, and the rest of the Edinburgh PEPA group for invaluable discussions and feedback during the development of the bond-calculus, and to our anonymous reviews for their thorough comments. Thanks also go to Juliet Cooke and Jos Gibbons for commenting on a draft of this paper. This work was supported by grant EP/L01503X/1 for the University of Edinburgh School of Informatics Centre for Doctoral Training in Pervasive Parallelism (http://pervasiveparallelism.inf.ed.ac.uk/) from the UK Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council (EPSRC).

each component is either a single site pi = s, or a cluster of multiple colocated sites pi = (s1| ... |sti ). For example, a simple pattern a  b  c allows chemical reactions to occur between three distinct molecules presenting sites a, b, and c respectively; whilst the pattern a  (b|c) allows reactions between site a on one molecule with sites b and c on another; and a pattern (a|b|c) allows unimolecular reactions involving a, b, and c all on a single molecular complex.

In Section 3 we saw how gene regulation can be modelled at a molecular level, by modelling all possible binding states of the regulatory region. This level of detail is not, however, necessary to give a useful model of the regulatory interactions in a network. In this section we will give a general purpose, high level model of gene transcription and translation in the bond-calculus, and show how affinity patterns and general kinetic laws may be used to capture the patterns of regulation which interconnect them. We will then look at the specific example of the Plant Circadian Clock [32].

These species can interact at a number of sites according to the central dogma of molecular biology : interaction at site cX causes GeneX to be transcribed into its RNA form mRNAX , whilst interaction at site tX causes mRNAX to be translated into its protein form ProteinX . We also allow the mRNAX to decay by inter- acting at site dMX and for ProteinX to decay by interacting at site dX . Finally, ProteinX has an additional site iX (influence) which does not change its state, but will allow it to act as an activator or repressor for other reactions.

