These methodologies form a toolkit for analyzing the perfor- mance of the studied information systems for a finite censored per- iod of time. The analysis takes place in the context of determining: 1. The time period between failures in the studied system; 2. The num-

The object of the study is the process of counteracting the infor- mation security protection subsystem (ISPS) impact of artificial threats to information security (ATIS). The subject of the study is the theory of Markov random processes for the analytical descrip- tion of the object and the theory of mathematical programming for the statement and solution of the corresponding optimization task. The aim of the study is the analytical formalization of the optimal scheme of information security (SIS) in the target information system.

Thus, the objectives of the study are 1. Analytically formalize in the paradigm of Markov chains the relationship between the set of ATIS and the structured ISPS in the appropriate quality metric; 2. Based on the received mathematical apparatus to carry out a state- ment of the optimization task for the composition of ISPS taking into account that the target information system at the set moment has to be in a functional condition with the corresponding proba- bility; 3. To test the proposed method of operational optimization of the composition of ISPS for a real information system and ana- lyze the results.

the probability that the j-th protective mechanism neutralizes the effect of the i-th ATIS. A complete set of m vectors of the form (12) integrally characterizes the ability of a structured ISPS to counter- act a certain multiplication of n ATISs. Moreover, considering the content of the sets of the form (12), to counteract the i-th ATIS can simultaneously several protective mechanisms. This fact can be analytically described by the expression

The positive effect of the implementation of the method pre- sented in Section 3 in the target information system is possible only after the analysis of operational data to determine the types of ATISs, the impact of which was recorded by ISPS. ATIS types were classified in the metrics proposed by the Open Web Applica- tion Security Project (OWASP). At https://owasp.org/www-project- top-ten/you can see a list of current ATIS types in order of danger.

posed mathematical apparatus is that all optimal SIS include R2 and R4. Instead, the relevance of R1 is already manifested for long censored time intervals T3, T4. Oriented on the critical application of the studied information system, this situation is normal. In the first place are the issues of reliable user authentication and the integrity of information resources. Since the set of users of infor- mation resources and the list of services is strictly controlled, the

