The next definition introduces the set of valid expressions for given sets F, R of algorithms. We will denote this set by Exp(F, R). These expressions represent the construction of a message by applying deterministic algorithms to bitstrings (either randomly generated or chosen by the principals).

first message, or always returns an encryption of the second message; the goal of the attacker is to find which. The intuition behind IND-CPA security is that, for a polynomial-time observer, the encryption function reveals nothing about the underlying plaintext. A precise definition follows.

The next theorem describes this intuition in a rigorous (if a little involved) way. It expresses IND-CPA security in terms of probabilistic statements by using the well-known fact that an asymmetric encryption scheme is not IND-CPA secure iff an attacker can compromise its IND-CPA security by performing only one query to the oracle. The resulted is stated using the same notational conventions as above.

Example 3.7 It is possible to represent in our model an attack to a 6-round version of DES using the well-known differential cryptanalysis technique. We are able to define a set of algorithms and probabilistic statements about them, and use these properties to estimate (using the distribution of maximum entropy) that, by en- crypting 200 pairs of plaintexts, an attacker can guess 30 of the 56 key bits with probability 0.65. This technique is somewhat involved; we present a simplified de- scription of it using our framework in the Appendix. A detailed description of this attack is given in [28].

SA. We first present an intuitive description of the result. Suppose that A is able to use the knowledge obtained about messages exchanged in the network, together with its own knowledge about the cryptographic primitives, to correctly uncover the bitstring corresponding to the expression E with a non-negligible probability.

As mentioned in the introduction, the work presented here tries to bridge the gap between the symbolic and computational approaches to the analysis of security protocols. This is a line of work which has been widely explored since [1]. Different proposals have dealt with this problem from different perspectives. In [2], algebraic properties of the cryptographic functions are included in the model. Several formal models for analysing guessing attacks have been proposed [21,15], some of which include probabilistic analysis [3]. Work has also been aimed at the computational validation of the cryptographic assumptions of the Dolev-Yao model [16], and even at automatically obtaining or checking cryptographically sound proofs of the secu- rity of protocols - namely using the CryptoVerif tool [9] and the BPW model [26]. Of course, a thorough comparison of our approach with other proposals in the liter- ature (both extensions of the Dolev-Yao such as those mentioned above and other information-theoretic approaches to security such as those presented in [4,11,22]) shall deserve close attention in the near future.

because the sum on the right-hand side is telescopic. The left-hand side is non-negligible by hypothesis, and thus so is the right hand side. The assumption that Q, BF return an answer in polynomial time for every possible input is necessary here, since we are running these algorithms with inputs that would be impossible in the original setting.

Example 3.7 (Cryptanalysis of DES) In this example we show that it is possible to represent in our model an attack to a 6-round version of DES using the well-known differential cryptanalysis technique. We refer the reader to [28] for a detailed description of the DES encryption scheme and this cryptanalysis technique. For simplicity, we will ignore the security parameter during this description.

