Many formalisms originally developed by computer scientists to model systems of interacting components have been applied to biology, also with extensions to al- low more precise descriptions of the biological behaviours [3,5,7,10,17,18]. Model checking permits the verification of properties of a system (expressed as logical for- mulas) by exploring all the possible behaviours of the system. It has been success- fully applied to analysis of biological systems. Examples of well-established formal frameworks that can be used to model, simulate and model check descriptions of biological systems are [13,11,7].

However, model checking techniques have traditionally suffered from the state explosion problem. A method for trying to avoid such a problem exploits the nat- ural decomposition of the system. The goal is to verify properties of individual components and infer that these hold in the complete system. A class of properties whose satisfaction is preserved from the components to the complete system was will give in Section 4. The sync-automaton has two states. For each state we display only the atomic propositions true in that state. There is a NOSY NC move from between the two states and three looping moves each representing synchronisation with two other sync-automata.

It is reasonable to define a computation as a fullpath in the semantics of the sync-program. We need to show that every fullpath in the semantics of PI projected onto J is a fullpath in the semantics of PJ . Firstly, we prove that every path in MI projected onto J is a path in MJ .

When cells are provided with lactose, the lac operon is induced. An inducer molecule binds to a specific site on the Lac repressor, causing dissociation of the repressor from the operators. The inducer in the lac operon system is allolactose, an isomer of lactose. When unrepressed, transcription of lac genes is increased, but not at its highest level.

In addition, availability of glucose, the preferred energy source of bacteria, affects the expression of the lac genes. Expressing the genes for proteins that metabolise sugars such as lactose is wasteful when glucose is abundant. The lac operon deals with it through a positive regulation. The effect of glucose is mediated by cAMP, as a coactivator, and an activator protein known as cAMP receptor protein (CRP). When glucose is absent, CRP-cAMP binds to a site near the lac promoter and concentration level which are affected by activation and repression of lac operon PI . When reacting with lactose, this enzyme, at low level, can produce allolactose or, at high level, can produce glucose and galactose. Since galactose does not participate in regulation we do not include it in our model.

We have shown that truth of ACTL formulae is preserved from sync-subprograms to the program. Failure to verify a property in sync-subprograms does not help establishing its satisfaction in the whole program. However, it is worth noting, that in some cases model inspection aids finding a larger sync-subprogram that allows for successful verification of the property.

A subprogram can be looked at as an abstraction of the program. In [9] property preservation is investigated in the framework of abstract interpretation. Other approaches consider reducing transition systems so that a particular property is preserved [2]. In [6] the authors consider a modular approach to quantitative model checking in a biological context.

We believe that our property preservation theorem can be extended to preserve all ACTL* properties in the way used in [12]. We plan to improve our approach with a weaker notion of fairness, in the line of [1], and with the possibility of describing dynamic systems with run-time creation of sync-automata. A quantitative extension of the method would be desirable in order to describe the systems more precisely.

