The Hypoxanthine is normally belongs to heterocycles family which peculiarly contains pyrimidine and imidazole rings. Hypox- anthine is a purine derivative with nitrogenous base rarely found as a constituent nucleic acid [1]. Heterocycles showing in their strange structures where the pyrimidine ring is fused to azolic moieties, are interesting systems being with important biochemi- cal, pharmacological and physicochemical property [2,3]. During the recent decades numerous pyrimidine derivatives have found to have wide clinical and pharmacological applications [4]. Partic- ularly, fused pyrimidine with Imidazole ring persists to attract con- siderable attention since their great practical usefulness, primarily due to very wide spectrum of biological activities [5,6]. The hypox- anthine naturally has different Tautomerism which resolves the specific prototype of hydrogen bond donors and acceptors present in a specific molecule. Similarly, the fused imidazole and its deriva- tives are generally having bioactivity against inflammatory media- tors [7].

After monitoring the literature, so far, no work has been found to determine the reaction path mechanism and structure activity relationship on hypoxanthine for the interpretation of physico- chemical property. In this work, the detailed analysis is carried out to find out the background reason of the compound to be pharmaceutical active. The experimental and theoretical molecu- lar spectroscopy tools have been used for investigating the molecule.

Since the existence of inductive and resonance effect in the rings and adopted atoms, the molecule is much reactive and induce new drug property. In this molecule, there were eight C-N bonds found, among them, the bond length of N11-C13 and C1-N2 were lesser than rest of others since it was imine group of bonds. The bond length of C-N in pyrimidine ring found to be lesser than imi- dazole ring in order to comfort the pyrimidine ring. The heteronu- clear bonds C4-N10, C3-N11, C1-N6 and N2-C3 were having approximately same bond length which was less than C5-N6 which is due to the existence of @O. The arrangement of hetero nuclear atoms in the chemical bonds in the molecule is usually increase the covalent energy in considerable way which tends to produce the increment of molecular orbital energy difference. This situation in the composite molecule generates the hyper chemical activity which may be intensive pharmacological character.

cussion, it was clear that, the chemical shift was found to be same in two places where the imine groups were placed and the effect of the same was observed. This was the root cause of the inducement of drug property. The other two different observation of chemical shift illustrated additional factor which react more for the stabi- lization of the drug effect.

The Molecular electrostatic potentials (MEPs) usually provided the information regarding chemical reactivity or the biological activity of a compound. The spatial distribution and the values of the electrostatic potential determine the attack of an electrophilic or of a nucleophilic agent as the primary event of a chemical reac- tion [40]. The three-dimensional nature of the electrostatic poten- tial makes it difficult to simultaneously visualize the spatial distribution and the magnitude of the electrostatic potential. Var- ious approaches have been made to indicate parts of the electro- static potential. Any point in the space around a molecule is characterized by a specific value of its electrostatic potential. The electrostatic potential on a molecular surface is mainly significant since it is on the molecular surface that molecules come into close contact with chemical reagents or biological receptors [41].

dipole moments concentrated over the molecule were supported by charges obtained from a standard Mulliken population analysis [42]. The two charge depletion zones were found between O and CAH bonds of hexagonal structure and N and NAH bond of five membered rings. Such inverse effect of split dipole moments of molecule exposed its good inhibition character.

The force constant of chemical bonds and resultant chemical reactive energy of intra molecular interactions can be measured by the ionization potential [43]. The ionization potential is observed to be 1.37 and 1.18 and if it is greater than unity it will ensure the moderate force constant. Accordingly, the effective val- ues are supposed to be sufficient to maintain the stabilized chem- ical reactive energy in molecular site. The Electronegativity of a molecule is an important parameter which assesses the local electro-chemical steadiness for the vital application of the predic- tion of centre of magnetic polarity of molecule [44]. Here, both parameters were found to be 4.09 and 4.02 in IR and UV region respectively. The observed values were found to be enormously high and it is able to bind with protein complex. It also demon- strated the spontaneous accumulation of electron cloud to produce

ated [47]. This was achieved by the fusing of two rings and most of enriched antibiotic compounds would be the derivatives of this structure. From this discussion, it was concluded that, since the compound having hyper symmetrical polarizations, it was strongly approved the pharmaceutical property.

Here, the several transitions have been observed over entire compound among which some of the transitions causing major drug property have been identified. In the first case, within the six membered ring, the energy of 5.18 and 6.27 kcal/mol were transferred from C1-N2 to C3 and C3-N11 respectively which were ment of the heat content of molecular system absorbed from exter- nal [49]. Usually, the DH is a positive change in endothermic reac- tions according which, in this present case, the chemical reaction was found to be conserved and the considerable potential energy consumed for fusing both the rings. The specific heat capacity of the present compound also found to be increased with respect to temperature. The kinetic energy of the system of molecules was

