In this work, we will reason on how a given focused proof, where atoms are assigned with some polarity, can be transformed into another focused proof, where the polarity assignment to atoms is changed. This will allow, in principle, transforming a proof obtained using one proof system into a proof using another proof system. More specifically, using the intuitionistic focused system LJF restricted to Harrop formulas, we define a procedure, introducing cuts, for transforming a focused proof where an atom is assigned with positive polarity into another focused proof where the same atom is assigned negative polarity and vice- versa. Then we show how to eliminate these cuts, obtaining a very interesting result: while the process of eliminating a cut on a positive atom gives rise to a proof with one smaller cut, in the negative case the number of introduced cuts grows exponentially. We end the paper by showing how to use maximal multi-focusing identify proofs in LJF , giving rise to a 1-1 translation between maximal proofs in LJF and proofs in the natural deduction system for intuitionistic logic NJ, restricted to Harrop formulas.

according to their right introduction rules: positive connectives do not have invert- ible right rules, while negative connectives are those whose right introduction rules are invertible. The polarity of a non atomic formula is then given by the polarity of its outermost connective. The interesting fact is that atomic formulas can be arbitrarily assigned as positive or negative, without affecting the completeness of the focusing discipline.

Interestingly, while the process of eliminating a cut on a positive atom gives rise to a proof with one smaller cut, in the negative case the number of introduced cuts grows exponentially. This difference in the cut-elimination algorithm is most defi- nitely related to the different evaluation strategies according to the Curry-Howard isomorphism, where cut-elimination corresponds to computation in a functional programming setting. We plan to investigate this better in the future.

ones: some pre-chosen atoms are considered negative and the rest are considered positive. That is, one is free to assign as positive or negative the polarity to atoms. From this, a formula is positive if its main connective is positive or it is a positive atom and is negative if its main connective is negative or it is a negative atom.

The transformations below might not preserve the size of a proof. In fact, it may well happen that after a proof is transformed from one proof system to another, the proof increases exponentially. Although this is relevant in some cases, such as in Proof Carrying Code, it is not that relevant when trying to unify the library of results obtained with different proof systems.

It turns out that the cut may not permute upwards on the left premise if A is negative. In fact, on focusing on a left formula F like in the last Section, if the resulting atom focusing on the left is negative, it has necessarily to be A and the proof finishes with an Il rule. For all other cases we could proceed as in the last Section.

Proof. Consider two neighbouring bipoles: if the positive phase of the top bipole permutes with the negative phase of the bottom bipole, then in an unfocused form we can perform the permutation and merge the two bipoles by uniting their positive and negative phases, obtaining another (multi-)focused proof. Since this is only a re-arrangement of rules applications, this operation terminates.	2

Corollary 6.4 There is a 1-1 correspondence between maximal proofs in mLJFH restricted to positive atoms and proofs in mLJFH restricted to negative atoms. Hence there is a 1-1 correspondence between mLJFH restricted to positive atoms and proofs in NJ restricted to Harrop formulas.

As the second contribution, we have proposed a multi-focused system mLJF for the focused intuitionistic system LJF [12]. We then showed how to use the notion of maximal proofs in order to identify proofs in intuitionistic logic. The same results have been established in [5] for the multiplicative-additive fragment of linear logic and in [4] for classical logic.

