In this work we propose what we consider the first quantum algorithm for multiobjective combinatorial optimization, at least to the best of our knowledge. The proposed algorithm is based on the adiabatic algo- rithm of Farhi et al. and it is constructed by mapping a multiobjective combinatorial optimization problem into a Hamiltonian using a convex combination among objectives. We present mathematical properties of the eigenspectrum of the associated Hamiltonian and prove that the quantum adiabatic algorithm can find Pareto-optimal solutions provided certain convex combinations of objectives are used and the underlying multiobjective problem meets certain restrictions.

Farhi et al. [9] presented a new quantum algorithm and computation paradigm more friendly to optimization problems known as Quantum Adiabatic Computing. This new paradigm is based on a natural phenomenon of quantum annealing [6]; thus, analogously to classical annealing, optimization problems are mapped onto a natural optimization phenomenon, and hence, optimal solutions are found by just letting this phenomenon to take place.

In this work, as our main contribution, we show that the quantum adiabatic algorithm of Farhi et al. [9] can be used to find Pareto-optimal solutions in finite time provided certain restrictions are met. In Theorem 4.1, we identify two struc- tural properties that any multiobjective optimization problem must fulfill in order to use the abovementioned adiabatic algorithm.

The outline of this paper is the following. In Section 2 we present a brief overview of multiobjective combinatorial optimization and introduce the notation used throughout this work; in particular, several new properties of multiobjective combinatorial optimization are also presented that are of independent interest. In Section 3 we explain the quantum adiabatic theorem, which is the basis of the adia- batic algorithm. In Section 4 we explain the adiabatic algorithm and its application to combinatorial multiobjective optimization. In Section 5 we sketch a proof of our main result of Theorem 4.1. In Section 6 we show how to use the adiabatic algo- rithm in a concrete problem. Finally, in Section 7 we present a list of challenging open problems. Full proofs of all theorems and lemmas appear in [2].

A multiobjective combinatorial optimization problem (or MCO) is an optimization problem involving multiple objectives over a finite set of feasible solutions. These objectives typically present trade-offs among solutions and in general there is no single optimal solution. In this work, we follow the definition of Kung, Luccio and Preparata [12].

According to Theorem 4.1, we can only find all supported solutions. Other works showed that the number of non-supported solutions can be much larger than the number of supported solutions [8]. Hence, it is interesting to construct a quantum algorithm that could find an approximation to all Pareto-optimal solutions.

