tiveness of mobile apps for the delivery of asthma self-management programs [16], which is however changing in the last years [19], [20], and both patients and health- care professionals are strongly supporting the mHealth interventions for asthma self-management [20] [21]. Furthermore, big data analytics using machine learning (ML) methods enable implementation of useful early predictors of risk of developing exacerbations [22], [23], [24], [25]. However, most of the proposed classification or regression prediction approaches only consider monitoring of one parameter (e.g. ACD or FEV1), focus on identifying who is at risk of developing an exacerbation and not when, and do not consider short-term personalized prediction of asthma control status to allow for personalized patient guidance in order to reduce the exacerbation risk.

The work presented in this paper focuses on the design aspects and first pro- totype implementation of the personalized Decision Support System (DSS) of the myAirCoach platform. More specifically, this work proposes a novel multi-model approach for the short-term prediction of asthma control status, which provides flexibility with respect to the set of collected clinical parameters for the implemen- tation of the rule-based decision support and allows for personalized guidance of the patients for optimal self-management of their asthma condition. The remaining sections of this paper are organized as follows: the Methods section provides an overview of the myAirCoach DSS, along with details on the short-term prediction approach proposed, including the machine learning algorithms used to train the models, the dataset and experimental setup and the annotation and pre-processing steps; the Results section presents the results of the ACD-based short-term predic- tion and the multi-parameter personalized short-term prediction results; and the last section discusses the limitations of the current study and future work, and presents the conclusion of the current study.

procedures and measurements [27]. Increasing the daily control of asthma through well-targeted self-management and personalized interventions has the potential to decrease the risk of developing exacerbations [12], [28], [29]. Thus, in the design of the DSS implemented in myAirCoach platform one of the major importance aspects is to optimize and personalize the short-term prediction of asthma control taking into account the established home monitoring procedures and measurements.

network in order to extract important high level information (e.g. warnings, alerts) both for patients and medical doctors. Machine learning algorithms are employed to train personalized classification models for two prediction tasks: short-term predic- tion of asthma control level and long-term prediction of exacerbation risks. For each type of prediction, the rule-based decision support modules are generating daily and real-time personalized patient advices and notifications, which are communicated to the patient mobile application and alerts for the medical personnel directed to the dedicated information visualization module.

The ACD is one of the most recommended numerical asthma control tools, being considered as sensitive to change in symptom control and widely used by patients for self-monitoring of their asthma condition [9]. The ACD questionnaire is used to calculate a daily score from 0-6, where a score of 0.0-0.75 is classified as well-

In addition to the standardized approach to establish the ACD-based asthma control status, an additional annotation approach is explored. The two main factors leading us to this approach are: (i) a deviation in score larger than 0.50 between two consecutive days is considered clinically significant, and (ii) for some patients (e.g. uncontrolled asthma) the baseline is not usually in the green status, but in the yellow zone. Thus, the proposed modified ACD-based annotation rule considers that the current day status changes only if the ACD average score deviates with more than 0.5 compared to the previous day, while the thresholds between status intervals are kept the same as in the standard approach.

For the purpose of this study, we have selected 4 classification algorithms, namely: Support Vector Machines (SVM), Random Forests, AdaBoost and Bayesian Network. The first three classifiers have been tested on many databases from var- ious application domains and have proven overall superior performance [33]. Fur- thermore, these algorithms were also considered in our preliminary study [34]. In addition, the Bayesian Network classifier is also considered in the current work, as it has recently demonstrated good performance in the specific application domain, in the prediction task of asthma exacerbations [35].

Support Vector Machines (SVM) is a well-known kernel method for supervised learning, widely used in bioinformatics, and known to perform very well especially for the binary (2-class) problem even with the linear implementation. Kernels are employed for the non-linear classification, improving the accuracy for classification of high-dimensional entities. Gaussian and higher degree polynomial kernels are employed for a more flexible decision boundary, with the risk of overfitting.

Random Forests is a bagging (bootstrap aggregating) algorithm, used to per- form both regression and classification tasks. A large number of individual classifiers (usually between 500 and 1000) are built at training time, which are small classifica- tion trees, and are applied to different bootstrap samples of the training dataset. For the estimation of classification performance the out-of-bag (OOB) error is used. For each bootstrap sample used to build a tree, there are samples left behind, which are not included in the training set. The OOB performance is estimated as the average performance of individual models on their left out samples.

AdaBoost is a widely used classification boosting algorithm, which creates a highly accurate prediction rule (or strong learner) by combining many week and inaccurate rules (weak learners). The weak learners are slightly correlated with true classification while the strong learner is arbitrarily well-correlated with the true classification. Similarly to Random Forests, the AdaBoost weak learners are simple classification trees. Usually between 500 and 1000 weak classifiers are combined iteratively, and at each iteration the weights of misclassified entities are boosted (increased) and a score is assigned to each classifier. The linear combination of the classifiers from each stage builds the final classifier.

consists of daily assessment of asthma control through various tools (e.g. ACD, spirometry) for a total of 76 patients. During this phase, a total of 1471 ACD questionnaires were filled online by the patients, the usage of reliever and controller was reported 1472 times, a total of 998 FeNO measurements were performed, and 3221 spirometry measurements were recorded. Being a dataset collected in real life conditions, from actual asthma patients who are self-monitoring their condition, this initial dataset is characterized by many consistency issues: failure to fill-in the ACD questionnaire on a daily basis, filling in the questionnaire twice and perform- ing only one spirometry measurement, performing FeNo measurement, but not the spirometry, failure to report on medicine usage on a daily basis, etc.

The statistical analysis in this study was accomplished using R language as an entire environmental tool which contains implemented functions and a variety of classifiers, including SVM, Random Forests, AdaBoost and Bayesian Network. In order to evaluate the classification results of each used classifier, due to the rather small size of the data set, we utilized 10-fold cross validation, as a more robust approach for predictive accuracy estimation. Reported overall classification accuracy is defined as the percent of samples that were classified correctly when the trained model is applied back to the data used to train it. The process to reach the training of the various classification models used by the multi-model schema for personalized prediction of asthma control status is presented in the following.

In a first study the four different classifiers were extensively tested with respect to their prediction capability using only the ACD measurements. More specifically, the ACD scores of previous days as used as features (input variables) and the current day control status, determined from the assessment of current day ACD score, as annotation variable. Both, the standard and the modified methods were considered for the annotation of the control status based on the ACD score. The 3 previous ACD scores used as input are collected (reported by the patient) in a window of

Best accuracy, of 80.41 percent, is demonstrated by the Random Forests algo- rithm in the case of consistent data collection (ACD reported daily during previous 3 days) and using the modified ACD annotation rule (ACD1) to establish the output asthma control classes. Overall, SVM and Random Forests algorithms demonstrate superior performance in all cases when compared to the AdaBoost and the Bayesian Network algorithms for the ACD-based short-term prediction task. With respect to the data collection window, the accuracy of all algorithms is slightly decreased when the training data includes also samples of inconsistent data collection.

