With the continuous popularization and application of smart devices, a large amount of data is accumulated. How to get useful information from those data has become a major problem facing mankind, and data mining technology has come into being [1]. At present, Data mining has been applied to medical, education, finance and other fields. As one means of data mining, cluster analysis has been widely concerned and studied by scholars [2,3]. Clustering is unsupervised learning, it is applicable to data sets without prior knowledge, such as the inherent structure cognition of biological populations, commercial location based on user location information, traffic recommendation of search engines, and other more fields [4,5].

multi-FCVI, and DS theory. From the perspective of parallel and serial, three ensemble model frameworks (DSMFCE-I, DSMFCE-II and DSMFCE-III) are proposed. Finally, this paper uses manual datasets and UCI datasets to simulate and verify the proposed DSMFCE. The simu- lations show that DSMFCE has good stability and accuracy in clustering validity evaluation.

based on the following 2 aspects: (1) FCVI only based on membership. Such as PC index [20], Modified Partition Coefficient [21] and P index proposed by Chen [22]. (2) FCVI based with membership and data ge- ometry. Such as Xie-Beni index [23], Wang proposed the VHY validity index [24], Naderipour proposed a fuzzy cluster-validity index based on the topology structure [25], and Tang proposed a fuzzy clustering val- idity index induced by triple center relation [26]. Study on the WCVEM

Therefore, this paper proposed a clustering validity ensemble model (DSMFCE) based on the combination of multi-fuzzy clustering algo- rithms, multi-FCVI and DS theory. Clustering algorithm ensemble uses the membership and clustering center of multi-fuzzy clustering algo- rithms to improve the generalization ability of the DSMFCE. Then inputs the updated cluster centers and membership degrees into multi-FCVI which can improve the adaptability of DSMFCE. The values of multi- FCVI are ensemble by D-S evidence theory to obtain each validity index basic probability assignment (BPA). Finally, the decision module is used to output the optimal number of the clustering. The paper also discusses the ensemble framework of multi-fuzzy clustering algorithms, separation between classes, and proposed the FS index (VFS) [37], which gives a better grasp of the overall degree of separation between classes. Know combines VXB and VFS to propose the VK validity function (VK) [38]. Wu changed the scale operation mode and proposed the new validity function (VPCAES) [39] by using the exponential operation method. VPCAES will normalize the distribution coefficient and index and can cope with noisy data well. However, VPCAES relies too much on the clustering center and falls into local optimization. Pakhiar and Ban- dyopadhyay proposed the PBMF clustering validity function (VPBMF) in

The embryonic DS theory was proposed by Dempster in 1967 [52]. Shafer introduce the trust functions into the embryonic DS theory pro- posed an intact uncertainty reasoning theory, that is the Dempster- Shafer (DS) theory [53]. The DS theory is often used to model multi- object information fusion, because it can model uncertainty flexibly and effectively without prior probabilities [54,55].

By ensemble single fuzzy clustering algorithm with multi-FCVI, such as DS-FCVE, the ability to adapt to the dataset is still poor due to the different ways of updating U0 and V0 of the initial clustering algorithm. In this section, multi-fuzzy clustering algorithms are introduced into DS- FFCVM, and an ensemble model based on multi-fuzzy clustering algo- rithms and multi-FCVI was proposed (DSMFCE). The stability and ac- curacy are improved by changing the structure of DS-FFCVM. DSMFCE is makeup with five parts. The first part, multi-fuzzy clustering algo- rithms and their corresponding updated membership degrees and clus- tering centers are used. The second part is calculating the value of multi- FCVI. The third part is to construct the validity index BPA function by regarding multi-FCVI as a hypothese. The fourth part is to fuse the in- formation of multi-FCVI through the DS theory. The fifth part is to design the decision module then output the optimal c. Therefore, this section integrates the five parts of DSMFCE by using series and parallel ensemble methods, and finally proposes three clustering ensemble models, DSMFCE-I, DSMFCE-I and DSMFCE-III.

of all BPA functions are input into DS theory to obtained the belief de- gree values of different c. Finally, decision module judges the optimal c corresponding to the maximum confidence. From the structure diagram, it can be found that the multi-FCM, FCVI and BPA function are inde- pendent and parallel before D-S fusion, and they do not interfere with each other. Finally, the overall results are inputted into D-S evidence

DS-FCVE is multi-FCVI ensemble based on single Fuzzy clustering algorithm, DSMFCE-II is the ensemble result of multi-fuzzy clustering algorithms and multi-FCVI and then weighted combination to obtain the optimal number of clustering. For this reason, this section compares DSMFCE-II with the DS-FCVE based on GAKFCM, KFCM, WKFCM, and FCM separately. To observe whether the performance of DSMFCE-II improves in the selection of the final cluster number. Validity optimal c. For led7 dataset, only DSMFCE-II can get the optimal c. For wine and zoo datasets, only DSMFCE-II can get the optimal c. Only VMPC cannot get the optimal c for heart and wpbc datasets. The optimal c cannot be found for ibeacon. The optimal clustering number judgment

for wpbc dataset. Just FWSCF cannot get the optimal c for balance dataset. DWSVF, WSCVI cannot get the optimal c for breast and bupa datasets. None of the schemes could find optimal c for ibeacon dataset. DSMFCE-II can find the optimal c for led7 dataset.

m = 2.0 is used in the above experimental processes. In order to verify the stability of the proposed model in the face of different m, m=1.5, m=2.0, m=2.5, m=3 and m = 5 were selected in this paper to observe the accuracy of DSMFCVE-II under different m. The selected datasets

