The method for automatic theorem proving proposed in [6], called Polynomial Ring Calculus, is an algebraic proof mechanism based on handling polynomials over finite fields. Although useful in general domains, as in first-order logic, certain non-truth-functional logics and even in modal logics (see [1]), the method is particularly apt for deterministic and non-deterministic many-valued logics, as shown here. The aim of the present paper is to show how the method can be extended to any finite-valued non-deterministic semantics, and also to explore the computational character of the method through the development of a software capable of translating provability in deterministic and non-deterministic finite-valued logical systems into operations on polynomial rings.

where the use of the so-called hidden variables (due to the non-truth-functional character of the paraconsistent semantics) was proposed. A polynomial version for the monadic fragment of first-order logic (FOL) has been given in [8], where it is also shown how any finite function can be expressed by means of polynomials over finite fields (cf. Theorem 3.1, p. 6). The method of polynomials can also be seen as a heuristic device able in some cases to discover new simple logical systems or new properties of logic systems, as shown in [10] and [11]. More recently, in [1] the method of proof by polynomials has been extended to modal logics.

In [2], and in other papers, A. Avron proposes the concept of non-deterministic truth-values through a generalization of the usual matrices, where the truth-value of a given complex formula is non-deterministically selected within a set of options. This non-deterministic approach, when applied to many-valued matrices, extends the notion of truth-functionality, at least when the non-deterministic character of the choices in question is finitely bounded.

wider range of logics that are not characterizable by means of ordinary finite ma- trices. Although the notions of analyticity in philosophy and logic do not coincide, they are certainly connected: in his book The Roots of Reference, of 1974, W. V.

As expected, an ordinary (deterministic) matrix is identified with an Nmatrix whose functions in O always return singletons. In this way, non-deterministic ma- trices constitute a genuine generalization of the deterministic ones. Two examples bellow illustrate how such semantics generalize the classical case.

It is important to emphasize that polynomial versions for the LFIs (see [9] for such logics), expressed by polynomials over the field Z2, can also be defined for bi- nary non-truth-functional semantics, as done in [7]. The resulting polynomials (over Z2) are different from those shown here (over Z3). In a certain sense, the Nmatrices recover part of the truth-functionality, which is lost in the binary semantics, and the polynomial representations neatly express such nuances. For more details, see [7].

Based on theorems 5.1 and 5.2, we then conclude that the above polynomials provide a polynomial representation for the correct and complete structure given in [2], section 3. From this, it is clear that our approach yields a correct and complete semantics for mbC (in this case, three-valued and non-deterministic) in terms of polynomials.

We have thus the same system (mbC) characterized by two distinct semantics, whose polynomial characterizations have different natures. The use of finite struc- tures of the kind of non-deterministic semantics has the benefit of preserving the advantages of logics with ordinary finite-valued semantics (in particular: decid- ability and compactness), while it is applicable to a much larger family of logics. Another important point about Nmatrices is that the generalization of the concept of many-valued matrix allows us to provide a finite structure for a logic that is not characterizable by finite (truth-functional) matrices, as in the case of mbC. This automatically provides a decision procedure for mbC, for instance, which is only given by means of the more general notion of possible-translations semantics (see [9]). Although the concept of Nmatrices is but a particular case of the concept of possible-translations semantics, Nmatrices constitute a handier tool for computing the semantics, and its polynomial expression also has this characteristic.

As a final comment on the method, there are some natural connections between our polynomial semantics and the relational semantics, as introduced by J. M. Dunn in [14] and studied in several other papers, notably in [3]. It should be clear that our restrictions to finite structures in this paper are not essential. Abstract characterizations of logics by means of polynomials over arbitrary fields, or vice- versa, characterizations of general structures defined over rings of formal power series interpreted as logics, are a next step in this study.

The PoLCa software 6 (open source and publicly available) translates sentences of several logics (such as many-valued, paraconsistent, etc.), whose semantics are de- terministic (truth-functional) or non-deterministic (controlled non-truth-functional) into polynomials over finite fields, automatizing what has been shown in the above examples. Proofs in such systems, then, reduce to handling polynomials in a natural and intuitive way.

