The first denotational semantics of a quantum programming language was given by the first author in [3], for the quantum flowchart language QFC. The semantics given there was compositional and took place in a category of superoperators, which are special completely positive maps. However, the language lacked a crucial feature found in functional programming languages, namely, the notion of higher-order functions.

In [4], we sought to address this omission by introducing a typed lambda cal- culus for quantum computation. This language resembles QFC in that it combines quantum and classical data types with classical control features, but it also includes lambda abstractions and therefore function closures. The problem of deciding the duplicability of data was solved syntactically, by giving a type system that distin- guishes duplicable and non-duplicable types. The quantum lambda calculus pos- sesses a reduction semantics, but no denotational semantics has been given for it so far.

In this paper, we study the restriction of the quantum lambda calculus to the purely linear case. This means we study the fragment of the language where each value, classical and quantum, must be used exactly once. The linear quantum lambda calculus differs from its nonlinear cousin in that it is less sensitive to the evaluation order of terms. We give a denotational semantics for this language in a category of completely positive maps, and we show that it is fully abstract with respect to the operational semantics.

In [4], we have defined an operational semantics for a lambda calculus for quantum computation with classical control. Here, we study the purely linear fragment of this language. We begin by re-adapting the definitions and results from this earlier paper for the linear setting.

Several questions remain open. First, the exact image of the denotational se- mantics is still to be characterized as a subset of the completely positive maps. Then it would be interesting to explore the categorical semantics of the linear language. Finally, we may want to add weakening and duplication and find a denotational semantics for the full quantum lambda calculus.

