In this paper we study the relationship between ordering structures on semirings and semiring-induced valuation algebras. We show that a semiring-induced valuation algebra is a complete (resp. continuous) lattice if and only if the semiring is complete (resp. continuous) lattice with respect to the reverse order- relation on semirings. Furthermore, a semiring-induced information algebra is compact, if the dual of the semiring is an algebraic lattice.

The valuation algebra, put forward in [1,2], is an abstract inference tool for treating uncertainty and local computation. In [3], it showed that many instances in other research areas, such as soft constraint systems, probability potentials, propositional logic, etc, can be seen as valuation algebras induced by some semirings. This pa- per concerns ordering structures on this kind of systems called semiring-induced valuation algebras.

We can see that, this order relation on semiring-induced valuation algebras de- fined here is related to the operations multiplication and addition on these under- lying semirings. While, the ordering on a semiring is defined directly from the addition operation. Naturally it is necessary to study the relationship between or- dering structures on semirings and their corresponding semiring-induced valuation algebras. The study on order relations over semiring-induced information algebras can be founded in [2,3]. However, the research on the connection between two or- derings described above did not begin. Here we give the necessary and sufficient condition for semirings to induce information algebras. Moreover, we show con- structively that the relationship between the continuity of two order relations over semirings and semiring-induced information algebras respectively. Further, we are concerned that how to construct semiring-induced compact information algebras, which are introduced in the study of representation of information. Then some conditions for semirings to induce continuous or compact information algebras will be provided in this paper.

The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 some basic no- tions in the study of semiring-induced valuation algebras are presented. Sufficient and necessary conditions for a semiring-induced valuation algebra to be an infor- mation algebra and then complete are shown respectively in Section 3. Section 4 demonstrates the correspondence between the continuity of the order relations on semiring-induced information algebras and semirings. A sufficient condition for semiring-induced information algebras to be compact is given finally.

