In this paper, we continue our line of research for defining an integrated framework for the specification and analysis of security and trust, aimed at providing the basis for the modeling and analysis of security and trust aspects of emergent dynamic coalitions (e.g., mobile ad hoc networks, peer to peer systems, web services). In particular, we consider two well-known languages: 1) the Role-based Trust-management framework (RT ) and, in particular, its most basic language RT0, and 2) the transitive trust model, for defining trust and recommendation relationships. First, we show an encoding of the transitive trust model into part of RT0; then, this subset is mapped into the inference construct of the Crypto-CCS process algebra. Also, we introduce in the languages operators dealing with levels of trust. The relationships among these languages could allow us to model and analyze trust and recommendation issues in distributed systems by means of standard formal techniques, based on inference systems.

In [14], we started an investigation about the development of a uniform framework for the specification and (automated) analysis for security and trust in distributed protocols. In particular, it has been shown how the same machinery based on in- ference systems used for the formal verification of security protocols may be used to analyze access control policies based on trust management systems (e.g., see [3,6,16,11,20]). However, we did not show a full integration, since the same frame- work could be used to express several theories, but not at the same time. For instance, both the role-based trust management approach advocated in [11] and the transitive trust model of [7,6] have been modeled. However, no attempt was made to compare them or to integrate these two frameworks in a single one. Here, we extend that work by providing an integrated inference system for describing both

Indeed, dealing with trust and recommendation is a peculiarity of so called dynamic coalitions, sets of electronic devices typically belonging to different security domains, and possibly driven by different purposes, that should cooperate in order to maintain active basic functionalities of the whole network. An example of a dynamic coalition is a mobile ad hoc network: here, communication is typically multihop, and all the nodes are called to actively participate in, e.g., routing functionalities, i.e., they should forward packets towards a destination on behalf of the source. There is no reason, however, to assume that the nodes in the network will eventually cooperate with one another, since, e.g., network operation consumes energy, a scarce resource in environments like ad hoc networks. Recently, researchers have proposed several mechanisms based on trust, reputation and recommendation, in order to enforce cooperation between nodes, [1].

Thus, in RT a central concept is the notion of role. A role is formed by a principal and a role term. If principals are denoted as A, B, C... and role terms are denoted as r, r1, r2..., then A.r is role term r defined by principal A. A role may define a set of principals who are members of this role, and each principal A defines who are the members of each role of the form A.r. Also, roles can be seen as attributes, i.e., a principal is a member of a role if and only if it has the attribute identified by the role, [11].

The formalization we are going to give describes the trust model within a series of inference rules, that will allow us to manage trust relationships by means of standard mechanisms (i.e., with the same mechanisms used with process algebras and similar methodologies, see, e.g., [5]). Moreover, by using an encoding based on inference rules, the comparison between the transitive trust model and the RT family of languages, which we are going to give in the following sections, will result more natural.

Considering RT , it should be noted that no explicit relation appears, involving more than two principals. On the other hand, the transitive trust model can express both recommendation and direct functional trust, and, in particular, a trace still exists of the recommender (see, e.g., rule (4), Section 4).

In [6,7], the authors suggest that there must be explicit rules for combining trust measures either when dealing with transitivity of trust (e.g., rule (3)), or in presence of multiple paths (e.g., rule (5)), or when dealing with a chain of recommendation steps followed by a last step concerning with functional trust (e.g., rule (4) and (4*) for the simplified model).

Example 4.4 aggregation. Suppose that A trusts B as a good cook, with two possible measures, v1 and v2. This could be possible since A could have collected two possible opinions about the goodness of B as a cook, e.g., by means of recommenders (not explicitly highlighted in the rule). Thus, A could choose to maintain a single credential regarding B, by combining the two measures according to some operator

In this subsection, we show the simplified model of Subsection 4.1 enriched with trust measures and rules for combining them. Rules (1), (2), (3) and the general rule (6) are the same as in the above subsection, thus we omit to explicitly put them. Clearly, rules (4) and (5) do not exist in the simplified model. Here, we define the link operator over rule (4*).

Moreover, here a simplified version of the trust model has been considered, in order to make it compliant with RT . This has the clear drawback that some information is lost (in particular, information on the recommenders, that in some application can be relevant), with respect to the original intention of [6,7]. Thus, refinements to the current work are possible through, e.g., the study of an extension to RT dealing with recommenders. Furthermore, an encoding has been presented from the simplified trust model to RT . The viceversa could also be considered, by studying how to deal with aspects like intersection of roles.

