With the development of computer science, more and more attention is paid to the research of its mathematical foundations which have been the common field of mathematicians and computer scientists. Domain theory (DT), for- mal concept analysis (FCA) and rough set theory (RST) are three important crossing fields based on relations (orders) and simultaneously related to topol- ogy, algebra, logic, etc., and provide mathematical foundations for computer science and information science.

Domain theory [1,5] was introduced by Scott for the denotational semantics of programming languages. The fundamental idea of domain theory is par- tial information and successive approximation. It deals with various posets, approximate orders and operational models of computing. The theory pro- vides mathematical foundation for the design, definition, and implementation of programming languages.

FCA is an order-theoretic method for the mathematical analysis of sci- entific data, proposed by Wille and others [4] in 1982. Concept lattices are the core of the mathematical theory of FCA. A concept lattice is a partially ordered set consisting of formal concepts, each of which represents a subset of objects called extent and a subset of attributes called intent. Over the past several decades, FCA has become a powerful tool for clustering, data analysis, information retrieval and knowledge discovery.

RST is originated by Pawlak [8,9], which is a new mathematical tool to deal with inexact, uncertain or vague knowledge. The basic concepts of RST are approximation spaces and approximation operators. In an approximation space, every subset can be approximated by two subsets, called the lower and upper approximations of the given subset. Using methods of lower and upper approximations, knowledge hidden in given information can be expressed in the form of decision rules. With the development of RST, it has attracted worldwide attention of researchers and practitioners and has achieved a lot of real applications such as medicine, information analysis, data mining and industry control.

Let K = (U, V, R) be a context. Kc denotes context (U, V, Rc), where Rc is the complement relation of R. Yao [15] has discussed relationships between RO-L(K), RA-L(K) and the classical concept lattice L(Kc) of context Kc and obtained the conclusion that they are isomorphic to each other. Strictly speaking, we have

Rough set theory and formal concept analysis capture different aspects of data. Combining the two theories, one gets the rough concept lattice of a given context. In this paper, we discussed properties of rough concept lattices from the domain theory point of view. We mainly investigated algebraicity and completely distributivity of rough concept lattices. We also introduced the notions of definable sets for a context and discussed algebraic properties of them. The work makes new links between FCA, RST and domain theory which may improve our understandings of the three theories and provides more research topics.

