BioAmbients is a powerful model for representing various aspects of living cells. The model provides a rich set of operations for the movement and interaction of molecules. The richness of the language motivates the study of dialects of the full model and the comparison with other computational models. In this paper we investigate the limit between decidability and undecidability of two decision problems, namely reacha- bility and spatial reachability, for semantic and syntactic fragments of BioAmbients providing movement capabilities and merge. Our results illustrate the power of merge with respect to the other movement oper- ations of BA for properties like reachability. Furthermore, they establish an interesting connection between BioAmbients and other computational models like associative-commutative term rewriting and Petri nets with transfer arcs.

In this paper we focus our attention on the reachability and spatial reachability decision problems for pure public BA with a weak reduction semantics for repli- cation (pBAw). Pure public BA (pBA) is a fragment of BA with only movement capabilities and merge. Differently from the standard semantics, with the weak re- duction of replication proposed in [1] the process !P can only generate copies of P . The reachability problem consists in checking if a process P0 can be reduced to a process P1. The spatial reachability problem consists in checking if a process P0 can be reduced to a process P3 with the same ambient structure as P1 and such that each ambient in P3 has at least the same collection of local agents as the corresponding ambient in P1. Spatial reachability has been introduced for Mobile Ambients in [2]. Our goal is to explore the limit between decidability and undecidability for these two decision problems by taking different assumptions on the syntax of pBAw.

Plan of the Paper In Section 2 we define pure public BA. In Section 3 we define TUCM and the decidability result for spatial reachability. In Section 4 we define an encoding of reachability in pBA in TUCM . In Section 5 we present decidabil- ity and undecidability results for fragments of pBA. In Section 6 we address some conclusions.

