The methods developed to prove such cut elimination theorems can be broadly divided into two categories: the reduction-based methods and the model-based ones. In the recent past, we have witnessed a convergence of these two kinds of methods. In this paper, I detail some of the steps of this transformation that has lead to consider reduction-based and model-based methods just as two sides of the same coin.

Therefore, to prove the disjunction property for arithmetic or simple type theory, we need to extend the cut elimination theorem first. This explains why there are several cut elimination theorems for various theories of interest. For instance, in arithmetic, we usually introduce a new form of cut specific to the induction axiom, and we prove the cut elimination theorem again for this extended notion of cut.

elimination rules of the connectors and quantifiers of A and the folding of A into P preceded by the corresponding introduction rules. This leads to very natural deduc- tion rules where, like in the usual mathematical practice, connectors and quantifiers almost disappear. Interestingly, the theories that have the cut elimination property in these three formalisms are the same [10,4]. This shows the robustness of this notion of cut.

With the usual notion of bi-valued model, it is not possible to permute the quantifiers and prove that there exists a uniform model M such that for every proposition A, if A is valid in M, then A is provable. But, if we extend the notion of model by allowing truth values to be elements of an arbitrary boolean algebra, then this statement becomes provable. An example of such model is the syntactic model, where the truth values are the elements of the Lindenbaum algebra of the language. In constructive logic, the boolean algebras need to be replaced by Heyting algebras, but this uniform completeness theorem can still be proved.

In [15], we have proposed together with Benjamin Werner a reduction-based cut elimination proof for a large class of theories in deduction modulo. In deduction modulo, unlike in type theory, the terms of the theory and the proof-terms are entities of different kinds, as well as the sorts of the language and the propositions. Thus, it was natural to interpret not only propositions, using reducibility candidates for truth values, but also terms.

As already said, the usual notion of bi-valued model can be extended to notions where the truth values form a boolean algebra or a Heyting algebra. This raises the question of the possibility to view pre-models as such Heyting algebra valued models, i.e. the question of the possibility to define an order on the set of reducibility candidates that makes it a Heyting algebra. Unfortunately, this is not possible, as in

Once this convergence is achieved, several directions may be worth explor- ing. First, we may want to deduce directly proof theoretical results form super- consistency, without proving cut elimination first. Second, we may want to extend the notion of super-consistency to type theory. The recent [6] that relates deduction modulo and type theory may be a good starting point.

