In this work we study the complexity of Sandpile prediction problems on several classes of directed graphs. We focus our research on low-dimensional directed lattices. We prove some upper and lower bounds for those problems. Our approach is based on the analysis of some reachability problems related to sandpiles.

Let be the class of planar sandpile digraphs. We can use the same reduction of theorem 3.9 to prove that the planar restriction of MCV P (MPCV P for short) is NC1-reducible to SPR [ ] . It is known (see reference [9]) that MPCV P is L-hard under quantifier free reductions, (hence L-hard under NC1-reductions).

Proof. Let (G, s, t) be an instance of REACH (planar). Let Gu be the undirected planar graph obtained from G by forgetting the orientations of its edges. First at all we add a center node to any face of G. We can use cGu to recognize the faces of Gu. To this end we can use the following procedure.

The nodes which we visit, and the edges that we use along a single walk consti- tute a single face. So, given v and e we can compute one of the two faces determined by v and e. If we use last procedure on any pair (v, e) we can compute all the faces of G.

Given F a face of G, we add a new node vF , and given u a node which lies on the border of F we add the edge (u, vF ) . Let HG be the output graph of our procedure. Note that HG was obtained from G by adding a center-sink node to any face of G, and by connecting each one of those center-sink nodes to the nodes located on the borders of their corresponding faces (the edges being directed from the border to the center). Furthermore, given s, t V (G), we have that (G, s, t) REACH (planar) if and only if (HG, s, t) REACH ( ). What have we gained with the construction of HG? Note that HG is a planar sandpile graph, since each one of the centers is a sink node, and any node is either a sink or can reach at least one center-sink in one step.

(Type 1) There exists an interval I2  n + 1, ..., 2n such that stt (g1 + ei2 ) takes the value 0 out of I2 and the value 1 on I2. Furthermore, the length of I2 is n + 2.

(Type 2) There exists an interval Ij  n + 1, ..., 2n such that gj takes the value 0 out of Ij and the value 1 on Ij  x , where x Ij and gj (x) = 0. Furthermore, the length of Ij is n + j + 1.

