Space solar power satellites (SSPS) have various future applications. Although it is difficult to supply power from outer space to the ground in the short term, it has many other applications, such as building charging piles in a synchronous solar orbit to charge many small satellites. This space infrastructure can address the power supply problems of small satellites operating in low or medium orbits. Therefore, the construction of the SSPS is crucial.

It has been 54 years since Peter Glaser first proposed the SSPS concept in 1968 [2]. Over the past 50 years, SSPS research has had its highs and lows. However, SSPS research has not ceased. Research activities on SSPS have mainly focused on innovative concept designs and experimental validations.

In addition, an experiment was conducted in 2019 employing a phased array to power a flying drone. For the flying drone, DC power of approximately 60 W was received at a distance of 10 m. When the distance was increased to 30 m, the received DC power was approximately 42 W [17].

In 2020, the US Navy Research Laboratory (NRL) launched a sandwich module aboard the Air Force X-37B orbital test vehicle [18]. The sandwich module was a 12 inch (1 inch = 2.54 cm) square tile that collects solar energy and converts it into RF power. In the same year, the US NRL utilized a light-emitting rectenna to convert wireless network signals into DC power. The experiment was conducted at the International Space Station [19].

The space segment of the OMEGA 2.0 system comprises three subsystems: the hemispherical condenser and photoelectric conversion, transmitting antenna and microwave conversion, and a smart-structure subsystem with a high-power mass ratio. This complicated system involves several problems, such as the coupling problem of the electromagnetic field, temperature field, structural displacement field, and other physical fields; the influence mechanism of nonlinear mechanical, structural, and material factors on electrical and optical performance; and the systematic optimization design problem based on the developed multifield coupling theory model and influence mechanism [23]. The optimization design problem can be mathematically described as a nonlinear programming problem PI, that is, determining the optimum structure and thermal and electromagnetic design variables to maximize the system power mass ratio [23]. For the optimization model, several constraints exist, such as electromagnetic, structural, and thermal performance constraints, the coupling theoretical model and influence mechanism constraint, and the manufacturing and size constraint, and so on.

In addition, the receiving antenna must be located in the far-field zone of the transmitting antenna. This is because the microwave power cannot be radiated in the near field. To address security concerns, the peak microwave power density outside the receiving antenna should be lower than the value specified in national standards.

The waste heat of the transmitting antenna is another issue that should be carefully addressed. Heat dissipation is an extremely challenging problem in sandwich-structured transmitting antennas. In the innovative design concept of OMEGA 2.0, the PV array, microwave power devices, and transmitting antenna are separated. Therefore, the heat dissipation problem could be reduced to some extent. However, considerable heat is produced during the DC-to-RF conversion process. If the waste heat is not efficiently dissipated, microwave power devices will deteriorate. Thus, a heat dissipation method was proposed, and its effectiveness was experimentally verified [25,26].

Monitoring antennas were utilized to obtain the incident microwave power-density distribution on the rectenna. Each monitoring antenna element was connected to a microwave power sensor, and the monitoring antenna elements were located symmetrically. When two symmetrical microwave power sensors have different readings, it means that there is a beam-pointing error. The beam-pointing error information is then fed back to the transmitting antenna. With phase shifters, the beam- pointing error can be compensated. Another point to note is that mechanical adjustments should accompany electronic adjustments.

The development of the ground OMEGA 2.0-based SSPS verification system was supported and assisted by Jin Huang, Wei Liang, Feng Zheng, Liwei Song, Xianli Li, Na Li, Sihao Qian, Shunxi Lou, Chaoliu Ge, Guanheng Fan, and the PhD and MSc students in our research group. The authors express their special thanks for their support and assistance.

