In this paper we investigate the Minimum Eccentricity Isometric Cycle (MEIC) problem. Given a graph, this problem consists in finding an isometric cycle with smallest possible eccentricity k. We show that this problem is NP-Hard and we propose a 3-approximation algorithm running in O(n(m + kn)) time.

For both graph classification purposes and applications, it is an important issue to summarize a graph into a more simple object such as a tree or a path, or in the case of this article, a cycle. Different constructions and metrics offer such a characterization, for example tree-decompositions and tree-width [8]. Another approach, on which we focus in this article, is to study the problem in terms of domination.

In the path case, the problem consists in finding a path such that every vertex in the graph belongs to or has a neighbor in the path. Several graphs classes were defined in terms of dominating paths. Graphs containing a dominating pair, that is vertices such that every path linking them is dominating are studied in [5]. Graphs such that short dominating paths are present in all induced subgraphs are characterized in [1]. Linear-time algorithms to find dominating paths or dominating vertex pairs were also developed for AT-free graphs [3,4].

Dominating paths do not exist however in every graph. A natural extension of the notion of domination is the notion of k-coverage (also called k-domination). For a given integer k,a path k-covers the graph if every vertex is at distance at most k from the path. The smallest k such that a path k-covers the graph is then a metric as desired.

The minimum-eccentricity shortest path (MESP) problem was introduced by Dragan and Leitert [6]. The name is transparent as it consists in finding a shortest path with minimal eccentricity. The study of this problem was originally motivated by its link to the embedding with low distortion of graphs into the line. Dragan and Leitert have shown that this problem is NP-complete, and designed some ap- proximation algorithms, and established its relationship with the Line Embedding problem [6]. The MESP problem is also related with graphs problems arising from biological data set [2].

Definition 1.1 [Isometric cycle] Let G be a graph and C a cycle of G. dG denotes the distance in G and dC the distance in G[C]. C is an isometric cycle if and only if, for every two vertices u, v of C we have: dG(u, v)= dC(u, v).

In other words, one of the two paths linking u and v in the cycle is a shortest path in the graph. Note that an isometric cycle is necessarily an induced cycle. The problem we are interested in consists in finding an isometric cycle with minimum eccentricity.

A longest isometric cycle may be computed in O(n4.752log(n)) time [7], which gives a polynomial-time 3-approximation for the MEIC problem [2]. It was also shown that a graph admitting an isometric cycle with low eccentricity admits a cycle embedding of low distortion [2].

Assume that a vertex x appears more than once in U 0. As both P and Pj are shortest path, they each contain x at most (and exactly) once. If x is in Pc,m then it is more distant from a than c and it should have been selected at line 8 instead of c. This leads to a contradiction. The same contradiction appears if we assume x in Pm,d.

