Encryption and signature schemes are fundamental cryptographic tools for provid- ing privacy and authenticity, respectively, in the public-key setting. Both privacy and authenticity are simultaneously needed in many applications on ad-hoc network where anyone can freely join or leave the network. This issue seems to be easily solved by composing a signature and encryption. However, it was noticed by [2] that such multi-user setting opens a possibility for some subtle attacks, not presented in the settings of stand-alone signature and encryption. Thus, a simple composition does not necessarily yield desired properties.

However, the security of signcryption tag-KEM is defined for the previous def- inition for security of signcryption [2] which restricts the adversary so that the adversary is allowed to access de-signcryption oracle (resp. signcryption oracle) for the attacked user but not signcryption oracle (resp. de-signcryption oracle) for the attacked user if the adversary attacks privacy (resp. authenticity). On the other hand, the modified definition [7,6] allows the adversary to access both oracles, irre- spective of whether the adversary is attacking privacy or authenticity (such attack is called simultaneous attack [6]). This means that the modified definition for se- curity of signcryption becomes stronger than the previous one and the security of signcryption tag-KEM in [3] is not enough strong for yielding the modified security of signcryption.

When addressing the security, we deal with two issues: Security goal and at- tack model. In [7], for privacy and authenticity, a common type of security goal and attack model is considered, called indistinguishability (IND)/strong existential unforgeability (abbreviated as sUF, sEUF, or sEF) and chosen ciphertext attack (CCA2)/chosen message attack (CMA), respectively. We denote the resulting se- curity notion by IND-CCA2/sUF-CMA. The notation follows [2,7,3].

In Step (iv), ASC,cca is restricted not to ask (pkS, SC) to de-signcryption oracle OV D,U , but can still use, for example, (pkS' , SC) for pkS' /= pkS. Variable v is state information of the ad versary. ASC,c ca is considered successful only if b = b'. We

The proof is almost the same as the one for the previous definition for security. We present here the proof for the IND-CCA2 security. The IND-CCA2 security of hybrid signcryption is proven in the same way as the IND-CCA2 security of hybrid encryption in [1].

