Abstract This article proposes a scheme for selecting the best site for sink placement in WSN applications employing backbone assisted communications. By placing the sink at a specific posi- tion, energy scavenging and delay constraints can effectively be controlled. In contrast to the con- ventional scheme for base station placement at the geographical centre or random placement at the end of the region of interest, the proposed scheme places the base station at either the graph theo- retical centre or centroid of the backbone connecting nodes in the region of interest. This strategy shows a considerable reduction in the total number of hops that each packet needs to travel to reach the sink. The proposed scheme is applied on all the families of graphs prevalent in backbone assisted sensor networks to confirm the performance consistency and improvement in network parameters of the communication backbone measured in terms of delay, the carried load and the total energy consumption, eventually affected by the average number of hops for the message to reach the sink.

Every WSN is constrained by low data rates, energy reser- vations, and usually a many to one communication pattern. Analysing the performance of such networks has been done with the help of Steiner trees [2], shortest path trees [3] or greedy heuristic [4] based trees. These topologies have been put to numerous routing protocols, and data aggregation methods to optimize energy, load, response time or simply net- work longevity. The choice of a tree based backbone for our research is attributed and influenced by the literary works available for performance optimality. Protocols such as HTECRP [5] claim to manage congestion and perform fairness [6] offers a hierarchical backbone tree algorithm for energy efficiency and sufficient network lifetime. While Localized area spanning tree (LAST) protocols for wireless short range sensor networks optimize the energy cost and the interference imposed by the structure [7,8], a BFS based tree rooted at the base station offers shortest path traversal for each data message which utilizes the sensor resources efficiently by employing a local repairing approach for the crashing nodes thereby increasing the lifetime [6] similar to CTP [9,10]. More- over, tree based strategies reduce the burden of retransmissions and hence can be used for congestion management [5]. Thus, it can be believed that a tree structure is popular in wireless sen- sor network structure, for most applications having one sink and too many sender nodes which justify our choice for further analysis. However, these researches focus on measuring the communication flows either for one or for multiple static or mobile sinks without emphasizing whether the placement of a sink too plays a role in determining the aforementioned net- work statistics such as delay, load and energy consumption. While tree based networks have been considered, the place- ment of sink has been done either at the root or at the source [11]. Also, source based trees and sink based tree construction algorithms have been analysed and used to optimize conges- tion in WSNs [12].

Sink location strategies include deterministic as well as ran- dom deployments. The placement of sinks has been chosen to be at the end points of the region of interest (ROI) or the edges of a ROI as in [17,18]. Researchers evaluate the network per- formance when the sink is placed at the midpoint of the edges of the ROI, the centre of the ROI or even at the centres of clus- ters in case of portioned ROIs. The load on the sink can be decreased by adapting the high energy nodes around the sink as the base stations. However, there is no focus on the delay. On the contrary, delay has been observed by using GA based approaches but without considering energy optimization [18]. Our article considers both energy conservation and reduction in delay by appropriate sink placements in the network already connected.

hop counts, leading to a longer lifespan [19,20]. Experimental evaluation confirms that topology aware algorithms give remarkable lifetime improvement as compared to geo-aware algorithms and naive centre placement strategy [17,21,22]. While there are local search techniques [23] that aim to maxi- mize the worst case delay and extend lifetime of a WSN, in practical scenarios, there may be obstacles or wireless range constraints that may not make the sink placements feasible.

Our article, therefore addresses the problem of converge- cast communication for a tree based topology. We try to pre- sent a strategy that, while a tree based backbone is incorporated as the steady backbone for convergecast commu- nications, the choice of the node would be the most appropri- ate to serve the purpose of the sink. We argue that the performance of the tree based communication is better if the sink is placed at the centroid or the graph theoretic centre of the tree.

We further divulge from comparing or proposing any best suited tree construction algorithm in terms of optimality. We further assume that the network employs a tree based back- bone for carrying out the necessary data dissemination. These algorithms are employed at a separate computer and the sink relocation is performed either manually or by mobile sinks or robots. Our main aim is to isolate the minimum energy con- suming node (MECN) that validates good performance in terms of the studied network parameters. We propose algo- rithms to identify the nodes appropriate to serve as the sink in a backbone assisted network on the basis of eccentricity and node degrees of the graphs.

Proof. Deletion of all the leaf nodes results in a graph that is still a tree. Careful observation reveals that the removal of all leaf nodes from tree uniformly reduces the eccentric- ities of the remaining vertices by one (Fact 1). So all ver- tices that were centres originally, still remain centres. Continuing this process leaves us with either one vertex which eventually is a centre or an edge whose end points are centres. h

It is known that the number of hop counts is basically determined by a routing scheme which decides the best route from a source to a destination. Also, most routing protocols choose the shortest route which has the smallest number of hop counts. With the increase in number of hops the total time to reach the destination increases. Hence, the performance is measured in terms of delay, the carried load and the total energy consumption which is eventually affected by the aver- age number of hops for message to reach the sink. We there- fore address these performance parameters to evaluate our sink placement scheme.

It is assumed that packets are sent to sink via multi-hop com- munication for energy efficiency in most WSNs. The interme- diate sensors act as routers and experience a high packet flow from other sensors and routers. Henceforth, the carried load per node increases and for nodes near the base station or the sink and eventually the packet delivery is delayed considerably. Optimal sink placement results in combating such scenarios. Our aim is to determine the best sited sink among the deployed nodes that conform to tree structured topologies for the rea- sons best known.

Typical WSN scenarios assume the message routed towards the sink that usually is the root of the tree. This strategy suffers from the problem of hot spots ending into communication dis- ruption due to single node failure closest to the sink. Adopting a graph based topology offers us the choice of variable routes and sink placement which usually turns out to be the geo- graphical centre or the end of the region under observation. The argument biasing this structure is based on achieving max- imal coverage under one sink. However, our article confirms that graph centroid placement of the sink node is better in terms of network delay and energy consumption rather than having a sink rooted tree for a communication backbone. Also, our results show that the message forwarding to the sink (in terms of the hop count) is the least for either the graph the- oretic centre or centroid. This ensures minimum delay and les- ser energy consumption per node and hence a longer lifetime. Our results are limited due to the simulation environment con- straints for small number of nodes. This work may be extended by incorporating a wider network with dense deployment. The poor performance of the Fisheye protocol motivates us to analyse our proposed work for incorporating mobility in future.

