Studies of cells in silico can greatly reduce the need for expensive and prolonged laboratory experimentation. The use of model checking for the analysis of biological networks has attracted much attention recently. One of the practical limitations is the size of the model. In the paper we report on parallel model checking of genetic regulatory network using the model-checker DiVinE. The approach can check linear time properties on large networks.

Understanding of the molecular mechanisms underlying the behaviour of complex living systems is the main challenge of systems biology. In particular, investigation of how large and complex biochemical regulatory networks control the response of a living cell to its ever-changing environment is the central topic receiving recently much attention. The stress response to environmental events is induced by the interaction of several interwoven modules with complex dynamic behaviour, acting on different time scales. These networks are large and complex. For instance, a human cell contains in the order of 10,000 substances which are involved in 15,000 different types of reactions. This gives rise to a giant cellular network with complex positive and negative feedback loops.

In this paper we report on parallel model checking of genetic regulatory net- works using the model-checker DiVinE [1]. We use the discretization method as proposed in [19] and implemented in Genetic Network Analyser (GNA) [6]. The key property of this method is simulation of ODE systems with unknown reaction rate coefficients. The distributed state space generator is built as an inherent part of the DiVinE tool which allows on-the-fly generation of the transition graph giv- ing thus in many circumstances the possibility to analyse properties of even larger networks as opposed to the explicit representation as used e.g. in GNA. DiVinE

As the biochemistry that controls cells of living organisms is a very complicated machinery, nontrivial physical properties have to be taken into account in mod- els. There is a large scale of mathematical approaches for modelling of biochem- istry [10,22]. They vary in amount of abstraction they provide. In this paper we deal with the traditional deterministic approach based on ODE. Most of tools pro- vided for this approach are based on direct numeric simulation of ODE solutions. Recently there appear specialised massively-parallel platforms [20,29,33] which can rapidly accelerate the numerical simulation. On the contrary, in this paper we deal with approximative discrete simulation of ODE solutions. This approach appears to be useful for analysis of genetic networks with unknown exact values of reaction rate coefficients [6,16].

space for the example above. It is proved [24,19] that each solution trajectory that starts in a point where each substrate has lower concentration than the respective maximal concentration value, never exceeds the maximal concentration value of any substrate. Moreover, each solution which started outside the box given by maximal values of concentration, at some point enters this box and from that while it never leaves it. Therefore the partitioning of any PL model must be always finite.

Space complexity of the symbolic simulation algorithm grows exponentially with the number of state variables in the modelled system. Therefore for models of real biological systems it is impossible to construct the entire state space representing symbolically all the possible behaviour of the system. GNA allows to limit the state space constructed only to the states reachable from a given initial condition. However, in a large system having around hundred of variables it still can be im- possible to handle the part of the state space which is of interest. As the resulting explicitly represented state space is passed from GNA directly to model checking tools NuSMV and CADP for further analysis, the exponential blow up significantly complicates the analysis of large models.

The  GeNeSim  state  generator  implements  the  DiVinE  methods  get initial() for determining the initial state of the system and get succs() that computes a container of states which are successors of a given state. By these two methods the implicit representation of the qualitative simulation is encoded. Such a representation allows integration of GeNeSim with DiVinE distributed on-the-fly state space analysis algorithms.

The value 1 has sense only for states which represent switching domains. The empty phase set signalises that the respective switching domain must be imme- diately left after it is entered. It symbolises the fact that in such a domain no substrate can keep its concentration constant.

We have experimented exploring the state space by OWCTY to find if the simu- lated models provide the behaviour specified by the two properties above. We have randomly modified a four-variable model of genetic regulation in bacteriophage lambda (thth) (according to Thieffry and Thomas [34]) providing high mutual in- teraction of genes. In particular, we have considered random modifications of this model with 6 and 8 state variables. Moreover, we have generated a scalable artifi- cial model (circ) with uniform circular interconnection of genes. For this model we have considered settings with 10 and 12 variables. We have run the experiments on a cluster which offers up-to 20 homogeneous workstations. The experiments have been scaled for 1, 5, 10, 15, and 20 nodes.

