The goal of this paper is the generalization of parallelism and concurrency results for adhesive High-Level Replacement (HLR) systems to adhesive HLR systems with negative application conditions. These condi- tions restrict the application of a rule by expressing that a specific structure should not be present before or after applying the rule to a certain context. Such a condition influences thus each rule application or transformation and therefore changes significantly the properties of the replacement system. The effect of negative application conditions on parallelism and concurrency in the replacement system is described in the generalization of the following results, formulated already for adhesive HLR systems without negative application conditions: Local Church-Rosser Theorem, Parallelism Theorem and Concurrency Theorem. These important generalized results will support the development of formal analysis techniques for adhesive HLR systems with negative application conditions.

In this section, we introduce adhesive HLR systems with NACs. Nacs are an import- ant feature for the modeling of transformation systems, expressing that a certain structure is not present when performing the transformation [4] and thus enhancing the expressiveness of the transformation. In order to provide a rich theory for such transformations with NACs, they are integrated into the framework of adhesive HLR systems. For this integration, mainly some new morphism classes have to be defined which are necessary for successful adaption of the theory.

Remark 2.2 In [3], adhesive HLR systems are based on either adhesive HLR or weak adhesive HLR categories, which only slightly differ in the van Kampen square property. In this paper, we only consider adhesive HLR categories and enhance them with NACs. Note though that all results formulated in this paper will be applicable as well in weak adhesive HLR categories with NACs such as e.g. for Petri net transformations with NACs.

For an adhesive HLR category with NACs we need in addition to an adhesive HLR category without NACs some additional properties on the special morphism classes in the category in order to be able to generalize all results. We distinguish three classes of morphisms, namely M, M' and Q, and a class of pairs of morphisms  E'. M is a subset of the class of all monomorphisms as given in [3] and the rule morphisms are always in M. The non-existing morphism q in Def. 2.6 for negative application conditions is an element of the morphism class Q. For pair factorization in Def. 5.25 in [3] we need moreover the classes M' and E'. M, E', M'    and Q should have the properties described in the following definition. Note that to each condition a remark is made in which theorem, lemma or definition this condition is needed for the first time.

In this paper results for parallelism and concurrency are described in order to ex- tend these notions on Algebraic Graph Transformation in [3] to Transformations with Negative Application Conditions. Summarizing we have proven the Local- Church-Rosser Theorem, Parallelism Theorem and Concurrency Theorem for trans- formations with NACs. These results are formulated in the context of the Adhes- ive High-Level Replacement Framework introduced in [3] with an extra necessary morphism class Q. This makes these results on parallelism and concurrency ap- plicable to all transformation systems with NACs fitting into the adhesive HLR framework. Moreover these results serve as a basis for the extension of other no- tions like Embedding and Local Confluence for adhesive HLR systems with NACs described technically already in [8]. Future work will be necessary on the applicab- ility and refinement of all new results and on the development of efficient analysis algorithms for transformations with NACs.

