DES, triple DES, IDEA, Blowfish, CAST 128 as well as stream cipher algorithm RC2 and RC5 are examined simultaneously with EMDS algorithm. The performance of various symmetric algorithms is usually determined by using simulation or mathematical methods. In this paper we present the simulation results of various metrics used to measure the performance of proposed and existing sym- metric cryptography algorithms. The performance of EMDS is eval- uated by implementing the algorithm in Java

In the present time, most symmetric encryption schemes are based on Fiestel network. It consist of number of rounds where each round includes bit shuffling, non linear substitutions (S-boxes) and exclusive OR operations. A short description of diverse Fiestel Network symmetric cryptographic algorithms is as follows.

Formulated by Tuchman to preserve privacy and amalgamation of information illustrated by data during transmission or while in storage. Triple data encryption algorithm was chosen for applying in financial applications in ANSI standard X9.17.It is a three level put up using DES at each level to defend in opposition to savage drive attacks, exclusive of devising an utterly latest block cipher algorithm. In addition to it, Triple DES is put into operation with diverse number of keys i.e.

Triple DES with two keys undergo meet in the middle attack so triple DES with three keys move towards subsistence. Despite the fact that it is more safe and sound but time-consuming than DES. It is applied by Federal organizations to protect receptive data. It captures 64 bit plaintext in addition to 168 bit key to produce cipher text of 64 bits in 48 rounds. Encryption course is an effort of Encryption and decryption process of single DES cipher.

The global Data Encryption Algorithm (IDEA) is a symmetric block cipher projected by Xuejia Lai and James Massey of ETH Zur- ich in 1991. It was anticipated to be a substitution for the Data Encryption Standard. Encryption algorithm acquires a 64-bits block of plaintext in addition to a 128-bit key as input along with it brings into being a 64-bits block of cipher text as output [4]. The strength of IDEA lies with utilization of XOR, binary addition and binary multiplication of 16-bit integers.

CAST 128 Encryption algorithm is pioneered by Carliste, Adams and Stafford Tavared of Entrust Technology in 1996 [6]. It has a fine obstruction to distinctive cryptanalysis, linear cryptanalysis and interrelated key cryptanalysis. It formulates the utilization of key size differing from 40 bits to 128 bits in augmentation of 8 bits each. It functions on 64-bits block of plaintext to generate 64- bits block of cipher text in 16 rounds .It makes use of two sub keys in each round: a 32 Kim and 56 bit Kris and the function F depends on the round.

Developed by Ron Rivest. It is a conventional encryption algo- rithm. It is simple to employ on 16-bit microprocessor. It acquires input of 64 bit stored in the 16 bit words and fabricates an output of similar size i.e. of 64 bits. The variable key size is taken one byte up to 128 bytes.

Static dictionary will be accessible in encrypted mode to both the sender and destination machines .Barely authorized user can decrypt it and still made changes in it. Dynamic dictionary is being formed at runtime and is not transmitted from source to destina- tion machine so that bandwidth utilization can be condensed.

It means number of characters in the encryption key. All the block ciphers, which we have studied, are using bits in the key . So, when we talk about length of the key, it means number of bits in the key. E.g.: If Key K = 1010; Length = 4 bits.

