Every abelian category C has a largest partial trace that is given by restricting the canonical total trace on the category consisting of objects in C and relations between them. We also show that the largest partial trace is a natural extension of the kernel-image trace on C. (Theorem 4.5 and Theorem 4.6)

Our motivation to study (partial) trace comes from importance of (partial) traces in categorical semantics for recursive computation and GoI, and we are interested in partial traces on additive categories and abelian categories because of use of C*- algebra in the first GoI. However, our results are just answers to purely technical questions on additive categories and abelian categories, and at this point, we do not have any practical application of our results to these research areas. To find practical application of our results is a future work.

The structure of this paper is as follows. In Section 2, we recall the notions of partially traced symmetric monoidal category, additive category and abelian cat- egory. We also give some examples and basic properties of these categories. In Section 3, we give examples of partial traces on additive categories and show that the partial trace given by Haghverdi and Scott is the largest partial trace among partial traces satisfying strong naturality. In Section 4, we show that every abelian category has a largest partial trace and when the abelian category is semisimple, the kernel-image trace is the largest partial trace. For proofs of some statements, see [8].

In this paper, a partial trace on a regular category plays an important role. In a regular category C, we can consider relations between objects in C, and we can define a category Rel(C) consisting of objects in C and relations between them. It is well-known that Rel(C) has the structure of a totally traced symmetric monoidal category. Then we can define a partial trace on C by pulling back the total trace on Rel(C). Below, we precisely describe this construction. We first recall the definition of a regular category.

We note that we can derive this total trace from the compact closed structure of Rel(Set), and this is true for arbitrary regular category: the total trace trZ on Rel(C) is derived from a compact closed structure of Rel(C) and is called the canonical trace in [9]. (We can check that Rel(C) is a compact closed category by following the idea of the proof of Rel being compact closed.) For relationship between compact closed categories and total traces, see [9,14]. It is tedious but doable to directly check that tr is a total trace on Rel(C).

The category Ab of abelian groups and homomorphisms is an additive category. When R is a ring, the category ModR of left R-modules and homomorphisms is also an additive category. In particular, the category VectK of vector spaces over a field K and linear maps is an additive category. We denote the subcategory of VectK consisting of finite dimensional vector spaces by fdVectK, which is an additive category.

