Abstract Mobile Ad-hoc network (MANET) is infra-structure less collection of mobile nodes which can communicate with each other through single hop or multi-hop technique. The hop count also known as path length plays a crucial role in packet delivery, routing load, delay, etc. The path length between source destination pair nodes depends upon factors such as the mobility patterns of nodes, routing algorithm, transmission range, etc. In this article, we have tried to predict the path length between a source destination pair in MANET using Autoregressive Integrated Moving Aver- age (ARIMA) and multilayer perceptron (MLP) models. The path length data are collected from MANETs using three different mobility models namely (i) Manhattan Grid Mobility Model (MHG), (ii) Random Way Point mobility model (RWP) and (iii) Reference Point Group Mobility Model (RPGM). This paper evaluates the predictive accuracy in forecasting the path length between source and destination nodes for Ad hoc On-Demand Distance Vector AODV routing in MANET using ARIMA model and MLP. It is found that neural networks can be effectively used in forecasting path length between mobile nodes better than statistical model and the MLP based neural network models are found to be better forecaster than ARIMA model.

The real applications where Reference Point Group Mobility Model (RPGM) may be used properly are the mobility behav- ior of the soldiers moving together in a group in the battle field. There is a logical center or group leader in each group. The movement of the group leader determines the mobility behavior of all other members in the group. Initially, each member of the group is uniformly distributed in the neighborhood of the group leader [6]. At every time instant, each node has its own sen or carefully designed based on certain predefined paths. The movement of group members is significantly affected by the movement of the group leader. For each node, mobility is assigned to a reference point that follows the group movement. Based on this predefined reference point, each mobile node could be randomly placed in its neighborhood. Formally, the motion vector Vt of group member i at time t, can be described as

The Random Way Point mobility [3,8] model is simple and is widely used to evaluate the performance of MANET. The Random Way Point mobility model contains pause time between changes in direction and/or speed. Once a mobile node begins to move, it stays in one location for a specified pause time. After the specified pause time is elapsed, the mobile node randomly selects the next destination in the sim- ulation area, chooses a speed uniformly distributed over the minimum speed usually taken as 0 and maximum speed and travels with a speed v whose value is uniformly chosen in the interval (0, Vmax). Vmax is some parameter that can be set to reflect the degree of mobility. Then, the mobile node continues its journey toward the newly selected destination at the chosen speed.

Autoregressive Integrated Moving Average (ARIMA) process proposed by Box et al. [12] is a stochastic process which is used to analyze the time series. An ARIMA model is denoted by the notation ARIMA (p, d, q) where, p denotes the orders of auto- regression, d means the integration (differencing) and q repre- sents the order of the moving average respectively. If the data set is stationary then the difference d is considered as zero, otherwise one has to compute the value of d. For instance, a time series process yt of a first order auto-regressive process is denoted by AR(1) and is expressed as

This allows a smooth transition between the low and high output of the neuron. The error is the difference between the actual and the preferred output. The error depends on the weights. So, the weights are adjusted in order to minimize the error.

An ANN model typically has an input layer, hidden layer(s) and an output layer. The basic computational unit of a neural network is neuron. A neural network can be used to extract an estimation of the autoregressive structure hidden in realiza- tions of a time series. In this approach, the neural network learns the characteristics of the dependency by optimizing the weights [13,9].

proposed a delay prediction mechanism and integrated that prediction mechanism with a proactive ad hoc network routing protocol called Optimized Link State Routing (OLSR). They used queuing delay only and showed that queu- ing delay can be modeled as a non-stationary time series. They used Multilayer Perceptron (MLP) and Radial Basis function to predict the non-stationary time series model of queuing delay in MANET. The delay prediction mechanism proposed by them is independently distributed and uses only previous delay values to predict the future delay value. Singh and Dutta

using MLP network. For generating different mobility sce- nario we use Bonn-Motion [19] tool. Bonn-Motion is a Java based software that creates and analyzes mobility scenarios. The generated scenarios are then exported to ns-2. The mobil- ity models we have considered in our experiments include

300 data are used for model building and 200 data are used for testing. Similarly, we have also taken 500 data sets for MLP network in which 300 for training and 200 for testing. The following steps are executed to forecast the path length value between the mobile nodes.

Phase I (determine the p, d and q of ARIMA model): Check whether the data set is stationary or not using ACF. The value of d is zero if the series is stationary. The p and q values are then determined using Akaike Information criterion (AIC) and Bayesian information criterion (BIC) values. The (p, d, q) values obtained represent the order of the ARIMA model which fits the said time series.

In our experiment, we consider the MLP networks with one hidden layer having h neurons. The number h is increased from 5 to 50 in steps of 5 units. Here we process the model for dif- ferent mobility models with the lag value which is already eval- uated in ARIMA model. For each architecture, the networks are trained on the training sets. The other parameters are the defaults for MLP networks library. We have also observed the effect of variation of learning rate of the MLP network to predict the path length between the mobile nodes. That is why we apply different learning rate from 0.01 to 1.0 and cal- culate the RMSE under three different mobility patterns such as RWP, MHG and RPGM.

