Effective diagnosis of Omicron can be helpful in quarantining patients and their families in all affected countries. As the disease spreads, it becomes increasingly important to get acute cases into specialized hospitals as quickly as possible and keep the spread under control. Due to prohibitive costs, as the identification of COVID-19 has become a rapid process relatively. Furthermore, there are financial and budgetary issues coming from diagnostic tests that affect both governments and patients with restricted access to health care. In March 2020, there was an increase in pub- licly available datasets of different images of chest X-rays and EEG of all such patient to diagnose this pandemic disease. Also diagnos- ing the visual images of the disease helps researchers to search and recognize potential trends for detecting disease. The high trans- mission rate of COVID-19 has caused a rapid inflow of patients into hospitals, imposing a major pressure on imaging physicians and often leading in physician shortages in the battle against the ill- ness. This problem can be solved using deep learning methods, which have made significant advancements in recent years. The goal of deep learning is to learn more accurate features by con- structing a multi-hidden layer machine learning model that is trained with a huge quantity of sample data in order to ultimately enhance classification or prediction accuracy.

Over the past 5 years, intensive machine learning applications have evolved rapidly to handle such pandemic diseases. Deep learning is the special type of machine learning approaches that focus primarily on the classification and extraction of automatic identification of image information. Object detection and medical picture classification are among the most common applications that using Machine Learning based algorithms. Machine learning is in-depth learning have proven disciplines in applying artificial intelligence as well as neural networks to extract, analyze and identify patterns of the medical data. When innovations emerge, it is becoming increasingly nontrivial to retake the inventions in this field of benefits in computer-aided and clinical decision- making systems [6].

Instead of traditional RT-PCR test that is usually considered as a gold standard for the diagnosing COVID-19 and omicron, machine learning based models gets more popularity because of its easy and quick processing. Furthermore, RT-PCR is expensive and time- consuming process. Another problem with this test is that it neces- sitates a laboratory kit, which might be difficult or impossible to get in many countries during times of crisis or epidemic. This research work provides a deep learning model for the diagnosis of Omicron from EEG and chest X-ray images. Instead of traditional machine learning methods that only focuses on chest X-rays for the diagnosis of patient that are ambiguous in results due to its bluer quality images [7]. There exists a need to provide some alter- native and most sensitive reading of patient such as EEG to effi- ciently diagnose. The early diagnosis to reduce the spread and death rate, it is very important to effectively dealt with sophisti- cated technical solutions. In this work a transfer learning based deep learning model has been designed that classify that weather the patient is diagnosed for COVID-19 or its Omicron variant.

The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: Past research on COVID and Omicron is examined in Section 2 Section 3 illustrates the proposed architecture for detection of Omicron from EEG and X-rays images. In Section 4, the outcomes of the experi- ments are presented, along with a comparison to current best prac- tices. Following the conclusion and future work in Section 5.

There exist several studies based on machine learning that attempts to perform screening of COVID-19. From 18 April, more than 33.15 million COVID-19 cases were confirmed and almost 5,563,834 people died worldwide [1]. Due to the unavailability of vaccination or medical medication for the COVID-19 disease, early identification of COVID-19 is very helpful for the person infected. After which one can have the ability to successfully eliminate him- self and the risk of contamination to a healthy population is mini- mized. Literary studies suggest several machine learning efforts for the screening of COVID-19 have been performed and still research- ers works on it.

The effect of COVID-19 on medical facilities including cardiac surgery, cardiac imaging and ambulatory appointments have been studied [8]. Their work suggest that COVID-19 has a momentous effect on the worldwide cardiac healthcare systems. They also con- clude that COVID-19 creates a growing need for remote health care and the pandemic has intensified the push toward telemedicine. In their work, they conducted a survey for the implementation of tele rehabilitation services between April and May 2020. In which the electronic questionnaire had sent to the heads of 42 Belgian CR centers via email [9].

A comparison was carried out using seven different well- recognized architectures of deep learning neural networks [10]. In their study, they collected highest performing architecture including VGG19 [11] and DenseNET201 [12]. The performed clas- sification on CXR images for COVID-19 and Pneumonia by using new CNN software named as COVID-net [13]. In their work, they use dataset of 13,800 CXR images of which 182 images were obtained from Covid-19 patients. From experimental evaluation they obtained a recorded accuracy of 92.4 %. At the end they con- cluded that sensitivity of the COVID-NET model [14] and ResNet50

From the past literature it has been analysed that machine learning models play a vital role in the diagnosis of pandemic dis- eases such as COVID-19 [20]. However, there still exists a need to provide more accurate and efficient model to do the said. Tradi- tional machine learning models are complex and may fail to pro- vide accurate detection of the new variant of COVID-19 such as omicron due to the less availability of features and test/train data [21]. Moreover, due to the poor and blur quality of trained images may also reduce the effectiveness of the classifiers. On the other hand, the RT-PCR process is expensive, rare, manual and time consuming.

This research work exploits the natural classification problem and explores the use of binary classification on X-ray images and EEG for COVID-19 and Omicron detection. In this paper, a transfer learning model has been presented to detect either the patient is COVID-19 or Omicron variant effected. Initially, COVID-19 and Omicron based images and EEG with specified properties such as rotation, small rotation and adding small amounts of distortion have been created. Later on, a deep learning based architecture has been deployed for feature extraction, pre-training and final classification to get desirable results. The training process has been performed with the collected images, the splitting ratio of dataset is recorded as 80 % & 20 % for train and test respectively. This work also includes the Receiver Operating Characteristics (ROC) curve for this model and cross validation to provide effectiveness of this model.

have been added to the database since the first update, along with 10,192 cases of normal pneumonia, 6012 cases of non-COVID lung infections, and 1345 images of viral pneumonia. As per their opin- ion, this database will be updated as soon as fresh X-ray images for COVID-19 pneumonia patients become available. COVID-ARC is a data repository for COVID-19-related multimodal (e.g., demo- graphic) and longitudinal (e.g., imaging scans) data, as well as other statistical and analytic tools. Access to data and user- friendly analysis tools are provided in this collection to help aca- demics better understand COVID-19 and encourage collaboration. Global collaboration among scientists is urgently needed to model the virus, analyses how it has changed and will change in the future, understand how it spreads, and discover a vaccine. In the case of a pandemic, this dataset can help scientists by establishing the infrastructure needed to quickly gather and analyses data in the event of an emergency.

However, sometimes to characterize a classification model out- put on collection of test data, the true values are usually known. This work test dataset or a validation dataset with expected results. We make test dataset for prediction of each instance. The number of predictions is correct for each class counts from the pre- dicted outcomes and predictions.

In the future, the proposed approach can be further utilized to diagnose many other infectious diseases, such as tuberculosis. whereas a more refined model can be built by introducing advanced machine learning models like enforcement learning and federated learning to the proposed work. One more possible feature direction could be the addition of an advanced similarity measure to the proposed work in order to detect other variants of COVID-19.

