Visualizations also have attracted considerable interest in different scientific dis- ciplines within the last years. In psychology, the role of pictures and animations as a learning aid was investigated in an impressive number of research projects [4], [5], [6], [10]. An interesting research field in learning with the help of pictures focuses on the fundamental differences between verbal and visual communication. One of the most significant differences is the fact that visualizations are usually more concrete than verbal descriptions can be. That means, it is not possible to describe a certain fact in a general way; a picture always illustrates a fact by an example. E.g., a drawn triangle is always a specific one; it is not possible to draw a general triangle. So the question is whether and how pictures and animations help in learning, es- pecially whether and how the learners are able to generalize the perceived learning material.

In computer science, there are several fields that deal with visualizations. The area of computer graphics has achieved major breakthroughs. With the help of an off-the-shelf PC (near) photorealistic views with different kinds of light sources can be computed and rendered in real-time. The most prominent applications for these techniques are all kinds of games. In the future, it is expected that the field of virtual, augmented and mixed realities will become increasingly important.

Last but not least, the subject of this workshop, namely program and algorithm visualization, is a third field in computer science that deals with pictures and anima- tions. The field covers, e.g., algorithm animation techniques for computer science education as well as appropriate visualization techniques of huge (legacy) programs in order to get an overview of the existing dependency and usage relations of the different parts (modules, classes, ..) of the source code.

In the past, psychologists and computer scientists pursued their investigations in- dependently from each other. On the one hand, psychologists often are not aware of the current trends in computer science. Computer scientists, on the other hand, are focusing primarily on technology. The consideration of human perception, thinking, and learning is often neglected by computer scientists.

For the experiment, one of the most important question to answer is: Against which other learning methods do we compare the learning results (for example, constructing animations with / without peer reviews, constructing animations with / without presentations)? In the past several experiments have been executed for comparing different levels of the engagement taxonomy [1], e.g. viewing versus responding, viewing versus changing, and viewing versus con- structing. Because of the limited amount of time and test persons, it is clear that our experiment can contrast the peer reviewing with only a single other method. We decided to compare the construction and peer reviewing of anima- tions with the mere construction of animations without giving any feedback to the constructors. We plan to execute two experiments with two groups: in the first experiment one group will do animation construction and peer reviewing whereas the other group will do only animation construction. In the second experiment it will be the other way round.

