systems. As an important component in interactive systems, human operators and their cognitive capabilities also determine the success or the failure of such systems. Thus, attention needs to be paid to specifying and analysing the human cognitive system. In this paper, we argue that formal methods can specify and simulate cognitive frameworks as well as interaction between users and computer systems, allowing performance measurement, both qualitatively and quantitatively.

active Interfaces (SRRIs). In such systems, stimuli are presented rapidly to a hu- man operator, as found in interfaces in cockpit environments or operations control rooms. A fundamental problem in perceiving stimuli in SRRIs is information over- load. When capacity limited attentional mechanisms are overloaded, errors are likely to occur. Salient stimuli (targets 5 ) are prioritised and processed more exten- sively than others (background items). In the context of SRRIs, stimuli may arrive so rapidly that they may interfere with each other. Thus, human operators could potentially miss some highly salient stimuli. It has been discovered that humans may miss a second target (T2) following a previous one (T1) after a few hundred milliseconds [23,4]. This temporal attentional limitation is supported by the results of a large number of psychological experiments, known as Attentional Blink (AB) tasks [23].

In order to explore the limits of temporal attention deployment in humans, we have developed a cognitive-level formal methods based model [26]. We have used a modelling technique called process algebra [9,18,21], which originated in theoretical computer science, being developed to specify and analyse distributed computer sys- tems [9]. A process algebra specification contains a set of top-level subsystems (pro- cesses) that are connected by a set of communication channels. Subsystems interact by exchanging messages along channels. Furthermore, process algebra components can be arbitrarily nested within one another, allowing hierarchical decomposition in the manner advocated in [5]. The advantages of using formal methods in the context of cognitive modelling will be discussed shortly. The main purpose of our model was to simulate attentional capture in the context of a specific experimental paradigm [4]. Assuming that this model captures fundamental limitations on atten- tional deployment, it should be generalisable to practical settings that share its key properties. In this paper, we first outline the experimental paradigm and model. We then go on to examine in some detail how it could be extended to SRRIs.

solution a constructive approach. However, there is a significant drawback with both approaches, that is, either acknowledging or inserting items may delay the presentation. In this paper, we will concentrate on illustrating how the modelling approach can provide insight into the design of constructive approaches, but will also explore some general implications for reactive solutions from the same theoretical position.

The general applicability of cognitive frameworks in the context of human-computer interaction has been demonstrated by the success of a number of broad cognitive theories, such as SOAR [22], ACT-R [1] and EPIC [20]. These are centralised production systems based models. Another cognitive theory is the Interacting Cog- nitive Subsystems (ICS) architecture [3]. This is a highly parallel architecture, in which control of system wide interactions is distributed rather than centralised. This theory assumes that our mental architecture is composed of nine subsystems:-

Each subsystem has the same internal structure. Information arrives in a sub- system, is copied into its local memory, called an image record, and is transformed for use in other subsystems. The subsystems differ in their inputs and outputs, that is, they are each specialised for storing and processing a qualitatively different form of mental representation [3]. ICS stresses that mental activity concurrently occurs in multiple domains (realized by their corresponding subsystems) at the same time. Although each subsystem in ICS has a restricted functionality, much richer men- tal behaviour can arise out of the interaction among multiple subsystems. It will become clear later that our model can be fitted into the framework of ICS, but a complete description of ICS is outside the scope of this paper.

Many broad cognitive frameworks are symbolic in nature, since there are a number of attractions for using symbolic models instead of connectionist networks in formalizing large scale mental architectures [5]. Firstly, symbolic systems are good at manipulating, explaining and reasoning about complex data structures. Secondly, the knowledge or rules are visible. Thirdly, large systems can be composed from small structures. Finally, symbolic representations facilitate compositional and hierarchical representation of knowledge.

As research on the blink and RSVP in general has progressed, it has become evident that the allocation of attention is affected by the meaning of items [19] and their personal salience [24]. There is also evidence from electrophysiological recording that the meaning of a target is processed even when it is not reported [25]. In addition, there are now reports of specific effects of affective variables, e.g. [6]. In particular, [2] has shown that the blink is markedly attenuated when the second target is an aversive word.

There is normally lag-1 sparing in key-distractor AB experiments, i.e. a target word immediately following the key-distractor is likely to be reported. This arises in our model because buffer movement takes time, hence, the word immediately following the key-distractor may be implicationally interpreted before the buffer moves to Prop.

When Prop is buffered and detects an implicationally uninterpreted word, the buffer is passed back to Implic, which can assign salience again. After this, target words entering the system will be detected as implicationally and propositionally salient and thus will be reported. Hence, the blink recovers.

tem, and response system respectively. Each process has a set of communication channels attached to it, for example, IMPLIC has five channels. A|[a1, a2, ..., an]|B denotes a parallel composition of process A and B, which synchronize on channel a1, a2,..., an.

We would like to use the b-models to simulate how stimuli appear in SRRIs. However, such stimuli are different from those arising from RSVP streams, since multiple events/stimuli can arrive simultaneously. Thus, we assume that SRRIs have a buffer 9 , which stores all events and presents them to the user serially. This assumption ensures stimuli appear in RSVP fashion, restricting our research to the area of temporal attention. The total number of items (background and targets) to be presented is 2n, where n is a parameter in the b-model, called the aggregation level. Intuitively speaking, the aggregation level determines the length of the traffic,

We now present the simulation results, focusing on the performance of the interface measured as the probability of seeing a target. In the first experiment, both the burstiness and the number of targets were varied. In the second experiment, both the burstiness and the aggregation level (total number of targets and background items) were changed. Finally, we explore how the window size affects the effeciency of the interface.

As our first step to applying formal methods in interactive systems that consider the attentional state of users, we have designed a model of SRRIs based on studies of the AB phenomenon. AB-aware systems proposed here could avoid presenting targets when human operators are not ready to perceive them. However, a significant cost is that the presentation rate may be reduced dramatically. Another observation from these experiments is that such a constructive approach cannot improve the performance beyond the baseline condition, i.e. when there is only one target in an RSVP stream.

Hence, future research may consider reactive approaches to improving SRRIs, for example, using the electroencephalogram (EEG) as an acknowledgement from the human operator. Such an approach may provide faster feedbacks than ex- plicitly asking user to acknowledge. Wyble et al [29] have performed a feasibility investigation on SRRIs using EEG. They have discovered that two potential EEG measures (reduced EEG power in the alpha band at posterior brain areas and a

P3-like deflection over parietal areas) may be correlated with whether a stimulus has been perceived. Critically, they have investigated the possibility of extracting these signals in real-time using compact devices implemented and integrated in a head-mounted display. It is possible that a reactive approach could improve perfor- mance above baseline. This is because such systems can identify missed targets and re-present them, while in constructive approaches, the user has only one chance to perceive each stimulus. It was also noticed that such EEG feedback may not always accurately predict whether the user has perceived targets. Hence, we could extend our formal model to produce feedback in a similar fashion as EEG signals and use them to investigate the feasibility of such interfaces. We could, for example, evaluate how accurate the acknowledgement should be, in order to make such an approach worthwhile.

