These theories had diverse motivations and are expressed in a range of mathe- matical forms. Quantum mechanics uses Hilbert space. Another theory which has recently attracted much interest [25] employs subsets of certain sets to represent states, and relations between these sets to represent the operations of the theory. Other quantum-like theories use quite different mathematical formalisms again [5,4]. The task of comparing these theories would be simplified if we had a single math- ematical framework in which they could all be expressed. We could then pinpoint aspects of the framework where theories differed, and identify these aspects with differing physical features of the theories.

This paper will outline such a framework, developed in [1,23,12,13,8], and then use it to analyse some key examples. In this case the physical property we will be interested in is non-locality. To this end we extend the existing framework to encompass an abstract definition of GHZ state, and a corresponding notion of correlations.

observables for theories other than Hilbert space quantum mechanics. Such a gen- eral account of physical theories was initiated by Abramsky and one of the authors in [1], and further developed by several others [23,12,13,8]. We refer the reader for physicist friendly introductions and tutorials on symmetric monoidal categories to [6,3] and [11,2] respectively.

stabiliser states. Such operations are called Clifford unitaries and form a group. In fact, all n-qubit Clifford operations can be simulated using the CNOT gate (which is itself a Clifford unitary), and the single qubit Clifford unitaries. These single qubit operations themselves form a group, isomorphic to the permutation group S4. The only measurements allowed in the theory are projective Pauli measurements.

Our definitions of Stab and Spek are in terms of concrete vector spaces and linear maps, sets and relations. This allows us to make a clear connection with the way in which the theories were originally formulated. From our categorical perspective however the internal structure of the objects of a category is irrelevant, only the algebra of composition of morphisms is important. From this perspective, both Stab and Spek are generated by:

Various results follow directly from this definition. (iv) and (v) together imply that Q has six states. (iii) and (iv) together imply that, with respect to any observ- able on Q, all states are either eigenstates or unbiased. We can further conclude that each observable on Q has two eigenstates and four unbiased states.

MUQTs apparently have some fairly severe restrictions placed upon them but these apply principally to the observables and states on the object Q, and there is still considerable freedom to define the properties of the observables and states on compound systems. Furthermore, MUQTs could differ greatly in their other morphisms on Q. Stab and Spek are far from being the only MUQTs.

In our abstract terminology we would say that the proof is employing a basis structure, and four of its unbiased states. An analogue of the argument could be reconstructed in any dagger symmetric monoidal category with these features, and with scalars which are numbers or Booleans. Certainly any MUQT will have an analogue of the proof, where the scalars pictured above are the GHZ correlations.

