weeds [1,2]. The weed science society of America defines a weed as any plant that is objectionable or interferes with the ac- tivities and welfare of humans [3]. Weed species might vary in their response to the phytotoxicity, it has received atten- tion in numerous publications [4,5]. Weed management research should find out some natural ways of minimizing the depen- dency on synthetic herbicides which is still in need of an effective and affordable technological solution. Allelopathy rep- resented aproper solution for this problem.

The seeds of B. pilosa were collected from the orchards habitat in El-Sharkia Governorate in Egypt, sterilized by 0.3% sodium hypochlorite, rinsed by distilled water, dried on the filter paper in the laboratory at room temperature for 7 days and packed in a paper bag until use [18,19].

The seeds of B. pilosa were germinated on filter paper in the dark at room temperature for 2 days. Twenty five germinated seeds were transferred to Petri dishes lined with two layers of Whatman No. 1 filter paper and 10 ml of different extracts were added in concentrations of 10, 7.5, 5 and 2.5% (v/v). In addi- left at room temperature. Experiment designed was random- ized complete block with three replicates and the experiment was repeated twice. The shoot and root lengths of seedlings were measured on the tenth day and growth inhibition for radicle and plumule lengths was calculated.

P. lagopus was lower than reported in Turkish ecotype [12]; this could be corroborated to the variation in the habitat, climate and/or genetic pool [22,23]. On the other hand, it attained the highest content of flavonoids and saponins compared to P. major and P. squarrosa.

P. squarrosa showed the maximum inhibitory effect of B. pilosa radicle growth at the same concentration. The same observa- tion was reported for plumule growth, although B. pilosa radicle is more sensitive to the Plantago extracts than the plumule which could be attributed to the direct contact of radicle to the allelochemicals [24]. Additionally, the inhibition of B. pilosa seed- ling growth was concentration-dependent. This is similar to the effect of eugenol and parthenin on B. pilosa seedling growth [1,30].

The reduction in the seedling growth of B. pilosa in this study may be attributed to reduction in cell division of the seed- lings, altering the ultrastructure of the cells [33]. The reduction of protein and nucleic acids, as well as the alteration of the ion uptake, water balance, phytohormone balance, photosyn- thesis, respiration and inactivate several enzymes in B. pilosa seedling growth [24,26,34].

According to the IC50 values, the methanolic extracts of the three Plantago species were more phytotoxic on the germina- tion of B. pilosa than the aqueous extract. Moreover, the allelopathic effects of the methanolic extracts on the growth of both radicle and plumule were higher than aqueous ex- tracts. This could be attributed to the degree of solubility of the allelochemicals in the studied Plantago species [40]. Metha- nol has the ability to extract a wide variety of active components compared to water.

constituents. Therefore, these two species could be possible can- didates to be used in managing this noxious weed in an ecofriendly bio-control method. Moreover, further studies are needed to identify and characterize the proper allelochemicals and demonstrate their modes of action.

