Every lrs obeys the MAIN PRINCIPLE (MP) and the TOP PRINCIPLE (TP). The MP states that the term in the MAIN value of every lrs is a subterm of the TOP value and a member of the PARTS list. The crucial part of the TP for the analysis we present below is that in an utterance, the TOP value of the utterance consists of exactly those terms that occur in its PARTS list. Technically, utterances are phrases with illocutionary force and are not embedded within any other phrase.

Our principles license three possible values for the TOP attribute of the sentence, these are listed in (19). The first two readings differ in whether the negation contributed by the negated verb has scope over that con- tributed by the subject (19a) or the other way around (19b). Finally, (19c) expresses the situation where the two negations are identical, i.e., where the terms 4 and 5 are identical. In fact, this is the only possible reading of (15).

The NCC is language-specific. Since Polish is an obligatory NC lan- guage, there may be at most one sentential negation. For French, an op- tional NC language, [8] argues that there might be maximally two nega- tions. The NCC achieves the same effect as the negation absorption opera- tion of [13], but, whereas negation absorption comes as a completely new and stipulated mechanism, the NCC enforces structural identities, just as

Our analysis of NC in Polish shows how token identity can be used in com- binatorial semantics to arrive at a natural account of concord phenomena. While the analysis is similar in spirit to GB analyses in the tradition of [13], we do not need any stipulated mechanisms such as negation factoriza- tion. Instead, we can simply use the major analytical tool of HPSG, token identity.

For reasons of space, here we have restricted our attention to the case of finite verbs and their complements. For a broader coverage of data, we would have to consider syntactic islands for negative concord as well as a more careful semantic distinction among different kinds of negation such as eventuality, metalinguistic and pleonastic negation, only the first of which licenses n-words in Polish, cf. [22]. Our account naturally gener- alizes to this more comprehensive set of data once we introduce the nec- essary syntactic and semantic refinements.

LRS is similar to underspecified semantic systems in using a list-like se- mantic representation. Thus, we can avoid Cooper storage mechanisms for capturing different scoping possibilities of quantifiers [3, 4]. Combina- torial semantics results by simply concatenating lists of subterms instead of introducing complicated syntactic mechanisms such as -conversion, as would be needed in Montagovian systems. In this respect, LRS shares many advantages of underspecified systems. At the same time, the se- mantic representations used in LRS are not underspecified. This hybrid status helps to avoid empirical and theoretical problems that underspec- ified systems usually face. The technical and conceptual differences be- tween LRS and underspecified semantic systems will be demonstrated through an explicit comparison with Minimal Recursion Semantics, MRS [5, 6, 7], which was originally developed for computer implementations.

The major similarity between LRS and MRS is the use of list structures as semantic representations. But, whereas the lists contain subterms of the overall logical form of a sign in LRS, MRS superimposes on them an extra handle structure to put the pieces together. The handle structure leads to a special treatment of conjunction and is mainly motivated by com- putational considerations from machine translation. The additional layer of structure makes it hard to express certain well-formedness conditions on semantic representations as part of the grammar. Examples are the condition that there be no free variables in the logical form of a sentence, or that there be a way to order the handles to form a non-cyclic tree-like structure which guarantees the existence of a fully scoped mrs. MRS, and UMRS [10, p. 46], explicitly say that these constraints are not part of the HPSG grammar; they belong to some extra-grammatical scope-resolution procedure.

[23]; it is not underspecification on the level of the semantic representa- tion language. Moreover, since any standard representation language can be substituted for the one we have used in this paper, LRS is expressively well-suited for the description of complex semantic phenomena. Finally, as we have seen in the application to Polish, it can also easily and mod- ularly be combined with the usual syntactic analyses of HPSG. Further research will have to investigate if LRS can also serve as a feasible frame- work for computing with HPSG grammars.

