The role of green tea polyphenon-60 (PP-60) in decreasing metabolic risk factors, oxidative stress, and inflammation and in the amelioration of cardiac apoptosis in experimentally induced diabetes was investigated. After the induction of diabetes in male rats by strep- tozotocin (STZ; 50 mg/kg, i.p.), PP-60 (100 mg/kg) was orally administered for two weeks. The treatment of the diabetic rats with PP-60 ameliorated hyperglycemia and HbA1c, increased insulin secretion, improved the HOMA-IR level and lipid profile and increased the levels of IL-1b, IL-6, and TNF-a. PP-60 also blunted the increase in the level of MDA and H2O2 and the decreases in the levels of GSH, SOD, and CAT in the heart of STZ-treated rats and improved heart function. PP-60 decreased the apoptosis of cardiomyocytes; enhanced Bcl-2 expression; blocked the increases in p53, Bax, caspases 9, 8 and 3; and ameliorated DNA damage in the heart. Our data suggests that PP-60 decreased apoptosis by blocking DNA damage via the action of caspases and the suppression of pro-inflammatory cyto- kines. The pleiotropic effects of PP-60, including its anti-hyperglycemic effect, hypolipi- demic influence, attenuation of oxidative stress reduction of circulating pro-inflammation cytokines and anti-apoptotic action through modulation of its related regulated proteins, contribute to and accompany the beneficial effects of treatment with PP-60 on diabetic heart dysfunction.

have been recognized to have numerous health benefits. However, the molecular mechanisms through which these molecules mediate their effects remain largely unknown [14,15]. Green tea is obtained from the fresh leaves of the Camellia sinensis plant and is processed to prevent oxidation of the polyphenolic constituents [16]. Experimental and clinical studies have confirmed the efficacy of phytochemicals in the modulation of oxidative stress-induced cardiovascular dis- eases associated with diabetes [17,18]. Catechins are flavanols that constitute the majority of soluble solids of green tea.

oxidant enzymes and scavenging free radicals [16]. The po- tential mechanisms underlying the antioxidant effects of tea as effective scavengers of physiologically relevant reactive oxygen and nitrogen species were reviewed previously. The aromatic phenol rings present in these molecules cause them to behave as antioxidants by reducing free radicals and chelating metals in the body [21].

The beneficial effects of green tea are related to catechins, particularly EGCG [30]. However, no previous study has investigated the efficacy of polyphenon-60, which contains pure catechins, mainly EGCG, in diabetes-induced cardiomy- opathy in rats. In addition, the mechanisms involved in its beneficial effects are not fully understood. Therefore, the present study was designed to evaluate the cardio- ameliorative effects of polyphenon-60 in STZ-induced early cardiac injury in rats and attempts to understand the mech- anism underlying the therapeutic effects of this compound with reference to biochemical and molecular markers.

were given standard commercial rat chow and water ad libi- tum. All of the experiments were conducted in accordance with protocols approved by the local ethical committee for in vivo animal experiments. The animals were divided into four groups of eight rats each. The first group served as a control. The second group received an oral dosage of polyphenon-60 (100 mg/kg body wt) every other day for a period of two weeks. The third group received a single i.p. injection of STZ (40 mg/kg body wt). The diabetic state of the rats was confirmed by determination of the blood glucose level after two days of STZ injection. The fourth group received STZ followed by green tea polyphenon-60 at the same doses as the second and third groups.

creatine kinase (CK-MB) and lactic dehydrogenase (LDH) ac- tivities using kits purchased from Elitech (Puteaux, France). The lipid peroxidation was estimated by measuring the amount of malondialdehyde (MDA). The hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) concentrations were determined following the kit's instructions (Dokki-Giza, Egypt). The antioxidant levels were

estimated by determining superoxide dismutase (SOD) activ- ity, catalase (CAT) activity, and glutathione (GSH) content using kits supplied by Biodiagnostic (Dokki-Giza, Egypt). The pro-inflammatory markers interleukin 6 (IL-6), interleukin 1 beta (IL-1b) and tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-a) were estimated according to kits purchased from R&D Systems (NE Minneapolis, MN, USA) and EBioscience (San Diego, CA, USA). The protein concentrations were determined as previously described [31].

Heart samples were prepared with PBS/BSA buffer and then incubated with anti-Bcl-2 [100/D5] antibody (ab692) or anti- Bax [6A7] antibody (ab5714) for 15 min at room temperature. The cells were then resuspended in 0.5% paraformaldehyde in PBS/BSA and analyzed by flow cytometry.

that green tea catechins inhibit intestinal glucose uptake by the sodium-dependent glucose transporter SGLT1 [37], acti- vates glucose uptake, and mimics insulin in that it decreases the expression of genes that control gluconeogenesis [38]. Moreover, EGCG increases the tyrosine phosphorylation of the insulin receptor and insulin receptor substrate [39]. Further- more, the administration of 100 mg/kg PP-60 markedly improved the body weight loss in the diabetic rats in com- parison with the diabetic group. This is likely due to the

therapeutic potential of EGCG on cardiovascular disease. Both experimental and clinical studies have suggested that EGCG may have such an effect [46,48]. The administration of PP-60 to the diabetic rats significantly lowered the serum levels of total cholesterol, triglycerides, and low-density and very-low-density lipoproteins and resulted in a significantly higher serum level of high-density lipoprotein compared with the diabetic rats. Previous studies have shown that catechin extracted from green tea improves the serum lipid profile in rats fed an atherogenic diet [49] and injected with STZ [50] and in obese patients with metabolic syndrome [51]. A recent study showed that the tea polyphenol EGCG actually binds to lipoprotein particles and facilitates the LDL antioxidant and anti-glycation activities in a high glucose environment. Lowering the levels of serum lipid risk factors through dietary polyphenol treatment appears to be the main scheme for decreasing the threat of cardiac disease and related complications [52,53]. These results indicate that EGCG is the major component of polyphrnol-60 that has a beneficial effect for protecting against risk of cardiac disease by improving the lipid levels. Thus, EGCG is a pri- mary agent in LDL-lowering therapy for the reduction of cardiac risk.

lipid hydroperoxides, 4-hydroxynonenal and malondialde- hyde, in the liver, serum and brain [55]. These results confirm the ability of PP-60 to attenuate oxidative stress in the heart. Marked increased in the serum CK-MB and LDH activities were demonstrated in the diabetic group, suggesting the incidence of significant injury in the membrane of car- diomyocytes, likely due to lipid peroxidation, and the leaking of the functional marker enzymes into the blood. After PP-60 treatment, the diabetic rats presented significant reductions in the elevated activities of CK-MB and LDH, demonstrating the efficiency of green tea catechin for the protection of car- diomyocyte integrity. This finding agrees with the ability of

herin and the gap junction protein connexin 43 in cardiac cells [56]. Green tea significantly reduces the serum biomarker levels, increases the antioxidants levels in cardiac tissue and restores electrocardiographic changes compared with the isoproterenol-only-treated group [57] as well as reduces cyclophosphamide-induced myocardial toxicity [58]. These data clearly show that PP-60 is effective against cardiac stress.

studies [61,62]. A previous study found that the levels of IL-6, TNF-a and IL-18 were increased significantly in patients with impaired glucose tolerance [63,64]. Therefore, it has been hy- pothesized that polyphenols can modulate cellular signaling processes during inflammation due to their antioxidant properties. It has been reported that green tea extract reduces the serum levels of TNF-alpha, insulin, and free fatty acid and decreases the mRNA expression level of TNF-alpha, inter- leukin (IL)-6, IL-1b, and IL-18 in the liver of obese mice [65] and

Concomitant with the disturbed metabolic risk factors, increased events of oxidative stress were found in the heart of the diabetic rats. Treatment with PP-60 evidently prevented the diabetes-induced decrease in SOD and CAT activities and MDA formation, which culminated into a marked ameliora- tion of oxidative stress in the heart tissue. Oxidative stress leads to the accumulation of the lipid peroxidation product MDA in the heart and causes impaired cell function. Mounting evidence strongly indicates the potency of the free-radical- scavenging abilities of catechins due to the presence of the C-ring gallate group. Galloylated catechins, including PP-60, are strong antioxidants due to their higher phospholipid/ water partition coefficients and hence have the protective properties of the membrane phospholipids [54]. Green tea extract can decrease lipid peroxidation markers, including be related to the inhibitory effects of PP-60 on p53 induction and DNA damage. A previous study demonstrated that p53 plays an important role in cardiomyocyte apoptosis in cardiac hypertrophy because the upregulation of the p53 and its dependent genes is important in the modulation of myocyte apoptosis in heart failure [71]. The present results demon- strated obvious DNA damage with a markedly high fraction of tail DNA and typical comet-like nuclei, which are indicative of increased DNA damage in the hearts of diabetic rats. Thus, apoptosis results in nuclear fragmentation via the action of caspases as well as pro-inflammatory cytokine release.

The mechanism of protection may be attributed to the effec- tive antioxidant and scavenging free radical potential of catechin. These data confirm recent reports that EGCG markedly protects against DNA damage and oxidative stress in different cells and tissues, including human leucocytes [72], human mucosa cell cultures [73] and liver cells [74]. PP-60 treatment effectively upregulates Bcl-2, downregulates p53 and protects against DNA damage. Hyperglycemia activates p53 and p53-regulated genes leading to myocyte cell death [13]. It has been reported that p53 can act to regulate the intracellular redox state and induces apoptosis by a pathway dependent on ROS production [71,75]. In contrast, Bcl-2 exerts anti-apoptotic and anti-necrotic effects through its antioxi- dant influence on intracellular ROS [6,76]. Bcl-2 may decrease lipid peroxidation by enhancing cell resistance to ROS and preventing ROS production [71]. Therefore, we propose that the anti-apoptotic effect of PP-60 by decreasing p53 induction and the decrease in Bcl-2 may be related, at least in part, to its antioxidant impact. It appears that PP-60 decreases apoptosis by blocking DNA damage via the action of caspases and pro- inflammatory cytokine suppression.

Yoon YS, Uchida S, Masuo O, Cejna M, Park JS, Gwon HC, et al. Progressive attenuation of myocardial vascular endothelial growth factor expression is a seminal event in diabetic cardiomyopathy: restoration of microvascular homeostasis and recovery of cardiac function in diabetic cardiomyopathy after replenishment of local vascular endothelial growth factor. Circulation 2005;111(16):2073e85.

