by 17 % and the total wear mass loss by 44 % on average. Based on the engine friction tests on the dynamometer, GO nanosheets reduced motored torque by up to 6 %, which represents the engine frictional losses, and improved mechanical efficiency by up to 2.8 % at certain engine speeds. An average improvement of 2.6 % in brake- specific fuel consumption (bsfc) and 2.7 % in brake thermal efficiency (bte) was observed across all engine speeds. The results of detailed engine tests suggest that the GO nanosheets additive has the potential to enhance the mechanical efficiency of internal combustion engines, leading to energy and fuel savings and indirectly contributing to reducing CO2 emissions.

super or turbocharging, increased engine speeds, start-stop systems, exhaust after-treatment systems etc. demand more properties from en- gine lubricating oils [16,17]. As a result, base engine oils containing these additives face challenges in providing the necessary friction and anti-wear properties under the high combustion pressure and tempera- ture conditions associated with these developments. Furthermore, the use of some conventional additives such as zinc dialkyl-dithio- phosphates (ZDDP) or the limitation of the sulfur and phosphorus con- tents raises environmental concerns due to toxic exhaust emissions and

cating oil additives has been widely investigated due to their unique properties. Nanoparticles have different shapes and structures, much smaller sizes, and higher specific surface areas compared to conven- tional additive components [30,31]. Therefore, their excellent thermal and lubrication properties make nanoparticles a promising choice as lubricant additives. In recent years, various nanoparticle additives have been investigated in the literature, which can be roughly divided into mainly four groups such as metals, metal oxides, carbon-based materials and boron-based materials. As an example of these, various nano metal additives like Fe, Cu, Sn and CO; different nano metal oxide additives such as TiO2, CUO, ZnO, Al2O3 and ZnAL2O4; various carbon-based materials including fullerene, carbon-nanotubes, graphene, graphene oxide (GO); and boron-based nano additives such as boric acid, hexag- onal boron nitride, zinc borate, cerium borate, which can be found in the

of these also concentrated on the synthesis and preparation of particles on the nanoscale. In general, most of studies consistently showed that the addition of nanoparticles to base oils enhances the coefficient of friction (COF) and anti-wear properties, while also improving viscosity and thermal conductivity. The friction reduction and anti-wear effects of nanoparticles in the base engine oil are explained by various mecha- nisms that can occur alone or in combination, such as interlayer sliding, tribofilm deposition and repair effects e.g [14,15,30,32,36,37]. Addi- tionally, these studies also indicated that the tribological characteristics of the lubricating oils are influenced by various factors, such as the composition, shape, concentration, size, and dispersion stabilization of the nanoparticles within the base engine oils [14,31,34,38]. However, most of these studies in the literature remained in the friction bench testing phase, and the experiments on internal combustion engines were also very limited.

they reported that Al2O3/TiO2 nanoparticles accelerated the engine warm-up phase by 24 %. Ali et al. [5] investigated the tribological behavior using graphene (Gr) nanoparticles for energy saving and reducing exhaust emissions in a gasoline engine. In their engine dyna- mometer test results, Gr nanoparticles added to SAE 5W-30 engine oil

cumulative fuel mass consumption with road load simulation during the NEDC test. Koita et al. [38] investigated the effects of Al2O3 or SiO2 nanoparticles additions into SAE 15W-40 engine oil for the performance of a four-stroke diesel engine. They reported that the addition of Al2O3 in 0.3 wt% minimized bsfc and provided maximum bte at various engine loads. Singh et al. [40] synthesized nanographite and spherical carbon nanoparticles as two types of new carbon nanostructures with graphite structural units. They conducted engine performance tests with nano graphite-based additives due to better results in tribology tests. In their engine performance results, engine bsfc values were reduced by up to 18

% and bte by up to 22 %. Singh et al. [6] investigated the effect of graphene nano-platelets additions to SAE 15W-40 engine oil on fuel consumption and piston ring wear in the gasoline engine. In their re- sults, graphene nano-platelets were found to contribute to an increase in

oil. They conducted tribology tests in linear reciprocating tribometer and engine performance tests with engine dynamometer, and compared results with SAE 15W-40 engine oil. Their results showed a 28 % reduction in COF in tribology tests and an 8 % reduction in bsfc with lower CO, SO2 and NOx emissions in engine tests. In another study, Lue et al. [41] investigated nano-SiO2 particles as an engine oil additive in 4- stroke single-cylinder scooter engine. They performed engine tests with the ECE-40 driving cycle test on the four-quadrant motorcycle chassis dynamometer. In their results, fuel consumption decreased by 15.22 % on average and acceleration performance increased by 10.3 % with lower exhaust emissions.

Frictional losses in an engine result from various sources, such as hydrodynamic friction in the crankshaft and camshaft journal bearings, mixed or boundary lubrication friction in the piston ring pack, and valve train [8,9,42,43]. Therefore, the measurement of overall frictional losses and engine mechanical efficiency on the engine dynamometer holds significant importance due to the different lubrication regimes that occurred on the component base through the engine speed. It is also important to develop the relationship between the friction and wear performance results of friction bench and engine dynamometer tests. As seen from the literature, there are a limited number of studies on nanoparticle engine oil additives that investigate both tribological fric- tion bench test results and engine performance test results on a dyna- mometer under real operating conditions.

GO as an additive, it is necessary to modify the surface of the GO nanosheets to prevent their agglomeration and enhance their solubility in the base oil. Therefore, more research is needed on this topic to provide more information on the effects of GO nanosheets as an engine oil additive on engine performance. To meet this gap, this study in- vestigates the effects of GO nanosheets as an engine oil additive in fully synthetic SAE 10W-40 base engine oil. Four different concentrations of GO (0.5, 1.0, 1.5, and 2.0 mg/mL) were added to the base engine oil.

surface have folded and wrinkled corners. Furthermore, there are no residues that may be causing any roughness or pollution on the surfaces of the sheets. The TEM image also confirms that the GO nanosheets have been exfoliated and have layered structures. The X-ray diffraction pattern obtained by using Rigaku Ultima-IV for the GO nanosheets in the

process, a significant portion of GO nanosheet additives remained ho- mogeneously dispersed. This result showed that the surface modification process was found to be beneficial in the stability of the mixture samples. Whereas, even on the first day after the mechanical mixing process, non- uniform dispersions of GO nanosheet additives caused by their ag- glomerations in the base engine oil were observed and most of them tended to settle to the bottom of the sample tube over time. Therefore, an ultrasonic mixing process is necessary to prevent the initial agglomeration of the nanoparticles within the engine oil.

late the firing engine conditions, motored engine tests were performed with fuel injections cut-off immediately after firing engine tests. Also, in this study, since the test engine was operated un-throttled at different constant engine speeds, the engine friction losses (pumping + friction losses) were assumed to be mostly dependent on the engine speed [5,8,9,42,68]. In the fired engine tests, effective engine brake power (Pe) in kW can be calculated with measured brake engine torque (Me) (i.e., fired engine torque) in Nm and engine speed (n) in rpm.

nificant reductions in the COFs were obtained. As is also evident from the measurements for 1.5 mg/mL GO nanosheet concentration, the GO nanosheet additive effectively reduced the COF in all lubrication re- gimes and provided much more efficient lubrication compared to the base engine oil.

addition of multi-layered 2D GO nanosheets to the interspaces of the contact points [30,32,45,86]. In the hydrodynamic lubrication regime, which occurs under high-speed or low-load conditions, the hydrody- namic flow of the lubricating oil film completely separates the contact surfaces. Changes in the lubricating oil viscosity with the GO addition become an important factor in the hydrodynamic viscous friction force due to the shearing resistance of the lubricating oil film [4,5]. Multi- layered 2D GO nanosheets, settled between adjacent base engine oil layers, provide relative ease of movement between the base engine oil layers and reduce viscosity as a result of a reduction in shear stress [30,45,69,76,86]. As also mentioned in Section 3.1, the dynamic vis- cosity values decreased up to 14 % and the VI showed a slight increase of up to 7 % with the addition of multi-layered 2D GO nanosheets at different concentrations when compared with base engine oil. The hy- drodynamic lubrication regime develops in internal combustion engines mainly in the crankshaft journal bearings and in some conditions in the piston skirts [8,9,42,43]. Under various engine operating conditions, the oil films tend to shear thinning at high shear rates present in engine components with low engine oil viscosity and high VI [71,76,78]. These reduce friction losses and have a significant effect on mechanical engine efficiency and fuel saving.

mL GO nanosheet concentration. The difference in carbon element on the worn surfaces was attributed to the C element in the structure of GO nanosheets, indicating the formation of tribo-film as due to the nano- particles deposition on the worn surface [4,5,54,69,82]. As mentioned earlier, multi-layered 2D GO nanosheets form a protective tribo-layer film on worn surfaces, which provides a smoother and flatter surface with mending and self-repairing effects.

and a maximum value of bte [4,5,8,9,87]. On the other hand, at higher engine speeds, the frictional losses become more significant as engine frictional power increases almost proportionally to the square of the engine speed [9]. Also, with the use of GO nanosheet additive, a reduction of up to 5.69 % in bsfc and an improvement of up to 6 % in bte were observed at 2200 rpm. Based on the average of five engine speeds,

different tribological regimes. As explained in Section 3.3, depending on the lubrication regime conditions, the friction reduction and anti-wear effects of GO nanosheets in the base engine oil are explained by various mechanisms that can occur alone or in combination, such as interlayer sliding, tribofilm deposition and repair effects [14,15,30,32,36,37]. In this regard, when the engine speed increases, the hydrodynamic (viscous) friction for both lubricant samples gradu- ally increases with the increase in sliding speed at the friction surfaces between the majority of individual engine parts. As a result, motored torque increases and mechanical efficiency decreases with an increase in the engine speed. In mixed or hydrodynamic lubrication, changes in

The additions of GO nanosheets caused significantly lower COFs and smaller WSDs in all lubrication regimes. GO nanosheets at 1.0 mg/mL and 1.5 mg/mL concentrations resulted in reductions of up to 13.8 % and 26 % in COF, respectively. Although the COFs slightly increased in all lubrication regimes when the concentration was increased to 2.0 mg/ mL compared to 1.5 mg/mL, they remained below the values of the base engine oil. The total wear mass loss results for both the boundary and mixed lubrication regimes were consistent with the COF results and exhibited a similar trend. The best GO concentration amount was determined as 1.5 mg/mL with its tribological performance in the mixed lubrication regime.

average reduction of around 3.7 %. The Me was 4.9 % higher at the maximum torque speed of 2200 rpm, and the Pe was 2.9 % higher at 2800 rpm with the use of the GO nanosheets additive. Based on the average of five engine speeds, both Me and Pe were almost 1.1 % higher. A reduction of up to 5.69 % in bsfc and an improvement of up to 6 % in bte were observed at 2200 rpm with the GO nanosheets additive. Based on the average of five engine speeds, bscf decreased by %2.6 and bte was

The results of this study demonstrate that the GO nanosheets addi- tives for engine lubricating oils have great potential to exhibit several roles, including viscosity modifier, anti-friction, and anti-wear proper- ties. These properties can enhance the mechanical efficiency of internal combustion engines in the transportation sector, leading to energy and fuel savings, and indirectly contributing to reducing CO2 emissions. However, detailed and long-term studies are needed on the effects of this additive on the engine warm-up phase, engine durability and service life and sustainability of existing commercial engine oils.

J. Patel, G. Pereira, D. Irvine, A. Kiani, Friction and wear properties of base oil enhanced by different forms of reduced graphene friction and wear properties of base oil enhanced by different forms of reduced graphene, AIP Advances 9 (4) (2019), 045011.

