variations. ANN is generated and tested with experimental data sets and the results show that there was a good agreement between the actual and predicted ANN values. Moreover, the results of ANN sim- ulation are compared with other data processing methods such as Support Vector Machine (SVM), Partial Least Squares (PLS), Principal Component Regression. In addition, the results of the residual value of ANN

The development of the lubricant industry is an important part of the improvement of the machine industry and other related indus- tries. Statistical data show that with a small increase in the cost of producing and choosing a better lubricant, many additional and undesirable costs can be reduced. This is due to the important and beneficial effects of using lubricants, which can reduce the amount of friction between parts with a relative motion by sepa- rating them with a film of oil, and cooling the engine and its inter- nal components, thereby reducing thermal stresses and longer life. Lubricants also seal the contact parts to prevent the diffusion of gases and fluids containing particles and carry particles due to wearing down of engine components between moving parts and collect them in the filter wall. In recent years, with the advance- ment of technology, the use of nanomaterials in different fields of engineering and various industries has been considered by researchers. These include the dispersion of nanoparticles in a base fluid leading to the formation of a nanofluid, first proposed by Choi [35] presented a combined theoretical and experimental investiga- tion on lnf and knf. They found higher values for these parameters of the nanofluid in comparison with the base fluids. It was reported that increasing the SVF would increase lnf and knf. Moreover, they denoted that the temperature would strongly influence knf. Aladag et al. [36] examined the dependency of lnf of CNT/water and Al2O3/water nanofluids on the temperature and shear rates (SR)

at low temperatures and SVFs. Depending on SR, the nanofluid sus- pensions display Newtonian or non-Newtonian behaviors. Hojjat et al. [37] studied three types of non-Newtonian nanofluids and measured their rheological characteristics with different SVFs at various temperatures. The dependency of the rheological proper- ties of the nanofluids on the SVF and temperature was reported. Also, their results show that all nanofluids display pseudo-plastic behavior. Recently, researchers have paid attention to a new class of nanofluids containing a combination of different nanoparticles,

multi-layer ANNs with back propagation (BP) learning algorithm were used to predict lnf of MWCNT-Al2O3 (30:70)/ Oil 5W50 hybrid nano-lubricant. Data used in this work is taken from litera- ture [59]. Back propagation is an ANN algorithm which, performed learning on a multilayer feed-forward ANN [46]. In order to achieve

the outputs a large number of inter-connected processors called neurons organized in layers. A three-layer (input, hidden and out- put) ANN with a large number of nodes in each layer connected the knowledge of inputs with outputs. The strength (weights) of con- nections are achieved through a learning process. The main objec-

the simulated ANN output. From this, we can conclude that the experimental data are close to the simulated ANN and accurately predict the results. The ANN was generated and tested using the collected experimental datasets and the results show that there was a good match between the actual and predicted values of the ANN.

c = 0.3333333. Partial least squares regression (PLS) regression is a fast, efficient, and optimal covariance-based regression method that is recommended for regressions with many explanatory vari- ables [55,56]. The explanatory variables tend to correlate. PLS is a transformer or regressor and is in many ways similar to PCR. It also shrinks the sample before using the linear regressor on the trans- formed data. The main difference from PCR is that PLS Transforma- tion is monitored [50,57].

Chu Y-M, Nazir U, Sohail M, Selim MM, Lee J-R. Enhancement in thermal energy and solute particles using hybrid nanoparticles by engaging activation energy and chemical reaction over a parabolic surface via finite element approach Article 119. Fractal Fract 2021;5(3):17 pages. doi: https://doi.org/ 10.3390/fractalfract5030119.

Shariati M, Mafipour MS, Mehrabi P, Bahadori A, Zandi Y, Salih MN, et al. Application of a hybrid artificial neural network-particle swarm optimization (ANN-PSO) model in behavior prediction of channel shear connectors embedded in normal and high-strength concrete. Appl Sci 2019;9:5534.

