Various pretreatment methods are used in anaerobic digestion or mechanical and biological treatment plants to remove plastics and other physical contaminants (metal, paper, glass, wood, sand, etc.) from HBW, mostly relying on mechanical methods, such as shredders, screens, and extrusion dehydrators. Among these facilities, separation efficiency varies depending on the quality of the incoming feedstock, technical capabilities, and product specifications [17]. However, plastics in HBW cannot be completely removed through mechanical methods [19], and their efficiency has not been extensively studied [16].

Alessi et al. [20] examined the efficacy of four biowaste pretreatment plants in impurity removal, yet the extent to which these pretreatment processes may unintentionally introduce MPs into the final output remains unclear [16,21]. To comprehensively understand the source, fate, transport, and accumulation of MPs in this process, it is essential to characterize their abundance, distribution, and chemical composition [22,23].

MPs were observed on the filter membrane through the digital microscope (VHX-6000; Keyence, Japan) and pulled using tweezers. Particles exhibiting bright color, good uniformity, and excellent elasticity were considered MPs [18]. These suspected MPs were isolated and photographed, and their shape, color, and maximum dimension (length) were recorded. Particles were classified into fiber, fibrous cluster, film, flake, granule, and sphere, according to He et al. [28]. The particle

Most secondary MPs formation is observed in rough shredders, biomass crushers, and biohydrolysis reactors. Compared with HBW, fiber MPs in the RSO decreased by 10%, while all other shapes increased. The overall size of MPs increased, with the proportion of nonfiber MPs over 5 mm and those between 2 and 5 mm increasing by 6% and 8%, respectively. BCO exhibited the lowest proportion of fiber MPs (62%), whereas spheres and granules represent the highest proportions (4% and 6%, respectively). The proportion of nonfiber MPs larger than 5 mm and between 2 and 5 mm significantly increased by 11% and 18%, respectively, in the BCO compared with HBW. Compared with HBW, BHRSO produced fewer fiber MPs (decreased by 18%), whereas film MPs increased significantly by 12% and comprised 14% flake, 3% granules, 3% spheres, and 2% clusters. Furthermore, BHRSO has the highest percentage of nonfiber MPs larger than 5 mm, which is 33% (increasing by 31% compared with HBW). These results show that these processes produce nonfiber MPs of larger size (> 2 mm). In contrast to results observed in pretreatment systems involving shredding units that reduce particle size and facilitate the transfer of MPs to the substrate fraction [17,20], our results indicate that the pretreatment process with a shredding effect has a stronger impact on fragmenting nonfiber plastic debris into MPs than reducing MPs to even smaller sizes.

Comparing the width of tributaries reveals that the screen is the most efficient method for removing plastic debris, while the biohydrolysis reactor and biomass crusher are the most likely to form secondary MPs. At the design stage, the phase of feedstock entering the anaerobic digestion system should be considered, as MPs can often exist in solid or liquid phases after passing through an extrusion dehydrator and impurity separator. Notably, judging the extent of plastic pollution based solely on visible plastic debris is inaccurate, which may lead to an incorrect assessment of MPs pollution. With the size distribution 205.6 million MP particles per 100 tonnes of HBW into an anaerobic digester, whereas Category III (receiving 81 tonnes of undepackaged HBW per day) processes an estimated 93.9 million MP particles per 100 tonnes of HBW into anaerobic digester. In suburban areas, the pretreatment system (receiving 200 tonnes of undepackaged HBW daily) processes an estimated 32.7 million MP particles per 100 tonnes of HBW into anaerobic digestion. Moreover, impurities and other solid phases not digested in anaerobic digesters are sent to incineration plants, where MPs range from 0.4 to 101.8 million MP particles per 100 tonnes of HBW.

During daily life, various physicochemical properties of plastics determine their intended applications, which in turn determine their distribution characteristics in different environmental conditions [44]. This study revealed that common plastic types in HBW encompass food packaging bags, plastic bags, lunch boxes, plastic bottles, foam boxes, and rope. Analyzing the shape, polymer type, color, and other physical and chemical characteristics of MPs and plastic waste could identify potential sources of MPs [32,45].

Although entirely abandoning plastic food packaging or HBW pretreatment is unrealistic, this study suggests steps to reduce the risk of MPs formation. While depackaging at the source was designed to supervise waste segregation, it has somehow evolved into an effective means to control MPs pollution [18]. Using a screen and manual sorting process before performing other pretreatment processes can concurrently decrease plastic debris and the risk of MPs being released.

