The present study was designed to estimate the protective or curative potency of an extract from Cocculus hirsutus leaves against CCl4 intoxication via its antioxidant property in rats. Liver enzyme markers (SGOT, SGPT, ALP, LDH, and bilirubin) and oxidative stress markers {lipid peroxidation (LPO), enzymatic antiox- idants [superoxide dismutase, catalase and glutathione peroxidase] and non-enzymatic antioxidants [re- duced glutathione, vitamin C and E]} were analyzed by spectrophotometry. Histopathological studies on hepatic tissue were also performed by the method of Hematoxylin and Eosin staining. Rats administrated with 30% CCl4 in olive oil intraperitoneally resulted in significant increase in the levels of SGOT, SGPT, ALP, LDH, and bilirubin compared to control rats. Significant elevation of hepatic LPO and depletion of

Hepatic-organ is the imperative organ, which regulates a wide range of physiological processes in the body and it is one of the major organs prone to the oxidative damage by the attack of reac- tive oxygen species [1,2]. Carbon tetrachloride (CCl4) exerted hep- atocellular damage has been largely evaluated and employed model for detecting the novel hepato-protective therapeutics. As the reactive oxygen species are the major cause for the deleterious effects in hepatic disorders, various plant extracts were reported for their hepato-protective activities through their antioxidant activities [3,4]. Natural antioxidants are especially considered as robust candidates to confer protection against chemical induced toxicity [5,6].

Antioxidant property has been reported to play a crucial role in the hepatoprotective capacity of many plants such as Spirulina maxima, Bauhinia hookeri, and various medicinal herbs [8,11,12]. Treating liver disorders with plant drugs has been an age old tradi- tion by Ayurveda, an indigenous system of medicine in India. Thus the search for potent natural source has become a prime focus for new drug development in pharmaceutical industry for hepatoprotection.

Leaves from Cocculus hirsutus plant were collected in and around Tirumala Tirupathi hills, India and compared with the vou- cher specimen deposited at the Department of Botany, Sri Venka- teswara University, Tirupati, India for its identification. The leaves were shade dried for a week and finely powdered using a blender. Ethanol extract of C. hirsutus (EECH) was prepared by soxhlation process. The plant powder (100 g) was extracted with 500 mL of 70% ethanol for more than 6 h and concentrated by rotary evaporation and vacuum drying. The yield of the plant

This experiment was performed according to the Organization for Economic Cooperation Development (OECD) guidelines. Ani- mals were divided into one control group and five plant extract treated groups (N = 6). After an overnight fast, rats were dosed orally with ethanol extract of Cocculus hirsutus (EECH) in distilled water at doses of 100, 250, 500, 1000, and 2000 mg/kg b. wt. Hourly observations of the animals for any signs of behavioral changes, toxicity and mortality was recorded over a period of 72 h [16].

Male albino rats were allocated into 4 groups each containing 6 rats. Group I received olive oil only (1 mL/kg body weight, i.p.) as a control, Group II (CCl4 induced) received mL/kg bodyweight of 30% CCl4 in olive oil, i.p. The EECH Extract (250 and 500 mg/kg body weight) was admintrated (orally) once in a day and CCl4 was administered after every 72 h. Treatment period was 10 days [4]. Blood was collected from all the animals through retro-orbital plexus. After collecting the blood, the rats were sacrificed and their livers were excise, rinsed in ice cold normal saline followed by

Reduced glutathione (GSH) content was determined by its chro- mogenic reaction with dithio-bis-2-nitrobenzoic acid (DTNB) [26]. Vitamin C was estimated by following the standard procedure described by Santhrani et al. [27]. Vitamin E was determined according to the protocol of Ramanathan et al. [28].

Liver tissues were embedded in paraffin blocks and thin sec- tioning was performed according to paraffin slice techniques. The sections were further mounted on to the microscopic slides and stained with Hematoxylin and Eosin stains [29]. These microscopic slides were observed under the light microscope and photographed.

Spotlight of the present study was on investigating the role of C. hirsutus against the hepatotoxicity of CCl4 and to understand the possible mode of action in hepatoprotection. Direct evidence of CCl4 causing liver damage was observed by the manifestation of alterations in various hepatic parameters {elevated MDA concen- tration, depleted levels of non-enzymatic antioxidants (GSH, Vita- min C and E), reduced levels of antioxidant enzymes (SOD, CAT, GPx)} in CCl4 alone administered (Group II) rats in comparison to control rats. The increase in levels of SGOT, SGPT, ALP and LDH in Group II rats also suggests the hepatotoxicity in these rats. To elucidate the hepatoprotective activity of ethanol extract of C. hir- sutus, this plant extract was administered in the concentrations of 250 and 500 mg/kg body weight to the respective group of rats. This concentration of the extract was chosen on the basis of earlier related studies suggestion that this dose would be effective [14,35]. Serum transaminases, ALP, and LDH are well chosen specific markers of hepatic damage [36]. CCl4 induced damage of hepato- cytes can leads to effect on their transport function and membrane permeability, leading to these enzymes leakage from the cells and releasing them into the blood stream [37]. In the present study, rats induced with CCl4 showed significant elevation of all these enzymes demonstrating serious damage of hepatocytes. Hyper bilirubinaemia which is the indicator of severe hepatic damage [38], was noticed in rats treated with CCl4. Treatment with ethanol extract of C. hirsutus, restored all the altered levels of liver marker enzymes and bilirubin in a dose dependent manner demonstrating its curative potential to maintain the normal functional status of the hepatic tissue.

The level of TBARS is related to lipid peroxidation and the lipid peroxide levels in liver were found to be considerably elevated in CCl4-challenged rats [39]. These free radicals trigger cell damage through two mechanisms namely covalent binding to cellular macromolecules and lipid peroxidation which affect the ionic per- meability of the membrane preventing the disintegration and sol- ubilization of membrane structure. The reduced TBARS formation after treatment with the EECH may be attributed to the antioxidant activity of the plant by scavenging the CCl3-radical generated due to the metabolic transformation of CCl4 in the liver. The antioxi- dant enzymes SOD, catalase and GPx constitute primary defense mechanisms against reactive oxygen species (ROS).

The antioxidant enzymes SOD, CAT and GPx constitute a mutu- ally supportive group of defense against ROS. The decrease in the levels of these antioxidant enzymes in liver of CCl4-treated rats may be due to the elevated lipid peroxidation or inactivation of the enzymes by cross-linking with malondialdehyde; this will cause massive accumulation of free radicals, which could further stimulate lipid peroxidation [40]. Administration of EECH signifi- cantly increased the activities of SOD, CAT, and GPx in the rats induced with CCl4; this suggests administration of C. hirsutus etha- nol extract appears to have brought about a remarkable improve- ment in the activity of these antioxidant enzymes in CCl4 intoxicated rats. Similar improvement of antioxidant enzymes by supplementation of phytochemicals and extracts such as polyphe- nols from Bauhinia hookeri [41] and Juniperus phoenicea [42] extract against CCl4 induced oxidative stress was recently reported.

proteins sulfhydryl groups and by scavenging free radicals [43]. The key protective mechanism of glutathione against oxidative stress is acting as a co-factor for several detoxifying enzymes and also regenerate Vitamins C and E back to their active forms [38]. In the present study, rats administered with two doses of EECH leaves had observed significantly higher levels of GSH, vitamin C and E when compared with CCl4 induced group and also near to the values obtained in normal rats. These results suggests that C. hirsutus extract appears to be a potent hepatoprotective agent against CCl4 induced oxidative damage by maintaining the GSH, vitamin C and E levels. In the present study, replenishment of GSH, Vitamins C and E by the supplementation of plant extract to confer protection against CCl4-induced liver damage, goes in accordance with Lavanya et al. (2012) [4] and Manubolu et al. (2014) [22] reports.

To provide direct evidence on protective effect of EECH against CCl4 induced toxicity, histopathological changes in liver tissues were evaluated. Marked disruption of the cellular structure of liver was noted in rats challenged with CCl4. Minimal disruption of the hepatocellular structure was noted in two doses of EECH treated groups of rats; these results provided supportive evidence for bio- chemical analysis (SGOT, SGPT, SALP, and LDH activities and MDA levels approximated to the levels in normal rats).

In conclusion, the results of this study indicated that EECH has a potent hepatoprotective activity on carbon tetrachloride induced hepatocellular destruction in rats. From the present experiments it was elucidated that the hepatoprotective nature of EECH may be due to its antioxidative and free radical scavenging properties. It also reveals that C. hirsutus is a robust medicinal herb for devel- oping as a phytomedicine against hepatic disorders and further studies are essential in the direction of isolating the active princi- ple of the plant which acts as an effective antihepatotoxic agent.

