Compared with [22], the multi-type methodology allows for more modularity, which not only has made it possible to account for the logic of IA3 (which could not be encoded in an analytic rule otherwise, see Footnote 6), but will also make it pos- sible to extend the present theory so as to cover weaker versions of rough algebras based on e.g. semi De Morgan algebras [15], or even general lattices [5,13], which will account for the proof-theoretic aspects of the logics of rough concepts. More generally, thanks to the multi-type methodology, the logics of rough algebras have been embedded into the wider context of the logics which are properly displayable. Properly displayable logics are studied as a class, and several metatheoretic results, such as semantic cut elimination, finite embeddability property, finite model prop- erty, can be given uniformly for large subclasses. Moreover, the modularity of the proof theoretic environment of properly displayable logics makes it possible to make different logics interact in a systematic way, so as to obtain e.g. dynamic epistemic logics based on the logics of rough algebras. This opens new interesting possibilities to enrich the theory of the logics of rough algebras.

For any f e / (resp. g e G), we let nf e N (resp. ng e N) denote the arity of f (resp. g), and the order-type s f (resp. sg) on nf (resp. ng) indicate whether the ith coordinate of f (resp. g) is positive (s f (i) = 1, sg(i) = 1) or negative (s f (i) = b, sg(i) = b). The order-theoretic motivation for this grouping is that the algebraic

Throughout this section, we let H denote any of the logics defined in Section 2.2; let A and HA denote its corresponding class of single-type and heterogeneous al- gebras, respectively, and let D.A denote the display calculus for H. The verifica- tion of the properties of every D.A follows very closely those of analogous proper- ties of other calculi designed using the general methodology of multi-type calculi (cf. e.g. [19,15,18,16]). For this reason, we only sketch them.

In the present subsection, we outline the verification of the soundness of the rules of D.A w.r.t. the semantics of perfect elements of HA (see Definition 3.6). The first step consists in interpreting structural symbols as logical symbols according to their (precedent or succedent) position, as indicated at the beginning of Section

In the present section, we briefly sketch the proof of cut elimination and subformula property for D.A. As hinted to earlier on, proper display calculi have been designed so that the cut elimination and subformula property can be inferred from a meta- theorem, following the strategy introduced by Belnap for display calculi. The meta- theorem to which we will appeal for each D.A was proved in [9].

