e.g. opium, hashesh etc. this can be applied on Qat (Catha edulis) whose dark-green leaves contain alkaloids similar to caffeine and are chewed in fresh condition. Thus, WHO classified qat as a drug of abuse that produces wide to moderate psychic dependence. Since (1956) qat was recommended to the UN Commission as Narcotic Drug and the prohibition of qat

The field studies had been conducted in 12 sites selected at different altitudes (1450e2440 m.a.s.l.) of the SanaaeTaiz mountains during 1992e1994. Anatomy of leaves, chemical analysis of soil sampleshad been carriedout in the laboratories of Botany Department, Faculty of Science at Damietta, Dam- ietta University and Sanaa (Sanaa University). The methods used are as follow:

Two soil samples were collected at two depths (0e20 cm and 20e40 cm) at different levels for six selected sites in Sanaa and Taiz mountains where qat grows. The soil samples were air- dried and subjected to physical and chemical analysis [11,12]. Twelve ground water (10-100 m depth wells) samples were collected from the twelve sites. Water samples were kept in polyethylene bottles for different analysis following Piper [11].

The leaf samples of C. edulis were collected from individuals growing in the 12 sites. Proline was determined in the leaves of qat according to Bates [13]. The total soluble eN (TN) was determined by the conventional micro-kjeldahl method [14]. For the preparation of thin sections of leaf of C. edulis, the paraffin method was used. The sections were examined using a research light microscope.

Two-Way Indicator Species Analysis (TWINSPAN) was applied to the classification of 12 sites of qat cultivation in Yemen, using the presence eabsence data [15]. Canonical Correspon- dence Analysis (CCA) ordination [16] was used to ordinate vegetation with the environmental variables. The computer program CANOCO 3.12 [17] was used for all ordinations. The result is an ordination diagram (biplot) in which points represent species and sites and arrows represent environ- mental variables.

Data of various studies on C. edulis were analyzed by the least significant difference multiple range test [18] to deter- mine significant difference among individual means for each altitude site. Pearson moment correlation coefficient was used to test the significance of the relationship between environ- mental and anatomical variables and species adaptive fea- tures (e.g. proline TN, CLA, .etc.).

In Yemen there are about 40 kinds of qat grown at different al- titudes. These include: Nahmy, Horry, Harazy, Sawtty, Seraty, Dulaea (upper area), Dulaea (middle area), Radaea, Garbany, Matary, Sharaby, Marary, Shamy, Sharw, Habashy, Bani, Hashish, Maswary, Samawy, Bokhary, Melahy, Mobarra, Nagary, Sabry, Khawalany, Hagawy, Sherky, Saddae, Khataby, Balady (Taazi), Obassy, Haramy, Gaeshany, Shamach, Maroh, Sharafy, Duhlla, Hamadany, Kootoby, Wadi Daher, Hadnany Afshy and Seiy, Baladi, etc. [19]. Shamy is of the midland is also called Shamach when grown in high land, it is the best quality, and its price may reach more than 5 timesthatof theother types and thus it is exported abroad. Such kinds of qat have different effects. Some make people happy and some cause sadness and anxiety. Some make the intestine hard and some soften it, some increase the sexual desire and some decrease it, but all kinds increases thirsty. Krikorian [20] on the other hand, distin- guished these kinds of qat: one has an effect on the brain more powerful than that of opium or hashish and bring about madness a second kind less violent, causes only the inheriting effect of a spirit, the third kind still less strong only provokes insomnia. He attributed such difference due to the total alka- loids and the other chemical constituents of the chewing leaves which seems to vary with the age of the plant, the season of leaves harvesting and altitude of growth. The last feature perhaps is an indicative of the influence of climate and genetics.

Morghen and Rufat [26] showed that qat is cultivated from shoots as is done in case of banana or from cutting. Harvesting of chewing leaves is carried out all the year round (2e4 times/ year). Only the small, young and fresh leaves and buds at the tip of the harvested branch are of value.

The chemical study of qat goes back to the nineteenth century Fluckiger and Gerock [27], searching for caffeine as the possible stimulating principle, found no traces of it but discovered instead an alkaloid they named kafin. Mosso [28] extracted from the plant (qat) a basic fraction with stimulant-like properties and called it as celastrine. Stockman [29] described three distinct alkaloids: cathine, cathinine and cathidine. Paris and Moyse [30] detected 3-6 alkaloids one of these might be ephed- rine. Karawy [31] separated three alkaloidal products in addition to cathine and ephedrine: cathinine, cathidine and eduline.

considerable quantity of ascorbic acid and tannins were found in qat along with less amounts of resins, sugars and sugar alcoholic. Ascorbic acid influences not only on con- sumer nutrition but on the pharmacological effect of the plant. Tannins are probably responsible for the gastric ef- fects of qat. It causes stomach trouble and makes the con- sumer puzzled. Qedan [36] found about 40 components in the essential oil distilled from qat, e.g. ocimene, B-phellandrene, teripinolene, a- and B-pinene, nerol, linalool, a-terpineol.

The effects produced by chewing the fresh leaves of qat are described as similar to those produced by an amphet- amine or amphetamine-like stimulant, only more pleasant and agreeable when not used in excess. Qat is also an appetite suppressant. Chewers in rural areas use the leaves to give them energy to work and in urban areas users chew qat as a pass-time stimulant, or as a study aid [24]. It is said that qat dilate the pupil of the eyes and to excite the whole of the central nervous system. Abdel Sattar [37] isolated ting- none and 22-hydroxytengnone from the callus of qat leaves grown in greenhouse. 22-hydroxytengnone exhibited sig- nificant cytotoxic activities against leukemia (ED50 0.54 mg/m) and prostate cancer (ED50 4.4 mg/ml). Tingnone was also shown to exhibit strong non- selective broad cytotoxicity against cancer.

The diagram shows that the species of group C (C. olitorius and H. longiflorum) are occupying the bottom left side of the diagram. These species occur in relatively saline habitats (with high EC, TSS, CL and Na). Similar comparisons make it clear that A. visnaga, the indicator species of group A, is highly

Since ancient times man has been aware of the properties of plants. The knowledge that he had of these properties enabled him to combat and resist as much as possible the harshness of nature. Thus, he had resource to certain plants to heal, to lose pain or to relieve hunger, in short to survive. Later on, the progress of science led him to isolate and to extract the active constituents of the plant that he knew to be psychoactive. On account of the benefit that they were able to take and feeling of the well being that they imported, these were quickly diverted from their original purpose. They were thus used for purposes that were no longer medical. In this way, abusive and wrong use of such plants made its appearance [38].

oppressive and psychoactive substance, in other words drugs, constitute the best refuge, the means of release and escape. Drugs, they believe, will provide them with a means of expression. But, they deluded themselves, for drugs end up by enslaving them to the extent of turning them late living or- ganisms that society rejects. This is the case of all drug addicts all over the world, however, the case is not the same in Yemen as well as in some countries of East Africa, Kenya, Ethiopia, Eritrea etc, where large number of people, unfortunately, do believe that qat is not a serious drug and chewing of its leaves, has no bad impacts on their health.

widely replacing the cultivation of coffee trees which has been almost destroyed completely except of few trees hidden be- tween the thick vegetation of qat. More than 97% of qat pro- duction of leaves is being consumed locally in Yemen. This, definitely has bad impact on the economy of Yemen which used to export its high qualities coffee seeds abroad.

Yemeni people living outside Yemen. The problem become even worse when we known that the farmers of qat may collect leaf crops 3-4 times/year whereas coffee tree produces only one seed-crop/year. Both farmers and merchants, most of them are decision- makers in Yemen, will strongly refuse any proposal aiming at the revival of coffee tree cultivation in Yemen on the expense of qat cultivation.

