Similar reasons originate the difficulty of expressing a complete evaluation. In the context of qualitative models (but the same argument applies to the numerical case) it is doubtful that a set of preferences expressed by a human being constitutes a complete (i.e., total) order of the domain of discernment. There could be several reasons that prevent the subject of the analysis from providing such complete in- formation. (S)he may be incapable or reluctant to describe a total order in very rich contexts, for instance, because of substantial difficulties in comparing every possible event, or because (s)he is interested in reasoning about a restricted portion of the domain [3,26,28,30,43]. This problem can be circumvented by adapting to the qualitative framework the pioneering approach proposed by de Finetti in the context of Probability measures [11,12]. Namely, by introducing the so called partial models, i.e. qualitative assessments defined only on some of the situations at hand and intended to be restrictions of some complete model. (Then, we deal with par- tial capacities, partial probabilities, and so on.) This approach allows the analyst of the problem to focus his/her evaluation on the situations really judged relevant,

w.r.t. the problem at hand. This also leaves open the possibility to enlarge the model to other scenarios that could enter on the scene later. The next section we formally introduce these notions and provide an axiomatic view of the most studied uncertainty orders.

Further differentiations among uncertainty notions are done by considering the specific way of combining distinct pieces of information (e.g., as mentioned, for Probabilities additivity is adopted). Within the numerical context, this yields a taxonomy of numerical measures. By following [14,46,47], various qualitative pref- erence orders can be introduced according to their agreement with the numerical models. The correspondence between a qualitative uncertainty notion and a nu- merical measure is given in terms of a representability result.

Analogous properties can be stated for other notions of preference orders. Propo- sition 2.7 relates the qualitative notions to the corresponding quantitative measures. For each of the uncertainty notions, the proof proceeds along the lines of Propo- sition 2.6 but employing, in place of condition (B), a different characterizations of total preference orders (see [4]).

Qualitative framework detection. This is a classification task: Given a (partial) assessment (domain of discernment, constraints, and preferences), the goal consists in detecting which is the most stringent among all compatible uncertainty frameworks. Notice that, by proceeding in this way, we actually invert the usual attitude towards qualitative management of uncertainty. In fact, specific axioms are usually set in advance, so that only relations satisfying them are admitted. Here, on the contrary, given a fixed preference relation, the goal consists in ascertain which are the reasonable rules to work with.

In this appendix we briefly describe the various generalizations of Probability measures referred to in this paper. The following material is far from being an exhaustive and complete treatment. We give just a informal introduction to the subject. The interested reader can refer to the widely available literature. Introductory treatment of the relationships between Probability measures, Belief functions and Possibility measures, can be found in [29,33,45], to mention some among many.

