Building a large system through a systematic, step-by-step refinement of an initial abstract specification is a well established technique in software engineering, not yet much explored in systems biology. In the case of systems biology, one starts from an abstract, high-level model of a biological system and aims to add more and more details about its reactants and/or reactions, through a number of consecutive refinement steps. The refinement should be done in a quantitatively correct way, so that (some of) the numerical properties of the model (such as the experimental fit and validation) are preserved. In this study, we focus on the data-refinement mechanism where the aim is to increase the level of details of some of the reactants of a given model. That is, we analyse the case when a model is refined by substituting a given species by several types of subspecies. We show in this paper how the refined model can be systematically obtained from the original one. As a case study for this methodology we choose a recently introduced model for the eukaryotic heat shock response, [19]. We refine this model by including details about the acetylation of the heat shock factors and its influence on the heat shock response. The refined model has a significantly higher number of kinetic parameters and variables. However, we show that our methodology allows us to preserve the experimental fit/validation of the model with minimal computational effort.

However, independently of the type of refinement chosen, the refinement process should preserve the systemic properties of the original model, e.g., the model fit. We present here an approach for data model refinement which preserves the previously obtained numerical properties of the model.

Some of the new kinetic parameters of MR may be known from the literature, or they can be experimentally measured. For the rest of them, for which no previ- ous knowledge and no direct kinetic measurements are available, a computational procedure is needed to calculate them so that (2) and (3) hold. Such a procedure should focus only on those parameters whose kinetic values are not known.

It has been recently shown that the acetylation of the heat shock factors (hsf), i.e., the transcription factors for the hsp-encoding genes, plays an important role in regulating the heat shock response [23]. The acetylation process consists in substituting an acetyl group for a hydrogen atom within a chemical compound. The reverse process, i.e., the deacetylation, represents the suppression of an acetyl group from a compound. Protein acetylation can occur at the alpha-amino group of the amino-terminus (N-terminal acetylation) or on the lysine residues at the epsilon- amino group (lysine acetylation) [7]. The lysine acetylation in particular is known to play a significant role in gene regulation by changing the charge of histone tails. Due to the neutralization of the positive charge of the histones, lysine acetylation diminishes their DNA binding affinity [4, 21].

We focus in this paper on quantitative model refinement as an essential stage within the complex process of model development in systems biology. In particular, we analyse the case when the model is refined by replacing one species with several subspecies. Specifically, we show that, by attaining the numerical setup of the refined model from that of the initial model, we obtain a quantitative refinement which preserves previously obtained numerical properties of the model, e.g., model fit and validation, see [3].

Our solution to the problem of setting the kinetic parameters of the refined model is clearly not unique. Since the systems of ODEs corresponding to the original and to the refined model are in general impossible to solve analytically, we adopt a symbolic approach where we make sure that the two systems of ODEs are isomorphic through the variable renaming given by the data refinement relationship. In the absence of any biological knowledge regarding the kinetic parameters of the refined model, our solution is only driven by the symbolic approach described above. If there is

We only focused in this paper on refining the basic heat shock response model of [19] in a quantitatively correct way to include some of the details of the acetylation of hsf. Due to lack of space, we did not include in the refined model the details regarding the role that the acetylation of hsf plays in fine-tuning the heat shock response, as described in [23]. We plan to return to these aspects in a separate study.

