Quantum Computing also enhances the most critical digitalization business drives in industrial manufacturing practice and helps predict the performance optimization, operational excellence, and use cases of manufacturing excellence in industrial manufacturing business units. In a general statement, in the twenty-first century, most of the industrial manufacturing facilities and units, along with the operations facilities, are handling sensitive information, critical product information, Indus- trial manufacturing data(CAD, CAM, Manufacturing Products Informa- tion), Financial transaction information, exchanges of data in between designer and prototype builders across the industrial sites, data related to the confidential print documents, marketing (pictures, videos, printed flags, animations) across the industrial sites. These data and information are critically confidential and essential for industrial manufacturing sites while considering a defense product or a critical chip manufacturing contract. The production planning for the existing products/services or new products/services needs a robust environment with a strong iden- tity, accessibility, and confidentiality guidelines within the manufactur- ing processing in industrial production sites [1].

In industrial operations and large enterprises, industrial sites have been using the core SAP S/4 applications to perform the day-to-day enterprise-wide operations in sales, manufacturing, financial transac- tions, manufacturing, and production order management. S/4 Systems needs data security, confidentiality, and to be accessible to authorized users, and it offers the capability to perform digital transactions across the GUI and Fiori application [6]. It would be ideal to have cipher trust transparent encryption in the S/4 Hana system to protect and safe- guard enterprise data and transactions in order to meet information se- curity compliance and safeguard data security, data governance as per enterprise-wide application, and corporate compliance as suites in ISO 27,001-Information Security Management System (ISMS) [7].

In quantum computing, the Quantum Key Distribution (QKD) plays a vital role in cryptography in quantum computing networks, is extremely useful for quantum industrial applications, and offers a huge amount of opportunity to protect key critical security information in Industry 4.0. One of the most secure communication methods for exchanging encryp- tion keys known only to senders and receivers is quantum key distri- bution (QKD). In quantum computing, the Quantum Key Distribution (QKD) plays a significant role in cryptography in quantum computing networks, which is extremely useful for quantum industrial applications because it provides better security information and safeguards critical industrial operational parameters across production sites. In QKD, the encrypted messages are shared with the communication parties (senders and receivers). Quantum key distribution is part of quantum physics, in which the exchange of cryptographic keys is transferred from senders to destinations with secure, achievable, guaranteed, and trusted commu- nication information between senders and receivers. QKD has two key players (parties): the source and the destinations [8].

In quantum cryptography, the process of encrypting the data and securing the information is done by applying a unique philosophy of "Quantum Mechanics/computing" which is to encrypt the data and transmit it to the destination from the source without even getting hacked by hackers. Quantum cryptography and QKD are the best meth- ods to protect the data privacy, security, accessibilities, confidentiality, and availability of information to authorize resources in a digital man- ufacturing environment and would be best practices in industrial oper- ation within Industry 4.0 [21,14,22]. Here are a few key principles of quantum mechanics within quantum cryptography:

In quantum computing, a beam splitter (BS) is used as the source of photon quantum entanglement, in which the statistics of photons change at the output ports of the beam splitter. In QKD, a beam splitter is used to divide the photons and polarize them, it divides beams of light lin- early or diagonally. Both parties Alice and Bob can see bits as (0, or 1). An attacker can use the beam splitter to interrupt or eavesdrop on the key creation process. Eve may then be able to control what she sends to Bob, interfering with their secret quantum key distribution process. Alice and Bob no longer have a secure channel in which they can create a secret key. Security issues such as beam splitting attacks and other interferences like light injection must be addressed in quantum encryp- tion systems. A beam splitter is an optical device that divides light into transmitted and reflected beams [6].

strategy, which is the solution of a complex semidefinite optimization. It uses the principle of quantum mechanics to encrypt the message for secure communication. With the help of a low-level cryptographic algo- rithm can build a cryptographic protocol to establish computer security and network security [23].

initializes qubits randomly between the four states and then sends them to Bob over the quantum channel. Bob measures the qubits on either the Z or X basis. Bob shares the bases he measured with Alice over classical channels and Alice confirms whether she measured the same. Alice and Bob also confirm some measurements to determine whether there was an eavesdropper on the line. Then they use the initialization or mea- surement of either a 0 or a 1 state in the respective basis as a bit in

Entanglement-based protocols: Based on the quantum state of two objects which are linked together, forming a combined quantum state. The concept of entanglement means that the measurement of one object thereby affects the other. In this method, if an eavesdrop- per accesses a previously trusted node and changes something, the other involved parties will know [25].

and cost factors. While considering practical network security within the QKD, it is advisable to consider the Device independent (DI), MDI- QKD, and network- QKD as the best practice to implement [8]. There are three main challenges concerning implementing the QKD into practice.

Quantum cryptography could save the most vital industrial product information, research and development information, product informa- tion and PIMs, and defense products related to key BOMs and compo- nents, as well as the most competitive challenges in qubits. Quantum computing and communications applications are used in industrial man- ufacturing facilities where key data, information, and sensitive indus- trial manufacturing information, as well as products and information related to key defense products and BOMs/components, are stored in secure, confidential locations accessible only to authorized users across the sites. Industrial cryptography and quantum cryptography were ad- dressed, and the opportunity for quantum communication was handled in this article [28].

