In Domain Theory quasicontinuous domains pop up from time to time generalizing slightly the powerful notion of a continuous domain. It is the aim of this paper to show that quasicontinuous domains occur in a natural way in relation to the powerdomains of finitely generated and compact saturated subsets. Properties of quasicontinuous domains seem to be best understood from that point of view. This is in contrast to the previous approaches where the properties of a quasicontinuous domain were compared primarily with the properties of the lattice of Scott-open subsets. We present a characterization of those domains that occur as domains of nonempty compact saturated subsets of a quasicontinuous domain.

Quasicontinuous domains introduced by Gierz, Lawson and Stralka [5] capture many of the essential features of continuous domains. Recently they have attracted increased attention through the remarkable work of J. Goubault-Larrecq [6] and through a paper by Li and Xu [11].

An important result concerning continuous domains is their characterization by properties of their Scott topology. A dcpo is continuous if and only if its lattice of Scott open subsets is completely distributive. Gierz, Lawson and Stralka [5] have characterized quasicontinuous domains by the property that their lattice of Scott-open subsets is hypercontinuous. One of the characterizations of hypercon- tinuous lattices is that they are images of completely distributive lattices under maps preserving arbitrary meets and directed joins.

Proof. Let C be a Scott-closed, hence lower set that meets all members of F. By 3.4, it has a directed subset A that still meets all members of F. The least upper bound x of A exists in the dcpo D and is in C since C is Scott-closed. Since A meets all members of F and since these members are upper sets, the upper bound

Note that these two statements are based on considering two different topologies on the underlying set: 3.4 is the instance of the Topological Rudin Lemma for the Alexandroff topology, whereas the derivation of 3.8 and 3.9 from 3.4 is based on the Scott topology.

