The goal of this literature review is to give an update on the recent developments for semi-infinite programs (SIPs), approximately over the last 20 years. An overview of the different solution approaches and the existing algorithms is given. We focus on deterministic algorithms for SIPs which do not make any convexity assumptions. In particular, we consider the case that the constraint function is non-concave with respect to parameters. Advantages and disadvantages of the different algorithms are discussed. We also highlight recent SIP applications. The article closes with a discussion on remaining challenges and future research directions.

Example 3. (Mathematical programs with complementarity constraints) Mathematical programs with complementarity constraints (MPCCs) consider the minimization of some objective function over a feasible set whose description contains complementarity constraints. Under the assumption of lower-level convexity and some mild regularity assump- tion, SIPs may be recast as MPCCs as follows.

token, it has been proposed to solve SIPs by solving a joint set of up- per and lower-level KKT conditions via homotopy methods (Fan et al., 2018; Liu, 2007). In the general case of a nonconvex lower-level prob- lem however, these approaches are not applicable. In the following, we survey solution approaches for SIPs with nonconvex lower-level prob- lems. These approaches have in common that they establish feasibility of a point in a SIP by globally solving the lower-level problem, either explicitly or implicitly.

This article is structured as follows. In Section 2 we survey re- cent algorithmic approaches to nonconvex semi-infinite optimization. Section 3 illustrates the suitability of these methods for a list of mod- ern applications of semi-infinite optimization. We close the article with some final remarks in Section 4.

linear SIPs, and they also received some attention for the solution of convex SIPs (Zhang et al., 2010). However, since we are not aware of successful dropping rules in the nonconvex case, the present review does not further comment on this topic.

More recent advances in this area focus on the solution of gener- alizations of SIPs rather than specializations. As such, the oracle ap- proach proposed by Tsoukalas and Rustem (2011) for the solution of SIPs was initially proposed by Tsoukalas et al. (2009) for the solution of GSIPs, bilevel programs and min-max programs with coupling con- straints. In contrast to the SIP variant, the original publication prescribes the solution of subproblems by stochastic methods and does not pro- vide a proof of convergence. The method proposed by Mitsos (2011) is extended to GSIPs in Mitsos and Tsoukalas (2015). Furthermore, the methods in Mitsos (2011) and Djelassi and Mitsos (2017) are extended to existence-constrained SIPs, which possess three rather than two levels in Djelassi and Mitsos (2021).

Marendet et al. (2020) propose a branch-and-bound algorithm for the solution of SIPs with box-constrained LLPs. They build on an exist- ing interval-based global optimization solver and extend its capabilities for the treatment of semi-infinite constraints. In particular, they perform branching on the upper-level variables while maintaining for each node of the branch-and-bound tree a tessellation that provides a superset of the lower-level optimal solutions for the given node. Then, upper and lower bounds on the optimal lower-level objective are obtained via nat- ural interval extensions applied over the tessellation. Convergence of these bounds and in turn convergence of the branch-and-bound scheme are achieved by successively refining the tessellations. Beyond this ex- tension of the branch-and-bound scheme, Marendet et al. (2020) also propose the use of constraint programming techniques in order to tighten the bounds on the lower-level optimal objective.

Due to the close relation of SIPs and bilevel programs, we also men- tion that the basic concepts of the methods discussed here are also applicable in bilevel programming absent convexity assumptions. As such, the adaptive discretization method is used to solve bilevel pro- grams in Mitsos et al. (2008a), Mitsos (2010), Tsoukalas et al. (2009), Wiesemann et al. (2013) and Djelassi et al. (2019). Similarly, a relaxation-based branch-and-bound method for the solution of bilevel programs is proposed in Kleniati and Adjiman (2014a, 2014b, 2015).

Another application of SIP and bilevel optimization is the param- eter estimation in mixture thermodynamics, which are prevalent in chemical engineering. We will here focus on so-called excess Gibbs free energy models, which describe the deviation of a mixture from ideal behavior. For details the reader is referred to Bollas et al. (2009), used also in process simulation. If the thermodynamic package is rig- orous, stability of the predictions is guaranteed. This corresponds to a nonsmooth solution method of the bilevel formulation (Dempe, 2017). This approach is in essence used in the standard tool DPP (Westhaus and Sass, 2004). As the problem is nonsmooth, either a derivative-free method or a nonsmooth method needs to be used. In practice, one can also heuristically apply a derivative-based method.

The third approach, proposed by Bollas et al. (2009), Mitsos et al. (2009) and Glass et al. (2018a) and implemented in Glass et al. (2018b) is to consider the specialized stability criterion and solve the resulting SIP. For the case of binary mixture and two phases

For the development of such methods, a few benchmark problems exist as well as some comparison of algorithms. It may be helpful to organize this in a more systematic framework. Similarly, some open- source and commercial SIP solvers are available, but a larger variety is desirable.

While this paper focuses on smooth and continuous nonconvex lower-level problems, in practice semi-infinite constraints also appear in more general settings, like with nonsmooth defining functions and/or with mixed-integer variables. Some of the aforementioned methods do not make assumptions on differentiability of the functions involved and are also applicable to the mixed-integer case. However, these methods rely on the global solution of subproblems which is challenging in the nonsmooth/mixed-integer case. So overall it is fair to say that the de- velopment of theory and methods for SIPs with nonsmoothness/integer variables is still in its infancy.

