In this paper, we study refinement for such partially known systems. In our setting, partiality refers to transitions: transitions between states may be present or not present (the standard case) as well as unknown. This third possibility is expressed by using a three-valued logic for reasoning. We define a simulation relation on such partial transition systems, and show that the simulation problem on partial transition systems can be rephrased in terms of two simulation problems on complete transition systems, employing an optimistic and a pessimistic completion.

Refinement is the central concept in a formal model-based development of systems involving a stepwise design on different levels of abstraction. In this setting, refinement takes on the role of a correctness criterion: a transfor- mation of a model needs to preserve the overall behaviour; for a user the same functionality should be available after the change. Refinement is usually shown via simulation relations between the models/specifications before and after the transformation.

Before treating partial specifications we give the corresponding definitions for the complete case. /The behaviour of) our specifications is given by transition systems over a fixed set of actions Act . Transitions describe execution of actions, viz. operations of the system.

Our system is a parallel composition of a large number of components but we only know one component. This component shares variables and/or communication channels with other components. The behaviour of our component thus depends on other components (e.g. the possibility of a communication), and hence we can only partially determine its transition system.

In this paper, we have defined a simulation relation between partial transition systems, where partiality refers to transitions. Both the transition systems and the outcome of a simulation check are formulated via a three-valued logic. We have discussed two different possibilities for simulation of unknowns: un- knowns being simulated by unknowns, or unknowns only being simulated by knowns. The latter has been adopted as the definition (due to it being more realistic), and for this definition we have shown simulation on partial tran- sition systems to coincide with two simulation checks on complete transition systems, using an optimistic and a pessimistic completion.

