A recent survey from McKinsey [4] showed that the adoption of AI in businesses is dynamically progressing, with more than 50% of survey respondents already using AI technology in at least one business function. Most common business functions are service operations, product and service development, and marketing and sales. The top three use cases across all businesses are service operations optimization, AI-based enhancement of products, and contact-center automation [4].

However, currently available research lacks a comprehensive analysis of the present and future potential uses of AI in power systems, considering different AI subfields, so-called domains. AI domains are theoretical, scientific areas defined as a part of the larger AI taxonomy [1]. AI domains include categories such as reasoning, planning, learning, communication, perception and interaction & integration. They are a valuable tool to study and compare the evolution of different AI algorithm groups over time within an economic sector (e.g., artificial neural networks, metaheuristics, rule-based systems, reinforcement learning).

To our knowledge, the presented study comes first presenting a taxonomic review analyzing jointly the volume of academic works on AI applications in power systems (how many studies in total, publication years, AI domains, power system use cases) and their evolution over time. This work aims to answer the identified research questions by offering a holistic analysis of the above-mentioned gaps. It covers the last 40 years of AI research in power systems.

The paper is organized as follows: While Section 2 sheds some light on the drivers behind the growing usage of AI in the power sector, Section 3 provides an overview of studies that reported a variety of use cases of AI in power systems. The methodology is presented in Section 4. The study concludes with an in-depth discussion of obtained results (Section 5), new research avenues (Section 6) and a set of conclusions (Section 7).

The increasing complexity of planning and operating electrical grids and electricity markets due to the higher number of actors and services. The current electric system was not designed to accommodate diversified and distributed power generation sources, particularly renewable generation with variable production patterns (e.g., [18]). Thus, new tools are

The increasing utilization of sensors such as smart meters and internet-of-things technology lay the foundation for new business opportunities that extract value from collected data and, eventually, may improve energy efficiency and/or decrease costs for consumers and companies. It has been stated that AI can create new business opportunities by processing and valuing new data streams of the power sector, particularly in smart homes and buildings, automation in industry (industry 4.0), as well as through improved power system asset management and maintenance strategies [24].

Recent studies have shown that AI ranks among the most utilized digital technologies in energy systems and particularly in power systems [16]. In the last years, a few studies on AI applications in energy systems have been published (e.g., [10], [40], [41]). However, studies remained selective in use case choice and analyzed AI domains, thus the outcomes cannot be used for a conclusive assessment of which AI domains are most promising for a given use case or where along the power supply chain AI is most likely to be most beneficial.

A recent, more detailed study [9] clusters nine broad application domains of AI in power systems into three fields, namely 1) maintenance and security, 2) general foundations of decision making and 3) distribution and customer services. The applications are further characterized by AI capabilities (audio and speech, image and face recognition, robotics and assistance systems and general data). The nine applications are then ranked according to their contribution to the energy transition as well as their maturity (closeness to commercial markets). The analysis by the authors reveals that the most developed and beneficial AI use cases for the energy transition are those that are specifically related to general foundations of decision-making (predictions, operations optimization, inventory optimization, predictive maintenance and strategic business decisions) [9].

The study of [41] proposed a three-dimensional indicator that allows for the assessment of the benefit of AI applications in the energy sector (not only power systems), considering a variety of use cases. The developed indicator considers economic saving potential, regulatory risk and technological maturity (via TRLs). Authors compare AI applications in 15 use cases, finding that applications are most mature for forecasting, maintenance and fault detection. However, the authors do not differentiate between different AI domains exploited in each use cases. In addition, the choice of use cases did not follow a systematic approach and thus remained arbitrary.

More recently, a couple of academic studies addressed the use of AI (including machine learning) in energy/power systems. For example, the studies [42] and [43], survey AI applications for power systems, but on rather arbitrarily chosen use cases (e.g., energy management, energy saving, smart grids, fault diagnosis, electricity consumption and generation forecasting). Similarly, the study of [44] provides a comprehensive overview of AI and machine learning applications to energy systems. While the authors provide interesting insights on research trends and connections between subfields in energy, their analysis on AI applications aims to cover the whole energy system and therefore lacks details on power system use cases.

[16]. In these works, the authors delineate use cases along the power system supply chain elements: generation, transmission networks, distribution networks, market operations and retail (the demand side). Here, an additional category is added with isolated grids/microgrids, as they are an emerging paradigm with particular characteristics that are normally part of distribution systems, but may operate as autonomous systems under isolated conditions, i.e., disconnected from the bulk power system [48].

For each supply chain element, typical use cases of AI target the enhancement of either planning or operation and maintenance (O&M) practices (e.g., compare [9], [11], [24]). In addition, as will be shown in the analysis, some use cases show how AI can be used to automate grids. In Retail, additional use cases exist that provide utilities deeper insights into user behavior and preferences. For market operations, the main use cases consist of enhanced price forecasting, increased flexibility through operation of local energy markets or energy communities as well as automated peer-to-peer trading and aggregation.

system/subsystem development and eventually system test, launch and operations. The TRL scale is a widely used framework, that has been applied to assess and compare the maturity of processes in the health sector [51] and recycling [52], among others. A recently published study provided insight into the overall maturity and forecasted future maturity of AI domains using the TRL framework as well as readiness-vs-generality charts [49]. However, assessments of technological maturity using TRL are limited to expert opinions and thus remain qualitative, and, to a certain degree, subjective [53].

While we would expect high publication rates translating into increased industry applications, the latter point remains rather speculative as there is currently no open accessible register that would allow one to analyze the real-world applications of AI, in the power sector and beyond. Therefore, in this work, rather than relying on subjective assessments, we characterize the use of AI applications in the power sector through their Research Maturity (RM). We define research maturity as the degree of advancement of AI employment in a certain power system supply chain. We estimate the research maturity by determining the relative share of work dedicated to a given use case by comparing published research listed in a major scientific platform using Boolean queries in the Scopus index1. Scopus is the largest abstract and citation database of research literature covering more than 5,000 publishers. In this work, the search field was limited to title, abstract and keywords, to avoid counting publications which only mention the searched queries and are not directly related to the subject area. Document types were not limited, allowing for articles, conference papers, book chapters, etc.

Two sets of queries were created with the goal of answering the research questions defined in section 1, and following the methodology described in section 4. The first set of queries focused on extracting general information on the state of AI research in the power sector. The second set of queries narrowed the search by specifying the applicable power system supply chain elements, AI domains and specific use cases. The exact queries used as inputs to the Scopus API search are shared as supplementary material. The quantification of amounts of research dedicated to each AI application eventually allowed to draw some conclusions on the technological maturity of each AI application and the identification of most utilized AI domains across the power supply chain (generation, transmission, distribution and so forth).

Having seen the general increased AI research trends in the power sector, the second step in this work consisted in studying the evolution of AI use cases in the field. To do so, the queries applied to the Scopus research database were narrowed down to specific use cases (e.g., Improved planning) for all power system supply chain elements (e.g., Generation) and AI domains (e.g., Planning).

AI-based controllers are in general well suited for use within microgrid environments since they have shown capabilities to deal with the complexity and uncertainty that are intrinsically related to smart grids (including microgrids). As in other fields, the ability of AI methods to analyze vast amounts of data from various sources has resulted in a great amount of work dedicated to load forecasting, such as in the work presented in [82] and [83]. The work of [83] is of particular interest as it considers uncertainties in load demand based on adaptive online learning. Another important feature of AI that is exploited within microgrid modeling is the ability to compensate for non-complete or inexact models; there are many works focused on primary, secondary and tertiary data-driven model-free control methods.

AI has also been used to cluster consumers electricity consumption profiles [37], [113], household appliance energy consumption patterns [114], or determine the social-demographic factors associated with DER adoption (e.g., [115] for the case of PV in Dutch households, [116] for EV, PV and HVAC in Portugal or [105] for EV, PV and heat pumps in a DSO service area in the Netherlands).

