Banks have introduced various financial transaction systems to manage money transfers between accounts, both locally and internationally. EMV (named after its inventors Europay, MasterCard, and Visa) is one of the most widely spread financial transaction systems. The aim of introducing EMV was to eliminate fraud. However, the EMV system has some vulnerabilities and it has suffered some attacks. The aim of this paper is to develop a risk assessment methodology for EMV transaction systems. The purpose of this methodology is to enhance the process of decision making by analysing, modelling and evaluating the risks that might occur during EMV payment transactions.

Banks use several systems to manage, track and settle payments and money trans- fers between accounts. These systems are both online and offline, varying from networks of cash machines to the processing of credit cards, and bookkeeping sys- tems [4]. Market economies benefit from financial transaction systems to ease money exchange between different parties in both domestic and international transactions [15].

This paper is part of an ongoing research project designed to develop a risk management of financial transaction systems by setting up an appropriate method- ology to model the risks, thereby providing managers with results to enhance their decisions. The project will apply the proposed methodology to three case studies, starting with the EMV system. This paper proposes a risk assessment methodology for EMV systems. The proposed methodology will study the EMV transaction pro- cess and identify the stakeholders. After that, a risk identification process will take place to identify the potential risks that could happen during payment transactions. Finally, we will model EMV transaction systems.

This section will be divided into three sub-sections. The first presents general background information about risk assessment and risk management processes in general. The second section will provide a background review of EMV systems. The third section provides a background investigation of risk assessments for financial transaction systems and related work.

Risk management constitutes a set of processes, starting with identifying the risks and ending with a treatment action or plan. Risk assessment is part of the risk management process and it aims to identify, model and evaluate the risk. Haimes defines the risk assessment process as a set of logical, systemic, and well-defined activities that provide the decision makers with a sound of identification, measure- ment, quantification, and evaluation of the risk associated with certain natural phe- nomena or man-made activities [14]. According to Haimes [14], the risk assessment and management processes include the following:

The EMV system supports magnetic strip authentication by a chip, which is harder to tamper with since it authenticates transactions using cryptography. The card holder is identified by a signature or by a PIN and the PIN is verified by the chip locally. This is branded as chip and PIN in some countries (e.g. the UK and Canada) since PIN verification is utilised in most point-of-sale transactions, and as chip and signature in other countries (e.g. Singapore) where signature verification is still used to authenticate customers [3,20].

In addition, a number of papers have proposed a risk assessment or modelling of other financial transaction systems. To address these papers we will adopt a high- level systematic mapping approach. It will investigate the processes and method- ologies currently in use.

The search was conducted for documents with publication dates ranging from 2000 to 2017, and for all document types (articles, books, etc.). After these results were obtained, all of the papers were screened to select the related papers that had clear risk assessment/modelling processes or methodologies, excluding all others. The relevant papers either introduced a methodology or simply performed the risk assessment, modelling or analysis. The above-mentioned criteria (keywords, time range limit and screening step) were employed in order to narrow down the focus of our research.

From a methodological point of view, different methodologies were utilised to assess, model, or analyse the risk of several financial transaction systems. Most papers start by analysing the business processes of the discussed financial transac- tion systems. For instance, [25] carries out a risk assessment approach for mobile payments starting with understanding and analysing mobile payment systems, iden- tifying roles, and linking these roles to mobile payment flow. Moreover, some papers utilise business process diagrams to illustrate the business process. For instance, [9] used several UML diagrams to build a better understanding of the smart card pay-

BPMN (Business Process Model and Notation) is a standard notation for business process modelling. It is a very strong modelling language that can be used to model business processes and how these processes should be executed. BPMN has the advantage of using swim-lanes, which show who is performing each process.

At this stage the research will focus on EMV contact-based transactions. Contin- uous Time Markov Chain (CTMC) was initially chosen as the modelling approach. Firstly, EMV processes (card authentication, cardholder verification and transac- tion authorisation) will be modelled on PEPA and the flow of the transaction will be taken from the BPMN. The next step is to add attacks to the model. The attacks will be added to the process where they could happen, as presented in the BPMN. After that, the modelling results will be used in the following steps. At this point, we started modelling the EMV transaction processes and the code below shows the model.

TransactionRejected = ( r e j e c t , r j ) . Payment ; TransactionCanceled = ( cancel , r j ) . Payment ; TransactionDeclined = ( d e c l i n e ,  r j ) . Payment ;

Risk expression identification will be based on particular stakeholders and for each stakeholder we will list events X cost for instance, what can go wrong? vs. cost. Different stakeholders will have different expressions but the model will be the same. Actually what can go wrong? is for the whole system and who pays? is a means risk expression for that particular stakeholder. The aim of this step is to link risk expression with the findings from the risk assessment processes so that we know what could go wrong?, who should pay?, and how much? However, this step is also part of future work at this stage.

