Section 2 critically reviews appropriate literature. Section 3 out- lines the development of the Genetic Algorithm tool for solving facilities layout problems, which is integrated with maintenance planning. The experimental results are presented in Section 4. Section 5 provides a discussion and highlights the conclusions of the work and identifies opportunities for future research.

used for solving FLPs, including: Genetic Algorithms; Simu- lated Annealing; Tabu Search; Ant Colony Optimisation; Parti- cle Swarm Optimisation; and Biogeography-Based Optimisation (Sooncharoen, Vitayasak & Pongcharoen, 2015). Genetic Algo- rithms have been a popular approach to solving facility layout design problems. Kia, Khaksar-Haghani, Javadian and Tavakkoli- Moghaddam (2014) found that GA can find near-optimal so- lutions in much less computational time than CPLEX software for almost all problems. Lenin, Siva Kumar, Islam and Ravin- dran (2013) demonstrated the effectiveness of GA for solving a single-row layout design problem. The results obtained from GA were more favourable than other approaches. Dapa, Loreungthup, Vitayasak and Pongcharoen (2013) reported that GA outperformed the Bat Algorithm and Shuffied Frog Leaping Algorithm in a multiple-row layout design. Vitayasak and Pongcharoen (2016) in- vestigated the affects of breakdown maintenance and provided a cost-based decision framework for re-layout investment.

Machine breakdown has been one of the most studied dis- ruptions in flexible job shop scheduling (Nouiri et al., 2017). The machine failure rate has been represented by the Poisson distri- bution (Schemeleva, Delorme, Dolgui & Grimaud, 2012) or gen- erated randomly (Nodem, Kenne & Gharbi, 2011). Machine life- time is commonly modelled using the Weibull distribution (Fitouhi & Nourelfath, 2012). The mean-time-to-failure has been repre- sented by the normal distribution or the exponential distribution (Schemeleva et al., 2012). Corrective maintenance has also been

The Genetic Algorithm (GA) is a population-based, nature- inspired algorithm (Goldberg, 1989; Holland, 1962). A set of can- didate solutions is generated as an initial set of solutions, which then undergoes an evolutionary search process. GAs use probabilis- tic transition rules to guide a highly exploitative search and also performs a multiple directional search by maintaining a population of potential solutions. In each iteration (generation) of the search process the crossover operator helps the GA move towards a local optimum (Hicks, 2006), whereas the mutation operator tends to move the search to a new neighbourhood which leads to increased diversity (Hicks, 2006; Islier, 1998).

This paper has presented the development of an approach that integrates maintenance planning with the design of non-identical machine layouts subject to dynamic demand, which addresses a gap in the literature. The GA aims to minimise the total material flow distance. The computational experiments were carried out us- ing eleven datasets with different demand distributions. The analy- sis considered three maintenance scenarios with PPM/QPM (ratios of 20/80, 50/50 and 80/20). Three levels of corrective maintenance were considered 10%, 20% and 30%. A combination of PMM/QPM with ratios of (20/80 and 80/20) and two values of %CM (10% and 30%) were studied. The material flow distances can decrease or in- crease when some machines were maintained during each period. This was caused by changes in the routings due to the use of al- ternative machines.

Designing robust machine layouts considering machine mainte- nance leads to reduced material flow distances up to 30.91%, 9.8%, and 20.7% for PM, CM, and PM and CM scenarios, respectively. The distances obtained from designing the layout without and with maintenance consideration had statistically significant differences in the means. The PPM/QPM ratios, %CM, and a combination of PPM/QPM and %CM had significantly resulted in the material flow distance in almost all datasets.

