Path-Execution computes a distance metric based on navigation paths [6,2]. To this end, they consider both false-positive paths, i.e. paths that are collision-free in the derived map but not in the ideal map, and false-negative paths, namely those which are collision-free in the ideal map but are considered to be unsafe in the derived map.

Most closely related to our formalism are the methods based on map scoring. We however focus on formalising the conceptual aspects when relating the ground truth environments with the derived context information. By using partial order relations on the sets of environments and derived context information, we can explicitly distinguish between unsafe and imprecise deviations. By this, our framework can be seen as a unification of the different map scoring approaches in the sense that all the different metrics can be represented and motivated on a formal basis. The work of [11] also studies abstraction as part of spatial knowledge representation, however they do not formally express safety aspects.

The e-correct environments are those which are indistinguishable from e under the given perception. The perception of e-imprecise environments yield strictly higher elements in the lattice order, which however in particular represent e. The union of e-correct and e-imprecise environments are considered to be safe with respect to e, the rest are considered to be unsafe with respect to e (basically as they do not cover the original environment e).

The usage of occupancy grids [9] for representing the spatial context for mobile autonomous vehicles has a long tradition. Many important problems in robotics, like map building, localisation, sensor fusion, path planning, and obstacle avoidance can be solved on a grid-based representation (see e.g. [18]).

In the following, we use a graphical representation for fields and grid valuations. A field is given by a box representing the area A and a number of gray shapes that represent the occupied space within A. Occupied cells in a boolean grid are drawn with a hatched pattern. The ideal sensor yields

Analogously to the previous section, the definition of a probabilistic sensor is a mapping to a probability distribution over the abstract lattice. Typically, the probabilities are only available on the lowest level, that is, for the perception of in- dividual attributes. To lift these probabilities to the function lattices, the methods described in the previous section on grid-based representations can be employed. The general framework as described in Section 2 and demonstrated in the previ- ous section can then be applied to obtain quantitative measures for object-based representations.

This work shows that modelling a sensory perception in a formal framework in- volving abstraction and concretisation functions allows for a mathematically sound investigation of safety aspects. Methodologically, we propose to model the infor- mation order regarding both the environment and the context in terms of lattices. Functions going back and forth between these two lattices express the interdepen- dencies between the original and the derived information. This formalisation makes a number of safety-related aspects explicit, and can thus help to provide formally rigorous arguments regarding the overall safety of a mobile autonomous system.

