A version of the integrable problem of motion of a dynamically symmetric gyrostat about a fixed point similar to the Kowalevski top, while acted upon by a combination of uniform gravity and magnetic fields is considered. This version is reduced, in general, to hyper- elliptic quadratures. The special case when the gyrostatic momentum is absent is solved in terms of elliptic functions of time.

Separation of variables in Euler's case was found by Euler himself, but the solution was expressed by Jacobi in terms of his newly invented elliptic functions. Lagrange reduced the case of axisymmetric top to separation of variables involving elliptic integrals. Explicit expression of the solution in terms of time was initiated by Jacobi and can be found with some variations in [3e5].

alized by Zhukovsky [9]. The corresponding solution was shown by Volterra to be expressible in terms of sigma func- tions of Weierstrass [10]. In [11], Wittenburg pointed out another solution in terms of elliptic functions of time. Detailed presentation of the history of general and particular solutions for a heavy gyrostat can be found in [12].

generalization to the problem of gyrostat has been found in a different context. The problem of motion of a gyrostat similar to the Kowalevski top and acted upon by two skew uniform fields (gravity and magnetic) was considered in [13]. A general first integral quartic in velocities and generalizing the Kowa- levski integral was found for this generic problem. As, in the

the gyrostat motion in one field. The second case does not contain the classical case of Kowalevski, since the intensities of the two fields are proportional and can vanish only simul- taneously. In the last case the cyclic variable is a comple- mentary angle to the sum (or difference) of the two angles of precession and proper rotation.

where I and l are the inertia tensor at O and the gyrostatic momentum vector. Both I and l are constant in the moving frame. We consider the components of all vectors as rows, thus obtaining the unusual order of the objects in the above expression for M.

exists a separation of variables. One of the possible ways to obtain a separation was pointed out in [30]. Complete real algebraic separation for the Goryachev case was given in [16,17]. Here we give a real separation for the gyrostat in the double field with singular symmetry under condition (7).

Hamiltonian (21) can be represented as the discriminant set of some polynomial. Still for this Chaplygin's case the complete algebraic separation of variables is not known. It seems likely that such a separation can be obtained based on the obvious analogy between the two problems.

