Throughout this paper we consider connected graphs that are undirected, unweighted and contain no loops or multiple edges. A graph G is said to be d-regular if every vertex in V (G) has degree d (i.e. each vertex has precisely d incident edges). When discussing any graph G, we let n denote the cardinality of V (G) and for d-regular graphs on n vertices, we assume dn to be even to avoid parity problems. For other basic graph-theoretical definitions we refer the reader to Diestel [3].

In the following section we give a description of our algorithm and in Section 3 we outline the method used for its analysis. Our analysis uses a theorem of Wormald [11] which we restate in Section 3. The results of this paper are encompassed by the following theorem, the proof of which is given in Section 4.

G. Once no edges remain, the set F is an edge dominating set in G. It is not difficult to see that the set F is also an independent-edge dominating set of G which is also referred to as a maximal matching.

Each operation after the first starts by selecting a vertex w u.a.r. from those vertices of minimum positive current degree in G and the operation is split into a series of sub-steps. Each sub-step chooses a neighbour u of w u.a.r. If the degree of both w and u is 1, this edge is isolated from the rest of the edges in G and we simply add the edge uw to F, remove the edge from G and start a new operation.

Consider the degree-greedy algorithm for finding a small edge dominating set as described in Section 2. Here, in the specification of Opr (which first selects a random vertex, w, of degree r), the set of randomised tasks consists of choosing a neighbour u of w u.a.r. and then (possibly) choosing a different neighbour of u u.a.r. from those vertices of current maximum degree in the set

The first term in (11) denotes the change in v-degree of w from v to 0 and the second term denotes the change in the v-degrees of the v neighbours of w from i to 0 (one for each of the sub-steps). The remaining terms denote the expected change due to finding v edge dominating set edges and removing the edges incident with their end-points. The expected change in the size of F per operation is simply v.

