Speaking of the present millennium, the rate of the number of vehicles registered in the US has risen to 19 % (i.e., approximately 46 million vehicles) in the early 20 years [1]. Due to this sudden increase, the issues of traffic accidents, road congestion, and envi- ronmental pollution have become more serious. There are some possible solutions to these issues, such as Intelligent Transporta- tion Systems (ITS) or smart traffic lights. These methods reduce the waiting time at traffic lights and enhance the quality of driving. In major cities, waiting time and traffic jams are critical, by scheduling traffic and enhancing junction traffic flow, smart cities may lessen congestion, trip times, and carbon dioxide emissions [2]. The traffic refinement process can involve (ITS) Intelligent traf- fic lights system, which can include Genetic Algorithm [3], Fuzzy Logic and Neural Network [4,5], PLC [6], Machine Learning and deep learning [7], or Virtual Traffic light (VTL) [8,9]. Different forms of these technologies were introduced in smart cities and Internet of Things (IoT) schemes Vehicle to Everything (V2X) [10].

However, in highly congested locations or where there are no waiting automobiles, this approach may be ineffective. We place a detector along the side road or on the traffic signal lights to track the demands of the vehicles as the new technique takes into account the vehicle demands at each intersection in an automated manner. A vehicle needs to go through a phase-changing process where green status should be asserted as fast as possible. Depend- ing on other incoming vehicles or the number of cycles for a partic- ular intersection (either minimum or maximum), the phase might be detected and the green status might be extended.

Xu et al used a generative adversarial network to predict the state of road traffic in 202. According to them, accurate state pre- diction is crucial for intelligent transportation systems. Such pre- dictions help travellers and the government to execute good plans and strategies regarding traffic management, respectively. Their proposed framework consists of three models, i.e., 1) Gener- ator (G): Use historic traffic states to build a spatiotemporal matrix and generate future traffic states from it. (2) The Discriminator (D):

For detecting traffic light states, Saini et al. introduced a convo- lutional neural network (CNN) in 2017, this CNN was based on the state recognition approach. Under various lighting setups and weather conditions, their technique proved reliable for driving evaluation [15].

Focusing on vehicle-to-vehicle (V-2-V) networking, Hagenauer et al studied the performance of self-organized traffic management algorithms. Instead of conventional ways of traffic light systems, this study incorporated virtual traffic light (VTL) on a leading vehi- cle. To carry out the election and traffic light computations in real- time vehicular networks, the researchers created an algorithm. They looked into the idea of using both synthetic and real-world cases to build an algorithm that enables arbitrary intersection arrangements. They concluded that VTL effectively uses all vehicu- lar system resources and enhances the experience of driving only under average network load [16].

When speaking of multi-intersection networks, it is suggested to use artificial intelligence to manage smart traffic flow. Arel et al experimented to reduce average waiting time, congestion, and the possibility of intersection cross-blocking, by using rein- forcement learning Neural networks (RL), they intended to control traffic light cycles effectively. They considered five intersections for this experiment, each one acted as an autonomous intelligent agent (either as a central or outbound agent). To find an approxi- mate value function, Q-learning was implemented with a feed- forward neural network. The results of this experiment show that for an isolated single intersection control under LFQ regulation, a multi-agent reinforcement learning-based control system is bene- ficial [17].

To communicate with traffic agents, Iyer et al. talked about syn- chronizing traffic flow by employing multi-agent fuzzy logic distri- bution and Q learning. They stated that the fuzzy system can manage the multiple input data levels provided by traffic lights. [18].

Teo et al used a simulation on a traffic light system to observe the impact of waiting vehicle lanes, amber time, and duration of green light. To ensure effective vehicle passing at the junction, they use a genetic algorithm to arrange the traffic light time cycling. Present queue length is fed to the Genetic algorithm as input and evaluated optimal green time for intersection, in this way, the algo- rithm can find an optimized solution. The speed of the genetic

A microscopic simulation was performed by Wang et al. They suggested an adaptive linear quadratic regulator (LQR) with incre- mental adjustments. A multi-agent simulation that produced 35 junction points was carried out. The observations collected from this simulation were then compared to regular traffic signals, an average of 29.9 s delay was recorded for a 20 s green cycle which was relatively less than the average traffic delay of normal lights. [19].

Siyal and Fathy applied edge detection and neural network algorithms to develop a process that improves traffic flow at the intersection. In this process, edge detection was used to identify vehicles and estimate their movement, whereas queue parameters were calculated using Neural networks. These neural networks were trained on different traffic flow records to develop a model with better accuracy as compared to conventional algorithms used for image processing [20].

Using CNN to collect and recognize features from visual camera pictures, John et al. introduced machine learning techniques based on computer vision for varying illumination environments. Here, the onboard GPS sensor is added to enhance identification accu- racy. The GPS pinpoints the area of interest for the traffic signal it contains. Utilizing data sets collected from various locations, the suggested technique was assessed and contrasted with the conventional traffic signal. In various illumination environments, they demonstrated impressive identification accuracy of their sug- gested approach [21].

To regulate traffic lights for a single junction, Zou et al. pre- sented an efficiently built fuzzy logic based on Wireless Sensor Network (WSN) [22]. According to this model, monitoring of traffic flow in nearby areas was done through single-axis magneto sen- sors that were supposed to be installed alongside roads. Based on the number of available vehicles, the fuzzy algorithm was utilized to alter the passing time for automobiles. In comparison with the traditional fixed cycle system, their research concluded that about a 22.7 % decrease in average waiting time and real-time control were obtained for the simulation period during the 80 s.

Several strategies were used by Biswas et al. to improve the traffic system. We targeted previous work done for enhancing intelligent traffic systems and carried out a detailed study to make comparisons among several different types of research on this topic. The study emphasized several contributions that appeared helpful for applying the smart traffic control system in developing countries [24].

Actual maps and mobility data were considered by Nesmach- now et al. when developing a traffic light synchronisation parallel algorithm for Bus Rapid Transit systems. Here, a different priority for buses and other vehicles was allocated. According to the researchers, through this approach, the average speed of public transport improves by almost 15.3 % and that of other vehicles by 24.8 % [28].

Road traffic conditions within a grid network were simulated by Burguillo et al. using NetLogo. To demonstrate how average wait- ing times were affected, varying numbers of self-organising inter- sections were used by the researchers. The findings of the study showed that the waiting time decreased in comparison to stan- dard, fixed-time traffic lights when the number of intelligent inter- sections were more than 50 % [30].

Vehicle waiting time was highlighted in the study by Patrascu et al. Jade framework, Java and SUMO were employed in their study, in addition to various kinds of agents. It was possible for the average waiting time to decline, and this would lead to a fuel reduction of 3.06 % and a speed increase of 9 % on average [32].

The perpetually (on) infrared transmitted dispatches infrared signals to the detector on the ground across a line-of-sight con- nection. No vehicles have moved past the beam throughout the duration the detector receives the infrared signal. In this case, the number of vehicles passing through will be determined by identifying the speed of vehicles and the length for traffic vol- ume because longer vehicles are more likely to cause greater traffic jam issues compared to normal length vehicles. Two timers will be triggered when the connection of the initial infra- red sensor is interrupted by the vehicle: (t-1 m) and (t-of broken connection).

