We study synchronization games on planar automata. We prove that recognizing the planar games that can be won by the synchronizer is a co-NP hard problem. We prove some additional results indicating that planar games are as hard as nonplanar games. Those results amount to show that planar automata are representative of the intricacies of automata synchronization.

the references therein). We have chosen to investigate the novel notion of synchronization games introduced in [2]. There are some previous works that study synchronization of automata from the point of view of game theory: The aforementioned work of Fominykh et al [2] define a new class of accessibility games related to synchronization, while Gonze and Jungers use game theoretical techniques to study the synchronizing time of automata [3].  We generalize the notion of synchronization games, and this generalization allow us to study accessibility games (see [3]) as a special case of our games. Then, we focus on synchronization games played on planar automata. We decided to focus on the later type of automata given that we have showed before that this special class of automata is representative of the intricacies of synchronization [4]

The game is played by two contenders, the synchronizer and the spoiler. The rules of the game estate that at odd rounds the synchronizer must choose a character from Sc, while at even rounds the spoiler must choose a character from Sp. The goal of the synchronizer is to produce (in despite of the spoiler choices) a synchronizing string for M. The aim of the spoiler is to avoid synchronization.

and it means that reduction to pairs also holds for non-standard games. We use the term pair-synchronization games to refer the games of the form (M, Sc, Sp, {p, q}) . Reduction to pairs yields a polynomial time algorithm for the recognition of the games that are won by the synchronizer, as well as a cubic upperbound on the length of his optimal strategies. The later upperbound follows from the fact that optimal

that Ci = Cj and |Ci| = 2. If the synchronizer is playing optimally, and in despite of this he produces a loop, then the spoiler is forcing this loop. The spoiler can force this loop infinite many times, and the synchronizer has not a winning strategy (contradiction). The later contradiction indicates that the synchronizer wins the

We study in this section some facts that are related to subset synchronization games. On one hand, we restrict the scope of our investigations by focussing on planar automata. On the other hand, we expand this scope by considering non- synchronizing automata.

