In this work we study an algorithmic problem related to gene regulatory networks. This problem is the counting of fixed points in boolean networks. We focus our attention on monomial networks, and we prove that the counting of fixed points is #P complete even in this restricted case.

Relations to previous work and contributions. This work is related to the works of R. Laubenbacher and his students (see [11]). Laubenbacher observed that any boolean network is a finite dynamical system over a finite vector space and he also observed that the functions whose domain are finite vector space and whose range are the corresponding fields of scalars are all polynomials. Laubenbacher and his students have studied boolean networks whose transition functions are poly- nomials satisfying some further constraints, so for example Hernandez-Toledo [7] studied linear networks (that is: boolean networks whose transition functions are linear functions) while Colon-Reyes studied boolean networks whose transition func- tions are monomials [3]. We prove that the counting of fixed points in monomial networks is #P complete, to this end we prove that the counting of antichains in partial orders is parsimoniously reducible to the former problem.

Outline of the paper. This paper is organized into three sections. In section one we introduce the basics of Boolean networks, we discuss, in some depth, the conjectures of Kauffman and we define the algorithmic problem that we study in this paper: the counting of fixed points in boolean networks. In section two we study the counting of fixed points when restricted to monomial networks, we prove that this restricted problem is #P -complete, and we prove that some further re- strictions are #P -complete as well, those later results suggest the existence of a phase transition for the tractability of the problem, this phase transition tells us that for boolean networks linearity implies tractability while nonlinearity implies intractability. Finally in section three, which is a long concluding remarks section, we propose some directions for future work which are related to a classical counting problem proposed by R. Dedekind in 1897.

orders that contain at least one antichain. It should be clear that the problem DA is a trivial one: any poset contains at least one antichain (any subset of size 1 is an antichain). The class #P is the class of counting problems that can be solved employing a Polynomial Time Counting Turing Machine. We can associate to DA, as to any problem in NP , a counting problem in #P, let #DA be the counting problem consisting in computing the number of antichains contained in a given input poset. Interesting enough the problem #DA is very much harder than the problem DA : the problem #DA is #P -complete [1], it implies that #DA is NP -hard and it also implies that #DA is hard for the polynomial hierarchy [16].

