This work aims to evaluate the spatio-temporal change in the surface water pollution in the middle Nile Delta using algal pollution index (Palmer Index). Water was sampled during winter and summer seasons from 18 stations distributed along the water pathways from south to north for two main irrigation canals (Qudaba and Mit-yazed canals) and two drains (El-Gharbia main drain and Janag drain). An algal analysis was carried out based on the species and genera that mentioned in Palmer Index (PI). High Palmer Index scores were noticed in most of the stations especially during summer, which might be related to various pollution supplies. Limited number of stations showed low palmer index scores indicating relatively clean water. In winter, the two irrigation canals showed similar spatial distribution patterns where PI val- ues increased reaching its maximum at the middle of water pathways and then decreased. In summer, PI had no definite trend in Qudaba canal and decreasing trend in Mit-yazed canals along the water pathway to the northern direction. PI of El-Gharbia main drain showed increasing and decreasing trends in winter and summer, respectively. Janag drain had opposite patterns compared to that of El-Gharbia main.

Organic pollution in the river Nile considers an essential active field of research [3,4]. It became a significant environmental prob- lem. Almost all freshwater bodies are widely affected by the human population explosion and urbanization. Water pathways are polluted by organic material such as sewage, food waste and farm effluent [5,6]. So, detecting the organic pollution and trying to manage this environmental crisis are considered important tasks to do.

Algae are considered an important component of any aquatic ecosystem and are responsible for the primary productivity of those systems [7]. Due to their relatively short life spans, their community composition alters quickly in a response to the changes of the water physico-chemical parameters [8]. That is why algal communities are used as indicators of aquatic pollution [9].

The first attempt to identify and prepare a list of the most tol- erant algal species and genera to pollution had been done by pal- mer [10]. Palmer index is considered a rapid, reliable and relatively inexpensive way to record water pollution probability across number of sites [11]. It is used beside other indices for inor- ganic pollution and eutrophication level [9]. Palmer index has been used before in Egypt by El-Kassas and Gharib [12]. In the present

In contrast to winter season, in summer Cryptophyta that indi- cates relatively clean water disappeared [9] and Chlorophyta exhibited flourishing of Chlorophycean taxa with large numbers of Pediastrum spp. and Scendesmus spp. were detected. Chloro- phycean taxa give unwanted odour to the drinking waters and also indicate eutrophication [20,21]. Moreover, presence of Dino- phycean taxa especially Peridinium spp. suggests advanced trophic level [22].

cryptocephala, Nitzschia acicularis, Oscillatoria princeps, Oscillatoria putrida and Oscillatoria tenuis. Palmer index value of station 5 is lower than the other stations and located in the probable high organic pollution range. Compared to winter data, summer water of this drain showed higher pollution load.

Palmer index was a significant tool to show the pollution prob- ability in the surface water of the Nile Delta either irrigation canals or drains. The Palmer index of genera was more helpful than that of the species in case of drainage water. Pollution load in form of Pal- mer index changes spatially along the water pathways or tempo- rally from winter to the summer for the same sampling station. In general, the surface water of the Nile Delta suffers from organic pollution in most of the sampled stations. In winter where the water depth is shallow and either canals or drains received a little water, the organic pollution was lower than that of the summer and generally, increased along the water pathways from south to north. In summer where the water depth was higher than winter, organic pollution load was noticed at all the stations. Mit-yazed maximum organic pollution was higher than that of Qudaba canal, due to the higher urbanization along Mit-yazed canal pathway compared to Qudaba canal. El-Gharbia main drain as a big drain had higher palmer index scores than Janag drain. As the canal water is used for drinking and drain water is used sometimes for fish and cultivation farms, therefore, caution and treatment should be done to avoid the hazardous effects of the detected pollution.

