dose rate. The U/Th concentration ratio in surface soil samples ranged from 0.05 to 1.72 with an average of 0.43 which is more higher (80%) than the world average of 0.26. The application of cluster analysis (CA) and principal component analysis (PCA), coupled with Pearson correlation coefficient analysis, were utilized to analyze the data, identify and clarify between the radiological parameters to know the existing relations. The CA and PCA results showed that the former method yielded three distinctive groups of the soil variables

The radioactivity level from the natural radionuclides is termed as background radiation which will depend on the amount of the radioactive materials in the environment. The background radiation can be high if the environment is polluted either from man-made or natural activities. Mate- rials from the deposit may be brought to the surface soil through processes such as weathering of rocks and soil for- mation. They can also leach into the groundwater system, contaminate it, and lead to pollution far away from the source.

condition. The ability of hydrogenous migration falls in the order U > Ra > Th. Uranium is able to remain in soluble state for a long time and gets migrated by flow of streams or river to a long distance. Horizontal transfer of uranium and thorium is dominated by interchange of sorption and desorption [5]. Un- fortunately rapid increasing of population and usage of fertil- izers for agriculture day by day contaminate the soils. Due to

at trace levels in all ground formations [1]. Monitoring the release of gamma radiation from natural radionuclides is important to protect the humans from lung cancer. The main sources of gamma radiations are due to two major radionu- clide chains: uraniumeradium and thorium. A geological and geographical condition of the study area determine the radioactivity and the associated external exposure due to gamma radiation at different levels in the soils of each region in the world [2e4].

In an earlier work, activity concentration of natural radionu- clide that in different locations of Yelagiri Hills is reported by Ravisankar et al. [4]. They indicated that average activity concentration of 232Th in that study was 1.19 times higher than world median value while the activity of 238U and 40K was found to be lower and also major gamma radiation exposure to humans in Yelagiri Hills due to enrichment of 232Th content in soils [4]. The present work is a continuation of the previous research work in Yelagiri Hills, Tamilnadu to study the spatial distribution of natural radionuclide and the application of Multivariate statistical method to analyze the data, identify and clarify between the radiological parameters to know the existing relations.

an altitude of 1410 m above Mean Sea Level and spread across 30 km2, the Yelagiri village (also spelled Elagiri at times) is sur- rounded by orchards, rose-gardens, and green valleys. Yelagiri comprises of 14 hamlets and a number of temples spread over a couple of hills. The highest point in Yelagiri is the Swamimalai Hill, standing at 4338 ft: Swamimalai is a popular destination for trekkers. The hill provides a good number of trekking trails

including the top to reduce background due to cosmic ray component by almost 98%. The inner sides of the lead shielding are lined by 2 mm thick cadmium and 1 mm thick copper to cut off lead X-rays and cadmium X-rays respec- tively. This graded lining shield further reduces the back- ground especially in the low energy region. Standard sources of the primordial radionuclides obtained from IAEA in the same geometry and having the same density, as that of the prepared soil samples, were used to determine the efficiency of the detector for various energies in the prescribed geom-

multichannel analyzer, count spectra were obtained for each of the soil sample. Each radionuclide can be detected in either direct or indirect way. The radioisotope 40K emits gamma ray with an energy of 1.461 MeV. Hence the deter- mination of 40K is considered as direct. The determination of 238U depends on the detection of the 214Bi radionuclide which is a member of the 238U decay series emitting an energy of 1.764 MeV. Therefore, the detection of 238U is indirect. The determination 232Th concentration is indirect as referred to the 208Tl radionuclide with an energy of 2.615 MeV, origi-

In addition to the external exposure, radon and its short-lived products are also dangerous to the respiratory organs. The internal hazard index (Hin) is used to control the internal exposure to 222Rn and its radioactive progeny [19]. The inter- nal exposure to radon and its daughter products is quantified by the internal hazard index (Hin), which was calculated using the following formula [19].

[25]. In this work, radioactive measurements acquired by the spectrometric gamma technique were subjected to qualitative and quantitative statistical analyses in order to draw a valid conclusion regarding the nature and significance of the dis- tribution of radioactive elements in soil samples of Yelagiri hills of Tamilnadu, India. The main statistical software in use was SPSS 16.0. The activity concentrations of natural radio- nuclides 238U, 232Th, 40K and obtained radiological data are taken for analysis.

emerged according to their similarities. Similarity is a mea- sure of distance between clusters relative to the largest dis- tance between any two individual variables. 100% similarity means the clusters were zero distance apart in their sample measurements, while the similarity of 0% means the cluster areas are disparate as the least similar region.

One of the authors (Dr. R. Ravisankar) is highly indebted to Mrs. S. Suganya, Assistant Professor of Physics, Government Arts College, Thiruvanamalai, Tamilnadu, India for her critical reading, constant support and encouragements in each and every stage of the manuscript preparation.

