A reverse flow injection analysis (RFIA) spectrophotometric method have been developed and compared with batch method for the determination of lorazepam (LOR) at the microgram level in pure and pharmaceutical dosage forms. The methods are based on the reaction of LOR with 3-methyl-2- benzothiazolinone hydrazone hydrochloride (MBTH) in the presence of ferric chloride in aqueous medium. The water soluble green color product was measured at kmax 659 nm. Under the optimum conditions, linearity was observed from 2 to 40 and 25 to 400 mg/mL LOR with detection limits of 0.61 and 2.29 mg/mL LOR by batch and RFIA procedures respectively. All the chemical and physical parameters related with reverse flow system were carefully considered and both methods were successfully applied for the determination of LOR in its dosage forms. These simple and high throughput methods could be utilized for pharmaceutical analysis of LOR.

It is applied in a wide range of indications and patient categories, because of its sedative and anticonvulsant properties. Within pediatrics, it is administered to children with status epilepticus and for intubated and mechanically ventilated patients [2]. Lorazepam is inexpensive, long acting (up to 72 h) [3] and has less risk of seizure recurrence. Lorazepam has a shelf life of 3 years and can be given intravenously (IV), intramuscularly (IM), and intranasal (IN) [4].

only a few FIA methods [15,16] available for the determination of LOR, one of them [15] was not specific, only one wavelength in the UV region being chosen for the spectrophotometric detection of LOR. until now the literature contains no reverse flow injection-spectrophotometric methods for the determination of LOR in pure or dosage forms. This study describes fast and simple batch and reverse FI methods as a direct methods that utilize a col- orimetric reaction for the determination of LOR in pharmaceutical preparations.

showed that the absorbance of the total flow rate of 0.6 mL/min gave the highest absorbance and good precision. After this value the absorbance decrease with increase the flow rate because the high speed would never get the reactants a sufficient time for mix- ing (i.e. the sample zone would form and get out the flow cell quickly) therefore, 0.6 mL/min, (total flow rate) was selected to be the best value.

The literatures reported only a few spectrophotometric meth- ods and two FIA methods for the determination of LOR in dosage forms and in biological fluids and these methods either need extraction or using a complicated and expensive techniques and until now the literature contains no reverse flow injection- spectrophotometric method for the determination of LOR in pure or dosage forms. The suggested methods, which are simple and rapid, offers the advantages of sensitivity more than the reported methods, and a wide range of determination without the need for extraction or heating. The wide applicability of the new method for routine quality control is well established by the assay of LOR at microgram concentration level in pharmaceutical formulations. The reaction can be carried out in batch and RFIA and in this paper both approaches were compared.

