under low field. An attempt has also been made to correlate the magnetic parameters from the percentage of Fe2+/Fe3+ and iron oxides. The information obtained paves a way for a better understanding of the technological development that took place in the ancient past and also the suitability of the samples for the determination of reliable ancient geomag- netic field intensity values.

Ceramics represent one of the earliest and most significant innovations of mankind. Their first appearance marks the beginning of a new period in man's evolution during which important technological developments rapidly succeeded one another. Pottery is considered to be the prime important fac- tor of archaeology [1,2].

Providing rich data for an understanding of the past cul- ture, it is a source for the study of ancient society and history, it occupies a unique position by its distinguishing and char- acteristic features as well as by its distribution in different areas and different periods. Since pottery differs in style, size, color, etc., and changes from region to region and age to age, it serves as an important criterion for identifying cultures pos- sessing different traits and tracing extraneous influences.

percentage of non paramagnetic Fe2+ and Fe3+ indicates that well ordered iron oxides are not formed, i.e., the samples are not fired to higher temperature or iron oxide particles are less than 100 nm. Itleadstothebehaviorassuperparamagnetic(SP) which blocks the formation of well ordered sextet in the spectra [21].

In the present study, the absence of well ordered sextet in the spectra indicates that the samples are not fired to higher temperature also due to the presence of SP grains. The pres- ence of poor sextet is due to the presence of grains with sizes greater than SP like SD/PSD. The above conclusions are also confirmed through rock magnetic studies of the above sam- ples. From the above notion it can be concluded that the forms hematite also due to the smaller grain size (super- paramagnetic hematite particles)). For this above reason, it may be concluded that the samples are fired under oxidizing atmosphere, the same is also revealed from the reddish brown color of the outer surface. The light brown color may be due to carbon deposition. The observed quadrupole splitting value of

during manufacturing. The black-and-red and brown-and- black ware of the samples also reveal the changing condi- tions adopted during firing cycle. The black color corresponds to carbon formed from dense smoke during reduced atmo- spheric firing using charcoal and wood. The outer red color of the sherds is due to the blow of air at higher temperatures during the end of the firing cycle (during cooling). The admission of air at lower temperature during cooling leads to gray (or) brown outer surface and inner black color. Red slip is

Na oxides. The significant amounts of Fe2O3 and Fe3O4 are responsible for the reddish and black color of the pottery sherds respectively [26e28]. In the present study, the CaO content in the above samples is less than 6% indicative of the non-calcareous clay used for the production of pottery [29]. The loss on ignition (6e10%) obtained for the pottery sherds is within the usual range and is associated mainly with volatile components and organic matter. These results are in agree- ment with Mossbauer and XRD results. Especially the pres- ence of iron oxides established in chemical analysis is in good agreement with the presence of sextets belonging to hematite and magnetite.

strength of the applied magnetic field and the particle size distribution of the magnetic grains. In the absence of ferri- magnetic minerals, c can be found due to antiferromagnetic, paramagnetic and diamagnetic minerals. Magnetic suscepti- bility c is also dependent on sample size. Therefore, it is customary to present susceptibility as mass or volume normalized susceptibility c [30].

archaeointensity measurements. The irreversibility behavior of sample may be due to alteration of lower curie phase mineral maghaemite to magnetite curie phase during labo- ratory heating [36]. Thermomagnetic curves are useful in- dicators for the thermal stability of magnetic minerals upon temperature in baked materials [37]. The reversibility between the heating and cooling susceptibility curves used here for testing the stability of the magnetic mineralogy upon tem- perature. The above observations are coinciding well with the chemical and Mossbauer analysis.

hematite and magnetite. It is obvious that the iron oxides are the main colorants. The artisans of Nedungur have used only non-calcareous clays for their household utilities. Higher mass specific susceptibility obtained using magnetic studies reveals the possibility of either the iron from the parent unbaked clay (or) due to higher firing temperature during

