We present two process algebra models of a Kai-protein based circadian clock. Our models are represented in the Bio-PEPA and the continuous pi-calculus process algebras. The circadian clock is not based on transcription and has been shown to persist with a rhythmic signal when removed from a living cell. Our models allow us to speculate as to the mechanisms which allow for the rhythmic signals. We reproduce previous results based on ODE models and then use our models as the basis for stochastic simulation.

We base our models on those described by van Zon et al. [16], who used an ODE- based model and were able to reproduce experimental observations. By producing a Bio-PEPA model for these phenomena, we can, from the same model, reproduce the ODE results of van Zon et al. and investigate the role of stochasticity using stochastic simulation algorithms. In addition, we believe our process algebra model to be more amenable to in silico experimentation and we demonstrate this with an investigation of the role of so-called shortcut reactions which will be explained in Section 4.

The KaiC proteins form hexamers. Each monomer within a KaiC hexamer can be individually phosphorylated (the addition of a phosphate group). Thus, a single KaiC hexamer can exist in seven distinct levels of phosphorylation corresponding to the number of monomers within the hexamer which are currently phosphorylated.

In addition, each KaiC hexamer can exist in one of two states, the active and the inactive state. A hexamer in the active state is more readily phosphorylated than dephosphorylated and the reverse is true for a hexamer in the inactive state. Thus, a single KaiC hexamer may exist in one of 14 states, corresponding to the seven distinct levels of phosphorylation in both the active and the inactive states.

A single hexamer can then cycle through the 14 possible states. To achieve a macro-level signal with many KaiC hexamers such cycles must be somehow syn- chronised. This is the role of the KaiA and the KaiB proteins. It has been proposed that the KaiA protein catalyses the phosphorylation of the KaiC hexamers in the active state, but does so with a preference for those KaiC hexamers with a low level of phosphorylation. The catalysed phosphorylation of active KaiC is written as:

Our model exhibits the 24-hour cycling of phosphorylation levels in KaiC hex- amers, and we plot the change in concentrations of the various species present. We formulate statements in the logic to capture the oscillation of mean phosphoryla- tion level across the KaiC population and its dependence on the presence of KaiA. Model-checking these confirms that our model has this behaviour.

F and G capture behaviour over time as usual in a continuous-time linear temporal logic: process P has behaviour F(b) if at some time in the future it has behaviour b; and it has behaviour G(b) if it has behaviour b at all future times. Variants Ft and Gt look only at behaviour up to time t. Finally, we introduce a modality[4] for behaviour in context, based on the guarantee operator from spatial logics: a process P has behaviour Qdb if, when P and Q are mixed, then the resulting system P  Q has behaviour b.

In previous work, Kwiatkowski and Stark built a c-pi model for the S. elongatus circadian clock, based on the mechanism proposed by van Zon, and demonstrated its periodic behaviour [12]. Here we have reused some of their parameters and methods, but with a new tool and new analyses. The tool, the continuous pi- calculus workbench (CPiWB)[2] provides access to alternative ODE solvers and a model-checker for the logic of behaviour in context.

We have also demonstrated here a novel software package, the CPiWB capable of analysing models in continuous-pi. Above this, the software implements a temporal logic for analysis of the time series generated from the numerical analysis of the model. The CPiWB is open source software and free to download. The temporal logic is powerful enough to include operators which allow us to perform in silico experiments on the model, and indeed experiments which involve changing the model part-way through a numerical evaluation. In the current implementation such queries rely on the model being authored in the continuous pi-calculus, but could conceptually be applied to any kind of model with process composition, including Bio-PEPA. Additionally queries which do not make use of the context operator to modify the model may be made over time series produced from any kind of model such as one written in Bio-PEPA.

