Plant hormones play vital roles in the ability of plants to acclimatize to varying environ- ments by mediating growth, development and nutrient allocation. The present investigation was undertaken to have some information about interactive effects of seawater salinity and some plant growth regulators (gibberellic acid, indole acetic acid or abscisic acid) on leaf area, pigment and chloroplast ultrastructure as well as saccharides and protein content of wheat flag leaf. In the majority of cases, seawater at 10 or 25% increased pigment content, particularly carotenoids. On the other hand seawater reduced leaf lamina area, Hill activ- ity and sucrose as well as polysaccharides and protein. The interactive effect of seawater and growth regulators accelerated the production of Chl a, Chl b and carotenoids by in- creasing the values of these pigment. Furthermore, grain pretreatment with gibberellic acid, indole acetic acid or abscisic acid induced marked increase in leaf lamina area, Hill activ- ity and sucrose as well as polysaccharides and protein. Irrigation of wheat plants by seawater at 10 or 25% caused dramatic changes in chloroplast ultrastructure of flag leaf. These changes include disorganized membrane system, disruption of bounding membrane, reduction in the size and number of starch grains and an increase in plastoglobuli. The presoaking of wheat grains in GA3, IAA or ABA resulted in an increase of plant tolerance against the adverse effect of seawater particularly at 10%. This resistance was estimated by the presence of normal chloroplast.

[2]. Pigment content which could be regarded as a criterion for photosynthetic activities were markedly affected by salt stress in the maize plants [5], in wheat [2], in broad bean [6] and in sorghum [7]. On the other hand, salinity decreased pigment in spinach [8], in black gram [9] and in wheat [10].

Plant hormones play vital roles in the ability of plants to acclimatize to varying environments by mediating growth, de- velopment and nutrient allocation. Hormones move through specific pathways to regulatory sites where they respond to stress at low concentration. All biological activities are di- rectly or indirectly affected by phytohormones [11]. Gibberellic acid and indolyl-3-acetic acid increased pigment content of sa- linized plants (i.e. in grasses [12], in kidney bean [13], in broad bean [6]). Furthermore, the interaction between salinity and phy- tohormones increased the number of chloroplasts per mesophyll cell of wheat flag leaf [12].

Plant growth regulator, kinetin, is known to modulate the key physiological processes under abiotic stresses in differ- ent crops [14]. Phytohormones have been reported to be involved in stress responses and adaptation [15,16], mainly abscisic acid (ABA), ethylene and salicylic acid (SA). However, much less is known about the role of cytokinins, gibberellins and auxins, traditionally not related to stress responses except for some few examples. One of the principal topics studied in plant re- sponses to abiotic stress, especially drought and salinity, is ABA accumulation. The biosynthesis and redistribution of this hormone is one of the fastest plant responses to abiotic stresses, causing stomatal closure to reduce water loss via transpira- tion and eventually limiting cellular growth [16].

Only few studies have been devoted to the influence of water stress in the plant cell organelles. Ionic additives such as NaCl and KCl caused a significant swelling of thylakoid mem- branes in chloroplast of Kandelia candel [17]. The most outstanding feature observed were the presence of a distinc- tive ultrastructure organization.

The most outstanding features observed were the pres- ence of turgid cells with enlarged amyloplasts and mitochondria [18]. In cotton, salinity induces shrinkage, lamellae swelling of chloroplasts and condensed mitochondria, with oxalate crys- tals occurring in the vacuole [19]. Furthermore, Aldesuquy et al.

For soaking experiment, a homogenous sample of wheat grains (Sakha 69) was selected. The grains were surface sterilized by soaking in 0.01 M HgCI2 solution for 3 minutes and washed thor- oughly with distilled water. The sterilized grains were divided into 4 sets. Grains of the 1st set were soaked in distilled water, while the grains of 2nd, 3rd, and 4th sets were soaked in gib- berellic acid (GA3) at 50 mg/L, indol-3-yl-acetic acid (IAA) at 5 mg/L and abscisic acid (ABA) at 1 mg/L, respectively for about 12 hours. The selection of the applied doses as well as the time of presoaking was based on preliminary experiments carried out in our laboratory for studying the effect of the provided growth regulators on the growth of different treated wheat plants by seawater [6].

This method was the same as Baka [25]. At heading stage (84 days from sowing), flag leaf of wheat plants were used in the present study. Normal green leaves of untreated plants were selected, together with those treated with seawater or seawa- ter and growth regulating substances. Tissues from between the veins were cut under a fixative containing 2.5% glutaral- dehyde in 0.1 M sodium cacodylate buffer at room temperatures and then washed three times in 0.1 M sodium cacodylate buffer at pH 7.0. The segments were left in the same fixative for 24 hours at room temperature and then washed three times in 0.1 M buffer over one hour. After washing, the segments were post fixed in 1% osmium trioxide in the same buffer, dehy- drated in graded series of ethanol and embedded in Araldite. Ultra thin sections were cut using JUN-5 Ultra microtome, stained by 2% aqueous uranyl acetate followed by lead citrate [26]. The ultra thin sections were examined and photographed by JUN-5G electron microscope.

Chloroplasts seem to be the organelles more sensitive to stress. Our study revealed that seawater salinity induced dis- ruption of membrane system of chloroplast and high vacuolated cytoplasm. These results fit well the observations of Blumenthal- Goldschmidt and Poljakoff-Mayber [34] who found that salinity caused swelling of chloroplasts and mitochondria and exten- sive vacuolization with distortion of tonoplast in Atriplex. Furthermore, Gausman et al. [19] reported that salinity induces with 25% seawater induced dramatic changes in chloroplasts and oleosomes particularly after 21 days post-anthesis. They revealed that there were slight differences between two wheat cultivars in response to seawater at 10% and 14 days post- anthesis in terms of chloroplast ultrastructure. The most obvious changes were observed with the treatment with 25% seawa- ter at 21 days post-anthesis. Moreover, disorganized membrane system was identified with swollen thylakoids and many plastoglobuli were recognized in the chloroplasts in compari- son to control plants.

Abscisic acid which accelerates leaf senescence [36] re- sulted in large chloroplast containing large amount of grana nearly filled most of the stroma. Furthermore, ABA increased the number of grana and plastoglobuli as well as induced or- ganized bounding membrane in seawater-treated plants. In connection with these results Hurng et al. [37] found that

It is not questionable that grain priming in plant hormones may retard the senescence of flag leaf and this advantage will keep it green for a prolonged time. Furthermore, these effects became clear particularly through the effect of these provided hor- mones on leaf lamina area, pigment, Hill activity, saccharides and protein as well as ultra-structure of chloroplast of flag leaf. Hence, chloroplast showed disorganized lamellar system such as regular stacking of grana and interregnal lamellae. Finally, presoaking of wheat grains in GA3, IAA or ABA resulted in an increase of wheat plants tolerance against the adverse effect of seawater particularly at 10%. This resistance was esti- mated by dramatic increase in pigment production throughout the presence of normal and healthy chloroplasts.

