Throughout the last decade, there has been an increased interest in various forms of dynamic epistemic logics to model the flow of information and the effect this flow has on knowledge in multi-agent systems. This enterprise, however, has mostly been applicationally and semantically driven. This results in a limited amount of proof theory for dynamic epistemic logics.

Classic epistemic logic has played an important role in both philosophy and com- puter science. However, recent years have witnessed the importance of also looking at the dynamics of knowledge, i.e. how knowledge of different agents can change due to the development of a system. There are two ways of adding dynamics to epistemic logic. One can either combine it with a temporal logic or combine it with some dynamic logic of actions. The latter approach has become increasingly common and has resulted in what is now called Dynamic Epistemic Logic (DEL), which includes operators for so called epistemic actions (cf. [13]). The interest in DEL has mostly been related to applications, and has mainly been semantically may be exponential in the general DEL case. However, it is currently unknown to the author exactly what the complexity of deciding DEL validities is. 4 When adding the global modality to the underlying epistemic logic, the complexity of this will already be exponential [11]. In this case, the exponential increase caused by the translation therefore does not destroy the worst-case complexity.

4 When dealing with arbitrary formulas of DEL, the question is how to measure the size of the action modalities. On the one hand, an action modality could be counted as one symbol, but when deciding validity, the finer structure of the action modality is needed. Thus, this may result in a high complexity for validity checking in this size of the formula. On the other hand, using another size-measure of action modalities, it may become possible to decide validity in lower complexity in that size.

6 This also works when the underlying logic is S5, however, if one wants to models beliefs using the logic KD45 a problem arise. The problem is that the frame properties defined by the axioms of KD45 are not preserved under the operation of taking submodels. Thus one cannot get completeness with respect to the class of models where beliefs are always interpreted as KD45. In other words the given semantic for the public announcement operator can result in agents having inconsistent beliefs after a public announcement.

Public announcements are just one kind of epistemic actions though.  To deal with a larger amount of epistemic actions in a uniform way, the notion of action models was introduced by Baltag, Moss and Solecki ([2]). The intuition behind epistemic action models is that the agents may be unsure about exactly which action takes place and that each action has a precondition that has to be satisfied for that action to take place. Epistemic actions can be represented by Kripke structures where each state is an event/action and instead of a complete valuation each event is assigned a formula of the language as a precondition.

