The aim of this paper is to pose a challenge to the experts of (algebraic) topology techniques. We present an early deciding algorithm that solves the set agreement problem, i.e., the problem which triggered research on applying topology techniques to distributed computing. We conjecture the algorithm to be optimal, and we discuss the need and challenges of applying topology techniques to prove the lower bound.

Results about the set agreement problem are intriguing, in the sense that they present an intrinsic trade-off between the number of processes in a system, the degree of coordination that these processes can reach, and the number of failures that can be tolerated [3]. Set agreement is a generalization of the widely studied consensus problem [4], in which each process is supposed to propose a value, and eventually decide on some value that was initially proposed, such that every correct eventually decides (just like in consensus). In contrast with consensus however, processes may not decide on more than k distinct values. Hence set agreement is also referred to as k-set agreement.

In [7], techniques borrowed from algebraic topology were first used to prove the impossibility of k-set agreement in an asynchronous model where k processes may crash. In [3,6], tight lower bounds were derived for set agreement in the synchronous model prone to process crash. The framework presented in [6] uses the tools from algebraic topology introduced in [7] and allows for proving lower bounds in both the asynchronous and the synchronous models.

Early deciding algorithms are those the efficiency of which depends on the effec- tive number of failures in a given run, rather than on the (total) number of failures that can be tolerated. The effective number of failures is traditionally denoted by f , whereas the total number of failures that are tolerated is denoted by t. In practice, failures rarely happen, and it makes sense to devise algorithms that decide earlier when fewer failures occur. For uniform consensus, Charron-Bost and Schiper [1] have shown that there is a significant improvement on the efficiency when con- sidering the effective number of failures. More precisely, they propose a uniform consensus algorithm in which every process that decides, decides by round f +2 in any run with f failures. This bound is shown to be tight [1,8].

To the best of our knowledge, no result for set agreement have been presented in the context of early deciding algorithms. In the present paper, we give an early deciding set agreement algorithm. We discuss the need and challenges of applying topology techniques to prove optimality of the algorithm.

model, and show how this implies a contradiction. We introduce a simulation algo- rithm (detailed in [5]), which enables processes in a synchronous, message-passing model, to simulate, with the help of a (supposely existing) set agreement algorithm satisfying (i) and (ii) above, an execution of a wait-free 3 set agreement algorithm in an asynchronous, shared-memory model. In [7], wait-free set agreement was proven to be impossible in an asynchronous, shared-memory model. This leads to the desired contradiction.

