Stably compact spaces Xs can be described as being derived from compact ordered spaces X by weakening their topology to the open upper sets. In this paper the probabilistic powerdomain of a stably compact space Xs is investigated using the compact ordered space X and classical tools from measure theory and functional analysis. This allows to derive in a unified and elegant way known and new results which are summarized in Theorem 5.4.

In denotational semantics, valuations and the probabilistic powerdomain have been introduced by Jones and Plotkin [7] as a substitute for probabilities and the space of probablity measures in order to model probabilistic phenomena in programming. Recently, the probabilistic powerdomain has received more and more attention. Most of the background material on probabilistic power domains is contained in dissertations that are not easily accessible except for an exposition of some basic properties in [5].

measures and probabilities for semantics, one has to adapt the classical no- tions of measure, probability, integration to domains. A domain is understood to be a continuous, directed complete, partially ordered set (see [5]). Every domain carries an intrinsic topology, the Scott topology, which is T0 but far from being Hausdorff. Valuations which, by definition, associate a kind of measure to each Scott-open set in a continuous way, take the place of mea- sures. The valuations on a domain form a domain in itself called the extended probabilistic powerdomain.

In order to keep our exposition as accessible as possible to readers not ac- quainted with domain theory, we will stick to the setting of compact ordered spaces. We use classical functional analysis in order to derive the close connec- tion between valuations on the stably compact space (X, G) and the properties of the probabilistic powerdomain over such a space on the one hand and reg- ular Borel measures and the compact convex set of probability measures on (X, O) in the weak*-topology on the other hand. All our results apply in particular to domains that are Lawson compact.

Some of our results are not new. We owe a lot to M. Alvarez Manilla [1,2] who has investigated the close connections between valuations and clas- sical measure theory. The merit of this paper, hopefully, is a straightforward presentation of the results with simple proofs based on standard functional analysis. We also are indebted to A. Jung for his helpful comments and his critisism.

