selecting specific combinations of essential oils, are able to explain their biological activity previously perceived a priori. Thus, the rosemary essential oil is used in aromatherapy for a relatively long time; however, its effects on the human body, particularly on the nervous system, have not been sufficiently studied. In one study involving 20 healthy volunteers who inhaled the rosemary essen- tial oil the subjective feelings of the participants and objective indi- cators of the autonomic nervous system (the body temperature, the heart rate, the rate of respiration and blood pressure) were assessed. The electroencephalogram was also taken in the partici- pants of the study. The measurements were performed before, dur- ing, and after inhalation of the essential oil. The results demonstrated a significant increase in blood pressure, the heart rate and the rate of respiration after aromatherapy. The volunteers noted that they felt more refreshed. Analysis of EEG also showed the stimulating effects of the rosemary essential oil on the brain wave activity [2].

taken the venous blood for determining 1,8-cineole in the serum. The results obtained showed that the concentration of 1,8- cineole absorbed into the bloodstream by inhalation of the rose- mary essential oil was positively associated with the effectiveness of the tasks proposed. It was also shown that the rosemary essen- tial oil contributed to improvement of the speed and accuracy of task performance. The effect of the essential oil on mood was not particularly noticeable [4].

The following statistical tests were used in the research: the Shapiro-Wilk test (W), the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test (D), the Mann-Whitney test (U), the chi square test (v2) b the Student t- test. The mean and median values, minimal and maximal values, standard deviation, lower and upper quartiles were also calculated. The database was formed in the Microsoft Excel program. The calcu- lations were made in the Statistica 6.1 program.

However, it should be noted that effects of essential oils on the human behavior may be rather unexpected. For example, it was shown that in the presence of the sprayed lavender essential oil the level of trust of a person toward other people increased. In con- trast, when inhaling the essential oil of peppermint people became less trusting, and in a role play they were willing to entrust money to strangers less readily. Such studies are important for the poten- tial impact on the consumer behavior, negotiations, and conclusion of transactions [20]. In regards to the effect of essential oils on the cognitive abilities, and, in particular, on memory, the currently existing scientific data can be also supplemented in the near future.

Despite the fact that in the world literature the fragmentary research of the relationship of essential oils with the characteris- tics of the human behavior is known the population of Ukraine remains unstudied up to the present moment. The results obtained complete the information about the effects of essential oils on the human short-term memory and contribute to the study of possibil- ities for correction of the short-term image and numerical mem- ory. Tests identifying the effect of the essential oil of rosemary on the cognitive features of students and the results obtained in our study have demonstrated that there are statistically significant differences between the values of the short-term memory of the participants of different groups, namely: the essential oil of rose- mary has a statistically significant increase of the image and numeric memory of the participants of the study compared to the control. The results of our studies complete the currently known information concerning the effect of essential oils on the expression of the human cognitive functions.

