Such an approach has been named kenetic engineering. The name was coined by J. Ferber in the context of distributed artificial intelligence research, and denotes the process of development artificial systems by applying inter- acting autonomous and proactive components [9]. Similarity with genetic engineering, as defined for natural biological systems, is intentional and em- phasises certain cohesion between the building principles of proactive artificial systems as compared to those of biological systems. Multi-agent systems rely essentially on behavioural features that cannot be specified in conventional algorithmic computing, but are inevitably present in real-time, autonomous, and/or proactive computing systems.

Ubiquitous (and pervasive) computing is based on the expansion of the principles applied in real-time systems and plug-and-play experiments. Com- putationally new concepts have emerged from the domain of ubiquitous com- puting in relation with autonomic computing [16] and proactive computing [39]. Those two new concepts are related in a sense that the existence of autonomic components in a system is a precondition to introducing proac- tivity features to the system. Autonomic and proactive computing has been

A system that exhibits proactive behaviour must have autonomous and proactive components. Each of the autonomous components may have its own independent time counting system. Those of the components that exhibit proactivity must have a perceptive subcomponent that collaborates with the goal processing subcomponent. The situation is further complicated if several proactive components form a coalition in order to reach a better perceptivity. A more detailed discussion of proactivity needs a separate publication.

H. A. Simon, in his essays about the science of the artificial (see, for example the third edition of those essays [37]), emphasised the importance of compu- tation over the border of two different environments. Such a computation corresponds well to the ideas of c- and o-machines. An interaction between a computing machine and some other entity that resides in a potentially different environment is considered as essential property of c- and o-machines.

Interactive computing has gained popularity since the 1990-es. The grad- ually changing role of practical computing, together with the improved, and more liberal understanding of the essence of computation has led to devel- opment of concepts, theories and models of interactive computation, such as [23,42,43,47]. The recent research papers have radically relaxed the strict and traditional restrictions of the Church-Turing algorithm theory. Some of these concepts assume radical generalisation of computability in the Church-Turing sense, for instance [14] defines computability logic where computation is de- scribed as game played by machine against the environment. Some others suggest a systematic step-by-step approach (e.g. [12]) that eventually also leads to non-trivial generalisation of Church-Turing thesis.

The above listed publications, together with the intriguing properties of new, practical computing systems forms the basis for selecting the dimensions of the feature space for taxonomy of models of computation. Taxonomy in a carefully selected feature space is to support the comparison of various meth- ods and approaches in order to move towards time-aware model of interactive computing. In this paper we suggest generic taxonomy that implicitly includes all the above listed publications. Development of the detailed taxonomy with explicit positioning of different methods in the feature space needs a separate effort and is not the goal of this paper.

This is category for models and systems where, in addition to topological time, one has a metric time (a counter of strictly periodic ticks that can be synchronised with astronomical time as used by humans). The counter of periodic ticks is usually strictly increasing. Based on this counter, the system designer may build timers that enable to use reversible time (i.e. occasionally to back in history, to redo things) or relative time for reasoning about properties in this system. Strictly increasing, reversible, and relative times (as measured by the different timers that apply the same metrics) are called time concepts [6].

The paper focuses on properties, development methods, analysis methods, and tools for software-intensive systems directly interacting with their envi- ronment. Many such systems are built from autonomous components that may exhibit proactive behaviour. Software-intensive systems differ from the other engineering systems in that they are clearly more capable for explicit proactive behaviour and rely on dynamic control structure more often as com- pared to the non-software-intensive systems in the artificial world (see also [37]). This paper states that applications of software-intensive systems re- quire properties that cannot be studied by conventional mainstream methods of computer science, and suggests that a new time-aware model of interactive computation is to be developed.

systems that directly interact with their environment and may contain au- tonomous and proactive components. This has led to emphasising the need for introducing a truly sophisticated time model into the mentioned computing systems and into respective models of computation. In a system composed of autonomous and proactive components, each of the components may have its own independent time counting system. Hence, one additional time dimension for the whole system cannot solve the time-awareness problem. Formal timing analysis of interactions in such systems presumes the use of more than one metric time plus simultaneous use of three time concepts (strictly increasing, fully reversible and relative with moving origin), such time model has not been widely used in computer science so far.

This research has been partially financed by Estonian Science Foundation (ETF) grant no. 4860, and by a grants no. 014 2509s03 and no. 018 2565s03 from the Estonian Ministry of Education. The authors sincerely appreciate the questions and recommendations of the reviewers that inspired major im- provements in the manuscripts.

