In this paper, a novel approach to discrete modeling of gene regulatory networks is presented. The approach is based on timed automata and is new in: (i) reflecting discrete abstraction of gene expression with arbitrary granularity, (ii) combining boolean logic with approximation of Hill kinetics. This is achieved by introducing delays that change dynamically with respect to current activity levels of regulating genes. The approach is implemented in UPPAAL and evaluated on benchmark models and on a biological case study.

The central topic in systems biology is analysis of dynamics imposed by complex interaction networks. The elementary layer of these networks is formed by genes and their mutual interactions through transcriptional regulation [15]. This phe- nomenon is captured by gene regulatory networks (GRNs). These networks control gene expression dynamics running on a relatively slow time-scale while determining functional modes of the cell.

All of these models are purely qualitative (and discrete) provided that the as- pect of time (resp. velocity of the dynamics) is entirely abstracted out, thus leading to strong approximations. However, although rates of individual processes in tran- scription are not known, they can be estimated synthetically to achieve behaviour observed in vitro. To this end, it appeared important to make a step back in the abstraction by extending discrete models with the quantitative aspect of time.

In [16], a general framework for abstracting continuous systems by timed au- tomata is introduced. Under that framework, an ODE model of dynamical system is rigorously transformed into a timed automaton representing over-approximation of continuous behaviour. However, supported non-linear ODE models must fit in the class of multi-affine systems. Since GRNs are modeled by means of higher non- linear systems based on Hill kinetics, the approach cannot be directly employed.

zero rate of degradation. Non-deterministic generation of increase and decrease events causes irregular gene expression profiles with oscillations over two adjacent expression levels. A detailed analysis of this problem is provided in [11] including extensions of the formalism that attempt to overcome the problem.

In comparison to boolean model, PADE model does not abstract from time and protein concentration, the abstraction approximates continuous Hill kinetics by reg- ulatory logic while time and its effect on concentration dynamics is preserved in the form of rates. For a given initial state, there is a unique PADE trajectory repre- senting time behaviour of all proteins. In contrast, from the corresponding initial state in the boolean model, there are several paths providing untimed abstractions which may represent unrealistic behaviours.

Constraints for situations (1), (2), (4) directly implement expected behaviour. Situation (3) is more intricate. It happens just when delay uncertainty allows both degradation and production. In non-stopwatch strategy, the behaviour is naturally modelled by non-determinism. In stopwatch case, concurrent activity of both clocks is solved by non-deterministically selecting just one of the clocks cup, cdown to be

To automatize the process of translating models into UPPAAL language, we have developed a tool model-builder [11]. The model-builder takes as input an XML file describing the GRN together with the settings of the timed model. Output of model-builder is a UPPAAL timed automaton representing the GRN timed model. In addition to this, the tool can parse the traces returned by UPPAAL simulation/model-checking in order to visualize the respective trajectories.

Please note that a comprehensive set of further case studies as well as per- formance benchmarks results is available in [11]. As regards the performance of UPPAAL reachability analysis for both model variants, the analysis of the 3-level model took 0.14s with 2491 states visited. For the 11-level model, the computation time was 0.73s with 6059 states visited. Results were performed on a computer based on Intel T7200 (dual core) 2GHz CPU with 2GB RAM.

Evaluation showed that the more activity levels are distinguished, the more precise are the results. However, increasing resolution of discrete levels arises in technical difficulty of delineating proper values for time delays. The results were achieved on automata without stopwatches, the entailed approximation did not qualitatively affect the expected (approximate) results.

For future work we plan to develop a method automatizing setting of delay values wrt rates in PADE model. This can be achieved easily for exponential decays in the degradation term. However, for delays of simple and even cooperated regulations the task is non-trivial and remains to be solved. An interesting question is to employ the inverse problems method [1] to determine constraints on delays compatible wrt time-series measurements on micro-arrays. On the theoretical side, we plan to study rigorously the relation of timed automata to the approximated ODE model. The abstraction has been only informally defined in this paper.

