Ad hoc wireless networks are networks where the nodes can communicate with each other without resorting to a centralised infrastructure. These networks have a large number of civil and military applications, ranging from communication sup- port in battlefield, search and rescue operations to object monitoring and tracking. One of the major challenges in ad hoc networks is to reduce energy consumption as these nodes are often powered by batteries [2]. As battery replacement may not be a feasible option during operation, alternatives to improve and optimize energy expen- diture in wireless networks are of great interest. This facts have driven the quest for power saving strategies aiming to extend the network lifetime [25,5]. These energy saving proposals can be grouped in two main categories: (i) techniques that allow the nodes to alternate between active/idle operational modes; and (ii) techniques that allow the nodes to adjust their transmission power. Recent works in the first category can be found in [34,9,30]. Topology control strategies fall in the second category and have been largely explored in the literature [22,8]. Topology control consists in allowing wireless nodes to select a subset of neighbouring nodes and/or adjust the transmission power with the objective of reducing energy consumption while maintaining network connectivity [7,3,23].

In traditional multiple-hop wireless networks, intermediate nodes cooperate with each other to assist in the task of relying data packets from a source node to the desired destination. Note that this process occurs at the network layer. Cooperative communication (CC), on the other hand, is a physical layer technique that allows single antenna devices to benefit from some advantages of Multiple-Input Multiple- Output (MIMO) systems by exploring the spatial diversity [28]. This technique allows nodes to improve signal quality and transmission range.  In CC, when a

Recent works have explored CC with topology control techniques to reduce en- ergy consumption [5]. Ways to increase network connectivity and improve network lifetime has been investigated [35,33]. However, to the best of our knowledge, no work so far explored CC to increase the connectivity to the sink in ad hoc wireless networks. Link failure due to battery depletion and node failure may prevent wire- less nodes to reach the sink. In this context, CC can be explored to improve network connectivity and to allow the establishment of alternative routes to the sink node.

The remaining of this paper is organised as following. Section 2 makes an overview of related works on topology control and cooperative communication. Sec- tion 3 describes the communication and network models and formalises the main problem addressed in this work. Section 4 describes the CoopSink protocol and Section 5 presents the simulation results that compares the proposed scheme with other similar and prominent strategies. Section 6 concludes the work.

tivity. Several optimized solutions of the basic algorithm are also discussed and a beacon-based protocol is defined for topology maintenance. In a more recent work, Li et al. [21] proposed a Localised Minimum Spanning Tree (LMST) algorithm. The LMST works by having each node building a localised MST based on 1-hop neigh- bouring information. The final topology is constructed so that the maximum node degree is 6. Comprehensive surveys can be found in [22,14].

Cooperative communication (CC) is a technique introduced by [19] and [26] that allow single antenna devices to explore characteristics of MIMO systems. In coopera- tive communication, a set of nodes transmit independent copies of the original signal. The intended receiver obtain independent versions of the transmitted signal which reduces the fading effect through multi-path propagation. In this communication model, each wireless node is assumed to transmit data and to act as a cooperative agent, relaying data from other users. CC was previously used in energy efficient broadcasting [1], constructing connected dominating sets [32], routing [17], among others applications.

Few works in the literature have considered the use of topology control and CC to improve network coverage in ad hoc networks. The possibility of link coverage extension using CC was investigated in [18,31]. In this context, Cardei et al. [5] studied the use of topology control combined with CC with the objective of obtain- ing strongly connected topologies with minimum energy consumption. The authors showed that this problem is NP-complete and two localised and distributed algo- rithms were proposed. Both algorithms take as input the result of a traditional topology control algorithm (without CC). The first algorithm uses a distributed de- cision process where each node uses information of neighbours with at most two hops. The second algorithm iteratively assigns transmission power to the nodes, using one hop neighbour information.

Yu et al. [33] proposed a centralised topology control scheme aiming to increase network connectivity and reduce transmission power. To minimise the number of cooperative communication links (CC-links) and to reduce transmission cost, a poly- nomial and an exponential (but optimal) helper decision algorithms were proposed. Zhu et al. [35] consider the problem of selecting energy efficient paths when CC-links are used. The authors propose two topology control algorithms to build cooperative energy spanners in which the energy efficiency of individual paths are guaranteed. Both algorithms can be executed in a distributed or localised fashion. The work in [33] focus on maintaining network connectivity with the objective of minimising global energy consumption. Similarly, the work in [35] focused on reducing energy consumption by selecting efficient routes.

In ad hoc settings, link failure due to battery depletion and node failure may prevent wireless nodes to reach the desired destination. In this context, CC can be explored to improve network connectivity and to allow the establishment of more efficient routes. This work addresses this problem. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work to explore the use of CC-links to improve network connectivity to a sink node in a wireless ad hoc networks.

This section first describes the CC model and the corresponding network model that are used in this work. In a second moment, the model is exemplified and the main problem of this work is formalised. The model defined in this section is similar to that used in [5,33,35].

In a CC from vi to vj, the node vi must, in a first moment, send its data to its helper nodes in Hi,j and, in a second moment, node vi and its helpers must simultaneously send the same data to vj. This way, the weight of the CC edge consists in the sum of the communication costs of these two moments. wd(Hi,j) is the cost of the first moment while wCC(Hi,j) is the individual node cost to transmit a data with CC, that is, it must be multiplied by (|Hi,j| + 1), that is, the number of nodes that are involved in the CC between vi and vj. In this work, the CC model is simplified assuming that the transmission power of vi and its helper nodes are the same. Furthermore, it is only considered the power consumption in each sender node.

Initially, it was our intention to compare the proposal also with the Greedy- (Add/Del)-Link technique [35], however, this technique assumes that the topology created, after adding the CC edges, would be necessarily connected. This hypothesis is not considered in both CoopSink and CoopBridges. Here, a resulting topology is the topology created after the application of a topology control algorithm. To evaluate the CoopSink performance, it is considered the following metrics:

The reason to consider M1 is to evaluate the connectivity improvements that CoopSink can bring to the network. M2 is justified once minimising energy con- sumption is a basic concern in ad hoc networks. M3 is used to verify the goodness of the routes connecting to the sink when compared with another proposals. M4 enumerates the average number of CC edges in the resulting topology. M4 is also useful to better understand the average energy cost, as CC edges consume more power than direct links.

CoopBridges obtained a ESF to the sink up to 2.34 times greater than CoopSink, while the MST obtained a ESF to the sink up to 2.29 greater. The greater the ESF difference is, the less efficient the routes are. From the above, it can be verified that CoopSink presented routes up to 2.34 times better with relation to other proposals in the scenario considered in this work;

From 60 nodes, the CoopBridges remains with basically the same number of CC edges than CoopSink-1.4 and CoopSink-1.8. However, the CoopBridges still has less connectivity to the sink. This shows that CoopSink is able explore CC links more efficiently than CoopBridges when the connectivity to the sink is considered.

