Steganography is a subdomain of the information security domain which mainly works on ensuring the covert transmission of secret messages using multimedia content as carriers. Generally, a steganographic technique adopts data-hiding methods to conceal the confidential data in the spatial content of an original digital medium, such as an image referred to as a cover to result in a transformed image, also referred to as a stego [2,7,8,30]. The recent two decades marked a significant advancement of steganography in digital images where various schemes have been proposed for content-adaptive paradigms [3,11,19]. The adaptive stegano- graphic models mainly consider confidential data as a fidelity con- straint for the source coding practice rather than considering the carrier media. A reverse scheme to steganography has also been

Based on the high imperceptibility of a stego image, which is a challenge to detect its nature, it is impossible to distinguish with a human eye between the cover and stego image; hence the main task of a steganalyst is to identify a cover from a stego image. Ste- ganalysis is mainly classified into three categories based on the output of the process. A steganalysis process that outputs image classification (as cover or stego) is known as detective steganalysis or binary classification [21]; a steganalysis scheme that targets to provide the locations of the hidden data is known as locative ste- ganalysis [20]; a steganalysis scheme that aims to predict the pay- load size is also known as quantitative steganalysis [29]; and a steganalysis process that aims to extract the secret bits of the con- fidential message is called forensic steganalysis [41]. In the existing works on steganalysis, several researchers focused on the binary classification of inquiry images into cover or stego [6,33,47], and some others focused on locative steganalysis but mainly working with LSB replacement and LSB matching [36,42] due to the possi- bility of discovering the impurities with these types of steganogra- phy. Based on the use of Rich Models (RM), and Ensemble Classifiers (EC), most of the state-of-the-art [39,44,45] showed a significant performance in classifying images into cover and stego and relying on the deep learning paradigm, the steganalysis of dig- ital images knew a gradual widespread [6,35,47].

The next parts of this paper are as follows: In Section 2, we dis- cuss the existing literature focusing on the features of the current methods and their challenges. Section 3 describes our approach and the proposed model, followed by the presentation and discus- sion of the experimental results in Section 4. In Section 5, we con- clude our works and suggest the future takes in line with our model.

Liu et al. (2015) introduced a steganalysis scheme to locate con- cealed information using steganography in the spatial domain. The method involves the retrieval of most cover pixels through recom- pression, then analyzing the differences in pixel distribution between the cover and stego images. This scheme finally employs the hypothesis testing theory to prove the correctness of locating the embedding positions. Inspired by Liu et al. (2015), Hu et al.

The introduction of fuzzy logic, a machine learning and mathe- matical model, have been significant enlightenment to several computer science applications such as metaheuristic algorithms [15,25,37]; self-controlling application [1,9,12], Autonomous solu- tions generation [28,10,34]. Benefiting from fuzzy reasoning, Liu et al. [27] departed from (Liu et al., 2015) to propose a new method to locate flipped bits resulting from modern adaptive steganogra- phy in the spatial domain. This method computes the modification maps between the cover and stego images and extends them to identify the locations of steganographically modified pixels. The proposed method showed better performance with an average of 90% accuracy in determining the location of the modern adaptive steganography but needs to locate the non-adaptive steganogra- phy. Failure to accurately change the pixels in non-adaptive steganography because the pixels modification is generally spread randomly to all the inquiry image pixels differs from the pixel modification in adaptive steganography, which targets the same locations.

sive data embedments, checking whether a re-embedding selects the same pixels again. We depart from a property that the cost matrix does not change between the first and second stego images. The following stages define our stages to obtain the modified maps.

in most payload location CNN, two challenges can happen. The first is that with a large convolutional kernel size, information may be redundant because of connecting many pixels, including some irrelevant pixels. The second is that a small kernel may also lose some vital information.

Our algorithm is designed to locate the pixels that likely hold the secret data added by adaptive steganography in the spatial domain. We have drawn inspiration from prior algorithms, and our algorithm performs best when the stego is confirmed. Our algorithm is designed for two scenarios.

proposed by Liu et al. [27], to quantitatively estimate the stegano- graphic payload. To show the performance of our model in locating unknown steganographic payload, we present the Receiver Operat- ing Characteristic curve (ROC curve) of our model, which is a graphical illustration of the performance of our strategy to show the location of the steganographic payload. In our method, the ROC curve shows a graph of the true positive rate over the false positive rate for various decision thresholds. Our ROC curve plots the true positive rate (TPR) on the y-axis over the false positive rate (FPR) on the x-axis, with the classification threshold variation along the graph.

are HILL, with a score of 0.2980. For HUGO-BD, the highest F1-score is achieved when the predicted algorithm is HUGO-BD, and the true algorithm is also HUGO-BD, with a score of 0.3102. For S- UNIWARD, the highest F1 score is achieved when the true algo- rithm is HILL, and the predicted algorithm is S-UNIWARD, with a score of 0.2198. Finally, the highest F1 score for WOW is achieved when the true and predicted algorithms are WOW, with a score of 0.3242.

ing that the results of the strategy proposed in this study show a significant outperformance over the considered existing methods for the HILL and WOW algorithms and show a slight superiority over the existing methods for the S-UNIWARD. The best improve- ment of the F1-score achieved with the proposed method over the existing methods is 0.2829 for the prediction of HILL.

In this study, the proposed steganalysis scheme involves using image modification maps generated by an adaptive steganographic method to create fuzzy correlation maps that can be used to locate modified pixels in an image. The study uses STC to generate mod- ification maps by re-embedding a random message, and those maps are crucial features to obtain the best fuzzy correlation maps of an image. The experimental results show outperformance over the recently proposed algorithms for two considered scenarios (payload location with known payload and payload location with unknown payload). Our strategy has proved effective for detecting hidden bits produced by adaptive steganography in the spatial domain. The implications of this study are that it offers a potential solution for detecting adaptive steganography, which can be par- ticularly challenging due to its difficult ability to modify image pix- els. This method can help improve the accuracy of steganalysis by using modification maps and fuzzy correlation maps to locate the modified pixels. However, the dependency of the effectiveness on the quality of the modification map generated by the stegano- graphic method may be a limitation to our strategy because the performance can be affected by the types of accuracy in modifica- tion map generation.

