The Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) is a well known method for evaluating the environment impacts owing to the product existence [14]. Currently, there are some commercial tools used for LCA (e.g. SimaPRO). Within these tools, metrics like the Global Warming Potential (GWP) [14] are estimated based on a conversion database of resource consumption. Nevertheless, these tools are not well suited to conduct a performance evaluation of the activities involved in the product life cycle (e.g. machines utilization, reliability analysis), since it is not adressed by LCA.

The concept of exergy is linked to the Second Law of Thermodynamics (SLT) [5, 16, 27]. It assess the amount of energy that can be converted into useful work. Exergy analysis has been employed to measure and compare the use of different energy sources in systems and processes [13, 27]. Some efforts have been made towards combining exergy and LCA in order to create a single sustainability metric [13, 23]. The main difficulty to use an exergy based method is to capture the entire exergy flow for each resource used in the production of a good or service.

Modeling is quite often used to make quantitative and qualitative evaluation of systems [10, 13, 17, 18, 28]. Stochastic models have been widely used for evaluating supply chains and manufacturing systems [26]. These models are well suited for modeling systems where there is at least one variable that is assumed to follow a probability distribution. The strict mathematical modeling is often applied in such cases [8, 22]. Although, queue networks, Markov chains, and Petri nets might also be adopted for stochastic modeling of these systems [10, 24, 26].

This section presents the proposed approach to assess environment impacting and business indicators using SRN models. In order to achieve this assessment, reward functions should be associated to transitions and places of a SRN. These functions are calculated for each state of the SRN model returning a result that represents the performance indicator.

Definition 2.1 presents a formal description for SRNs based on [7]. This definition groups the weight of immediate transitions and the rate of timed transitions into a single matrix, in spite of the original definition, where such elements are described in different matrices.

It is important to stress that a resource might be used as energy source, raw material or be a waste of an activity. For instance, wood might be a raw material in the production of a good, and some amount of this wood might be wasted. It can also be burned, providing energy for an activity.

The proposed classification aims at providing means to separately measure GWP and exergy outputs of each activity/process, without being over-detailed avoiding a complex and inefficient evaluation process. Furthermore, a different value of GWP or exergy efficiency can be assigned to the same substance depending on its classification. For instance, a block of wood has a different GWP value when used as raw material of a good, disposed for recycling, or disposed in landfill. We chose this categorization based on the conversion factors usually adopted in LCA [4, 9, 12], in order to provide detailed description of the GWP of consumed/disposed resources.

An important remark considering the rewards definition is that they do not distinguish between places of the SRN. Instead, reward rates are based on the state of the SRN. But, sometimes it is wanted to have an insight of a specific process or a set of processes of the modeled system. In such cases, the rewards should be defined for each place and transition of the SRN.

This section presents some SRN models that were conceived to represent facilities and processes of a supply chain and manufacturing systems. The manufacturing systems models were based on [10]. These models were conceived with the aim of developing a library of reusable components that could be used to model systems in a bottom-up approach. Furthermore, the composition of these modules result in a final model that has some properties like boundedness, allowing either a steady state or transient evaluation [1].

This section presents a case study conducted in a Brazilian meat processing industry. This study considers a production line composed of different machines and sub- processes. These elements were grouped in stages of the production line. It was thus mapped three main stages which will be called Stage 1, Stage 2 and Stage 3. This case study focuses on the following environment impacting aspects: energy consumption and waste generation. Beyond environment issues, we also model the failures at each stage. We address this issue to assess the impact of fails in the system performance. This impact might provide information for decisions on the model, the failures were also represented. It is thus possible to compare the effects of failures over performance and environmental metrics. Since for this kind of problem the failure rates tend to affect not only the availability but also the system performance, they could not be modeled in separate, for instance using reliability block diagrams.

This paper presented the evaluation of GWP and exergetic indicators in manufac- turing systems and supply chains using stochastic models. It presents a comparison of exergetic values for different energy sources and the corresponding GWP resul- tant from the use of such sources. It was observed the importance of considering not only the energy source, but also the localities, that means, the effects of the system location (e.g. country, city, etc) over evaluated metrics. Especially for the electricity, the GWP factor might vary substantially according to the country that is using such issue. Since resources are detailed, its costs could be directly assessed. In conjunction with the analysis of costs, this kind of comparison might support the cost/environment trade-off analysis.

The proposed approach uses a single model to measure environmental and per- formance indicators. Using stochastic Petri nets to measure such indicators allows the calculation of measurements like the probability of having an indicator over a limit amount. Furthermore, this modeling technique allowed the definition of high-level components that could not be defined using other techniques like Markov chains. The library of components could thus be used to model a whole system using a bottom-up approach.

