The Shape Calculus is a bio-inspired timed and spatial calculus for describing 3D geometrical shapes moving in a space. Shapes, combined with a behaviour, form 3D processes, i.e., individual entities able to bind with other processes on compatible spatial channels and to split over previously established bonds. Due to geometrical space, timed behaviours, a wide degree of freedom in defining motion laws and usual non- determinism, 3D processes typically exhibits an infinite behaviour that prevents any decidable analysis. Shape Calculus models are currently used only for simulation and, thus, validation of models and hypothesis testing. In this work we introduce a complementary, and synergetic, way of using the calculus for systems biology purposes: we define a first abstract interpretation that can be used to verify untimed and unspatial safety properties of a given model. Such an abstraction focuses on the possible interactions that, during the evolution of the system, can occur among processes yielding new composed processes and, thus, new species. Other possible abstract domains for the verification of more expressive properties are also discussed.

In this context, the Shape Calculus [2,1] was proposed as a very rich language to describe mainly, but not only, biological phenomena. The main characteristics of this calculus are that it is spatial - with a geometric notion of a 3D space - and it is shape-based, i.e., entities have geometric simple or complex shapes that affect processes consisting of entities with a 3D shape and a dynamic behaviour, situated in a 3D virtual environment. 3D processes move accordingly to a personalized (to each process) motion law, collide and possibly bind each other and compound new 3D processes. Thus, a network of interacting 3D processes typically exhibits infinite behaviours. On the one hand the expressive power of the calculus is very high and it embeds natively features that are typical of biomodels. On the other hand, this richness and infiniteness prevents any application of analysis techniques existing for untimed and/or unspatial systems. Currently, Shape Calculus models are used as a base for a related simulation environment, called BioShape [5], that is used for model definition, simulation and validation [4,7] as well as for hypothesis testing and uniform multi-scale simulations [6].

The Hexokinase process evolves by binding with one instance of each metabolite. Once it has connected with both of them and all delays are consumed, a strong-split action is possible, i.e., the reaction occurs. Glucose and ATP evolves to glucose-6- phosphate and ADP, which we assume to be, for simplicity, nil.

several GLC and ATP to represent different concentrations over the space. After abstracting from space and velocity, all the instances of a same 3D process collapse to a unique abstract 3D process. Hence, elements of the abstract domain are sets of abstract 3D processes.

Example 3.4 (Glucose/ATP bond) Consider again Example 2.5. We are now in- terested in verifying if it is possible for a glucose and an ATP molecule to interact, i.e., bind. Considering any concrete network with some instances of the 3D processes defined in the example, the abstraction will always be the set of the following three abstract processes:

According to the concrete domain glc-hex-atp would not be able to complete a reaction, i.e. glc-hex-atp / due to the delays of both GLC and ATP. This is not the case of the abstract domain in which the strong-split action can be executed. Thus we obtain also {GLC [nil ], AT P [nil ]}. No further transition for these processes can be executed, so fixpoint is reached. Hence, we can conclude, for instance, that GLC and ATP processes cannot interact directly between each other.

