The Information Technology (IT) and Advanced Communication models are used for observing, sensing, evaluating and integrating distinctive data in Smart Cities for performing intelligent and smooth operations. The applications such as, Smart Transportation, Environmental Protection, Smart Grid, etc, are under Smart City [1]. Moreover, those applications comprises of different and huge varieties of devices such as, sensors, and some other IoT devices for sensing the environment, data transmission and communica- tion through Internet [2]. In recent days, cloud sensing models are widely adopted for providing effective solutions for common data sensing [3]. Moreover, the crowd sensing models are effec-

The remainder of this work is framed as follows: Section 2 deliberates the related work. The complete and clear depiction of proposed work flow is presented in Section 3. The evaluation results are presented with graphs obtained from simulation envi- ronment in Section 4. The Section 5 contains the conclusion and future enhancement possibilities in incorporating security over crowd sensing models.

There are myriad works are developed for handling the privacy issues in advanced communication models and transaction ser- vices. Crowd sensing is considered as an efficient tool for providing cost effectiveness, utilization of human intelligence and solving distributed issues. Amazon Mechanical Turk (AMT) is a popular crowd sourcing service, which is having several vulnerabilities and possibilities for data leakage [16]. For providing privacy pro- tection in AMT, the authors of [17] developed privacy wrapper. Further, in the work [18], the authors used group signature tech- nique for solving the privacy issues in crowd sensing models. In [19], for effectively handling the data privacy issues, more author- ities are used. The distributed authority mechanisms are used to enhance the model trust rate. Moreover, for effectively solving issues related to decentralization, blockchain based models are developed.

incentive approached were included. The authors of [21] combined the blockchain as payment gateway for developing a secure com- munication model, still the privacy protection problems are there in the communication model, specifically, in handling with mali- cious participants. The model proposed in [22] concentrated on data privacy and anonymity, however, not concerned about the smart contracts and the cost effectiveness. The paper [23] pre- sented an effective survey work based on the incorporation of blockchain models in IoT. Blockchain based participant identity and access management model has been developed in [24], for enhancing the IoT security. Moreover, in [25], IoT model used blockchain method with smart contract declarations were deployed for complex automation process. Object Security Archi- tecture (OSCAR) [26] has been proposed, which provided end to end security based on authentication and authorization models for securing the IoT resource access.

After performing that, the participant selection, the winning participant can execute the task and broadcast the sensed data. For enforcing data privacy at this phase, the Public Key Encryption is used for authorized data access. The participant data is encrypted with the symmetric key. When the manager obtains the data, it is decrypted using the private key. For reducing the storage rate of blockchain model, the hashed data is updated.

There are two major issues in selection of participants and reward allocation process. The task manager has no information about the data sensed by the participants before it is shared over the model. Hence, the participants can upload the fake or modified data. In addition, the improper reward providing to participants may reduce the model operations. For solving the above issues, in this work DSecCS is proposed. The first issue is solved consider- ing the factors, present sensed data quality and the participant rep- utation. And, further, the reward is allocated based on the bid_rate and the inclusive grade for the reasonable reward distribution is processed.

In this paper, Block Chain based Advanced Data Security- Reward Model (DSecCS) is developed for MCS. Additionally, the model effectively combines the blockchain model for developing the mobile crowd sensing model to can resist various attacks. The utilization of blockchain is for securing the MCS, without con- sidering the third-party authority. Smart Contracts are effectively defined for preventing the fraudulent. Here, the reward allocation is processed based on the factors such as, bidding rate, reputation rate and present data quality. The experimental results show that the model is efficient in all considered network evaluation factors and security factors, than the compared models.

In this paper, Block Chain based Advanced Data Security- Reward Model (DSecCS) is developed for MCS. Additionally, the model effectively combines the blockchain model for developing the mobile crowd sensing model to can resist various attacks. The utilization of blockchain is for securing the MCS, without con- sidering the third-party authority. Smart Contracts are effectively defined for preventing the fraudulent. Here, the reward allocation is processed based on the factors such as, bidding rate, reputation rate and present data quality. The experimental results show that the model is efficient in all considered network evaluation factors and security factors, than the compared models.

