\Formal Concept Analysis" [5] has been developed by Rudolf Wille [15], Bernard Ganter and their colleagues at Darmstadt. In their approach the construction and visual display of concept lattices, that is partially ordered sets of concepts, is crucial. The nodes of the concept lattice correspond to abstract concepts of the phenomenon being modelled and relationships within the lattice are re ective of relationships in the external world. Their book has numerous examples, and their method has found application in industrial applications (reported by Ganter & Wille) and in code re-engineering [8,14].

< abg; 123 >. The set abg is closed in A; 123 is closed in O. In this case we have oriented the lattice with respect to A, the set of attributes, where the universe A = abcdef ghi (which must be closed) is the lattice supremum. The singleton set fag, which is an attribute of every object is the lattice inf imum. It is partially ordered with respect to set inclusion.

An operator ' is a closure operator if X  X:', X  Y ) X:'  Y:', and X:':' X:'. The Galois closure on binary relations is one kind of discrete closure operator. A more general treatment of closure spaces has been advanced in [9,12]. A central idea in these papers is that of the generators of a closed set, Z, denoted Z: , by which we mean a minimal set Y such that Y:' = Z. For example, with a convex hull closure operator, the generators of a convex n-gon are its n vertices (or extreme points). 2

An n-gon is uniquely determined by its generators. Whenever the gener- ators of a closed set must be unique, we say the closure operator is uniquely generated and call the resulting closure space an antimatroid. 3 Much of the closure literature, e.g. [2,3,4,9,12] assumes antimatroid closure.

Using concepts from closure spaces, it is quite straightforward to generate the concept lattice while simultaneously determining the generators of these closed concepts. For example, the single attribute e generates the closed con- cept acde. That is, feg:'R 1 = facdeg. To see this in R, observe that every object which has property e (there is only one!) also has properties a, c and d as well. Similarly we nd that either fbdg or fbf g will generate fabdf g because attributes b and d only found together in objects 5 and 6, which also share attributes abdf . This closure space, and most arising from concept anal- ysis, are not antimatroid. Nevertheless, they retain much of the structure of antimatroid closure spaces [7].

one more object and its attributes. How will this transform the lattice LR?" This is the essence of discrete, empirical induction. Given a collection R of observations that have an internal structure denoted by LR , how does new information transform this structure? Actually, such transformations are in- herently \graceful" and \local" in nature because of a fundamental property of closed sets | the intersection of closed sets must be closed. This leads to an interesting interplay between closed sets Z = X:' and their generators Z: .

Every time we add a row (object/attributes observation) to R, we add at least one new closed set to LR, because the attributes of a single row constitute a closed set of A 6 . Let < o0 ; A0 > denote this new row. If there exists Z 2 L such that A0 = Z, then the lattice remains unchanged. Suppose not. Then, there exists at least one closed Z in L	such that A0  Z. We consider A0 \ Y for all closed Y; Y  Z. These are the only elements of the concept lattice LR with which A0 can interact.

This newly observed datum has also changed the generation structure of LR . In LR , we have (cg _ ch) ) acgh. In LR2 , we have cg ) acg, so cg can no longer be a generator of argh. Now in LR2 , ch ) acgh.

We observe that this new object is not very di erent from existing ob- jects. It is contained in Z = acgh, which is fairly low in LR . Suppose Z = abcdef ghi = U, the universe of attributes? One can show that ef is a generator of abcdef ghi, along with 11 other minimal generators. But, there are no objects associated with abcdef ghi = A. In this world, ef is a logical induces a lattice homomorphism on its closure lattice L. 8 As observed ear- lier, concept closure spaces are not normally antimatroid. We conjecture, but have not yet proven, that deletion in concept lattices will still induce at least a meet homomorphism.

