A large number of special-needs cases live in developing countries, regularly neglected and in extreme poverty. This research focuses on people with hearing and speaking impair- ment (deaf and dumb) in Egypt. According to last official statistics, there are 360 million people worldwide have dis- abling hearing loss [1] where more than 3 million of them are located in Egypt [2]. Most of the Egyptian deaf lack the ability to read or to write the standard Arabic language. There- fore, the only way of communication among them is the Ara- bic Sign Language (ArSL) that is not understood by hearing people. This fact has a great impact on the social life of the Egyptian deaf community that comes to be quite isolated and has large difficulties to gain social experiences and relationships.

However, the situation was quite different in the Arabic region where there is no real consideration of governments to the disabled people. For example, as marked by the report in [5], the Egyptian government limits an ArSL translation to News Programs on Television for only 10 min up to 7 h per week. Also, the administration does not allow deaf persons to get legislative documents translated into ArSL. Definitely, the disabled community is still out of the administration inter- ests and future plans.

Even more, the assistive technologies directed to deaf communities in the Arabic countries are quite a few and limited. Besides the government ignorance, the complexity of the Arabic language and the ArSL is the main reason for this limitation. Arabic language is much wealthier than English and is considered as one of the most complex nat- ural language [6]. Regarding ArSL, a standard dictionary can be found in [7] that contains 1600 of the basic and most common signs. Nonetheless, each country has its own modified version of this dictionary that holds new signs for its colloquial language and modified signs for most of the existing words. Even more, you can find for the same word a different sign in distinct cities of the same country [8].

As a conclusion, deaf individuals in developing Arabic countries can communicate with normal people only through an ArSL human interpreter who is very hard to find and in all the cases will break the conversation privacy. To help the Arabic deaf community to integrate with the society and to communicate easily with others, there is a big need to develop an automatic machine-based interpreter that can convert from Arabic speech to ArSL and vice versa [9]. The work in this paper focuses on the first direction, the Arabic speech to the ArSL, while the other direction has been discussed in [10].

database has been used in the form of a set of resource files. The system evaluation was based on the System Usability Scale (SUS) [18] of only five users and claimed an average of 91%. However, the proposed system has many limitations. First, the decision to depend on a local database, on a mobile device with limited storage, has limited the number of signs that can be stored in the database. Secondly, the application has 50 characters as the maximum length of the translated sen-

The service layer comprises the core processing functionalities of the system. In general, the system provides two main oper- ations to its users. First, it converts the speech of a normal per- son to ArSL. Secondly, it translates the text encoded in an image to ArSL. The first step in each of these scenarios is extracting the text that needs to be translated to ArSL.

The Microsoft Advanced Technology Lab in Cairo has pro- moted the Arabic Toolkit Service (ATKS) [24] as a suite of Natural Language Processing (NLP) components that target the Arabic language. The suite contains a spell-checker to detect and correct misspelled words; a morphological analyzer (SARF) that can analyze an Arabic word and extract its root, pattern, stem, part of speech, prefixes, and suffixes; a dia- critizer that can provide an accurate diacritization for Arabic text; a named entity recognizer (NER) to classify named words into persons, locations and organizations categories; a collo- quial to Arabic converter that translates the Egyptian collo- quial text into modern standard Arabic; and a part-of-speech (POS) tagger. The ATKS describes these modules as web ser- vices hosted on Windows Azure [25].

This work focuses mainly on the Egyptian deaf community. Hence, most of the input will be in the Egyptian colloquial text. Using the colloquial format for the translation process is inefficient as it will result in a very large set of words and an unbounded avatar database. Therefore, the second step of text preprocessing is connected to the colloquial converter module that translates Egyptian colloquial text into standard Arabic text. Additionally, it handles mixed text that combines modern standard Arabic and colloquial text by translating only the colloquial words and selecting the best translation based on the context.

The driver dropped the deaf person on the mentioned address. Unfortunately, the deaf person discovered another problem. There are three similar buildings on the street and he cannot recognize which one is the new club. Again, he used our program to scan the text announced on each building and he was able to recognize his destination as the program has translated the titles into ArSL.

