The mitigation of dephasing poses a significant challenge in improving the performance of error-prone superconducting quantum computing systems. Here, we investigate the dephasing of a transmon qubit in a dispersive read- out regime using a Josephson travelling-wave parametric amplifier as the preamplifier. Our findings reveal that the potent pump leakage from the preamplifier may lead to severe dephasing. This issue could be attributed to a mixture of measurement-induced dephasing, ac Stark effect, and heating. We show that pulse-mode readout is a promising measurement scheme to mitigate qubit dephasing while minimizing the need for bulky circulators. Our work provides key insights into mitigating decoherence from microwave- pumped preamplifiers, which will be critical for advancing large-scale quan- tum computers.

qubit measurement but they may induce dephasing when the pump is on. In general, these preamplifiers are based on nonlinear wave mixing, converting pump photons into amplified signal photons. Compared with a reflective Josephson parametric amplifier (JPA)[1], a travelling-wave parametric am- plifier (TWPA)[2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7] is a promising preamplifier for scaling up due to its higher bandwidth and larger dynamical range. But the leakage of the microwave pump may pose a severe dephasing challenge for both types of amplifiers. This problem can impede the development of dynamic quantum circuits [8] and quantum error correction[9], which may open up a powerful pool of algorithms of practical quantum advantage[10]. A good understand- ing of the origins of such dephasing is in need in order to find a solution.

To systematically understand and address this dephasing challenge, we study the effects of TWPA on qubit dephasing. Thanks to the high-coherence tantalum-based superconducting transmon qubits[17] and home-made TW- PAs, we are able to quantitatively explore the dephasing from pump leakage. In Section 2 we briefly introduce qubit dephasing, TWPA, and how they are connected to each other. Particularly, we discuss multiple aspects of TWPA that can cause qubit dephasing, including backward amplification, leakage of the pump, and backward noise. And we describe a metric to compare different readout modes. Then, in Section 3, we experimentally explore some of these dephasing factors and assess a corresponding solution called pulse- mode readout. We measure the above metric to confirm the effectiveness of our approach. Finally, in Section 4, we conclude about the significance

A TWPA is a two-port device that amplifies signals by utilizing the non- linearity of an array of Josephson junctions, a long wire with kinetic in- ductance, or other types of nonlinear transmission lines. It operates based on three- or four-wave mixing, where one or two pump photons are down- converted into a signal photon and an idler photon. By imparting energy from a strong pump wave into the signal wave, the TWPA provides expo- nential gain to the signal as all waves propagate through it with matched phase.

TWPAs are useful for qubit readout because they can achieve near quantum- limited noise, wide bandwidth, and high gain. Their added noise[28, 29] orig- inates from non-superconducting materials and the intrinsic quantum fluctu- ations of the signal and idler waves[30], with a minimum of 0.5 photons - the standard quantum limit. Above this limit, the dielectric loss of the TWPA substrate is often dominant[31]. With noise near this limit, a TWPA can sig- nificantly increase the SNR compared to commercial high electron-mobility transistor (HEMT) amplifiers.

TWPA also suffers from the mixing of the reflected pump and reflected signal waves. This process resembles forward amplification but with a weaker reflected pump. Thus, backward amplification is also possible given a large enough impedance mismatch, e.g. if the TWPA array wave impedance reaches 150 Ohm[33].

During qubit measurement, information is extracted while dephasing is induced. The efficiency of the measurement is quantified by the mea- surement efficiency[35], which reflects the trade-off between sensitivity and decoherence[36]. Measurement efficiency is the ratio of measurement rate to dephasing rate. That is, when dephasing is entirely caused by the intrinsic uncertainty relations through extracting information, the measurement ef- ficiency is one. A lower measurement efficiency indicates excess dephasing beyond the inherent uncertainty. It can be measured using the method in [35], and we describe a modified version as follows:

With pulse mode, a compelling conjecture arises: qubit dephasing during qubit operation is comparable to that of off mode, as the dephasing sources we explored are significant only when the pump is on; meanwhile, the SNR during qubit measurement approaches that of continuous mode. We may thus achieve optimized measurement efficiency. This conjecture will be sub- stantiated experimentally in the following section.

During the first cooldown, a circulator was present and only the first directional coupler was used. For the second cooldown, the circulator was removed and a second directional coupler added to measure backward gain. Fortunately, the TWPA operating point remains nearly unchanged, allowing direct comparison of dephasing between the cooldowns.

circulator but within normal fluctuations. More important is what happens when the pump is turned on at the operating point compared to when the pump is off. With the circulator, the dephasing shows no degradation. But without it, T R drops by nearly an order of magnitude, definitively showing that the pump severely impacts qubit dephasing without proper isolation. Although a circulator can provide such isolation, its insertion loss, stray magnetic fields, and bulky size are undesirable. Therefore, it is important to understand the effects of leaked pump photons on the qubit chip. In the following, we look beyond the operating point for a more general picture.

