With the utilization of cloud foundation and its convention set of IoT, assets can give robots and mechanization framework [12]. The operation of robots and robotization frameworks depends upon information through the system to help [13]. We can enhance robot and computerization framework utilizing cloud either by giving access to datasheets, production models, benchmark, recreational instruments, open rivalry for the plan and framework or open- source programming can also contribute for the said cause [14].

coming sections of the paper. The literature study has been carried out in section 2. The methodology of the proposed work is eluci- dated in section 3. The results obtained through the work proposed are presented and analyzed in section 4, followed by the conclud- ing remarks in section 5.

The application of robots in medicine and healthcare comprises several types, i.e., surgery, rehabilitation, telepresence, sanitation, etc. As it is a susceptible application area, it needs extra attention to be drawn. The main concern regarding robots in medicine and healthcare is their safe use, both for patients and agents. The authors have assessed the risk of using robotic systems for wrist and elbow rehabilitation, particularly from the safety point of view [11]. The results are further analyzed through Fuzzy Logic to know the extent of the safety. This innovative method for risk assess- ment was then tested successfully on 18 patients for the trials, val- idating the safety concerns.

In this study, the authors have provided a robust motion detec- tion algorithm for the robot, which detects motion rate using a background subtraction technique [19]. It captures the static image, and whenever it detects any change, it subtracts the current image from the previously captured image to analyze the differ- ence. It gives object blobs compared to the last image frame in which the object was detected. In this way, motion can be detected from the background [20].

The utilization of fuzzy procedures in achieving autonomy has gotten across the board in recent years and various fields of applied autonomy, such as to conduct structure, coordination of conduct, observation, limitation, and so on. The centrality of the commit- ments was at its peak till the end of the 1990 s, where the funda- mental point in mechanical autonomy was the execution of essential practices. In recent years, the deliberation in autonomy implementation moved to build robots that work independently in natural conditions. The actual effect of fuzzy methods in the mechanical technology network is not as profound as it was in the beginning phases to apply autonomy or what it is worth for in other application regimes. However, new rising regimes in mechanical technology, for example, human and humanoid com- munication, or settled ones, for example, discernment, are genuine instances of new expected domains of uses where hybridized fuzzy methodologies, will without a doubt, be fitted for showing their ability to manage such perplexing and dynamic situations [26].

