This article reviews blackbox optimization applications of direct search optimization methods over the past twenty years. Emphasis is placed on the Mesh Adaptive Direct Search (Mads) derivative-free optimization algorithm. The main focus is on applications in three specific fields: energy, materials science, and computational engineering design. Nevertheless, other applications in science and engineering, including patents, are also considered. The breadth of applications demonstrates the versatility of Mads and highlights the evolution of its accompanying software NOMAD as a standard tool for blackbox optimization.

lation used for the design of a helicopter rotor blade failed in 60% of the calls (Booker et al., 1999) and the aspen (Aspentech, Accessed: 2020- 11-06) chemical engineering simulator failed in 43% of the calls during the optimization of a process to treat a toxic byproduct in aluminum production (Audet et al., 2008a).

two variables for each GMON helped to generate better solutions. More generally, this feature allows the user to indicate which set of variables are related with each other. These sets need not be disjoint. The al- gorithm generates directions in each subset associated to the groups, rather than generating directions in the entire space spanned by all variables.

HQ developed the Simscape Power Systems (SPS) electrical simu- lator to model and simulate electric power systems within the MAT- LAB Simulink environment (Delavari et al., 2018). SPS can estimate electrical parameters of asynchronous machines based on manufacturer specifications (MathWorks, 2018a), which is similar to a model cali- bration problem. HQ decided to replace the MATLAB optimization toolbox by a trust-region approach (Bellavia et al., 2004). Although the new method was fast enough, the proposed default settings were in- appropriate to generate high-quality solutions. This turned out to be a parameter tuning problem and NOMAD was used to adjust the calibra- cessfully applied to different fields of materials science to (i) optimize materials performance, (ii) optimize industrial processes, and (iii) de- sign new materials. A goal in alloys design is to determine a set of compositions, temperature, and pressure that optimize a set of func- tions that describes the material properties under certain constraints. These functions depend on the amount, type, and structure of phases. Note that in the thermodynamic context, a phase is a region through- out which all physical properties of a material are uniform; in general a solid phase has a unique crystallographic structure, while a liquid or gas phase are homogeneous mixtures. The material properties (mechanical, thermodynamic, structural, dynamics, thermal transport, surface prop- erties) depend on the phase volume fractions and the temperature. Phase volume fractions depend on both temperature and composition. Closed- form expressions of material properties as functions of composition and temperature are not known. Optimization of industrial processes either involves the determination of an optimal material or optimal process conditions such as temperature, pressure, weight fraction between dif- ferent chemical constituents, etc.

lead to the design of several innovative materials and the optimization of important industrial processes for the production of primary metals, such as iron, aluminum, and copper. This combination also allowed the screening of potential multi-component alloys, searching for composi- tions having desired properties and phase assemblages within a reason- able amount of time. In multi-component systems, an evaluation of a given property by FactSage can be time-consuming, as it ranges from a few seconds up to a few minutes, depending on the system size and the calculation type. Determining optimal alloys under a given set of

low-cost PCMs with good performance in terms of heat storage capac- ity is a real challenge. A methodology to determine local minima of the liquidus surface is presented in Gheribi et al. (2011). The tech- nique consists of minimizing the freezing range. When a PCM solution

until no additional PCM solutions can be found. This method has be proven to be reliable, as it predicted with considerable accuracy the global minimum of the liquidus temperature in an eight-components salts system, for which the liquidus temperature was measured exper- imentally (Renaud et al., 2011). More recently (Gheribi et al., 2020), the same procedure produced 30 new potential low-cost PCM materials with excellent heat storage capacity.

Finally, NOMAD was used for metamaterials in Audet et al. (2013), Diest (2013). More specifically, these works aim to adapt the spectral response and near-field interactions of split ring resonator metamate- rials, by tuning the spectral position of resonant reflection peaks and near-field interactions within the metamaterial over the near-infrared spectrum.

based on heuristics (e.g., genetic algorithms, simulated annealing, par- ticle swarm optimization, etc.) These algorithms are designed to always yield results, which largely explains their popularity. However, the de- sign engineer cannot characterize the optimality (or lack thereof) of the obtained results, as these heuristics are not supported by a useful con- vergence analysis (Audet and Hare, 2017).

The advent of modern direct search methods has offered an invalu- able toolkit to design engineers for conducting derivative-free optimiza- tion whose results are supported by convergence theory (Kolda et al., 2003). The first engineering design application reported in the litera- ture utilized the direct ancestor of Mads with mixed variable program- ming (Audet and Dennis, Jr., 2001); a thermal insulation system was optimized with respect to categorical variables (number and material type of heat shields), resulting to a 65% improvement in performance relative to the best design known until then (Kokkolaras et al., 2001). An interesting feature of the design optimization problem was that the number of optimization variables was a function of one of the optimiza- tion variables. The analysis models and constraint handling procedure used in Kokkolaras et al. (2001) were enhanced by Abramson (2002, 2004), which led to even larger performance improvements.

Design  optimization  of  nanoparticles  was  performed in Chamseddine et al. (2020) for a cohort of tumors which vary in size - an important clinical covariate. In this paper, the authors also optimized the drug diffusivity along with the nanoparticle size. The results suggested that integrating the selection of the drug and the nanoparticle size in practice may lead to better treatment outcomes.

Talgorn et al. (2017) considered both NOMAD and gradient-based al- gorithms to solve the subproblems formulated by an interdisciplinary feasible architecture known as non-hierarchical analytical target cas- cading. Results show that NOMAD yields higher-consistency solutions (i.e., solutions with smaller discrepancies among disciplinary subprob- lems), but with greater variance than the MATLAB implementation of an interior point gradient-based algorithm.

There are numerous applications of direct search methods in astro- physics. In a paper with more than 700 co-authors (Aasi et al., 2013), NOMAD was used for a computationally intensive search for periodic gravitational waves carried out with the Einstein@Home volunteer dis- tributed computing project.

Kinematics analysis of galaxies are performed in Ramakrishnan et al. (2019), revealing various deviations from pure circular rotation in the inner kiloparsec of seven galaxies, including kinematic twists, decoupled and counter-rotating cores. That paper states that the Mads algorithm is becoming quite indispensable in practice.

This review focused on three particular application domains of black- box optimization. Over the past two decades, direct search methods and algorithms such as Mads evolved through research motivated by a vast variety of applications. Since its introduction in 2006, Mads can now consider continuous and discrete, (including categorical) variables, handle blackbox constraints and multiple objectives, tackle increasingly larger problems (partially through parallelism), and, even solve stochas- tic blackbox problems.

