We study a model of side-effecting processes obtained by starting from a monad modelling base effects and adjoining free operations using a cofree coalgebra construction; one thus arrives at what one may think of as types of non-wellfounded side-effecting trees, generalizing the infinite resumption monad. Types of this kind have received some attention in the recent literature; in particular, it has been shown that they admit guarded iteration. Here, we show that they also admit unguarded iteration, i.e. form complete Elgot monads, provided that the underlying base effect supports unguarded iteration.

in the evident sense, provided that e is guarded. The latter concept is defined in terms of additional structure of T b as an idealized monad, which essentially allows distinguishing terms beginning with an operation from mere variables. Guardedness of e then means that recursive calls can happen only under a free operation. Similar results on guarded recursion abound in the literature; for example, the fact that T b admits guarded recursive definitions can also be deduced from more general results by Uustalu on parametrized monads [27].

The motivation for these results is, well, to free non-wellfounded recursive def- initions from the standard guardedness constraint. Note for example that in [20], it was necessary to assume guards in all loop iterations when interpreting a while- language with actions originally proposed by Rutten [24] over a completely iterative monad. Contrastingly, given that T b is a (complete) Elgot monad, one can now just write unrestricted while loops. We elaborate this example in Section 5, and recall a standard example of unguarded recursion in process algebra in Section 6.

According to Moggi [17], a notion of computation can be formalized as a strong monad T over a Cartesian category (i.e. a category with finite products). In order to support the constructions occurring in the main object of study, we work in a dis- tributive category C, i.e. a category with finite products and coproducts (including a final and an initial object) such that the natural transformation

We proceed to recall the definition of the coinductive generalized resumption trans- former [20]; for simplicity, we consider a version with only one family of free oper- ations (rather than a whole signature or, even more generally, an arbitrary endo- functor on the base category). We then prove our main result, stability of the class of complete Elgot monads under this construction (Theorem 4.5).

