In this survey, we deal with the problem how a universal computer can be constructed in a reversible environment. We discuss this problem based on the frameworks of reversible Turing machines, reversible logic circuits, and reversible cellular automata. We can see that in spite of the constraint of reversibility, there are several very simple reversible systems that have universal computing ability.

Since reversibility is one of the fundamental microscopic physical laws of Nature, it is important to investigate how universal computer can be implemented efficiently in a system having this property. This is because the size of future computing devices will become nanoscale ones. Here, we give a survey on universality issues of such systems, in particular on reversible Turing machines, reversible logic circuits, and reversible cellular automata. We can see that even very simple reversible systems have universal computing ability. In these reversible systems, computation can be often carried out in a very different manner from conventional computing systems, and thus they give new ways and concepts for future computing.

A reversible logic element is a primitive for composing reversible logic circuits, whose function is described by a one-to-one mapping. There are two types of such elements: one without memory, which is usually called a reversible logic gate, and one with memory. Early study on reversible gates was made by Petri [26]. Later, Toffoli [29,30], and Fredkin and Toffoli [5] studied them in connection with physical reversibility. Among many reversible logic gates, Toffoli gate [29,30] and Fredkin gate [5] have been studied extensively, and are known to be logically universal. On

The Billiard Ball Model (BBM) is a reversible physical model of computing proposed by Fredkin and Toffoli [5]. It is an idealized mechanical model consisting of balls and reflectors. Balls can collide with other balls or reflectors. It is assumed that collisions are elastic, and there is no friction. Fredkin and Toffoli [5] showed that Fredkin gate is realizable in BBM.

however, in general difficult to design an RCA if we use traditional CAs [9]. So far, a few frameworks are proposed for designing RCAs. They are CAs with block rules [13,31], partitioned CAs (PCAs) [14], and CAs with second order rules [13,31].

It has been shown that a local function of a PCA is one-to-one iff its global function is one-to-one [14]. Furthermore, PCAs are a subclass of traditional CAs. Hence, if we want to have an RCA, it is sufficient to construct a PCA whose local function is one-to-one.

[13] first showed a universal model using a 2-state CA with block rules. Imai and Morita [7] gave a universal 8-state triangular RCA using the framework of PCAs as stated in the following theorem. In their model, each triangular cell has three parts with two states, and has an extremely simple local function.

We described how reversible systems can be computation-universal. We saw that in spite of the strong constraint of reversibility such systems have full computing power. We also argued that universal computing systems can be composed of very simple primitives such as 2-state reversible logic elements or reversible local functions of PCAs.

