Channel modeling is crucial for studying the behavior of quantum channels in order to build an efficient error correction scheme in addition to security verification of different protocols. While most current analyses of quantum protocols use a traditional mathematical approach, we employ a simpler probabilistic model checking which is more compatible with classical implementations to investigate the dependency of the security on the quantum channel noise. We also compare a couple of eavesdropping strategies from the security point of view.

The field of quantum information theory has brought the potential to accomplish feats considered impossible by purely classical methods. One of these is the ability to transmit an unconditionally secure message between two parties, known as quan- tum cryptography. Quantum cryptography is one of the earliest practical results among the various theories which are tied with quantum mechanics and are not yet fulfilled by present technologies.

logic that governs classical communication. On the other hand, those postulates enhance security beyond computational security. It should be noted that the quan- tum channel and quantum bits are utilized for transmitting classical bits of the key. The complete communication either involves a classical medium in parallel or the classical data can be sent through the same quantum channel [1].

probabilistic modeling approach and built a simple model for channel noise and imperfections which have been verified by PRISM programming. The results are shown to tend to those of the noiseless channel cases and the comparison of differ- ent tapping scenarios is consistent with the other works [13]. The rest of the paper is organized as follows: The model of quantum channels is described in section 2. The PRISM model checker, simulation details and experimental results are given in section 3. The paper is concluded in section 4.

Because of the random behavior of quantum phenomena, it has been suggested to use an appropriate probabilistic tool for verifying quantum protocols instead of log- ical model-checkers like SPIN [6, 14]. Among them, PRISM (probabilistic symbolic model-checker) has some advantages especially for BB84 analysis as the protocol developers also used it for this purpose [7]. Papanikolaou proposed an analysis of BB84 for two possible attacks where the channel is considered noiseless and all the device imperfections are neglected [14].

