Arigatoni is a lightweight overlay network that deploys the Global Computing Paradigm over the Internet. Communication for over the behavioral units of the overlay is performed by a simple resource discovery protocol (RDP). Basic Global Computers Units (flC) can communicate by first registering to a brokering service and then by mutually asking and offering services.

Colonies and Individuals are the main entities in the model. A colony is a simple virtual organization composed by exactly one leader and some set (possibly empty) of individuals. Individuals are global computers (think it as an Amoeba), or (sub)colonies (think it as a Protozoa). A formal definition of a colony is given using this simple BNF syntax: a formalization of the Virtual Intermittence Protocol (VIP) in terms of a labeled transition system; in our modest opinion, this is the first attempt to capture the behavior of an intermittence protocol using formal methods and a labeled transition semantics mathematical tool. Advantages of this approach is that rely on robust mathematical basis as languages and concurrency theory. As such, formal and mechanical proof on protocols related with overlay networks is feasible.

Aftermath, the processed data should be analyzed using a Virtual Reality Center, VRC (GCVCRCPU) based in Houston, U.S.A. by a specialist team and the resulting recommendations for the next data (GCVRCSPEC) collect campaign have to be sent to John. Hence one would like the following scenario to happen:

Proof (Sketch) Observe that the red parts of the pseudocode of the GC concerning the set and unset of the variables globalmode/regmode leads to the firing of the two rules (JoinGCU) and (LeaveGCU). Moreover, the red parts of the pseudocode of the GB concerning the set and unset of the variables globalmode/regmode leads to to the firing of the two rules (JoinGCU) and (LeaveGCU). The last two rules of the transition systems, namely (LinkCol) and (UnLinkCol) are encapsulated (hence hidden) in the function calls Update(Colony,Metadata).

