A variety of key indicators have been used to assess users' experience of immersive technology, including presence (Cummings & Bailenson, 2016), engagement (Boyle et al., 2012), and enjoyment (Dey et al., 2018). The achievement emotion theory (Pekrun, 2006) and Makransky et al. (2017, 2020) further conceptualized that learning outcomes in VR settings stem from the simulated presence of stimuli and feedback embedded in the VR program along with affective factors, and are mediated by cognitive factors (e.g., self-efficacy). Thus, it is necessary to measure the sense of presence and motion frustration, and further eval- uate their impact on user performance (Menin et al., 2022). Accordingly, in the present study, we asked: How are frustration and the presence of fire influence the learning progress in a VR Fire-Escape program, and how does self-efficacy of game play mediate the aforementioned relationship?

Presence in VR is a technology-induced subjective experience when the individuals are placed in a simulated environment but gain similar experience to interacting with real objects. Individuals experience an increased sense of presence while using VR for training that could cause an increase in their learning efficacy (Ding et al., 2020). Students who are engaged in a high-presence VR environment were found to show more confidence in using VR (Song et al., 2021). It is thus important to study the roles of presence in virtual environment that can vary in different disciplinary contexts (Lim & Richardson, 2022). As such, the present study explored the role of fire presence in VR after players experienced interaction with the VR Fire-Escape program.

This study highlights the important role of game-play self-efficacy that may maximize the potential of VR programs to help learners immerse in a controlled, danger-free virtual world to gain new life-saving knowledge and skills (Yang & Goh, 2022). Given our findings, first, frustration slows down learning progress by lowering individuals' gameplay self-efficacy. When fundamental physical functioning can only be carried out through controllers, and when visual stimuli deviate from previous real-life experience (Calvert & Abadia, 2020; Wu et al., 2021), individuals waste cognitive resources on learning the use of gadgets and familiarizing themselves with the virtually constructed sight. Instead of paying due attention to the authentic learning task, frustration with VR programs grow because of the gap between real-life and simulated perceptual experience (Iskander et al., 2019), and we found that such emotional reaction is in turn related to a lower self-efficacy (Pence, 2022). Despite the numerous strengths of VR educational programs for promoting positive learning outcomes (Coban et al., 2022), difficulties with the operation of VR appear to present unnecessary hurdles and lower the learning outcomes (Song et al., 2021). Given the importance of GPSE in VR programs, VR-related frustration as a representation of risks should be reduced to cultivate GPSE.

Our findings further demonstrate that a vivid visual and audio rep- resentation of the authentic task (i.e., presence) and a lower level of frustration are both essential for building higher gameplay self-efficacy, even for life-threatening stimuli that may influence participants' deep learning. The affective and perceptual experience appear to have distinctive relationship to GPSE that educators and VR program de- velopers have to deal with both of the constructs to facilitate meaningful learning.

Based on the findings, our research highlights the value of VR pro- grams for training adolescents to cope with stressful and life-threatening incidents, the necessity of realistic presence in fire scenes, and the importance of reducing technological barriers for learners. VR remains a useful tool for training adolescents about the knowledge and skillset necessary for fire safety and escape. With potential risks, danger, and other limitations of providing drill-type courses, VR programs appear to be a safe and effective alternative (Yang & Goh, 2022). Second, with such an understanding, our findings imply that a more authentic presence when using VR may lead to better gameplay self-efficacy and eventually a better learning outcome. VR program developers should construct a realistic environment in the VR programs to facilitate self-efficacy and mastery of life-saving skills. In this sense, program developers should

The findings should be interpreted with caution. First, our quasi- experimental design does not support a causal relationship between using the VR Fire-Escape program, gameplay self-efficacy, and mastery of content knowledge and skills because of the lack of a control group. As a result, the findings should be interpreted as correlational. Researchers should conduct a similar study in the future but with a randomized control trial to justify the causal relationships. Second, the effect size of GPSE on learning progress was small, indicating that other variables are at play. It is possible that the effect size is small because the content is too simple for high school students since students may have already learned the fundamentals earlier. Researchers can further identify salient pre- dictors of learning outcomes that can also be promoted by VR programs besides self-efficacy or when the VR programs serve as a review of pre- viously learned content. Third, we did not compare who has not prac- ticed the VR Fire-Escape program to those of practiced, in terms of learning effectiveness in performance. Finally, the results can only be generalized to high school students. More research should be conducted with individuals of different ages to verify the effect of the VR Fire-Escape program.

