forecasting, machine learning, optimization, predictive analytics, and statistics, be- tween others [3]. The main problem in Data Science is the data volume, in some cases, it can be so great that is prohibitive to apply traditional statistics methods and even some machine learning or data mining algorithms. For this reason, it is necessary to have strategies for obtaining a representative subset of the data with which the classification or prediction algorithms do not affect their performance.

In Data science are several approaches based on graphs, where the main idea is based on extracting knowledge from graph topologies. Newman et al. [11] pro- posed an approach for clustering communities through iterative remove edges from a graph, the algorithm gives more weight to the borderline edges between commu- nities than the edges inside it. Their results showed that it is possible to extract community structures from networks artificially generated using information from known communities.

Zhang and Hancock [18] proposed a graph-based method to feature selection. They used weight graphs, where a vertex represents a feature and their pairwise relationship is an edge, the weight of an edge was given by the degree of relevance between two features. Their proposal uses the multidimensional interaction infor- mation criterion for feature selection, this criterion detects the relationships between feature combinations with greater relevance. Therefore, the proposal gets the most information that a class has.

On the other hand, Maillo et al. [10] proposed a fuzzy kNN approach based on Hybrid Spill-Tree, where through a tree structure the nearest-neighbors are approx- imated. This method has two types of binary trees: a Metric-Tree and a Spill-Tree. The Metric-tree organizes the instances of a dataset in a spatial hierarchical manner, where its root vertex represents all instances, and each vertex represents an instance. An internal vertex is partitioned into two subsets, who are disjoint sets, i.e they do not have repeated instances. While, the Spill-Tree is similar to a Metric-Tree, with the difference that Spill-Tree enables repeated instances.

of the weights  w(e) on its edges. A subgraph of a certain type with minimum (or maximum) weight, is a graph which path of minimum (or maximum) weights connecting two specified vertices u0 and v0. A Minimum Spanning Tree (MST) is an induced subgraph, where the set of edges connects all vertices, without any cycles and the sum of its edge weights are the minimal.

The Algorithm 1 describes the general procedure. The proposals build a weighted complete graph (GraphProcedure in the Algorithm 1) to generate an in- duced subgraph (Section 3.1) or a Minimum Spanning Tree (Section 3.2). Note that, IRm is a desirable imbalance ratio, that is, the desirable ratio of the positive class size to the negative class size.

The methods that not have a good percentage of reduction are TL and SBC. The first one removes instances according to achieve the form a link, so in most datasets, it is possible that in the negative class there are not instances that form a Tomek link. While the second method, cluster construction is probably the reason, due to the low density of the negative class.

