The fifth generation (5G) technology improves the user experience and creates new possibilities for a variety of applications, including transportation, device-to-device communication, agriculture, and manufacturing. These new use-cases significantly increase the number of users, volume of traffic, throughput, and latency. Hence, there is a need to modify the radio access network (RAN) for the 5G system. This study investigates the various RAN architectures such as cloud-RAN (CRAN), heterogeneous cloud-RAN (HCRAN), and fog-RAN (FRAN). The architectures are examined in a variety of contexts, including system efficiency, spectrum and energy efficiency, fronthaul capacity, latency, resource sharing and allocation, and so on. Also, current issues with these architectures are highlighted, as well as some existing remedies.

The rest of this article is structured as follows. Section 2 introduces the basics of the 5G system, key milestones and Standard Development Organisations (SDOs). Section 3 discusses the 5G radio access network (5G RAN) architectures and limitations. Finally, Section 4 concludes with the key contributions and future work.

Radio access network (RAN) is the most critical component of a mobile network. This is evident during the deployment phase, which is followed by the operational complexity, and cost. The RAN is a collection of interconnected base stations that are linked to the core network and provide coverage in a specific area based on radio access technologies (RATs). The traditional mobile networks depend on a distributed RAN architecture such that a single RRH is linked to a

of deployment. In [27], the cost for BBU hotelling strategies: BBU stacking, BBU pooling, and CRAN BBU was modeled and the performance were compared. In [28], a network planning and provisioning framework was proposed to optimize the cost of deployment in CRAN. The framework utilized a mixed inte- ger quadratic constrained programming (MIQCP) method, which maximizes the cost of deploying a virtualized 5G service chain.

from the later are quantized and compressed before being sent to the RRH through fronthaul links [37]. A general form of compression technique was proposed for downlink CRAN in [36]. A finite-capacity fronthaul was developed to connect the BSs to a centralized processor. This method allows the centralized processor to centrally encode signals that will be broadcast by the BSs using the fronthaul links in a cooperative manner. In [37], a combined data-sharing and compression solution for downlink CRAN was introduced, allowing for better control over fron- thaul/backhaul capacity usage. Moreover, the issue of jointly optimizing digital baseband beamforming and fronthaul com- pression techniques at the BBU alongside RF beamforming at the RRHs was studied in [39]. This joint design of fronthauling and hybrid beamforming ensures that the weighted downlink sum-rate and network energy efficiency of the CRAN system is maximized. A standard point-to-point fronthaul compression method was studied in [47], while several multivariate fronthaul was investigated in [48,49].

was introduced. For a single cloud, wireless or optical backhaul links were used to connect the cloud to BSs from different layers. On the other hand, multiple clouds were connected using hybrid backhauling to a group of BSs. Moreover, a design that separates the HCRAN operation into unique layers; infrastructure, control, and application layers was proposed in [65]. The design incorpo- rates massive MIMO (mMIMO) to enable broadband transmission. This method improves the scalability and flexibility of the system since RRHs become smaller and complex computations could be performed and managed by the BBU pool obtained by the mMIMO.

procedures latency. The authors utilized a systematic design with unique open-loop radio access to reduce air interface latency. Likewise, an information-based resource optimization was imple- mented to reduce radio resource optimization delay while a social data cache-based routing/paging strategy was used to eliminate the latter type of latency. However, this design is not applicable for heterogeneous carrier communications over the HCRAN and remains as an open issue since the latency performance can be negatively affected by unreliable communication.

Additionally, [76] introduced a dynamic stochastic resource op- timization model to obtain a tradeoff between energy efficiency and queue latency limitation. The approach utilized a simple Lyapunov optimization strategy based on local information at the transmitter. This method addressed the issues of energy efficiency optimization, power consumption of RRHs, and interference lim- itations to achieve near-optimal system stability by minimizing traffic congestion using a weighted minimal mean square er- ror (WMMSE) technique. Thus, yielding a balance between time averaged energy efficiency and queue backlogs.

Interference control is intended to be more efficient in HCRANs compared to a typical HetNets since the centralized operation of CRAN allows collaborative signal processing across the networks and supports coordination between BSs. Moreover, controlling interference in HCRANs may be challenging due to the exten- sive heterogeneity of BSs, network size, and fronthaul/backhaul limitations. As a result, a number of studies have been car- ried out to address the HCRAN interference problem. In [77], an interference-conscious user association strategy based on cell sleeping approach was investigated such that a cloud computing unit was used to manage the operation status of the BSs. A sub- optimal user association problem was introduced to optimize the aggregate user utility as such, a distributed heuristic algorithm was presented as a solution to the problem.

