Agriculture automation is the main concern and emerging subject for every country. The world population is in- creasing at a very fast rate and with increase in population the need for food increases briskly. Traditional methods used by farmers aren't sufficient enough to serve the increasing demand and so they have to hamper the soil by using harmful pesticides in an intensified manner. This affects the agricultural practice a lot and in the end the land remains barren with no fertility. This paper talks about different automation practices like IOT, Wireless Communications, Machine learning and Artificial Intelligence, Deep learning. There are some areas which are causing the problems to agriculture field like crop diseases, lack of storage management, pesti- cide control, weed management, lack of irrigation and water management and all this problems can be solved by above mentioned different techniques. Today, there is an urgent need to decipher the issues like use of harm- ful pesticides, controlled irrigation, control on pollution and effects of environment in agricultural practice. Auto- mation of farming practices has proved to increase the gain from the soil and also has strengthened the soil fertility. This paper surveys the work of many researchers to get a brief overview about the current implementa- tion of automation in agriculture. The paper also discusses a proposed system which can be implemented in bo- tanical farm for flower and leaf identification and watering using IOT.

With the advent of technology in this digital world, we humans have pushed our limit of the thinking process and are trying to coalesce nor- mal brain with an artificial one. This continuing exploration gave birth to a whole new field Artificial intelligence. It is the process by which a human can make an intelligent machine. AI comes under the domain area of computer science which can be able to discern its milieu and should thrive to maximize the rate of success. AI should be able to do work based on past learning. Deep learning, CNN, ANN, Machine learn- ing are certain domains which enhances the machine work and helps to develop a more advance technology.

Among all of these, the most widely used and constantly applied method for research purposes is ANN. Our human brain is the most com- plex part of the body. Based on the inter linked neural networks, electric signals traverses through the neurons with the help of axons. Synapses which are at the end of each node passes the signal ahead. ANN method was invented by keeping in mind the same concept of the working of the human brain. There are various algorithms of this approach such as for training this particular model algorithms like Silva and Almeida's algo- rithm, Delta-bar-delta, Rprop, The Dynamic Adaption algorithm, Quickprop are used based on its application. 9 neurons are used in the process. ANN is a task- based method which tells the system to operate based on some inbuilt task rather than a conventional computational programmed task. The architecture of ANN consists of three layers:

This paper encompasses the links which make embedded systems and AI coherent with the agriculture sector. Implementation of AI and expert systems in agriculture is a narrowly defined subject. This topic was discussed by McKinion and Lemmon (1985). Agriculture is the es- sential part of any country. At present South Korea, China, North America are investing trillions of money for development in the agricul- ture sector and implementing more advance technologies. The popula- tion is increasing at a very high rate which is directly related to the

increase in the demand for food. India is a rich source for food crops and especially for species. The agriculture sector is one of the most sensitive sectors of the Indian economy, supporting all other sectors and spread- ing its importance in far- reaching areas. With the advent of technology in other industries, it is a very crucial point to implement automation in agriculture.

The pressure on the agriculture sector will increase with the con- tinuing expansion of the human population and so agri-technology and precision farming have gained much importance in today's world. This are also termed as digital agriculture which means the use of hi- tech computer systems to calculate different parameters such as weed detection, crop prediction, yield detection, crop quality and many more machine learning techniques (Liakos et al., 2018). This paper dis- cusses about the different applications of ANN, ML, and IOT in agricul- ture and many models which helps in precision farming.

Artificial Intelligence and Machine learning has penetrated each and every category mentioned above. Bannerjee et al. (2018) segregated ad- vancements in AI category wise and gave a brief overview on various AI techniques. Computers and technology started penetrating in this sec- tor from 1983 onwards. Since then, there have been many suggestions and proposed systems for betterment in agriculture from the database to decision making process. Filtering out every process, only AI based systems have proved to be the most feasible and reliable one. The AI- based method does not generalize the problem and gives a particular solution to a particular defined complex problem. The literature survey covers major breakthroughs in the domain of agriculture from early

1980s to 2018. The paper discusses more than fifty advancement in technologies in the sub domain of agriculture. First it discusses penetra- tion of Artificial neural networks and expert systems to solve above mentioned problems, then machine learning and fuzzy logic system. Lastly it covers automation and IOT in the agriculture.

Artificial neural networks have been incorporated in the agriculture sector many times due to its advantages over traditional systems. The main benefit of neural networks is they can predict and forecast on the base of parallel reasoning. Instead of thoroughly programming, neu- ral networks can be trained. Gliever and Slaughter (2001) used ANN to differentiate weeds from the crops. Maier and Dandy (2000) used neu- ral networks for forecasting water resources variables.

Within the span of three years, two expert systems had been devel- oped to increase the production of cotton crop. First, COMAX. In 1986, Lemmon made a successful attempt in developing an expert system called Comax (COtton Management eXpert). Lemmon, being the pio- neer in AI in agriculture sector, develped a program called Gossym which is microcomputer friendly and bolster the use of Comax (Lemmon, 1986). For the first ever, the expert system (Comax) was suc- cessfully integrated with a computer model (Gossym) and simulated for the growth of cotton crops. This expert system was developed in order

Batchelor et al. (1989) discusses about the soyabean crop growth model which is defined as SMARTSOY in the paper and the model is called SOYGRO. The model is explained by knowledge based approach where it is divided into two approaches first being the positivistic ap- proach stating the attempts to duplicate the processes of domain ex- perts in order to come to a conclusion while the second approach being the normative approach which attempts to duplicate the conclu- sions excluding the processes of the domain experts. The damages caused by insects are determined by systematic method for determining the damage rates and the cost control. Here, the positivistic and norma- tive approach collapses because the later method helps it the selection of insecticide and application rate. However, the systematic method does not help to find the insect damage rate on yield. This is a major drawback for generating recommendation because we need to mix both the approach as the yield reduction is calculated by previous expe- riences of the similar insect attack, pesticides used and the outcomes of the crops in the end. The goal to generate recommendation specifically for soyabean crop is based on calculation of the damage rate and the cost to treat the plant and gain the yield. This calculation is derived by both the approaches.

An expert system PRITHVI based on fuzzy logic was developed in Ra- jasthan, India by Prakash et al. (2013). The system was designed explic- itly for Soybeans crop. This system gathered its knowledge base from agricultural officers, published literature, and experts of soybean crops. Fuzzy logic was considered in studying the whole system and ad- vising the farmer as an expert. PRITHVI was divided into five modules. The main aim of developing this expert system was to help the farmers in the region increase their soybean production. The system used MATLAB as a user interface module.

Evapotranspiration process is imperative for maintaining the stabil- ity in the hydrologic cycle, sustainable irrigation method, and water management. Parameters- Elevation, Mean daily Temperature, Max. daily temperature, Min. daily temperature, Wind Speed, Relatuve Hu- midity, Sunshine Hours, Daylight hours, Latitude, Condition coefficient. There are more than 20 established method to determine ET which is dependent on several parameters.

Furthermore, also a method was created to discriminate weed from crops with the help of image analysis and neural networks. It had the ac- curacy of more than 75% without any beforehand plant information fed into the system. (Aitkenhead et al., 2003). Shahzadi et al. (2016) devel- oped expert systems based smart agriculture system. The concept of IoT in this system was to send the data to the server so that actuators of the field should be able to take appropriate decisions. For that, the server should be intelligent enough to take decisions independently. This sys- tem consists of temperature, humidity, leaf wetness, and soil sensors. It only gives the information about the field and doesn't act on the irriga- tion process.

Arif et al. (2012) developed two ANN models to estimate soil mois- ture in Paddy fields using decidedly less meteorological data. Both these models were then corroborated and validated by studying ob- served and estimated soil moisture values. The first ANN model was generated to get the estimate ET. The help of minimum, average, and the maximum air temperature was taken. To develop the second model, solar radiation, precipitation, and air temperature data was gath- ered. Both these models resulted in the accurate and reliable estimation of soil moisture in the paddy fields by using the least meteorological data, less labor and time consumption.

Hinnell et al. (2010) discuss the neuro drip irrigation systems where ANNs were developed to predict the spatial water distribution in the subsurface. For drip irrigation method to properly function, water distri- bution in the lower level of the soil is of the grave importance. Here, ANNs makes the prediction which comes handy for the user which in turn results in the fast decision-making process. ANN models give the result of wetting patterns (first and second) after the soil is infiltrated with the water from the emitter which is on the surface of the land. Thus, the ANN model provides continuous patterns to the user. Also,

researchers developed a model to study the yield of the maize crop. A multi-layered feedforward ANN (MLFANN) is used. To fuel such net- work, learning algorithms like GDA (gradient descent algorithms) and CGDA (Conjugate gradient descent algorithm) are employed. Both the algorithms have been written and simulated in the MATLAB using nueral network toolbox (Singh and Prajneshu, 2008).

Precision agriculture and WSN applications combine an exciting new area of research that will greatly improve quality in agricultural production, precision irrigation and will have dramatic reduction in cost needed. Furthermore, the ease of deployment and system mainte- nance, monitoring opens the way for the acceptation of WSN systems in precision agriculture. Using the proposed methodology, in finding the optimal sensor topology, we contrive to lower implementation cost and thus make WSN a more appealing solution for all kinds of fields and cultivations. (Keshtgari and Deljoo, 2012).

It is imperative for any sector to evolve with time. The agriculture sector had to adapt the breakthroughs and inventions which came along in automation field. Yong et al. (2018) came forward with emerg- ing research area of embedded intelligence (EI). Embedded intelligence in agriculture sector includes smart farming, smart crop management, smart irrigation and smart greenhouses. It is necessary for a nation to in- clude these growing technologies in agriculture sector for growth of a

the soil with water. However, site- specific use of automatic irrigation system took birth in the early 21st century; this method proved to be a significant success as it reduced the cost, feasibility, and complexity of the developed system. Furthermore, the unit can be set up which transports the fertilizers and pesticides in the field using the same method. For that, new kind of sensors would have to calibrate for trans- mitting accurate information. (Dursun and Ozden, 2011).

Research has been conducted to test the ET based, ICT based, and IIS based technology. In Riyadh, a research was conducted in Wheat and Tomato field in which both sprinkler and drip irrigation method were employed and tested with ICT as well as IIS. A graph of water depth ver- sus growth period of the crop (weekly) was plotted for all three methods. A concise observation concluded that IIS was far more feasible in a matter of water usage than ICT and ET based system. It skyrocketed the frugality of water usage from 18% to a whopping 27%. (Al-Ghobari and Mohammad, 2011).

To improve efficiency, productivity, global market and to reduce human intervention, time and cost there is a need to divert towards new technology named Internet of Things. IoT is the network of devices to transfer the information without human involvement. Hence, to gain high productivity, IoT works in synergy with agriculture to obtain smart farming. Malavade and Akulwar (2016) focused on role of IoT in agricul- ture that leads to smart framing (Malavade and Akulwar, 2016).

802.15.1 PAN/Bluetooth, IEEE 802.15.4 ZigBee and many more are nec- essary to know while planning its application. Researchers also discussed about IPV6 the Internet Protocol for wireless communication and also many hardware system for establishing a WSN. By using WSN, Precision farming is possible and the strategy is used for crop manage- ment. Different data is recorded by the sensors and stored in the system. The system is made to learn by the previous data from the sensors and future actions are taken accordingly (Shiravale and Bhagat, 2014).

The highlighting features of the paper presented by Gondchawar and Kawitkar (2016) includes smart GPS based remote controlled robot to perform tasks like; weeding, spraying, moisture sensing, bird and animal scaring, keeping vigilance, etc. Secondly, it includes smart ir- rigation with smart control based on real time field data. Thirdly, smart warehouse management which includes; temperature maintenance, humidity maintenance and theft detection in the warehouse. Control- ling of all these operations will be through any remote smart device or computer connected to Internet and the operations will be performed by interfacing sensors, Wi-Fi or ZigBee modules, camera and actuators with micro-controller and raspberry pi.

R-CNN extensively used in object detection and in automation it is used for fruit detection and counting of fruits. Bargoti and Underwood (2017) discusses the use of R-CNN in fruit detection of orchards, while training the input to the network is 3 channel colour image (BGR) of ar- bitrary size. They have used VGG16 NET with 13 convolutional network and also ZF network which has 5 convolutional layers. Data augmenta- tion is used because it helps in artificially enlarging the dataset and changing the variability of the training data. The results discussed by them are promising as for both mangoes and apples Faster R-CNN outperformed the ZF network approach. (R-CNN stands for regional convolutional neural network).

its web portal. DSAS as different stages where the it can interconnect many devices on the single time and give the real time data to the farmer. The farmer plays the vital role as he can monitor the real time data and also control all the machine through software's. Systems like spray controller will spray the pesticide on the field in a defined amount. Similarly, irrigation controller helps to manage irrigation and fertilizer controller manages fertilizer. DSAS works through the data given by different sensors like soil moisture sensor, nitrogen sensor, etc. (Tan, 2016).

Kumar (2014) used fertility and pH meter to take out the percentage of ingredients of the soil and developed wireless sensor based drip irri- gation system. Ingale and Kasat (2012) used IC 89c52 microcontroller to build a smart irrigation system. The prototype supplies water only when humidity and moisture drops below a standard decided value hence it conserves water to a certain extent. A semi-automatic irrigation system was developed and tested on the field of Okra crops (Abelmoschus esculentus). The system used four moisture sensors and PIC16F877A processor was used. The valves in the system turns ON only when there is a voltage drop across any two sensors in the filed drops below a fixed value and remains ON until the value comes to the decided threshold value. (Soorya et al., 2013).

Sicat et al. (2005) developed an FK-based fuzzy model to decide the land suitability. Various fuzzy sets were generated using farmer's as well as scientific knowledge congruently. The sets used S-membership func- tions and were used to determine soil texture, slope, and colour. The re- search work was done in several villages of Nizamabad district of Andhra Pradesh state of India. In FK-based fuzzy factor maps, it is not necessary to take the lower and upper limits 0 and 1 respectively. This is because in knowledge-driven fuzzy modeling there is no constraint on choosing the membership functions as long as the functions are in context of the factor which has to be modeled (in this case FK-based model).

There is a major problem of water wastage and a dearth of water in conventional irrigation methods employed. To give an example, Egypt faces a problem of water distribution from the Nile river with neighbor- ing countries. Ample research had been carried out to solve the prob- lems faced in the irrigation, process. Many companies have developed a sensor-based smart irrigation system. These systems have been devel- oped for optimal water usage, monitoring of water pollution, and to take care of some other grave problems. Soil moisture and temperature sen- sors interact directly with embedded components in the field and take

Need of automation in the agriculture sector is must and there are many ways it can be implemented in practice. Irrigation is the foremost thing where automation is necessitate for optimal water usage. Soil moisture sensor helps to monitor the moisture level of the soil and starts watering the farm as the value get below the threshold level set by the farmer. The embedded system and Internet of Things help to de- velop a compact system which monitors the water level of the farm without human interaction.

This system is necessary in the agricultural sector as every plant has some particular need of environment. A fixed amount of water at regu- lar time and favourable environmental gases around helps the plant to grow perfectly healthy. By classification through deep learning it be- comes easy for the farmers or botanist to grow plant, as by identification of plant and its favourable conditions, farmers and botanist can provide such environment and proper irrigation.

Agriculture monitoring is the much necessitate reducing human in- terventions in practice. Day by day demand for food is reaching its high peak and the without execution of the modern methods in agriculture it is very hard to achieve the increasing demand. Agriculture monitoring is the prime concern as it helps to reduce labour and increase the produc- tion. Artificial Intelligence has been implemented in crop selection and to help the farmer in the selection of the fertilizers. With the help of

All the authors make a substantial contribution to this manuscript. KJ, AD and PP participated in drafting the manuscript. KJ and AD wrote the main manuscript; all the authors discussed the results and implica- tion on the manuscript at all stages.

