The agriculture sector is no exception to the widespread usage of deep learning tools and techniques. In this paper, an automated detection method on the basis of pre-trained Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) models is proposed to identify and classify paddy crop biotic stresses from the field images. The proposed work also pro- vides the empirical comparison among the leading CNN models with transfer learning from the ImageNet weights namely, Inception-V3, VGG-16, ResNet-50, DenseNet-121 and MobileNet-28. Brown spot, hispa, and leaf blast, three of the most common and destructive paddy crop biotic stresses that occur during the flowering and ripening growth stages are considered for the experimentation. The experimental results reveal that the ResNet-50 model achieves the highest average paddy crop stress classification accuracy of 92.61% outperforming the other considered CNN models. The study explores the feasibility of CNN models for the paddy crop stress identification as well as the applicability of automated methods to non-experts.

India is a rice-growing country with a wide range of rice varieties adapted to wide spectrum of agro-climatic conditions. As a result, the crop has become a host for a variety of biotic and abiotic stresses, all of which have a negative impact on crop productivity and survival. Realizing the economic losses caused by them, efforts have been made to comprehend the importance of integrated and automated paddy crop management for the timely intervention and mitigation of the stresses. Furthermore, experts and politicians are also concerned about improving paddy production and yield. The agricultural experts identify the stress categories by the visual inspection of individual paddy plant leaf which is subjective and tedious in nature. The paddy

In agriculture, emerging technologies such as Big Data, Machine Learning, and the Internet of Things have been widely used to improve all parts of rice production processes, ushering in a new era of smart farming. Significant gains in agricultural tasks have been noticed as a result of innovations in AI-based deep convolutional neural networks. Plant disease recognition, crop/weed separation, fruit grading, and land stat classification are just a few examples of agricultural applica- tions where CNNs achieve human-level accuracy. Several improve- ments have been made in the architecture of CNN with the gradual increase in the number of layers to make CNN scalable to multiclass problems. The most popular CNN models are GoogLeNet, AlexNet, Inception-V3, VGG-16, DenseNet-128, and ResNet-50. One of the appli- cations under consideration in this work is the processing of images of

The usefulness of pre-trained deep learning CNN models for constructing non-destructive and cost-effective systems to automate the identification and classification of rice crop diseases can be seen with a literature review. Using traditional image processing techniques, significant attempts have been made to automatically identify and clas- sify paddy crop diseases from individual leaf images (Huang et al., 2015; Mohan et al., 2016; Mohanty et al., 2016; Orillo et al., 2014; Pugoy and Mariano, 2011; Phadikar et al., 2012; Phadikar et al., 2013; Sethy et al., 2020). The literature survey reveals the potential of pre-trained deep learning CNN models in the recognition and classification of paddy

The effectiveness of contemporary transfer learning models such as Inception V3, VGGNet with 16 layers, ResNet with 50 layers, DenseNet with 121 layers and MobileNet with 28 layers in the classification of paddy crop biotic stresses on five paddy crop varieties is explored in the present work. Fine-tuning and evaluation of state-of-the-art deep convolutional neural network models are utilized to determine the best model. In the classification of four categories of paddy crop stresses, including the healthy crop category, the RestNet-50 model outperformed all other models with the highest average classification accuracy of 92.61% by learning over 26,840 images. The ResNet-50 and DenseNet-128 models have nearly identical classification results. How- ever, when training and testing times are taken into account, the ResNet-50 model is effective. Since the work considers a larger number of CNN models for the task of image-based paddy crop biotic stresses classification, the results are promising. But, work needs to be carried out as future research is in improving the computational time. In the present work, there is a scope for adding new stress categories as well as enhancement of existing dataset with significant number of stressed paddy crop images. The work can be empowered with the sensor

