[12] used approximate dynamic programming (ADP) to solve ambulance dispatching and relocation problem. The ADP model has reduced the response time in the city of Vienna, the capital of Austria to 12.89%. This improvement is due to the main source for improvement which are the dispatching and relocation deci- sions. Study [13] adapted maximum expected coverage location problem model to determine the strategic location for a mobile ambulance in Shah Alam Selangor. Study [14] successfully imple- mented maximal covering location problem using local Open- StreetMap geodata together with Dijkstra, Quick Hull and Greedy Adding algorithms to solve the ambulance location selection in Johor Bahru Malaysia. Very recently, [15] analysed relocation strategies of ambulances using Double Standard Model to ensure a fair comparison of their performance. The above review supports the assertion that ambulance location management is tantamount to operational research problems. According to [16], emergency management is often conceptualized as a complex multi- objective optimization problem where an emergency situation is solved with limited resources. Therefore, the ambulance location problem is indeed a problem where multiple qualitative resources need to be considered concurrently.

fuzzy sets (T1 FS). Most of the existing FSAW methods are built from linguistic terms based on T1 FS. In reality, some decision might not be given as an exact relative crisp scale. The linguistic interval scales are used instead. The authors decide to use interval type-2 fuzzy sets (IT2 FS) scale for expressing linguistic evaluation due to the fact that the IT2 FS provides more flexibility to present uncertainties than T1 FS. Furthermore, IT2 FS can be used as an indicator of uncertainty where the larger length of the interval may capture more room of uncertainty that happened during the process of information gathering from the decision makers [24].

tions are totally crisp thereby, it is weak in handling uncertainty. The limitation of T1 FS saw the preference order obtained using FSAW method is slightly inconsistent with the result obtained using the proposed method. As IT2 FSAW, the IT2-FTOPSIS also used the similar IT2 FS, but they differ in weight determination for each criterion. This might explain the small inconsistency in preference orders among the three methods.

Locating ambulance is one of the most important issues in the emergency management. Due to rapid growth of population, many researchers initiate work to identify the most strategic location in deploying ambulances, which in return, can benefit the residents. Hence, ambulance services are urged to seek and recognize the suit- able and strategic location for the benefit of people. At the same time, the services also may minimize the loss of precious life. A good ambulance location can guarantee the arrival of an ambulance to the emergency call scene within a defined time threshold. Because of time pressure, lack of experience and personality, experts often eval- uate the criteria and alternatives in the case of ambulance location using the linguistic variable. In this paper, we have proposed an interval type-2 fuzzy simple additive weighting to evaluate ambu-

(0.3896), represents slightly higher than other alternatives. There- fore, the A1 is the best ambulance location for deployment of an ambulance. The order of the rest alternatives is public clinic, parking lot, petrol station and highway. This preference order is obtained from the implementation of the proposed method with the linguistic data. It is better to have a comparable analysis as to check the

agreed on road networks as the most influential alternative in ambu- lance location selection. Perhaps a reliable validating mechanism, such as sensitivity analysis could be introduced to investigate the stability of the suggested method. The implementation of the sug- gested method to other real applications is still open for further investigation.

