A differential evolutionary algorithm (DE) is proposed to implement the minimum zone evaluation of flatness errors. It is a heuristic evolutionary algorithm based on population optimization. Compared with other methods, it is efficient and robust. Then, the objective function calculation approaches of planar error are developed, which directly originate from the definition of minimum zone solution and conform to the ISO standard. Finally, the experimental results evaluated by different methods confirm the effectiveness of the proposed DE. Compared to conventional evaluation methods, it has the advantages of algorithm simplicity and good flexibility.

Y14.5 [1] specifies that the form tolerances on a component must be evaluated with reference to an ideal geometric feature, ISO Standards [2] recommends the form tolerance being evaluated based on the concept of minimum zone. As for the flatness tolerance, it can be defined as the least possible value of the normal distance between two parallel planes that enclose all measurement points.

One of the most widely used techniques for geometric error evaluation is the least squares method (LSM) and. It is easy for implementation, efficient in computation, and commonly used in coordinate measuring machines (CMMs). However, the LSM does not guarantee the minimum zone solution specified in the ISO standard and can result in overestimation of form tolerances and the rejection of good parts.

G ,towards the global optimum. NP does not change during them initialization process. The initial vector populationis chosen randomly and should cover the entire parameter space. As a rule, we will assume the initial population should better cover the entire search space as much as possible by uniformly randomizing

If the values of some parameters of a newly generated trial vector exceed the corresponding upper and lower bounds, we randomly and uniformly reinitialize them within the prespecified range. Then the objective function values of all trial vectors are evaluated. After that, a selection operation is performed. The objective

In this paper, an effective DE is presented to implement the flatness error evaluation of minimum zone method. The objective function mathematical model of minimum zone method is formulated and the initial population generated methods is given. Compared with conventional evaluation methods, the proposed algorithm has the advantages of algorithm simplicity and good flexibility. The typical practical examples are representative in industrial application and their results verified that the proposed method could search the optimal solution efficiently. And it is well suited for form error evaluation in CMMs.

