The traditional data fitting method based on least square method is not good for vector data fitting whose independent variable is random. So this paper proposes a new criterion of data fitting which is the least quadratic sum of geometrical distance, and brings forward the new fitting scattered data method based on the new criterion. At the same time the paper puts forward the optimization algorithm for the solution of the data fitting parameter. Simulation experiments show that the fitting precision of the new method is higher than the one of least square method for data fitting of vector, whose independent variable is random.

workers carry on much research work on the least square fitting method and obtain fruitful efforts. For example, Principal Component Regression (PCR), Partial Least Squares (PLS), all kinds of Non-Linear Principal Component Regression (NLPCR), all kinds of Non-Linear Partial Least Squares (NLPLS), Neural Network method and the syntheses of these methods ect., which used in actual quite many in present project[4- 9]. In this article, we do not use the method which is mentioned by the above literature when carry on scatter- point fitting, instead of using the minimum of geometrical distance sum of squares as new fitting standard, we propose a new data fitting method based on the new standard. In the method, including model transform, turns fitting parameter solution into "constrained optimization problem", and provides the fitting parameter solution algorithm. The simulation experiment indicated that, the fitting parameter solution algorithm is feasible and effective; in the data fitting which independent variable is the random variable vector data, we can get a higher fitting precision by using the new data fitting method instead of least square method.

The authors would like to thank the editors and the anonymous reviewers for their valuable comments and constructive suggestions. This research is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 61272077, 61202319), the Natural Science Foundation of Jiangxi Province(No. 20114BAB201034) and the Scientific and Technological Project of Jiangxi Province(No. 20133BBE50022).

