corresponding to poor receiving conditions. In addition, the model turns out to be robust to the reduction of image resolution. Its performance is also measured and compared with an alternative Support Vector Machines (SVM) technique. The results show the undeniable superiority of the proposed CNN algorithm over the SVM benchmark.

Raw and complete information from the GNSS correlator out- puts are synthesized in 2D-images. The correlation delay and Doppler shift ranges are selected in order to capture complete multipath information. This is a novel approach in comparison to standard multipath mitigation techniques that are using only one dimensional delay correlation information.

The proposed framework covers the generation of image data, the choice of the CNN architecture, its training as well as its validation. Experiments are fully reproducible. To the best of our knowledge such complete workbench is unique in the research community.

In general, a receiver is impacted by multiple multipaths, especially in urban environments where reflectors are numerous. Sometimes, the direct path may even be absent due to an obstruction, for example when high buildings are surrounding the receiver [18]. However, in this study the assumption is made that the direct path is always present and a single multipath will be considered.

A high end GNSS antenna has been connected to the receiver. The antenna was set up in a clear view site to avoid multipath contamination. Moreover, only signals from high elevation satel- lites were considered afterwards so that the collected samples could be considered as multipath free. The recording was carried out on Friday the 14th of February 2000 from 08:05 UTC.

The considered model integrates I and Q signals, I and Q multipath and correlated receiver noise. If a multipath signal is received in addition to the main signal, as the signal processing chain is linear, the correlator output can then be considered as the sum of the correlator output of the main signal and the one due to the multipath. In this work, a single multipath contamination is considered. Its contribution

Convolutional neural networks [20] are nowadays considered as among the most powerful tools to learn information from images. This is explained by their computational efficiency and their impressive performance on image information processing. Their learning capabil- ity comes from their ability to automatically construct and combine abstract features from an image. The first layers of the network are composed of convolutional layers. Such layers apply several filters over the various regions of the input image and create feature maps that are various versions of the filtered input image. Several convolutional layers are usually stacked in order to progressively extract meaningful information from the feature maps as the depth of the network is increased. The last layers of the CNN perform the task of classification usually through several layers of neurons with dense connectivity. The weights of each convolution layer filters (also called kernels) and those of the dense layers are learned through supervised learning based on gradient back-propagation. The underlying structure of convolutional layers has the advantage of having sparse connectivity and high weight sharing among neurons, which leads to much greater computational efficiency over fully connected neural networks when image sizes are large or the image resolutions are high.

The above principles are at the heart of CNN architectures. Several additional components are usually integrated in the network. Some Pooling layers are used in order to reduce the dimension of feature maps. A Flatten layer is added in front of the stack of dense layers so as to transform feature map information in vector-like input. To increase the generalization power of the network, a dropout mechanism can also be used to artificially and randomly remove a small portion of the neuron connection within the network. The number and the organization of these various components generate several possible CNN architectures [21].

Among CNN architectures that have proven to be effective in prac- tice [22], the VGG-like architecture has been shown to be one of the best choice for image feature extraction [23]. Despite its number of parameters to be trained compared to other popular and more complex architectures such as Inception V3 [24], ResNet [25] and other variants, it has been widely adopted in practice by the ML community. The architecture is composed of several blocks of convolutional layers that are each separated by a pooling layer that decreases the feature map dimension between blocks. As the depth increases, the dimension of layer input decreases but the number of filters increases. When data are organized on a multi-scale basis, mixing macro and micro patterns, the number of convolutional blocks should be chosen sufficiently large. For the GNSS multipath application, such multi-scale representation is not expected in the signal. This is the reason why the chosen architecture only includes one convolutional block composed of two convolutional layers. It is therefore a very simple instance of a VGG-like network.

In addition, there is also the possibility to build a class-discriminative localization map that will highlight the regions of the input image that are most important for the trained CNN to assign a specific class to the image. Several methods have been proposed along this line [27,28]. The GradCAM method [28], that will be used later in this study, is often used for such purpose as it is applicable to most standard CNN architectures. The main idea is to compute the gradients of the score

