[15] intended to outline activities in judging the satisfaction of help- less people with teleconsultation, like e-Health assistance provided by healthcare professionals in their areas. As a result, we added studies of teleconsultation-based services extended to low-income and clinically susceptible people worldwide. It emphasizes COVID-19 monitoring, treatment, and prevention as well as enhances/delivers services and offers treatment from a human rights viewpoint.

found that distributed EHR has some advantages over centralized EHR. However, the people of urban areas are only familiar with the central e-Health system. Furthermore, the absence of a backup plan is another trouble for centralized EHR. The study aims to develop an interoperable distributed system integrated EHR where data is made flexible by loose coupling to overcome these difficulties. The data recovery, MPI, is also included in the proposed framework.

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, a literature related to the problem domain is described and reviewed. Section 3 describes the system architecture and development phases. The experimental results and the evaluation of this study are discussed in Section 4. Section 5 presents the conclusion.

The idea behind this study comes from the analysis of the re- cent works related to e-Health systems. The literature helps us to find out the different approaches on the e-Health frameworks and guides an advanced approach to overcome the current health care challenges. In the treatment of chronic disease, an ICT-based method was developed, which has a number of foreseeable future trends and scenarios in e-Health [26]. A study on telehealth and e-Health found the cost-effectiveness of telehealth and e-Health services for primary care patients [27]. There is a tremendous improvement in e-Health services and people are evolving with the innovative technologies of health [10]. Depends on the availability of smart devices and systems, health management and treatment have changed drastically [28].

This study reviewed various methods and technologies related to the distributed EHR systems, and investigated their findings, outcomes, and limitations. Some of them are centralized and some of them are decentralized or distributed. Some of the potential solutions and related technologies are described in the following sub-sections.

Two login modules, one for the client and another for the local doctor, have been developed in the system; the client module will act as the remote health care center for the rural patients with the neces- sary components. Rural patients will come to the remote health care service center or a pharmacy for e-Health service. The administrator in pharmacy will input the patient history to the health system. In order to connect the service center with electronic health system for patient registration and service delivery, we have followed the following steps to implement this module:

In such digitized era e-Health systems have great importance in developing countries. So it is clear that developed interoperable dis- tributed e-Health system plays a significant role in the health care of developing countries. This section presents the current health care chal- lenges and how these challenges are addressed in-terms of advanced and sustainability.

The authorities and health care organizations tend to be developed a distributed e-Health system to enhance public well-being and improved healthcare outcomes with lower costs. Distributed e-Health, or the use of ICT tools in the healthcare system, recommend benefits in world- wide health care, such as remote interactions with patients, fast access to medical care specialists, and remote monitoring skills. As technolog- ical advancements compete effectively into the third world, e-Health and medical information technology is anticipated to rise rapidly in developing countries.

The experimental results of the developed system emphasize the presence of many challenges. The shift from hospital based health care services to electronic health care services needs organizational, cultural, and technical changes and supports. An incomplete health standard also gives us trouble to develop a complete health care sys- tem. Without greater knowledge rural doctors, patients, and health professionals cannot cope up with this system.

