Agricultural products are used to cater the dietary needs of animals as well as human beings. Agriculture has been a part of everyone's life directly or indirectly. It is the way of crop production which results in providing food, the building block of every human being. Whether a human resides in a metro city or lives in a village everyone survives on this crop production one or the other way. With the advent of civili- zation humans have started cultivating crops like wheat, cotton and others. With the development in every area of life there has been some vast development in the domain of agriculture also. Along with the variation in the types of crops being grown other activities were also started such as farming, raising cattle etc.

Crop production involves taking care of all the activities for the better yield across all the seasons. It involves complete analysis of the soil being used, the type of seeds used, the major nutrient re- quirement of the particular crop and many others. Yields obtained from the crops, and other sources are being used to meet the daily needs of not only the farmers, but for others also. But as every field suffers from some form of issues agriculture or crop production also faces major challenge in the form of crop diseases. With the huge demand of food around the world, it becomes necessary to focus on the crop production. It is aimed to protect the overall yield from any type of loss before reaching to the market. Besides ca- lamities caused by nature such as draught, earthquakes, diseases also accounts to major crop yield losses.

In context of quality or in the context of quality, yields are re- duced due to various types of plant diseases. Plant disease can be de- scribed as some form of modification that hampers the normal processes in it. Crop production can be majorly affected by these dis- eases which may reduce the quality and quantity of the overall pro- duced yield. Management of large amount of crop yield involves various timely activities such as keeping a watch for diseases, which reduces it to undesirable stuff. It also involves finding imme- diate cure for various challenges faced. Disease can affect the overall functional capacity of the plant. It may result in reduced growth, less fruit production, more leaf falls and many other ailments also. Some- times the disease may spread from crop to crop or may be spread by some pathogen or other means. Sometimes they may be caused by some fungi or some bacteria. Sometimes even viruses get transferred with seeds from one place to another.

From a long time, identifying the crop disease is done by the experts through their naked eyes based on their knowledge and experience. Find an expert and contact them is not only a tedious and time consum- ing task but also a very long and expensive method. Therefore, the com- plete process sometimes takes so much time which become time taking for the disease to be eradicated and also very tedious in case of large areas (Liu et al., 2020), (Mishra et al. (2020)).

Modern techniques available, for plant disease detection, like pro- cessing, similarity identification and deep learning based classification techniques better in respect of time saving than the old methods used (Nagaraju and Chawla, 2020), (Nagasubramanian et al., 2019), (Kulkarni and Ashwin Patil, 2012), (Jasim and Tuwaijari, 2020), (Sun et al., 2020). They help farmers to improve the quality of crops, also bringing a reduction of disease occurrence by early detection and timely curing them (Sinha and Shekhawat, 2020).

In the process of detection of disease, number of imaging techniques is being used. One of the imaging techniques being used id photo acous- tic imaging, which makes the use of light absorption in case of tissues. It makes the use of property of light's absorption by tissues and its conver- sion into heat further resulting in the generation of photo acoustic sig- nals. Here the pressure distribution radiated by tissues further being mapped and used for imaging purposes. Considering various imaging techniques one of the important techniques is magnetic resonance im- aging. It can be described as imaging technique that gives detailed im- ages that are mostly used for knowing different types of diseases. In this method strong magnets are being deployed generating strong mag- netic field resulting in proper alignment of the protons. Later application of electric field makes the movement in these protons. Finally turning off of the rf filed sensors help in the detection of energy being released from movement.

Among the various spectroscopies one of the recent methods is of fluorescence spectroscopy. It makes the use of fluorescence measure- ment, being released after the excitation of light with area of interest. Mostly for vegetative studies or plant disease detection laser induced fluorescence are often used on a large scale. These are mostly needed for identification of various physiological states of different plants. Ma- jorly the green leaves are being tested for chlorophyll fluorescence or blue green fluorescence. These help in early identification of any type of impairment resulting from major nutrients deficiencies. (Sankaran et al., 2010).

Among the recent techniques being used one of the effective imag- ing methodology is using hyper spectral imaging. In this technique elec- tromagnetic spectrum of an image's pixel is being used for the detection of plant disease present. In this technique wide spectrum of light is being used for the analysis of each image's pixel. It helps in the detection of various diseases in more reasonable manner among the variety of plants being considered. Hyper spectral imaging is further extended when used with microscopy for higher resolution clear images. It helps in microscopic studies at the genotypic level of varied plant leaves. (Rumf et al., 2010).

Digital Image Analysis has evolved over many years. It firstly began with the era of 2D image analysis came. Secondly, knowledge based ap- proaches using MRI and CT changed the developmental procedures. Lastly, analysis of fully 3D images was brought to the light. Digital

For identification of different plant disease, sensors for imaging sys- tem are deployed to accumulate the data for study of leaves from differ- ent aspect. Various useful imaging techniques include thermal imaging, multispectral imaging, fluorescence imaging, hyper spectral imaging, visible imaging, MRT. Also 3D imaging methods are also tested along various other methods. In next sections we present a state of survey on these techniques along with their applications in different ways.

Photo acoustic imaging is a technique that has been derived using hybrid biomedical imaging that is originated around the photo acoustic effect. It involves the amalgamation of different benefits such as optical absorption contrast along ultrasonic spatial resolution involved in deep imaging of diffusive and other regime. The studies bring the fact that photo acoustic imaging can be used for various purposes such as tumor analyzing, mapping of the level of blood oxygen, imaging of the brain activity, and other disease detection, etc.

One of the most common applications of it is breast imaging. Usually one of the three approaches are being used commonly, the tele- ther- mography, the dynamic angio-thermography and the contact thermog- raphy type. The imaging thermographic digital methods involve the advantage of the principle derived from metabolic activity. Also vascular circulation with the area surrounding a developing breast cancer is studied to detect the higher value.

The paper compares the technologies like imaging technologies using spectroscopy along profiling based techniques used to asset in looking the usual health and disease in leaves. The advantage of using these technologies is that they are accurate in detecting pant disease. The challenges which are faced in these techniques is to find the opti- mize solution for a definite disease of plant and also automating the techniques for continuous checking of the plant disease. (Sankaran et al., 2010).

Major oil content makes peanut an important agricultural product. This paper (EwisOmran, 2016) presents a method for early identifica- tion of plant disease. It basically focuses on the study of effect of fungal disease as leaf spots in peanut plant leaves. Early and late leaf indices were identified with the help of in situ spectroscopy. It further involved thermal and spectral calculations for differentiating healthy and in- fected plant leaves. Later plant chlorophyll decrease is also being identi- fied as a stress detection factor among the infected leaves.

This paper (Federico Martinelli et al., 2015) describes modern method of identification of disease in plants based on nucleic acid and protein analysis. This paper describes different mobility spectrometer and lateral flow devices which will detect early infections directly on fluid. It also summarizes that remote sensing technologies coupled with spectroscopy based methods results in high spatialization and hence help in early identification of any infections in plants. The paper discusses all these tools and how they are helpful in looking for different plant disease and also nucleic acid based methods and serological methods.

Hyper-spectral imaging makes the use of much traditional imaging technique along with the spectroscopy to aggregate different spectral information simultaneously. The objective of this technique is to find the spectrum for involved pixel contributing to the image being consid- ered. In Hyper spectral imaging device is deployed for a wavelength dis- persion and also a transportation stage are present in addition different from the traditional computer vision system. (Li et al., 2017) (Rumf et al., 2010).

In plants stresses can be classified as biotic and non-biotic where bi- otic are being induced by beings as viruses, fungi and others. In paper (Baranowski et al., 2015) hyper spectral imaging and the thermal imag- ing identifies plant stress due to fungi in oilseed rape. Initially the ther- mal images of oilseed rape were being analyzed for temperature distributions. Also hyper spectral images were also recorded. Further distributions temperatures were compared using kernel density curves. Spectral analysis of the leaves with different reflectance was again analyzed.

Images were acquired over large scale olive orchid. Various vegeta- tion indices as optimized soil adjusted vegetation indices were taken into account while modeling for this study. Correlation coefficient for completer canopy was also used for determining the level of disease spread. Later SVM classification was done for the bifurcating levels of disease. Almond production depends on major environmental factors as climate, sites, resistance to diseases and others.

The paper (Cao et al., 2015a) demonstrated that for wheat powdery mildew detection, canopy hyperspectral reflectance can be used while analyzing the unhealthy symptoms. It being observed that wheat culti- vators responded more sensitively to canopy reflectance in which wheat cultivars were more susceptible to powdery mildew. The chal- lenge faced here included discriminating the wheat powdery mildew

from other ailments. This paper (Kamlesh Golhani et al., 2018) discusses various techniques for the processing and detailing of the data used for hyper spectral analysis, giving special emphasis on detection of plant disease. This paper introduces NN techniques for the development of spectral disease index (SDI). Data being different from camera images, results in difficulty of linearity detection of hyperspectral image. The various challenged faced in NN are like detection of the diseases of three categories such as pre symptomatic and asymptomatic for a single plant.

The paper (Lowe et al., 2017) summarizes the techniques to detect different stress in plants and it focuses on hyperspectral imaging method to detect the early beginning of disease and to predict about the health of the plant. Various indices are increasing day by day and they are important to detect specific criteria for vegetation. For example, vegetation index can be used identify the normal health of the plant but the challenge is we cannot use the index set for one plant and use it for the data of another plant.

The paper (Mahlein et al., 2013) discusses development of different disease index (SDIs) for the identification of diseases in crop plants of sugar beet and the leaf diseases as leaf spot, sugar beet and others. At different stages of development, hyper spectral signatures were assessed for both healthy and diseased leaves. For differentiating be- tween diseased and healthy leaves, several optimized indices of disease were tested. The advantage of SDI is that SDI disease can be easily distin- guished which is difficult using vegetative indices. The challenge is to send the generated SDI and to specify its usability for disease monitor- ing on canopy with different sensors.

This paper (Mahlein et al., 2017) discusses hyperspectral imaging and data analysis routines to identify and quantify relevant plant dis- eases. Hyperspectral imaging can be helpful in giving new insight into data of different plant at different level. This paper (Moghadam et al., 2017) discuses imaging methods (VNIR and SWIR) along ml technolo- gies for the identification of TSWW, i.e. Tomato Spotted Wilt Virusin capsicum in plants.

capture images, a highly sensitive VIS-NIR camera is used the HS cube images with reduce motion blur. After the step of capturing of images another step is performed for enhancement of the quality of HS images. The paper (Okamoto et al., 2007) proposes to develop a weed detection method using hyperspectral imaging to control weed detection. According to the species, plants can be categorized as crops and weeds. Using hyper spectral imaging, first of all the

plants is segmented from the soil surface. Then image pixel of crop and weed are classified with the help of species other characteristics. Various classes of variables are generated which are then used for data compression, followed by the process of extraction of features and then on it linear discrimination is applied. Among other advan- tages one of the major advantages is that this classification method can be practically applied.

Paper (LauryChaerle et al., 2004) makes use of chlorophyll fluores- cence imaging and thermograph for knowing and comparison of infec- tion by fungus and viral infection in plant leaves. Here both the imaging techniques are used comparatively under different growth scenarios for pathogen plant interaction study. Firstly, the imaging of tobacco leaf is analyzed for the lesion presence resulting from TVM. Also the usage of salicylic acid application on tobacco leaves is further checked by color reflectance. Secondly beet root is again sprayed with Cercosporabeticola spore solution. Here the different response of different temperatures resulting in varied fluorescence effects is being characterized. This paper briefs about the combined usage of multiple types of imaging for plant and various pathogen combination for early symptoms detection.

Herppich, 2014a) presents the detection of head blight disease in wheat plants using chlorophyll fluorescence and also with hyper spectral im- aging. It signifies the ways in which hyper spectral imaging is being use- ful for higher information density extraction. In this paper the different imaging techniques are being further highlighted as better methods of early bight disease detection.

The paper (Bauriegel and Herppich, 2014b) discuss about how chlo- rophyll fluorescence and hyper spectral imaging, can help in identifying fusarium head blight in wheat both in laboratory and field. Also two methods hyperspectral imaging and CFI analysis are compared seeking their usage in detecting fusarium. The CFI methodology is helpful during the initial phase of inspection whereas hyperspectral imaging involves various wavelengths in image analysis and thus helps in meaningful monitoring of the disease. Hyperspectral imaging is effective while deal- ing with the visibility of infection symptoms. The challenges are that for any image based methodology on field recording of head blight will re- quire two passages over crop whether the imaging system are used sin- gle or being combined.

The paper (Moshou et al., 2005) discusses about combination of im- aging techniques using hyper spectral reflection with fluorescence for distinguishing yellow rust disease with wheat of the increasing disease, hence the paper discusses about the formation of a real time remote sensing system for disease detection. The images from hyper and multi spectral fluorescence reflection, are used to find the of disease present. It is found that fusing the measurements from the two methods gave discrimination of 94.5% by using QDA. The methodology used for date fusion is SOM (self-organizing map) NN. The advantage of using fu- sion of measurements from different optical sensors is that they identify

Several instruments and methods have been developed for thermal imaging of plant. The thermal imaging method is very useful for many different operations of agriculture before and after harvesting. For this site specific Crop management and precision farming, Thermal imaging is an important phenomenon where Plant, soil, and water relationship has been studied in detail by several researchers. (Vadivambal and Digvir, 2011).

In paper (Yang et al., 2019) a method has been described for fast de- termination of disease in tea leaves using a method making use of appli- cation of infrared thermal imaging technology. In paper (Xu et al., 2006) the comparison of different temperature distribution under the effect of virus strain-TMV on three species of tomato plant leaves are shown. Here thermal images are being used for the determination of changes in pathogen related proteins and salicylic acid in infected leaves and normal leaves. It is also highlighted how the transpiration is affected by pathogen infection.

This Paper (Raza et al., 2015a) focus on the involvement of thermal depth data with visible light image for automatic identification of dis- ease in tomato plant leaves. It shows the way of initial setup done for the acquisition of visual and thermal images. Here a technique for dis- parity detection has also been proposed.

This paper (Wang et al., 2013) gives a way of using digital infrared thermography for detection of the changes as water loss further affect- ing the temperature also. It also shows the importance of identification and prevention of fungal toxin for agricultural needs. In this paper the leaf temperature is observed under variant conditions. It also estimated stomata apertures by nail varnish method. Later on leaves with

Thermal imaging of plant leaves result in early identification of dis- ease thus reducing large agricultural losses. In paper (Raza et al., 2015b) an algorithm is proposed for the identification of disease in plants using silhouette registration through visible images. Initially the algorithm detects silhouette through visible light images. It also em- ploys stationary wavelet transform for thermal images for the same. It makes use of gradient-based method in this multi scale approach. This paper also shows that another method that can be further used for dif- ferent sample using silhouette presence while registering the images.

In 2D Imaging data is taken from two different dimensions which differentiate given some denominations of plants such as development, overall height, and yield estimation. Thus, the need of 3D imaging ap- pears as an essential for automatic plant diseases detection. There are various techniques for 3-D image acquisition (Bellmann et al., 2007) (Jarvis, 1983) (Blais, 2004) and 2-D together with 3-D machinery in

It can be described as one of the techniques that are beneficial where expert can give certain useful information about the seed region or a brief description about the region used to perform segmentation. Fur- ther an algorithm works fine for the refinement including the segmen- tation. There can be other methods also some including manual intervention for providing the different classes of the tissue using pixel information. Along with all lastly, feedback control principle is also being involved with segmentation, which adds to other benefits for the users such as flexibility, the automatic removal of issues.

Yan Cheng Zhang et al. (2007) brought one of the Selection methods to light, that makes use of fuzzy curves for the identification of presence of disease in cotton plant leaves. The given technique has been found to be better in terms of the speed of the execution. It yields a better classi- fication result without being affected by the local minima issues that are otherwise usually prominent in the nonlinear methods. Savita N Ghaiwat also gave a survey of the different types of the classification methods feasible for detection of various diseases in plant leaves (Ghaiwat and Arora, 2014).

Gurjar and Gulhane (2012) briefed about the regularization method. Here a technique has been discussed that involves the use of Eigen fea- tures. It has been highlighted how it is being better than some of the other techniques with respect to accuracy. For the identification of some of the disease caused by fungus such as red spot, it is able to work with an accuracy of 90%.

Revathi and Hemalatha (2012) have given disease identification method that makes use of detection of edges based on uniform Segmen- tation. One of the disease commonly found in cotton leaves such as Fusarium wilt gets easily identified using this technique. Other types of diseases as Root rot, Gray mildew, Leaf blight, Bacterial blight, Boll rot, and Leaf curl have also been detected through neural networks. Here application of this method beneficial in smart farming has also been discussed. Madhogaria et al. (2011) have given technique of

classification using individual information of each pixel for classifying diseases of plants. It has also shown use of svm. Tian et al. (2010) discussed a technique using different classifier such as support vector for the early detection of disease present in wheat plant. The disease de- tected here includes leaf blight and powdery mildew.

Sannakki et al. (2011) has given the detection of disease profoundly present in pomegranate leaves. The technique shown also helps in the identification of the specific detoriation stage of the disease discussed. Here the use of decision tree learning, fuzzy logic along with Bayesian network has been discussed.

Arivazhagan et al. (2013) discussed a technique involving four stages of early disease detection. It also shows the use of software for the automatic identification. The various stages discussed here include formation of a color transformation for the given image that is followed by masking of the green pixels. These are further followed by removal of definite threshold values along with segmenting them. Feature extrac- tion and computation of texture information has also been discussed. It is being shown on a data of 500 plant samples including lemon, to- mato, beans, banana and others resulting in an accurate rate of 94%.

identification of plant diseases making use of image Processing. Piyush Chaudhary et al. (2012b) have given an algorithm for disease detection. It involves the segmentation of spot using varied processing methods in plants. Also a systematic comparison among HIS, cielab and ycbcr color has been derived while spot identification.

The paper (Mohanty et al., 2016) proposes to train a deep neural network by using 54,306 images having healthy unhealthy leaves both to identify 26 diseases and 14 crop species. It proposes the use of Smartphone for diagnosing crop diseases. The model proposes both classifying the crop species and identifying the disease on images of the plant thus making use of Smartphone for detection of crop disease

feasible. The shortcoming of this paper is that this model gives higher accuracy for the dataset for which model is trained. However, if the data set is collected from different condition, the accuracy of model would be reduced. Also the image collected is more focused on only upper side of leaves which needs to be elaborated.

The paper (Konstantinos P. Ferentinos, 2018) proposes the develop- ment of convolution neural network models for detecting and diagnosing diseases in different leaves making use of deep learning methodologies. In paper Sladojevic et al., 2016, proposes the method of deep neural net- works for leaf image classification to recognize plant diseases. The model which is developed helps in identification of plant diseases. Further a method for differentiating them has also been shown. Caffe is used to give the training in deep CNN. The final accuracy of the trained model was 96.3%. The challenge highlighted here includes the collection of im- ages for better accuracy of the model, having apt augmented done.

This paper (Rumf et al., 2010) proposesa procedure for detecting and differentiating between healthy and diseases plant leaves using support vector machines with vegetative indice. This paper also differentiates be- tween the different diseases like lercospora, powdery mildew and leaf rust also identifying the diseases at an initial stage. The leaves are inocu- lated with the different pathogens like lercosporapeticola, uromycesbetac or E rysiphebetac causing lercospora leaf spot, and powdery mildew and hyperspectral data are recorded from these diseases leaves and healthy leaves. In this paper diseased leaves and healthy leaves. This paper shows use of 9 vegetation indices for automatic classification. The classi- fication accuracy has been drastically improved to 97%. The advantage of using SVMs method based on Vis is that this procedure can also applied to other plant pathogen systems.

The paper (Behmann and JorgSteinrucken, 2014) proposes an ap- proach combining supervised and unsupervised methods to identify drought stress on barely. The methodology is applied on both polled plants found in drought stress condition or properly watered. Ordi- nal classification with support vector machine has been brought to use for visualizing the division of different sections. It also differen- tiates between both easily. Paper shows that drought stress is de- tected 10 days earlier than NDVI. The advantages of this method are that it is an optimum technique for early identification of drought.

This paper (Khitthuk et al., 2018) mainly involves analyzing the dif- ferent plant features based on varied statistics. It also includes the pro- cess of classification. Here firstly the image is processed using Gaussian low pass filter. This paper (Vaishnnave et al., 2019) discusses the technique for the early determination of disease such as in ground- nut plant leaves.

In paper (Jhuria et al., 2013) images of leaf is first captured and preprocessed for noise filtering. It also involved image enhancement and application of morphological operation. Later on Kmean clustering has been shown for cluster formation. Finally, random forest classifier enabled the classification of different fungal disease as Bacterial blight, Cercospora Leaf spot and as Alternaria alternata.

In paper (Dhakate and Ingole, 2015) a system is being shown for the determination of presence of disease in pomegranate plant. Here differ- ent way has been highlighted for training purpose using back propaga- tion method. Bacterial blight, fruit rot were among the major identified. It also described the use of k mean clustering for cluster formation of the images used.

This paper (Anand et al., 2016) focus on the identification of brinjal plant leaves disease. It showcases the process of pre-processing of the plant leave images. Further K mean clustering has been used, followed by the feature extraction step that is accomplished by using the color Co-occurrence Method. This highlights the various parameters used for the identification as Area, perimeter, centroid, and diameter for showing presence of disease.

This paper (Islam et al., 2017) gives a method that involves machine learning technique along with image processing for detection of pres- ence of disease in potato plant leaves. It shows the importance of early detection of disease. Firstly, the region of interest has been extracted by masking the background. Further a multicast support vector classifier is being for differentiating between the absence and presence of disease using color and texture characteristics. Later Gray Level Co-occurrence method is also being placed for extracting specific features including ho- mogeneity, correlation contrast, and energy.

Detection of disease in plant is the most important step for reduction of agricultural yield losses. Here paper (Gaikwad and Musande, 2017) involves development of early detection methods for different plant dis- ease. Initially the wheat plant leaves image taken were undergone the process of preprocessing. This is further followed by K mean clustering partitioning method. Here the basic features extracted include texture, shape and color. It highlights the neural network classification method for the detection of fungal disease presence wheat plant leaves.

Increasing huge losses in cotton yield due to various diseases is a cru- cial reason for developing an early disease detection system for cotton plant. In paper (Bhimte and Thool, 2018) a method is proposed for early detection of disease among cotton leaves through Support vector machine. This paper (Pawar and Jadhav, 2017) proposes a novel method for identifying disease and classification. It highlights this process in- volving acquisition. Here k mean clustering algorithm is being used for pomegranate plant leaves analysis. Various features as. Color, morphol- ogy, edges, texture have been extracted and classified using ANN method.

This paper gives an overall review for the various techniques of dis- ease identification. It also presents brief summary of different imaging methods useful for early detection of plant diseases. We present the Current Trends and Challenges for detection of plant disease using com- puter vision and advance imaging technique. These techniques include thermal, hyperspectral, fluorescence, Multispectral, and 3D imaging.

We have also presented different techniques for early determination of plant diseases and classification. The major techniques are SVM, K- means clustering, Deep learning, and K-NN. This review concludes that there is a need for efficient method with comparison to the cost in- curred. Also a reliable and efficient sensor deployed for looking fulfill- ment of proper criteria of plant health would facilitate advancements in agriculture. In future, work can be done to develop a more efficient, and robust system for early automatic tracing and can be extended to identify all possible diseases.

