Weather forecasting aims to determine the state of the atmosphere over a given forecast period at a specific location. The weather can be described as variations in atmospheric variables such as temperature, wind speed and direction, humidity, sun-shine, cloudiness and precipi- tation [1]. With the advent of the Internet of Things (IoT), it is possible to obtain real-time weather predictions. Multiple weather sensors can be deployed at a low cost to collect weather data in different locations. Machine learning algorithms can then be applied to the collected data to perform predictions with a high level of accuracy [2]. In addition to IoT,

In [4], David Irwin et al. proposed CloudCast, a mobile application that provides personalized short-term weather forecasting. The aims of this work were to investigate the hypothesis that current cloud platform connectivity and diversity could mitigate the impact of data staging and computational latency for Nowcasting. The architecture consisted of linking the radar sensor network of the Collaborative Adaptive Sensing

quests. A nowcasting algorithm was used to predict high impact weather events for short time intervals. The authors observed high accuracy for 10 min Nowcasts. Further testing showed a 2 min delay for the delivery of a 15 min Now-casts image to a mobile client. The study revealed that commercial and research cloud services can be used for real-time now- casting applications.

In [5], Bobby D. Gerardo et al. presented a Flash Flood Warning System using SMS with advanced warning information. The system ar- chitecture consisted of a remote monitoring device made of an ultra- sonic sensor, pulse detector, a wireless modem, a FEZ Domino board and a 6-V battery charged by a solar panel. The water level and speed were measured and sent to a server. The server application and the modem which was used to issue SMS messages to subscribers were both simu- lated. To test the framework, water levels and velocity were recorded for seven days. The collected data was used to train an MLR model to predict future water flow. Using the predicted values, a risk value was calcu- lated which was then used to determine a threshold to issue warnings to users.

An experimental analysis of a cloud-based real-time weather fore- casting system was made by S. G. Totad et al. to investigate how the Cloud and IoT can be used for weather data collection and prediction [6]. The experiment architecture consisted of two DHT11 sensors to measure temperature and humidity and an Arduino board connected to a Raspberry pi. Data from the sensor were sent to the Arduino board, the Raspberry pi fetched the data and stored them in a public cloud through ThingSpeak. To perform analysis and prediction based on the collected data, one year of prior data was fetched from the cloud and correlation analysis of the parameters was then performed. An ARIMA model was generated for predicting the values for the upcoming year. The results showed satisfactory prediction results for the first two successive years. Beyond that, the prediction accuracy started to drop.

Network (CNN) for forecasting severe convective weather (SCW) con- ditions. The study aim was to compare the CNN model to other machine learning algorithms including Support Vector Machine (SVM), Linear Regression (LR) and Random Forest Classifiers. To train the models, five years of severe weather observations were used from the National Centers for Environmental Prediction (NCEP) final analysis data. A large sample of data for each severe weather type was selected for training. The CNN model used consisted of six layers using a softmax classifier. After training the model, a sample of 50 unlabeled NCEP data was fed to

the network to calculate the probability of an SCW occurring. Four skills scores were used to determine the performance of the network forecasts. When the skills scores were compared to other data mining algorithms, the CNN model showed an increase of 33.2% in SCW detection. The CNN model also scored higher in the skill scores compared to the other algorithms.

This work therefore provides an important architectural and math- ematical framework for state of the real-time weather forecasting sys- tems. Moreover, it investigates the aspect of collaborative weather forecasting which has a lot of potential to significantly improve forecasts in correlated regions. The proposed architectures and multi-platform applications also provide ease of deployment and scalability.

To connect to the API, the JSOUP class was used. A connection to the URL was opened by using the connect() method of the static JSOUP class and then the get() method fetched and parsed the HTML data into a Document object. The Document object was converted to a String using the text() method. The response String was then type-casted to a JSO- NObject. The necessary reading was extracted from the response and encapsulated in a JSONObject. The JSONObject was then sent either to the Local Server app or Cloudant platform for storage.

The web application is a webpage that is displayed to users when they visit the servlet link. The webpage provides a graph that displays the variation of the weather parameters in real-time. The user can also download weather data for a specific date or only the last N readings. The page is also responsible for contacting either the cloud-hosted or the locally hosted servlet for analytics results and displaying it to the user. A dynamic web application was written in the Eclipse IDE and deployed on the Bluemix server on IBM Cloud. The web app presents the

The K-Nearest Neighbours (KNN) algorithm is one of the simplest machine learning algorithms. It is based on a lazy learning method where the first K samples nearest to each sample test data are selected [20]. In this paper, to measure the distance between the test instance and the dataset the Euclidean distance function was used. For regres- sion, the outcome was taken as the mean of the K nearest observations.

Collaborative sliding window cross-validation for each algorithm has been performed in this work. In most cases when evaluating a machine learning model performance, the data is divided into a training and testing set. The testing set is obtained by randomly choosing a portion of the original data unseen by the model during training.

The deep learning networks, however, experienced a mean increase of 8% for the average MAPE. There was a 3.79% increase in average error for the MLP network and a 12.2% increase for the CNN network. However, the increase in error can be attributed to the small training dataset and unoptimized network. The deep learning networks can be optimized by tuning the hyper-parameters. The experiment labelled MLP [10K] demonstrates that with the necessary parameter tuning, the overall error for the deep learning networks can be further minimised. It can be observed from the above graph, that the optimized network

When comparing the algorithms, it was observed that the average error for machine learning algorithms (MLR, MPR and KNN) is much lower than that of the deep learning networks (MLP and CNN). The lowest overall error achieved was 2.11% from the MLR algorithm while the highest error encountered was 4.81% by the CNN network. This indicates that the MLR algorithm was able to better extract the non- linear relationship between the explanatory variables. From the above graph, it can be shown that tuning the hyper parameters [MLP 10K] of

Mimboro P, Lumban Gaol F, Lesie Hendric Spits Warnars H, Soewito B. Weather monitoring system AIoT based for oil palm plantation using recurrent neural network algorithm. In: IEEE 5th international conference on information technology, information systems and electrical engineering (ICITISEE); 2021.

