using different methods through comments, shares and re-tweets [6]. Mok et al. [29] proposed an Interactive Genetic Algorithm (IGA) to customised fashion design to enable customers create their preferred fashion designs in a user-friendly manner [29]. Unfortunately, busy customers would not have the time to start creating new designs themselves. In these days of e-payment, some customers even send money to designers and expect the fashion designers to deliver appropriately. In another develop- ment, set-theoretic qualitative comparative analysis (QCA) was used to discover patterns that hold reliably across some cases [27,26,15,17].

This paper also builds on the fact that fashion design could not only be based on the style but commercial success implications. Jacobs et al. [17] states that fashion companies need to maintain balance between artistic and economic considerations. In this per- spective, this paper analyses the attributes that would account for more and better business gains for designers as it helps designers to know the type of designs usually ordered for, by customers with the design code, and which combinations have the highest patron- age. Our findings show that in order to attract more customers to patronize designers, the style, fabric, color combinations are con- sidered important as these revealed the level of projective creativ- ity in fashion design. In addition, it also projects the designers as a creative entrepreneur, balancing business and the art.

The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 briefly presents the literature overview of data mining and fashion world. Section 3 considers market incentives for fashion designers using k-means. In Section 4, implementation and result are presented, while section 5 discusses the results. Section 6 concludes the paper and provides pointers for future work.

[22] proposed a new form of LRC, which was proven to be balanced even with low-dimensional excessive number of data. In addition, another work proposed a global linear regression coefficient (GLRC) classifier that uses the test sample vector and whole class subspaces to calculate the GLRC rather than the use of test sample and the class subspace to calculate the distance, which is used for classification [12]. Very recently, k-means was introduced to fash- ion design with a dynamic reduction through homogeneous clus- ters (dRHC) [31]. Therefore, data mining techniques are evolving from modifications of the previous approaches with time.

Industrial design is the professional service of creating and developing concepts and specifications that optimize the function, value, appearance of products and systems for the mutual benefit of both users and manufactures. The roles of industrial designers are to create and execute design solutions for problem of form, usability, ergonomics, marketing, brand development and sales. Fashion design merges sketching and general visual skills with the power of imaginations. The interest is in knowledge of materi- als creative designs with lay outs, ordering supervising and bud- geting [4].

Customers in this category choose from two or more different original designs to make up entirely new design. They either choose original top with different original design of skirt and or combine part of the designs. Any adjustment or addition to the original design is considered as a combined design by the designer because a new design product will emerge from the existing designs.

the number of data is less than the number of clusters then we assign each data as the mean vector of the cluster. Therefore, each mean vector will have a cluster number. However, if the number of data is bigger than the number of clusters, for each data, we cal- culate the distance to all mean vector and obtain the minimum dis- tance. Thus, the data is said to belong to the cluster that has minimum distance from this data [19,2,31].

During the study, the computations were a little limited with the number of data analyzed. When the data is increased, the result is expected to be more precise. However, immediate next research steps should be to explore other criteria that would foster fashion business development.

