Lying within the cranial cavity, the human brain is composed of the cerebral hemispheres and the cerebellum, incompletely separated by the cerebral falx between the hemispheres and the cerebellar tentorium between the cerebrum and the cerebellum [1]. In other words, the intracranial space (ICS) is separated into the supratentorial space (STS) and the infratentorial space (ITS) by the tentorium. Because the brain is roughly bilateral symmetric, the falx is often used to represent the intact mid-sagittal plane (iMSP) and the separated cerebral hemispheres connect at the subfalcine space (SFS) [2]. The tentorial incisura (TI), an opening at the center of the tentorium, provides the only communication between the STS and the ITS [3]. The TI is divided into the anterior, middle, and posterior incisural spaces, with the midbrain (upper brainstem) occupying the middle one.

We have proposed methods that can automatically measure MLS with symmetry-based and landmark- based methods, and the results were verified clinically [5-8]. To our knowledge, however, there has been no biomechanical model dedicated to simulating brain herniation in the literature. In this study, we try develop a simple 3-dimensional geometric model that can be applied to simulate brain deformation, especially brain herniation occurring at the STS, caused by a supratentorial intracranial mass, based on computed tomographic (CT) images of patients with no intracranial pathologies.

Each CT image was 512x512 pixels in size, resulting in a resolution of 0.49 mm per pixel. To rule out the diagnosis of intracranial hematoma, the original CT density values were transformed from Hounsfield units to 8-bit gray values in a windowed value range (center 35 HU, width 150 HU) [6]. CT slices at levels from the

For each CT data set, the global gray level histogram was obtained. Then, pixels with bone density in all CT slices of the given data set were automatically tagged using a threshold derived from the histogram. The detailed settings were previously described [6, 7].

We have developed an algorithm that can differentiate the intracranial regions from the extracranial ones automatically [11]. With in the ICS, however, it is difficult to separate the STS from the ITS because the cerebellar tentorium is thin and has gray levels similar to the brain itself. Therefore, we manually labeled the boundary between the STS and the ITS and labeled the regions on the computer screen. The skull base openings of these regions were also labeled to prevent failures of the region-growing algorithm.

Using planimetry method of the Cavalieri principle, the volume of a given region is its area multiplied by the slice thickness. The total ICV, the volume of the STS (V_STS) and that of the ITS (V_ITS) of the patient, are the sum of the volumetric results of all corresponding regions across all CT slices. We also measured the length and width of the STS, defined as the largest anteroposterior diameter and the largest transverse diameter among all STS regions. The height of the STS is the total thickness of the STS volume, counted from the vertex to the level of the midbrain.

In addition to the volume and outer dimensions of the STS, we also measured the sizes of its openings, namely the SFS and the TI. The SFS and the TI meets at the midbrain. Due to the complex anatomy in this region, we only tried to identify the midbrain and omitted other structures such as vessels, nerves and the pituitary gland. The midbrains in the patients were manually recognized by human experts and their lengths and the widths were recorded. We measured its length of the SFS at the level of interventricular foramen of Monro [4]. We also counted the number of slices containing connected cerebral hemispheres from the corpus callosum down to the level of the midbrain and the total thickness was considered the height of the SFS.

Based on craniometric data from last section, we constructed a simple model of the STS. The model assumes the shape of the upper half of a sphere with a diameter of 160 mm. The volume of this STS model is 1072 mL, which is 6.7% smaller than the average V_STS but is very close to that of females, 1077 mL. Both the length and the width of this model are 160 mm. The length of the model is 3.9% larger than that of craniometry, while the width of the model is 17.6% larger. The height of the model, 80 mm, is 11% smaller than the average height of the STS obtained from craniometry.

The ratio between V_ITS and ICV is important in patients with Chiari malformation type I. Using volumetric magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), Sgouros et al. measured these values in healthy and diseased pediatric subjects. In the healthy group, the ICV was 1383 mL, the V_ITS 186 mL and the PFV/ICV ratio was

In our simplified model of the STS, we did not take shape variation and sex difference into account. The outer and inner dimensions of the STS are simplified. The average length, width and height of the STS in our patients were 154.7, 136.1, and 90.3 mm. If we assuming that the STS is half ellipsoid in shape, the average V_STS would be 989 mL, considerably smaller than the actual volume of 1154 mL.

Males have larger ICVs and V_STSs than females. Compare to females, the ICV was 15% larger, the V_STS 14% larger, the V_ITS 20% larger in males in this study. The average length, width, and height, as well as the inner dimensions, of the STS were about 4% larger in males. The model we created has a V_STS

Theoretically, the CT studies produce a series of images that are parallel to the OM line. However, the actual gantry tilt angle varied from -2 to 28.2 degrees, depending on patient posture and whether there is need for cervical spine imaging. We did not find any relationship between the degree of gantry tilt and variables we measured (p=0.374). Sahin noted larger difference between volumetric results using coronal and axial slices of 10-mm thickness but the difference is small with 5-mm slices. [12]

The volumes of the STS and the ITS are highly correlated to that of ICV. Males have larger ICVs and thus larger V_STSs. In this study, all female patients have ICVs smaller than 1400 mL, while two male patients have ICVs larger than 1550 mL. Significant amount of extra-cerebral CSF exceeding 180 mL was observed in the patient with the largest ICV of 1716 mL, who had a ventricular CSF volume of 87 mL. On the other hand, smaller ventricles were observed in those with smaller ICVs. Since our model has a volume slightly smaller than the average V_STS of all male and female patients, we consider this model applicable to all patients except those with extremely large ICVs.

