extracted from the input data using a feature extraction method. DL al- gorithms can automatically extract high-level features from the dataset and learn from these features. Although the implementation of the ML and DL models is straightforward, there are some challenges with selecting algorithms, tuning parameters, and features for better predic- tion accuracy (Janiesch et al., 2021).

This SLR focuses on published research studies into cattle identifica- tion using ML and DL approaches. The search process identifies poten- tial primary studies that address the research questions. The answers to the research questions are discussed based on the data extracted from the selected studies. This study defined the following seven research questions (RQs) for the SLR.

This study reduced some keywords from the search string for the Science Direct database as the maximum Boolean connectors (AND/ OR) for this database is eight. Since the Scopus database yielded many articles with the general search string, the search results were reduced by putting two different keywords together. In this SLR, we did not limit the publication year during the search. After performing the above search strings, a total of 731 articles were retrieved.

The selection criteria are used to identify the studies that can answer the research questions. In this study, inclusion and exclusion criteria were defined based on the research questions. The search results from all databases were recorded on a spreadsheet for scrutiny using the in- clusion and exclusion criteria. A study was selected for the SLR when the inclusion criteria were true but the exclusion criteria were false. The ex- clusion criteria were: (1) publication is not related to ML or DL for cattle identification, (2) publication is a survey or review paper, (3) publica- tion is not written in English. The inclusion criteria were that the publi- cation must be applied to either the ML and/or DL approaches for cattle identification.

To address the research questions, each selected article was read in full and the necessary data elements were extracted from it. A spread- sheet was prepared to store all the extracted data for the selected articles. The spreadsheet columns represent the different data elements of the studies, and the rows represent the articles reviewed for the SLR. In the spreadsheet, each article is summarised by research goal, dataset, feature used, featured extraction, model, location, publishing year, performance evaluation metrics and challenges. The extracted data are then classified according to the research questions. The summarised results of this SLR are reported in Section 4.

notches is used to identify individual cattle. Ear notching has potential welfare implications, and other identification methods are more welfare friendly (Noonan et al., 1994). The ear notching method applies only to a limited number of cattle on a farm. Thus, it is not used to identify indi- vidual cattle on large-sized farms.

Ear tagging is a livestock identification method (Awad, 2016) that is widely used to provide individual cattle identification. It is quick to im- plement and features a low-cost identification system. An ear tag can be made of metal or plastic with bar codes, letters or numbers, and the tags can vary in size and colour. But ear tags can fall out, resulting in lost in- dividual identification (Wang et al., 2010). In addition, ear tags risk damage, can be duplicated, and are susceptible to fraudulent manipula- tion. Lost tags do not allow for the long-term recognition of individual animals (Fosgate et al., 2006). These limitations led to the development of electronic identification devices (EIDs).

The body coat pattern and face are unique features for identifying in- dividual cattle (Kumar and Singh, 2020). With the recent advent of ML and DL methods, facial and body coat patterns have been widely used for cattle identification (Arslan et al., 2014; Andrew et al., 2016; Yang et al., 2019). For the ML models, the features are extracted from the face or body images and then fed into the models for identification. DL models have powerful feature extraction abilities for cattle identifica- tion without pre-specifying any features (Kumar et al., 2018a; Andrew et al., 2017).

In recent times, automatic cattle identification has gained popularity among researchers using ML and DL methods. The traditional methods cannot handle large datasets, and the accuracy of these methods is poor relative to ML and DL methods (Kumar and Singh, 2020). In this SLR, ML and DL based approaches for cattle identification are considered for dis- cussion as the other methods are out of scope in this study.

SVM (Joachims, 1998) is a widely used algorithm for cattle identifi- cation. It is a technique that uses a hyperplane to classify different groups that separate the classes by maximising their marginal distance in high dimensional feature space (Joachims, 1998). The marginal dis- tance is the gap between the hyperplane and its nearest data points for the two classes. The dataset follows the condition that each data point belongs to only one of the two classes.

et al., 2016; Schilling et al., 2018; Li et al., 2017; Awad and Hassaballah, 2019; Kumar et al., 2017b; Zaoralek et al., 2016); Ahmed et al., 2015; Tharwat et al., 2014a, 2014b; Hu et al., 2020; Kumar et al., 2018a; Achour

This SLR found that YOLO (Redmon et al., 2016) is the most used de- tection algorithm for cattle detection problems. It is a popular and well- performing object detection model. The YOLO algorithm follows the re- gression model, and it predicts classes and bounding boxes for the full object in one run of the algorithm. It has several versions, including YOLO, YOLO-V2, and YOLO-V3. The localisation accuracy was improved in YOLO-V2 by adding batch normalisation to the convolutional layers. Additionally, it increased the image resolution and used anchor boxes to predict bounding boxes (Redmon and Farhadi, 2017). In YOLO-V3 (Redmon and Farhadi, 2018), the authors increased the convolutional layers to 106 and built residual blocks and applied the skip connections technique to improve the object detection performance.

The region-based CNN (R-CNN) (Girshick et al., 2014) is another powerful object detection model that is part of the family of CNN models. R-CNN has improved versions named Fast R-CNN, Faster R- CNN and Mask R-CNN. Faster R-CNN consists of two modules (Ren et al., 2015). The first module, called a fully convolutional network, pro- poses regions, whereas the second module, named the Fast-RCNN de- tector, uses the proposed regions. These two modules together form a single and unified DL network for object detection. This study found that the Faster-RCNN is one of the most used detection algorithms for cattle detection.

A cattle identification dataset stores the cattle images or frames cap- tured from videos. For individual cattle identification, the features of the cattle images are extracted using feature extraction methods and stored in the feature dataset along with a specific cattle number. The features are then fed into a DL or ML model for training and testing.

SIFT is a popular and widely used algorithm to detect local features. The algorithm seeks features by looking at interesting points in an image as well as descriptors related to scale and orientation. Thus, it achieves good outcomes in matching image feature points (Lowe, 1999).

Breed: NC = Non-classified, An = Angus, H = Holstein, P = Pantaneira, M = Multiple, S = Simmental, C = Canchim. Type: M = Muzzle, B = Body, T = Tailhead, M.G = Mammary glands, F = Face, He = Head.

extraction methods for cattle identification, whereas the KNN and DT classifiers are mainly used with the LBP feature extraction methods. It is also observed that the LBP feature extraction method is used with al- most all the ML models for cattle identification. This is mainly because of its powerful texture feature extraction capability from images in pattern recognition systems.

the challenges for cattle identification using ML and DL approaches, the same challenges can be found for identifying other animals (e.g., sheep and pigs). To address the seventh research question (RQ7), the identified main challenges are discussed in this section, along with future research opportunities.

et al., 2021; Qiao et al., 2019; de Lima Weber et al., 2020). In these cases, a standard and high-quality cattle dataset is needed to be used for large- scale evaluations of feature extraction methods and cattle detection and identification models.

Benchmark dataset. There is a lack of benchmark datasets that can be used to extract all the relevant features for cattle identification prob- lems. Based on this SLR, we found that a few datasets are publicly avail- able, although the value of these datasets is minimal due to the lack of uniform data standards. As the performance of the existing ML and DL models still depends on the dataset, the standard benchmark dataset needs to be available in the public domain. Thus, the model using a uni- form dataset may apply to real firms for cattle identification. A recom- mendation from the current study is to create a large-scale benchmark cattle dataset that can be used by researchers for cattle identification problems in the field of precision livestock farming.

Feature selection. Most of the articles reviewed in this SLR used datasets with a small number of individual cattle, therefore there was a lack of efficient feature selection methods on large datasets. Scholars may develop methods to extract important features from the large dataset for cattle identification. Additionally, like human face land- marks, researchers can consider cattle face landmarks as features for cattle face recognition. In this paper, we give a comprehensive overview of cattle identification. For cattle that have coat patterns, for example Holstein, Belgian blue, Shorthorn, Ayrshire and Irish Moiled, the body or whole head area can be used to differentiate animals. For those that have pure colour skin, like Augua, Dexter, and Sussex, the muzzle pat- tern is the unique biomedical feature to use. Many advanced deep learn- ing models have been developed for object detection. However, only limited models have been applied for cattle identification. There is a large opportunity to continue to develop and promote advanced ma- chine learning technologies for livestock production.

parameters in the model architecture increases the complexity of ML and DL models (Alzubaidi et al., 2021) but may also increase the model accuracy. However, when the model becomes too complex, it tends to overfit the training dataset, and such situations reduce the model performance on the test dataset (Srivastava et al., 2014; Xu

et al., 2019). Overfitting was a commonly reported problem in this SLR. It makes the model dataset dependent, and therefore the model does not perform well when applied to other datasets. The researchers use different methods to prevent overfitting problems, including data aug- mentation, ensembling, and cross-validation. Thus, they can train ML and DL models to generalise well to a new dataset.

Open environment operation challenge. Another challenge iden- tified here was the implementation of the cattle identification models in the real farm environment. Although some researchers tested their models on cattle farms, no models were applied to the livestock farm management systems. A large dataset incorporating many individual cattle would be useful to train ML and DL models for application on real cattle farms for identification. Additionally, due to the computation cost of a vision-based system, it is unlikely to run real-time identification without using a server over the cloud. Dairy cattle are often kept indoors, making it relatively easy to implement a vision-based identification system for better biosecurity management. However, for the beef industry, cattle are scattered in an open environment, and reliable and cheap network connectivity is still under development. It will be very costly if im- ages are transferred back to a server via satellite. So the implementa- tion of cattle identification in these environments wild still needs the maturity of the IoT technology.

tems are still under development. There are some proposed static image-based approaches (Andrew et al., 2021; Qiao et al., 2020) in use. For example, dairy cattle that are living indoors, where it is easy to set up the vision system. But for cattle scattered in the field, it will be very challenging to obtain consistent features for accurate object rec- ognition from the captured images/videos. Therefore, the power of ma- chine learning and computer vision has not been fully integrated into practice.

The main limitation of this study is the database search for the rele- vant articles. This SLR considered four electronic databases. We identi- fied 55 studies using the search strategy described in the methodology section. There may be more articles available that have not been in- cluded in this study due to not considering other electronic databases. Some relevant articles might have been missed because of the search keyword string. To maximise the number of relevant articles, we chose the databases by considering the scope of this study, and we con- ducted a broad search with a search string including main search terms and their synonyms. Another possible limitation is the data extraction from the selected articles, because some data could be missed in this process. To minimise the amount of missing data, we cross-checked the analysed data. These limitations will provide doors for future SLR, but they do not inhibit the main goal of presenting a comprehensive pic- ture of the usage of ML and DL approaches for cattle identification.

challenges need to be addressed for efficient and effective cattle identi- fication systems and further improvements to ML and DL models. It is concluded that automated and real-time cattle identification systems will play an important role in livestock farm management in the future. We believe that this study will facilitate future researchers in develop- ing automatic cattle identification systems.

