An affective state of a learner in E-learning has gained enormous interest. The prediction of the emotional state of a learner can enhance the outcome of learning by including designated mediation. Many techniques are developed for anticipating emotional states using video, audio, and bio-sensors. Still, examining video, and audio will not confirm secretiveness and is exposed to security issues. Here the creator devises a fusion technique, to be specific Squirrel Search and Rider optimization-grounded Deep LSTM for affect prediction.

The Deep LSTM is trained to exercise the new fusion SS-ROA. Then, the SS-ROA-grounded Deep LSTM clas- sifies the states like frustration, confusion, engagement, wrathfulness, and so on. It is based on the interaction log data of the E-learner. In conclusion, the course and student ID, predicted state, test marks, and course completion status are taken as result information to find out the correlations. The new algorithm gives the best performance in comparison to other present methods with the highest prediction accurateness of 0.962 and the most note- worthy connection of 0.379 respectively. After discovering affective states, students may get the advantage of

The emergence of E-courses helps to increase learning opportunities for individuals by allowing them to access premium courses at any time and from any location. As a result, the sharing of educational resources can greatly improve the spirit of learning [1]. Throughout many years, a vast range of online learning platforms have emerged. As a result, the quality of online education is regarded as a key component of an educational system [2].

In contrast to traditional learning methods like in-person instruction, research indicates that e-learners are less committed and transmit less knowledge. These poor results have ascribed to an asynchronous nature of interaction and hence lack of learning [3]. In a traditional classroom, it is possible to dynamically monitor student moods, lack of inspiration or focus, and interest in a particular subject. Yet, in digital learning platforms, this kind of sentiment analysis becomes a significant problem [4].

Research in specific fields such as data mining in education, cogni- tive science, multimodal learning, and psychology has made compelling progress in learning analysis. It is guaranteed to monitor learner engagement and improve learning effectiveness in online learning [7]. Data mining provided relationships between various variables developed based on activity records of students and student perfor- mance. Attributes that show a reasonably high correlation with the performance of students are used as improved predictors. These vari- ables are said to be relevant because they can be used to predict at-risk students [11]. Affordable online education has attracted the attention of

Additionally, Predictive Learning Analytics (PLA) [3] helps in- structors improve course quality. At-risk student predictions [3], exam grades, and quiz scores [3] show that is likely to have an absolute impact on the learning experience. The best-known predictive model for pre- dicting the performance of students is the Artificial Neural Network (ANN) [18].

courses, Data Structure and Files (C1), Data Base Management and System (C2), and Human Computer Interface (C3) are viewed for the experimental study. The above noted three courses have High, Medium, and Low complexity. Different learners are made to learn these courses online. Based on the studying behavior of learners in LMS, a log file is recorded.

Each learning behavior log file carries the important points of course ID, topic ID, Lecture ID, lecture type, time spent, opening time, closing time, and the examination rating of the learners. Then, the feature in- dicators are extracted. Based on the features and using Deep LSTM, the affective states of the learners are predicted. The proposed SS-ROA is used to train Deep LSTM. The SS-ROA is devised through a combination of Squirrel Search and Rider Optimization Algorithm. Thus, SS-ROA- based Deep LSTM predicts the different affective states.

Other sections of the paper include: Section 2 displays an explanation of affective state prediction methods used in earlier works. The proposed method for affective state prediction using SS-ROA-based Deep LSTM is shown in the 3rd Section. The analysis of techniques is depicted in Section 4 and Section 5 provides the conclusion.

With conventional presentation strategies and a high learner- instructor ratio, an instructor faces extraordinary obstructions in the study hall. Generally, instructors convey the teaching material and un- derstudies learn it. With this approach, instructors are typically not ready to react to the individual necessities of learners. Besides, because

A modern couple of years have considered a flood in the utilization of multidisciplinary techniques to consider the hard position of feelings in learning. Affective computing is a growing subject uniting scientists and professionals from distinctive fields, extending from Artificial Intelli- gence (AI), and Natural Language Processing (NLP) to cognitive and sociology [30]. Emotion data is utilized to enhance studying [31]. Here, affirmative and distrustful feelings are perceived with the aid of the usage of two models, particularly behavioral logs and biosensors. Fusion of it is done using a Bayesian Network [32].

set-up methodology to get more correct outcomes. Here learners are given a chance to finish lessons at their speed and preferences. The re- cords used to be gathered in the log report and a Bayesian network is used to classify affective states. Correlation between interaction log and questionnaire response used to predict the same. The effects had been practically the same, but larger realness was once obtained via the interaction log method. The model used in this research demonstrates a

V. Chitraa [31] led a study on pre-processing techniques for behav- ioral logs utilized in web usage mining. The facts were once pre-processed to clean the records and afterward put in an information set. Session ID, Learner ID, and path completion records were used in the dataset. The Apriori algorithm was utilized for finding the patterns. According to investigations of Pekrun [36], the thoughts related to learning change on a massive scale. Anxiety is the most straight was inferred. Aside from this, the accompanying emotions related to study- ing had been boredom, anger, relief, satisfaction, and enjoyment. However, their assessment had a constraint of no longer enabling an actual conclusion structured on motives of feelings.

Some experiments perceived feelings using biosensors [38,39], and some made use of a fusion of bio-sensors and facial expressions. The sensors would record changes in the nervous system of the body. They utilized SVM calculations for making ready data and perceiving feelings [40,41].

wearable devices like smartwatches and fit bands. Authors have uti- lized here Emotion Wear Framework [42]. In the Emotion Wear framework, a person sees the content material which is saved on the cloud via a smartphone used in the VR headset. The person wears gloves that produce quite several signals, which are utilized to understand thoughts. The thoughts detected had been specific but there was a delay in investigation and the sensor price was associated with it [42,43].

output. The weight of RNN was fine-tuned to increase the precision of speech emotion classification using a hybrid optimization model called the Arithmetic Exploration updated Wildbeast Model, which combines two optimization models, namely the Arithmetic Optimization Algo- rithm (AOA) and Wildebeest herd optimization (WHO). Only basic emotions like happy, sad etc. are detected here.

The method for facial emotion recognition utilizing a novel hybrid deep belief rain optimization algorithm has been presented by Alamgir, F.M., and Alam, M.S [45]. This method combines Rain Optimization Algorithm (ROA) with Deep Belief Network (DBN). This classifier can classify fundamental emotions like happiness, surprise, fear, etc. with greater accuracy. To increase the stability of training even when trained for a greater number of iterations with a wider range of data samples, more optimized models must be created.

A hybrid optimization algorithm has been created by Vedavathi and a colleague [46] as a method for an effective e-learning recommendation system for user preferences. They have employed an improved whale optimization algorithm (IWOA) and deep recurrent neural network (DRNN). IWOA depends on the chasing conduct of humpback whales. Premature convergence causes WOA to become trapped in local optima. In IWOA, this problem is solved. Here authors has proposed an e-learning suggestion approach that is based on DRNN and IWO calcu- lations for prescribing e-learning assets to students in e-learning situa- tions. The new method had demonstrated more accurate results when compared to the existing algorithms.

From the literature survey, it is found that a range of modalities like facial expression recognition, questionnaires, interaction log conduct, and sensing techniques such as Galvanic Skin Response (GSR), Electro- cardiogram (ECG), Electroencephalography (EEG), etc. have been used by researchers to predict emotions. Facial expressions and sensors have privacy issues related to them. There may be a bias from learners when questionnaires had been used. So, an interaction behavior log [47] is an excellent way to predict an affective state of a learner.

The literature survey indicates that most of the researchers have developed tools, envisioned thoughts, or tried to devise methods of adapting content or providing responses to the learner. Due to the response, the enhancements have been determined in the performance. Many of the researchers have used the techniques such as Neural Network, RNN and Deep LSTM.

videos of 1 h, two documents, one PDF, one PPT, and two exams. The log is recorded for more than 100 students while studying these subjects. Student ID, Course ID, Topic ID, Lecture ID, Type of document (Video/ PPT/PDF/DOC), Opening and Closing time is recorded.

Affective states are events that are used for representing short and long-term emotions that are experienced by the user while doing some activity. Knowing the changes in the affective states of the learner is very helpful in the education field and it is associated with an increase in learning outcomes. Here, the proposed SS-ROA-based Deep LSTM is developed for the affective state prediction of students daily. The fea- tures are given as input to the Deep LSTM [18,22]. The Deep LSTM is trained using the proposed SS-ROA and is obtained by integrating SS and ROA. The proposed algorithm effectively predicts affective states, such as frustration, engagement, boredom, confusion, anger, and surprise. The architecture of Deep LSTM, training of Deep LSTM and the gener- ated output are illustrated below.

The resultant extracted features (EF) acquired from interaction logs were fed to the deep LSTM for prediction. It is more beneficial rather than other classifiers. It is exceptionally effective to achieve the emotional state forecast, using the memory cell of the classifier. Deep LSTM uses the previous states and information related to their neigh- boring states for anticipating further states. It offers prediction by setting up the encoding layers. Gates can regulate the flow of information. It makes use of three gates Forget, Input, and Output. These gates have a very important role in LSTM.

When information is passed and the gate is activated, the informa- tion is fed to the memory cell. The significant benefit of adjusting the cell and the gates is to deal with the information flow. Here, the classifier utilizes the past condition of neighbors and the input cell to assess the further cell state.

gathering plays out a few procedures for arriving at the target. Subse- quently, it is noticed that it performs affective state prediction with enhanced accuracy. Likewise, the ROA is exceptionally powerful. It undergoes fictional computing to settle the optimization issues. It has less convergence rate and it is more receptive to hyper-parameters. Besides, it follows the multi-directional search space and hence it has a fast convergence rate that depends on the over-taker position.

The ROA considers the four groups of riders. Every group follows its approach to arrive at the target position. As the name implies the bypass rider tries to win by bypassing the leading path. The follower goes after the rider who is in the lead position. The over-taker overtakes to arrive at the leading position. The attacker takes the position by taking the maximum speed to attain the goal.

According to the researchers [52], the update strategy used by over-takers elevates the rate of success so it is used further in SS-ROA. Henceforth, by consolidating SSA with the ROA, the presentation of an emotional state forecast can be altogether improved. Thus, the newly, devised SS-ROA updates the weights of the Deep LSTM. The SS-ROA has the capability of fast convergence by avoiding local minima that mini- mizes the error while mapping the input feature vectors. Thus, a more accurate affective state classification is performed. Besides, the cost and

Methods are analyzed by using Setup-1, considering different courses concerning accuracy and correlation parameter. Through analysis, it is observed that maximum accuracy of 0.930 is calculated by projected SS- ROA-based Deep LSTM in course 3. The maximum correlation of 0.379 is measured by projected SS-ROA-based Deep LSTM for course 1. Hence, it can be observed that projected SS-ROA-based Deep LSTM shows improved performance in affective state prediction.

Methods are analyzed by using Setup-2, considering varying student performance concerning accuracy and correlation. Throughout the analysis, it is noted that the highest accuracy of 0.962 is calculated by the proposed SS-ROA-based Deep LSTM for the high-performance stu- dent category. The maximum correlation of 0.236 is calculated by the proposed method in affective states with exam scores for the low- performance student category. Hence, it can be observed that the pro- posed SS-ROA-based Deep LSTM shows improved performance in af- fective state prediction.

The developed affective state method (SS-ROA-based Deep LSTM) obtained the best performance in terms of accuracy and correlation. The newly devised SS-ROA algorithm has the capability of fast convergence rate with the avoidance of local minima. Besides, the most significant feature selection it also reduces the computational complexity of the network, and the Deep LSTM predicts the time series data more accu- rately. Thus the tuning of the Deep LSTM with the novel SS-ROA opti- mization enhances the prediction accuracy that leads to the better performance of the system.

