According to the World Health Organization (WHO), one in every four individuals suffers from mental health disorders worldwide [2], with over 280 million people of different ages suffering from de- pression [3]. In [4], it has been reported that mental diseases in Bangladeshis range from 6.5 to 31.0% among adults and 13.4 to 22.9% among children. A recent study claims that more than 7 million indi- viduals in Bangladesh, predominantly urban and metropolitan areas, suffer from depression and anxiety [5]. Depression has been found

The following is the order in which this article is organized. Related works are addressed in Section 2. Section 3 focuses discussion of the methodology adopted in this work. Section 4 examines the acquired outcomes. Section 5 discusses how the outcomes achieved our research objectives. Section 6 discusses the limitation of this work and finally, Section 7 includes a conclusion with remarks on our future work.

In recent years, with the immense growth of artificial intelligence and machine learning techniques, many studies have been performed to detect depression and anxiety-related mental disorders employing a wide range of private and public datasets. Nemesure and his team utilized ensemble-based machine learning approaches to predict the depression and anxiety of undergraduate students [11]. More than four thousand students from the University of Nice Sophia-Antipolis participated in this study. The XGBoost model attained an AUC of

0.67 for the validation set. Lee and Kim applied machine learning frameworks to predict the depressive behavior of American adults [12]. They used the United States National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) dataset. NHANES conducted a PHQ-9 survey of approximately 8600 people for ten years. Boruta and LASSO feature

Ryu and colleagues developed a machine learning-based depression forecasting system for stroke survival patients [14]. NIHSS survey and Hamilton depression prediction index were performed on 623 individ- uals from a medical center in Korea. SVM and KNN reported accuracies of 77.5% and 73.3%, respectively. Haque et al. [15] developed an automated depression detection scheme for children using the Young Minds Matter dataset. The Boruta approach has been used to select the important features. The Decision Tree classifier produced 95% accuracy and 0.99 precision.

There has been considerable work on predicting depression among Bangladeshi individuals using locally collected datasets. For instance, Choudhury and his team used deep learning and five machine learning algorithms to predict depression among Bangladeshi undergraduate students based on some basic questionnaires [7]. Recursive Feature Elimination with Cross-Validation and Random Forest Classification was used for selecting salient features. A total of 65 questions were included in their dataset, including 7 basic information, 16 depression- related queries, 21 BDI and 21 DASS 21-BV (Bangla version) questions. After pre-processing, 577 participants were considered in this study. Zulfiker and his colleagues [16] used six different machine learn- ing classifiers and three distinct feature selection methods to predict depression and extract relevant features. Synthetic Minority Oversam- pling Technique (SMOTE) [17] and Burns Depression Checklist (BDC) were also used in this work. The AdaBoost technique with the Selec- tKBest feature selection approach provided the best performance with 0.9256 classification accuracy.

Ahmed and teammates used five machine learning classifiers on two datasets to predict depression and anxiety [18]. In addition, two well- known depression and anxiety measuring scales were used in this work. The CNN model attained the highest accuracies of 0.96 for anxiety and 0.968 for depression detection employing 45 epochs. In [5], the authors utilized a binary logistic model to predict depression for Bangladeshi university students. The authors have collected a private dataset from an online survey of 210 participants using the DASS-21 scale. According to this study, relationships with parents and friends, bedtime and di- etary patterns, and family socioeconomic status are the primary factors of depression and anxiety. Moon et al. employed various machine learn- ing and ensemble approaches to predict the depression of employed Bangladeshis [19].

In order to measure depression levels, clinicians develop a set of questions that are given to an individual under assessment. The questions typically contain options that the individual needs to select. Based on the responses provided, a score is given per question. The total score obtained is then used to assess the level of depression of an individual. Different scaling systems exist, which are used by psychiatrists to diagnose the level of depression one is suffering [20].

Ibrahim et al. used Zagazig Depression Scale (ZDS) to measure the existence of psychological illness in a group of Egyptian under- graduate students [24]. In this work, ZDS, an individually-assessed Arabic language interpretation of the Hamilton Rating Scale was used to determine the pervasiveness of mental disorders symptoms. Partic- ipants revealed an average ZDS coefficient of approximately 18 and a maximum of 20. These ZDS scores indicate that more than 71% of the survey participants suffer from mild depression. Guo [25] used HAMD- 17, CES-D, and WHOQOL-BREF evaluation metrics on undergraduate students with SSD to assess the impacts of electroacupuncture and cognitive behavioral therapy, or their combined effects, on mental disorders.

Ozawa conducted cross-sectional research on Japanese outpatients with ICD-10-defined depressive disorder [26]. Montgomery-Asberg De- pression Rating Scale (MADRS) was used in this study with 100 de- pressed outpatients and 36 healthy family members. In [27], the au- thors directed exploration on a significant number of people with abrupt mood swings and subsyndromal depression symptoms. The integrated characteristics specifier was described as a score of 1 to 3 on selected items of the Montgomery Asberg Depression Rating Scale (MADRS) or Hamilton Depression Rating Scale (HAMD-17). According

The survey was conducted online using Google Forms and offline (printed copy) over about nine and half weeks, i.e., from October 23, 2021, to December 28, 2021. A consent agreement document to partic- ipate in the survey was attached on the first page. Participants were given a brief idea about the study and their voluntary participation in the consent form. It was clearly stated that no traceable personal information would be collected and participants could stop taking the survey and withdraw at any time. A total of 684 records were collected

Since most of the participants are students, one source of depression originates from academic performance. Therefore, in order to under- stand the perception of the respondents in terms of their academic performances, seven statements were provided. The respondents used a 5-point Likert scale to specify their agreement level with these statements.

In this work, five different hyperparameter optimization techniques (randomized search CV, grid search CV, hyperopt, TPOT classifier and Optuna) were used to find the best values for the hyperparame- ters for the proposed machine learning models. RandomizedSearchCV selects the optimal values by randomizing the search operation. In GridSearchCV, all values of hyperparameters are searched. The Bayes Theorem-based technique and a Python library, Hyperopt, are used in Bayesian Optimization. Natural selection, genetics concepts and a Python tool, Pipeline Optimization Tool (TPOT), are used in Genetic Algorithms. Optuna uses various optimization methods for finding the optimal hyperparameter values automatically.

In order to find out the salient features from both datasets, nine feature selection techniques were utilized, 1. Recursive Feature Elimi- nation (RFE), 2. Univariate Selection (SelectKBest), 3. Fisher Score- Chi- squared Test, 4. Feature Importance (ExtraTreesClassifier), 5. Pearson Correlation, 6. Mutual Information, 7. Mutual Information Regression,

random features. Mutual Info Regression also estimates mutual de- pendency for a continuous target variable. In the Uniqueness feature selection process, a significantly small number of unique value contain- ing features were selected manually. In the Variance Threshold process, all features whose variance did not meet the threshold were removed.

This study aims to identify the major reasons for depression among Bangladeshi university students. Our research found several factors ex- hibited by depressed university students. Most students are unaware of this mental disorder, and alarming 42.4% students consider committing suicide due to anxiety and stress. Experiencing emotional or sexual violence and financial hardship are discovered as important factors that contribute to depression. Besides, regular smoking, physical inactivity

Another objective of this research is to test if depression can be ac- curately predicted with the newly created depression assessment scale and using various machine learning and deep learning models. The new depression assessment questionnaires have been created employing the voting technique on eight well-known depression measuring scales. Various feature selection approaches and hyperparameter optimization techniques have been performed to enhance the performance of the prediction models. The accuracy is further increased by keeping the dominant features, i.e., removing irrelevant ones.

