One of the main challenges of using Marine Control Source Electro-Magnetic (MCSEM) sounding for Hydrocarbon de- tection has been the airwaves phenomena. In shallow water the response from the air half-space often masks the response from the subsurface. In this paper we present a curve fitting approach to identify a mathematical function or model that best describes the pattern of the airwaves data. The identified model can serve as a prediction model for the airwaves. Synthetic data are simulated in a geologic model that is fairly representative of the area where real MCSEM data were collected. Root Mean Square Error (RMSE), Sum of Square Error (SSE) and Coefficient of determination (R2) were used to evaluate the performance of the prediction model. The result indicates that exponential decay function can describe the airwaves data with RMSE of 3.1e-7, SSE of 1.3e-11 and R2 of 0.990.

An exponential function is a widely used function in fundamental and applied sciences to model a relation- ship in which a constant change in the independent variable gives the same proportional change (i.e. percent- age increase or decrease) in the dependent variable [9]. All forms of exponential function originate from the primitive two (2) parameter family. The variations that exist within this extended family resulted from mere transformations, shifts and stretches of the common stock defined as:

Where,  and  are the function parameters that represent the Y-intercept and the base for the function re- spectively. The random variable is denoted by x where they all determine the exponential function's input- output behaviour [10]. It is worth to note that  is always positive in order to make real and algebraic sense. This implies that x is also positive always. Therefore, the output values of the function f(x) are either com- pletely positive or completely negative depending respectively on whether the sign of  is positive or negative. In many different applications and indeed calculus, the common choice of base for exponential functions is

Curve fitting technique was used in this study to identify a model that can serve as a shallow water air- waves prediction model. We have identified an exponential decay function of the form f(x) = ex to best describe the airwaves data. The study results shows that the exponential decay function can achieve R2 of 0.995, RMSE of 1.6e-7 and SSE of 3.4e-12. The near 1.0 for the coefficient of determination the small RMSE and SSE observed indicates that this prediction model indeed fits the data well. As this study is done with simulated data, the next step is to carry out the experimental work to verify the results.

