Some researchers have innovated optimisation algorithms based on nature observations, these algorithms are known as nature-inspired algorithms. In [9] a bat-inspired algorithm was developed based on echolocation to sense distance between a bat and its surroundings. Particle swarm optimisation (PSO) was inno- vated after observing behaviour of fish and birds schooling [10]. Differential evolution (DE) algorithm was created by Storm and Prince [11] based on population evolution using mutation, cross- over and selection operations. Ant and bee algorithms were devel- oped based on the foraging behaviour of ants and bees that use pheromone as a chemical messenger and the concentration of pheromone is regarded as indication of quality solutions to the problem being solved [12]. Simulated annealing (SA) is based on the characteristics of the metal annealing process [13].

Cuckoo search (CS) algorithm is also a nature-inspired algo- rithm, based on brood reproductive strategy of cuckoo birds to increase their population [14]. However, CS is more effective than other nature-inspired algorithms. In fact, DE, SA and PSO are spe- cial cases of CS algorithm, hence it is no surprising why CS algo- rithm outperforms them [14]. In [15] CS algorithm outperformed DE algorithm in terms of convergence speed to reach optimum solution. In addition, CS algorithm was reported as being more computationally efficient than the PSO [16].

The aim of this paper, is to develop and assess the performance of Cuckoo search algorithms with increasing switching parameter between local and global random walks as the number of iteration increases. The first CS algorithm has linearly increasing switching parameter. The second CS algorithm implements exponentially increasing switching parameter, and the third CS algorithm uses increasing power switching parameter.

The parasitic cuckoos are good in sporting nests where eggs have just been laid and their timing of laying eggs is very precise. They lay one egg in the host nest which will normally hatch quicker than the other eggs. When this happens, the foreign cuckoo would remove the non-hatched eggs from the nest by pushing the eggs out of the nest. This behaviour is aimed at reducing the prob- ability of the legitimate eggs from hatching. Furthermore, the for- eign cuckoo chick can gain access to more food by mimicking the call of the host chicks. There are times when the host cuckoo dis- covers that one of the eggs is foreign. In that case the cuckoo either gets rid of the egg or abandon the nest altogether and moves to build a new nest somewhere else [19].

nest represents a solution, and each cuckoo can lay only one egg (thus representing one solution). We can safely make no deference between an egg, a nest or a cuckoo. The aim is to use the new and potentially better solution (cuckoo egg) to replace a bad solution in the nest.

In the original cuckoo search algorithm, switching parameter between local and global random walks is keep constant at 0.25 as Cuckoo search algorithm searches for global minima. There is limited research studies in CS algorithm efficiency improvement by dynamically changing the value of switching parameter. In

different. To address these differences, each CS algorithm was run twenty times for each of the ten test functions and the results were saved in Microsoft excel file. Using Microsoft Excel, statistical anal- ysis was performed to determine mean, standard deviation. Then

This paper introduced nature-inspired optimisation algorithms and highlighted that CS algorithm is a more general and efficient algorithm when compared to PSO, DE and SA. Then some studies carried out to improve the CS efficiency were reviewed. It was found that most CS efficiency improvements were based on apply- ing different probability distribution functions (Cauchy, Gauss and Gamma) to determine the random walk step sizes. The contribu- tion of this paper is the investigation of dynamically increasing switching parameter in CS algorithms performance. Three CS algo- rithms using linear, exponential and power increasing switching parameters were developed and tested against the constant and linearly decreasing CS algorithms. The CS using exponential increasing (CSEI) switching parameter was found to be more effi- cient than other CS algorithms.

This work is supported by the Institute for Intelligent Systems at the University of Johannesburg in South Africa. We are very thankful of Prof Xin-She Yang for providing demo CS algorithm in the book Nature-Inspired Optimisation Algorithms. We would like to thank also anonymous reviewers for their valuable comments.

