Wireless sensor networks (WSNs) are important platforms for collecting environmental data and monitoring phenomena. Anomalies caused by hardware and software errors, unusual events, and malicious attacks affect the integrity of data gathered by such networks. Therefore, anomaly detection process is a necessary step in building sensor network systems to assure data quality for right decision making. This paper presents a new distributed online anomaly detection model that measures the dissimilarity of sensor observations in principal component space. The new model distributes the detection process over the network to minimize energy consumption while ensuring high detection effectiveness. The detection effectiveness and efficiency of the new model are proved through experiments on real world dataset from Sensorscope system project. Experimental results reveal that the model achieved high detection rate with relatively few false positive rates compared to an existing model.

A distributed deviation detection model in WSN was described in [4] to avoid the unnecessary communication and computational effort. This model was designed based on a non-parametric statistical technique called kernel density estimator. The hierarchical structure which is always used to implement any distributed solution was not adopted for this model. Instead, the hierarchical structure was emulated by assigning each group of low capacity sensors to one of some limited more powerful sensors based on spatial proximity. An In-network outlier detection algorithm was proposed in [5] and aimed at reducing the communication overhead results from massive data transmission in WSN. This algorithm was based on distance similarity to find the global anomalies in WSN. In this model, each node applies the distance similarity measure to find the anomalies and broadcast its result to its neighbours. Other nodes perform the same task until all nodes agree on a common decision on anomalies. Broadcast communication lead to high energy consumption. The problem is worsen when deal with large scale WSN.

Variety of distributed models was designed based on the QSSVM [3, 7-10]; however, the common limitation of these models is the prohibited computational cost of applying the QSSVM on the limited sensor resources. Moreover, the dependency of SVM on some parameters substantially affects the detection effectiveness. These parameters need to be chosen for each WSN application and therefore affect the practicality of the solution. The authors of [15] proposed statistical based outlier detection methods based on

In this paper, a new distributed online anomaly detection model is designed using the one-class principal component classifier (OCPCC) previously proposed in [11] to detect anomalies as they occurred. The difference between the model proposed in this paper and the model in [11] is the selection of detection threshold and the variant of PCA algorithm used. In [11], the threshold was selected by clustering the dissimilarity vector of training data using automated clustering threshold procedure which has high computational cost to be used for online detection. In addition, the called candid-covariance free incremental principal component analysis (CCIPCA) algorithm which was originally proposed in [12] and utilized for data reduction for WSN in [13] was used as a core for the design of the proposed model in this paper. Data samples chosen from sensorscope GSB[14] dataset were used to validate the detection effectiveness of the model in terms of detection rate and false alarm rate. A comparison with an existing distributed model in [15] was conducted to show the advantages of the proposed model.

In this paper, the detection threshold that represents the local normal model (LNM) is chosen to be the maximum MaxDiss and minimum MinDiss bounds of the dissimilarity vector Dtrain . The LNM parameters are then sent to CH to construct the GNM. Different strategies are used to build the GNM at CH; however, the details of such strategies are not the subject of this paper.

Grand St. Bernard (GSB) [14] is one of sensorscope project deployment dataset was gathered using WSN deployment at the Grand St. Bernard pass that is located between Italy and Switzerland. The network is formed of 23 sensors that record metrological environmental data that include; (ambient and surface) temperature, and humidity. 2 clusters were formed in this deployment in which the small cluster has 5 sensors and the big cluster has 18 sensors. The observations of the small cluster which have 5 sensors namely, Node- 25, Node-28, Node-29, Node-31 and Node-32 were used to evaluate the proposed model. In our experiments, the ambient temperature observations in the period 6am-14pm of data recorded on 5th March 2007 were used. The observations are labeled using the Mahalanobis distance measure as used in [15].

This paper introduces the preliminaries and initial experimental results of new distributed anomaly detection model for WSNs. The model was designed based on the calculation of the dissimilarity between sensor observations in the principal component space. Experimental results and comparison with recent existing work indicate that the new model is promising in terms of achieving high detection effectiveness while efficiently utilizing the limited network resources. Further experiments are needed to investigate the performance of the model with multivariate data and additional real world datasets.

