[45] of the HDAC decoys in the Oxford Protein Informatics Group site [46]. For DNMT1 inhibitors, counterparts were generated on-demand with DeepCoy [44] using the active compounds dataset as reference. The compounds of interest were generated to match DUD-E descriptors in a 150:1 decoy-to-reference ratio following selection of top decoys us- ing the provided DeepCoy scripts. Finally, the following descriptors for both sets were calculated in DataWarrior: molecular weight (MW), topo-

Model training and validation. We compared the performance of four different classification algorithms for each dataset (i.e., DNMT1 and HDAC2): logistic regression (LRC), decision trees (DTC), random forest (RFC), and extreme gradient boosting classifiers (xgboost classi- fier; XGBC). The comparison was performed with Scikit-learn and xg- boost [49] Python modules. Each model was trained and validated by ten-fold cross-validation and grid search optimization to tune their re- spective hyperparameters. Finally, we selected the logistic regression model for both classifiers, given its compatibility with the swarm op- timizer architecture and performance comparing with the best perfor- mance model, xgboost.

structure_Match). We chose these specific weights to balance the struc- tural features of the generated molecules, considering pharmacophoric elements previously suggested for DNMT1 [52] and HDAC2 [53] during the curation and filtering process. The substructure matching query was N-(p-methylphenethyl)-benzamide. This compound was selected based on selective HDAC2 inhibition, which may be related to other mech- anisms beyond zinc interactions, such as hydrogen bonding networks [54].

(within an average of 30 optimization steps and 45 runs). The resulting structures were subjected to a semi-automated selection process to alle- viate the tendency of these molecular generators to produce uncommon substructures, intricate chemical patterns, duplicate molecules, small di- versity sets, or structurally incorrect compounds [56]. Given the phar- macophoric traits of the generated molecules, our hypothesis holds that many of these molecules contain enough structural information to elu- cidate the general pattern necessary to produce a biological response in one or two of the selected biological targets. To further increment the molecular diversity of putative dual inhibitors, we added ten decoys for each generated structure using DeepCoy generator. Finally, we ran- domly selected one of the ten decoys obtained per structure, resulting in a balanced proportion of approximately 1:1 positive and negative exam- ples. The final dataset was preprocessed and represented as described for the independent DNMT1 and HDAC2 datasets.

Xgboost [49] was developed to control over-fitting, improve per- formance, and increase computing speed compared with other tradi- tional non-ensemble algorithms. Therefore, we selected this classifica- tion method, applied grid search for hyperparameter tuning followed by ten-fold cross-validation. Training of the final dual inhibitors clas- sifier was done using the dataset of generated putative dual inhibitors, described in the last section.

Natural products continue to have paramount importance in drug discovery [57]. Often curated by a trial-and-error process searching for therapeutic agents, it is not surprising that almost one-third of FDA- approved new chemical entities were derived from natural sources [58]. For this reason, we selected a large natural product collection available in the public domain as the chemical space for virtual screening: the natural products database COCONUT with more than 406,076 unique flat natural products collected from 53 data sources [59]. Of note, the virtual screening protocol proposed in this work can be used with any small-molecule database.

Another common problem during machine learning campaigns is overfitting. Indeed, algorithms are prone to poor generalization if cau- tion is not exercised during model training. To overcome this issue, best practices include the use of a validation set and early stopping [79]. Ad- ditional measures include hyperparameter tuning; for logistic regression penalties, such as L1 and L2, are commonly used to avoid overfitting. For XGBoost slow learning rates and early stopping are strongly rec- ommended as best practices. For the case study presented hereunder, overfitting may also arise from data. Given the trend to follow specific pharmacophoric traits to design DNMT (nucleosides or charged amines) and HDAC (hydroxamates) inhibitors, we used a consensus approach for hit pruning using SBDD.

Drug discovery endeavors are on the hunt for novel methodologies or optimization strategies to diminish the high attrition rate and cost involved. Polypharmacology become a promising venue for better ther- apies, however, this increases the complexity of the rational design. This work introduces a general CADD pipeline that integrates LBDD and SBDD to support dual-target compound discovery and design. As a case study, we successfully developed a classifier for DNMT1/HDAC2 inhibitors using public datasets and open-access software. The classifier uncovered two promising scaffolds in the COCONUT natural product database that was used as an example of a large screening compound database. Both scaffolds showed high scores and good interaction with both proteins at the molecular level. We conclude that the flexibility and adaptability of the proposed pipeline has predictive capabilities of sim- ilar or derivative methods and is readily applicable to the discovery of small molecules targeting many other therapeutically relevant proteins.

San Jose-Eneriz E, Agirre X, Rabal O, Vilas-Zornoza A, Sanchez-Arias JA, Miranda E, Ugarte A, Roa S, Paiva B, Estella-Hermoso de Mendoza A, Alvarez RM, Casares N, Segura V, Martin-Subero JI, Ogi FX, Soule P, Santiveri CM, Campos-Olivas R, Castel- lano G, de Barrena MGF, Rodriguez-Madoz JR, Garcia-Barchino MJ, Lasarte JJ, Avila MA, Martinez-Climent JA, Oyarzabal J, Prosper F. Discovery of first-in-class reversible dual small molecule inhibitors against G9a and DNMTs in hematological malignancies. Nat Commun 2017;8:15424. doi:10.1038/ncomms15424.

