in terms of service-layers technology selection [4]. The history of the physical layer of cellular broadband infrastructure generations shows that is changed and shifted approximately once every decade for instance 4G to 5G. While the television broadcast has changed over time, for instance in analog television (ATV) to digital television (DTV) tran- sition the national television system committee (NTSC-3.58) converted to advanced television system committee (ATSC) standard in USA or phase alternation line (PAL) converted to digital video broadcasting-terrestrial (DVB-T) in Europe and NTSC-J converted to integrated service digital broadcast (ISDB) in Japan [5,6]. Besides, there is an approach to broadcasting between broadcast owners to supply and

structures gap physical layers [14]. They are emerged as a possible so- lution to have hybrid technology using a multi-layer delivery system recommended by researchers in the last few years [15]. To develop the provide technologies that can satisfy such mandates, the convergence broadcast and broadband and hybrid broadcast and broadband (HBB) are being researched and developed as a kind of integration methods worldwide for decades [12,16,17].

The LTE-B introduced evolved Multimedia Broadcast Multicast Ser- vices (eMBMS) as an orthogonal and PD-NOMA introduced layered di- vision multiplexing (LDM) as non-orthogonal service providers [19,20]. The eMBMS operates as a PTM intermediary live big-data transmission. The technology is expected to play a significant role in reducing the loading of delivering multimedia streaming for future cellular broad- casting. Also, the technology will support geographic positioning in- formation updates such as local news, climate and traffic reports, stocks

In the beginning, Shi et al. [13] proposed Cell-TV, which was a paradigm of cellular digital television (CDTV) broadcasting over mobile networks. Lykourgiotis et al. [15] presented broadcast and broadband combinations for real-time services. Shokair et al. [17] provided a hybrid broadcast/broadband network as a potential solution to mitigate the increasing demand for CDTV. Authors in Refs. [29,30] presented a

et al. [37] presented performance analysis for far and near users in a non-orthogonal based system. L. Zhang et al. [38] investigated non-orthogonal multiplexing in 5G-MBMS in broadband-broadcast convergence. The first planning of hybrid CDTB service in standalone and cooperative digital video broadcasting-next generation handheld (DVB-NGH) and LTE model presented in Ref. [39]. Tusha et al. [40]

In this section, the mathematical analysis in three sub-sections are followed as 1) The BER performance is investigated and analyzed. 2) Fractional Transmit Power Allocation (FTPA) algorithm for LDM multi- services is considered and analyzed. 3)The outage probability perfor- mance is considered and analyzed.

getting worse compare to the with FTPA case. Moreover, using FTPA has an impact on UL BER performance and obviously on LDM. Since FTPA has no gain on LL BER performance, the effect on LDM is not as clearly visible as UL BER performance.

is concluded from this research that non-orthogonal and orthogonal hybrid framework technology has outperformed BER and outage rate performance compared to a solitary technology. Therefore, we proposed that for next-generation CDTV as a middle infrastructure for broadcast network owners. In a special case, we recommend it for next-generation CDTB broadcast.

