Background and objective: Electronic fetal heart monitoring is currently used during pregnancy throughout most of the developed world to detect risk conditions for both the mother and the fetus. Non-invasive fetal electro- cardiogram (NI-fECG), recorded in the maternal abdomen, represents an alternative to cardiotocography, which could provide a more accurate estimate of fetal heart rate. Different methodologies, with varying advantages and disadvantages, have been developed for NI-fECG signal detection and processing.

Prenatal cardiac monitoring is an extremely important aspect in the early detection of pathological conditions of the fetus. Electronic fetal heart monitoring is currently used in most of the developed world to detect risk conditions for both mother and fetus. The main goals are to rule out possible conditions that could lead to fetal morbidity or even death. Early and more effective detection of fetal abnormalities can help obstetricians and pediatric cardiologists prescribe appropriate medica- tions in a timely manner or take necessary precautions during delivery or after birth. The main purpose of fetal monitoring during childbirth is the early recognition of intrauterine hypoxic infection, to lead the clinician to timely intervention to avoid any complications in the health

Non-invasive fetal electrocardiogram (NI-fECG), recorded in the maternal abdomen represents an alternative to cardiotocography, which could provide a more accurate estimate of fetal heart rate. Moreover, electrocardiographic fetal heart activity could be obtained by studying the morphology of the ECG. However, the fetal ECG (fECG) is difficult to be extracted by the mixed abdominal signal, mainly due to the poor signal-to-noise ratio (SNR), which has limited its use to date. Noninva- sive fetal ECG has some limitations and potential problems that should be considered.

Recently developed fetal monitoring systems utilizing noninvasive fetal electrocardiography have become commercially accessible to expectant parents as alternatives to conventional prenatal care practices [3,4]. Some other alternative monitoring systems [5,6], which allow for the remote collection and real-time sharing of critical maternal and fetal biometrics, include the beltless pod and patch duo transmitting elec- trocardiographic (ECG) and electromyographic (EMG) data signaling fetal and maternal heart rates and uterine action. While there have been advancements in the development of fetal ECG monitoring devices, the analysis and interpretation of the recorded abdominal ECG signals can still be challenging due to the abovementioned reasons.

Developing robust and efficient signal processing techniques for extracting fetal ECG signals from noisy recordings remains a research challenge. Noise from maternal ECG, uterine contractions, and move- ment artifacts can significantly affect the quality of the fetal ECG signal. Further research is needed to improve the accuracy of signal processing algorithms for better fetal ECG extraction. Although currently, available fetal electrocardiogram monitoring systems have primarily focused on temporary, short-term surveillance, An overhaul of the current ap- proaches to investigating fetal heart function will be necessary if we are to engineer unobtrusive technologies sophisticated enough to scrutinize cardiac rhythms indefinitely, allowing for continuous evaluation of the

as a matrix, which is considered unchangeable during the process. This is related to the assumption that the mixed signals are stationary. However, physiological processes often produce mixtures of multivar- iate signals that are not stationary [34], and therefore, their proportions in the mixture can change over time, although the mixing matrix can be considered stationary for short time periods [35]. In a fECG extraction scenario, this could lead to the fetal component being corrupted and not useful for further processing.

Since its introduction, Empirical Mode Decomposition (EMD) [36] has widely been used to denoise non-linear and nonstationary mixed signals. In EMD based techniques, signals are decomposed into a set of oscillatory components, which are called intrinsic mode functions (IMF). Denoising in the EMD domain translates into a partial reconstruction of the signal using only IMFs containing useful information and rejecting IMFs that carry mainly noise. Determining and removing the

signal quality indices. The performance of the ICA algorithm in fECG recordings can be greatly hindered by the assumption of a sta- tionary composite signal. In real life scenarios, fetal movements that occur inside the uterus can lead to a variation in the position of the fetal heart in respect to the abdominal electrode positions [38]. These amplitude modulations can potentially obstruct the performance of the ICA process and the quality of the separated signals can be reduced.

Wavelet transform is a signal processing tool that is widely used in biomedical signal processing because of its ability to produce a sparse representation for many real-world signals [39]. In the context of fetal ECG processing wavelet transforms have been used as a denoising tool in the form of Wavelet Thresholding (WT) [40]. Taking into advantage the ability of wavelets localize data on different scales, WT can preserve important signal features while removing noise. Denoising a signal using wavelets usually consists of three main steps.

at 2048 Hz, with a duration of 15 s each. Each signal contains three differential maternal channels extracted from the thorax, and three unipolar abdominal leads. db2 and db3 were employed in order to provide quantitative results of the algorithm in terms of FHR estimation.

FastICA. In this work, the Independent Components (ICs) were extracted with a deflation approach. PCA deflation is a way to iteratively compute the principal components of a dataset. It starts by computing the first principal component and removing its effect from the data. This is done by projecting the data onto the first principal component and subtracting the resulting projection from the original data. The process is then repeated with the new, deflated data to compute the second principal component, and so on. The nonlinearity in the fixed-point al- gorithm is calculated using the hyperbolic tangent function:

wavelet analysis. They can be used to identify low-quality signals after the application of the ICA. An average sQI computed from the above indices is used to determine if accurate fECG separation is achieved. The indices used in this study are.

Nonstationary and nonlinear signals can be decomposed into IMFs, and this basis functions can reflect the components of the main signal. However, some of these components are not useful, while some of them reflect the characteristics of the original signal. Hence, selecting the effective IMFs has been an important process while processing signals in the EMD domain.

lated and real data by comparing the detected QRS complexes (QRSdet) with the reference QRS provided in the datasets (QRSref). There are several statistics that should be mentioned when evaluating the per- formance of any NI-fECG extraction algorithm. The classic statistics for evaluating a QRS detection algorithm, which were also used in this study include: The Sensitivity (SE), Positive Predictive Value (PPV), Accuracy (ACC), and F1 score (F1). Beyond these metrics, we also calculated the Mean Average Error (MAE), which represents the absolute time differ- ence, expressed in milliseconds between the reference QRS values and the detected QRS values. The statistical measures used in this study are described below:

Accurate and automatic distinguishing of IMFs for real-time signal processing and how to process different types of IMFs remains an open problem. In the conventional EMD noise reduction method, higher order IMFs are often discarded to reduce noise. However, this process causes significant information losses in the reconstructed signals. Algorithms for assessing the importance of IMFs were developed by Flandrin et al.

[71] and Wu et al. [72] based on the statistical analysis of the functions resulting from the decomposition of the signals. In the field of nonin- vasive fetal ECG analysis there is a lack of research on the selection of optimal IMFs while using EMD and other similar decomposition methods. The correlation algorithm presented in this work takes advantage of signal specific characteristics of the produced IMFs to partially reconstruct a fECG signal that improves FHR detection.

93.60%, ACC = 90.45%.The heuristic search on algorithm showed that on the ADFECGDB by average values of SE = 3.07%, PPV = 2.27%, F1 = 2.00%, ACC = 3.77%. It should be noted that our results were consistent optimal IMF selection demonstrated an improvement on FHR estimation

Gupta A, Srivastava MC, Khandelwal V, Gupta A. A novel approach to fetal ECG extraction and enhancement using blind source separation (BSS-ICA) and adaptive fetal ECG enhancer (AFE). In: 6th international conference on information, communications & signal processing; 2007. https://doi.org/10.1109/ icics.2007.4449716. 2007.

Huang NE, Shen Z, Long SR, Wu MC, Shih HH, Zheng Q, Yen NC, Tung CC, Liu HH. The empirical mode decomposition and the Hilbert spectrum for nonlinear and non-stationary time series analysis. In: Proceedings of the royal society of london.

