The high global competitiveness between companies characterizes the 21st century industry. Constant changes in demand by the consumer side lead to a shorter lifetime of products. To remain competitive, companies must be able to respond quickly to this rapid demand. The big challenge is implementing new methodologies that allow system adaptability and flexibility to mass production methods to obtain a high product variability and, at the same time, large production volumes. Since the beginning of industrialization, there has been considerable interest from the industry side to innovate their production systems and develop new ideas. The applicability of new technologies in the industry, which lead to paradigm changes by allowing increased rev- enues at lower costs, are usually known as industrial revolutions, and the current one is the 4th Industrial Revolution or Industry 4.0 (I4.0) [1].

However, the adoption of such properties by industry is still rel- atively poor compared to academic research since the application of proper solutions and technologies in real environments is complex, i.e., there are unique and difficult challenges that may not exist in controlled environments. Also, despite the interest from the industry to update their production systems considering I4.0 principles, and increase revenues at lower costs, the technology acceptance is still slow. This is mainly because these are emergent technologies with low Tech- nology Readiness Level (TRL), sometimes still immature and lacking proper integration and validation among real industrial situations.

For this purpose, this paper presents a Systematic Literature Review (SLR) on AIS applications in AMS. The objective is two-fold. On the one hand, the study collects and analysis the scientific contributions that report industrial AIS applications in multiple research areas to tackle different problems. On the other hand, these applications are assessed based on the Level of Autonomy (LOA) introduced to the system, considering a taxonomy of system autonomy presented by Peres et al. [6]. To this end, the following research questions were formulated:

related scenarios). Second, it presents the main existing literature re- views on one or more of these topics. The analysis of the existing literature reviews and identified limitations leads to the justification of development of this SLR, which focus in the merger of all the addressed topics.

Germany has one of the most competitive manufacturing industries in the world. Because of its vital machinery and plant manufacturing industry, its global significance of ICT competencies and its know- how in embedded systems and automation engineering, Germany has the advantage of being the leader in the research, development and production of innovative manufacturing technologies. Also, they al- ready followed a structured and integrative approach for the AMT implementation to take advantage of all their individual and systemic benefits [10]. So, in 2011, the Industrie 4.0 term was first used at the Hannover Fair, and, in 2013, the Industrie 4.0 Working Group presented a final report [11], stating that I4.0 is the strategic initiative to secure the future of the German manufacturing industry.

However, Germany was not the only country that have recognized the trend to deploy AMS into the manufacturing industry. Similar ini- tiatives are also found, such as the U.S. Smart Manufacturing Leadership Coalition (SMLC) [12], the Chinese Made In China 2025 (MIC25) [13], the French Usine du Futur [14], the British Catapult [15], the Korean Industry Innovation 3.0 [16], etc.

[17]. With this it was introduced to European industries the urgency to deal with the fusion of the online world and the world of industrial production. The paradigm is changing, and those who are the leaders in the digital domain will take the lead in industrial production. The support for research in this area increased dramatically over the years, and I4.0 became a hot topic among practitioners and academics in Europe and one of the top priorities for research centres, universities and companies. For the first time in the history of the industrial revolution, a revolution was announced before it actually happened [18]. This provided various opportunities for companies and research institutes to shape the future of I4.0 actively.

Most AMT nowadays relates to integrating computational and phys- ical processes and connecting billions of objects over the internet. This is often addressed by modern CPS, IoT, and other similar technologies. Many conventional terminologies, such as Manufacturing and Supervi- sory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA), Industrial Control Systems (ICS), Robotics, among others, are commonly used to refer to the same AMT. This ambiguity is especially apparent in the AMS paradigm when numerous other technologies and concepts overlap, such as embed- ded systems, IoT, MAS, CPS, industrial networks, Wireless Sensor & Actuator Networks, Digital Twin (DT), among others.

This makes defining AMS and AMT difficult, especially when consid- ering all of the application scenarios and research fields. Furthermore, because research in some of these technologies is so vast and may encompass multiple disciplines of knowledge, they eventually become their own research domains. Next, it is presented a description of the core AMT, which are paving the way for the development of recent AMS and Industry 4.0-related application scenarios.

MAS MAS is based on a society of intelligent, cooperative, proactive, and autonomous entities called agents that represent physical or logical things in the system. It is derived from the field of distributed AI. The agents are dispersed across the environ- ment, interacting with one another and with the environment to achieve a specific or common objective, sharing information, making choices, and modifying their behaviour as conditions change [27].

AI Manufacturing processes should employ a computationally pro- cessable model, such as data-based, physical-based, numerical- based, or discrete-based, to realize the full potential of decision support. Data-driven models involve the analysis of sensor data to discover hidden patterns in the data. This is referred to as data mining, and it can employ one or more AI algorithms to extract relevant information from data. These approaches may be based on hard computing, such as Machine Learning methods, or on soft computing, such as Biologic Inspired Computation [6,31, 32].

Cloud/Edge Computing Because of advancements in Cloud comput- ing, IoT has become appealing. Wireless devices are distin- guished by their mobility and battery power, which present sev- eral constraints for data process and storage needs for running algorithms. This means that these capabilities can be relocated out of the constrained devices to powerful remote servers as long as a network connection is available (for information ex- change). Cloud computing refers to the ability of hardware and software systems to deliver data services over the Internet. Data collected from the sensorisation layer can be further processed remotely on the Cloud or the Fog. On the other hand, Fog

Industrial Robots An industrial robot is a self-contained, reprogrammable, multifunctional manipulator with three or more axes that can be stationary or mobile, used in industrial au- tomation applications. An industrial robot generally comprises a manipulator that moves an end-effector to accomplish the intended duties, a controller that actuates and regulates the manipulator, and a teach pendant that programmes and super- vises the operations. There are also Automated Guided Vehicles (AGV), which are robots that transport goods in facilities. More recently, collaborative robots emerged. Cobots are designed to work safely alongside human workers in a shared, collaborative workspace [42,43].

Computer systems have reached a level of complexity where hu- man intervention for operation and control is becoming increasingly difficult. In the IoT paradigm, the visions of ubiquitous and perva- sive computing will become true by surrounding us with embedded technology and transforming every physical object into a CPS. These CPS are connected to sensors and actuators to maintain communication between physical and virtual worlds and are interconnected to other CPS using communication systems. How can such a complex system be managed in this scenario, considering all the actively interacting heterogeneous devices and uncertainty involved? In 2001, the Inter- national Business Machines Corporation (IBM) suggested the concept of Autonomic Computing, referring to the need for new methods to manage and control the behaviour of complex systems, where these systems should be able to adapt themselves, eliminating the need for human intervention [44].

Biologic Inspired Computation refers to the study of biologically mo- tivated computation, which belongs to the field of Natural Computing and a sub-field of Computational Intelligence. Biologic Inspired Computa- tion main goal is to solve engineering and computation problems by generating solutions inspired by different biological processes from the natural world. Several sub-disciplines focus on adaptive and intelligent systems, such as Evolutionary Computation, Swarm Intelligence, Fuzzy Systems, Artificial Neural Networks (ANN), and AIS.

The BIS is a robust and self-organized system with remarkable abil- ities, such as recognition and discrimination, maintenance, inference from danger/context and memory. To maintain a healthy state, the BIS processes the state of the body and takes action accordingly through healing processes [52,53]. The BIS is a multilayer system wherein different types of defence mechanisms are active in each layer. There are three main lines of defence: the anatomic barrier, innate immunity and adaptive immunity. The anatomic barrier is constituted by physical obstacles, such as skin, mucous membranes and skin secretions, to prevent pathogens such as bacteria and viruses from entering the organ- ism. If a pathogen breaches the first line of defence, innate immunity provides an immediate but non-specific response, such as inflammatory response and antimicrobial proteins. If pathogens successfully evade the innate response, it will activate the adaptive immunity, which adapts its response during an infection to improve its recognition skills and kill the pathogen.

The BIS consists of a set of organs (central and peripheral lymphoid organs), cells (lymphocytes or white blood cells and granulocytes) and molecules (immunoglobulins or antibodies) [54,55]. The central lymphoid organs, such as bone marrow and the thymus, are responsible for producing and assisting lymphocytes. The purpose of peripheral lymphoid organs, such as lymph nodes, spleen and mucosal tissues, is to facilitate the interaction between lymphocytes and antigens.

the recognition process, the epitope bonds to the lymphocytes using the paratope, which is the bonding molecule of the lymphocyte. Antibodies are a particular type of molecule. They are the paratopes of the B cells and are responsible for binding to the antigen. Antigens are mostly known as non-self cells, while the host body cells are known as self-cells. Epitopes are usually non-self if they are part of antigens, or self since some proteins of the host body could be recognized by lymphocytes.

[56] presents a deep review of AIS, focusing on anomaly detection applications in CPS. As described next, four main immune mechanisms have inspired most standard AIS techniques [5]. However, there are ensemble methods, which represent approaches that combine more than one basic technique. Finally, there are immune-inspired methods, which do not follow exactly a specific immune model but use immune principles.

Artificial Immune Network Models (AIN) [58,59] Jerne [60] pro- posed the immune network theory, also known as idiotypic network theory, in 1974, which suggests that the immune sys- tem maintains an idiotypic network of interconnected B cells for antigen recognition and immunological memory. An idiotype is a group of antibodies that share a common characteristic. This algorithm investigates the interconnectivity of different immune cells, i.e., cell populations linked over successive generations, to stimulate or suppress immune responses. The Artificial Immune Network algorithm (aiNet) [61] is a well-known approach in- spired by the AIN. In this technique, antibodies stimulate and suppress each other to stabilize the network and the memory. An idiotype is stimulated when the antibodies from the group bind to idiotopes of other groups of antibodies. This results in the increase of the concentration of antibodies from the idiotype, and the concentration of antibodies from the recognized group decreases, leading to the stimulation or suppression of a given immune response.

The second great AIS application field is regarding optimization problems. Cayzer and Aickelin [79] presents an AIS approach applied to the task of film recommendation. Zand et al. [80] demonstrates how the CSA can be used to solve the File Transfer Scheduling optimization problem. A traffic signal control system was developed based on AIS to supervise an isolated intersection and build a regulation strategy as soon as a disturbance (such as congestion or an accident) is de- tected [81]. Also, Chen and Zhang [82] presented an AIS approach for scheduling wireless access networks in a 5G message service system.

Considering AMS-related SLRs, Peres et al. [6] present a systematic review of current Industrial AI literature, focusing on its application in real-world manufacturing environments. On the other hand, Radanliev et al. [96] provide a literature review of current and future challenges in using AI in CPS, and present a new conceptual framework for analysing the evolution of AI decision-making in these type of systems. Moreover, thus far, several review-type articles deserve attention in the AIS field. To review available immune models and related inspired methods, Timmis [86] survey the current state of the AIS approaches and reflect on the field roadblocks for future development. In this work, Timmis et al. [88] analyse AIS in a broader context of interdisciplinary research, based on an established conceptual framework that encap- sulates mathematical and computational modelling of immunology, abstraction and then the development of engineered systems. Finally, Dasgupta et al. [5] survey the significant works in the AIS field and, in particular, it explores up-to-date advances in applied AIS during the

Other proposals focus specifically on AIS application scenarios. Zheng et al. [89] review immune applications of the AIS approach and propose several suggestions to the AIS community that can be undertaken to help move the area forward. On the other hand, Hak- tanirlar Ulutas et al. [66] presents a literature review of the CSA, its variants (basic and hybrid approaches), and the main applications. More recently, Al-Khatib and Doush [95] extensively summarize re- search of AIS and categorize them based on the application problem to understand the current trend of the usage of this category of algorithms. Related to the security field, there are several AIS review papers.

Systems field, with the primary focus on biologically-inspired adaptive approaches, including AIS, to the Network Intrusion Detection problem. Bayar et al. [91] provide a survey on biological immunity and highlight the main concepts and mechanisms that are particularly relevant to fault detection, diagnosis and recovery (FDDR) problems. More re- cently, Aldhaheri et al. [72] and Alrubayyi et al. [97] present an SLR and a survey with a comprehensive study of empirical research on AIS approaches to secure IoT environments. Moreover, and also related to AMS, Bere and Muyingi [92] presents an analysis of AIS solutions to secure Industrial Control Systems (ICS) from persistent threats. Finally, Muhamad and Deris [90] review the production scheduling problems, focusing on ways AIS can be used to solve job-shop and flexible job- shop scheduling problems. On the other hand, Raza and Fernandez [93] present a detailed review of immuno-inspired robotic applications.

To the best of our knowledge, none of the previously identified re- views formed insights into applying AIS approaches in AMS. Generally, we find studies focusing only on the AMS domain or the AIS domain. Some AMS-domain reviews also address autonomy in industrial systems (Self-*), but do not include directly in the study AIS applications. On the other hand, AIS-domain reviews have the purpose of surveying the main immune models or specific AIS applications. However, these application scenarios are not related to the industry.

Nevertheless, we encountered three reviews similar reviews, which merge both AIS and AMS domains [90,92,93]. However, these reviews are limited to specific application contexts and/or research categories, such as ICT security, job-shop scheduling and robotics. Thus, there is a need for this systematic review. The main contribution is a compre- hensive study of AIS models applied to different application contexts and research categories within AMS. This will provide readers with a complete understanding of the role of AIS in industrial scenarios.

More information regarding the search strategy, i.e., the electronic database search strings used, can be found in Appendix B. The search was conducted between July and October 2021 and then updated in July 2022. In both phases, it included academic research that: (i) contained at least one term from each group (see Appendix A) in either the abstract, title or keywords; (ii) published in peer-reviewed journals, conference proceedings or book chapters; (iii) written in the English language.

Regarding the CPS application area, Rammig et al. [111] (P14) proposed an online model checking technique that can be applied to identify needs and adapt the currently running software system proactively. In this case, a DT-based approach is used for continuous system supervision. This way, achieving a lightweight solution for Self-adaptation in Real-Time Operating Systems (RTOS) is possible. The proposed solution is demonstrated in a paravirtualization context (virtual machines) and tested in an abstracted emulation framework. On the other hand, Lokesh et al. [104] (P07) propose a MAS-CPS model- based integrated with an ensemble immune model (combination of DT and AIN). This model introduces resiliency and self-adaptation to the system by enabling state awareness, self-tolerance and self-healing. The proposed solution is demonstrated as a generic framework and applied to a simulated dataset containing data from several CPS layers, such as monitor & actuator, communication and computation & control. The authors propose a similar solution to the same problem [105]

In the Electric Power Industry, Li et al. [121] (P24) address the distribution service restoration problem, in the event of a large-scale blackout in a power distribution network with DGs, by proposing a generic immune-inspired MAS, designated Multi-agent Immune Algo- rithm (MIA). This solution introduces adaptability, resiliency, Self- tolerance and Self-healing properties to the power system. The so- lution is demonstrated using a power flow analysis software of a simulated scenario with real-world conditions. More recently, but in the Manufacturing application area, Rocha et al. [99] (P2) studied industrial approaches to distributed machine diagnosis, using a MAS paradigm combined with AIS. For this work, lightweight NSA, AIN and CSA models are developed based on fuzzy logic, enabling distributed system adaptability, resiliency and Self-tolerance. The models were demonstrated and validated in simulation environments.

of 4 since the robot system can behave as an adaptive and autonomic system and continuously self-learn within known system boundaries. However, proposals related to SCADA/ICS and Electric Power Industry achieve LOA of 3 since the system can self-adjust its own behaviour. However, a human is responsible for overseeing system decisions.

Robotic immuno-based control systems are very popular. In the early years, Lee and Sim [131], Jun et al. [126] and Sun et al. [140] (P34, P29, P43) were already proposing an ensemble method, combin- ing CSA and AIN and achieving cooperative control in a distributed autonomic robotic system. Based on the MAS paradigm, the proposed solution enables adaptive group control as a swarm strategy, where robots can find and execute tasks that are spread out in the environ- ment. Validation is performed in a simulated environment regarding a collaborative robot search problem. On the other hand, Michelan and Von Zuben [137] (P40) investigates an autonomic control system of a mobile robot based (in this work, non-distributed), using an AIN model. The robot navigates to solve a multi-objective task, namely, garbage collection, while it adapts to environmental conditions to establish a trajectory without colliding with obstacles. The authors used simulation to validate the solution.

Moreover, considering mobile robots, Lau and Wong [129] (P32) present a fully distributed and adaptive control framework, based on generic immune theories, to manage, coordinate and schedule a fleet of agents employed in an AGV system. The framework was validated in a simulation study of an intelligent transport system operated by a fleet of AIS agents in a warehousing environment. Later, the authors presented a mathematical model of the control framework [136] (P39).

[116] (P19) proposes an anti-jamming ensemble approach that com- bines DT with AIN for distributed machine energy leakage diagnosis in complex environments such as parallel-machine job shops. In order to evaluate the proposed approach, several experiments were performed on a tyre vulcanization shop floor in China to diagnose the steam leakage of steam traps. Results show that the lightweight immune approach introduces robustness and Self-tolerance. Moreover, Kim et al.

In the Electric Power Industry, Ieao et al. [109] (P12) propose an ensemble methodology based on the unconstrained binary program- ming (UBP) model and the CSA to estimate fault sections in electric power systems. The proposed methodology is tested in a simulated environment, using part of the South-Brazilian electric power system. On the other hand, mainly used in Smart Grid environments, Lima et al. [106] (P09) propose a method of using a voltage and current abnormality detector filter in electrical distribution systems based on the NSA. The solution was validated in two simulated distribution systems.

In manufacturing, Pinto et al. [98] (P01) presents an IDS approach based on the deterministic version of the DCA (dDCA). To evaluate the dDCA effectiveness, a testing dataset was generated by implementing and injecting various attacks on an OPC UA-based CPS testbed. The properties introduced by the immune model are adaptive, robustness and Self-tolerance. Later, Pinto et al. [113] (P16) propose the Incremen- tal Dendritic Cell Algorithm (iDCA) for online incremental detection in an unsupervised manner. The iDCA was also validated using datasets. Moreover, Clotet et al. [114] (P17) propose a MAS real-time IDS, based on the NSA, to detect attacks targeting physical components at the industrial process level. The solution was validated using a dataset from a water treatment plant laboratory.

Regarding CPS applications, Pinto et al. [144] propose a Model- based Engineering (MBE) approach to enable security-by-design during the development of CPS, using the IEC 61499 standard. The security features introduced rely on an IDS based on the iDCA. The authors used a CPS testbed to validate the proposed approach. Results show that the solution is very lightweight and can dramatically reduce design and code complexity while improving application maintainability.

In the robotics field, Degeler et al. [112] (P15) propose a DT-based IDS to protect AGVs against cyber-attacks that can cause severe physical damage to the manufacturing system. The solution is validated in a simulated factory floor with a distributed scenario (three AGVs oper- ating simultaneously). Finally, related to the Electric Power Industry, Igbe et al. [102] (P05) propose an IDS in industrial communication scenarios based on the dDCA. In this case, the authors used the DNP3 protocol and proposed a dataset for a Smart Grid scenario to validate the solution.

line). On the other hand, Zhao et al. [119] (P22) propose an online fault diagnosis system for safety in chemical processes by combining Artificial Neural Networks (ANN) with an immune-inspired model. The solution was developed for a lab-scale distillation process, achieving adaptive, robust and Self-tolerance properties. Moreover, in CPS ap- plication scenarios, Zhu et al. [118] (P21) also propose an artificial immune system-based fault diagnosis, designated AISFD, combined with Bayesian estimation, for controlling alarm floods during transi- tions of chemical processes. A pilot-scale distillation process was used to validate the solution.

Operations Research deals with developing and applying advanced analytical methods to improve decision-making in complex problems, where optimal or near-optimal solutions are typically found. In this SLR context, Operations Research can be found in several applications, mainly for optimization and scheduling problems. The AIS model is used as a meta-heuristic method, such as in the Electric Power Industry, Robotics, Manufacturing and CPS. Regarding TRL achievement, one

On the other hand, one can find very low and also very high LOA. For example, the maximum LOA found in the Electric Power Industry was 2 since systems present only partial autonomy. In both manufacturing and robotics fields, one can find LOA of 3 and 4 since the system already presents several autonomic capabilities, including most of the decision-making on its own.

through real-world industrial deployment in some companies in Swe- den, the U.K. and Spain. More recently, considering now the CPS field, Semwal and Nair [117] (P20) presented a decentralized mechanism, based on the combination of CSA, AIN and DT, applicable to multiple distributed problems in CPS. Although being developed for CPS, the solution is validated in both emulated (CPS) and real (robot) scenarios. In this case, robots must discover the best path to follow in a real mobile multi-robot system.

Finally, considering the robotics topic, Gao and Luo [139] (P42) proposed an AIN model for efficient cooperative task allocation in a multi-robot system with autonomously distributed architecture. The dynamic allocation method for cooperative robots was demonstrated and analysed in the simulation of emergency handling. On the other hand, Xu et al. [101] (P04) proposed an AIS-fuzzy method (fuzzy systems combined with CSA model) for a hybrid optimization technique in order to accomplish distributed formation control. The System-on- a-programmable-chip (SoPC) methodology is adopted for the solution validation, where each robot is realized as an independent CPS in one FPGA chip.

Safety refers to the absence of threats to human operators, i.e., to the fact that machines, production facilities or products should not pose a danger to people or the environment. On the other hand, Security (IT security or cyber-security) refers to the protection of digital systems, i.e., the system itself needs to be protected against misuse and cyber-attacks.

considering the complexity of AMS architectures and the global con- nectivity of shop-floor systems, exposing these types of systems to much more vulnerabilities than the already existing systems. Also, consider- ing the similarities that the BIS functionalities have with the problem of detecting attacks/intrusion in computer systems, AIS has incredible potential to be used for autonomic IDS. However, this research is still in its infancy. More detail about bio-inspired IDS and AIS-related security in AMS enabler technologies, such as IoT and CPS, can be found in previous work [72,87,92,147].

In the Manufacturing application area, Li and Cai [107] (10) pro- poses the I2S solution to achieve optimized sustainability, i.e., opti- mization of manufacturing lifecycles for global energy consumption reduction. On the other hand, Guo and Yang [116] (P19) proposes an approach for machine energy leakage diagnosis in complex environ- ments. Considering the resource utilization goal, both proposals tackle the global energy consumption reduction (job re-scheduling or energy leakage detection).

Regarding the Electric Power Industry application area, Bhuvaneswari et al. [134] (P37), and Lizondo et al. [123] (P26) propose control solutions. The first work, the control of a microgrid operation, aims to optimize the power production of local DG systems. The second work proposes a control system to tackle the Peak Load problem. Both proposals focused on energy demand management, which dictates correct resource usage in different periods, such as the size of generators, transmission lines, transformers and circuit breakers. On the other hand, and also related, Xiaobo and Guoqing [130] (P33) focused on planning distribution networks by considering the cost minimization of DGs and the power losses.

Communication Network Infrastructure refer to the needed infras- tructure that enables a higher volume or quality data exchange pro- vided by communication networks. Overall, challenges associated with this goal are related to (i) scalability, (ii) security and (iii) availability. In the AMS context, all industrial assets are connected via the Internet, according to IoT principles. Thus, wireless communication technologies play a significant role since they allow ubiquitous internet access and increased interaction (availability). Also, as the number of networked connected devices increases, the network infrastructure should be scal- able. Finally, the increased number of connections opens the surface of harmful cyber-attacks to be deployed in the system (security).

In this SLR, four publications tackled network-related issues, namely NIDS [98,102,113,144] (P01, P16, P05 and P48), focusing only on the security aspects of the network infrastructure. This research work is not enough to impact this AMS goal. Also, other approaches may be needed for the other two challenges.

Standardization and open standards for a reference architecture refer to the normalization of cooperation mechanisms and information exchange between system devices. Reference architectures are helpful for the development, integration and operation of the technological innovations introduced to the AMS. A common standardization effort exists in networked devices in a manufacturing system, such as Edge devices, related to the Communication Network Infrastructure AMS goal.

In this SLR, [102] (P16) and [144] (P48) tackle standardization goals. On the one hand, [102] focus on the HIDS on networks using the Distributed Network Protocol 3 (DNP3) communication protocol, which is part of the IEEE Standard for Electric Power Systems Com- munications. On the other hand, [144] uses the IEC 61499 standard to provide security-be-design features during the development of a CPS.

Moreover, Pinto et al. [98],Pinto et al. [113] (P01 and P16) provide detection in field networks using OPC UA. Although having continu- ous specification work, strong user support and implementations, and considerable marketing efforts to support its adoption, OPC UA may be considered a standardization attempt rather than an established standard at this stage.

Despite the rich research efforts and numerous implementations of existing AIS models, its actual prevalence in AMS is still relatively low. The results of this study suggest that most of the performed research is implemented and validated as a proof of concept, using datasets, simulation environments or, at most, demonstrated in laboratory en- vironments since the average TRL is between 3 and 4. The impact of such technologies on system autonomy is also disappointing since the average LOA is between 2 and 3 (partially/limited autonomy).

MAS: A Multi-Agent System is, by nature, a system that presents autonomic behaviours by manifesting one or more Self-* proper- ties. These type of systems consist of multiple interacting intel- ligent software agents, which develop complex behaviours even when each agent have a simple individual strategy (like a swarm). Essential characteristics of such agents are the autonomy level (self-aware), the knowledge of local views only and distributed control. These characteristics greatly resemble the properties of immune models, so the application development usage of both technologies is widespread.

Edge Devices: The Edge computing paradigm brings computation and data processing together to the edge device level, i.e., devices that collect sensor data. This way, achieving real-time processing of real-time data generated by sensors is possible. In Edge com- puting scenarios, data may travel between different distributed nodes connected through the Internet, such as an IoT scenario. These nodes may also be resource-constrained devices, like a typical embedded system. Considering the AIS applications, Edge Devices are found in the lab or relevant environment validation scenarios. They work great together because immune models are lightweight, robust, and distributed. This means they can

Secure Water Treatment (SWaT) testbed [114,158]: SWaT rep- resents a scaled-down version of a real-world industrial water treatment plant. The dataset contains network and physical (pro- cess) data on the different number of sensors and actuators in all stages of the SWaT testbed for anomaly-IDS purposes. The NSA model was validated using this dataset.

Skoltech Anomaly Benchmark (SKAB) Dataset [56,159]: The devel- opment of SKAB is based on sensor readings deployed in a water circulation system from an IoT testbed, located in the Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology (Skoltech). Anomalies are in- troduced by inserting different physical faults in the system, such as closing valves, increases in temperature, and rotor imbalances. The CDCA model was validated using this dataset.

This study comprises a systematic literature review, restricted to journal and related conference papers in Artificial Immune Systems and Advanced Manufacturing Systems fields. By characterizing previous surveys and reviews in terms of their purpose and topics addressed (AMS, Self-* and AIS), the authors identified the need for this study. The systematic review was conducted following PRISMA guidelines, and the publications considered are indexed in the IEEE Xplore, Sco- pus, ScienceDirect, Springer, ACM, Inspec, Knovel and Web of Science databases.

This study results in a comprehensive characterization of AIS appli- cations in AMS. We start by analysing the research trend considering these topics and then assess the status of such work. With this analysis, it was possible to define the main motivations for using AIS in AMS and identify the research gaps while commenting on possible future research trends in these topics. Finally, based on the systematic review of existing AIS in AMS literature and empirical evidence, a conceptual framework is proposed, providing a holistic view of the core elements of applying AIS in AMS, such as application areas, research categories, and immune models developed.

