In this study a visual machine technology-based intelligent system was developed and evaluated for separation and recognizing the alive and dead eggs of rainbow trout fish. The features derived from imagery processing of alive and dead eggs were used as the decision-making variables in the classifier. Multi-layer Perceptron neural network (MLP) and Support Vector Machine (SVM) models were used as the classifiers. With paired t-test, 10 effective features were selected from 15 features for classification. The k-fold cross validation method was used for better evaluation the classifiers. By changing the size of the training data set from 80% to 20%, the clas- sifier ability and stability were evaluated. The results showed that in the training phase, all the mean values of the statistical indices for MLP and SVM classifications were complete for all categories (100% of the classification was predicted correctly). Also, in the test phase, the performance indicators of both classifiers were very satisfactory (the average accuracy was 99.45%). Therefore, it is possible to use both classifiers with certainty for separation the rainbow trout fish eggs.

study was aimed to develop a visual machine for separation the alive and dead fish eggs. The images were categorized with two classifiers: SVM and MLP. The results of this research can be useful for food engi- neers to construct an accurate device for solve this problem.

In this research, energy is a measurement of image homogeneity. Be- cause the homogeneous gray level is low, the values are squared (Gong et al., 1992). Contrast is the local variations in the pixels of an image. Dif- ference between the brightest whites and deepest blacks in an image is defined as contrast. If the difference between these two factors is high, the value of the factors become high and then the quality of the image will increase. Homogeneity is defined as the combination of the ele- ments, parts and characters of the image. Correlation is the linear de- pendence of gray levels in neighboring pixels or certain parts of the image. If the same gray level is high, it implies that the correlation be-

than Trainlm at train phase because its recognition error was zero in most cases and its results were better than Trainlm at test phase. The best performance of Trainbr was observed by seven neurons (in the hidden layer) with logsig transformation function. So, the Trainbr algorithm led to a better result than Trainlm with lower number of neurons.

performance parameters for MLP neural network at train, test and whole phases for 100 various datasets of 5-fold cross validation method. In this section, MLP was trained by three inputs selected at sensitivity analysis step. The results of training phase showed that MLP classifier could perfectly separate the alive and dead fish eggs by the three se- lected features. Also the results of test phase showed that MLP had a good performance at this phase, too. In total, mean precision of MLP neural network was found to be 99.45%.

In this paper, 15 features were selected out of 200 images of alive and dead eggs of rainbow trout fish by image processing technique. Be- tween them, 10 features were chosen as the effective ones by statistical comparison of two classes. The 5-fold cross validation technique was used with 20 replications to evaluate the performance of MLP and SVM models. The results showed that the best choice for the classifica- tion for the fish eggs was MLP with Trainbr training algorithm and seven neurons with logsig transformation function in hidden layer. The results of MLP sensitivity analysis showed that with three features (F4, F9 and F10), almost 100% classifications could be achieved. The same features were used by SVM classification. The rbf type was applied as a kernel function for SVM. The results of SVM classification showed insignificant differences between MLP and SVM classifiers. Finally, the generalizability of two classifiers was assessed by reducing the size of

