The boll weevil (Anthonomus grandis L.) is a serious pest that primar- ily feeds on cotton plants and has cost the U.S. cotton industry more than 23 billion USD in economic losses since it first entered to the U.S. from Mexico in the 1890s (Harden, 2018). The National Boll Weevil Eradication Program (NBWEP) has successfully eradicated the boll wee- vils from major parts of the U.S.; however southern parts of Texas (the Lower Rio Grande Valley) remain prone to re-infestation each year due to its sub-tropical climatic conditions and proximity to the Mexico border (Roming et al., 2021). The sub-tropical climatic conditions allow cotton plants to grow year-round and therefore the left-over

spray capable unmanned aircraft systems (UAS) are used for this pur- pose and the typical spray rate ranges from 0.56 to 1.12 kg/ha (FMC Corporation, 2001). Malathion is classified as toxicity class III pesticide and therefore can be dangerous to humans when not applied wisely (United States Environmental Protection Agency, 2016). Apart from this, excessive spraying of the chemical may kill beneficial insects and pests in the fields of rotation crops. Therefore, it has become a necessity to detect and locate VC plants growing in the middle of rotation crops. On doing this, a spot-spray capable UAS can precisely spray herbicides (before pinhead squaring phase) and pesticides (after pinhead squaring phase) only at the locations of VC plants. Hence, detecting the VC plants is crucial for the management aspects of TBWEF because it can speed up the management practices as well as help minimize the chemical costs associated with herbicides and pesticides.

ing VC plants growing in the middle of corn fields by using remote sens- ing multispectral imagery collected by unmanned aircraft systems (UAS).YOLOv5 is a one stage object detection algorithm that was origi- nally released in four different variants (YOLOv5s, YOLOv5m, YOLOv5l and YOLOv5x) based on the network depth and number of parameters (Jocher, 2020; Jocher et al., 2021). The letters s, m, l, and x represent small, medium, large, and extra-large respectively depending upon the network depth and parameter size used. The specific objective of this paper is to do a comparative analysis of the performances of all the four variants of YOLOv5 for detecting VC plants in corn fields at three different growth stages (V3, V6 and VT) of corn plants. This study is an extension of our previous studies in which both YOLOv3 and YOLOv5 were used successfully in detecting VC plants at a single growth stage of corn plants (Yadav et al., 2022a, 2022b).

of variety Phytogen 350 W3FE (CORTEVA agriscience, Wilmington, Del- aware) were planted in the corn field of Weslaco. Some of these were planted in line with corn plants while the rest were planted in the fur- row middles. Similarly, a total of 180 cotton seeds-90 of the variety Phytogen 340 W3FE (CORTEVA agriscience, Wilmington, Delaware) and another 90 of the variety Deltapine 1646 B2XF (Bayer AG, Leverku- sen, North Rhine-Westphalia, Germany) were planted at the test field in Burleson County.

In this study, at all the three growth stages of corn, the instances of VC plants as compared to the instances of background class (i.e., corn with weeds) was always less which means there was im- balance between the positive (VC plants) and negative (background) classes. In such cases, performance of any classifiers are found to be biased towards the majority class and therefore one cannot

There is a tradeoff between detection accuracy and the amount of area surveyed because to survey larger area, images need to be captured from higher altitude like in the case of V3 stage which eventually de- creases spatial resolution and a compromise in detection accuracy. However, if 87% mAP is not too low then we recommend of surveying at V3 growth stage for detecting VC plants as it results in detecting them in a larger area. We also expect the detection accuracy to improve and perhaps surpass that of V6 and VT stage when the images can be preprocessed using the techniques described in the GitHub repository of MicaSense (MicaSense Incorporated, 2022). This way, the system will be more practically viable and applicable by the personnel involved in the boll weevil eradication program.

