Findings: Our analysis reveals that the most important mobility trend categories that exhibit the strongest as- sociation to COVID-19 cases and deaths include retail and recreation and workplaces. This is the first time a network structure and rank propagation modelling approach has been used to link COVID-19 data to mobility patterns. The infection determinants landscape illustrated by the network results aligns soundly with county socio-economic and demographic features. The novel feature selection and clustering method presented clusters useful to policymakers, managers of the health sector, politicians and even sociologists. Finally, each county has a different impact on the national total.

As of January 16, 2021, more than two million people have died from the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV- 2), widely known as COVID-19 [1]. The new infectious disease emerged in Wuhan (Hubei Province, China) and was first discovered as a cluster of pneumonia cases of unknown cause in December 2019 [2]. Since then, the disease spread rapidly throughout the world, obliging the WHO to declare COVID-19 as a global pandemic in March 2020 [3]. To this date, COVID-19 has affected more than 200 countries and terri- tories, with western Europe particularly severely impacted [1].

According to Perumal, Curran et al. [11]; COVID-19 was first discovered in Ireland on the February 17, 2020. A middle-aged lady returned from Northern Italy and suffered from general symptoms such as cough, followed by sweats, fever, nausea or chest pain. Nine days

later, on February 26, 2020, SARS-Coronavirus-2 RNA was detected. Since then, the total number of people infected with COVID-19 in Ireland increased to 147,613, with a 14-day case notification rate per 100,000 inhabitants of more than 1200 in week one of 2021 [12]. The latest numbers from the European Centre for Diseases Prevention and Control revealed that more than 2300 people have already died from the disease in Ireland. Among those, 80-year-old or older age groups continue to be impacted the hardest by the virus [13]. Throughout the pandemic, a pressing issue has been on preventing excess pressure on the health system and deciding on the optimum level of social restrictions to prevent the spread of COVID-19 while maintaining a high level of social utility. Quick Interventions using machine learning methods on COVID19 datasets are very important to reduce the spread speed [14]. To that end, this research adds to the current debate and provides a better understanding of the inter-relationship between the changes of mobility patterns and the epidemiological confirmed COVID-19 cases per county with the total number of deaths.

Coupled with confirmed COVID-19 cases and the total numbers of deaths from Ireland, we analyse publicly available geo-located smart- phone data provided by Google COVID-19 Mobility Reports (GCMR). This data can be used to compare pre-pandemic (baseline) to activity throughout the pandemic to better understand mobility patterns by inferring the location visited by individuals. A particular advantage of the GCMR is that the android operating system has more than a 57% market share among smartphone users, the largest market share in Ireland [15]. For this reason, the provided data likely captures the movements of more individuals than any other provider.

Diverse algorithms have been exploited on COVID-19 data, such as Support Vector Machine (SVM), Random Forest (RF), k-Nearest Neigh- bours (kNN), Neural Networks (NN), Decision Trees (DTs). These tools have been used to predict various COVID-19 outcomes, such as the number of confirmed positive cases [23], as well as drug development, false news prediction, and vaccine discovery [24]. Bryant and Elofsson [16,17] built a Bayesian model to estimate the number of deaths on a given day based on changes in the basic reproductive number (R0) as a result of changes in mobility patterns. However, whereas Bryant and Elofsson [16,17] compute the importance of each category for eleven countries, in this study, we determine the importance of mobility factors within the counties of a single country. In addition, Ilin, Annan-Phan et al. [19] showed that data made available by Google, Facebook, and other providers could be used to evaluate the effectiveness of non-pharmaceutical interventions and forecast the spread of COVID-19 b y using statistical models. Sulyok and Walker [20]; using Google data for various countries, suggested that data related to community mobility are of use for COVID-19 modelling, using Bayesian Information Criteria as a model selection method. These sources of data have been high- lighted as one of the best data sources to analyse mobility patterns [22]. Nevertheless, to our knowledge, this data has not been used in an Irish context, nor has it been used as a means of linking mobility patterns with COVID-19 transmission data using a rank propagation approach.

were associated with a high risk of spread. Ronchi and Lovreglio [26] propose an ex-post simulation framework to assess viral transmission patterns against confinement and interaction dynamics within build- ings. Their research allows for appropriate parameters to be put in place in order to limit the spread of COVID-19 or future pandemics. Moham- madi, Chowdhury et al. [27] propose a similar approach, from the perspective of pedestrians interacting on sidewalks rather than in buildings.

The proliferation of COVID-19 has severely impeded the construc- tion sector. Araya [28] took advantage of agent-based modelling (ABM) to simulate the spread of disease among construction workers to allow the successful realisation of construction projects throughout the current pandemic. One advantage of ABM is that it illustrates complex systems that consist of individual elements or agents. Rules that govern in- teractions and behaviours are defined to model the agents in a con- struction project. Araya [28] categorised activities as low, medium, and high risk for workers in their model. Through the heterogeneity of the agents and the possibility of interacting within the same environment, the system behaviour appears during simulations. Their results indi- cated that a spread of COVID-19 in a construction project may reduce the workforce by up to 90% in high-risk environments.

In conjunction with the retail sector, the latest research of [32] ar- gues that the willingness of shoppers to return to shopping depends on their feeling of safety, which is strongly related to measures like providing hand sanitiser, limiting the number of people in stores and monitoring social distancing. With the aim to solve the issue of social distancing [33], exploit theoretical knowledge in different areas of research such as crowd science [34] or operational research of ergo- nomics [35]. With this theoretical foundation, the researchers devel- oped an extensive method to determine the minimum amount of space an individual needs for social distancing in closed and open commercial spaces. Both static (e.g. queueing) and dynamic (e.g. walk freely) en- vironments are considered in their model.

fering Twitter user recommendations of whom to follow; in graph- theoretic problems such as community detection [44]. As part of the modelling approach, we calculated an individual ranking PPR score per mobility trend and did this per each Ireland county. These ranking scores are linked with mobility patterns, confirmed cases and deaths. The PPR scores are then normalised and divided by the count of cate- gories to be transformed into relative prominent factors and absolute importance measures. This is a representative approach since all network nodes are valued simply by occurrence [41]. Once the scores have been estimated, hierarchical clustering is performed on the

In this section, we introduce the data collection and the methodology that we use in our article. Specifically, we first describe the data collection (section 3.1) and pre-processing analysis (section 3.2), and secondly, the algorithmic approach we employ to estimate inter- relationships among the data (section 3.3). Finally, we describe the attribute importance analysis and the clustering of our results (section 3.4).

We refer to the mobility data in the dataset: as the Causes and the confirmed COVID-19 cases as the Cases. Time series with no data are excluded from Causes and Cases data. Regarding Causes, specifically, the following variables were eliminated for all the datasets because of missing data: [Leitrim_transit_stations, Longford_parks, Long- ford_transit_stations. Monaghan_parks, Roscommon_transit_stations].

Our model assumes that there are correlation patterns among mobility and confirmed cases of different counties. This correlation may or may not reflect a causality relationship. However, this assumption is helpful in network modelling. Correlational networks have been useful in finding complex patterns in different research domains, especially in finance [51] and biology [52]. The algorithms used to extract results from the network models filter low correlation relations with methods like maximum spanning trees [42] or value them as much as the cor- relation value [53]. Another benefit of assuming interconnection be- tween different mobility and case variables of different counties using

converted value in the smoothed time series. The date range of Causes in the dataset is from March 05, 2020 to November 16, 2020, corre- sponding to a death reporting from March 26, 2020 to December 07, 2020. Even after data processing and noise reduction, a total of 1643 out of 39,064 values (~4%) of the time series elements were not available in the final dataset. We used the implementation of the correlation function in the Pandas package in Python, which excludes the missing values from its calculation.

From the modelling approach, a Personalised PageRank (PPR) score is calculated per each county individually, and linked with mobility patterns, confirmed cases and deaths. PPR indicates the absolute sig- nificance of the structures within the data, which unsurprisingly high- light cases and deaths as significant nodes of interest. Mobility patterns are relatively under-considered in the PPR network. As such, we trans- formed the PPR scores for the mobility patterns into relative prominent factors, such that relatively significant factors can be identified. We carry this out by:

Once the significance is estimated, the counties are grouped into different categories to facilitate visualisation of the results and discus- sion. According to the distance of their scores, we group the counties in two ways; according to the number of dominant mobility categories in each county. We sorted the most significant mobility categories per county according to their prominent factor scores, and we gathered the counties in groups of the same number and same dominant mobility categories. For instance, two counties with only retail and recreation and workplace scoring above 1, belong to the same group.

element as a separate cluster and then merge them into larger clusters successively. Specifically, in each particular step of hierarchical clus- tering, it finds the pair of clusters with the smallest distance and then merges them into a new parent cluster [60]. We used Euclidean clus- tering distance (square root of the sum of square distances). The step is repeated until only one cluster formed, and the results can be described in a dendrogram [61]. The clustering was implemented on the ClustVis [62].

the dataset or anywhere else to have a test set to evaluate the error using famous criteria like accuracy, precision, or recall. In our Personalised PageRank algorithm, the value of 1 is assigned to the Death node and is propagated through the network structure. So the source of the error will not be what is propagated through the network but how it is propagated. The means of the propagation are the weights of the link. However, as mentioned before, the weight of the links can be a source of error due to the way they are calculated. These weights, as mentioned in the meth- odology, are calculated by lead-lag correlation functions. The correla- tion function uses the GCMR and CSO time series (noisy data), which are the base source of the error in our methodology. This noise is produced due to failure to record the right information or record the information correctly, information aggregation from different local sources like local hospitals, lack of data gathering at weekends and holidays. Some parts of these noises are correlated to each other, and some are not. These noises

Top causes that influence the Ireland Death numbers for 2020. Movement Trend Categories 1) Groc: grocery and pharmacy percent change from baseline, 2) Park: parks percent change from baseline, 3) Reta: retail and recreation percent change from baseline, Tran: transit stations percent change from baseline, 4) Work: workplaces percent change from baseline. RPF: relative prominent factor.

workplaces and both the difficulty of social distancing and the cultural awkwardness of adhering to social distancing might be factors in the prominence of these locations in our findings. Furthermore, Retail and recreation and workplaces mobility were only allowed during times of lowered lockdown restrictions. This suggests that loosening restrictions had a direct causal impact on the COVID-19 related deaths.

five mobility categories. Intriguingly, all four counties have direct rail- way networks with Dublin, the central hub of the virus in Ireland. However, the movement trend category: transit stations does not appear as often as the other variables (less than 5%). This is consistent with a relatively low level of public transport use and a relatively rural population.

Retail and recreation category dominates the top determinants of infection casualties. The COVID-19 pandemic has forced numerous businesses to limit the number of shoppers inside the store to minimise infection rates. Yet, confusion about what steps have to be taken is hindering the efforts of retail traders, and there is an immediate ne- cessity to comprehend how distancing can be secure. Ntounis, Mumford et al. [33] estimated the amount of space needed to safely social distance in various retail environments when there are people present. The proposed method can work as a step forward in understanding the very practical problem of capacity, which can allow retail spaces to operate safely and minimise the risk of virus transmission. Perlman and Yechiali

[31] proposed a new method by which to quantify the risk of an infected customer when queuing outside the store, when shopping, and while checking out. In their attempts to protect both consumers and workers while reducing related costs, the results are valuable and applicable to governments and companies alike. We recommend those approaches to be investigated for counties where Retail and recreation ranks the highest.

One county mobility category-parks appears as the most significant (Meath_Parks). Very few other parks appear in the top results (11% approximately). Public parks in Dublin are not detailed in the top results suggesting that Parks are not a significant location for COVID-19 transmission. In rural counties, parks are uncommon, and the defini- tion of parks is ambiguous. We suggest this is the result of a number of outlying cases in a rural county.

Urban agglomeration appeared in our study to be of the most im- pactful sites. Mohammadi, Chowdhury et al. [27] developed a risk estimation model considering the problem of physical distancing re- quirements for urban sidewalk pedestrians. This is why the urban de- signers and policymakers want to force a 2-m distance among pedestrians to avoid the virus spread. The study demonstrated the application of the proposed approach in a simulated virtual walkway environment. Such an approach could help health policymakers find out the best methods to enforce social distancing among urban sidewalk pedestrians.

Regarding the individualistic behaviour during the pandemic, a study showed that people are less (vs. more) willing to take risks when information is positively (negatively) framed, irrespective of disease type, although they are generally more risk-averse in real pandemics [36]. Furthermore, people high (vs. low) in emotionality are more willing to comply with preventive health behaviours when information is framed positively (vs. negatively), but only in the case of a real dis- ease. These findings provide a range of insights into the design and management of health recommendations aimed at promoting public health. We suggest linking preventive suggestions to country in- dividuality and local pride for establishing more effective and affecting communication.

Instead of using the Google mobility data, mobile positioning data could be used to measure the effect of COVID-19 restriction measures on human mobility. Santamaria, Sermi et al. [38] carried out spatio-temporal harmonisation to a mobility indicator that captures insights into the mobility patterns of the EU population and can provide information regarding the effect of COVID-19 restriction measure on mobility in the EU.

Our findings suggest that even in the case of an island country, the significance of COVD-19 determinants shows geographical in- homogeneity. Confinement measures should be applied accordingly. Although interventions regarding mobility in parks and retail and recre- ation are advisable in the cases of Kildare or Wexford, they would have little impact in Longford and Monaghan. The clustering presented sug- gests similar infection spread management among counties inside a group and differentiated between the groups. As those measures put major economic and psychological stress on communities, resolving and targeting them as necessary only on locally impactful sectors will restrain costs, back measures public acceptance, enhance compliance and result in overall safety improvement.

movement, which may be affected by weather patterns, national holidays, vacation periods, etc. Important bank holidays, extreme weather events, or other major events can significantly affect the mobility relative change. Nonetheless, it is worth noting, though, that no evidence of any major events in Ireland that could have systematically biased the Google mobility data during the baseline period.

on communities and costs. Furthermore, county limited and county specific information and preventing measurements would enforce a sense of responsibility and shared consciousness in the community and back measures public acceptance, enhance compliance and result in overall safety improvement. We conclude by encouraging private com- panies such as Google to continue sharing data to foster academic research in areas of public interest.

Further research could include different PageRank family algorithms on the pandemic datasets. In this research, we used Personalised Pag- eRank to study the effect of different features on one feature with the assumption that there is an underlying network model in our data space. Personalised PageRank is an efficient algorithm regarding the time order complexity that can converge in a few number of iterations. According to the study of Page and Brin in 1999, PageRank can converge in 52 iterations for a network of Web Pages with 332 million links with different in-degrees and out-degrees [41]. For the use of other algo- rithms in the PageRank family, modifications of the research problem has to be formed. For instance, HITS and SALSA algorithms try to partition the nodes of a network into two categories of hubs and au- thorities, where hubs are the nodes that have an influence on other nodes and authorities are nodes that are affected. Changing the research problem to the discovery of effective and under influence features in the general data space of the pandemic, HITS and SALSA algorithm - which is an optimised version of HITS in some applications - can be used [68]. SimRank finds similar nodes in a graph considering the whole graph structure and interrelationships among nodes. Using SimRank, the research problem swaps into finding features with similar behaviour in the pandemic data space.

Furxhi Irini: Conceptualisation; Formal analysis; Visualisation; original draft; review & editing. Arash N. Kia: Conceptualisation; Formal analysis; Methodology; Coding, review & editing. Darren Shannon: Data curation; Formal analysis; review & editing. Tim Jan- nusch: Visualization; review & editing. Finbarr Murphy: review & editing. Barry Sheehan: Data curation; review & editing.

