All types of interactions within and across different omics levels form a huge network and function together in a variety of processes. For example, gene networks regulate the synthesis of protease, which fur- ther catalyzes metabolic reactions like lipid degradation [11]. Recently, graph-based deep learning (GDL) has provided new insight into analyz- ing biological network data. The main idea of GDL is message passing, which updates node representations via the aggregation of information from local node neighborhoods. GDL has shown strong performance in analyzing biological networks. However, limited research has been con- ducted on the integration of biological networks with multi-omics data. In this paper, we propose AutoGGN, a multimodal method of inte- grating molecular interaction networks and omics data. GCNs are at the core of AutoGGN. They are designed to explore the hidden patterns in omics data through message passing and aggregating across molecu- lar interaction networks. Specifically, we demonstrate the effectiveness of AutoGGN through three tasks: single-cell embryonic developmental stage classification, cancer type classification, and breast cancer sub-

96.4% on the test set, outperforming XGBoost [14] and MLP [12] by 4.7% and 6.3%, respectively, on the independent test set. It is par- ticularly remarkable that our method achieved higher accuracy than AutoGenome [9] (95.9%), which is an RFCN-based method designed for genomic profile modeling. This shows that integrating molecular interaction networks with gene expression data enables us to explore

Precise cancer type prediction is essential for cancer diagnosis and therapy [15]. In recent years, machine learning methods have shown great success in cancer prognosis and prediction. Open-source cancer databases such as The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) and Gene Expres- sion Omnibus (GEO) further provide researchers and clinicians with large-scale multi-omics data for analysis [16]. For example, Mostavi

for all the splits and 98.4% on the test set by integrating gene expres- sion data and mutation data with the PPI network. It outperformed Au- toOmics (which also used two types of omics data as input) by 1.2% on the test set. This shows that AutoGGN has great potential in integrating multi-omics data with biological interaction networks.

Cancer is a very complex disease group where genetic heterogeneity exists not only between but also within cancer types [21]. This may lead to large differences in how patients respond to drugs or immune therapy even when dealing with the same type of cancer [9]. Therefore, accu- rate cancer subtyping is necessary to provide personalized treatment and better patient care.

We evaluated AutoGGN on breast cancer subtyping using two type of omics data: gene expression profiles and protein expression profiles. We collected patient samples with breast cancer from TCGA and focused on four subtypes: luminal A, luminal B, triple-negative, and HER2-enriched according to PAM50-profiling-test. The dataset consists of 396 patients and the network input contains 14,912 nodes and 3948,022 edges.

To deal with the black-box challenge of neural networks, we used SHAP to explain and visualize the feature importance of each gene to the predicted class. For example, in the single-cell developmental stage classification task, we found that most of the important genes for the classification task were closely related to embryonic development. The explainable results can help researchers and other types of users bet- ter understand deep learning models and also provide insight into the molecular mechanisms behind omics data.

Besides the preceding classification tasks, AutoGGN can also be ap- plied to a wide range of biomedical tasks. For example, AutoGGN can be integrated with the Cox proportional hazards model [28] to predict the life expectancy of patients. Accurate estimates will help doctors develop more appropriate treatment plans and provide better patient care [29]. Researchers have found the expression of some biomarkers to vary con- siderably in tissue- and age-specific manners [30]. AutoGGN can tackle this challenge by utilizing omics data from different tissues of donors of various ages and the molecular interaction networks to find the most important genes that contribute to tissue and age predictions. Other ap- plications may include bio-marker identification and drug sensitivity prediction. Further work will be continuously conducted to extend the application scope of AutoGGN.

Protein-protein interaction network: The protein-protein interac- tion (PPI) network data of humans (Homo sapiens) and mice (Mus mus- culus) was obtained from the STRING [32] database, which collects both known and predicted PPIs. Interactions with a combination score lower than 0.98 were excluded for the first two tasks. In the breast cancer sub- typing task, we excluded interactions with a combination score lower than 0.1 to retain as many node features as possible due to the limited size of the protein expression data.

data was originally corrected by median centering across anti- bodies. No further preprocessing steps were applied. Due to the limited size of protein features, we retained all the features from two types of omics data. The value of features missing gene ex- pression or protein expression data was set to 0. A PPI network that consists of 14,912 nodes and 3948,022 edges was extracted based on the features from omics data.

For all the tasks, we put aside 10% of the dataset for testing and applied 5-fold cross validation to the rest of the data. For each of these five folds, we constructed AutoGGN as well as the baseline models (MLP, XGBoost, AutoGenome, and AutoOmics) using the training set and pre- dicted the labels of the evaluation set. This method of splitting the dataset helped us evaluate the robustness of the models. Five-fold cross- validation is repeated 5 times to avoid accidental error and their mean and standard deviation of the accuracy of the classification accuracy are reported. To find the best hyperparameters of different models, we per- formed grid search. The search space for different models are listed as follows:

We used the SHAP package [23] to conduct the feature importance estimation and explain how the model works. SHAP supports Gradient- Explainer (an implementation of expected gradients), which can approx- imate SHAP values for AutoGGN. The best AutoGGN model identified and the training set were used as input for the SHAP module. After ob- taining the SHAP value of each feature for each sample, we summed all the SHAP values within each class and obtained the feature importance score for each class. This is how we identified important features for the classification.

reports, including classification reports and confusion matrix, are output in the specified path. And the best model is saved based on the best metrics. 5) Model prediction module: The best model is used to predict on the independent test dataset. Predicted class and softmax value of samples are output in this module. 6) Explanation module: To interpret the reason underlying the classification, the important features which contributes more to each category are reported based on SHAP [23].

All the data sets utilized in our study are public data. The omics data used in the pan-cancer classification and breast cancer subtype classification tasks is from TCGA. The data used for single-cell classi- fication data is from accessions: Atlas: E-MTAB-6967 and the processed data was downloaded following the instructions at https://github.com/ MarioniLab/EmbryoTimecourse2018.

Szklarczyk D, von MC, Gable AL, Lyon D, Junge A, Wyder S, Huerta-Cepas J, Si- monovic M, Doncheva NT, Morris JH, Bork P, Jensen LJ. STRING v11: protein-pro- tein association networks with increased coverage, supporting functional discovery in genome-wide experimental datasets. Nucleic Acids Res 2019;47.

