The NTTL has spearhead for testing tractors and reported source of reliable data. These data have been arranged for fuel consumption, wheel slip, engine speed, forward speed, drawbar pull, drawbar power, and hydraulic oil temperature of tested tractor. The hydraulic oil temperature was measured and monitored to verify steady state op- erating conditions of the tractor and data collection procedure (Roeber et al., 2017).

From 1986, the NTTL has tested performance of tractors based on of- ficial procedure described by the OECD standard (Kocher et al., 2011). Currently, the OECD standard Code 2 was devoted for official testing of performance of agricultural and forestry tractors under steady state controlled conditions (OECD, 2020). According to the standard, the tests must be conducted on concrete flat surface in order to eliminate ef- fect of soil characteristics on tractor performance. During the tests, the tractor was loaded by a load car. The load car controlled the loads ap- plied to the tractor. The load car was a Caterpillar articulated dump truck. The load car was outfitted with two load cell transducers

Intelligent fuzzy systems were developed to estimate drawbar pull supplied by the MFWD tractor, based on three independent input vari- ables of slip of driving wheels, tractor weight, and tractor driving mode. The intelligent fuzzy system has five layers comprising various nodes in each layer. These five layers are called fuzzification, normalization, fuzzy rule, defuzzification, and output layer, respectively. The intelli- gent fuzzy estimation is accomplished through passing data sets in these five layers. The estimation scenario is explained in following paragraph.

imately 61 m length of straightaway. If similar results were achieved for two tests, next load set point was applied. If the results were not sim- ilar, more data were collected until two tests showed similar results. De- tails for test track with concrete flat surface were fully explained by Howard et al. (2013). The test data sets (288 sets) considered in this study for all eleven MFWD models of New Holland tractor were col- lected at the NTTL from 2000 to 2004.

increases and thereby results in increment of net traction force (Taghavifar and Mardani, 2014c; Taghavifar and Mardani, 2014d; Taghavifar and Mardani, 2015). When net traction force generated by driving wheels increases, obtained drawbar pull for the tractor rises. The same results for increase of the tractor drawbar pull as a result of in- crement of slip of driving wheels and tractor weight have been found by Richardson and Cooper (1970) and Rasool and Raheman (2018).

It must be spotlighted that slip of driving wheels have indirect rela- tion with inflation pressure, dynamic load, and tire type (bias and radial ply). Tire types of the New Holland tractors in this study were radial ply. Radial ply tires develop higher gross traction force than bias ply ones (VandenBerg and Reed, 1962; Forrest et al., 1962; Taylor et al., 1976; Gee-Clough et al., 1977; Wulfsohn et al., 1988; Kumar et al., 2019). Moreover, the radial ply tires have lower slip (Cegnar and Fausti, 1961; Worthington, 1962; Coates, 1985) and rolling resistance force

(Thaden, 1962; McAllister, 1983; Kurjenluoma et al., 2009; Kumar et al., 2019) in comparison with the bias ply tires in the same conditions of tire and soil. These facts are corresponded to footprint of radial ply tire on soil than that of the bias ply tires (Thaden, 1962; Kumar et al.,

2018). The higher footprint with narrower and longer shape (Cegnar and Fausti, 1961; VandenBerg and Reed, 1962; Taylor et al., 1976) dis- tributes uniform ground contact pressure and decreases rolling resis- tance force, and finally leads to lower slip and higher gross traction force (Cegnar and Fausti, 1961). Therefore, in the same conditions of soil and wheels, employment of radial ply tire rather than bias ply tire type could be an effective way for increment of net traction force gener- ated by driving wheel as well as the tractor drawbar pull.

In this study, the intelligent fuzzy system of developed calculator has been trained based on the drawbar pull data sets of some tractors tested in the NTTL. It must be acknowledged that drawbar pull tests in the NTTL have been commonly performed on concrete flat surface. There- fore, the calculator in this form can be used for construction and indus- trial environments with concrete flat surface and it cannot be employed for various soil conditions and types of the MFWD tractor. This restric- tion implies necessity of adoption of the calculator for different models of the MFWD tractors and soil conditions in future research works by retraining the intelligent system of the calculator with more specific data sets. Another inherent drawback of the calculator is regarded to workspace of its user interface. Since the calculator has been developed in fuzzy workspace of the Matlab software, dependency of its user inter- face on the software restricts its broad employment. Therefore, this re- striction dictates necessity of a drastic effort for development of spreadsheet graphical user interface for the calculator like ones sug- gested by some previous researchers (Al-Hamed and Al-Janobi, 2001;

Sahu and Raheman, 2008; Pranav and Pandey, 2008; Catalan et al., 2008; Kumar and Pandey, 2009; Al-Hamed et al., 2010; Mehta et al., 2011; Pranav et al., 2012; AI-Hamed et al., 2014; Kumar and Pandey, 2015; Aboukarima, 2016; Kumar et al., 2017).

