Validation: Before building a final phase picker model, the val- idation process allows testing the model against data that have not been used for training. In general, 20% of the entire dataset are retained and excluded from the training dataset. The perfor- mance of the model on this validation set represents how likely the model is to succeed in correctly predicting phases in the face of independent seismic data. A trained model could either be approved (i.e., deemed satisfactory), tuned, or rejected based on the validation results (Livieris et al., 2020). The validation stage should not be time-intensive; however, if the model is rejected, the project returns to the training stage to revise the architecture and parameters. This training and validation loop continues until a model is approved.

Experimental results showed that, in this way, convergence of the model is faster during training. For the phase picker channels, users can select the default P and S pickers, or additional channel identifiers, i.e., P, Pg, Pn, S, Sg, Sn, etc, if those labels are available in the training metadata (i.e., catalog picks). BET will automatically rewrite the output channels based on these selections. Alternatively, users can use the default P and S labels as surrogate for other binary labels, for example, blasts and natural earthquakes, to start training a new model for the discrimination of anthropogenic and natural events.

predicts      a      high      probability      (>0.6)      at      the      correct      sample      position. reviewed P and S arrival times are taken from the NEDB catalog at station CN.BTB for a magnitude 2.0 event on 2015-01-02 at an epicentral distance of 78 km. The picker

The application and development of DL models are steadily growing in seismology. BET provides a user-friendly platform for engaging a broader range of users, including those without machine learning or coding experience. BET allows researchers to explore DL pickers without having to worry about in-house computational power and other technical concerns. BET will prove useful in improving model performance and lowering the magnitude of completeness of exist- ing seismic catalogues. Similar packages can be developed for other seismological tasks, including those in exploration seismology, where fine-tuning pre-trained models by synthetic data is even more common due to the scarcity of large-scale labeled training datasets. Other appli- cations of BET are in the discrimination between natural earthquakes and anthropogenic events, where separate training datasets may be developed for each event types. This package will be both practical for students to understand deep learning applications and convenient

This research was funded by a Discovery Grant (RGPIN-2018- 03752) from the Natural Science and Engineering Research Council of Canada (PA). The authors thank Stephen Crane, Laurel Sinclair, two anonymous reviewers and the editor for their reviews of this manuscript. This is NRCan publication number 20220610.

