The exploration of structure-activity relationship (SAR) is one of the most important tasks in medicinal chemistry. SAR analysis provides a basis for key structural features to determine molecular activity, and also provides a basis for screening clinically-oriented candidate molecules [29]. Quantitative structure-activity relationship (QSAR) is a chemical data analysis method that predicts molecular properties by establishing a linear or non-linear relationship between the descriptors calculated from molecular structures and the biological activity values of these molecules [30]. Some machine learning (ML) methods were applied to construct SAR and QSAR models, such as decision tree (DT) [31], ran- dom forest (RF) [32], support vector machine (SVM) [33], extreme gra- dient boosting (XGBoost) [34], and artificial neural networks (ANNs) [35]. Molecular descriptors were used to characterize the physical and chemical properties or structural characteristics of compounds. In mod- eling, different descriptors needed to be tried to achieve the best effect of the model.

0.07 nM to 50000 nM. We referenced three studies to define compounds [6,109,110]. We deleted the compounds with IC50 values between 50 nM and 100 nM, then defined compounds with IC50 less than 50 nM as highly active, and compounds with IC50 greater than 100 nM as weakly active. As a result, the whole dataset was composed of 2982 JAK1 inhibitors, including 1712 highly active and 1270 weakly active inhibitors. The whole dataset is shown in JAK1_dataset.csv in the Sup- plementary materials.

Extended connection fingerprints (ECFPs) were a kind of Morgan fin- gerprints, which were ring fingerprints based on the ECFP algorithm (a variant of the Morgan algorithm) [40]. According to different needs, by changing the radius and bits, Morgan fingerprints can theoretically characterize molecules of any size and any number of molecular fea- tures. As the radius and bits increase, the effective information con- tained in Morgan fingerprints will gradually increase. However, as the number of bits increase, Morgan fingerprints will become very redun- dant sparse matrices (most of the information is 0). Therefore, it is nec- essary to select the appropriate radius and bits according to molecules with different characteristics. This feature of Morgan fingerprints pro- vides a high degree of freedom for fingerprint analysis. In this study, we calculated 4096-bit Morgan fingerprints with a radius of four. For

the two molecular fingerprints, we calculated the variance on each bit, then removed bits with variance less than the average variance. The purpose was to avoid invalid information due to too consistent infor- mation on a certain position. The final molecular fingerprints used for modeling were 80 bits (MACCS) and 958 bits (Morgan fingerprints), respectively.

Random forest (RF) is an ensemble method based on bagging [118]. It randomly builds and integrates multiple decision tree to create a for- est structure. In order to classify the dataset, each decision tree is given a classification, the score of each tree is calculated to make the final de- cision. The process was repeated many times and the final prediction is a function of each prediction derived from different constituent decision tree [32]. In this study, the parameters that need to be optimized for the RF algorithm are criterion, max_features, max_depth, max_leaf_nodes and n_estimators. We used the grid optimization method to find the optimal parameter combination in the five-dimensional space.

tain MACCS155 and MACCS138. These inhibitors all contained six- membered aliphatic rings, but there were no heteroatoms in the aliphatic ring and no aliphatic chain structure. In addition, they contained three consecutive nitrogen atom structures, which made them all contain pyrrolotriazolopyrimidine. A total of 35 inhibitors meet the above characteristics, 33 of which were weakly active inhibitors.

