Following the world tendencies, the topicality of renewable energy production in Latvia is increasing. Currently, most of the electricity from renewable resources in Latvia is made from hydropower plants, but 1% of electricity is produced by cogeneration of biomass (Energy strategy 2030, 2011), which is seen as a perspective source for increasing renewable energy production under the conditions of Latvia. The development of cogeneration plants is largely encouraged by funding from the EU structural funds, Cohesion fund, and European Agriculture fund for rural development available from the government of Latvia and the EU in the past few years as well as for the coming year (2013).

At the moment there are 23 biogas production plants working in the territory of Latvia with the total power capacity of 29.92 MW. Till the year 2030 it is planned to increase the total production capacity up to 90 MW (by producing biogas from various biomasses) (Energy strategy 2030, 2011). With the expansion of biogas production from agriculture biomass, sustainability aspects, risk assessment and risk management become topical in farms that produce this kind of energy.

In the flow diagram, the variables that determine biogas production are shown. These variables are modulated in other blocks of Production module, for example, biomass from maize and biomass from grass are modulated in the block ,,Biomass''. Biogas outcome is assumed as a probable variable with a normal distribution, that is determined by an average value and a standard deviation. Likewise the risk variables are determined by the experts and connected to the Production block variables that are affected by these risks.

Each of the blocks of the Production module gives an outcome in the process of simulation: grain yield, biomass yield, number of dairy cows, amount of milk produced, etc., as well as income and costs of the production in the farm. All production costs and income of the farm are summarized in the Finance module, which gives a possibility to estimate the profit of the farm. For example, production of electricity from biogas

