The feasibility of crop signaling techniques has been investigated by scientists during past few years. Up to now, no review on crop signaling technology has been published for plant identification. This paper first provides an introduction of the new concept on crop planting signaling. Challenges of existing noncontact methods including spectroscopy and imaging techniques (such as hyperspectral imaging and multispectral imaging) for discriminations of crops and weeds have been presented in Section 2. In Section 3, an emphasis has been given to the studies of recent years in advanced crop plant signaling using physical, biological and chemical markers to simplify and ensure the success of the crop and weed detection. The discussions are given on the advantages, chal- lenges and future prospects of crop planting signaling for real time applications.

canola and tomato from different weeds grown under various sunlight intensities with high accuracies (88% to 94%) (Eddy et al., 2014; Slaughter et al., 2008; Staab et al., 2009). However, it takes a lot of time and effort to effectively remove the large amount of redundant in- formation contained in the full wavelength range to simplify the model (Su et al., 2020) and improve the speed of on-line detection (Su, 2020; Su et al., 2019, 2020).

The seed coats of lettuce and tomato are non-permeable to the sys- temic Rh\\B dye, but the snap bean seed coat is permeable to this marker (Salanenka and Taylor, 2011). Rh\\B has been successfully used as a systemic crop signaling compound excited under UV light to distinguish snap bean plants from three weeds including burning nettle, barley and groundsel with 100% accuracy (Su et al., 2019a). In their

Topical markers (water-based latex fluorescent paints) were applied to the plant stems or foliage of crop seedlings by a real-time spray sys- tem during transplanting. The spray system was modified from a stan- dard row crop transplanter, which could accurately target the paint to seedlings. Compared with plant labels, topical markers are automati- cally applied to plant seedlings in the field, making the marking process faster and easier. More information about this spray system can be found elsewhere (Vuong et al., 2017). When the signaling compound was excited using UV light 3 weeks after seedling transplanting, its fluo- rescent signal was still machine-readable. The amount of topical marker applied to the foliage of crop seedling is very limited as an excessive amount of marker may affect the photosynthesis of the leaves and

The success of crop plant signaling depends on the identification of effective compounds for use on the farm and the development of a safe delivery approach that generates sufficient signal strength to achieve plant identification. Disadvantages to weed/crop differentiation in the field include variable lighting conditions, the ability to robustly control the illumination of the scene with pulsed high-intensity lighting, and the need for high speed plant capture and processing capabilities. The robustness, signal strength, and visibility of fluorescent compounds are critical. Crops in the field are particularly vulnerable to competition from weeds at the seedling stage (about 3 to 5 weeks) (Su, 2020). The time interval of 3 weeks may be not enough for weeding, but more re- search is needed to investigate the alternative new signaling marker that has longer fluorescent lifetime in the future. In a recent study, it was found that the signaling compound showed great photostability in celery plants for 5 weeks (Su et al., 2020c). After 3 to 5 weeks when the crops have survived and grew large, the weeds will not be a big problem. The presence of camera and computer hardware solutions, such as image intensifiers and graphics processing units (GPUs), can mitigate some of the potential signal problems. The rapid development of advanced GPU and camera will bring new imaging sensors with higher resolution at lower cost. High-tech companies that develop intel- ligent weeding technologies are relatively small, but they will likely

