Large coal-fired power unit is a complex nonlinear system with more uncertainties to describe the energy-consumption behaviour, evaluate the coal rate for power generation and optimize the practical operation. The operation optimization problem can be described as Model (1), which consists of two parts: a optimum target such as the highest power efficiency or the minimum coal consumption, and a couple of constraints such as the power load, coal quality, ambient factors and operation conditions. The expression of such optimization problem is explicit but it is difficult to determine the optimal targets in operation optimization of power units, especially considering the varying boundary constraints, operation conditions and system features.

The increasing development of measuring, monitoring and information technologies strive a highway for the operation optimization of power units including data processing, uncertainty measuring, intelligent modelling and expert system building[2~5]. Clustering and fuzzy associated rules-based methods are used in process control and individual parameter optimization such as excessive air flow and boiler efficiency[2,5]; neural network (NN) and SVR methods are introduced to model the NOX emission of the coal-fired boiler and the operation parameters are optimized with ant colony optimization algorithm (ACO) and GA method. This made a reference for the operation optimization of power plants.

In SVR model, there are three factors, i. e. the type of kernel function, kernel function parameter and punish coefficient, dramatically affecting the accuracy, complexity and generalization ability of the model built with SVR. For this, it is important to select and optimize the above parameters[4].

GA is one of the optimization algorithms, which is derived from Darwin's genetic choice and biological evolution process of natural selection. GA is a global optimization algorithm with strong commonality, robustness and promising applications in machine learning, process control, economic forecast and optimization[9~10]. It consists of the following 7 main components: string coding, initialization, fitness function, selection operation, crossover operation, mutation operation and stop criterion.

Step 1  Initial parameter Settings. Preset GA algorithm population scale, selection operation, crossover operation and mutation operation and termination evolution algebra. Choose operation selection scale selection operator, crossover operation using single point crossover operator, mutation operation use basic for mutation operator.

A 600MW subcritical coal-fired power unit is selected as the case unit. The boiler is of HG-2023/17.6- YM4 type, subcritical, -type layout, intermediate reheat controlled circulation drum-type; the steam turbine is of N600-16.7/537/537-I type, 600MW subcritical condenser steam unit, single intermediate reheat, four cylinders, quadruple-flow and single-shaft.

steam temperature, x2 is reheat steam pressure, x3 is main steam temperature, x4 is main steam temperature, x5 is condenser end difference, x6 is vacuum of condenser, x7 is exhausted gas temperature, x8 is oxygen content in gas, x9~x15 is respectively1 # heater terminal temperature difference (TTD), 2 # heater TTD, 3 # heater TTD, 5 # heater TTD, 6 # heater TTD, 7 # heater TTD, 8 # heater TTD, respectively. The parameters of GA are set as: population size selection for 50, coding method for binary coding, crossover probability was 0.8, the variation probability is 0.1, eolution algebra for 150 generations.

