Recently, on the basis of the available production data, various ma- chine learning methods, especially neural networks, have been success- fully used to select the featured parameters that affect well production and then predict oil and gas well production under a supervised learning framework (Cao et al., 2016; Hou, 2019; Liu et al., 2019, 2020; Gu et al.,

However, in the abovementioned oil and gas well production pre- diction methods, whether physical model-driven or data-driven algo- rithms, they focused more on medium-to-long-term production prediction in the unit of month or year and were less involved in time series prediction of a single well's daily production and abnormal monitoring in the whole life cycle of a tight gas field (Dong and Yang, 2009; Sagheer and Kotb, 2019; Jiang et al., 2021). Therefore, considering the current and past statuses of daily production time series, we proposed a deep network prediction method based on long short-term memory (LSTM) neural network and further compared it with traditional data-driven machine learning approaches such as random forest (RF) and support vector regression (SVR).

A decision tree (DT) is a supervised learning algorithm that selects the best decision scheme by constructing the decision process and calculating the corresponding mathematical expectation under the condition of known probabilities of all events. It can be expressed as a tree structure, in which the internal nodes represent different levels of decision schemes and the leaf nodes (endpoints) represent the final decision results. However, they are prone to overfitting. Therefore, ensemble learning methods are often used to replace a single DT, that is, RF (Breiman, 2001). Assuming that the prediction results of each DT are good, there is overfitting for different datasets. The RF notes that by constructing many DTs and averaging their prediction results, the robustness of the DTs can be improved while maintaining their prediction ability. The RF algorithm first conducts random sampling with replacement of the dataset to obtain several new datasets to create as many different DTs as possible. For these newly created datasets, each DT is constructed, and the weighted average is conducted according to the different importance of features to obtain the prediction results of the RF.

The model function of SVR is a linear function. The SVR constructs an interval band on both sides of the linear function. The loss is not calcu- lated for the data samples falling into the interval band but for the samples located outside the interval band, and it is calculated according to a specific loss function. The SVR also introduces the kernel function method from the support vector machine to expand the algorithm to higher dimensional data space. There are many kinds of kernel functions. In this paper, the Gaussian kernel was used to map data samples x1 and x2 into high-dimensional space, which is defined as

However, the RNN networks are challenging to achieve long-term transmission of the input. When the back-propagation mechanism is adopted to update the weights in the RNN, the gradient of the latter layer will be multiplied by that of the former network layer as the number of network layers increases gradually. Hence, the RNN is prone to gradient explosion/disappearance (Bengio et al, 1994). To solve the problem of long-term dependencies, many network structures have been proposed, such as LSTM neural networks and gated recurrent units.

The reservoir indicators of gas wells generally include static geolog- ical and dynamic production data. Static geological data refer to well- head position coordinates, depth, resistivity, sonic interval transit time, rock density, compensated neutrons, shale content, gas layer thickness, total porosity, permeability, and hydrocarbon saturation. Dynamic pro- duction data mainly refer to the daily gas production, gas pressure, casing pressure, and production time of a gas well under different production dates. To facilitate the comparison of different methods, this study ig- nores the remaining dynamic production characteristics and only con- siders the daily gas production time series. Next, the RF, SVR, and DLSTM-FNN models were applied to dynamically predict the daily gas production time series for 1692 tight gas wells in the Sulige gas field.

Although the RF had the smallest error in the short training sample set, which was 0.0884904, it had the largest error in the test set, which was 0.1878669. The DLSTM-FNN had the smallest error in the testing set, which was 0.1378165 and 0.03 less than the SVR prediction error. Additionally, its prediction was the best.

dynamic daily production prediction were verified using 1692 time series of wells in the Sulige gas field. Among them, the DLSTM-FNN deep learning model had a good ability in time series modeling. For the short training sample set and the rapid prediction of thousands of wells, the quantitated prediction performances revealed that the DLSTM-FNN model was more accurate and reliable and was more in line with the actual dynamic trend of the daily production of gas wells. Furthermore, the proposed DLSTM-FNN model can be applied to the time series pre- diction of other tight gas fields based on transfer learning.

