four key steps: image data collection, pre-processing of images, feature extraction and classification (Shanmugam et al., 2020). Different ad- vanced technologies are in vogue to execute these steps. The most vital part of these steps is weed identification and classification. For the last few years, Artficial Intelligence (AI) and deep learning strategies have been utilized for weed management with progressions in innova- tion replacing the traditional approaches (Sharpe et al., 2019, 2020; Su, 2020).

AlexNet is an 8-layer CNN that outperformed all other models in a large margin and won the ImageNet large scale visual recognition chal- lenge held in 2012 (Krizhevsky et al., 2012). Although LeNet (LeCun et al., 1995) had achieved decent results on early datasets of smaller size, the performance while training CNNs on larger datasets were not that impressive. AlexNet has achieved huge improvement over LeNet and it was the first architecture to adopt consecutive convolutional

(Szegedy et al., 2015). GoogLeNet had achieved a top-5 error rate of 6.67% in ILSVRC, which is very close to the human level performance. In comparison to the AlexNet and GoogLeNet, InceptionV3 model focuses on consuming less computational power. InceptionV3 model optimizes the network with the help of factorized convolution, dimen- sionality reduction, regularization and parallelized computations (Szegedy et al., 2016). Xception is an extreme version of the inception. Depth wise separable convolutional layers make Xception different

The model was trained with the help of training data and before the training got started, the model parameters like number of epochs, batch size, learning rate, etc. were set. Validation set was used for unbiased evaluation of the model. This helped to optimize the hyperparameters of the model. After identifying the right parameters, the model was

Deep convolutional neural network-based weed detection is prom- ising and supports automation of agricultural operations. This work demonstrated the capability of using DCNN models for weed identifica- tion in bell pepper field. In this study, four deep learning models (Alexnet, GoogLeNet, InceptionV3, Xception) have been applied for the identification of weeds present among the bell pepper field. InceptionV3 outperformed others in terms of precision, accuracy, and recall. The potential future work includes detection of crop and weed in real-time and execution of the weeding action by intelligent weeders and/or site-specific herbicide applicators based on the decision made by the DCNN models.

