A robotic system generally consists of a motion generating mechan- ical hardware module, an electronic control module, a software module that run a decision support system to drive the electromechanical actu- ators and a communication protocol for data transfer within and outside the system (Angeles, 1997). The electronic module would consist of em- bedded microcontrollers, PLC's, or other advanced hardware such as FPGA's to generate the actuating signals. These signals are then received by the motor drivers to supply driving power to the actuators. Power regulators are used to provide different operating power levels for each component according to its working range. Also, multiple sensors are used to monitor the environment (Joseph Raj et al., 2019) and the robot operating parameters (position measuring devices such as en- coders, limit switches and potentiometers) (Chen et al., 2018). The elec- tromechanical actuators such as stepper and servo motors provide driving torque to the robot joints through power transmission mecha- nisms like gears, timing belts and pulleys with minimal backlash. The

Robot operating system (ROS) is an open-source firmware architec- ture, mainly designed for the development of robotic tools. It consists of several libraries which are capable of performing complex tasks such as navigation robots, multiple robot coordination assisted with machine vision and sensor integration. Araujo et al. (2015) developed a mobile robot platform using an Arduino board controlled by ROS. The control

trajectory at the specified linear speed of the manipulator. Further, accel- eration at the beginning and deceleration at the end of the trajectory were provided to maintain smooth actuation. Once, the manipulator reached the target position, SGF sent a handshake signal to the PGF through serial bus to continue the cycle for the next position.

coupled with the platform. Thus, the rotation of the stepper motor was converted into a linear motion in Z direction. A parallel jaw gripper was attached to the robot arm at the connecting point of the two passive links. The gripper was made to open and close using a servo motor. An- other servo motor mounted on the passive link was attached to the grip- per to provide the rotary motion of the gripper in planner coordinates. Four limit switches were provided at the robot arm frames to act as sensing boundary of the robot arm. Two limit switches (limit switches 1 and 2) sensed the boundary position of the active robot joints. The limit switches 3 and 4 detected the upper and lower boundary positions

developed firmware was successfully implemented on an embedded hardware to pick and drop of pot seedlings loaded on a feeding con- veyor using a parallel robot arm with an average cycle time of 3.5 s with a success rate of 93.3%.

Rahul K. is persuing Master of Science at Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur in Farm Machinery specialization under Agricultural and Food Engineering Department. His re- search focuses on implementation of robotics and automation in agricultural machinery. He is also interested in artificial intelligence, machine vision and mechatronic system de- sign.

