Simonton (1991) developed an end-effector for controlling the posi- tion, velocity and force to minimize damage to the petioles and main stem of geranium cuttings. An end-effector that uses rack and pinion type mechanism to convert rotational motion of the stepping motor to the clipping motion of the finger was reported by Kim et al. (1995). A machine vision system was reported to detect the unsuccessful transplanting (Beam et al., 1991). Whereas Tai et al. (1994) used ma- chine vision system to locate empty cells on the tray and guiding healthy plugs into empty cells to re-transplant. In another study, Ryu et al. (2001) developed an end-effector which can grip, hold and release a seedling plug using a pneumatic system. The performance was evalu- ated by identifying empty cells in 72- and 128-cell trays with 16 days old cucumber seedlings using vision based system.

used to move the metering shaft to and fro. The DC motor was used to move the protray forward as per the programme. The metering mecha- nism was also controlled by programming using micro-controller, step- per motor and DC motor. The feed roller has to feed one pro-tray of seedlings at a time to the metering system. The sprocket of the ground wheel has 28 teeth and 14 teeth sprocket on the idler shaft. The increase in speed is in a ratio of 2:1.

The idler shaft has sprocket with 20 teeth and sprocket on metering shaft with 12 teeth. The increase in speed is about 1.7 times. This rota- tional speed is used to eject out the plug seedling from the pro-tray into the delivery box. To maintain the optimum plant to plant spacing, the velocity ratio between ground wheel shaft of the feeding mecha- nism and metering shaft is kept as 3.4:1.

120 mm apart from one end. Both the switches were pressed with the help of special bush attached on the metering shaft. When stepper motor moves and its presses the right switch, then controller receive sig- nal from switch digital pin and it gives digital output at direction pin of stepper motor driver. Thus, motor rotates in clockwise direction and when left switch is pressed stepper motor moves in anti-clockwise direc- tion. As the direction of stepper motor changes, DC motor turn ON with delay of 1 s and after 75 milliseconds DC motor becomes off. The DC motor makes to moves only in anticlockwise direction so that the feed roller rotates in forward direction. The microcontroller provides 5 V DC voltage as power supply for both drivers. A 12 V DC battery is used as power supply for both motors and microcontroller.

motor according to controller command. The controller provides three types of signal to driver they are: PWM, enable and direction. Enable signal used to actuate the motor or halt the operation of motor, if it is high it turns ON motor, otherwise vice versa. DC motor was operated at 12 V and 5 V was providing to DC motor driver by Arduino for oper- ating the motor at constant speed. Controller generates PWM for con- trolling the speed of motor and it also set the direction of motor clockwise or anticlockwise. DC motor was used for controlling the lon- gitudinal movement of feed roller.

The system mainly consists of pro-tray feed roller unit, metering unit, delivery unit and corresponding embedded system. The embed- ded system developed is used to drive the metering mechanism and the mechanical system used to drive the system at optimum rota- tional speed at 3.4:1 transmission ratio to obtain recommended plant to plant spacing. At the same time, the seedling pro-tray feed rollers and metering shaft is driven by DC motor and stepper motor to supply the seedlings transversely and longitudinally, respectively, so as to eject the seedling from the pro-tray and releasing into the fur- row. The entire operation was controlled by embedded system. The pro-trays are fed longitudinally and metering shaft moves trans- versely. The seedlings are ejected by rotating fingers mounted on the metering shaft.

2.0 km/h beyond which the transplanting efficiency reduces. At this speed, the transplanting efficiency was 90.3% which is considered very good (Khadatkar et al., 2018). It was observed from the result that transplanting percentage increases with increase in speed of operation and then reduces afterwards, which may be due to the reason that at higher speed the soil covering was not proper.

The results above indicated that the developed embedded system work satisfactory with developed programme. It also indicated the test values obtained during the study may be used to carry out the field trial for its efficient working and further development. The results also show that optimum speed of operation as well as angle of pro-tray feed roller can improve the efficiency of the transplanter. Therefore, speed of operation and angle of pro-tray should be optimized to use in the new prototype for further application.

system that would enable the singulation and optimum plant to plant spacing was developed and tested. An embedded system based soft- ware programme was developed, the hardware design was fabricated and it was integrated successfully with the seedling transplanter. The average values of performance parameters obtained with the developed system was found to be closer to the recommended values. The result indicated that average values of plant to plant spacing, planting depth, transplanting efficiency, percent furrow closer, angle of inclination and miss planting were 600 mm, 46 mm, 90.0%, 84.2%, 180 and 3%, respec- tively. The developed system ensures the optimum transplanting rate, the ability to transplant at higher speeds, singulation of seedlings and maintaining proper plant to plant spacing. The study indicated that speed of operation and angle of pro-tray feed roller are important fac- tors in improving the efficiency of the transplanter.

