The WOA is inspired by the special hunting activity of humpback whales, which are intelligent swimming creatures. Normally, they tend to hunt small fishes near to the sea surface. Humpback whales use a specialized hunting process called the bubble net feeding technique. Where, they move around the targets and generate distinctive bubbles across a ring or 9-shaped path [10,18].

To simulate such behavior in WOA, there is a 50% chance of choosing between both the shrinking encircling system and the spiral system to change the whale location, which is represented in this research by the optimization problem vectors, which are DG type, location, size and operating power factor during the optimization. In WOA, the best current potential solution is believed to be the target prey and the other search agents are trying to change their positioning towards it. The numerical simulation of WOA involves three stages as follows: The encircling prey, the spiral bubble-net feeding strategy, and the scan for food sources.

Seyedali M. et al. developed MVO [19]. The optimization software was created based on the idea of the big bang model and the Multiverse conception. Originally, according to the theory, the Big Bang is simply the cause of the existence of every element in this world. However, the latter concept deals with the presence of some universes. Almost every universe could have various physical rules, which react and collide with each other according to multiverse theory. The numerical model of MVO

Wormholes: it is responsible for exchanging objects between different universes or even between different parts of the same universe, and it is considered as a bridge either for various universes or for separate pieces of the same universe. In this step, the process of roulette wheels is used to construct the entire white/black tunnel at normal inflation levels, which can be used for objects exchanges between universes. The inflation rates are evaluated depending on two parameters, which are; the traveling distance rate (D) and the wormhole existence probability (Wp).

Stability is a key factor in the study of distribution systems. This was explored in several publications by multiple methodologies. Due to changes in power generation, the voltage stability of the systems in this study is advised to prevent the collapse of voltage.

IEEE 118-bus is a large scale power system consists of 118-bus, 54 generators and 186 branches with an active and reactive load of 4242 MW and 1438 MVAR, respectively. Therefore, this system is chosen to perform the study cases, to demonstrate the applicability of the proposed techniques to larger systems. This system is conducted in light of the survey, which indicates that few studies are applied to such complex networks and to check the remarkable performance of the algorithms in solving such large-scale systems.

of DG types mix are determined for each case study using the three- optimization algorithms. In addition, the third and the fourth DG-type optimal operating power factor is determined. Furthermore, the ob- tained results from WOA, MVO and SCA are compared and summarized. Where it is noticed that MVO scored the optimal results regarding the O.F value for the three introduced networks. However, there is symmetry between the obtained results from MVO and WOA in the case of IEEE 33- bus in addition to another similarity between results of MVO and SCA in the case of the realistic system.

