tiveness of the approach also was evaluated on the other clustering metrics and obtained high results. The proposed system can be installed in both internal and external cloud infrastructure. This allows, to detect attacks on the external cloud network, as well as on the internal physical network or in the virtual network between hypervisors.

E-government is an innovative transformation of technology, the state can use this system to improve citizen-state relations by providing quality services to citizens. Cloud computing is a new way to provide services over the Internet. In cloud computing, all resources (hardware, software, network resources) are provided as a service. Cloud-based e- government is considered to be the leading paradigm of distributed computing systems in the field of e-government. Cloud-based e-gov- ernment uses cloud services as a fundamental element in building intelligent networks of collaborative applications distributed within or outside the state.

The CSA (Cloud Security Alliance) has identified several types of threats to the cloud: Denial-of-Service (DoS), data breach, unauthorized access, insecure APIs, vulnerable applications, account hacking, mali- cious content, data loss, and abuse of services [2]. One of the most common types of attacks that cause serious damage to the cloud and affect its effectiveness is DoS. DoS is a method used by hackers to disrupt the availability of services and resources to its legitimate users.

Since DDoS attacks can occur in different layers of the Internet, including the cloud, methods of countering attacks must be designed and used in separate layers [4,35]. The working principle of the pro- tection mechanism of each layer is different. For this reason, the paper proposed a method to detect DDoS attacks in the network layer.

3643 network layer DDoS attacks were recorded [5]. According to the Kaspersky report, in the 4th quarter of 2019, the number of DDoS attacks doubled [6]. The report [7] notes that the number of attacks on SaaS services has tripled in 2018 and increased to 41% in 2018 from 13% in 2017. Attacks on data centers and cloud services have also risen from 11% to 34% in these years.

The scale of DDoS attacks is gradually expanding. Over the last decade, DDoS attack traffic has increased from 70 Gbps to 1.35 Tbps (Terabytes per second, Tbps) [8]. Attackers use cloud computing and IoT (Internet of Things) to generate large amounts of attack traffic [9].

For the detection of DDoS attacks, a hybrid model that combines Principle Component Analysis and clustering algorithms has been constructed. The proposed approach is evaluated in terms of the clustering quality, against the baseline algorithms such as Agglom- erative Clustering, k-means, and DBSCAN. On the CSE-CIC-IDS2018, NSL-KDD, and HTTP CSIC 2010 datasets the experiments have been provided.

The paper is constructed as follows. Section 2 presents an overview of the related work. Section 3 explains the Cloud network infrastructure, introduces the DDoS attack scenario on the Cloud, and presents the framework of the proposed DDoS attack detection system model con- structed in this paper. Section 4 describes machine learning methods that are used in the proposed hybrid model. Section 5 gives the clus- tering metrics used to evaluate the quality of the clustering. Section 6 presents the application scenario of the proposed system in a cloud network. Section 7 provides the results obtained from the experiments on CSE-CIC-IDS2018, NSL-KDD, and HTTP CSIC 2010 datasets. Section 8 gives the conclusion of the research.

The difference between traditional security systems and cloud se- curity systems is that the cloud security systems are installed and launched on separate components of the cloud. For example, security mechanisms installed in VMs monitor the security status of VMs. Secu- rity mechanisms installed in the hypervisor monitor the condition of the hypervisor. Security mechanisms installed at the nodes of the cloud network monitor the security of the cloud network [21].

Numerous studies were conducted to detect DDoS attacks in the cloud. Supervised and unsupervised machine learning algorithms are widely used in the detection of DDoS attacks. While the goal of super- vised approaches is to conduct research on pre-labeled benchmark data, the goal of unsupervised approaches is to label data by referring them to separate spaces according to similarity criteria. One of the most common unsupervised approaches is clustering algorithms. Clustered data can be used to label the data points.

In [16] a semi-supervised machine learning method has been pro- posed. Firstly, the network traffic is divided into the desired number of classes by the application of the unsupervised method, then the clus- tered data is labeled as normal, DDoS, and malicious traffic classes by using the voting method, at last, the detection of unknown traffic classes is provided by using the supervised approach. In the unsupervised learning phase of the proposed approach, to map the data into the low dimensional space, by applying the PCA method the feature extraction is performed. Although the work addresses the recent DDoS vectors, the performance of the method has been evaluated only by entropy.

detect attacks launched by insiders. In this study, an approach to detecting abnormal intrusions at the hypervisor level has been proposed to prevent DDoS attacks between virtual machines. An approach uses an evolutionary neural network. The evolutionary neural network is created based on the integration of the PSO and the Neural Network, and the main aim of this model is to classify and detect the traffic flow be- tween virtual machines. The drawback of this method is that it is computationally expensive.

[12] investigated the possibility of combining cloud computing and SDN technologies to protect against DDoS attacks. In this study, the DDoS attack prevention architecture constructed on SDN is called DaMask. The DaMask model consists of 2 modules: an anomaly-based attack detection module, called as DaMask-D, and an attack preven- tion module, called DaMask-M. In the DaMask-D module, anomalies are detected based on a graphical probabilistic inference model. The disadvantage of this approach is that it does not take into account the possibility of false positives occurring. Blocking of all suspected traffic in an instant in some cases results in the disruption of real user services.

[1] analysed the DDoS attack detection methods in the cloud. The taxonomy and a conceptual model of the preventive mechanism against DDoS attacks in the cloud are given. Here, the current research issues and future research directions have been investigated. Common DDoS attacks targeting cloud computing were analysed and categorized into two groups: application layer attacks and infrastructure layer attacks.

[22] proposed a distributed network security approach at the hypervisor level. The developed system is implemented in each pro- cessing server of cloud computing. To detect intrusions, the security system on each server monitors network traffic coming in and out of the virtual network, internal network, and external network associated with the appropriate virtual machine. From the cloud network traffic, the features are obtained using the Binary Bat Algorithm (BBA). Obtained features fed into the input of the Random Forest Algorithm and in this way, the detection of intrusions from the cloud network traffic and alert generation are provided. The effectiveness of the proposed approach is evaluated on the UNSW-NB15 and CICIDS-2017 datasets. A drawback of the proposed method is that it produces high false alarm rates and cannot accurately define the baseline of a normal profile.

Machine Learning based Intrusion Detection System. Here, the genetic algorithm is developed by applying parallel processing and fitness ratio hashing strategies. As a result of the algorithm development, the pro- cessing time and solution convergence time are minimized, and the computing power is saved. To optimize the heuristic search the SAA algorithm is applied to the Improved Genetic Algorithm (IGA). To evaluate the effectiveness of the method the CloudSim 4.0 simulator and the CICIDS2017, NSL-KDD (2015 version), and CIDDS-001 datasets open for scientific research are used. The proposed system can be installed in both internal and external cloud infrastructure. This allows detecting attacks on an external cloud network as well as on an internal physical network or in a virtual network created between hypervisors. One limitation of this approach is its failure to detect attacks that are not predefined in the system.

In [26], the network traffic clustering method based on the DBSCAN algorithm for the detection of DDoS attacks has been proposed. The proposed approach consists of three phases: the analysis phase, the clustering phase, and the prevention phase. The disadvantage of this study is the failure to provide the selection of informative features that significantly increase the efficiency of clustering.

In [29], a DDoS detection system based on the artificial neural network called a voting extreme learning machine (V-ELM) has been proposed. To implement this process, several Extreme learning ma- chines were used simultaneously in the V-ELM classifier. The results of all these machines are combined using a majority vote technique to get the final result.

One of the attacks that threaten IT services of cloud computing is IoT- based distributed denial of service attacks. Currently, the number of IoT devices with security holes is increasing rapidly. Bot writers take control of these types of vulnerable IoT devices and launch massive DDoS at- tacks against cloud systems. In Ref. [30], a new approach based on gesture verification was proposed to implement effective prevention of DDoS attacks. Here, obstacles to customers are generated based on gesture verification. IoT devices do not have the ability to draw gestures to overcome the barriers. Gestures here can be just drawing a circle or a line.

[31] proposed a system called LSTM-CLOUD based on the Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) method for the detection of DDoS attacks in an open cloud network environment. The method detects DDoS attacks based on the signature. LSTM-CLOUD model consists of two blocks: detection and protection. In the first module, attacks are detected by applying LSTM, and in the second module, if the attacks are detected, the defense mechanism is activated to defend the cloud system.

[33] proposed an efficient DoS attack detection system that uses the Oppositional Crow Search Algorithm (OCSA), which integrates the Crow Search Algorithm (CSA) and Opposition Based Learning (OBL) method to address such types of issues. The proposed system consists of two stages: selection of features using OCSA and classification using Recur- rent Neural Network (RNN). In this model, the essential features are selected using the OCSA algorithm and fed to the input of the RNN classifier, and classification of the data is provided.

[36] proposed a deep learning-based model for DDoS attack detec- tion. The proposed model has three main steps. At first, the data is fed to the DNN Input Layer, then into the first hidden layer. This layer like other hidden layers in this model is activated using Rectified Linear Unit (ReLU) activation function and the output from this layer is passed into three more dense layers all of which are activated using ReLU sepa- rately. For countering overfitting dropout is applied to each of the three

[37] analysed deep learning models including restricted Boltzmann machines, deep belief networks, and deep autoencoders for DDoS attack detection. The performance of each deep learning model was evaluated using two new real traffic datasets, namely, the CSE-CIC-IDS2018 dataset and the Bot-IoT dataset. The comparison of deep learning models with machine learning models is provided.

The virtual network creates communication between VMs on the same physical server. Through the internal network, various compo- nents such as cloud management systems, storage systems, network servers, etc. can communicate with each other. The external network acts as the main interface between the cloud user (front end) and the

tion by consuming bandwidth, router performance, or network re- sources. Attackers use protocols in the network and transport layers (OSI Layers 3 and 4) to attack the target host. Examples of such at- tacks are TCP Syn flood, UDP flood, and ICMP flood attacks.

Application layer attacks. Disables services to legitimate users by consuming server resources (e.g., sockets, CPU, memory, disk/ database bandwidth, and input/output (I/O) bandwidth). The attacker uses system and protocol vulnerabilities to disrupt the availability of cloud resources. Examples of application level attacks are HTTP attacks.

the two data clustering. From a mathematical standpoint, the Rand index is related to the prediction accuracy but is applicable even when the original class labels are not used. Rand Index is a metric that cal- culates a similarity rate between two clusterings. For this calculation, the rand index considers all pairs of samples and counts pairs that are assigned in similar or different clusters in the predicted and true clus-

Adjusted Mutual Information. Mutual Information is a metric that measures the consensus of two assignments, ignoring permutations. Two different normalized versions of this measure are available, Normalized Mutual Information (NMI) and Adjusted Mutual Information (AMI). The adjusted mutual information can be calculated using a similar form to that of the adjusted Rand index:

The internal network of the cloud infrastructure is a virtual envi- ronment. In the virtual environment, there exist many virtual machines on the same physical server. These virtual machines communicate with each other via a virtual switch without leaving the physical server. Because they interact within a physical server, security systems installed on the local network cannot see this network traffic. If the traffic flow between these VMs does not pass through the security mechanism, this situation creates a gap for all types of attacks. Here, the attacker com- promises one of the VMs and uses it to gain control over other VMs within the same hypervisor. The control of this breaking operation of the attacker is impossible. Besides, the virtual environment is exposed to various threats, mainly concentrated in the hypervisor: Hyper jacking, VM escape, VM migration, VM theft, and Inter-VM traffic.

External network. A DDoS detection system placed on the outside of the cloud detects network attacks implemented by compromised nodes of the external cloud network or attackers connected to the Internet. The goal of these attackers is to gain access to the internal cloud by bypassing the firewall. Here, the DDoS detection system acts as a secondary pro- tection layer after the firewall to eliminate its vulnerabilities.

Internal network. Deployment of a DDoS attack detection system (sensor) on virtual servers within the cloud, allows the detection of at- tacks occurring in the internal network of the cloud. The DDoS detection system installed here monitors both virtual traffic and traffic flow transferred from the virtual server to the physical server. It is not advisable to install a security system on every VM, as this will create an additional workload and complicate the work of the VM. Besides, the migration, provisioning, and de-provisioning of VMs are implemented dynamically so the installation of separate security mechanisms on each VMs also poses management challenges.

on other metrics. When applying the PCA + k-means algorithm to the than 0.5 is considered bad. This algorithm also demonstrated low results significantly improved. Thus, the PCA + k-means algorithm obtained the CSE-CIC-IDS2018 dataset, the results of the k-means algorithm were values of 0.9923, 1.0000, and 0.9412, respectively on the accuracy

all models, the accuracy obtained a value above 0.7200. In our work, we obtained better results compared to the results of best-performing models in terms of accuracy, precision, recall, and F-measure metrics. In some works which are being compared, there is no information about what type of attacks are being detected. From the comparison, it is

Protection against DDoS attacks should not be only the responsibility of the cloud provider. The protection procedure should be provided comprehensively on both sides, both, by customers and the provider. Security must be comprehensive, from the device used by the user to access the network to the servers running in the cloud.

To protect the cloud environment from both internal and external attacks, based on data clustering, the method of detecting the DDoS attacks with high accuracy was proposed. The hybrid approach pro- posed in this study is based on the combination of machine learning methods. In this approach, the PCA extracts the most informative fea- tures among numerous features. By applying the clustering methods to a new dataset formed from the selected features, the DDoS attack detec- tion was carried out.

