Descriptive statistics were used to describe and understand the data. Multiple regression analysis was used to test the research model. In addition, t-test and ANOVA were employed to examine the differences between the students based on their demographics. Regression analysis assumptions including normality,

at the individual determinants of BI, attitude (b = .32), subjective norm (b = .22) and university support (b = .18) had all significant influence on BI at the .001% level. Perceived e-learning accessibility (b = .12) had a significant influence on BI at the .01% level, whereas Internet self-efficacy (b = .083) was significant at the

These constructs accounted for 56% of the variance in PU. The effect size of this index is much larger than typical (Cohen, 1988). On the other hand, Internet expe- rience (IE) (b = .06) was not found to have a significant relationship with PU, thus hypothesis 9 was rejected.

e-learning than female students. However, the magnitude of the difference in the means was very small (g2 = 0.02). Further, to see if the students are different in their intention to use e-learning based on their place of residence, another t-test was carried out. No statistically significant difference was found between the

was found to have an impact on perceptions of on-line learning. Similarly, the cur- rent study found a significant difference between external and regular students in their intention to use e-learning. External students showed greater intention to use e-learning than regular students. The attractiveness of e-learning for external students is maybe due to the benefits of e-learning systems, such as their flexibility and interactivity (Taylor and Todd, 1995; Ndubisi, 2006). Furthermore, the students were found different in their intention to use e-learning based on their faculty.

As attitude toward e-learning was found to have a strong impact on the intention to use e-learning among the students, policy-makers should attempt to build po- sitive attitudes among the potential e-learners such as male and external students. One way of achieving this goal is by highlighting the usefulness of this mode of learning to potential users. One of the greatest advantages of e-learning as per- ceived by the students is that it gives university students greater flexibility in time and place (Ndubisi, 2006). Moreover, e-learning enhances interactivity, i.e. com- munication between the students among themselves and with their tutors. As a re- sult, designers of e-learning systems should pay attention to these benefits and design e-learning programmes that offer flexibility and interactivity. In addition, attitude toward e-learning is influenced by the perceptions of e-learning ease of

This study had some limitations. First, e-learning in Saudi Arabia is still in its in- fancy with a paucity of information on its use at the time of the study. Thus, the greatest part of pertinent literature comes from other nations and may not truth- fully explain the situation in Saudi Arabia. Second, the current study relied on one sample that had its unique features and may not be totally representative of the broader population. This may affect generalising the findings. Furthermore, this study utilised only self-reported measures. Although this method has been repeat- edly employed in the past as a way of measuring attitude and perceptions, it is nec- essary to be aware of the weaknesses and issues associated with this method.

