The building located at nearly 5300 meters above the sea, the lowest outdoor temperature in the coldest month is below -40  , with more than 330 frost days and more 3.0m frost line, above 8-class winds. The people living here even cannot take a bath throughout the year, the water for eating are from ice, passive solar houses was designed for solving the problem of water for eating and taking bath for the residents, locating at the south of the buildings.

The height of solar house is 2.5 meters, considering local latitude and the solar altitude angles in winter, the day lighting glass was incline with angle of 45 , area of 11.8 m2, the bottom of incline plane was connected with a vertical glass of 1.85 m high, area of 7.42 m2,

Solar house can be divided into two areas by trombe wall: the bathroom and the heat preservation room. The incline glass was cross the two part of the solar house, the heat preservation room can get sunlight from the incline plane directly. Single-layer ordinary transparent glass with 5 mm thickness was used for day lighting, Light transmission ratio  of glass is 70%, The east, west, north wall of solar house was established on the wall of pool vertically with the same size, decorating heat storage material as much possible as it can, which can increase the thermal inertia of solar house, and the bath room can increase its temperature at the same time. The south of trombe wall was consisted with 200mm thick concrete brick; the west and east side wall was also used as heat collection and storage wall. The outside surface of south trombe wall was black, four holes for draught with the same size 400  250, two uptakes and two downtakes.

Heat pipe vacuum tube solar energy water heater collector was applied to supply heat water firstly, electrical heating system was used as complementary energy with the power of electric heaters 2 kW, the light area of heat pipe vacuum tube was 1.2 m2. Effective volume of water tank was 150 liters, locating in the highest point of solar house, without insulation which can increase the direct heating area.

Sensor arrangement: indoor temperature sensor was settled (the bathroom, heat preservation room) at the height of 1.5 m from ground; outside temperature sensor was settled at height of 1.5m from ground, under the shadow and without wind. The Solar radiation intensity measurement instrument was settled at 1.0 m from ground outside the window.

