6.05% in Fold-3 and 7%, 6.975% and 6.42% in Fold-4 of the basin. Receiver operating characteristics (ROC) curve and statistical techniques such as mean-absolute-error (MAE), root-mean-absolute-error (RMSE) and relative gully density area (R-index) methods were used for evaluating the GES maps. The results of the ROC, MAE, RMSE and R-index methods showed that the models of susceptibility to gully erosion have excellent predictive efficiency. The simulation results based on machine learning are satisfactory and outstanding and could be used to forecast the areas vulnerable to gully erosion.

transport the soil (Dondofema et al., 2008). Electrical Conductivity (EC) and SAR interactions increase the sensitivity of soil to gully erosion (Shahrivar et al., 2012). Besides, soil physical and chemical properties can not only increase the susceptibility to gully erosion but can also reduce the growth of vegetation in the soil. The literatures of Nandi and Luffman (2012); Battaglia et al. (2002) assessed gully erosion based on soil physio-chemical factors. However, the integration of numerous environmental factors using appropriate methods for gully susceptibility erosion modeling (GESM) is essential for protecting the soil and water (Shit et al., 2015).

The k-fold cross-validation (CV) approach is one of the statistical validation approaches used for mapping the various natural hazards. The K-fold may be in several forms, namely two-fold, three-fold, four-fold, etc. Arabameri et al. (2020b) used a four-fold cross-validation approach to map the susceptibility of land subsidence. Ghorbanzadeh et al. (2018) used the 4-fold validation method for mapping land subsi- dence and vulnerability to forest fires. In this study, we have used the

Planning Bureau). The primary data likes soil samples were collected through field survey for assessing the physiochemical properties of the study area. Measurement of width, depth and areal coverage were also done through field survey. The soil chemical properties such as pH, manganese, phosphorous, potassium, iron, organic carbon, sulfur, zinc were measured through laboratory analysis.

imagery can be used to obtain the information about gully erosion in remote areas where human cannot reach. The Google Earth image is of high resolution and has good capability to detect the gullies in the remote area (Arabameri et al., 2020b). First, gullies were identified through the Google earth images and then for the locational verification and mea- surement of width, depth and areal coverage field survey was done with global positioning system (GPS). In the study area, a total of 120 gullies

In multiple regression models, linearly related two or more explana- tory variables are called multi-collinearity. To remove the highly corre- lated and inappropriate factors among the various geo-environmental factors for mapping various natural hazards, tolerance (TOI) and vari- ance inflation factor (VIF) were widely used (Saha 2017; Roy and Saha 2019; Arabmaeri et al. 2020; Sardooi et al., 2019; Yu et al., 2015). The

Radial Basis Function Neural Network (RBFnn) is a familiar nonlinear neural network. The RBFnn is characterized as a neural network with hidden layers. In addition, RBF consists of three layers, namely the input layer, the hidden layer, and the output layer. For each unit, the input layer converts data or vector elements into hidden layers. Each unit in the

Random sub space (RSS) classifier. The random sub-space clas- sifier (RSS) is an important hybrid ensemble and a parallel learning al- gorithm. Ho (1998) introduced Random sub-space (RSS). For this algorithm, multiple decisions of the classifier were combined using the optimization of the sub-set. Such function space subsets are chosen randomly from the training classifiers (gully inventory datasets). Comparatively, the ensemble approach of random sub-space (RSS) is distinguished from the others by an ensemble algorithm since it consists of multiple sample numbers (Pham et al., 2020). The classification of the original feature space was done in the first stage by the q dimensional training of subsets L. In this study, the RBFnn as base classifier was applied in this algorithm for each of these subsets. In the end, the inte- gration of the base classifier has extracted from the weighted majority

an efficient model for solving problems of classification and regression (Kuhnert et al., 2010). It is a significant overhaul of the bootstrap ag- gregation and belongs to the ensemble model family (Jaafari and Pour- ghasemi, 2019). The RF algorithm was performed in two stages: 1) the RF model uses a bootstrap sampling technique to set up training sets around 2/3 of all observations randomly and creates a tree for each training set (Youssef et al., 2016). Approximately 1/3 of all observations that are not used during the construction of the training set will be used during the bootstrap sampling as a test set and known as the out-of-bag sample (OOB) which can be used to determine misclassification errors and es-

Based on the four types of classification such as true positive (TP), true negative (TN), false positive (FP) and False Negative (FN) area under the curve of ROC (AUCROC) was calculated. The true positive (TP) and the True negative (TN) are the number of pixels properly classified by the models, while false positives (FP) and false negatives (FN) are the number of pixels incorrectly classified by the modes (Arabameri et al., 2020a). Researchers considered if the AUC value is less than 0.5 the performance is erroneous of models (He et al., 2019). The values of AUCROC were categorized into different categories by Fressard et al.

areas are occupied by the very high susceptibility class for Fold-3. For Fold-4 the very high susceptibility class covered 7% (RBFnn), 6.42% (RSS-RBFnn), and 6.97% (RTF-RBFnnn) of the catchment respectively. GESMs results showed that the very high susceptibility region of gully erosion is located in the catchment's northwest and middle parts due to the concentration of lateritic soil and the presence of barren land. However, a very small portion of the basin is covered by the very high susceptibility class.

