Adaptive neuro fuzzy inference systems (ANFIS) is an adaptive net- work that is based on Takagi-Sugeno fuzzy inference system (You et al., 2017). It is an artificial intelligence model that has effective self-learning function and mechanism (Ling et al., 2014). ANFIS is a nonlinear compu- tational intelligent system that adapts itself by forming rules to survive with changing environment and uncertainty. It is a synergetic system of

The acceptability of the quadratic model depended on the p-value of the analysis of variance and the value of the correlation coefficient (R2). The difference between the experimental and the predicted values was utilized in determining the significance of the regression model ob- tained. The three-dimensional (3D) surface plots were employed in the study of the interactive effects of the input variables.

The ANN and ANFIS were simulated by utilizing the Neural Network of MATLAB 8.5 software 2015 version. The ANN design can be satisfacto- rily modeled using the RSM generated experimental data (Mourabet et al., 2014; Nazerian et al., 2018). Thus, twenty (20) experimental

About 70% of the experimental runs were used to train the net- work, 15% was used in testing the network while the remaining 15% was used to validate the result. These represented 14 experi- ments, 3 experiments and 3 experiments respectively. According to Kiran and Pragnesh (2016), using more data sets in training re- duces processing time in ANN learning and improves the generali- zation capability of models. The 15% used in testing the network was to provide an independent measure of network performance during and after training. In the validation, the network generalization was measured by network validation and halted when generalization stopped improving in order to avoid over fitting.

The learning algorithm utilized in modeling the ANN process was the Levenberg-Marquardt. In order to enhance reduction of network error, the response and the input variables were normalized between 0 and 1 (Mourabet et al., 2014). Trainlm was used as the training func- tion because it regularizes the bias value using the algorithm of the Levenberg-Marquardt.

The appropriate number of hidden neurons was determined by trial and error method with the aim of getting the lowest possible error be- tween the predicted and the measured values. Large number of neurons leads to unwanted over-fitting and complicated network topology while very few neurons reduces the convergence rate of the network (Mingyi et al., 2017).

The p-value gave information whether a statistical hypothesis is sig- nificant or not and how significant it is (Agu et al., 2020). The model F- value of 280.27 and p-value of b0.0001 showed that the quadratic model chosen was significant. The individual model terms were tested for their significance based on the p-values of each term. A significance level of 95% was chosen hence, all the terms whose p-values are b0.05 were significant otherwise, they were termed insignificant (Gholamhossein et al., 2016).

Relatively lower p-value and higher F-values showed better signifi- cance effect of the model term on the response (Josh et al., 2014; Tan et al., 2008). Therefore, all linear terms of drying time (X1), drying air speed (X2) and temperature (X3), the interactive terms of X1X2, X1X3 and X2X3 and the squared terms of X2 and X2 were significant. Only the squared model term of X2 was found to be insignificant. The model term found to have the significant effect on the response was drying time (X1) followed by temperature (X3) while the interaction of X2X3 and the squared term of X2 have the least effect on the response.

relatively less significant than that of temperature and drying air speed. It was found that increasing the drying time reducing the moisture con- tent of the potato slices. Again, drying air speed seems to have the least effect on the drying process among the three independent factors con- sidered. The elliptical nature of the 3D curves suggested good correla- tion between the two variables (Iheanacho et al., 2019). These results indicated that the quadratic model selected is appropriate for the modeling. Similar trend was reported by Oguanobi et al. (2019).

The R2 values of RSM and ANFIS were 0.998 showing better correla- tion than that of ANN which was 0.970. The ARE value of the ANFIS was smaller than that of the RSM. The RMSE values were 0.0273, 0.0282 and 0.1178 for RSM, ANFIS and ANN respectively. This result showed that the RSM and ANFIS gave better significant prediction than the ANN in the drying of potato slices. RSM was reported to be better than ANN in op- timizing the design parameters for a V perforated baffle (Sunil, 2015) though in most other cases, ANN gave a better prediction than RSM.

RSM, ANN and ANFIS models were used to predict the moisture con- tent reduction of potato slices in a hot-air drying process. CCD was employed in the RSM analysis where a quadratic model with R2 value of 0.9980 was obtained. Drying time had the most significant singular effect on the drying process followed by temperature. ANN model

gave R2 of 0.970 with 5 neurons in the hidden layer. Mean square error of 0.00656 was obtained at epoch 4. ANFIS model also showed good pre- dictive behaviour with R2 of 0.998 and average training error of 0.03574 at epoch 2. The comparative analysis showed that the RSM and ANFIS were better in predicting the moisture content reduction of potato drying.

