Epilepsy is a brain disorder caused by abnormal activity, which is observable through neural electrical biosignals. Epilepsy can incur in epileptic seizures, events in which the epileptic individual feels sensory disturbances, commonly accompanied by strong pain and involuntary muscular contraction [1,2]. Due to the bioelectrical nature of seizures, Electroencephalography (EEG) is a direct means of analyzing it. Through the acquisition of EEG signals, useful information can be processed and used for monitoring individuals who suffer from this disorder.

several cases within the database. Then clusterization of cases in groups is proposed in order to improve the training and evaluation of the ANN, alongside a channel reduction aimed to decrease the computational load of the algorithm. After the data sets are structured, feature extraction techniques are proposed, using temporal and spectral analysis like Standard Deviation and Short Time Fourier Transform (STFT). The pre-processing of data includes the proposal of two techniques to improve the ANN accuracy, being those of the data superposition tech- nique and the anticipation of target data, both for the training phase of the algorithm. Finally, the LSTM network is developed, using two structures due to the techniques proposed, and its performance is analyzed by the training accuracy, and the sensitivity (true-positive rate) and specificity (true-negative rate) of the predictions.

The method starts by selecting and grouping patients based on the number of epileptic events presented in the recordings, then only EEG channels common to all recordings are maintained and the data entries containing epileptic events are added in a target column vector. The data pre-processing step starts with channel reduction to less than a quarter of the channels selected, followed by the extraction of 5 temporal and spectral features, just as data normalization and target encoding. The last proposed technique consists of the proposal of two data manipulation techniques - input signals superposition and anticipation of target values, both for training data. Finally, considering the two techniques proposed, two RNN structures are created to test the accuracy, sensitivity, and specificity in identifying pre-ictal regions.

The threshold used for peak counting was 80% of the maximum signal amplitude for each EEG channel used, considering the entire patient re- cord being analyzed. This threshold was obtained in preliminary tests by varying the threshold from 50 to 90%, looking for a value that could better represent visually distinctive peaks, but minimizing the detection of local maxima. All observations in a time frame of 1 s were summed, then this sum was replicated for all samples in the second in question, being 256 samples due to the sample rate of 256 Hz.

After the data normalization, the targets are encoded in such a way that the ANN can easily process the data. This is done by categorizing values that are originally zeros and ones into an array, by using the one- hot encoding process. The outcome of the encoding process is that each set of data entry have a target represented by a two columns array, specifying if an epileptic is occurring or not in that sample.

arbitrarily chosen in the present methodology was not optimal and that this value does not appear to have a local maximum either. Using a similar target anticipation technique [25], was able to anticipate facial movement predictions, obtained by monitoring with a camera. However, although the present ANN architecture differs from the architecture proposed by Ref. [25], the principle of data anticipation training is the same.

As with target anticipation techniques without overlapping data, there was no consistent increase in sensitivity. Despite the improvement of sensitivity of 16.9% for group 1, there was a worsening of 16.3% for group 3, characterizing a strong dependence on performance with the patient analyzed.

Although data overlap resulted in higher sensitivity for groups 1 and 3, remembering that for the other groups the sensitivity was null, the results followed the pattern observed in the anticipation of targets. Compared to the basic structure, sensitivities are better for group 1 and worse for group 3. This shows that for the ANN structure and techniques proposed in this paper, the use of target anticipation is not good. Consistent results for prediction sensitivity also show the same behaviors when used in conjunction with other techniques.

This work reached a maximum percentage of 8.33% and 61.3% of anticipated seizures onset detection and epileptic events classification, respectively. It is important to consider for this comparison that the present development used an extensive database and a combination of data from several patients, to generalize all scenarios present in the database as much as possible. Ideally, this combination of factors would make the ANN apprehend the generalization of pre-ictal segments; however, results show a model difficulty in learning the variety of EEG patterns for so many patients.

When comparing the results with works such as [19], which showed sensitivity around 98% in the classification of ictal regions, inter-ictal and pre-ictal with SVM classifier, it can be noticed that the result ob- tained with the present ANN LSTM is less satisfactory as it reaches a maximum of 61.3% sensitivity (using the data superposition). However, it must be considered that, as cited by Refs. [19], the database of such previous work was relatively small, being about 30 times smaller in time of recordings in comparison to the database used in this work, with 3.28 h of data versus 101 h of the files used in the present work. When analyzing a shorter data set, there is less probability of facing specific seizure scenarios with particular patterns that differ from others. Even with the present considerations, it is interesting to notice the use of

The work of [20] adopted the same database as in this development, aiming to classify epileptic events by using the Extreme Learning tech- nique. The temporal and spectral characteristics have similarities, although the final results differ widely, with the work cited reaching 95% of correct classifications. The authors used only one EEG channel from the 3 patients selected, contrasting with the present research, which used 4 EEG channels from 10 different patients, resulting in 5 times more data. Therefore, it is again considered that the referred work may have been

In [26], the authors used the same database as this work to implement seizure prediction using LSTM with patient-specific analysis; the work achieved over 99% sensitivity and specificity, and 0.11 false positives per hour when evaluating pre-ictal segments of 15 min before seizures. Some significant differences between the present work and [26] remain in the signal segmentation, class imbalance approach and time window used to asses the performance of anticipated predictions.

It was possible to verify a strong dependence on the proposed tech- nique with the patient and their EEG patterns, suggesting that it may be not possible to obtain EEG patterns generalization for several patients in a single ANN model. This strong dependency was especially visible in sensitivity results. Considering this, it is suggested that such models be first trained and tested with only one patient, then generalized with the combination of other patients. It was possible to verify a strong depen- dence on the proposed technique with the patient and their EEG patterns, suggesting that it may be not possible to obtain EEG patterns general- ization for several patients in a single ANN model. This strong de- pendency was especially visible in sensitivity results. Considering this, it is suggested that such models be first trained and tested with only one patient, then generalized with the combination of other patients.

The directions of future research would be to experiment with the combination of other features, using Multivariate Discriminant Analysis to find resulting features that have a greater correlation with pre-ictal periods. The combination of different features can result in dimension- ality reduction and eventual elimination of redundant features for training. Experimentation with larger databases and Deep Learning structures, using only raw EEG data, could result in a model with a low number of EEG channels, in case significant features are successfully extracted by the deep learning model. It is also suggested to test similar EEG databases, compare results, and further analyze the ANN generalization.

