4.0 technologies, including AI, the IoT, big data analytics, and blockchain. Chen and Yu (2021) summarise the recent developments in reliable, precise, and cost-effective remote tools in the food industry, such as AI-based techniques, image processing systems, and sensors for quality evaluation. According to the authors, image processing systems and AI can be utilized for different objectives such as product classification based on shape and size, detection of product defects and microbes, and food quality grading. Qazi et al. (2022) review the literature pertaining to the applications, challenges, and future trends of IoT tech- nologies and AI techniques in smart agriculture. Finally, Tripodi et al. (2022) study the contributions of AI and machine learning to data anal- ysis and their use in next-generation breeding.

research procedure employed. Next, we analyse the main results, in- cluding the yearly distribution of publications, the most productive journals and nations, the most influential publications, and the research hotspots. In Section 4, we discuss the findings and highlight research contributions, research agenda, and shortcomings. In Section 5, the study finishes with short reflections and conclusions.

maximum was thirty. We can observe slow and inconsistent growth, surpassing thirty published documents in 2010. The last three years have witnessed unprecedented growth in the third phase (2011 to 2020). During this period, AI applications in the agri-food industry re- ceived great attention, as evidenced by the sharp increase in publica- tions. In 2020, scholarly output more than doubled from 2019, surpassing 1700 documents, suggesting that the proliferation and prev- alence of various AI approaches and applications in the agri-food indus- try can explain this dramatic increase.

In general, the findings from the keyword co-occurrence clustering suggest that AI techniques such as machine learning, deep learning, and artificial neural networks were the most common approaches in agri-food systems and thus, accelerated the sector's digitalisation. Addi- tionally, robots, the IoT, wireless sensor networks, and UAVs are popular technologies integrated with AI to modernise farming practices. Never- theless, other adjacent technologies like blockchain, 3D printing, aug- mented reality, and virtual reality did not appear in the visualisation.

By addressing the first research question, our bibliometric review analyses the key productivity measures of the field. According to the sam- ple we analysed, the earliest publications were published in 1992. In ad- dition, the analysis depicted the dynamics of scholarly production throughout three major stages. The initial period of publication ran from 1992 to 2000, and during this period, only a few publications were pro- duced annually. In the second stage, between 2001 and 2010, the field grew steadily, reaching 40 publications for the first time in 2010. This was due to the unprecedented advances in computer science during this period. In the third stage, between 2011 and 2020, AI techniques

In addition, our research identified the most pertinent sources. Com- puters and Electronics in Agriculture, a leading journal, dominate the AI literature in the agri-food industry in this regard. On the one hand, com- puter science and engineering journals were the most prolific and ranked highly. In contrast, this ranking did not include business, man- agement, operations research, and decision science-focused publica- tions. According to the number of citations received, the United States dominated the list, while European and Asian countries occupied signif- icant positions. In the top 20 most influential nations, no contributions from Latin America and Africa were relevant. This suggests that the sci- entific outcome on a global scale was more concentrated and predomi- nantly represented by developed nations.

Technology. Technological progress contributes to the automa- tion of agri-food activities, agricultural productivity, efficiency, reliabil- ity, and precision (Bechar and Vigneault, 2016). The smart reform of agri-food systems necessitates the implementation of innovative prac- tices and technology-driven processes. This calls for agri-food organisa- tions to adopt AI to fortify their technological infrastructure. As such, the combination of AI and other technologies like the IoT, edge computing, blockchain, and augmented reality is considered a promising solution for pest identification, safety traceability of agricultural products, and environmental pollution caused by the use of fertilisers and pesticides (Zhang et al., 2020). Furthermore, AI augments the utility of data analyt- ics to improve crop production and assist farmers in selecting the best breed according to their location and climate (Lova Raju and Vijayaraghavan, 2020), monitoring livestock in real-time (Taneja et al., 2020), and predicting frost events (Diedrichs et al., 2018). Therefore, the following research propositions can be investigated:

The agri-food industry represents the major consumer of water on a worldwide scale since crops largely depend on water availability. Con- sidering the significant depletion rate of water resources, there is a need for effective water management to conserve this resource and es- tablish sustainable agricultural production. The effective use of water can be conducive to significant improvements in water quality and a de- crease in health issues and pollution (Neupane and Guo, 2019). In this vein, recent research on AI demonstrates the technology's ability to

The bibliometric analysis in this study resulted in several conclu- sions. We identified the most prevalent AI techniques and related tech- nologies (e.g., robots, the IoT, big data, UAVs) and their applications in the agri-food industry. This may assist practitioners in determining which AI-supporting methodologies to employ. Second, utilising RBV theory, we developed a framework to assist practitioners in deter- mining which AI deployments may impact agri-food resources. When applying AI to agri-food activities, the seven resource categories (raw materials, water, soil, energy, human resources, technology, and relationships) must be evaluated. In addition, practitioners should care- fully consider the economic and technical viability of incorporating AI while emphasising the technology's ethical and socially responsible dimensions.

Our study has limitations. This review began by performing a key- word search against a single database, Web of Science-WoS. Conse- quently, relevant publications may be omitted, especially those not indexed in the WoS database. The authors' keywords may also intro- duce bias into the analysis. To circumvent these issues, future studies may utilise multiple databases (e.g., Scopus, Google Scholar), include additional keywords, and employ additional analysis methods (e.g., meta-analysis, main path analysis).

the relationship between AI and agri-food systems, how farmers use AI techniques to modernise agriculture, the major trends in AI integra- tion in agri-food businesses, and the challenges and concerns associated with leveraging AI in the digitalisation of agriculture and farming activ- ities. AI has the potential to be an indispensable tool at every level of the intricate agri-food supply ecosystem. In addition to physical product ecosystems, its role can extend from primary production to processing, distribution, and retail, encompassing agricultural assurance and logistics service ecosystems.

In terms of scholarly output, we identified three distinct phases of AI in the agriculture and food industry. We observed that exponential growth began in 2015 due to advances in computational sciences and the emergence of innovative technologies. Unsurprisingly, AI research is published in computer science journals. The United States, China, and Spain were the top three most influential nations in terms of citations per country. Latin American and African nations contribute negligibly to AI research in the agri-food industry. In addition, robotics, the IoT, and unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) were identified as signif- icant technologies that could benefit from AI techniques such as ma- chine learning, deep learning, artificial neural networks, convolutional neural networks, and fuzzy logic. In addition, we identified machine learning and deep learning as recent trending topics. On the other hand, integrating AI with blockchain technology, virtual and augmented reality, 3D printing, and bioinformatics have received little attention. Therefore, future research should concentrate on how AI can enhance these technologies' capacity to manage soil, water, energy, crops, and livestock. In addition, the barriers to AI adoption were analysed and categorised into four broad groups: social concerns, technical concerns, privacy and ethical concerns, and organisational concerns.

