The lack of bioinformatics tools to quickly assess protein conformational and topological features motivated to create an integrative and user-friendly R package. Moreover, the Fiscore package implements a pipeline for Gaussian mixture modelling making such machine learning methods readily accessible to non-experts. This is especially important since probabilistic machine learning techniques can help with a better interpretation of complex biological phenomena when it is necessary to elucidate various structural features that might play a role in protein function. Thus, Fiscore builds on the mathematical formulation of protein physicochemical properties that can aid in drug discovery, target evaluation, or relational database building. In addition, the package provides interactive environments to explore various features of interest. Finally, one of the goals of this package was to engage structural bioinformaticians and develop more robust and free R tools that could help researchers not necessarily specialising in this field. Package Fiscore (v.0.1.3) is distributed free of charge via CRAN and Github.

tant analytical angles. The function builds on the Kyte-Doolittle hy- drophobicity scale [1,18] to detect hydrophobic regions in proteins. Regions with a positive value are hydrophobic and those with neg- ative values are hydrophilic. This scale can be used to identify both surface-exposed as well as transmembrane regions, depending on the

hydrophobic influence from the surrounding amino acids is calculated in. While the terminal amino acids cannot be included into the window for centering and weighing, they are assigned unweighted values based on the Kyte-Doolittle scale [18]. The plot values are all scaled from 0 to 1 so that different proteins can be compared without the need to convert.

Thus, the hydrophobicity analysis can be especially useful when preparing to engineer proteins for various expression systems as the superimposition of structural features and hydrophobicity scores can help deciding if a protein region or domain is likely to be solvent ex- posed or prefer hydrophobic environments. For example, assessing the hydrophobicity and structural milieu of the N or C terminal amino acids can help selecting which terminal site should be tagged (as was demon- strated with Nur77). Moreover, this tool could be broadly applied in drug discovery studies involving the assessment of protein-protein in- teractions, protein-nucleic acid interactions, and membrane association events based on physicochemical characteristics.

user wants to test other clustering options that were not provided by the automated BIC output. This is an advanced option and the user should assess the BIC output to decide which model and what cluster number he or she wants to try out. It is important to note that cluster_ID offers a user-friendly implementation of GMM where most technical decisions are already incorporated automatically.

malised B-factors. 3D visualisation of dihedral angle distribution for ev- ery residue is also included. These plots can be used for a quick as- sessment of the overall parameters as well as to summarise the obser- vations. Density plots are very useful when evaluating how well the selected features or scores separate protein structural elements and if a protein structure is of good quality (i.e., dihedral angles, B-factors, or Fi- scores provide reasonable separation between elements). The function also gives another reference point to establish if the selected number of clusters differentiates residues well based on the secondary structure

Overall, this example reveals that extracting patterns through scor- ing and machine learning could help identify proteins that have shared and functionally related features. Thus, Fiscore allows an easy implemen- tation of protein structural data mining and classification without nec- essarily performing multiple visual inspections of the structures. These analytical principles can also be applied to explore other proteins of interest and their potential ligands.

of complex analytical steps so that the researchers without an exten- sive background in structural bioinformatics or machine learning could still use the tools for their analyses, such as protein engineering, pro- tein assessment, and data storage based on specific target sites. Thus, the interactive analytical and visualisation tools could become espe- cially relevant in the pharmaceutical research and drug discovery stud- ies as more complex targets and protein-protein interactions need to be assessed in a streamlined fashion. In other words, ability to trans- late structural data into parameters could accelerate target classifica- tion, target-ligand studies, or machine learning integration. Since target evaluation is paramount for rational therapeutics development, there is an undeniable need for specialised analytical tools and techniques that can be used in R&D or academic research. Implementing these novel approaches could significantly improve our ability to assess new targets and develop better therapeutics. As a result, the Fiscore package was de- veloped to aid with therapeutic target assessment and make machine

