Fruit is a key crop in worldwide agriculture feeding millions of people. The standard supply chain of fruit products involves quality checks to guarantee freshness, taste, and, most of all, safety. An important factor that determines fruit quality is its stage of ripening. This is usually manually classified by field experts, making it a labor-intensive and error-prone process. Thus, there is an arising need for automation in fruit ripeness classification. Many auto- matic methods have been proposed that employ a variety of feature descriptors for the food item to be graded. Machine learning and deep learning techniques dominate the top-performing methods. Furthermore, deep learning can operate on raw data and thus relieve the users from having to compute complex engineered fea- tures, which are often crop-specific. In this survey, we review the latest methods proposed in the literature to au- tomatize fruit ripeness classification, highlighting the most common feature descriptors they operate on.

It is imperative to improve the status of global food quality and secu- rity to meet the needs of the ever-enlarging world's population. In- creased fruit production through adding to the area cropped is not sustainable as land is a limited resource, thus productivity per unit of a land area must be increased. At the same time, there is a need to pre- vent waste. For fruit production, the timing of harvest is crucial to ensur- ing that the yield meets the commercial ripeness specifications. Over- or under-ripe fruit has a lower or even no retail value and represents sig- nificant income loss and a waste of resources. For the consumer, harvesting too early reduces the taste and quality of fruit whilst a late harvest can lead to reduced shelf life, poor appearance, and undesired flavors and odors.

The phenotypic changes during fruit ripening are complex. In most cases, a green, hard, and immature fruit becomes more colorful, softer, sweeter, and aromatic. Numerous physical and chemical attributes can be quantified during ripening. These include size, shape, texture, firm- ness, external color, internal color, the concentration of chlorophyll, Sol- uble Solids Content (SSC), starch, sugars, acids, oils, and internal

This survey offers a high-level overview of the fruit ripeness classifi- cation task and of the methods that have been applied so far to reach ex- cellent performance, with a major focus on the most novel DL techniques. We found two other surveys that have been dealing with fruit ripeness classification in the past. The work by Randhawa et al.

This section introduces the formal statement of the fruit ripeness stage classification problem. Furthermore, basic biological notions enabling fruit ripening are discussed. These allow for a full understanding of some of the features and the representations used to grade fruit ripeness.

Ground truth ripeness is generally assessed visually by a human op- erator led by some guidelines that describe the ripening stages (e.g., comparing the color of the peel of the fruit to standardized color charts). Human visual inspection is a highly subjective, tedious, time- consuming, and labor-intensive process. Tools-based techniques such as colorimeters or spectrometers, on the other hand, allow for accurate and reproducible measurements of the corresponding features with minimum influence by the observer or their surroundings (Anzalone et al., 2013; Das et al., 2016).

(ii) non-climacteric. Climacteric fruit is harvested at full maturity and is capable of maintaining the ripening process even when de- tached from the plant. The respiration rate and ethylene formation in this kind of fruit, though minimal at maturity, rise dramatically to a climacteric peak (i.e., the peak of edible ripeness), at the onset of ripening, after which it declines (Speirs et al., 1990). On the other hand, non-climacteric fruit is not capable of continuing its rip- ening process once it is detached from the parent plant. Also, this type of fruit produces a very small quantity of endogenous ethylene and does not respond to external ethylene treatment.

Fruit ripening is associated with textural alterations. Textural change is the major event in fruit softening and an integral part of ripening Gowda and Huddar (2001). This process appears dramatically in climac- teric fruits. Similarly, the softening process is an integral part of the rip- ening of almost all fruit. It has immense commercial importance because the post-harvest life of the fruit is to a large extent limited by increasing softness, which brings with it an increase in physical damage during handling and an increase in disease susceptibility.

Fruit ripening has been reviewed numerous times in the literature. In 1984, Yang and Hoffman (1984) discussed several aspects of the physiology and biochemistry of ripening, including the influence of ex- position to ethylene. Some years later, in the study by Speirs et al. (1990), some evidence seemed to show that protein and perhaps RNA synthesis played a role in the induction of ripening. The techniques of modern molecular biologists have enabled this theory to be examined in a precise way, and evidence for the direct genomics control of the rip- ening of climacteric fruits is now accumulating rapidly. Nonetheless, there is evidence that cellular compartments are modified through rip- ening, and recent proof suggests that lipid oxidation and/or phase changes within membranes contribute to changing metabolite distribu- tion within cells as ripening proceeds. How novel transcriptional and/or translational events and changes in metabolite partitioning interact and contribute interdependently or independently to ripening is still a mat- ter of conjecture. It may well be that both theories are more or less cor- rect and both mechanisms are involved but to different extents in different types of fruit. Regardless, fruit ripening appears to be a well- regulated, genetically determined event. Coming as it does at the end

When feeding data to a model (be it statistical, ML- or DL-based) a proper representation of the data involved is needed. More specifically, a set of features is collected to build a description of each data item. The more these features are representative and diversified among different classes, the more effective the classification. The next sections introduce the main types of features that are used in the literature to address the fruit ripeness classification problem.

Fruit types vary widely in aroma characteristics due to differences in the composition of the aromatic volatiles present in fruit aromas, which are ultimately determined by plant genetics (Prasanna, 2007). Fruit pro- duces a wide range of volatile organic compounds that impact their characteristically distinct aromas and contribute to unique flavor char- acteristics. Fruit aroma and flavor characteristics are of key importance in determining consumer acceptance in commercial fruit markets based on individual preference. Previously, professional human graders have been used to judge fruit quality based on visual and aroma charac- teristics for selecting and evaluating fruit for ripeness at harvest and saleability in commercial fruit markets. The advent of electronic-nose (e-nose) devices has offered new alternative tools for grading fruit for ripeness. These instruments are very effective in discriminating com- plex mixtures of fruit volatiles, and thus are new promising efficient, and effective tools for classifying fruit based on its peculiar odor.

The task of fruit ripeness stage classification has been studied for de- cades. This has given birth to a vast literature on the topic. Our review is based on peer-reviewed papers published between 2014 and 2022. We deem this range of years appropriate for allowing a good trade-off be- tween the depth and breadth of the survey. Among this corpus of liter- ature, we identify three main groups of methods, that are: statistical, ML-based, and DL-based (regardless of the fruit type involved). Much of the seminal literature regarding fruit ripeness classification employs statistical models to address the task. At the same time, ML provides a toolbox of powerful algorithms that allow accurate classification perfor- mance. Some of these methods have been applied to the fruit ripeness classification task. However, in recent years, DL methods have taken over traditional techniques and helped to push state-of-the-art accuracy without  the  need  to  compute  complex  engineered  features.

Further research was conducted on different color spaces. Moving on to the RGB color space, in Goel and Sehgal (2015) they used the differ- ence between R and B values to enhance the classification of the differ- ent tomato ripeness stages, reaching 94.3% accuracy on a proprietary dataset of 250 images. Other statistical methods investigated include unsupervised classification, such as the K-means and Gustafson-Kessel algorithms. These have also successfully been applied to automatically separate bananas of different ripeness stages based on RGB values (Pardede et al., 2019). In later research, rather than only using the aver- age RGB values, the histogram of each channel was used to find matches with predefined reference histograms for each ripeness group (Satpute and Jagdale, 2016).

For a more comprehensive understanding of the problem, Castro et al. (2019) evaluate the combinations of four ML techniques and three color spaces (RGB, HSV, and L*a*b*) with regard to their ability to classify cape gooseberry fruit. To this end, 925 samples were col- lected, and each fruit was manually classified into one of seven different classes according to its grade of ripeness. The classification of ripeness of cape gooseberry fruit was sensitive to both the color space and the clas- sification technique used. The models based on the L*a*b* color space and the SVM classifier showed the highest f-measure regardless of the color space, and the PCA combination of color spaces improved the performance of the models at the expense of increased complexity.

fruit odor to classify samples of berries into five classes. For classifica- tion, they employed ANN, PCA, and LDA analysis. The ANN achieved a precision of 100% and 88.3% for blackberry and white berries, respec- tively. Also, PCA analysis characterized 97% and 93% variance in the blackberry and white berry, respectively. The least correct classification for white berries was observed in the LDA method.

for the assessment of fruit ripeness. Key wavelengths have been se- lected, with different feature selection techniques. This operation was performed before modeling in order to reduce the redundancy of the whole spectral dataset. One of the widely used feature selection criteria

is based on beta coefficients derived from PLS models. The PLS models measure how great an effect an independent variable has on the depen- dent variable. A comparison of the performance of different MLR models with wavelength selection based on beta coefficients and PLS models with full spectra as input showed that the final outcomes were similar for the ripeness grading of strawberries (ElMasry et al., 2007). The same feature selection methods were also used by Rajkumar et al. (2012) to predict the ripeness of bananas by MLR model and achieved a good correlation for ripeness. Another key wavelength selection method that can solve the collinearity problem is the successive projec- tion algorithm, which iteratively adds wavelengths one by one until a specific number of wavelengths is achieved with a minimum redundant information content. This method has been used to select the feature wavelengths for input to the PLS model and a high correlation was found for predicting persimmon ripeness (Wei et al., 2014).

Again using CNNs, Liming and Yanchao (2010) discuss an automatic vision-based system for sorting and analyzing strawberries. They pro- posed an automated system to predict the ripeness level of strawberry fruit, using a very simple CNN architecture. For the success of classifica- tion, appropriate features must be extracted. Surface color, size, and shape are necessary features for classification. The surface color of strawberry fruit determines its ripeness level. The CNN proved to ex- tract color, size, and shape features from strawberry surfaces and achieves as high as 91.6% accuracy.

than 0.95). Additionally, a CNN was used to extract spatial features from the spectral wavelength and the first together with the three prin- cipal components for laboratory samples. A pretrained AlexNet CNN was used to classify the early ripe and ripe strawberry samples, which obtained an accuracy of 98.6% for the test dataset.

Adding to the discussion on classification based on color features, Rivero Mesa and Chiang (2021) propose a non-invasive automated sys- tem for export-quality banana ripeness tiers. This system combines nu- merous features, including RGB values and hyperspectral imaging, put together by DL techniques. The multi-input model achieved an excellent overall accuracy of 98.45% using only a minimal number of samples compared to other methods in the literature. Moreover, the model was able to incorporate both the external and internal properties of the fruit. The size of the bananas was used as a feature for ripeness grade classification as well as other morphological features using RGB imaging. Reflectance values of the fruit were also used and obtained through hyperspectral imaging. These proved to offer valuable informa- tion and have shown a high correlation with the internal features. This study highlighted the combined strengths of RGB and hyperspectral im- aging in grading bananas, which may serve as a paradigm for grading other horticultural crops.

A similar system was developed by Garillos-Manliguez and Chiang (2021) to estimate six maturity stages of papaya fruit whilst suggesting a novel nondestructive and multi-modal classification method using deep CNNs. The models they designed estimated fruit maturity by fea- ture concatenation of data acquired from two imaging modes: visible- light and hyperspectral imaging systems. Morphological changes in the sample fruit can be measured with RGB images. At the same time, the spectral signatures, which provide high sensitivity and correlation with the internal properties of the fruit, can be extracted from hyperspectral images with a wavelength range between 400 nm and 900 nm. In the study, some of the most popular pretrained CNN archi- tectures (i.e., AlexNet, VGG16, VGG19, ResNet50, ResNeXt50, MobileNet, and MobileNetV2) were investigated to utilize multi- modal data cubes composed of RGB and hyperspectral data for sensitiv- ity analyses. Such multi-modal variants could achieve up to 0.90 F1 scores for the six-way classification. These results confirm the above- mentioned findings indicating that multi-modal DL architectures and multi-modal imaging have great potential for real-time in-field fruit ripeness estimation.

A recent breakthrough in DL has been the introduction of attention models (Bahdanau et al., 2015), which found application, among others, in fruit ripeness classification. Attention allows learning a weighted sum of embeddings of the input tokens that can then be manipulated in various ways (e.g., for input classification). The study by Herman et al. (2020) led to the development of a model for oil palm ripeness prediction using a residual-based attention mechanism ANN (ResAttDenseNet) that could recognize the small detail differences be- tween images. The proprietary dataset used for conducting their exper- iments consists of four-hundred images including seven levels of ripeness. As a result, they showed that the proposed model could im- prove the F1 Score by 1.1% compared to the highest F1 score from other basic DL and traditional ML models compared in the study.

Global food security for the increasing world population not only re- quires increased sustainable production of food but also process optimi- zation. This means that a significant reduction in pre and post-harvest waste is imperative. The timing of when some fruit is harvested is crit- ical for reducing waste along the supply chain and increasing fruit qual- ity for consumers. The early in-field assessment of fruit ripeness and prediction of the harvest date and yield by non-destructive technologies have the potential to revolutionize farming practices and enable the consumer to eat the tastiest and freshest fruit possible. As discussed above, a variety of non-destructive techniques have been applied to es- timate the ripeness or maturity but not all of them are applicable for in situ (field or glasshouse) assessment. Non-destructive methods are very promising for in-field ripeness assessment, but the most critical ques- tion is how to link such assessment to predict yield and the optimal har- vest date. This is highly challenging and made complicated by ripeness variability within and between plants.

of the harvest date of blueberries. The minimum and maximum daily temperatures from the weather forecast for two weeks ahead were used as input for the model. This method was closer to a real application and potentially could be paired with non-destructive techniques to de- termine the current ripening stage of the crop.

Interestingly, it was found that environmental temperature affects not only fruit growth but also the near-infrared reflectance spectrum in a non-linear way (Ma et al., 2007). Kawano et al. (1995) compensated for the surface temperature effect by developing a combined MLR model, which covered a variety of temperatures ranging between 21 and 31C. On the other hand, Peirs et al. (2003) compared a global cali- bration model that covers a wide temperature range and calibration models for each temperature range. Both methods performed well for the ripeness prediction of apples, but for practical purposes, the global calibration model was preferred.

