However, current methodologies are still significantly influenced by spatial contrast, the difference of illumination between adjacent local areas of receptive field. The model response temporally fluctuates with high variance against input variability of natural signals. In addition, recognition of low-contrast looming motion has always been a chal- lenging problem for artificial vision systems. The causality would be (1) internally non-linear attribute of motion detection, and (2) externally large variation in local contrast of natural signals [28].

For computationally implementing contrast neural computation in motion sensitive visual systems, Fu et al. introduced fly contrast mech- anisms and pathways for estimation of natural background motion; the model demonstrated improved response compared to neural model processing only motion signals [59]. Li et al. incorporated in a single- channel LGMD model the contrast neural computation, initially in- dicated its effectiveness in looming detection [60]. Wang et al. also showed effectiveness of contrast computation in a small target motion detector preventing fake detection [61]. Differently to those works, and combining the latest physiological research, this paper presents an ap- proach to harmonizing motion and contrast vision within four parallel ON/OFF channels for looming detection. The method is validated by a large data set of natural signals.

Parallel ON/OFF contrast channels The second is the calculation of local spatial contrast delivered by ON/OFF contrast pathways parallel to ON/OFF motion pathways. According to the fundamental research in [29], in the nerve centre of Drosophila, the calculation of contrast information and motion information are carried out in different paths. That is to say, it will not be affected by the motion information when calculating the contrast. Therefore, the normalized signal flow will enter a parallel channel specially used to calculate the contrast through implementing neural competition between centre and surrounding unit response. The calculation can be expressed as the following:

The second part is the test of complex scenarios. In this test, our data set includes 1100 original videos. These videos are made based on different realistic, wide-field scenes adapted with respect from a previous research [63]. More specifically, the indoor scenes include libraries, shopping malls, etc. The outdoor scenes include forests, grass- lands, villages, etc. Based on these panoramic scenes, we generate a looming square with different grey values, similarly to the test in the aforementioned simple scenarios. In addition, in order to simulate the visual stimulation of insects during flight, we also set the background to move to the right at a constant angular speed of 20 degrees per

characteristics of the proposed neural model with emphasis laid on performance in extremely low-contrast scenarios, and against various natural signals. After that, we show improvement based upon the incorporation of ON/OFF channels in looming detection. Lastly, as the contrast neural computation is the main novelty of this modelling research upon previous works, we look into the effects of dynamic normalization mechanism, and ON/OFF parallel contrast pathways on looming detection against high input variability.

degree of the coefficient of variation is measured by the inter-quartile range (IQR) of the violin diagram. More precisely, the denser the dis- tribution of the coefficient of variation, the better the statistical result is. The smaller the coefficient of variation, the better the statistical result is. Therefore, we would prefer the distribution of the coefficient of variation concentrated at the bottom of the violin plot. In addition, in the violin plot, the coloured dots represent the calculated coefficients of variation. The border of violin (grey line) shows the corresponding distribution of the coefficient of variation. The green line in each violin represents a box-plot, used to characterize the dispersion degree of the coefficient of variation.

of the model will be greatly affected by the contrast representing the largest variance to the tested data. Both of our proposed model and the model of Li et al. [60] are able to detect looming motion in low-contrast environments. In contrast to the model of Li et al. [60], the output of our proposed model is more consistent across different contrasts.

significantly by incorporating the ON/OFF channels, in comparison with the model of Li et al. [60] that processes motion and contrast vi- sion regardless of polarity changes, i.e., ON-contrast and OFF-contrast. Precisely, the proposed model peaks more smoothly to looming motions in a large number of different natural scenes. The statistical results show the proposed model has more densely distributed coefficients of variation and smaller inner distances. This suggests that our proposed model is invulnerable to environmental illumination.

This paper has presented a novel way of coordinating contrast and motion vision to improve effectively the performance of looming de- tection in extremely low-contrast scenarios, and against a large variety of natural signals. The proposed neural model features feed-forward visual processing in a stratified neural network with four bio-plausible parallel ON/OFF channels encoding polarity motion and contrast in- formation separately. The contrast neural computation is the main novelty of this modelling research as it first works as an instant, dy- namic normalization mechanism to open the gates for ON/OFF motion signals. There are also ON/OFF contrast pathways to neutralize high- contrast local ON/OFF motion induced excitations, in order to stabilize model response against high input variability of natural scenes. Accord- ingly, the proposed model performs consistently in highly variable, and various-contrasted scenes.

To corroborate the proposed method, we have crafted a new data set consisting of thousands of looming-square motions in cluttered and dynamic backgrounds. To highlight our achievements, the comparative experiments have been carried out. The results verify our proposed method is more robust for looming detection in natural scenes, espe- cially at extremely low contrast. Separating motion and contrast into ON/OFF channels works effectively to alleviate the response fluctuation against natural signals, and make the visual system peak more smoothly to looming motion.

For resolving real-world, complicated detection problems, recent years have witnessed much progress based upon image processing and deep learning methods [64,65], as well as advanced sensor strate- gies [66]. We insist another promising way is drawing lessons from neuroscience on how animals deal with similar situations. Insect in- telligence is featured by efficiency and parsimony that can offer a number of excellent paradigms to build artificial vision systems and neuromorphic sensors. In this regard, the proposed approach is also of great potential to be utilized in hardware applications like bio-inspired robotic systems [67,68], and micro/aerial robotic systems [19,20].

