A considerable work could be traced on automatic grading and sorting of mangoes specifically based on attributes related to external appearances such as shape, size, color, weight and defects (Roomi et al., 2012; Sa'ad et al., 2015). A work on grading of mangoes using shape features (region-based and contour based) and wavelet descrip- tor is reported in (Khoje and Shrikant, 2012). Further, Khoje and Shrikant (2013) have used feed forward neural network and support vector machine for grading of mangoes based on their size features. Identification of external defects on mangoes using texture features is also addressed (Musale and Pradeep, 2014; Pauly and Deepa, 2015).

In addition to the above mentioned attributes, the ripeness parame- ter is also taken into consideration for grading of mangoes (Vyas et al., 2014; Nayeli et al., 2012; Salunkhe and Aniket, 2015; Chhabra et al., 2011; Mansor and Othman, 2014; Nandi et al., 2014). However, most

During ripening process of mangoes, changes in skin color and tex- ture are the predominant features irrespective of the method being used for ripening. In our study, initially color features were adopted to represent each stage of ripeness in mangoes. To quantify the color pres- ent in a segmented region of a mango, color features from different color spaces such as RGB, L*a*b, HSV, CMY and YCbCr were extracted (Gonzalez and Richard, 2002). Four color features were extracted from each individual color space. For example, in case of RGB space, features representing each individual channel (R, G, B) and their fusion as a sep- arate feature were extracted. As mean value provides the average value of all the pixels in an image, means of individual channels of a color space were considered as features.

features of all K number of color spaces at each level of the proposed hi- erarchical method of classification. Based on the performances of classi- fiers at each level of classification, the best performing classifier and the corresponding color feature of the respective color space is fixed up. To optimize the system, the dataset was divided into T1% for training and T2% for testing at every level of classification. Let P be the number of classifiers used at every level of the hierarchical method of classification. The study was recommended to be carried out for L number of trials by choosing the training and testing samples randomly.

In this study, a successful attempt was made to explore the applica- bility of a hierarchical method of grading of mangoes based on their ripeness. The significance of the L*a*b color space features in discrimi- nating four different classes of Alphonso mango variety was brought out. The empirical analysis made in this study argues that the hierarchi- cal approach has a superior performance than a single-shot multiclass approach. Further, the study on six classifiers and their possible combi- nations with different color features revealed that, the usage of SVM and simple threshold classifier was more effective. The success of this study on post-harvest management of Alphonso mangoes motivated for fur- ther studies of other varieties of mangoes in addition to consideration of additional parameters such as store time, temperature and moisture. The recommended method of classification can be deployed for offline application in post-harvesting management of mangoes.

