disease information (Soto et al., 2008; Wilson and Brownstein, 2009). Through the epidemic intelligence (EI) concept, their mainstreaming into surveillance systems has been a paradigm shift for disease surveil- lance and control. Driven by the International Health Regulations (IHR) (WHO, 2005), EI integrates two components in a single surveillance sys- tem: indicator-based surveillance (collection of structured data through traditional surveillance systems) and event-based surveillance (collec- tion of unstructured data from informal sources) (Paquet et al., 2006). Combining these two components has proven to enhance surveillance systems' performance by increasing outbreak detection timeliness and number (Arsevska et al., 2018; Bahk et al., 2015; Dion et al., 2015; Barboza et al., 2013).

Informal sources cover a diverse spectrum, but they all share the information in textual format. Peculiarities of textual data include linguistic ambiguities, redundant and noisy information, a lack of normalisation, etc. Besides, daily amounts of such information can rap- idly overwhelm surveillance systems, including moderation steps per- formed by experts. Event-based surveillance (EBS) systems thus

The motivation of this work is to use simple and effective statistical measures to extract epidemiological events that are easy to analyse by experts. The measures studied and extended in this paper use weak knowledge based on the number of examples in textual data without the need to determine counter-examples. The main objective is to de- termine which parameters that we need to integrate. We focus on 2 main parameters associated with our statistical methods and unsuper- vised approaches: (i) what textual context to use (i.e. document, sen- tence, and word) for extracting pairs of elements to define an epidemiological event for animal disease surveillance and (ii) which pairs of entities and generalisation to apply for event extraction. This type of results could be relevant insights for integration in embedding approach architectures.

Section 2 presents the related work on event-based surveillance sys- tems, entity extraction, entity normalisation and linking and event ex- traction applied to animal disease surveillance. Section 3 presents our global process in order to extract relevant events. Sections 4 and 5 dis- cuss the results obtained with different strategies.

EBS systems were pioneered in 1994 by the International Society for Infectious Diseases (ISID), through the Program for Monitoring Emerg- ing Diseases (ProMED). ProMED is a human-curated system that relies on an extensive network of experts worldwide who detect and share re- ports on disease outbreaks using a common platform (Carrion and Madoff, 2017). Moderators validate the information.

BioCaster and the Platform for Automated extraction of animal Dis- ease Information from the web (PADI-web) rely on fully automated pipelines. BioCaster was a public health surveillance system supported by the University of Tokyo from 2006, with a priority focus on the Asia-Pacific region (Kawazoe et al., 2008). BioCaster is no longer opera- tional, but it is included in our review because it relied on a unique and well-documented ontology-based approach. PADI-web was created in 2016 to monitor online animal health-related news for the French Epi- demic Intelligence System (FEIS) (Arsevska et al., 2018; Valentin et al., 2020b).

Between these two extremes of pure automation and pure manual data collection and analysis, other prominent systems combine auto- mated text-mining based steps and a dedicated team of curators to as- sess and verify the outputs. Semi-automated systems include HealthMap, founded by the Boston Children's Hospital in 2006, the Ca- nadian Public Health Agency Global Public Health Intelligence Network (GPHIN), the European Union MediSys, Argus and AquaticHealth.net.

i.e. nonspecific domain entities (dates, locations, etc.). Recently, neural network training algorithms have shown great success in several NLP tasks, including named entity recognition. These models have achieved state-of-the-art results while alleviating the burden of the amount of feature pre-processing (Chiu and Nichols, 2016). The RNN-based

Thematic entities are usually normalized to their canonical form (e.g. disease acronyms are converted into the full disease name). GPHIN pro- vides a link between the detected entities and UMLS terminology and definitions. BioCaster Ontology provides access to term definitions, syn- onyms and translations in eight languages, along with a link to medical ontologies (including ICD-10, MedDRA, MeSH and SNOMED-CT) (Collier et al., 2008).

Event extraction methods have been extensively studied in many domains such as business and financial (Du et al., 2016), biomedical (Zhu and Zheng, 2020), and outbreak-event detection (Piskorski et al., 2011) domains. (Xiang and Wang, 2019) propose a comprehensive and synthetic survey of event extraction methods. Briefly, they include pattern-based methods, machine learning methods (supervised or semi-supervised), deep learning methods, and unsupervised methods. In the studied EBS systems, HealthMap, PADI-web, BioCaster and MedISys include an event extraction step, all of which rely on a different

BioCaster event extraction uses a simple rule language (SRL), in- spired by the so-called declarative information analysis language (DIAL) (Feldman et al., 2001). SRL creates sophisticated matching pat- terns combining entity classes, string literals, regular expressions, entity types including verbs of infection, common victim expressions, occupa- tion names, etc.

To address this issue, we propose association mining methods (i.e. unsupervised machine learning approaches) in order to extract entity co-occurrence in news articles. More precisely, our approach involves two steps: (i) the detection of pairs of entities based on their relative po-

where Px is the probability of occurrence of x, Py is the probability of occurrence of y, and Pxy is the probability of co-occurrence of x and y (joint probability). Mutual Information is sensitive to rare and specific co-occurrences (Roche et al., 2004).

To evaluate the proposed approach, we first annotated a corpus of news articles with events (Section 4.1). We further used the list of anno- tated events as a gold-standard to automatically determine the rele- vance of the retrieved pairs of entities (Section 4.2). The quality of the

An epidemiologist read each of the 438 documents to detect all dis- ease events contained within them. To ensure consistent and reproduc- ible annotation, events found in the documents were compared to a gold-standard database, i.e. the Emergency Prevention System for Prior- ity Animal and Plant Pests and Disease (EMPRES-i) database. EMPRES-i is a publicly available animal disease information system created by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) (Martin et al., 2007). Among other sources, EMPRES-i stores the official notifica- tions from the World Animal Health Organization (OIE). Each detected event was labelled using the unique EMPRES-i identifier. When the ep- idemiologist could not link an event to an official one, she created a new event identifier and manually recorded the epidemiological features (location, date, disease and host). The final corpus annotated with the event identifiers is hereafter referred to as the event corpus.

Overall, 771 events were detected in the corpus. Among them, 70% (n = 541/771) were reported in a single news article. The events pres- ent in several news articles were reported in up to 11 news articles (me- dian number of 3 news articles).

In the following experiments, we selected only news articles con- taining at least one event (a corpus of 229 documents). Even if still mod- est in size, our corpus is highly specialized regarding both its domain (i.e. animal health) and its nature (i.e. online news articles).

From the annotated event corpus, we can map each publication date datei with the set of its corresponding events (i.e. the events annotated in the news articles published on datei). Sets including the publication dates and their epidemiological attributes are used as gold-standard lists to evaluate the relevance of extracted pairs of features. We created a gold-standard list specific to each type of pairs, as follows:

We extracted all the disease-host and disease-location pairs using the co-occurrence parameters described in Section 3.1. The word win- dow size ranged from 1 to 200 words on each side (left, right, and both). This window was chosen by (Piskorski et al., 2011) for an event extraction task, assuming that most relevant information would be present in the first 200 words. The sentence window size ranged from 0 to 20 sentences per side. We ranked the retrieved pairs in decreasing order based on their Mutual Information or Dice values. We evaluated the quality of the ranked list according to the parameters and associa- tion measures' ability to assign a better rank to relevant pairs than to ir-

and      two      spatial      generalisation      levels. For left side, distances are converted to their positive value. Horizontal lines correspond to the normalized F-measure values at document-level. Level 0: no generalisation, level 2: generalisation at the country level.

(on both sides), and the scores slightly decreased with the largest win- dow sizes. At the country level, the MI F-measure remained below 0.70 while that of Dice ranged from 0.80 to 0.88. The Dice ranking reached maximum values between 100 and 125 words (both sides) and remained increased for all window sizes.

The statistical approaches used in this paper (i.e. Dice and MI) de- tected event-related pairs of epidemiological features with a good trade-off between precision and recall. Our results showed that using a window of words outperformed document-based and sentence- based methods while reducing the probability of detecting false pairs.

The use of the BERT (Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers) model for event extraction could represent an attractive future work as discussed in Section 6. But the use of pre-trained lan- guage models has some limitations with respect to the specific domain addressed in this paper. For example, we studied the use of embedding methods like the Word2vec model that consists in a 2-layer neural net- work. We used a pretrained corpus (i.e. Google News corpus with 3

Several gold-standard disease-location pairs were not detected due to a linkage between GeoNames and the Global Administrative Unit Layers (GAUL) used by the EMPRES-i database. In the latter, Taiwan and Hong Kong are considered distinct countries. On the contrary, the GeoNames hierarchy considers them as administrative units of China. (Claes et al., 2014) used a manual procedure to link both databases.

were about the foot-and-mouth disease in endemic areas, and the last article referred to a suspected case of African swine fever. Such cases were rare in the studied corpus. Still, it should be noted that the host at- tribute is not necessarily communicated in news content, either because the disease is yet well known (e.g. endemic disease in an area) or be- cause the event is only a suspicion. The host is thus implied because this information is secondarily compared to spatial features. This behav- iour may bias models that determine news articles' relevance based on the presence or absence of a host's name.

Before applying extraction methods, expansion of text content could be proposed using word embedding architectures like the BERT model. BERT produces word representations that are dynamically informed by the words around them (i.e. context dependent). This model achieved new state-of-the-art results for several NLP tasks (Piskorski et al., 2020; Torregrossa et al., 2021; Trieu et al., 2020).

