Because in previous work the range of the search space are limited in the array for easy searching and this was encoded in the header file to be used at decompression stage. However, it is possible that complex images may generate large arrays which, in turn, will impair compression (make it more computationally demanding). For this reason, we suggested another method in this paper using DFT and reduced limited search area (i.e. search area contains just two values [MIN, MAX]). Such bounding makes searching for the sought values easier and faster. Any further detailed information about Matrix Minimization can be found in

A 3D surface mesh reconstruction method was developed by Rodri- gues [8,19] with a team within the GMPR group at Sheffield Hallam University. The working principle of the 3D mesh scanner is that the scene is illuminated with a stripe pattern whose 2D image is then captured by a camera. The relationship between the light source and the camera determines the 3D position of the surface along the stripe pattern. The scanner converts a surface to a 3D mesh in a few milliseconds by

Our literature survey did not show results for image compression using the DFT alone. The reason is that by applying a DFT, it yields two sets of coefficients, real and imaginary. If one wishes to keep those for faithful image reconstruction, then it is not possible to achieve high compression ratios. We applied the DFT as described in this paper resulting in images with good visual quality and low compression complexity. A comparative analysis between compression ratios for DFT alone and DFT followed by the Matrix Minimization algorithm show

This research has demonstrated a novel approach to compress images in greyscale, colour and structured light images used in 3D reconstruc- tion. The method is based on the DFT and the Matrix-Minimization al- gorithm. The most important aspects of the method and their role in providing high quality image with high compression ratios are high- lighted as follows.

