To solve a problem of individualization in learning based on Intelligent Automated Educational Systems (IAES) involves to devise special methods of decision-making. In this article we propose to implement a complete individualization in learning (assessment, individual learning path management, adaptation of the curriculum and test sampling, the synthesis of man-machine dialog) by means of afference process simulation. It is considered the problem of searching for a compromise of goals between the models of a student, a teacher and a tutor within the base of the current learning environment. To this effect it is proposed a four-stage IAES-based decision-making scheme and synthesis mechanism of Cognitive Maps of Knowledge Diagnostic (CMKD). The problems of CMKD synthesis and visualization is considered. In conclusion, the results of approbation the proposed technologies in learning are provided.

Sustainable improvement of modern intelligent automated training systems brings in individual learning in education to a new qualitative level. However in the recent times such systems serve as bridging tool for traditional forms in education. E-learning resources available through global and corporate computer networks allow develop a learned-oriented didactic material capable to solved individual goals [Schejbal, 2012]. But the accessibility of individual-oriented net-training (self-study) implies an integrated approach to the analysis of the learning environment and decision-making by solver of Intelligence Automated Educational/Training System (IAES).

As a first approximation, IAES includes such component as an e-course translator, training subsystem (virtual laboratory, programmed mathematical model, e-workbook) control subsystem (usually in the form of computer tests), I/O interfaces, database, solver, along with a set of models comprising knowledge base aimed at performing such functions as presentation, consolidation and didactic material control by means of making decisions of individualization of educational material, on-line guiding the learning of an individual, adaptation of the e-material presentation and control functions and flexible man-machine dialog in a natural language interaction form [Uglev, 2008 and 2010] when implementing individualized learning. To provide these IAES should apply an effective mechanism for decision-making that the kernel of the system (the solver) will perform in conflict-of-interest cases. The conflict arises when determining the IALS strategy performance that simultaneously considers both the problem of learning (e-learning developer in the form of teacher's model), and individual goals of a learner (student model). This work is an attempt of a comprehensive view of the topic.

Obviously, to move to a weighted decision or combination of them, a detail logic display f should be implemented, organizing expert conclusion with advanced computing capabilities (e.g. in the form of a weighted ontology). We can offer a unified approach to the complex processing of original data on the student's interactions with IAES, allowing to organize decision-making process in individualized learning.

CMKD is processed with IAES solver each time when you need to make a decision from R or a need for rebuilding the map arises. In IAES window represents the discipline structure with overlapping of pooled dynamic and calculated characteristics of learning environment, as well as bringing the common meaningful data from the passport and student discipline for the selected semantic layer in the reference area. The semantic layers are responsible for grouping and normalization (metric concentration) of the pooled data, as well as their visualization, operating symbols, arrows and numbers, their design (shape, color, contours, shading, etc.). The basic semantic layers are considered integrated, competence, assessment, profiling and several others.

Integrated automation of individualized learning means further research into the methodological, technological and technical potential of intelligent algorithms application. Conflict resolution between target plants student, teacher and tutor models can only be achieved by improving the technology of decision- making applying core learning system. In this work we proposed a variant of the organization of such technology.

