Abstract Analytic Hierarchy Process (AHP) is one of the popular decision support systems for multi-criteria decision making problems. The AHP has different theories for prioritization, consis- tency evaluation and consistency improvement, a review of which is presented in this study before diving deep into the core contribution. Consistency evaluation is one of the key computations while using the AHP. This paper describes a method that can be employed to improve the consistency of the judgment matrix utilized by using the Cosine Consistency Index (CCI). The approach described uses a cosine maximization method to revise the entries in the judgment matrix on an iterative basis until the CCI is improved. The recommended method entails that it is possible to modify any judg- ment matrix to achieve CCI of desired level. Finally, the proposed algorithm is tested with numer- ical examples and improved CCI values are validated through paired sample t-test. The results of this study showed that the algorithm significantly improves CCI values with the inclusion of pro- posed approach.

methods and additive normalization methods, while it performs better than weighted least square methods and logarithmic least square methods. Further in terms of Euclidean distance based error measures, CMM has the lowest error reported as com- pared to other methods such as Eigen vector based methods, additive normalization methods performs, weighted least square methods and logarithmic least square methods. This is why, this study focuses on the CMM and attempts to address some of its existing limitations as discussed in forthcoming sections.

This paper described the use of a corrective model that utilizes cosine maximization to produce a comparison matrix that exhibits consistent CCI. The CM technique is used to maxi- mize the sum of the cosine angle between each column vector and derived priority vector of a PCM. An algorithm has been suggested for determining transformed PCM and the weight vector. The cosine maximization was employed to amend a pair of entries that exhibited maximum errors, thus ensuring that the resulting matrix maintained all major information that was present in the original matrix. Through applying either the WAM form or the WGM form detailed in Step 5 of the approach, it was possible to revise the matrix in an effective manner. As such, the approach recommended is viable and can be applied to inconsistent CCI ratings of <0.90 in order

