Emerging next-generation (xG) wireless communication technolo- gies such as fifth-generation (5G) and beyond, internet-of-things (IoT), cognitive radio networks, etc. promise fast speed, high capacity, low latency and impressive reliability, among others [1,2]. Wireless sensor networks (WSN), despite no longer being a new technology, are also developing modern models and prototypes that are being designed and deployed to help achieve the promises and expectations of xG wireless communication. The new WSN designs for modern applications are referred to as next-generation wireless sensor networks (xWSN) [3]. Alongside other xG technologies, these modern xWSN models and pro- totypes do have practical applications in smart cities, device-to-device (D2D) communications (such as machine-to-machine and vehicle-to- vehicle communications), e-health, e-agriculture, e-transportation, e- education, and several other modern sensor-dependent xG wireless communication applications.

may still occur. A network failure in the xWSN may be a result of the limitations in size, quality, durability, storage capacity, processing capability or lifetime of the sensor nodes (SNs) being deployed for network operations [4]. Network failures in the xWSN may also be caused by complexities in the network operations or difficulty in the terrain or location of deployment and usage of the SNs [5], or by some other foreseen or unforeseen factors [6].

The negative impact of network failures on the performance of xWSN has been alluded to in [7]. Importantly, network failures in xWSN, if uncontrolled, can frustrate the realisation of the promise of high reliability in the xG network applications for which they are deployed. Therefore, to help mitigate the effects of network fail- ures in xWSN, appropriate network restoration models must be in- corporated in the network design. Such network restoration models would effectively anticipate the occurrence of failures and provide timeous backup and/or recovery plans for the network in which they are incorporated. Developing network restoration models for xG com- munication applications is an important area of research in modern telecommunications.

Even though it is still an evolving technology, there are already a few researchers who have studied xWSN and discussed some rel- evant use of the technology in modern applications. An example of the application of xWSN in modern technologies is in cognitive radio sensor networks, as recently studied in [8]. Moreover, some works have investigated and developed network restoration solutions for xWSN and other emerging xG wireless networks. A good review of the application of network restoration for xG networks was carried out in [9]. The work explored network failure and restoration for xG networks, and gave specific examples of network restoration models and applications in 5G, IoT, xWSN, etc.

Apart from the work in [12], more recent works on network failure and restoration for xG networks such as xWSN are now employing p-cycles to carry out restoration and recovery of their networks, and to protect them from network failures. Indeed, p-cycle restoration schemes have been shown to have some significant advantages over most other network restoration schemes. The first advantage of p-cycles over other schemes is that p-cycles achieve network recovery from network failures at speeds that are near to the achievable speed of ring- based restoration, while still attaining restoration capacities that are close to the achievable capacity of mesh-based restoration [13]. The next advantage is that p-cycles achieve good recovery and protection of communication networks against both link and node failures [14]. Another benefit is that p-cycles usually carry out network restoration using only the spare capacities of the links in the network, making the network highly capacity-efficient [9]. A final advantage is that network restoration through p-cycles is quite effective in protecting both spanning (or on-cycle) and straddling links in a network [12]. These important advantages make p-cycle restoration particularly ideal for xWSN and most other emerging xG networks.

In this subsection, we present a realistic consideration of the archi- tectural description of the xWSN being set up for D2D communications. In practical xWSN to be employed for D2D communications, the net- work devices are the SNs in the network. Communication between the SNs can either be single-hop or multi-hop. Single-hop communication means that communication is simply from one SN to another neigh- bouring SN. Multi-hop communication implies that communication is from one (source) SN to another likely non-neighbour (destination) SN, via other SNs that act as relays between the source SN and the destination SN. For the D2D communications network under consider- ation, the SNs in close proximity communicate with one another using a direct link, therefore their radio signals do not travel through a base station or a core network. Furthermore, each SN has at least one sensing

Similar to most other xG technologies, in D2D communications, it is common to find heterogeneous traffic load demands and fluctuating wireless link conditions. Despite this, the xWSN for D2D communica- tions under consideration should be capable of providing autonomous network services under such different conditions to various kinds of users, and for different kinds of user demands. The xWSN for D2D communications are able to achieve all these expectations by simply setting up the network using the distributed architecture. With this ar- chitecture, data transmission via the SNs is carried out in a distributed manner. The distributed network architecture for D2D communica- tions offers some important advantages over other types of architec- ture, especially the centralised network topology. The most signifi- cant advantages of the distributed architecture are cost-effectiveness, ease of network recovery from failure and better scalability of the network [15].

To carry out the p-cycle selectivity, an appropriate cost is assigned to each p-cycle being considered for possible selection. This cost is determined by summing the costs of all the links that make up the p- cycle. For the selection process, the set of p-cycles selected comprises the p-cycles that minimise the total costs associated with selecting them. Determining the particular p-cycle(s) to be selected for achieving network restoration by using the cost implications of each potential p- cycle as a criterion is a crucial aspect of the selection process. This is because selection based on cost implications helps to achieve the needed cost-effectiveness in the network restoration design for the xWSN.

the load on the limiting link of the p-cycle(s) is carried out to achieve capacity improvement (that is, an improvement in the COR value) of the limiting link. This is because it is an integral part of the process of improving the overall capacity of the p-cycle(s) being used for restoring the network. The local traffic distribution process is explained in the remaining part of this subsection.

Furthermore, to ensure that the additional traffic on the links that are being used to carry out the restoration does not affect the original traffic flowing in those links, in the network design the concept of network restoration without interference is employed. This implies that the restoration is carried out using only the spare capacities on the links that make up the p-cycles. As a result, the spare capacities on the links that would otherwise have remained unused are now well employed in the network. With this design plan, capacity gain is achieved on individual links in the network, which translates into improvement in the overall restoration capacity of the network.

This is because the traffic that the selected p-cycle can successfully restore without interference depends on the link that has the minimum spare capacity on that p-cycle [12]. The link with the minimum spare capacity in a p-cycle is referred to as the limiting link. The limiting link of a p-cycle poses a serious bottleneck to the amount of traffic that the selected p-cycle can restore.

the concept of load redistribution. Simply, load redistribution means shifting some of the load on a link to other neighbouring links in order to free up more space (capacity) on that particularly link. Specifically for the model developed in this paper, we target the limiting link of the p-cycles that are selected for network restoration as the link to carry out the load redistribution in the xWSN design. In other words, the load redistribution incorporated helps to achieve an improved value

Further to the concepts of p-cycle selectivity and load redistribution already incorporated, in this subsection we present a third useful concept for achieving significant improvement in the capacity of the p- cycles being selected for restoring xWSN from link failures. The concept is that of employing individual p-cycles to achieve network restoration from double link failures. Indeed, if two links are in close proximity and they do have overlapping protection, the probability of simultaneous failure on the two links can be quite high. Thus, providing sufficient but also resource-efficient protection from such double link failures is quite essential for the xWSN.

In this section, we present some results to demonstrate the perfor- mance of the restoration model and the various improvement concepts incorporated and investigated in this paper. The xWSN for D2D com- munications is simulated as a test network of 100 SNs (which represent the devices in the D2D communication network) and 250 links be- tween the SNs. The SNs are randomly deployed in a sufficiently wide geographical location. The packet switched traffic model is used for modelling the data traffic in the network. The packet switched traffic model is employed because it supports most internet protocol-based transmissions, and because it is a well-developed standard for machine- to-machine communications, of which D2D communications are part. One other scenario that could impact the range of the parameters used is the possible large size of practical xWSN. However, the model and parameters employed in the paper are quite scalable. Therefore, they are sufficient to represent practical applications of xWSN.

topologies in consideration use a maximum of the average nodal degree of 4.0 in achieving their normalised capacity cost. Therefore, the data points plotted in the results presented can be seen as the results of the normalised total capacity cost of the optimal solution for the network. In evaluating the performance of the p-cycle-based restoration model and the improvement in the restoration solutions realised through the various schemes incorporated, we present the results of the average path length and the total capacity cost for the network. The average path length is given as the number of links in the p-cycle that is selected and used for restoring the network. Thus, the average path length indicates the hop count of the p-cycles being employed for achieving network restoration. The total capacity cost is the sum of the costs of using the WPs and the RPs. The cost of using the WPs is usually known in advance by the network. The cost of the RPs is the additional cost incurred by employing the p-cycle(s) that are selected for network restoration. This cost is evaluated as the sum of the costs of all links on

