Abstract Organizational commitment has been studied extensively world over and hundreds of research articles are available however a few studies address organizational commitment in IT sector high technology employees. In Pakistan insufficient research is available specific to IT sector employees. The present study is an attempt to better describe these factors which can induce organiza- tional commitment in Pakistani IT sector high technology employees.

These diverse findings highlight importance of compensation. It needs to be tested whether organizational commitment in Pakistani IT professionals can solely be induced through compensation or there are some other factors in addition to compensation. However literature review strongly establishes relationship between organizational commitment and compensation. Hence in present study Compen- sation is one of the independent variable and its relationship with Organizational commitment will be seen in the findings.

Questionnaires were printed and given to the heads of the respective human resources departments of each organization. Participation was anonymous to have an impartial opinion. The questionnaires were accompanied by a covering letter explaining the confidentiality and importance of this research.

Although these selected organizations employed thousands of employees but the professional Information Technology employees were in limited numbers. A total of 85 IT professionals were serving in these organizations and due to their limited number whole population was taken as sample. Out of these respondents 77 responded making response rate 90%. Keeping in view the limited number of IT professionals in public sector organizations the sample is sufficient for analysis of various results.

**p < 0.01). The IT professional feel that they are praised on positive performance by their boss. They are provided with a feed back on their performance. The find- ings are supported by Dockel (2001) and Soulen (2003). Raabe and Beehr (2003) also found a negative relationship between supervisor support and turnover inten- tion. Recognition on job well done intrinsically motivates individuals so the orga- nizations should take such steps that IT professionals are not under valued. Moreover organizations should devise a mechanism so that efforts of IT

The relationship between Training and development and organizational com- mitment is also significant (0.349**, **p < 0.01). These findings are supported by Shelton (2001) but Dockel (2001) did not found a significant relationship though it was positive. The response from questionnaire indicate that the IT professionals feel they are not being provided the job related training and sufficient time is not allocated for this training. These professionals are working in an industry where new technology is replacing the existing technology quite swiftly and training is the only way through which these professionals can update their knowledge about the new technologies. Hence the organizations should devise a detailed training program after necessary need assessment and allocate sufficient time for training of these professionals.

Majority of the studies were conducted measuring the relationship of three com- ponents of organizational commitment, i.e., Normative, Continuance and affec- tive components with different variables such as pay, Job characteristics, Supervisor support etc. and some also found the relationship between organiza- tional commitment and these factors as a whole. Since no such study was con- ducted on Information Technology (IT) professional in Pakistan the study found the relationship of three variables, i.e., Pay, Supervisor support and Train- ing and Development on Organizational commitment as whole.

The first hypothesis of present study was that compensation is significantly and positively related to organizational commitment. From the above discussions and significant correlation values it is established that among high technology IT pro- fessionals in Pakistan compensation is significantly and positively related to orga- nizational commitment. Thus hypothesis one is established.

