To our knowledge, there currently is only one method available that combines the systematic assessment of structural relationships between active compounds with SAR visualization and prospective compound design, i.e., the SAR Matrix (SARM) approach [11]. SARM analysis sug- gests new analogues by systematically comparing core structures and substituents in related analogue series (ASs) and identifying unexplored core-substituent combinations across these series. The compound design component of SARM has been extended through deep generative mod- eling, leading to DeepSARM [12], which utilizes additional information from selected targets and associated compound data sets to further ex- pand the design space.

Herein, we report the extension of DeepSARM for iterative compound optimization. In the following, we first introduce the SARM/DeepSARM framework and then detail the iterative DeepSARM (iDeepSARM) approach. An exemplary compound design application is presented to illustrate methodological characteristics of iDeepSARM and its design capabilities.

DeepSARM was based on the idea to further expand analogue design by taking information from compounds with activity against different targets into account that are related to the primary target of interest [12]. For example, a DeepSARM model can initially be trained with compounds active against the target family to which the target of inter- est belongs, followed by fine-tuning of the model for the primary target. This procedure increases the close-in analogue design capacity of the SARM approach. SARMs resulting from original two-step fragmentation can then be further expanded with novel key and value fragments and additional SARMs entirely consisting of novel fragments and compounds can be obtained.

2 (i.e., the key 2 generator) is trained using input key 2 / output key 2 pairs, the model for value 2 using key 2 / value 2 pairs, and the model for value 1 using key 1 / value 1 pairs. Compounds with newly generated key fragments are added to an original SARM containing structurally analogous keys (meeting the step-2 fragmentation criterion) and hence further expand the SARM.

number of SMILES tokens for a given fragment. The minus sign ensures that high probabilities result in small scores for fragment prioritization. A log-likelihood threshold can be applied to filter fragments. Com- pounds are then obtained by combining newly generated key 1 and value 1 fragments. Further DeepSARM calculation details are provided

Each scaffold represents an MMS. Value 1 and value 2 fragments serve as R-groups for two different substitution sites. Newly generated value 1 and 2 fragments are filtered for structural alerts (SMARTS of in-house collections of chemically undesired substructures) and accepted frag- ments are used to construct a SARM variant with pre-defined dimen- sionality for each key 2. This SARM variant consists of value 1 / value 2 combinations from which corresponding compounds (key 2 / value 1

value 1 and 2 fragments obtained during iterative fine-tuning. Results are shown for five iterations (i = 1, 2, 3, 6, 10) color-coded by compound activity. (D) The compounds. It is color-coded by predicted compound activity (pIC50) or log-likelihood score for value 1 / value 2 combinations. (C) The SARM is updated with new

order  of  likelihood).  (G)  Value  2  and  (H)  value  1  structures  from  the  SARM  for  i  =  10  are  shown. five iteratively updated SARMs are color-coded by log-likelihood scores. (E) Value 2 and (F) value 1 structures from the SARM in (B) are shown (sorted in ascending

til a pre-defined activity threshold or number of iterations is reached. Success of iterative fine-tuning intrinsically depends on the reliability of compounds activity predictions and log-likelihood scores. Preferably, comparable trends in the progression of activity and log-likelihood esti- mates should be observed during the optimization procedure.

square root of the number of GTM nodes and m the square root of the number of radial basis function centers. For other parameters, default settings were used. After constructing the GTM model, the responsibil- ities of atomic features were calculated using the transform function of ugtm and the MTM was generated based upon the summed responsibil- ities.

protein 4 (BRD4), a chromatin-associated protein functioning as an epi- genetic regular [31]. Both PLK1 and BRD4 are cancer targets. In this compound design effort, DeepSARM was pre-trained using compounds with activity against PLK1 or BRD4 and fine-tuned with PLK1/BRD4 dual-target inhibitors [30]. Here, we have modified the design protocol by pre-training with inhibitors of the human kinome, followed by fine- tuning with BRD4 inhibitors and iDeepSARM optimization of BRD4 in- hibitory activity. Hence, generated candidate compounds are expected to have the potential to be multi-kinase and BRD4 inhibitors and are optimized for BRD4. Although we currently do not have the option to experimentally test preferred candidates, this design effort is well suited to illustrate the computational iDeepSARM approach.

64. Key 1 / value 1 and key 2 / value 2 pairs were divided into training and validation sets (9:1), respectively. For iterative fine-tuning, temper- ature factors for value 1 and 2 generation were set to 1.0. Fine-tuning was carried out over 10 iterations. For each iteration, 100 computed compounds with highest predicted activity were selected as input. For

ity than JQ1. The MTM of this candidate compound displayed global similarities to the one of JQ1, but also distinct differences in projected feature sets, for example, an additional feature center in the lower left quadrant of the map. A docking model of the candidate compound was generated with AutoDock Vina [35]. When the candidate compound was docked to BRD4, the same enantiomer as observed for JQ1 in the X-ray structure was used. In the model, a hypothetical binding mode similar to JQ1 was observed with conserved interactions, but also mod-

Herein, we have introduced a computational methodology for com- pound optimization that builds upon the SARM/DeepSARM framework and further extends its molecular design capacity. The core of the iDeep- SARM approach is an iterative optimization scheme based upon an RNN architecture that uses DeepSARM results as input. Iterative fine-tuning of iDeepSARM models is supported by a new CNN-based activity pre- diction method as well as matrix variants for visualization. Importantly, iDeepSARM is applicable to optimize both R-group combinations and individual scaffolds, which represents a novel feature. For scaffolds con- sisting of complex ring systems, a variety of structural modifications are

