rameters on the oil yield of TCK, as well as the modeling of solvent ex- traction of Terminalia catappa L. kernel oil using RSM and ANNs, for possible industrial application of the base fluid as transformer oil. Fur- thermore, the physicochemical properties of the oil were examined using standard methods. Furthermore, gas chromatography (GC) and Fourier Transform Infrared (FTIR) were used to determine the fatty acid compositions and functional groups present in the oil, respectively. Finally, the X-ray diffractometry was used to reveal the characteristics of the crystalline structure of both the TCK and the residue left after extraction.

Commercial ANN software, using Neural Network Toolbox of MATLAB R2017a software package was used in this study. The TCKO yield was successfully predicted using Multilayer Full Feedforward (MFFF) and Multilayer Normal Feedforward (MNFF) neural networks. The networks were trained by Incremental Back Propagation (IBP). The ANN architecture consisted of an input layer with three neurons, an output layer with one neuron and a hidden layer. The optimal net- work topology was determined with one hidden layer, while the num- ber of neurons in hidden layer and the hidden layer transfer function and output layer were determined iteratively, through the development of series of networks. The individual ANNs were trained using 1000 iter- ations. The CCD experimental data were used for both training and testing.

The predicted TCKO oil yields obtained from RSM and ANN were compared with the experimentally obtained responses. This was aimed at the evaluation of the efficacy of the both optimization methods. Coefficient of determination (R2) and root mean square (RMS) were determined and used in the identification of the best ANN models architecture. Similarly, the RMS was used for comparing the RSM and ANN predicted and experimental values, for purpose of

done using central composite design (CCD). A three-factor-five-level CCD, which generated 20 experimental runs that were afterward carried out, was used in the modeling and optimization studies. There- after, oil was extracted from the TCK sample using solvent extraction method, and n-hexane as the extracting solvent. X-ray diffraction (XRD) analyses were carried out on the milled TCK and residue samples left after the extraction. Similarly, physicochemical characterization,

The p-value provide details as to whether a statistical hypothesis is significant or not and how significant it is. When the calculated p- value is b0.05, based on 95% confidence level, the evidence against null hypothesis H0 is stronger (Talib et al., 2016). Therefore, the model for TCK oil extraction was found to be significant as its p-value was =

60.14), respectively. The difference in the fatty acid composition of TCKO in this work, and those of the previous works, could be attributed to factors, like geographical location and variety (Menkiti et al., 2017; Ejikeme et al., 2010). Therefore, there is the need for the modification of the TCKO, in other to improve on its saturation level, prior to its pos- sible industrial application as transformer fluid (Menkiti et al., 2017; Agu et al., 2019).

ASTM D97 and D93, 2008. Standard Test Method for pour and flash points, respectively. Bai, Y., Saren, G., Huo, W., 2015. Response surface methodology (RSM) in evaluation of the vitamin C concentrations in microwave treated milk. Journal of Food Science Tech-

Mazaheri, H., Ghaedi, M., Ahmadi Azqhand, M.H., Asfaram, A., 2017. Application of Ma- chine/Statistical Learning, Artificial Intelligence and Statistical Experimental Design for the Modeling and Optimization of Methylene Blue and Cd(II) Removal From a Bi- nary Aqueous Solution by Natural Walnut Carbon. Royal Society of Chemistry https:// doi.org/10.1039/c6cp08437k.

