Abstract Traditional academic institutions as well as newly established online or hybrid educational organizations in the Middle East (ME) are still in the early phases of trying to get students and their parents to accept and adapt to the con- cept of e-learning. Different countries and different universities within individual countries within the ME have achieved various levels of success to this regard. While some traditional universities have already started offering a good number of e-learning courses, others are still in the very early stages of setting up such programs. This paper presents a general overview of the current situation of e- learning in the ME. It presents drivers and barriers to e-learning, the different types of e-learning initiatives, steps being taken towards overcoming the chal- lenges, and a possible future of e-learning through a case study of ongoing devel- opments by an authority on e-learning in Saudi Arabia.

Censorship in most Middle Eastern countries is common practice. For this reason, many of the countries within this region were hesitant to widely adopt the Internet. Governments were concerned about external political influences that might try to negatively manipulate their people. They were also concerned about immoral material such as pornography. Exposure to such material could be considered dangerous to youths and to the religious moral values of those nations (Mirza, 1998).

In the remainder of this paper we shall start by taking a look at some of the research that has been conducted especially with regard to e-learning drivers and barriers in the ME. We then present several initiatives and models for intro- ducing and utilizing e-learning in the region. We finally conclude with a look at possible future of e-learning in the ME through a case study of undergoing devel- opments in Saudi Arabia.

The ME in general has been a late follower when it comes to the adoption of e- learning. This can be greatly attributed to the delay in the adoption of the Inter- net as a whole by most governments of the region. As a result, little research with regard to the benefits, limitations, barriers, and acceptability of e-learning in the ME has been published. Generally, however, recently published research seems to indicate a high approval level by both faculty and students. We look in this sec- tion at a few research efforts that highlight the value of e-learning in the Middle East.

Additional research that presented specific country research include: research on the attitude of Kuwaitis students and people in general regarding e-learning (Al-Khashab et al., 2007); the perceived relevance of online MBA programs on cit- izens of the Arabian Gulf countries (Anwar, 2008); and, an Arabic language re- search regarding the affect of supporting a traditional course with e-learning material on the performance of English course students in Saudi Arabia in com- parison with students taking the same course through solely traditional means of course delivery (Al-Jarf et al., 2003). Results of the later revealed that students benefiting from the e-learning course material who were encouraged to participate online without any grades being rewarded or deducted for such participation, performed much better than the other students. Failure rate of students in the e-learning section was only 10% in contrast to a failure rate of 30% in the mainly traditional course. Other research with regard to e-learning in the Middle East includes Furaih (2005) and Alzamil (2004).

A good number of reasons can be blamed for the passive attitude that many ME governments took in response to e-learning. The biggest and probably most important reason was the very low Internet penetration rate by the general public (Al-Kahtani et al., 2005). This factor in itself can be attributed to several reasons including the high initial costs associated with Internet access, low speed and qual- ity Internet connections, and the fear that Internet connection would bring-about immoral values and corruption to the family (Mirza, 1998). The conservative reli- gious clerics were continuously warning of the dangers the Internet will bring to the society. Many adhered to the warning.

Yet one more cause for not rushing into the adoption of e-learning in the Mid- dle East is the great lack of online repositories that contain educational material in the Arabic language (Al-khalifa et al., 2008). A great percentage of faculty mem- bers may not be capable of creating such material, and hence, courses would not lend themselves to e-learning. Training and workshops are recommended to bridge the technology gap and improve faculty self-perception (Georgina and Olson, 2008). Scientific programs such as computing sciences, medicine, and engineering may be more applicable for e-learning in the ME as most scientific colleges teach their courses in the English language, and hence, electronic course material may be more readily available.

When it comes to institutions of higher education, similar types of variations in e-learning adoption can be seen across the different parts of the ME. Three main models of college-level e-learning institutions can now be found in different parts of the region. These include a virtual e-learning model, a hybrid e-learning model, and a traditional university e-learning model.

The virtual model involves the establishment of specialized online universities. Examples of such universities include the Syrian Virtual University (http:// www.svuonline.org) inaugurated in 2002 by President Bashar Al Asad of Syria; the Hamdan bin Mohammed e-University (http://portal.etqm.ae/en/home/), ini- tially established as the e-TQM College out of Dubai in the UAE, also established in 2002; the Mediterranean Virtual University (http://ls-ewdssps.ces.strath.ac.uk/

The Mediterranean Virtual University (MVU) was a developed as a cooperative e-learning initiative. This cooperative program involved eleven different universi- ties from five Mediterranean countries. These countries included Jordan, Egypt, Malta, Turkey, and the UK. Each partner university developed no more than four online courses for a total of 40 courses. These courses made up programs in com- puter science and engineering. The idea was that a student can complete a degree program through a set of online courses that originate from different universities under the umbrella of the MVU. Even though registration in the university initially started in 2006, it seems that the university is no longer active.

The Knowledge International University (KIU) is a university specializing in online degree programs in Islamic studies. They also offer degree programs in eco- nomics and management, and computer and information technology. What distin- guishes this university from other virtual universities in the region is that Arabic is the main language of study. Special units within the university include the College of Islamic studies for non-Arabic speakers and the Institute of Arabic language for non-Arabic speakers.

branches of the AOU were established in 2002 in Kuwait, Jordan, and Lebanon. In 2003, branches in Saudi Arabia, Bahrain, and Egypt also started operations. The Oman branch is expected to start excepting students in the very near future. Total number of students enrolled in all countries has already exceeded 22,000 back in March of 2007 (Golden, 2007). The Saudi Arabia branch is the largest in number of enrolled students with nine developed centers already in operation across the country.

An e-learning-based instructional system has been established in the form of a national center that supports the educational processes in tertiary insti- tutes at all levels and stages, free from the restrictions of time and place. This center is to incorporate all universities collective efforts and experiences in establishing e-learning and distance learning concepts. Benefits are to be reaped by different members of society regardless of their socioeconomic or academic backgrounds.

The National Center for e-Learning and Distance Learning has started many projects to achieve its goals. JUSUR is a custom-developed LMS, and is already used by three major universities in Saudi Arabia. The future release of the JSUSR project is to include other tools based on Web 2.0 technology. ZAD is a digital library project which already includes more than 90,000 electronic book titles of and other educational resources. Other projects of the center that support the e- learning initiative include promoting e-learning to the public, establishing a call center for student support, and building a national learning objects repository. The National Learning Object Repository is a promising project that enables staff and universities in Saudi Arabia to share learning objects.

Despite the delayed application of e-learning within most ME educational sys- tems, the wheels of change have finally started turning. The great economic upturn experienced by many countries of the ME over the past few years, especially by those that are oil producers, has finally started to pay-off. Governments are now much more willing to confront the challenges of the educational system. At- tempts at altering K-12 educational systems have already been started. This in- cludes the introduction of technology into the classroom at early years of study in most ME countries, and likewise for the English language.

Even though a great percentage of members of society may still be unfamiliar with technical advancements and concepts of e-learning, plans are being put into place where such technology can become widely recognizable and usable in the very near future. Training and workshops should be given more attention to in- crease the faculty perception of e-learning. On the other hand, the availability of by laws that govern the e-learning and distance learning will help encouraging students to participate in these types of learning.

