extravehicular activities is developed under the complex system theory. The astronaut in space suit with the backpack is described with a complex system model. Then a coupled forward-inverse dynamics model is present to calculate the motions of every subsystem and the whole system dynamically without introducing additional variables for multi results problem; and a sensor-actor model is built for analyzing the torque on the joints generated by the space suit which expands the analytical space from two dimensions to three dimensions. Finally, in order to show the effectiveness and feasibility of the method, application examples of the constrained operations are presented.

even rescue for spaceflight accidents, need to be implemented by astronauts outside the space vehicles. However, EVA is also a type of difficult and expensive task, for it must be completed with limited time, work space and energy by astronauts wearing special space suits with heavy backpack in microgravity environment [1]. Therefore, each task needs a particular design before implementation and each astronaut needs hundreds of hours for training before launched to space [2]. All of the preparations need to be carried out under the conclusions from studies on the motions of suited astronauts in microgravity. Modeling and Simulation (M&S) is chosen as a good method for studies on EVA for the reasons that physical microgravity simulators have inherent limitations, even today it cannot recreate the same microgravity environment as that in space yet, and differences between operations in space and on the ground will shade some important information [3][4][5][6][7].

In next section, a novel method for M&S of the motions of astronauts during EVA is discussed in details. Then in section 3, some applications on preparations for space station mission are introduced, in order to show how to use the method. At last, discussion and recommendation for future work are presented respectively.

Where h is the history of the angle . In fact, torques generated by space suit passively depends not only on the history of the input, but many information about the joint. If there are one more DOFs on the joint, torques in different orientations will affect each other. And the angular velocity will affect the torque too. So the torque generated by space suit is:

