Abstract The outlook for e-commerce and e-government depends not only on individuals acceptance of internet technologies as viable transaction means, but also on the recognition of the Web as a reliable milieu. In light of this, a compre- hensive model describing the factors that drive individuals to accept on-line transactions over the Web was developed and tested. This study attempts to inte- grate the well-established technology acceptance model (TAM) with three con- structs; namely trust, credibility and risk, which are of paramount importance in predicting individual acceptance of on-line transactions.

How can a nation or a society prepare itself for and thus join the information highway toward higher levels of economic and social development? The answer is neither short, nor direct and to the point. However, we can say that it could be done in two ways: making use of other experiences, and through education and curriculum development. Other experiences can manifest themselves in tailoring conceptual research models and transplant them to suite our cultural values and environment.

Internet was officially made available in KSA in 1997 by a ministerial decision and the public access finally debuted in 1999. In December 2000 there were about 200,000 Internet users in Saudi Arabia. By 2005 the number of Internet users in KSA had surged to 2.54 million, making a growth rate of 1170% and putting the KSA as one of the fastest growing Internet markets (source: Internetworldstats website http://www.internetworldstats.com/middle.htm#sa).

The CITC annual report (2005) show that the Internet in Saudi Arabia will wit- ness a promising future as it is estimated that the Internet usage will keep on grow- ing rapidly. In addition to the new Internet structure that can cut the prices of Internet access, there are also other factors that can speed up the growth of Inter- net usage in Saudi Arabia. One reason for the growth is that 60% of the Saudi population comprises teenagers and young adults who are adapting to new tech- nologies faster than expected. Also, as the usage of Internet grows in all the Arab countries, the amount of Arabic content on the Internet will grow as well. This in

Saudi Arabia is struggling hard toward the adoption of ICT applications mani- fested in the electronic solutions of e-commerce and e-government. When trying to put Saudi Arabia into the context of the extant of electronic solutions literature, the situation reveals a scarcity of sources. Saudi Arabia makes up one third of the Arab PC market and ranks fourth for the total ICT market among the 22 Arab states. Furthermore, Internet users are widely proliferating to jump from 200 thousand users by the end of the year 2000 to 4.8 million users by the end of the year 2006 (http://www.internet.gov.sa). The advent of the Internet and the impetus by high authority toward e-commerce and e-government are important catalysts for individuals and organizations toward the adoption of electronic solu- tions for their competitive advantage.

In 2004, the Saudi Crown Prince issued a decree to the Saudi Computer Society to provide a National IT Plan (NITP) for Saudi Arabia. The Saudi NITP project, just recently approved by the Saudi government in 2007, utilizes information and other technologies to promote knowledge and to support economic development throughout the Kingdom. The plan asserts that scientific and technological inno- vation is an essential feature for the economic development, such that support for the development of science and technology is seen as a measure of development. The plan stresses the importance of disseminating information services and of enhancing the awareness of IT throughout Saudi society. Two specific initiatives to foster IT adoption include: (1) an incentive policy that offers a 25% bonus of basic salary to Saudi nationals who specialize in computers or pursue an IT ca- reer; and (2) a new initiative from the Communications and Information Technol- ogy Commission (CITC) to provide one personal computer per Saudi household to leverage IT assimilation and diffusion.

The United Nations Economic and Social Committee for West Asia (ESCWA) re- port (Mandorah, 2003) gave an overview of the development undertaking place in Saudi Arabia in the transformation process toward an Information Society. This report discloses recent indicators for the information society in Saudi Arabia. It emphasizes that the Saudi market is the largest information market among Arab countries with a strong expectation for substantial growth in the future. The underlying motivating factors at Saudi economy were: (1) high percentage of pop- ulation growth rate which exceeds 3% and having the majority of the population being under 20 years old (43.4% of the population is under 15 years old), and (2) the high financial resources. Major developments toward a Saudi information society summarized by Mandorah (2003) are:

Pons (2004) in researching the problems and difficulties encountered in promot- ing the concept of e-government in the Middle East evaluate the opportunities along with the adoption of the technology to render advantages to the Arab world. Pons argues that understanding e-government applicability and effectiveness in the Arab countries is of vital importance to increase and promote its use. Among the barriers affecting e-government in the Arab countries were: information security, technical and infrastructure, educational, governmental, social and cultural fac- tors. Just recently, the Saudi government approved several laws that govern the informational transactions. Such a move is a real driving force for citizens to en- gage in electronic transactions. However, the obstacles preventing rapid progress in this direction are not merely technical. In fact, the technology side may prove the least difficult to address; the organizational, legal, political and social aspects may prove to be much more of a challenge. Hence, in an information society

Credibility is another important factor reported in the literature that is likely to influence e-transaction. Some authors regard credibility as a component of trust or risk (e.g., McKnight et al., 2002; Pavlou, 2003) while others deal with credibility as a distinguished concept (Liao et al., 1999, 2003; Wang et al., 2003). This study fol- lows the latter direction and considers credibility as a distinguished concept. In general, the perceived credibility that people have in the system, to securely con- clude their transactions and maintain the privacy of their personal information, affects their voluntary acceptance of e-transaction. Perceived risk is also an impor- tant element of B2C e-commerce that is likely to affect consumer behavior (Jar- venpaa and Tractinsky, 1999). Risks are either technology-driven which is derived from the underlying infrastructure (environmental risks), or relational,

resulting from the trading partner (behavioral risks) (Ring and Van de Ven, 1994). Since trust, perceived credibility, and perceived risk are essential constructs when uncertainty is present (Luhmann, 1979; Schoorman et al., 1995), these beliefs are integrated here in the proposed e-transaction acceptance model.

The first step often involves basic data exchange from the retailer to the consumer, such as browsing, gathering information, and making product and price compar- isons. The next step usually involves the consumer providing some personal infor- mation by registering an e-mail address, describing product preferences, and providing feedback. This step is often supplemented by automatic information ex- change that is intentionally or involuntarily captured through cookies, log-data, and data-mining tools. The final step involves provision of private and monetary information, such as credit card information, actual purchase preferences, and payment and address information, in order to complete the purchase of a product or service.

activities may often cease during the process. Even if information exchange and product purchase may be theoretically distinct intentions, they are posited, without loss of generality, as practically indistinguishable in on-line transactions. Likewise, issues involving e-commerce can be applied to e-government on-line transactions in order to predict the concerns and problems of citizens with the technology.

In contrast to traditional consumer behavior, on-line transactions have certain unique dimensions, such as (1) the extensive use of technology for transactions, (2) the distant and impersonal nature of the on-line environment, and (3) the implicit uncertainty of using open technological infrastructures for transactions. Overall, these three unique differences reduce consumer perceptions of control over on-line transactions, thereby increasing their apprehension about acceptance of e-transac- tions. In terms of Web retailer opportunism and related risks, theories regarding trust and risk in B2C e-commerce are employed. In terms of technology use for on-line transactions, TAM is employed to describe and predict system use.

There is a broad consensus that both traditional merchants and Web-exclusive retailers have widely embraced the low-cost Internet infrastructure to increase their consumer reach. However, consumers have not adopted B2C e-commerce to the same degree, primarily because of risk concerns and trust-related issues (Harris Poll, 2000; Hoffman et al., 1999; Palmer et al., 2000). Therefore, uncer- tainty around consumer transaction intentions is fundamental in predicting accep- tance of B2C e-commerce. In order to understand better the role of uncertainty in the proposed e-commerce acceptance model, the constructs of trust, credibility and perceived risk are put forward as fundamental in predicting B2C e-commerce acceptance. The practical utility of proposing trust, credibility and perceived risk as salient beliefs stems from the fact that Web retailers have considerable influence on these variables, mainly through their trustworthiness, reliability and integrity and ability to mitigate risk.

systems literature because it focuses on system use, has reliable instruments with excellent measurement properties, is parsimonious, and is empirically sound. It has been shown to apply to a wide range of information technologies, including e-commerce. For example, Gefen and Straub (2000) examined the effect of per- ceived ease of use on e-commerce acceptance, and Moon and Kim (2001) investi- gated the impact of perceived usefulness and ease of use on consumer use of the Internet. Therefore, even if TAM was originally intended to predict technology use in the workplace, the TAM variables can also be employed to predict individ- ual behavior in online transactions.

Fogg and Tseng (1999) propose that trustworthiness is a key component of cred- ibility, rather than credibility being a cue for trustworthiness. By contrast, we agree with Corritore et al. (2003) to see it the other way around, i.e., credibility as a cue for trustworthiness. That is, if an object has credibility (e.g. the author is a recog- nized expert), that credibility is a positive signal of the trustworthiness of the object. Hence, credibility provides a reason to trust but is not trust itself. This will guide the direction of causality between credibility and trust as the former predicts the latter.

Corritore et al. (2003) identify three perceptual factors that impact on-line trust: perception of credibility, ease of use and risk. Later, Corritore et al. (2005) identify perceived credibility as an antecedent and a predictor of trust. Accordingly, the following hypothesis is derived:

Reliability results from testing the measurement model indicate that the mea- sures are robust in terms of their internal consistency reliabilities as indexed by their composite reliabilities. The composite reliabilities of the different measures in the model range from 0.71 to 0.90, which exceed the recommended threshold value of 0.70 (Nunnally, 1978).

The convergent validity was tested with PLS-Graph by extracting the factor loadings (and cross loadings) of all indicator items to their respective latent con- structs. These results indicate that all items loaded: (1) on their respective con- struct from a lower bound of 0.72 to an upper bound of 0.93; and (2) more highly on their respective construct than on any other construct. A common rule of thumb to indicate convergent validity is that all items should load greater than

and total effects. The path coefficient of an exogenous variable represents the di- rect effect of that variable on the endogenous variable. An indirect effect repre- sents those effects interpreted by the intervening variables; it is the product of the path coefficients along an indirect route from cause to effect via tracing arrows in the headed direction only. For more than one indirect path, the total indirect effect is their sum. The total effect of a variable on an endogenous variable is the sum of the direct and the indirect effects.

Perceived usefulness (PUSEF) of the web technology exhibited a strong positive influence (b = 0.35, p < 0.01) on intention for e-transaction. Perceived ease of use (PEOU) of the web technology also exhibited a strong positive influence (b = 0.174, p < 0.01) on intention for e-transaction. PEOU has a very strong

Each of age, gender, and educational level significantly influenced perceived credibility and perceived trust [(b = 0.076, b = 0.077); (b = 0.286, b = 0.270); (b = 0.215, b = 0.076) respectively]. Both gender and educational level signifi- cantly influenced perceived risk (b = 0.196, b = 0.090) respectively. Additionally,

the variations in the endogenous constructs by their antecedents among the respon- dents who participated in the study. About 25% of the variance of e-transactions, 30% of PUSEF, 28% of PEOU, 18% of perceived credibility, 25% of perceived trust, 11% of perceived risk, and 22% of Internet use were explained by the model. Respondents of this study reported that the major obstacles that face them regarding the adoption and use of computers and Internet were 17.6% lack of interest, 63.7% lack of training, 33% technological, 36.3% financial, 3.3% no fea- sibility. Their access channels to the Internet were 6.6% via ISP, 64.8% pre-paid

the corroboration of the applicability of TAM in Saudi Arabia in the field of Internet as a medium for e-transactions. Our findings show that intention for online transac- tion over the Internet is predicted by both PUSEF and PEOU, and PEOU in turn is a major predictor of PUSEF. Therefore, all the structural paths in TAM proved to be significant in the Saudi settings. Accordingly, this study adds further support to Al- Gahtani (2007) for the applicability of TAM in Saudi Arabia as a viable model in investigating individual acceptance of new and emerging technologies.

The well known TAM was augmented with four major constructs related to e-transactions in addition to several demographic variables to view a broader picture of e-transactions acceptance in Saudi Arabia. Credibility, trust, risk, and general Internet use were hypothesized to be antecedent to perceived usefulness and ease of use as major predictors of new technologies acceptance. Intention to transact over the Internet is the dependent variable in this study which is con- sidered as the surrogate for actual online transaction over the Internet. The total

General Internet use was also hypothesized to be an antecedent to perceived usefulness of transacting online over the Internet towards its acceptance. Addi- tionally, this study integrated individual age, gender, educational level, and work type to test their potential effects to some antecedents to e-transactions. All hypothesized relationships related to these demographic variables were supported in our survey except that of the impact of work type on trust and the impact of age on perceived risk as they were found to be non-significant.

We hope this study would contribute to a better understanding of individual on- line behavior in the emerging e-commerce and e-government environments. Saudi IT policy and decision makers can make use of our findings in solving problems facing them in moving to a digital economy and information society. Media pro- grams should communicate to the public the roles and benefits of e-transactions in all levels and how they could be made use of in our daily life. Another important role of the media would be the preaching of the recently approved legislations by the Saudi government to govern the informational transactions. Of concern is the existence of a hard core of reluctant or non-users of e-transactions. A proactive policy such as the IT caravan voyages would provide those with the relevant facil- itating conditions to promote e-transactions via practical applications of e-com- merce and e-government.

