The discovery of plate tectonics emerged from a huge amount of new data on seafloor bathymetry and a courageous new approach to an- alyze them. In the next decade, our way to use modeling to understand geodynamics will have to evolve by combining artificial intelligence with high-performance computing (HPC) simulations (Morra et al., 2021). While the number of geoscientists who use HPC is increasing, there is great need for fast and reliable geodynamic tools for producing the large number of training and verification samples necessary to train machine learning algorithms. New numerical methods for geodynamics must be carefully crafted to maintain their performance on parallel computers and be tested for non-linear rheologies which are responsible for the fragmentation of the surface in tectonic plates.

16 CPU 2.2 GHz Xeon cores and the viscous simulation took 13.8 min. The LBM kernel calculations ran at 3.45 GFlops = 78% of peak per- formance per core, and the total LBM algorithm including streaming and inter-core communications ran at 1.93 GFlops = 44% of peak performance per core. The computer code runs in 2D or 3D and was

spreading centers) and downwelling plumes (c.f. subduction zones). Again, one observes a different pattern of convection for the viscous case (right column) with convection in the upper layer being more distributed within the layer as smaller convection cells, or horizontally flowing broad regions within the upper layer.

Supervised learning techniques that can be used to analyze full convection models vary from Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) (Morra et al., 2020), which are already widely used to analyze images in geosciences, as well as Support Vector Machines. For example, re- cently efforts have been made to extract fundamental parameters such as Prandtl and Rayleigh numbers from a CNN applied to LBM models of convection (Boroumand et al., 2023) where 200 snapshots of 88 convection simulations were used to train and test the Neural Network based classifier. In a future not too remote, we can see how Generative Artificial Intelligence will be used to predict solutions of mantle dy- namics models, as recent attempts in atmospheric convection (Mooers et al., 2020) and convection in general (Jiang and Farimani, 2020) have shown to be possible.

While all these approaches are promising and give us a snapshot on the future of geodynamics modeling, the present challenge is rep- resented by the large number of samples of training set and by the high level of quality, detail and reliability of the training set. In this sense, LBM represents a unique opportunity for geodynamics research to produce the necessary datasets, due to the capability to almost perfectly scale to large number of processors (Mora et al., 2020) with very high performance (Mora et al., 2023), and to model at the same time high as well as low Prandtl numbers (Mora and Yuen, 2018a).

