The rest of paper is structured as follows: Section 2 consists of related work. Section 3 presents the proposed multilevel classification of security concerns in cloud computing. Sec- tion 4 is based on the dynamic security contract concept. Sec- tion 5 concludes the paper.

In [9], security aspects of one of the popular cloud Amazon Elastic Compute Cloud (EC2) have been discussed. It consists of systematic analysis of various crucial vulnerabilities in pub- licly available Amazon Machine Images (AMIs) and mecha- nisms to eliminate them. The proposed tool referred to as Amazon Image Attacks (AmazonIA) uses only publicly avail- able interfaces regardless of the underlying cloud infrastruc- ture. As a result of exploiting vulnerabilities and successful attacks, authors are able to extract sensitive information including passwords, and credentials from AMIs. The extracted information can be used to initiate botnets, or create back doors to launch impersonate attacks or access source code of a web service available on AMI. The authors have dis- cussed effects of successful attacks and also the methods to

Authors in [11] consider security as a service for cloud- based applications. The architecture considers the existing ser- vices at different levels. It considers user-centric security i.e., users have control over their security permitting them to use security solutions across different clouds. They can subscribe to any security solution provided by any cloud provider and use that particular security solution for their cloud and may also have multiple security solutions for a particular service depending upon its criticality. The multiple security solutions can also be used at different levels.

In [3] Cloud Computing Open Architecture (CCOA) concept is discussed for clouds in virtual environments. The role and functions of the architecture are discussed according to different infrastructures for IT and business systems. Different types of architectures complicate security management for cloud sys- tems. This architecture provides a solution for different security aspects regarding virtual environments. The authors suggest physical and logical isolation of data instances for each customer to enhance the data privacy and expeditious replication and recovery system. Authorized users based on the role-based access control can access the sensitive data on platforms. To pre- vent intrusion attacks, cloud service provider blocks the mali- cious and un-trusted codes enabling digital forensic applications. Research in [14] suggests a trusted computing and attesta- tion system for virtual environments. In virtual environments systems are more prone to threats due to the poor computer communication architectures and hidden network channels. These hidden channels can be a risk since many virtualized net-

In cloud computing applications are deployed in shared resource environments; therefore, data privacy is an important aspect. Data privacy has three major challenges: integrity, authorized access and availability (backup/ replication). Data integrity ensures that the data are not corrupted or tampered during communication. Authorized access prevents data from intrusion attacks while backups and replicas allow data access efficiently even in case of a technical fault or disaster at some cloud location. Data are shared and communicated at the common network backbone. Hence malicious attackers or intruders can deploy hidden proxy applications between the

cloud provider and consumer to scavenge information of login credentials and session details [4]. An intruder can also per- form packet sniffing or IP-spoofing as a middle-party and can access and/or alter the restricted or sensitive information. One possible solution for the data privacy in cloud computing is Cisco Secure Data Center Framework that provides multi- layer security mechanism [4].

A successful attack on the cloud interfaces can result in a root level access of a machine without initiating a direct attack on the cloud infrastructure. Two different kinds of attacks are launched on authentication mechanism of clouds. The control interfaces are vulnerable to signature wrapping and advanced cross site scripting (XSS) techniques. First kind of attack is referred to as signature wrapping attack or XML Signature Wrapping attacks. Single signed SOAP message or X.509 cer- tificate can be used to compromise security of customers? accounts through operations on virtual machines or resetting of passwords. Second type of attacks exploits the vulnerability in XSS. The particular vulnerability attack steals username and password pair information.

IaaS and PaaS layers are overlapped in the model due to their interdependency on each other. The attacks on these layers are grouped into three types: attacks on cloud services, attacks on virtualization, and attacks on utility computing. The security concerns for IaaS and PaaS are discussed below.

A software virtualization attack may examine the VM images to launch an attack or steal of information, especially targeting development images, which are accidentally released [21]. It is also possible to provide a VM image having malware to cloud computing system resulting in theft and corruption of data. For example, cloud consumers are enticed to run tainted VM images contributed to image repository manipulating the registration process for first page listing.

customer. It also provides two basic advantages of cost reduc- tion and scalability. Security risk associated with utility com- puting is access by attackers who want to utilize resources without paying [8]. Majority of hackers and crackers use the computing power or storage for the illegal use. The common use of public cloud includes e-commerce, web-application and Web site hosting making these services vulnerable to vari- ety of attacks on possession, authenticity, integrity and utility. A compromised client may perform a Fraudulent Resource Consumption (FRC) attack by using the metered bandwidth of web-based service that results in a financial burden on the cloud consumer [19].

At second level available services on PaaS and IaaS consti- tute hardware virtualization, software virtualization, utility computing and development services. Some attacks on these services may be severe up to the extent that even the real machines can be affected. Most of intruders try to hack these layers with the help of ARP spoofing, MAC spoofing or exe- cuting malicious codes on cloud platforms.

Web services and web portals are attacked to break encryp- tion or to get signatures and user credentials. Attacks on SSH (Secure SHell) extract API keys, user credentials and publisher credentials. Attacks for breaking encryption, extracting signa- tures, keys, and credentials are associated with low to medium level risks. However attack on publisher credentials has high- level risk. Hardware virtualization is attacked through ARP spoofing and MAC spoofing. Risk level associated with hard- ware virtualization is medium to high. Software virtualization is threatened by hacking with automated tools and has a high level of risk. Malicious codes and scripts can be executed with development services and these may adversely affect the whole cloud system, and hence risk associated with development ser- vices is high. Utility computing is associated with high risk level and can be attacked by hacking or for SLA.

(2). The example shows subset of web portal services and hard- ware virtualization consisting of possibilities of attacks and security services of authentication, authorization, multi- tenancy and data privacy. It is important to observe that risk level changes to high as cloud service changes to hardware vir- tualization from web portal. Hence security service dynami- cally switches over to multi-tenancy and data privacy.

