method, a nondestructive method with a rapid detection speed (Qi et al., 2002) that extracts the dispersion curves of surface waves and then in- verts the near-surface velocity information (Xia et al., 1999; Park et al., 1999), is widely used in the detection of UUS (Pugin et al., 2013; Xia et al., 2015).

We introduce the block coordinate descending (BCD) method (Zhao et al., 2015; Xu and Yin, 2015) to improve the capability of the SA algorithm to synchronously optimize multiple parameters. Then, the multiple parameters, namely, h and Vs for each layer in a multilay- ered model, can be inverted by the improved SA algorithm.

Although a higher-order mode was recently used (Wang et al., 2019), the mode most extensively applied during Rayleigh wave exploration is the fundamental-order Rayleigh wave because of its high energy and the ease with which it is observed (Yu et al., 2018). In this study, the dispersion curve of the fundamental-order Rayleigh wave is used to invert the near-surface Vs and h of each layer. Here, we use the improved fast generalized reflection-transmission coefficient method (Chen, 1993; Pei et al., 2008) to calculate the dispersion curves for different models.

During the inversion, the Vs and h in each layer usually range from 0.5 to 1.5 times the true value (Lu et al., 2016) to improve the accuracy. In practical applications, we can limit the search ranges of these two pa-

Moreover, the investigation depth of the Rayleigh wave is half of the maximum wavelength. We set the model range of Vs from the 0.5 times the minimum Rayleigh wave phase velocity to 1.5 times the maximum phase velocity. The layer thickness is greater than 0, and the sum of the layer thicknesses is smaller than the maximum wavelength.

We add Gaussian noise of 20 dB to the dispersion curve to test the per- formance of the BCDESA and SA algorithm under noisy conditions. We set the termination error of the BCDESA to 12 because the mean square error (E) of the noisy data and the clean data is between 10 and 11. The other parameters are not changed.

The inversion of Vs profiles from Rayleigh wave dispersion curves constitutes a typical nonlinear inverse problem, which is characterized by multiple inversion parameters and high dimensionality. It is not easy to solve such a problem by using a traditional nonlinear inversion tech- nique, such as the SA algorithm, because an increase in the number of layers (a random iterative direction) leads to large errors in high- dimensional nonlinear problems. Based on the SA algorithm, we pro- pose the BCDESA algorithm, where the high-dimensional nonlinear SA parameter inverse problem is solved by the BCD algorithm. By using the population evolution and optimal control attributes of the DE technique, the SA algorithm is transformed to control the whole iterative process with error, thereby avoiding the instability of the inversion algorithm. This method can also be used to solve other nonlinear inverse problems in the future.

program for outstanding talent of the University of Electronic Science and Technology of China (No. 2019-QR-01), and Project of Basic Scientific Research Operating Expenses of Central Universities (ZYGX2019J071; ZYGX 2020J013). We thank three anonymous reviewers whose comments substantially improved the presentation of our work.

