A new fractional two dimensional triangle function combination discrete chaotic map (2D-TFCDM) is proposed by utilizing the discrete fractional calculus. Furthermore, the chaos behaviors are numerically discussed in the fractional-order difference. The bifurcation diagrams, the largest Lyapunov exponent plot and the phase portraits are shown, respectively. With the keys produced by elliptic curve in finite field, the discrete fractional map is converted into algorithm, and applied to color image encryption. The image encryption method is first proposed by us worldwide.

Public key cryptography (asymmetric cryptography) is a famous techniques for many years [16]. Strong public-key cryptography is often considered to be too computationally expensive for small devices if not accelerated by cryptographic hardware. Elliptic curves are popular settings for building efficient public key cryp- tosystems. Elliptic curve cryptography (ECC) is an popular effective public key cryptography techniques. ECC has many advantages, such as small storage capacity, faster computations and reduction of the power consumption [17]. Menezes Vanstone Elliptic Curve Cryptosystem (MVECC) was one of the famous techniques that used ECC and gave security for the data [18]. We take use of this technique in our paper and make it more adapted to image encryp- tion and security.

introduced. In Section 3, we provide the introduction of elliptic curve in finite field. The working mechanism of the Menezes- Vanstone Elliptic Curve Cryptosystem is described in Section 4. Then, in the next section, we present fractional 2D-TFCDM and standard map on time scales from the discrete integral expression. The bifurcation diagrams, the largest Lyapunov exponent plot and the phase portraits of the map are also displayed while the differ- ence orders and the initial points are changed. In Section 6, we dis- play the applications of fractional 2D-TFCDM with the Menezes- Vanstone Elliptic Curve Cryptosystem in the image encryption. In Section 7, the results of applications in part VI are analyzed. At last, some conclusions are given.

Let elliptic curve E defined over F100927 with parameters a = 1, b = 6 in (7). Since #E = 100, 829 is a prime, According to [31], it is a safe elliptic curve. set x = (x1, x2)= (95, 364, 5113), a = (2, 4), d = 91, 338, then da = (54, 157, 1425) = b, the secret key  k = 63, 236, (c1, c2) = kb = (84, 416, 20, 597)= dc, c = ka = (20, 607, 18, 966). m = 9.536405113

Fractional 2D-TFCDM is obtained from the 2D-TFCDM. Then, new chaotic dynamics behaviors is found with the map. Further- more, the map can be applied in encryption and decryption of image transmission in information security. The results show that the DFC is an efficient tool for fractional generations of the discrete maps. We believe that the fractional calculus methods and frac- tional discrete formula will give us a better description of discrete fractional dynamics in future. From our research, we discovered that no paper has been reported on information security of frac- tional difference.

