The recognition of handwritten script is a difficult task due to the different handwriting qualities and styles that are subject to inter-writer and intra-writer variations. Many recognition sys- tems in many applications have been proposed in recent years where higher recognition accuracy is always desired. Typically, the recognition systems are adapted to specific applications to achieve better performance. They can be divided into three

main steps: preprocessing step, feature extraction and selection step, and classification and verification step. Handwritten digit recognition problem can be seen as a subtask of the optical character recognition (OCR) problem. Unconstrained hand- written digit recognition has been applied to recognize amounts written on checks for banks or zip codes on envelopes for postal services, etc.

This paper focuses on feature extraction and classification. The performance of a classifier can rely as much on the quality of the features as on the classifier itself. A good set of features should represent characteristics that are particular for one class and be as invariant as possible to changes within this class [1]. Commonly used features in character recognition are: invariant moments [2], projections [3], zoning feature [4], Four- ier descriptors [5], and contour direction histogram [6]. A fea- ture set made to feed a classifier can be a mixture of such features.

A probabilistic neural network (PNN) approach for the recognition of the handwritten Indian numerals [17] based on the center of gravity and a set of vectors to the boundary points of the digit has been presented however Montazer et al. [18] proposed a holistic approach using neuro-fuzzy inference engine to recognize the Farsi numeral characters. Finally, Impedovo et al. introduced a genetic algorithm based clustering approach using zoning features [19] whereas an adaptive zoning techniques for handwritten digit recognition are presented [20,21] where the features are extracted accord- ing to an optimal zoning distribution. The experimental tests show the effectiveness of the latter with respect to traditional approaches for zoning design.

This paper is broken down into five sections. Section 2 provides details on the feature extraction and selection tech- niques. Section 3 deals with the classifiers used for the recog- nition purpose, experimental results are discussed in Section 4, and finally Section 5 presents some conclusions and perspectives.

where hi is the ith bin of the tangent histogram of the whole digit, fi is the ith component of the feature vector f, which is between 0 and 1, and   is the 2-norm. Thus,  f  = 1. Conse- quently, these features are a translation and scale invariant contour descriptors and they are independent of the way a con- tour is traced.

Feature selection aims to reduce the dimensionality of the feature space for classification by selecting the most informa- tive features. The most informative features are the ones that best separate the different classes. Feature selection has been used previously for many applications, yielding higher speed and reduced computational cost for the classification process.

SVM is a classifier derived from statistical learning theory first presented by Boser et al. [30]. SVMs were introduced in [31] as learning machines with capacity control for regression and bin- ary classification problems. It has also been proved to be very successful in many other applications such as handwritten digit recognition, image classification, face detection, object detec- tion, and text classification. In the case of classification, SVM try to find an optimal hyperplane that correctly classifies data points by separating the points of two classes as much as possible. For the linearly separable case, the support vector

There are two common methods to solve a multi-class problem with binary classifiers such as SVMs: one-against all (or one-vs-rest) and one-against-one. In the one-against-all scheme, a classifier is built for each class and assigned to the separation of this class from the others. For the one against- one method, a classifier is built for every pair of classes to sep- arate the classes two by two. Another approach to the recog- nition of n different digits is to use a single n-class SVM instead of n binary SVM subclassifiers with the one-against- all method, thus solving a single constrained optimization problem.

This paper presents a system for the recognition of the hand- written Persian numerals that could be used for automatic reading of numerical amounts of checks. The main contribu- tion of this work focuses on feature extraction where a novel feature set based on transition information in the vertical and horizontal directions of a digit image combined with the well-known chain code histogram (CCH) is discussed and compared with others in the literature. The classification sys- tem is based on SVM, which is considered one of the most powerful classification techniques and is now widely used in many pattern recognition applications. The results of our experiments show that feature selection procedure reduces the dimensionality of the feature space without affecting the performance of the classifier where the system can maintain high performance with less computational complexity compar- ing to the systems in the literature.

