As mentioned above, due to the limited size of the dataset, it is not possible to make accurate inferences taking all the predictors into ac- count. Thus, several dimensionality reduction techniques have been used on the dataset to select the top predictors that define the nutrient concentration of the aquaponic solution. The predictors which had zero variance were removed from the dataset. Then, a correlation matrix was constructed between the predictors, and one of the two predictors,

Next, all the predictors with less than 5% importance in the dataset were eliminated as they would likely incorrectly skew any inferencing made from the dataset. As the primary goal was to bring down the size of the dataset to 5 primary chemical predictors, Recursive Feature Elimination technique with XGBoost classifier was used, which ranked the predictors in the order of their importance. This resulted in bringing down the size of the dataset to 5 chemical predictors. In addition to this, 2 categorical predictors were also appended to the dataset, one storing the month and the other storing the place in which the observations were recorded. Therefore, a total of 143 observations with 7 predictors were used to design classification rules and carry out inferences.

Phosphorus, with the importance of 4.51% and 4.44% respectively, and from the list of chemical properties, pH, SAR, and charge balance with the importance of 1.2%, 0.93%, and 0.93% respectively were removed. Thus, the final list of chemical predictors used in the analysis was as fol- lows: Potassium, Boron, Bicarbonate, Sulfate, and Chloride concentra- tions in the solution (all of these measured in ppm). In addition to this, 2 categorical predictors were also appended to the dataset, one storing the month and the other storing the place in which the observa- tions were recorded. Therefore, a total of 143 observations with 7 pre- dictors were used to design classification rules and to carry out inferences.

Next, due to the low sample size, there is a high probability of overfitting the data because of which, the notion of different Bolstered error estimators has been introduced in this domain. The performance of linear classifiers like LDA and Linear SVM along with the performance of non-linear classifiers like CART (Depth = 2) and 3-NN have been used along with these Bolstered error estimators, and results have been discussed below. The value of the depth of the decision tree was chosen as 2 due to the low volume of the dataset as a higher value of the depth would result in overfitting the data and lead to unreasonably high accuracy on the training dataset. The value of the K for the K- Nearest Neighbor was chosen to be 3 using Elbow method as the mean cluster distance on the training dataset was optimal.

This type of error is calculated as the sum of all error contributions divided by the total number of points. For a linear classifier where the decision boundary is a hyperplane, the analytical expressions for the in- tegrals were calculated. For the non-linear classifiers, a small number of Monte-Carlo samples were generated (M = 10). The expression for a general Bolstered resubstitution estimator is as follows:

As the name suggests, in this type of error estimation, the classifiers are trained on each subset separately. Every subset contains all the data points belonging to one particular class except one which is used as the test datapoint. Therefore, in a binary classification problem, if m datapoints belong to class 0 and n datapoints belong to class 1, there will be a total of m-1 subsets for class 0 and n-1 subsets for class 1; and the classifiers will be trained separately on all of them. In the end, an aggregate of the error on each of these subsets is calculated to find out the total Bolstered Leave One Out Error estimate for each of these classifiers.

The main motivation behind using this entire approach is designing a recommendation system so that the users of the hydroponic set-ups get an alert on the appropriate levels of nutrient concentrations that should be maintained to obtain the maximum yield. To achieve this, the training dataset has been used to design the approach. From the values of the pre-recorded observations, a set of rules were developed for both the classes.

hardness of the solution can be maintained at 1970 umhos/cm and 140 ppm of calcium carbonate, respectively, which is important given the higher yield levels (about double) obtained during these months compared to the rest of the growing season. Any increase in these prop- erties can increase the hardness of the solution, resulting in eutrophica- tion (Glibert et al., 2005). To control this and maintain the hardness of the solution within 140 ppm, anoxic mixers need to be installed to de- nitrify the wastewater with the use of bacteria, which breaks down the nitrates to release oxygen and nitrogen gas (Peng et al., 2008).

6.5 and 8 by maintaining a balance between the chemical concentra- tions of nitrogen, phosphorus, potassium, sulfur, calcium, magnesium and heavy metals namely iron, manganese, boron, copper, zinc and mo- lybdenum to facilitate growth of microbes in the aquaponic solution which is vital for nutrient uptake by plants (Kledal et al., 2019). How- ever, the ideal range of nutrients that should be maintained in the solu- tion has not been discussed by Kledal et al., and our work can be viewed as a quantification to facilitate the findings that were made in this paper.

Likewise, Nozzi et al. have compared the nutritional quality of lettuce, mint and mushroom herbs grown in three different aquaponic set-ups with varying amounts of additional macronutrients and nutrient uptake from fish feed, but there has been no concrete explanation for how nu- trient addition in each case supplemented the growth of these plants (Nozzi et al., 2018). In our case, a proper description of how the pro- posed recommendations of the Machine Learning model affected the quality of the crops in the aquaponic solution, as compared to the base- line model, has been elaborately discussed.

This is the first study of its kind to use AI for optimizing nutrient con- centrations in aquaponic solution. Our proposed method is much supe- rior to the conventional methods of growing plants in aquaponics as it emphasizes on quantifying the regulation of nutrients and routine mon- itoring according to the month in which the crops are grown. The num- ber of nutrients that need to be regulated in the aquaponic solution as mentioned before were chosen using feature selection and dimension- ality reduction techniques, and we finalized five most important chem- ical parameters from the initial set of 20 parameters, which resulted in reducing the cost of nutrients by around 75%. Further, the AI model we developed here is scalable and could be implemented in aquaponic operations at various sizes. Our model also overestimates the possibility of toxicity to the plants and fish, which in fact ensures produce quality. The most important issue which has been addressed by automation in aquaponics is the cost incurred due to human labor as aquaponics only involves an initial cost of setting up the farm and water purification units for each of the tanks, with the only recurring cost being the cost in- curred with utilities.

However, the approach presented here does have some limitations. The sparse data makes it difficult to gauge the structure of the data for applying any Bayesian statistical approaches. This can be compensated with an increase in the volume of the dataset, which needs to be ad- dressed in future. Another limitation is the weather conditions in which the observations were recorded, i.e. all the three aquaponic farms were located in Southeast Texas, with warm summers and mild winters. Addition of data from geographical locations with much more variable weather conditions is expected to further improve the robust- ness of the model presented here.

From the above experimental results, it can be concluded that the Semi-Bolstered resubstitution Error estimation technique works best with Linear SVC as the classifier with the value of penalty parameter set to 1. A set of recommendations have also been prescribed for each of the predicted classes, which have been discussed in detail in this paper. It has been verified experimentally as to how the proposed rec- ommendations positively impacted plant and fish growth in a single system. In the future, more attention would be paid on how the concen- tration of heavy metals affects the growth of plants in aquaponic envi- ronments. Moreover, the success of the classification technique presented here can be extended to other data-depleted domains, which is another contribution of this paper.

