The choice of pattern classifier and the technique used to extract the features are the main factors to judge the recognition accuracy and the capability of an Optical Character Recognition (OCR) system. The main focus of this work is to extract features obtained by binarization technique for recognition of handwritten characters of English language. The recognition of handwritten character images have been done by using multi-layered feed forward artificial neural network as a classifier. Some preprocessing techniques such as thinning, foreground and background noise removal, cropping and size normalization etc. are also employed to preprocess the character images before their classification. Very promising results are achieved when binarization features and the multilayer feed forward neural network classifier is used to recognize the off-line cursive handwritten characters.

The process of reading handwritten text from the static surfaces is termed as off-line cursive handwriting recognition. Simulating the behaviour of the human brain into a machine (for the task of reading handwritten or printed text) opened innovative prospects to improve man-machine interface. For the last four decades, the classification of cursive and unconstrained handwritten characters has been a major issue in this field of research.

The off-line character recognition is an active area of research these days. As compared to machine printed character recognition, the work done by the researchers in the area of handwritten character recognition is very limited as mentioned by Apurva A. Desai [1]. In 2002, Kundu & Chen [2] used HMM to recognize 100 postal words and reported 88.2 % recognition accuracy. In 2007, Tomoyuki et al. [3] used 1646 city names of European countries in the recognition experiment and the accuracy of 80.2% is achieved. In 2006, Gatos et al.

Binarization is an important image processing step in which the pixel values are separated into two groups; white as background and black as foreground. Only two colors, white and black, can be present in a binary image. The goal of binarization is to minimize the unwanted information present in the image while protecting the useful information. It must preserve the maximum useful information and details present in the image, and on the other hand, it must eliminate the background noise associated with the image in an efficient way.

The use of binarization features along with the neural network classifier employing back-propagation algorithm delivers outstanding classification accuracy of 85.62 %. Training sample quality, feature extraction technique and the classifier are the main factors deciding the accuracy of the recognition system. All these techniques can be refined because a scope of improvement is always there. In future, a combination of binarization features with some other type of features such as Projection profile Features, can be investigated in the recognition experiment. Apart from MLP classifier, other classifiers such as RBF, HMM, SVM etc. can also be examined in future.

