Within the last decade, (self-)adaptivity increasingly became an in- tegral part of the design of next-generation information and communi- cation systems [1]. Concepts such as intelligent systems [2], cyber-physical systems [3], Internet of Things [4] or self-aware computing systems [5] established a trend in systems engineering to- wards constellations of typically distributed autonomous subsystems that integrate dynamically into an overall system constellation and self-adapt their behaviour in response to changing situations [6]. We refer to sys- tems with abilities to autonomously modify their behaviour and their structural integration in terms of cooperation with other (sub-)systems as self-adaptive and self-organising (SASO) systems in the remainder of this article.

explains the underlying system model for SASO systems including the assumptions made by the authors and describes related work. Section 3 presents an approach to the measurement of adaptation behaviour sta- bility, which is experimentally analysed in section 4. Finally, section 5 summarises the paper and gives an outlook on future work.

In this article, we refer to a SASO system S as a collection A of autonomous subsystems ai that are able to adapt their behaviour based on self-awareness of the internal and external conditions. We further assume that such a subsystem is an entity that interacts with other entities, i.e., other systems, including hardware, software, humans, and the physical world with its natural phenomena. These other entities are referred to as the environment of the given system. The system boundary is the common frontier between the system and its environment.

Only a few contributions focused on general metrics to determine the effort and the benefit of (self-)adaptation in distributed collections of autonomous subsystems, see Ref. [24] for an overview. Examples include the relation between working and adaptation time, the availability of subsystems for task processing, and the performance of the overall system (i.e., the degree to which a certain goal is achieved). This has been accompanied by a transfer of traditional performance metrics, see Ref. [21] or augmented with measures necessary for control strategies of SASO systems [25]. However, the focus on an degree of adaptation, the stability of adaptations, and the foundation for deriving a trade-off be- tween possible performance gain of individual component systems and negative impact on macro-level behaviour has not been focused.

Kinoshita proposes a measure which he uses as an indicator for un- usual activity changes in a distributed multi-agent system. Kinoshita defines two values, the activity factor at a given time and the variance of fluctuation of the activity factor. The activity factor is based on the classification of each agent as either active or inactive. Let N denote the total number of agents in the multi-agent system and let nt be the number of active agents at a given time t. The activity factor zt is defined as

clearly visible but are not as outstanding as in the previous simulations. The other peaks are a result of the random traffic. This shows that the measure is still applicable in such an environment although its perfor- mance to identify major events is not as good as in situations with less noise.

