(SSD), impacting performance. As of October 2020, RPI4 did not natively support booting from USB 3.0 or a faster disk like an SSD. Some known hacks could force the RPI to operate the OS from an SSD [18]. The official MoodleBox website estimates a maximum number of users to be between 20 and 30 [19] when it runs on a 32-bit OS, Wi-Fi and from an SD Card.

In this work, we built a 3-tiered LAMP stack on a 64-bit version of Ubuntu while maintaining the same environment as MoodleBox and labelled it as RPI64Box for comparative purposes. MoodleBox and RPI64Box were run from SD card and SSD to measure performance differences. To our knowledge, this work is the first port of MoodleBox to a 64-bit Ubuntu version of Linux.

In order to evaluate the performance of the RPI4, four distinct tests were carried out, namely a device storage performance test, a compre- hensive performance test of the LAMP stack, an evaluation of the overall response time of generated pages and a monitoring of the server resource usages. All the tests are based on existing available scripts, as detailed in sections 3.1 to 3.4.

The disk I/O performance in terms of writing and reading speed can be measured from the Unix/Linux shell using HDParm, DD, FIO and IOZone commands. Furthermore, James Chambers came up with a benchmark script [18] which provides a unique score after executing the previous commands to indicate the performance of the storage media under test. The advantage of the benchmark is that it already has the vast majority of disk makes that were rated against the script, and their scores are listed online. This list makes the selection of storage media for an RPI4 easier, especially when planning ahead for performance improvements.

network latency. One simple benchmarking approach would be to measure the execution time of these specific server areas. For example, the processor speed could be measured by counting the time it takes for a 10 million loop to complete. The database performance could be eval- uated by measuring the time to execute a specific Structured Query Language (SQL) operation. Moodle has a plugin called the System benchmark tool [29] which carries a similar performance check on various components of the 3-tier architecture. Although this method uses a simplistic approach to measure server performance, the System benchmark is ideal because of the different elements tested. The values are not definite measures representing the performance of a server but rather an indicative overview of performance in various areas. The

issued values close to 100%, indicating device saturation. It is worth noting that the percentage of disk utilisation from iostats tries to calculate the average close to the nearest second. At times minor delays in computing provide results of more or less than 1 s, leading to a percentage higher than 100%, which can be safely rounded to 100% [33,34].

represents only test environments, the size of courses, and the number of concurrent users that an RPI4 can withstand as per the Apdex rating. The RPI4 can support between 50 and 100 users for medium-sized courses with CPU overclocking. However, the quality of the Apdex rating will be poor.

insight into the use of faster disks through USB 3.0 Bus in the overall performance of the web server and a simple way to evaluate and compare storage devices. (4) The experiments pushing the RPI4 hard- ware to its limits and CPU overclocking confirmed that the scarce resource is the CPU itself. This information provides a significant hint for future works related to performance improvement of 3-tiers for IoT Devices like RPI4; for example, optimising CPU intensive operations can further improve throughput and response times. (5) The whole web server environment is available as a disk image that can be transferred to a disk and booted from an RPI or similar IoT devices. The Disk image can be used as a benchmark to evaluate how other RPI alternatives like the RockPi 4 [36], Orange Pi 4 [37] and upcoming versions of RPI devices perform as a 3-tiered web server compared to the RPI4.

