Land is the most valuable resource in most countries. Accesses to land, security of tenure and land management have significant implications for development [1]. In Latvia, totally 98% of land is situated in the countryside. According to the State Land Service (SLS) information, woodland comprised 46.3% and UAA - 37.3% of the total area in Latvia at the beginning of 2012 [2]. Therefore, a more efficient use of every

The EU development becomes topically dependent on renewable energy resources (RER). The output of RER has increased over the recent years. In the future, agriculture as a supplier of biomass for RER producers will play a very important role [5]. In the EU, biogas production from agricultural plants reached 36% in 2007 [6]. There were approximately 4000 biogas facilities in Germany in 2008 [7], about 3% of the agricultural land area is used for bioenergy production (70 000 ha) in Sweden [8], and political interest in biogas has also increased in Denmark, where they forecast a growing potential of biogas energy from agricultural biomass before 2020 [9].

Starting from the autumn of 2010, the Rural Support Service (RSS) surveys the utilised agricultural area in Latvia and provides information to local governments on the calculation of the additional immovable property tax rate (1.5%). The related Cabinet regulations set the criteria for stating that the land is not maintained in a good agricultural and environmental condition [19].

output of silage - 26 million tons a year, which would enable the production of 4.8 million m3 of biogas or 1200 MW of electricity. To achieve it, it is necessary to construct 2400 new facilities with a capacity of 500 kW each. This would promote both the development of respective rural territories, and the creation of new jobs and the increase of tax revenues to governmental and municipal budgets; decrease of the incurred ecological effects in the sphere of environmental protection by reducing the emissions of greenhouse gases; diversification of farmers income sources [6]; reduction of the necessary resources for purchasing fertilisers; improvement of crop rotation by avoiding monoculture [7]; use of thermal energy etc.

In a long-term, by increasing the agricultural productivity and efficiency in Latvia at least to the EU-12 level, it is possible both to double the output of food and to increase the output of electricity produced from biomass of agricultural origin 22 times compared with the present level. Approximately 2400 new biogas facilities are necessary to achieve this result. Hence, there is a potential and a possibility in Latvia to develop not only food production, but also renewable energy resources.

