The mass nutritional elements in soil mainly include carbon (C), ni- trogen (N), phosphorus (P), potassium (K), silicon (Si), sulfur (S), cal- cium (Ca), magnesium (Mg), and so on. To a large extent, those elements can reflect the soil fertility, and they are also considered as the basic elements for guaranteeing the plants growth and maintaining normal physiological activities (de Carvalho et al., 2014).

Glumac et al. (2010) analyzed 6 dried and pelletized soil samples containing from 0.5% to 3% of organic C (OC) by LIBS. A strategy based on the optimized combination of high dispersion and appropriate time gating parameters was developed to minimize the interference of atomic and ionic Fe I and Fe II lines adjacent to the C I line at

Erler et al. (2020) used a commercially available handheld LIBS spec- trometer for a spatially resolve determination of nutrients and various soil parameters in two agricultural fields. Most measurements were conducted in the laboratory. Three different multivariate regression methods (PLSR, Lasso, GPR) were characterized and compared for mea- suring soil parameters. Lasso and GPR yielded better regression results than PLSR. Several nutrients, such as Ca, Mg, K and Fe, could be deter- mined with good accuracy. Other nutrients, such as Mn and P, could only be determined qualitatively with the handheld instrument.

He et al. (2018) compared the detection ability of single-pulse (SP) and collinear double-pulse (DP) laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy (LIBS) for soil nutrient elements. 63 soil samples were collected for SP and collinear DP signal acquisition, respectively. Macro-nutrients (K, Ca, Mg) and micro-nutrients (Fe, Mn, Na) were analyzed. The results in- dicated that the DP-LIBS technique coupled with PLSR could be an accu- rate and reliable method in the quantitative determination of soil nutrient elements.

Nicolodelli et al. (2014) developed a method for separating the Al interference from the C emission line in LIBS measurements. 43 sam- ples from two typical forest Brazilian soils rich in Al were collected and analyzed using a low-resolution LIBS apparatus to measure the intensities of C lines. As a result, two C lines at 193.03 and

Martin et al. (2010) discussed that how LIBS spectra collected on dif- ferent types of soil varied according to laser wavelength (532 and 1064 nm) and excitation energy (45, 90, and 135 mJ), and then multi- variate approaches were used to explore whether calibration models could be developed for LIBS that were independent of the soil chemical and physical properties. Finally, a set of operational parameters and sta- tistical analysis techniques were located, which would produce a robust calibration model or models for predicting the C concentration in soils by LIBS.

Additionally, Martin et al. (2013) used LIBS combined with multivar- iate analysis to differentiate between the total carbon (C), inorganic C, and organic C in a set of 58 different soils from 5 soil orders. The results were compared to the laboratory standard technique (e.g. combustion on a LECO-CN analyzer) to determine the true values for total C, inor- ganic C, and organic C concentrations.

Knadel et al. (2017) used LIBS technology to determine the content of organic carbon, clay, silt and sand in Danish agricultural soil, and compared it with vis NIRS method. The results showed that LIBS model was similar to vis NIRS model in all soil properties, but the differ- ence was not significant (p N 0.05), except for the prediction ability of sand (p = 0.0305). Therefore, using LIBS can get lower prediction error of soil properties.

Izaurralde et al. (2013) employed three advanced technologies to measure soil carbon (C) density and the results compared against those obtained by the dry combustion (DC) method. The advanced methods are Laser Induced Breakdown Spectroscopy (LIBS), Diffuse Re- flectance Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy (DRIFTS), and Inelas- tic Neutron Scattering (INS).

Glumac et al. (2010) examined the 247.8 nm line of atomic C (C I) in detail to assess the effect of potential elemental interferences. A combi- nation of high dispersion and appropriate time gating of the LIBS signal was found to generate very high signal/noise ratio spectra using low laser powers and therefore, allowed accurate determination of the C content down to the sub-percent level in the presence of Fe interfer- ences. A strong correlation of the LIBS C signal with measurements made by the thermal oxidation, dry combustion method was observed. The total nitrogen (TN) and total phosphorus (TP) in soil were deter- mined by Laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy (LIBS) technique (Lu et al., 2013). The relationship between line intensity of analyte element and its concentration was established and conducted to obtain calibra- tion model. Then, the strong linear correlations (0.981 for N and 0.868

Ding et al. (2019) proposed LIBS technique combined with interval partial least squares (iPLS) to determine Cu, Zn, Cr and Ni in oily soil samples. The full spectrum was divided into 10, 20, 30, 40, 50, 60, 70, 80, and 90 subintervals for iPLS model optimization. Compared to the PLS model using the full spectrum, the iPLS model with the 30th

subinterval from the 80-interval case as the input variable has higher R2 and lower RMSE for Cu, Zn, Cr, and Ni. The R2 improved from 0.96 to 0.99, and the RMSE reduced from 0.03 to 0.01. The calculation speed increased about 5 times.

Zhao et al. (2019) used the method of combining principal compo- nent analysis and deep learning to classify the LIBS data of soil samples with different levels of lead added to two to four weeks of tobacco plant- ing. The robustness of the method was verified through a comparison with the results of a support vector machine and partial least squares discriminant analysis. A confusion matrix of the different algorithms showed that the DBN achieved satisfactory classification performance on all samples of contaminated soil.

Yuan et al. (2016) measured the elemental concentration of Cr contained in soil with laser induced breakdown spectroscopy (LIBS). The laser wavelength was 1064 nm, pulse width is 8 ns, repetition fre- quency was 10 Hz, and the analysis line of LIRS was 4 nm. The results showed that the relative standard deviation (RSD) of the detected con- tent of Cr was 12.1% at the delay time of 4.78 us and the soil sample sur- face 1 mm behind lens focal point. The limit of detection (LOD) of LIBS is

Ferreira et al. (2008) used artificial neural network (ANN) as calibra- tion strategy for LIBS, aiming Cu determination in soil samples. Two strategies of simple linear regression (SLR) and wrapper approach were employed to select a set of wavelengths for ANN learning.

Motto-Ros et al. (2008) presented an artificial neural network (ANN)-based advanced analytical method for automated identification of elements and measurements of seven elements (Fe, Mg, Si, Mn, Al, Ca, and Ti) concentrations in rocks and soils, as well as its experimental validation. Results demonstrated that the ANN method worked success- fully for all major elements of the tested natural rock and soil samples. Dell'Aglio et al. (2011) analyzed soil samples of various origins by LIBS using the calibration curve method. The total concentrations of Cr, Cu, Pb, V, and Zn were determined, and compared with those ob- tained by ICP-OES. Furthermore, an anthropogenic index (AI) was eval- uated for Cr (AICr) and Zn (AIZn), and proposed as a simple and fast

Nicolodellia et al. (2015) have used dual-pulse excitation setup in order to improve LIBS's sensitivity. The key parameters as excitation wavelength, delay time and inter pulse, that influence the double pulse (DP) LIBS technique in the collinear beam geometry were opti- mized when applied to the analysis at atmospheric air pressure of soil samples of different origin and texture from extreme regions of Brazil. The collinear DP LIBS system improved the analytical performances of the technique by enhancing the intensity of emission lines of some ele- ments up to about 5 times, when compared with conventional SP-LIBS, and reduced the continuum emission.

Chatterjee et al. (2019) collected a total of 20 soil samples both from near the thermal discharges as well as away from the thermal manifes- tations in the Manuguru geothermal area. LIBS spectra were recorded for all the collected soil samples and principal component analysis (PCA) was applied to easily identify the emission lines majorly respon- sible for variety classification of the soil samples.

Akhtar et al. (2018) has used a combination of magnetic field and LIBS to improve the detection limit of heavy elements in different Soil samples. The emission intensity enhancement factor up to about 8 has been observed and the limit of detection (LOD) of Cr has been improved from 18.2 mg/kg-7.7 mg/kg in the presence of magnetic field. A modi- fied PCA was developed which is based on the spectral truncation method to reduce the huge number of spectral data obtained from LIBS. The PCA bi-plot on the LIBS data reveals the presence of two differ- ent clusters.

Bousquet et al. (2007) used the LIBS (Nd: YAG laser delivering 10-ns pulses at 1064 nm, 20 mJ laser pulse, and 10 Hz repetition rate) tech- nique to conduct a quantitative analysis of chromium (Cr) in soil sam- ples and proposed a method for classifying soils by applying principal components analyses (PCA) to LIBS data. To reduce the dataset's dimen- sionality, relevant spectral lines related to major elements were selected.

Kim et al. (2014) used LIBS to determine Zn concentrations in vari- ous types of soil samples. For enhancing the performance of the LIBS analysis and minimizing the factors affecting LIBS results, the data pro- cessing methods of discarding and Kriging interpolation methods were combined. The discarding method decreased the precision of pulse-to- pulse variation and the interpolation methods improved the sample-

Fu et al. (2018) developed a new method for the determination of cadmium in soils using LIBS. The heavy metals were enriched by the cat- ion exchange resins. And then, the LIBS signal levels were further en- hanced by a sample container with spatial confinement. During this process, the soil only needs to be treated with water to achieve slurry status, rather than any complex pre-treatments. The detection limit for cadmium in soils is 0.132 mg/ kg by using this method.

Mukhono et al. (2013) employed the multivariate chemometric methods to deal with the LIBS spectra of soils and rocks samples from a geothermal field lying in a high background radiation area (HBRA). Multivariate calibration strategies (PLS and ANN) were developed and applied for prediction of the trace elements. Then, principal components analysis (PCA) and soft independent modeling of class analogy (SIMCA) were utilized to classify and identify the HBRA geothermal samples, HBRA non geothermal sources and NBRA geothermal samples.

As mentioned above, the soil in different types, sources and compo- sitions, a large number of exploratory studies have been achieved. Re- searchers should focus on developing the more novel techniques to obtain the more robust models and results. It can provide a theoretical guidance for detecting and controlling heavy metal pollution.

Besides these studies above, some researchers used LIBS technology to detect soil related materials (ore, soil on other planets, chemical, coal, and agricultural products, etc.). The fruitful results were achieved, which also revealed the powerful ability of LIBS technology in chemical analysis field.

Deng et al. (2020) used LIBS to test the coal quality. The PLS model was established based on the adaptive reweighted sampling (CARS) and the successive projections algorithm (SPA). The results show that LIBS combined with spa-pls technology has a good prospect in the de- tection of N and S content in coal.

Ma et al. (2020) adopted the technology of indirect laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy (ID-LIBS) to improve the detection sensitivity of Cl and S elements in water. The method detected Cl in water by indi- rectly detecting the excess silver (Ag) after the precipitation reaction of Ag and chloride,and detected S in water by detecting the excess barium (Ba) after the precipitation reaction of Ba and sulfate. The results showed that the technique of indirect LIBS can achieve the sensitive de- tection of Cl and S in water.

Li et al. (2020) proposed LIBScombined with laser-induced fluores- cence (LIF) technology to enhance the spectral intensity of uranium in ores and eliminate spectral interference. The study demonstrates that LIBS-LIF has excellent potential in the exploration of uranium resources. Judge et al. (2013) used LIBS to analyse depleted uranium (U) and thorium (Th) oxide powders and uranium ore sample as both pressed pellets and powders. The acquired results proved that LIBS as a potential rapid in situ analysis technique can be widely used in nuclear

Schroder et al. (2013) used LIBS technology and the multivariate analysis methods to detect and identify the eight different salts (CaCl2, CaSO4, KCl, K2SO4, MgCl2, MgSO4, NaCl, Na2SO4), pure and frozen salt so- lutions under Mars soil. PCA, SIMCA and PLS-DA models were built, tested and optimized for both, the pure salts and the frozen salt solu- tions. Gottfried et al. (2009) employed both single- and double-pulse LIBS technology combined with PCA and PLS-DA algorithm to distin- guish the natural carbonate, fluorite and silicate geological materials.

Liu et al. (2018) evaluated quantitatively by LIBS the elemental nu- trients content and the level of Cu contamination in 270 samples of three kinds of rice. The contents of the nutrient elements C, K and Mg in the various kinds of rice as resulting from PCA analysis of LIBS data showed the feasibility of LIBS for classifying rice types and evaluating their quality.

Besides above, LIBS could be employed to conduct an early diagnosis of plant diseases, especially for citrus, soybean and tobacco. Sankaran et al. (2015) applied LIBS to citrus leaves for analysis of various anoma- lies, including diseases, such as the Huanglongbing (HLB) bacterial de- structive disease and citrus cancer, and nutrient deficiencies from Fe, Mn, Mg, and Zn. First, pre-processing methods including baseline cor- rection, WT multivariate de-noising and normalization were employed to deal with the LIBS spectra. And then, the spectral features were ex- tracted by PCA and quadratic discriminant analysis (QDA) and SVM were used to distinguish the healthy and infected samples. As a result, a high average classification accuracy (97.5%) was obtained.

Ponce et al. (2018) employed LIBS combined with PCA to classify 6 citrus varieties (Macrophylla, Valencia orange, Sugar Belle, Ray Ruby grapefruit, Meyer lemon and honey Murcott). Here, a multi-pulse laser setup coupled with a microscope was employed to collect the LIBS spec- tra of the plant phloem. And those LIBS spectra revealed the emission lines of the elements Ca, Na, N, H and Fe and the molecules CN and C2. The results of PCA on LIBS data allowed to discriminate healthy from HLB-infected samples with a high level of accuracy (about 90%). The re- search indicated that LIBS combined with chemometric methods was considered to be a rapid, low-cost and efficient tool to discriminate be- tween healthy and HLB-infected citrus plants.

