lization and storage (CCUS) and other fields. For microseismic moni- toring technology, denoising is an important part of its data processing technology (Dai et al., 2019). Because the amplitude of the microseis- mic (small magnitude) signals is always much weaker than that of seismic signals, and the measured data is always polluted by noise, the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) is much lower than that of active source seismic events. It is difficult to directly pick up arrive time and locate events from the original observation data.

In order to suppress noise and improve the accuracy of arrival time picking and localization, many efforts have been made to develop many effective denoising methods. Traditional microseismic noise sup- pression methods are proposed based on domain transform algorithms and some thresholding methods, including wavelet transform (Cao and Chen, 2005; Gaci, 2014; Liu et al., 2016; Mousavi et al., 2016; Mousavi and Langston, 2017), continuous wavelet transform (CWT) (Mousavi and Langston, 2016b,a), short time Fourier transform (STFT) (Allen and Rabiner, 1977), S-transform (Tselentis et al., 2012), radon transform (Sabbione et al., 2013, 2015; Zhang et al., 2015), wavelet packet

0.3 ms, a total of 5000 sampling points, and intercepting 2000 sampling points with signals as the length of the input signal. Data enhancement was carried out by adding Gaussian noise with different signal-to-noise ratios, wind noise from field acquisition, construction noise, traffic noise and mixed noise to the signals respectively. As the real noisy signals do not exactly satisfy the characteristics of Gaussian distribution and are more relevant to the situation in the field, the generalization ability of the network can be improved. A total of 300,000 training samples were constructed, with 20% of the samples used as a validation

of EEMD filtering is about 0.83, and the average mean square error is about 0.09; The average similarity coefficient of wavelet threshold transform filtering is about 0.86, and the average mean square error is about 0.08. Since the average similarity coefficient of the proposed

We propose a microseismic signal processing method based on CBDNet neural network which is mainly for denoising of the surface microseismic monitoring. Different from other common deep learning methods, the proposed method simultaneously learns the Gaussian random noise, wind noise, construction noise, traffic noise and mixed noise through the residual learning strategy, which can significantly improve the SNR, and has better universality and signal authenticity. When encountering different types and different intensities of ambient noise in field work, even if the signal and noise are superposed, the proposed method can still suppress certain noise and extract the signal, and the denoising performance will be different when facing different types of noise.

