Supervised machine learning algorithms have been widely used in seismic exploration processing, but the lack of labeled examples complicates its application. Therefore, we propose a seismic labeled data expansion method based on deep variational Autoencoders (VAE), which are made of neural networks and contains two parts- Encoder and Decoder. Lack of training samples leads to overfitting of the network. We training the VAE with whole seismic data, which is a data-driven process and greatly alleviates the risk of overfitting. The Encoder captures the ability to map the seismic waveform Y to latent deep features z, and the Decoder captures the ability

Y from latent deep features z. Later, we put the labeled seismic data into Encoders and get the latent deep features. We can easily use gaussian mixture model to fit the deep feature distribution of each class labeled data. We resample a mass of expansion deep features z* according to the Gaussian mixture model, and put the expansion deep features into the decoder to generate expansion seismic data. The experiments in synthetic and real data show that our method alleviates the problem of lacking labeled seismic data for supervised seismic facies analysis.

The VAE captures the deep feature distribution of seismic data when it converges. We put the labeled samples into the decoder, and obtain the deep feature distribution of each class. It is easy to fit the deep feature distribution with the gaussian mixture model (GMM) for each class. It should be noted that each class of data following one gaussian mixture

and alleviates the problem of over-fitting. We use this method for syn- thetic and real data and the results demonstrate that the generated expansion labeled data enhance the seismic waveform classification performance. In the synthetic data experiment, the classification accu- racy is improved by 20 % with the proposed method when SNR is 3.

features z need to follow the prior gaussian distribution. Therefore, the loss function of the VAE includes two parts, one is the reconstruction error, which is measured by the Euclidean distance. Another part of the loss function is about the feature z, and the KL divergence be used to measure the differences between z and prior gaussian distributions. Hence the VAE loss function is defined as follows:

We proposed a novel data-driven, semi-supervised label expansion method. We use whole survey seismic data as the training data for VAE, which provides enough training data and alleviates the risk of over- fitting. The encoder of VAE projects seismic data into deep features, and the decoder of VAE generate seismic data from the deep features. We

The manuscript has not been published before and is not being considered for publication elsewhere. All authors have contributed to the creation of this manuscript for important intellectual content and read and approved the final manuscript. We declare there is no conflict of interest.

