Supervised domain adaptation methods can exploit labeled samples from both source and target domain. Thereby, labeled samples in the target domain are substantially less numerous than labeled samples available in the source domain (otherwise there would be no need to render the estimation problem as a domain adaption problem, i.e., solely using a supervised learning algorithm in the target domain would be appropriate). In contrast, unsupervised domain adaptation methods assume that two unlabeled domains need to be matched. If there is prior knowledge available in the source domain but not in the target domain, and if the joint distributions of source and target domain are different, but related enough to ensure that the source domain information can be of help for solving the prediction problem in the target domain, we can regard the situation as a semi-supervised domain adaptation problem [5].

source-target domain combinations by computing a variety of similarity metrics, ensemble pruning for identifying a set of robust similarity metrics (sec. 2.2), implementation of a voting strategy to select a favorable source-target domain combination and learning a regression model thereof (sec. 2.3).

We aimed to consider metrics that feature a low level of sensitivity regarding, e.g., outliers, the scale of measurement, or data dimension- ality [21]. Besides evaluating the suitability of a single metric to select a proper source-target domain combination, we also follow the idea to

Model selection was carried out using the root-mean-square error (RMSE). In the context of the ensemble pruning strategy, we set the number of metrics to be selected to four to establish a tradeoff between the computational burden and enabling an extensive description of a source-target domain combination. Beyond, we also created an ensemble that includes all metrics and ensembles based on the random selection of four metrics (20 random selections) for benchmarking our proposed ensemble scheme. Overall, we evaluate 11 selection mecha- nisms, whereby 8 correspond to the deployment of the considered similarity metrics, and 3 represent ensemble schemes. Results were also tested regarding statistical significance using a paired t-test with a sig-

First, it can be noted that the unadapted models, despite featuring the largest deviations in this setup, yield accuracy levels that indicate that the models did not fail when applied to a new domain. This can be attributed to the exhaustive set of spectral-spatial features which im- poses invariance in the models. However, when actually aligning source and target domains, a substantial decrease of MAE can be achieved. Compared to the domain adaptation strategy which solely foresees to align domains, our proposed additional mechanisms to select a proper source domain for an aligned target domain enable on average a further

increase of 4.7 and 4.9 percentage points (p.p.) regarding built-up density and height, respectively. Expectably, MAEs are by far the lowest when learning and applying a model within a domain. Thus, the difference in accuracy compared to the domain adaptation settings can be regarded as an error cost, that is related to the acquisition of training data for a target domain.

encourage further deployment for remote sensing data analysis. Given the modular nature of the method, we are interested in adapting the method for multiple image modalities, e.g., integrating SAR measure- ments with corresponding feature set. Further, we aim to integrate this domain adaptation approach, which is independent of the learning al- gorithm, in supervised multitask ensemble learning models [15,29].

