Rice (Oryza sativa L.) is among the most essential cereal crops on the planet, contributing significantly to global food security by providing food for more than half of the global population (Chauhan et al., 2017). Today, around one-third of the world population, while about 1.7 billion people in South Asia, including more than 50 million families, subsist entirely on rice (Manzanilla et al., 2011; Nayak et al., 2019). Rice may become extremely

A total of 40 soil samples were collected from different study sites using hand-held GPS and thermometer instruments in the month of November to December 2020 and from May to June 2021. Firstly, we identified the Tulaipanji rice field in the study area during a pre-field survey considering the local people's perceptions. To collect soil sam- ples, we selected 5 soil sampling sites from 8-g panchayats using a stratified random sampling method. The soil samples were collected at a 40 cm zig-zag depth from the surface. At each soil sample site, five soil samples, with an average distance of 20 m, of about 500 gm were collected and mixed for laboratory analysis. After collecting the soil

One of the simplest yet efficient machine learning ensemble ap- proaches is Bootstrap Aggregation (also known as bagging) (Prasad et al., 2006). Bootstrap Aggregation is a fundamental technique that may be used to decrease variance in algorithms that have a high number of it- erations (Breiman 1996). The goal of bagging is to decrease variance while retaining the bias of a decision tree and avoiding over fitting (Shahabi et al., 2020). The Bagging Tree generates several sets of input

generate models. The average of all forecasts from these trees is then used to create the final conclusion, which is more resilient. Using several replicas of the trained data subset improves the precision of a single tree (Talukdar and Pal, 2019).

People who live in alkaline soils are more likely to have zinc shortages because of the inverse pH of the soil available. Some other things that affect soil fertility are how much sulphur there is in it. Crops that grow quickly can take in a lot of sulphur. Potassium treatments to rice field soils keep the redox potential of the soil from dropping. They also lower

acting as a nutrient supply and the PGRs assisting with physiological injury repair. Increased specificity of interactions between different management strategies and the environment (soil types, intensity of water logging, etc.) as well as between management practises. In general, all kharif crops in India are cultivated in rainfed circumstances with little irrigation. To sustain Tulaipanji farming, irrigation systems need be installed in the Study area.

Sri Gopal Ch. Ghosh, WBAS (ADMIN.), Assistant Director of Agri- culture, Kaliyaganj Block, Uttar Dinajpur, deserves our deepest gratitude for skilfully guiding us through the whole study process, giving encour- aging suggestions, bringing new aspects to our work, and carefully covering the entire section and making minute adjustments. Addition- ally, the authors want to express their appreciation to the soil Testing Laboratory in Raiganj, Uttar Dinajpur for conducting soil sample testing. We also thank Retd. Professor Dr. Gopal Chandra Debnath (Visva Bhar- ati) and Former Professor Dr. Narayan Chandra Ghosh (Rabindra Bharati University) for their encouragement.

