Semi-supervised clustering is a machine learning technique that was introduced to boost clustering performance when labeled data is available. Indeed, some labeled data are usually available in real use cases, and can be used to initialize the clustering process to guide it and to make it more efficient. Fuzzy ART is a clustering technique that is proved to be efficient in several real cases, but as an unsupervised algorithm, it cannot use available labeled data. This paper introduces a semi-supervised variant of the FuzzyART clustering algorithm (SSFuzzyART). The proposed solution uses the available labeled data to initialize clusters centers. In another hand, to deeply evaluate the characteristics of the proposed algorithm, a clustered binary data generation algorithm with controlled partitioning is also introduced in this paper. Indeed, the controlled generated clusters allows studying the characteristics of the proposed SSFuzzyART. Furthermore, a set of experiments is carried out on some available benchmarks. SSFuzzyART demonstrated better clustering prediction results than its classic counterpart.

Clustering techniques are useful to group similar unlabeled data instances together. It is used to explore unlabeled datasets and to discover similarity relationships between its instances. In some real cases, it is possible to have access to labeled data instances. These instances are, usually, not enough to learn a classifier. In fact, the available labels could represent a subset of possible labels, on only a tiny fraction of the dataset, preventing the training of a learner. However, usual clustering algorithms are not designed to consider this information about labels. In such cases, semi-supervised techniques can use the labeled instances to guide the clustering process.

Fuzzy ART is a clustering algorithm that demonstrated good per- formance in many real cases [2,4,5]. However, in the case where some labeled data instances are available, Fuzzy ART cannot con- sider this information to improve the clustering quality. This paper presents a simple and efficient solution to initialize Fuzzy ART with available labeled data instances. Indeed, the proposed approach is a semi-supervised Fuzzy ART (SSFuzzyART) that considers available labeled data instances to initialize clusters.

In this article, an algorithm for generating binary data grouped by clusters of controlled variances is introduced. This algorithm allows the generation of binary data sets having characteristics known and mastered beforehand. These datasets are used to test and validate the effectiveness of binary data partitioning solutions. Being able to control the characteristics of the data generated also makes it possible to study the applicability of these methods and their weaknesses. These char- acteristics are also useful for choosing a machine learning technique. Indeed, the choice will be guided by the characteristics of the data and tests in circumstances similar to real cases. In addition, a study comparing dimension reduction algorithms was carried out to show the usefulness of the generated data in the choice of a dimension reduction algorithm, under the angle of the conservation of the characteristics of the clusters in space.

The contributions of this paper are the following: (1) the proposition of a semi-supervised version of the Fuzzy ART, SSFuzzyART, clustering algorithm. SSFuzzyART uses a set of available labeled instances to initialize the clusters centers. Also, a set of experiments is made to eval- uate the proposed algorithm and to study its strength and weakness.

This paper is organized as follows: Section 2 presents an overview of the current state of the art on the semi-supervised clustering, Fuzzy ART and clustering data generation. Section 3 details the classic Fuzzy ART algorithm and the proposed SSFuzzyART. Section 4 presents the clustered binary data generation algorithm, and evaluates the gener- ated clusters through a set of experiments. Section 5 introduces the considered evaluation measures, evaluates the characteristics of SS- FuzzyART using the generated data, compares SSFuzzyART clustering to FuzzyART clustering and discusses the experiment results. Finally, Section 6 concludes the paper.

Semi-supervised clustering combines elements of both semi-super vised learning and clustering analysis. By incorporating class labels, semi-supervised clustering directs the clustering procedure, leading to improve performance. Over the past years, many remarkable initiatives have surfaced, focusing on both exploration and practical implementa- tion in various fields. [10].

Fuzzy Adaptive Resonance Theory algorithm is a classic online clustering algorithm that is known to be sensitive to data order. To remedy this issue, several research papers introduced solutions for this problem. Elnabarawy et al. [15] used evolutionary computation to improve Fuzzy ART. Liew et al. [4] used a genetic algorithm for the same purpose.

According to [18,19] that present detailed surveys about the semi- supervised clustering, most available semi-supervised clustering solu- tions consider the k-means clustering approach. However, to the best of our knowledge, there is no existing work that focus on a semi- supervised FuzzyART clustering approach. Indeed, Fuzzy ART is a specific clustering algorithm that showed its performance to detect clusters with different sizes and to overcome the case of imbalanced data. Then, a semi-supervised FuzzyART inherit from Fuzzy ART its characteristics and improves its results using labeled data.

Data is ubiquitous and is often a resource in various situations. However, generating such a value depends on higher quality data. In addition, in situations involving sensitive confidential data such as business data or background, it is imperative to maintain data confi- dentiality by adhering to quality standards. The demand for top-notch data and privacy-friendly practices has become increasingly evident in recent years, as companies and researchers use it more extensively.

In real world problems, some labeled data instances may be avail- able. Fuzzy ART algorithm is not able to consider this available data in its clustering process. To resolve this problem and make Fuzzy ART output more efficient in such cases, this paper introduces the SSFuzzyART algorithm.

The choice of the scenario depends on the data to be clustered and the problem to be solved. For example, if there is some doubt about the labeled instances, it could be useful to apply the second scenario and to keep SSFuzzyART cluster these instances again. In cases where the quality of labeled instances is high, then it is recommended to consider the first or the third scenario.

In this paper, the second scenario is considered. Then, labels are no longer considered in the clustering process and the instances used for initialization are clustered with the rest of the data regardless of their initial labels. This choice allows studying the ability of SSFuzzyART to correctly put the labeled instances in their clusters.

The binary data generation algorithm introduced in the 4.1 section is evaluated in this section. Indeed, in order to use these artificially generated data with confidence, it is important to control the quality of their generation. This quality control is defined through the control of the distance between the vectors in the same cluster (intra-cluster distance), and the distance between clusters (inter-cluster distance).

from the python library scikit learn. The generated samples follow the normal distribution. Then, the idea is to generate a set of real-valued random clusters. Next, a threshold is used to transform these real-values to binary values. Then, if a given real value is lower than the threshold,

data sets generated with the Baseline data generation algorithm. In this experiment, we generated one real valued data set as explained above, and we used two different binarization threshold values, 0.1 and 0.9 respectively. The distance matrix consists of calculating the distance

Several experiments are made to evaluate the proposed SSFuzz- yART. All experiments presented in this paper are implemented with Python3. Then a set of evaluation measures is introduced in Section 5.1. A first set of experiments evaluates the characteristics of SSFuzzyART (Section 5.2. Finally, an evaluation of SSFuzzyART and a compari- son with FuzzyART using three available benchmarks is presented in Section 5.3.

As the binary vector dataset is simulated, the cluster in which each point belong is known. This allows for assessing the ability of SSFuzzyART to effectively cluster binary vectors. The quality of the SSFuzzyART clustering is assessed using the Adjusted Rand Index, which compares the SSFuzzyART clustering with the known vector assignment from the generation process.

In the future work, it will be interesting to test SSFuzzyART in a real world problem and to study its impact on real data. A second perspective is to compare the three possible scenarios introduced in Section 3.2, and to study their impact on real world problems. A Third perspective of this work could be to find a solution to influence the Fuzzy ART clustering process with available labeled data.

