The static aeroelastic problem determines flight load, lift loading, drag, efficiency of control, trimming of the aircraft, static stability and maneuvering quality on steady flight conditions. It also has an influence on modern aircraft with high performance which cannot be neglected on the aspects of performance, static and dynamic stability, etc. At the same time, in the preliminary and detailed design phase of aircraft, a more precise and highly efficient analysis method is demanded, as the design cycle of modern aircraft is shorter.

A static aeroelastic analysis method based on surface element and leaded in CFD pressure distribution, which is applied to the early and detailed design stage of aircraft, is recommended in this study. Derived from external nonlinear steady aerodynamic pressure distribution data, correction factor is used to make amendments to aerodynamic influence coefficient matrix and steady aerodynamic pressure distribution of high-order panel method based on three-dimensional surface element. The static aeroelastic response analysis result is accurate and high efficiency because of combining with modal method to make an elastic revision.

The result data in this study is non-dimensioned on basis of following parameters. They are shearing force (mg), bending moment (mgl), twisting moment (mgc) and wing tip vertical displacement(l). m represents wing mass, g is gravity acceleration, l is reference half-wingspan, c is reference chord.

Above contrast results show that the wing's upper and lower surface aerodynamic force is well revised in this method. The revised aerodynamic pressure and its distribution trend are well matched with that of the origin CFDs'. It is confirmed that this revise method gets good accuracy and validity.

From the comparison of shearing force and bending moment distribution along wingspan shown above, it is clear that in rigid case, the difference about aerodynamic force numerical value and variation trend between high-order panel method and high/low-order panel method which is revised by CFD data are all very small. Then after revised in elastic further, the difference is smaller. From the comparison of the curve of torsion moment along wingspan, the difference between high-order panel method and high/low-order panel method which is revised by CFD data in the numerical value and trend in rigid and flexible cases are small. But in torsion moment distribution, the result of high-order panel method is higher than high/low- order panel method revised by CFD data. The main reason is after the CFD data revision, pressure center in chordwise move back from leading edge.

