Agriculture is a complex system science and the knowledge of it is consisting of much concepts and relationships. In order to find out the important domain knowledge from complex agriculture knowledge system, we need to concept modelling effectively, so as to better supporting distributed information retrieval, analogy inference and data mining based on knowledge system. As a kind of classical knowledge theory of the ontology, it can be used to solve the knowledge presentation problem.

Define agricultural ontology as "the science of agricultural have a set of identity, the concept of system clear and formal specification". Agricultural ontology mainly by the agricultural knowledge of the concept, the relationship between the concept and the computer can identify the formalization description language composition. Building agricultural ontology goal is to form for agricultural information organization structure of the common understanding, understanding and analysis of the agricultural domain knowledge, in order to further the establishment agriculture semantic network laid the foundation. Therefore, agricultural ontology is about computer language of agriculture concept of knowledge representation, carrying on the agricultural knowledge organization, developing agriculture knowledge service of scientific methodology. Define the agricultural Ontology as follows [9]:

Attribute of AO is used to describe the concept of agriculture ontology; it has a function of limiting concept and examples. Attribute of AO can be summarized from different knowledge as follows: first of all, the crop belong to plant, it inherits related properties of plant, such as genetic property class, shape and structure property class, distribution property class and so on; besides, the crop have their own property class, for example, the growth environment property class including weather and other growing conditions. Each properties class including several properties, so they can form a full property description of the crop in a sense. In order to manage ontology expediently and reflect the hierarchy relationship among the properties, we describe the property and relationship as an ontology system and called it the crop property ontology. The

After building the agriculture ontology and the agriculture knowledge-base, there is a very important work we need to do, that is checking and reasoning on the knowledge. But it will be fantastic based on the existing ontology. So we should construct a consistency of axiom base.

If the knowledge representation for agricultural production wants to achieve the service of the integration knowledge level, with no ambiguous existing and same information in the same field and the diffidence application system, the help of ontology is necessary. The organization Agriculture Ontology (AO) manages the system resources and makes foundation for information exchanging. [10] As the knowledge resources of agricultural classification and description of the conceptual system, AO is defined as the five elements of ontology approach{c, ac, r, ar, h}, and c stands for a set of concept; ac stands for a set of each attributes of concept; r stands for relationship set; ar stands for a set of each attributes of relationship; h stands for Concept hierarchy. Take tomato pest control ontology for example:

