gorithms include BREED [19], Flux [20,21], BROOD [22] and etc. There is no doubt that these approaches have been useful for mining pharma- cologically relevant regions through analyzing the crucial and privileged substructures (known as fragments) from known bioactive compounds [23]. Nonetheless, the generated compounds are usually confined to a small chemical space by attaching various chemical moieties or side chains to a limited number of compound scaffolds. Beside, they largely rely on exhaustive search or stochastic search algorithms [11,24,25]. Thus, new fragment-based methods with the capacity to rapidly design large amount of compounds with high structural novelty and target spe- cific characteristics are needed.

tool named DeLinker to connect two fragments in a three-dimensional manner [38]. Our group constructed a transformer model named Syn- taLinker [39] to link terminal fragment pairs extracted from ChEMBL database [40]. Several recent reports showed that deep generative mod- els can even been tailored to specific targets upon transfer learning [41,42] with focused subsets of bioactive compounds [28,43]. Follow- ing this idea, we introduced a SyntaLinker-based workflow, namely SyntaLinker-Hybrid, for target specific molecular generation by carrying out transfer learning and fragment hybridization.

SyntaLinker is a deep generative model that can generate a linker fragment to assemble two terminal fragments into a molecule. The model is built on a transformer architecture with multiple encoder- decoder stacks. Each stack is further composed by a multi-head self- attention sub-layer and a position-wise feedforward network (FFN) sub- layer. To prepare model training, each compound in the training set is

1OSV and 4BKX, respectively. In the former three structures, highly ac- tive compounds are co-crystallized. For HDAC1, the crystal structure is in complex with its substrate peptide as a ligand at the active site. At the beginning, the protein structures were prepared with the Protein Prepa-

were generated by the LigPrep module, in which all tautomers and iso- mers were enumerated. The Epik algorithm [58] was employed to de- termine the ionized states at pH 7.0. The docking site was defined by a box centered on the crystal ligand using the Receptor Grid Generation module. Then, docking at the Glide-SP precision was carried out with

Chemical space can be characterized by a variety of descriptors, such as structural and physicochemical properties. In this study, the MACCS fingerprint [48] was used as the structural descriptor to represent chem- ical space. It is formed by a 166-dimensional binary vector, and each dimension corresponds to a predefined seed structure. Then, principle component analysis (PCA) was performed on the molecular fingerprint

10 docking poses saved for each compound, and GlideScore was used as the scoring function. The ROCS method [59] in the OpenEye soft- ware (version 2020) was applied to measure shape similarity between different binding poses. Kernel density estimation (KDE) [60] analysis was implemented to calculate the statistical probability distribution of docking scores and shape similarity.

amount of fragment pairs through exhaustive enumeration. The number of 1% fragment pairs is as high as tens of thousands. Considering com- putational cost, we randomly selected 10,000 fragment pairs for model sampling, and ten molecules were generated for each pair. In such a situ- ation, the percentage of valid molecules among the generated molecules is comparable to that obtained by previous model evaluation, in which terminal fragments in a pair came from the same compound. The va- lidity for FXR even increases although its percentage is still lower than other targets. Interestingly, the uniqueness values are improved for all targets, which is probably attributed to the fact that most hybrid frag- ment pairs did not exist in the training set of transfer learning models. In particular, most targets have over 40% unique valid molecules contain- ing the input terminal fragments (we named them matched molecules).

Sun J, Jeliazkova N, Chupakin V, Golib-Dzib JF, Engkvist O, Carlsson L, Wegner J, Ceulemans H, Georgiev I, Jeliazkov V, Kochev N, Ashby TJ, Chen H. ExCAPE-DB: an integrated large scale dataset facilitating Big Data analysis in chemogenomics. J Cheminform 2017;9:17.

