Articles and papers have been since published concerning the nature of AI; by Minsky (1961), Newell (1963), Winston (1976), Davis et al. (2002) and many others. In the last decade, the petrophysics community has begun to make robust efforts to apply data-driven techniques to the challenges of petrophysical evaluation, including the application of AI. These come under the heading of machine learning techniques and ap- plications include carbonate characterisation (Bigoni 2019), log depth matching (Le 2019), enhanced formation evaluation (Posenato-Garcia 2020) and resistivity inversion (Li 2019).

developed due to a variety of technical challenges including the thin- bedded nature of the sediments and the presence of both mobile and immobile viscous residual oil. The oil is a highly viscous liquid, which if produced, could block production tubing due to the shallow depth of the reservoir and associated low pressures. To successfully produce dry gas, identification of both oil and gas zones was necessary to enable gas zones to be perforated, and oil zones to be excluded.

During the development drilling campaign, the reservoir was appraised by using a formation evaluation programme designed to address the presence of oil within the thinly bedded reservoir. In conjunction with core data and high-resolution electrical logs (incl. MSFL), nuclear magnetic resonance tools (NMR) were used to identify and avoid perforating zones with higher oil saturations. The main objective of running an NMR tool was to help identify intervals of high residual oil saturation. These intervals were then confirmed at the wellsite by selectively using the MDT-LFA (Modular Formation Dynamics Tester-Live Fluid Analyser) to confirm the composition of the fluids and check for mobility. Borehole gas chromatography data was also used to confirm these interpretations.

The NMR results were calibrated to high quality Dean and Stark oil, gas and water saturations and high-resolution wireline logs from the cored wells. AI techniques applied to the NMR curves enabled the pre- diction of fluid types in uncored sections and oil mobility was predicted throughout the reservoir section. Conventionally, Dean and Stark water saturation measurements are made in reservoir zones where oil-based drilling fluid has been used. The development wells were cored using a water-based mud system and the objective of performing Dean and Stark was to infer residual oil saturation (Sor) from the gravimetric mass bal- ance of the residual fluids present. Where possible the measurements were performed on a one per foot basis.

intervals. The perforation strategy on all development wells appears to have been successful, and no oil was produced during well testing. Gas sands that lie below the oil sands were also perforated successfully. Further information of this technique is described by Cuddy (2004).

Shear velocities are useful for enhanced seismic evaluation and to understand and control wellbore stability whilst drilling. AI was applied to a North Sea field consisting of 30 wells, where only 5 had recorded borehole shear velocities. The objective of this study was to populate all 30 wells with shear velocity data in order to improve the reservoir modelling and aid future well drilling.

with a randomly generated f and uses local search by mutating the co- efficients one at a time or flipping the operator between an addition and a multiplication. The mutation range is initially set very high in order that the individuals search all of the solution space. After a number of gen- erations, a pool of individuals is selected by linear ranking for mutating and cloning. Mating is achieved by coefficient merging. Some of the best individuals are cloned to add more individuals where solutions are most promising. After a number of generations, the mathematical operators are fixed and the percentage change in mutated coefficients is gradually reduced. The algorithm stops when the percentage improvement in evaluation reaches a predefined lower limit or a maximum number of iterations have been reached.

Knowledge of permeability is important in determining the well completion strategy and the resulting productivity. The problem with permeability prediction is derived from the fact that permeability is related more to the aperture of pore throats rather than pore size, which logging tools find difficult to measure. Determining permeability from well logs is further complicated by the problem of scale, well logs having a vertical resolution of typically 2 feet compared to the 2 inches of core plugs. AI has been used in several fields to obtain better estimates of permeability compared to conventional techniques.

1. The standard porosity logs; density (RHOB), neutron porosity (NPHI) and sonic compressional velocity (DT) are show in track 3. Track 7, on the far right, shows a computer processed interpretation for this well, where the shale volume is shown in green, sandstones in yellow, oil in red, the bulk volume of water in dark blue, coal beds in black and calcite stringers in cyan.

The left-hand histogram shows the core permeability distribution for this field. The colours represent each of the 15 wells. Notice that the permeability distribution is bimodal. The AI prediction is shown as the centre histogram and shows a similar bimodal distribution. The least squares linear regression, shown on the right, shows a good prediction of the average permeabilities but is poor at the upper and lower ends. The upper and lower permeability predictions are important, in the reservoir model, as these represent that barriers to flow and conduits to production respectively. Whereas least squares regressed towards the mean, AI preserved the dynamic range of the core permeability data. An incorrect permeability distribution will not upscale correctly in the 3D reservoir model (Cuddy 2013).

The recorded density log, shown in green, is reading the mud density around X80 feet. The predicted density log, shown in red, was derived by from all the other logs as if the density log was not run in this well. Although the LQC is automatic the final step of replacing the poor log by the predicted log is currently left to the petrophysicist. Further infor- mation on the use of the technique in the Heather Field is discussed in Kay (2002).

Outliers may be valid data such as coal beds, calcite stringers or fractures. Our AI programs keep all data points and minimise the linear distance (Mean Absolute Error) rather than the squared distance. We find any random noise is often swamped by valid data. It is important to stress that AI is only capable of solving problems where it is given sufficient good quality data.

Steve Cuddy is a retired Principal Petrophysicist from Baker Hughes. He holds a PhD in petrophysics at Aberdeen University. He also holds a BSc in physics and a BSc in astrophysics and philosophy. He is the inventor of the Fractal FOIL Function that accurately describes the distribution of fluids in the reservoir model. He writes AI software and has 45 years industry expe- rience in petrophysics. In recognition of outstanding service to the SPWLA, Steve was awarded the Distinguished Service Award in 2018.

