The impulse towards a larger introduction of Information and Communication Technology (ICT) in the agricul- tural field is currently experiencing its momentum, as digitisation has large potentialities to provide benefits for both producers and consumers; on the other hand, pushing technological solutions into a rural context encounters several challenges. In this work, we provide a survey of the most recent research activities, in the form of both research projects and scientific literature, with the objective of showing the already achieved results, the current investigations, and the still open challenges, both technical and non technical. We mainly focus on the EU ter- ritory, identifying threats and concerns, and then looking at existing and upcoming solutions to overcome those barriers.

Smart Farming (SF) refers to the application of ICT to agriculture. Data collected and analysed through ICT techniques support efficient production processes [1], thus motivating scientists, practitioners, pri- vate and public companies to work towards the goal of developing and encouraging the use of innovative technologies to support farmers on the ground. According to the European Union (EU), the most relevant tech- nologies and techniques to be fully exploited are the satellite imagery, the use of agricultural robots, a larger use of sensor nodes to collect data, and the potentialities of Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) for aerial imagery and actuation. Those indications are contained into the declaration of cooperation on A smart and sustainable digital future for European agricul- ture and rural areas1 signed on April 2019 by 24 EU countries.

According to the aforementioned declaration, the first obstacle to- wards a full implementation of SF in rural areas is the lack of connec- tivity, i.e., digital divide. The advent of 5G is promising to improve such a situation in rural and low-income areas [2], but scattered coverage must be still taken into account, as highlighted in recent surveys in the EU territory [3]. Rural areas remain challenging, not being covered by any Next Generation Access network: up to 53% at the end of 2017 in EU [3]. Putting this issue aside, a plethora of initiatives can be identified towards

the objective of the digitisation of agriculture. As an exemplary case, Smart AKIS, an EU-funded thematic network promoted by the Agricultural European Innovation Partnership (EIP-AGRI) established in 2016, aims to close the gap between scientific knowledge and practitioners, in order to promote concrete solutions to be implemented. A solution can be defined as anything that makes the farming practice more controlled and accu- rate through ICT, reducing both the costs and the environmental impact, while also increasing the production. SF has the potential to also improve work safety, contributing to the sustainability of agriculture [1], but its socio-economic implications are debated [4].

Capital Expenditures (CAPEX) and Operating Expenditures (OPEX) for software, machinery, and data. Farmers generally tend to identify SF as a set of tools that benefits only large holdings, both in crop and livestock production. This is linked to the perception of high costs and complexity of the involved technologies. What is lacking from this image is the possibility that innovative technologies might not be only large-scale and thus costly, but rather also slow and precise, plus small and cheap [7].

The aim of this work is to survey both research initiatives and sci- entific literature on the topic of SF, looking at recent technologies and techniques being used or being actively pushed for adoption. In addition, we discuss still open challenges hampering such an objective. The rest of this work is structured as follows: Section 2 surveys research and inno- vation projects covering SF activities in the EU territory, then the scope of the survey is enlarged by taking into account the state of the art in the scientific literature. Section 3 discusses the open challenges at today, considering both technical and non-technical factors. Finally, Section 4 draws the conclusions and opens to future directions.

The use of unmanned vehicles is another trend of great interest. Beyond the aforementioned Flourish, APMAV, BigDataGrapes, and Dragon projects, the PANTHEON project, by taking advantage of the technological advancements in the fields of robotics, remote sensing and big data management, aims at designing an integrated system where heterogeneous unmanned robotic components (terrestrial and aerial ro- bots) move within the orchards to collect data and perform common farming operations. The SWEEPER project has proposed a robotic system to harvest sweet peppers in greenhouses, leveraging on machine vision techniques to acquire both colour and distance information, and then storing collected peppers in an on-board container. Another robotic platform has been developed in the ROMI project to assist in weed reduction and crop monitoring, reducing manual labour. Land robots also acquire detailed information on sample plants, and an UAV assists by providing information at crop level. The GreenPatrol-Robot project designed and built a satellite-guided autonomous robot for pest control in greenhouses. It exploits Galileo satellite services to navigate, achieving good positioning accuracy inside greenhouses. The AFarCloud project aims at the agricultural productivity increase via PF techniques. The proposed solution is a distributed platform for autonomous farming ro- bots that allows the integration and real-time cooperation of agricultural systems to increase efficiency, productivity, and food quality. This plat- form is integrated with a Farm Management System (FMS) to support monitoring and decision-making solutions based on real-time data

Several projects are mainly based on improving the information derived from satellite optical data. The AGRORADAR project aims at delivering innovative algorithms and data models that can process Copernicus EO Syntethic Aperture Radar (SAR) data to achieve precise and detailed information. The AUDITOR project develops an improved Global Navigation Satellite System (GNSS) augmentation system for services in PF applications. The project enables cost-effective PF services to farmers, like recommendations regarding site-specific application of

water, fertilizer and pesticides. The WATER4AGRI project combines microwave data obtained from different satellites to provide datasets for retrieving key information about water availability for crops at field level. The SENSAGRI project combines optical and radar measurements to develop three prototype services for near real-time operations: surface soil moisture, green and brown Leaf Area Index (LAI), and crop type mapping. The MISTRALE project provides soil moisture maps to decision makers in water management using GNSS reflectometry (GNSS-R) via satellites and UAVs. The project has developed a prototype sensor embedded on a dedicated software platform. The APOLLO project brings PF closer to farmers through affordable information services, making extensive use of free and open EO data. The proposed services help farmers to make better decisions by monitoring the growth and health of

Real-time stream processing, analysis, and reasoning are key concepts towards automation in the agricultural field [22], i.e., towards a larger use of robots that can adapt to space- and time-varying conditions with minimal delay. Robots can perform very precise operations, and can operate in fleets, as proposed in Ref. [23], which considers both UTVs and UAVs. Moving systems rely on GNSS techniques for precise posi- tioning, and PF applications need large accuracy. Several commercial systems integrate a GNSS receiver and use one or more fixed Real-Time Kinematic (RTK) reference base stations [26] for providing accuracy up to centimeters. Further than precise positioning, robots depend on machine-vision systems to navigate the environment [25]; according to the technology and the scenario under consideration, specific spectral signatures are of interest, as for instance hyperspectral imagery in both local and remote sensing. Commercial devices, to be used on board, already capture both RGB and Near Infrared Imagery (NIR) bands, and stereovision systems are used for 3D maps [25].

UAVs can be seen as part of a WSN, acting as mobile nodes [17], thus the analytical characterisation of the channel model between a moving UAV and fixed terrestrial nodes becomes of interest [20]. Low-power 802.15.4-based solutions have been investigated in rural contexts, using UAVs as data mules [19].

Here, semantic analyses have been proposed as well, like for instance the valuable work in Ref. [35]. The Agri-IoT architecture, a layered and complex framework, provides additional value to DSSs because it further facilitates informed and accurate decisions thanks to semantic web and real-time reasoning.

Large IoT platforms generate huge amounts of data to be analysed, thus calling for data analytic techniques able to extract meaningful in- formation. Nowadays, big data immediately come to mind [45] as a set of strategies towards this objective, but it must be noted that its application to agriculture is recent. Generally speaking, the big data paradigm goes in an opposite direction with respect to acquiring more control over own data by farmers. To counteract that, the possibility for farmers to economically gain from sharing and accessing large volumes of data works as an incentive [46]. In Ref. [47], the authors underline the dif- ficulties in discovering and combining large heterogeneous datasets in the agro-environmental field, often complicated by lacking of metadata. Furthermore, the need for semantic analyses and interoperability is highlighted in Ref. [47]. Natural language processing and machine learning techniques play a role here, facilitated by existing initiatives for building and maintaining open large repositories for training purposes, like CINERGI by Earthcube.

Once meaningful information is available thanks to raw data sources and to analytics techniques, decision making is performed. This is where machine learning techniques and, more generally, AI can be fully exploited toward autonomous systems. To this aim, a fundamental challenge is moving intelligence from cloud platforms to closer compu- tation platforms, such as edge solutions, handling and processing data close to the source, thus reducing delays. Multi-Access Edge Computing

(MEC), jointly with 5G, is expected to play a role here. In the case of agricultural autonomous systems, real-time constraints are more easily satisfied by edge solutions than remote centralised systems. According to Ref. [48], in order to build sustainable infrastructure, the several emerging architecture paradigms (with different degrees of centralised and distributed entities) must comply to open standards for both easiness of implementation and cost reduction. Environmental monitoring and real-time agricultural data analytics and control can benefit from those paradigms, for instance by providing localized information about pollu- tion and pests in the vicinity of edge servers [49].

grant the data originator (i.e., the farmer) a leading role in controlling the access to and the use of data.3 The concerns on data use and access have been explored also in Ref. [4], highlighting existing scepticism by Australian farmers and divergence of expectations between involved actors. On the one hand, marketers and traders expect that big data techniques increase the reliability of predictions in the market dynamics; on the other hand, farmers are convinced that power asymmetries will increase, thus acting as a brake. Similar considerations are in Ref. [53], when looking to Ireland: whilst recognizing that SF is a real opportunity for the farming context, potential challenges and risks should be carefully considered to anticipate and reduce the gap among winners and losers.

In this work, we surveyed the most relevant research activities aiming at improving and encouraging the adoption of SF techniques in agricul- tural contexts. Large efforts are currently poured to boost ICT use, at least in the EU, where this analysis is focused. On the one hand, the already established use of sensor nodes and heterogeneous data sources, as well as simple analytic techniques, is pushing DSSs in the farms; on the other hand, a growing need is there for ever advancing technology and open standards to consolidate existing scenarios in an interoperable and low- cost manner, as well as programmes to help ICT diffusion in areas suffering from digital divide.

Gao H, Shi H, Hou K, Jian D, Peng Z, Connier J, Pinet F, Zhou H, Diao X, De Vaulx C, et al. Interoperability and sensor integration for smart farming. In: New and smart information communication science and technology to support sustainable development; 2018.

Soto I, Barnes A, Eory V, Beck B, Balafoutis A, Sanchez B, Vangeyte J, Fountas S, Van Der Wall T, Gomez-Barbero M. Which factors and incentives influence the intention to adopt precision agricultural technologies?. In: Research in agricultural & applied economics. University of Minnesota; 2018.

