Recent years, the inter-discipline of bioinformatics and neuroscience has been developed with more and more researchers studying in molecular and cellular level, which resulting huge number of publications and findings. A tool of scientometrics, Citespace II was used to identify the hot topic and evolution map of this inter-discipline with the data download from Web of Science. Five research clusters were found with the method of co-citation analysis. The evolution map of knowledge base with 1991-2012 was described.

Neuroscience appeared in the 1960s and mainly studied the structure and function of nervous system. Research at the molecular and cellular level is an important part of it. With the development of information technology and molecular biotechnology, more and more bioinformatics knowledge, such as gene, are used by neuroscience researchers. The interdisciplinary bring new development for bioinformatics and neuroscience.

* Co-citation analysis: if two literatures are simultaneously cited by another literature, these two build the relationship of co-citation. The more the two literatures are co-cited, the tighter their relationship is. Co-citation analysis aims to pick out the different fields of researches by the way of classifying the typical literatures in that subject according to the relationship mentioned above.

analyzed the genome-wide expression data from DNA microarray hybridization and the output was displayed graphically, covering the clustering and the underlying expression data simultaneously in a form intuitive for biologists. In the result, he found that genes of known similar function grouped together and a similar tendency in human data .Thus he proposed that co-expression of genes of known function with poorly characterized or novel genes may provide a simple means of gaining leaded to the functions of many genes for which information was available currently(Eisen, Spellman et al. 1998).At the same time, with the development of IT, network database arises which, to a certain extent ,solves the problem of the dispersion of biological knowledge. For example, Hosack introduced how to get intuitive graphical abstracts from DAVID and use them to make annotations and summaries of identifiers for gene and protein(Dennis Jr, Sherman et al. 2003).

C5 cluster focuses on codon and transcription related field and the cited literature was published in the year from 2011 to 2012.Grantham put forward codon catalog and genome hypothesis that the genome instead of the individual gene is the basic unit in codon selection in 1980(Grantham, Gautier et al. 1980).Then in 2000, Nakaamura Yusuke find the P53AIP1.This gene has an important impact on cell apoptosis and its

transcriptional activation can be regulated by the phosphorylation ser-46(Oda, Arakawa et al. 2000). Castrochavez compared the common codons of men and other animals(drosophila, squid and so on) and revealed that the third distribution of the most common codons in humans is 12-8-2,CGA,nucleosides ending while 13-6-3,UAG,nucleotide ending in squid(Castro-Chavez 2011).

