Therefore, choice of ER was very important in oxygen-enriched pyrolysis process. ER could control the components and heat values of gas products. In addition gas product quality could be improved owing to the increase of oxygen concentration within a certain ER range.

Solid wastes include general solid waste and hazardous solid waste. Municipal solid waste (MSW) included in general solid waste means the solid waste, semi-solid or liquid waste produced by activities of living in the city or services for urban households. Ways of dealing with MSW are roughly divided into solid waste landfill, part recovery, part fermentation and heat disposal. Due to many advantages of MSW heat disposal, such as high efficiency, large volume reduction rate, part of the energy available and without taking up a lot of land resources, particularly increasing the calorific value, many developed countries have used heat treatment to dispose MSW. [1-4] Heat disposal technology is divided into thermal incineration and pyrolysis, the former technology is more mature, and the latter is a new technology developed in recent years.

Many issues, such as high inert gases content, the low heat value, large amount of smoke and so on, still exists in simple pyrolysis or combustion. The simple oxygen-enriched combustion technology can not fundamentally solve these issues, solid phase (non-homogeneous) combustion control and production of secondary pollution. In order to solve the above problems, oxygen-enriched pyrolysis technology for the treatment of MSW was proposed. The mechanism of MSW oxygen-enriched pyrolysis was explored, and the associated systematic study was carried out, which could provide the theoretical basis for the conversion of

Organic components of MSW are distilled in the dry distillation layer generating CnHm gases in which CH4 is the main component. Water-gas reaction and reduction reaction of CO2 coming from the oxide layer mainly occurs at the carbon materials layer in reduced layer The oxidation reaction of waste carbon and oxygen occurs in the oxide layer. Therefore, the produced gases are mainly composed by CO, H2, CnHm and so on [18]. In dry region MSW is dried and dehydrated by the high-temperature walls of the pyrolysis device and high- temperature gas produced in other reaction regions, which makes preparation for further crack of

The calculation of theoretical temperature for MSW oxygen-enriched pyrolysis was obtained by adding enthalpy of the combustible products of gasification process and checking drawn against. And the actual furnace temperature will be lower than the theoretically calculated temperature. When using air as oxidant, excess cold air coming into the furnace and nitrogen contained in the air with the content of 79% make the furnace temperature reduced, increase the heat loss, while produce excessive smoke emission. And there are still inert N2 and incompletely reacted O2 retaining in the produced gases.

concentration. It could be observed that the heat value of the gas product has a rapid increase with the increased oxygen level, which is the result of the interaction between the increase of combustible gases and decrease of nitrogen content. The heat value of gasification products decreases with the increase of ER, especially when ER is greater than 0.30 the heat value gas product declines rapidly. This is attributed to that the increase of CO2 content and the decrease of CO and CH4 contents as a result of the increase of ER. When ER transcends the transition point (ER=0.25), H2 content begins to decline, leading to rapid decline in heat value.

