From the perspective of physical disciplines, the physical quantities which have the epitaxial relationship with the concept of voltage include the various radiation pressures, the water levels, the pressures and the temperature differences, etc (the concentration difference which determines the reactants is also included in chemistry). The physical quantities which are corresponding to the current include the various radiation flows, the water, the gas and the heat flows, etc (the chemical reaction product flow). Therefore, the definition of the resistance (conductivity) parameters can be directly expanded in the physical (chemical) system. At the same time, it can be also linked to the properties and the shape of the composite materials.

Taking the species and the populations as the example, the exogenous pressures which are derived from the food, the security, the habitat and other natural conditions can be reduced to the input voltage from the concept. In order to balance the exogenous pressure, the system status and the behavioral responses should be presented in the forms of the input of certain things, energies or information. The concept can be reduced to the input current. Similarly, the endogenous pressures which are derived from the input effects or the environment can be reduced to the output pressures from the concept. In order to balance these pressures, the system status and the behavioral adjustment should be presented in the forms of the output of certain things, energies or information. The concept can be reduced to the output current.

The cognitive and psychological system objects belong to the monitoring subsystem of human individual. The input information not only derives from the external (physical, biological and social) environments, but also originates from the adjustment of the internal state of the system caused by the environment. The output information (the partial information depends on the memory and the evaluation units) will constitute the feedback quantity which can directly act on the human decision-making subsystem and it can also control and affect the internal and external behavior status of the whole human system. Although the input and the output of this system have the multi-dimensional features as well as the staggered relationship between the internal levels, the application significance of the parameter expansion should also exist in different degrees from the perspectives of the use of external information, the adjustment of internal state and the information output generated by the main targets.

In order to avoid this false judgment, the actual object scope of assimilation structure can be limited to the self-organizing system. The organized man-made system objects can be considered as the subsidiary objects of social and economic self-organizing systems to develop the exploration of the historical evolution. At the same time, the micro-structural changes of the specific circuit or the man-made products within a certain range of experimental conditions can be regarded as the technical topics which should be separately verified and analyzed.

The influence of this intervention on the whole system may be limited in the functional parameters within a short period of time or within a small scope. Even so, the original relationship between the system structure (or the structural forms) and the function has been also changed to a certain extent. When the external condition changes for a long period of time or within a large scope, the changes of the essentiality of this relationship will become a real trend.

In any case, the determination of the general applicability of assimilation rule has the great theoretical significance. The assimilation structure also has the existence value from the perspective of theoretical economy. Then, the causes of the structural changes can be classified into three categories: regularity or stability, contingency and assimilation. In the process of examining the structural evolution of specific objects, if the first two factors are excluded, the assimilation can be attributed to.

As an abstract biological system, no matter the populations or the individuals, the tissues and organs or the cellular genes, the existence of feedback is considered as the common performance. The systematic internal functions in the process of adapting to the environmental changes, especially the changes of external structure and forms, have become the fact which has been widely recognized[5]. The proposition of assimilation rule is helpful to seek the more scientific explanations.

When the examination is conducted in a single cell and the genetic level, it should be noticed that the conditions which constitute the specific environment of input and output not only include the internal conditions of biological systems, but also contain the external natural (physical or chemical) conditions. Therefore, assuming that the changes of these conditions can affect the gene expression and the regulation process through the certain path, the application of assimilation rule will be meaningful in this level. If the survival adaption of different individuals is considered as the self-regulating performance of population gene pool system under the different environment, the controversy between the Darwinism which emphasizes the selection of environment for the natural mutation of species and the Lamarckian which stresses the selection of the adaptive mutation of species for the environment will obtain a common development and mutual promotion research platform due to the proposition of assimilation rule.

In short, the various theoretical basis of the formation and the development of species[6][7] will obtain the new scientific orientation due to the proposition of assimilation rule. The whole biological basis can also penetrate into the evolutionary process of life with various assimilation methods through identifying the changes of external environmental factors. Then it will be more mature and complete.

The brain and the parameters which dominate the nerve organs and tissues will inevitably have the corresponding internal assimilation changes with the changes of the external (environmental conditions) parameters of input and output. Such changes can not only obtain the adaptive advantages, but also indirectly affect the environment. This indirect influence has provided the external conditions for the re-occurrence of internalization process. Therefore, the organizational structure of cognitive organs will have the tendentious changes with the deepening of specific cognitive processes, which can support the enhancement of specific functions.

For various social organization systems, the adjustment objects of assimilation rule are wide. They are intersected with each other, which are the components of environment. The following general description of the logical relationship of assimilation process is expected to complement the existing theoretical basis.

If the changes of external parameters are beyond the adjustment scope of original system functions, the assimilation of the alteration of system structure will start. At this time, no matter the changes of the sharing demands of some members or the changes of general environment, both of them can make the system structure face the shock pressure: the changed income pressure (= efficiency- cost) comes from the environment and the changed sharing payment ratio pressure is from the system. If these pressures are not released, they will be accumulated to a force which can destroy the system structure. Then, the communication rule between the members or the different systems will be spontaneously changed and the vicious competition development will be appeared.

From the perspective of systematology, the health is just the strength and the stability of human regulatory functions. According to the assimilation rule, this kind of strength and stability can be partially caused by the external environmental factors. Therefore, the moderate exercise and the invasion of a small amount of harmful factors (including the immune therapy) can become the means to maintain or enhance the human health.

