The usage of 5G enabled technologies is expanding rapidly with its potential impacts in many fields, and it provides a real-time services more than our expectation [50]. The aim of this study is to focus the 5G technology and current healthcare issues as well as to highlight 5G based solutions that can handle the COVID-19 issues in different arenas. This paper emphasizes the evolving roles of 5G enabled technologies, like AI and machine learning, IoT objects, big data analytics, cloud computing and other digital platforms in emerging applications for han- dling the current epidemiological challenges. Besides a comprehensive review of 5G enable technologies to combat the coronavirus outbreak, the study discusses various technological and healthcare challenges as well as prospective for developing 5G powered healthcare solutions.

Education: The pandemic severely affected on-site academic activities, and about 153 countries around the world have closed their educational institutes. It affected about 1.2 billion students learning carriers, reported on May 2020 [70]. Due to the closing of universities, millions of international students left foreign countries that caused negative impacts on education.

Online Platforms and Communication Networks: As most of the countries in the world are imposing lockdown, the normal operations have disrupted and people working from home using online platforms. The utilization of communication networks is increasing significantly. It is reported that the Internet traffic is increased more than 25% on the typical usage [76]. Ta- ble 3 highlights the impacts of the coronavirus pandemic on the existing mobile networks [23].

The existing healthcare system is facing a number of challenges and problems. Major global challenges include lack of healthcare services and facilities, lack of digital resources and limited access, lack of quality treatment and high costs, lack of digital devices and systems, etc. [17,81].

Lacks in Developing Intelligent Healthcare Solutions: The existing healthcare is suffering for poor data-driven practices in patients assessment in which both patients and staffs are restricted to utilize proper medication procedure and digital de- vices [90]. It sometimes causes over-or under-estimated effects of undesirable drug reaction. The development of intelligent healthcare solutions can provide the best care to the patients as well as to ensure safe and quality services.

The WHO deployed an international project on EMF in 1996 [101], and the project investigated the health impacts of exposure to fre- quency radiations in the range of 0 to 300 GHz [102]. Most of the study did not find a link between RF signals from cellular towers or phones and diseases. From some investigations in 2011, the WHO said the radiation from cellular might cause some brain cancers [103]. But radiation does not cause a virus. The international radiation watchdogs,

Digital Pathological Analysis: 5G is being supporting to de- velop smart hospitals by improving digital pathology and di- agnosis. The healthcare has already experienced the 5G pow- ered computed tomography (CT) scanning remotely in real time [114]. The medical specialists will be able to utilize 5G net- works to access the large volume of health data obtained during diagnosis or surgery from anywhere in any time.

Remote Surgery and Medications: The promising features of 5G will revolutionize on online treatments and surgery. The 5G healthcare innovations include telemedicine, tele-surgery or robotic-surgery, remotely emergency care, etc. The 5G based telemedicine provides a remote consultation platform, in which the health professionals can treat the patients effectively. The tele-surgery provides a real-time operation, and the surgeons can perform remote surgery using surgical devices through 5G networks [115]. 5G connected ambulances or mobile clinics in rural areas could enable AR assisted operations to serve the patients with appropriate critical care.

Now-a-days, the advanced digital technologies are being trans- formed in healthcare to handle the world epidemic COVID-19 [118]. The promising 5G enabled digital technologies, such as IoT, AI, Big Data Analytics and Cloud Computing, Blockchain, etc. have been augmented the public-health strategies [25] to fix the current healthcare limita- tions and confront the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic [34].

that enables a uprising automation with resource utilization and energy efficiency [120]. While the existing 4G networks support only 4000 devices per square kilometer, 5G can con- nect up to a million devices per kilometer. Thus, IoT with 5G standards is revolutionizing the existing healthcare with a diver- sity of solutions [121], such as remote health monitoring and diagnostics, remote medications and treatment, telemedicine and telesurgery, patient information management, emergency caring, and much more.

Remote Diagnosis and Treatment: 5G connectivity is rev- olutionizing in continuous contagion monitoring and remote diagnosis from anywhere in this pandemic [132,145]. It also enables digital medicine that can share a high-volume of health information across a worldwide network of health specialists for caring patients. In January 2020, China has first developed 5G remote diagnosis and treatment system [146] that can support remote diagnosis and treat patients in this pandemic.

The emerging innovations using digital technologies rely on a re- liable telecommunication infrastructure and high-speed Internet con- nectivity. The integration of 5G enabled technologies is a transfor- mation of the person-centered care models to the community-based approaches [149,150]. It offers a real-time health solution for the whole population [151]. Some of the pioneering healthcare solutions using 5G enabled digital technologies in response to the COVID-19 pandemic are highlighted in the following sub-sections.

Step 1. Data Acquisition from Heterogeneous Sources: A variety of IoMT devices are connected together through the established 5G network. The first step involves the gathering of data from heterogeneous sources via these devices with appro- priate specifications (hardware and software). The composed data from different systems and devices are utilized by either

Step 2. Using the mHealth database, the healthcare agency announces for infected people and their family to take the isolation, and do the testing procedures at the earlier stage of the COVID- 19 infection. The database of the identified COVID-19 cases can help in contract-tracing during future outbreaks. It can help to inhibit the social interventions by restricting the social contact, outdoor movement, public gathering, etc.

Step 3. The real-time data from the mHealth system can help to estimate the infected cases and death as well as to under- stand the nature of infection. The chance of future outbreaks depends on this estimation. The major affected areas are declared as red zones, and it can assist to declare the full restrictions on movement and public gathering, the closing of offices/institutions, etc., in the red zones [165,166].

Epidemic Prevention Robots: 5G-powered smart robots using thermal imaging technique are being employed to control the spread of the virus in many countries [175]. These robots were developed by integrating 5G technology, cloud computing and computer vision to accomplish the emergency tasks, like face recognition, temperature screening, etc. in the pandemic [176].

The 5G-enabled robots and drones with smart vision sensors have been utilized to patrol the risks zones. They have the ability to track multiple target objects simultaneously while patrolling. They can also monitor the spread of sickness, notify public to wash their hands, detect and notify for wearing masks, etc.

Unmanned Cars: The self-driving vehicles or unmanned cars are being employed to avoid contact between individuals at infected areas, which greatly reduces the risk of infection. In- tegrating 5G and autonomous driving technology, the cars can perform fully automated and contact-free tasks with improved efficiency [177]. This vehicle is connected to the remote server through 5G network, and used as an intelligent system for dis- infection, transportation, patrolling, epidemic prevention broad- casting, etc.

5G-powered Disinfection Robots: The 5G-powered disinfec- tion robot is designed with a spray sterilization system that can effectively disinfect the contagious area [179]. It can effort autonomously in accordance with a settled disinfection route, setting time, fixed-points, multi-track mobile disinfection and sterilization in the contagious world [180]. Thus, robots are increasingly being deployed at the front lines against the COVID- 19 pandemic in order to reduce cross-infection risks and improve work efficiency and quality [181].

Advancements in Healthcare: 5G technology can improve per- sonalized and preventive care. 5G powered telemedicine en- ables real-time health consultancy and emergency treatment. Moreover, a fully-implemented 5G network will enhance med- ical operations and management as well as quality treatment experiences for both the patients and medical staffs.

The use of 5G network in integrating other digital technologies (like AI and machine learning, IoMTs, big data analytics, cloud computing, etc.) is now a reality in healthcare. From the literature, it is clear that 5G enabled technologies as well as intelligent systems have a prospect to improve healthcare services, such as medical diagnosis, health mon- itoring, treatment, management, etc. As the 5G poses non-ionizing radiation, there is no significant health risk of 5G RF wave below the recommended safety level. There is no evidence that 5G signal causes the spread of the coronavirus. Moreover, 5G enabled digital technolo- gies have been used for limiting the COVID-19 outbreak, and enhancing the public-health strategies in 2020. Some advanced technology giants are conducting their researches on 5G related applications that will combat against the health risks of any undesirable epidemics. The successful utilization of 5G technology to tackle healthcare challenges will enhance the acceptance of such technologies for other sectors in the future.

Ahmed  S.  A  community-based  approach  is  key  to  truly  person- centred  care.  2018,  Online;  The  Health  Policy  Partnership  Ltd., https://www.healthpolicypartnership.com/a-community-based-approach-is-  key-to-truly-person-centred-care/. [Accessed 30 December 2020].

