The lake sediment geochemical data used for this study, the sampling protocol, analytical methodology, quality control and quality assurance procedures are documented in McCurdy et al. (2016). The survey consists of 3441 samples, including field duplicates, and was sampled at a reso- lution of about one sample per 13 km2. The data used in this study is from a campaign to re-analyze lake sediment samples using modern analytical methods as part of the Geological Survey of Canada's GEM program

geochemical anomalies related to bedrock mineralization. For one of our workflows, the data was transformed using centered log-ratio (CLR) (Aitchison, 1982). Censored data were replaced with half the detection limit. For a discussion on the appropriateness of the application and ef- fect of log-ratio transformations, particularly as it pertains to data embedding (e.g., feature space geometry), algorithm selection and per- formance impacts for our intended ML task of geochemical anomaly

Following Zhang et al. (2021), we use major and minor elemental concentrations to predict the concentrations of the trace elements under similar assumptions as Grunsky and de Caritat (2019), in that regional lithology and secondary processes have high explanatory power for a majority of the observed geochemical variability. In this manner, we assume that the key variabilities in lithology, alteration and minerali- zation are captured by the data of major and minor elemental concen- trations. Hence, anomalies that by definition, cannot be explained by the rock-forming elements must constitute either noise or additional geological or geochemical processes, some of which are probably asso- ciated with mineralization processes that are of further exploration in- terest. In our technique, the trained ML models serve as implicit and dynamic (they are capable of predicting trace elemental concentrations across many lithologies or rock types, see Zhang et al., 2021) regional geochemical baselines and the prediction residuals are the deviations in elemental concentrations. Although supervised methods are used, they are strictly used to build geochemical baselines and are not used to train

There have been many approaches to using geochemical composi- tional data, much of it within the multivariate domain. For the purpose of prospectivity mapping, the key goal is to produce maps that correctly identify, with as high selectivity as possible, true geochemical anomalies that are invariably indicative of the locations of mineral occurrences. Although the definition of geochemical anomaly has not changed, the methods used to delineate baselines from anomalies have continued to evolve and improve. There has been a general trend of further adoption

The authors would like to thank Annick Morin (GSC) for providing geological mapping support for the study area. We would also like to thank Beth McClenaghan (GSC) and Dr. Robert F. Garrett (GSC, Emeritus scientist) and three anonymous reviewers for providing insightful com- ments that have greatly improved the readability and scope of this manuscript. The authors thank Dr. Hua Wang for editorial handling. Data used in this study is open access and can also be found at the Natural Resources Canada (NRCan) publication database (GEOSCAN) under OF 8026 or ID 298834.

Ghorbani, Y., 2018. Gaining access to high-tech and critical raw materials: a driving factor in developing future concept and methods in mineral processing and extractive metallurgy. In: III Congress of Industrial Engineering of the North of Chile, 22-24th August, 2018, Antofagasta-Chile.

