The geophysical logs interpretation means the prediction of borehole geology information (e.g., lithofacies, porosity) according the logs, which is a fundamental and worthy work to understand the undersurface earth. The recent years have witnessed the development of the applications of machine learning in logs interpretation. For example, a semi-supervised model named Laplacian support vector machine is proposed to solve the

problems of scarce labels (Li et al., 2020). The smoothnesses implying in the feature space and depth are utilized to propagate the labels form labelled samples to unlabelled ones, therefore increasing the classifica- tion accuracy. Although the Laplacian works in semi-supervised learning, the setting of Laplacian is still empirical so that the introduction of unlabelled data might result in a worse performance compared with just using labelled data. Hence, an ensemble mechanism is used to combine some candidate Laplacians and calculate an optimal one to guarantee the safety of using semi-supervision (Li et al., 2021). More similar work could be found in the literatures (Dunham et al., 2020; Imamverdiyev and Sukhostat, 2019; Zhu et al., 2018).

addition, data mining and processing techniques can be coupled with machine learning algorithms to solve the problem of data imbalance (Long et al., 2016; Zhong et al., 2020) Filtering techniques help us to remove some of the random non-stratigraphic responses (Lv et al., 2018; Ruckebusch, 1983), but do not have a significant effect on the distribu-

Extreme Learning Machine (ELM) can be used to address classifica- tion and regression problems, which is proposed by G.-B. Huang (Huang et al., 2004, 2011). Its model training is efficient compared with some traditional learning algorithms, meantime completing regression and multi-class classification tasks effectively. For example, considering a classification task with training dataset {X; Y} = {(xi; yi)}n , ELM cor- responding to the training dataset with L hidden layer nodes is described as

