where xi represents the ith sample, vk represents the kth cluster center. vk and xi have the same feature dimension. uik represents the probability that the ith sample xi belongs to the kth cluster center vk. q is a weighted index, which is generally specified manually.

According to the theory of geology and stratigraphic sedimentology, there is a strong correlation between the seismic signals of adjacent reflection elements. This can be used as prior information to provide more knowledge constraints for seismic facies classification, improve the lateral continuity of the seismic facies map and enhance the robustness of the algorithm. During the sedimentary evolution of the formation, it is often accompanied by the formation of anomalous bodies, resulting in the formation of karst caves, faults and other structures in the formation. Therefore, the correlation between adjacent reflection elements cannot be represented by hard division (Su-Mei et al., 2022). So we established a probabilistic model to characterize this correlation, and then we used cross-entropy as a distance measurement, fused it into the loss function of FCM, and proposed a novel seismic facies analytical method.

category with the highest degree of membership. Computing member- ship is an iterative process accompanied by updating of cluster centers (as shown in Algorithm 1). The FCM method will take into account the influence of all the data when updating the cluster center in each iter- ation, no matter how much the data is affected by the noise. However, the FCM-CEC method will take into account the constraints of the lateral continuity of the formation. Those data that are less affected by noise tend to have higher soft probability values in the early stages of algo- rithm iterations. They are more likely to be classified in the same cate- gory as adjacent reflectors and will play a more important role in the next iteration. On the other hand, the impact of data that is more affected by noise will be weakened with the iterative process. We believe that letting more reliable samples play a more important role in the clustering process is the reason why the FCM-CEC method can achieve better results.

The conventional seismic facies analysis methods are often purely data-driven approaches, ignoring the correlation between adjacent seismic gathers, making the seismic facies with poor lateral continuity. In this article, we propose the FCM-CEC method. A probabilistic model is developed to describe the correlation of adjacent formation reflectors. Then the lateral continuity of strata is added as priori information to the mode division of seismic reflection elements. Tests on synthetic data and real seismic data demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method. The seismic facies maps obtained by the FCM-CEC method have better consistency within the geological body and less uncertainty on the boundary. Moreover, the proposed method can obtain more information about the lithologic body of interest.

