Despite the improvement and decision making in agriculture is not an easy task (Tamene et al., 2021), digital breakthroughs have the power to transform the sectors (Goedde et al., 2021). Utilization of dig- ital technologies is helpful in providing the right solutions to few of the most burning issues of our time, comprising climate variability, food in- security and malnutrition, and environmental degradation (Abell et al., 2019). Digital technologies enhance user benefits via facilitating instan- taneous information exchange, and access to new information among people (Deichmann et al., 2016).

Digitalization for agriculture (D4Ag), the application of digital break- throughs in the whole ranges agricultural value chains, overcomes chal- lenges in agricultural activities and helps better earning for smallholder farmers, food and nutrition security, climate change adaptation and ex- tends the involvement of youth and women (Tsan et al., 2019). D4Ag contributes to a structural transformation of the agri-food sector via ac- celerating the information to smallholder farmers or to other agricul- tural value chains actors, involving extension agents, agri-inputs dealers, agribusinesses, financial service providers and policymakers by using digital tools, and channels (Tsan et al., 2019; Muyiramye and Addom, 2020). These solutions comprise mobile-accessible apps and tools that rise access to timely market price data, financial services, weather predictions, pest outbreaks, and more (Thompson and Gyatso, 2020). The variety of digital tools in agriculture is wide- ranging from low-tech solutions disseminating voice and text-based ad- visory on feature phones, to advanced holistic tools including satellites, sensors and big data analytics (GSMA, 2020a).

we used all-inclusive approach comprising original research articles, peer-reviewed articles, working papers, conference papers, book chap- ters, database, guide book, and indexes from different sources to pro- duce a broad review. The literature was collected via, Web of science, and Google scholar and so forth, largely focusing on recent studies. The key words used were: impact of digitalization on smallholder farmers agricultural transformation, influence of digitalization on facili- tating market information and agricultural value chain linkages, impact of digitalization on farm yield and income improvement, the effect of digitalization on social well-being and risk minimization, digital inclu- sive and divide in agriculture, effects of digitalization on access to finan- cial services, and challenges influencing of agricultural digitalization in SSA.

The proportions of the agribusiness sector development is low when compared to that of farming size in most of SSA (World Bank, 2013). Many of these countries (such as Ethiopia, Malawi, Burundi) remain to depend on the export of agricultural commodities. The agricultural commodities export of them accounts for about 75% of their exports with very slight or no processing included (UNIDO, 2011). Furthermore, the majority of African farmers still face challenges to access real-time marketing and price information that help them to make sound deci- sions on time and market and at what price to sell their produces.

With regard to opportunities of digital connectivity, the Information Communication Technology (ICT) innovations rise efficiency gains due to the minimized need for physical journeys between value chain ac- tors. Furthermore, ICT enabled information permit firms the capability to improve monitor and manage vital resources and employees (Esselaar et al., 2007; Donner and Escobari, 2010). Higher information flows help build stronger networks between firms. As a result, ICTs en- able new creative and innovative activities between groups of firms (Foster and Heeks, 2013). Moreover, digital technologies and market- places might potentially alter the interaction of small firms with mar- kets, and enable new types of business model and innovation at scale online (World Bank, 2016). The research finding by Hartmann et al. (2020) in Kenya indicates that the adoption of smartphone increased multifaceted knowledge (vertical knowledge flows, and horizontal knowledge networks), options to navigate the variety of chain alterna- tives (domestic production, informal export production), and emerging digital markets among horticultural smallholder farmers.

In addition, food production in the region has not kept pace with population growth (Tittonell and Giller, 2013; Deutsche Bank Research, 2014), due to lowest land and labor productivity rates of the region in the world (Tittonell and Giller, 2013). However, there is no single solution for agricultural productivity improvement in SSA. Conse- quently, it necessitates improved access to numerous inputs, enabling policies, and a good-operational supply and value chains (Thompson and Gyatso, 2020). Furthermore, attaining agricultural production growth will be unthinkable unless developing and disseminating yield-enhancing technologies since it is no longer possible to meet the growing food demand along with the increasing population through the enlargement of cultivable area (Asfaw et al., 2012).

Previous studies witnessed that information asymmetry has con- ventionally inhibited smallholder farmers' access to markets, which in turns limited the adoption of modern technologies that could have boosted their farm productivities (Ochieng et al., 2013). Often extension agents have traditionally been the primary means of reducing the infor- mation asymmetries related to technology adoption and provider advi- sory services to farmers in SSA (Davis, 2008). Despite the role of extension workers is mainly crucial when it comes to promoting mod- ern agricultural technologies, their capacity to provide updated and ac- tionable information might be limited by the low ratio extension agent to farmer, under developed infrastructure, together with low incentive and responsibility (Aker, 2011). The comprehensive advice on recom- mendable fertilizer application rates has failed to realize attainable yield improvements for crop production in several SSA (Arouna et al., 2020).

Farmers need lifelong learning and continuous access to diverse sus- tainable yield improvement technology-related information, to care on- going, flexible adaptation to varying burdens and opportunities (Pretty and Bharucha, 2014; Brown et al., 2017). As a result, farmers tend to be more interested to information that is easier to access than conventional extension services, and more personalized to their specific situation. Which suggests the need to access efficiently information delivery means in the context of the adoption technology to the target farmers' specific situations (Davis and Sulaiman, 2014). The use of ICT platforms have a potential to shift the traditional extension scenario (Ochieng et al., 2013) by accelerating and offering more information for farmers (Thompson and Gyatso, 2020).

In case it might be challenging to fit the broadcasts with farmers on regular procedures due to the high labor load of farming and related ac- tivities, user-centered interactive voice response can also be alternative means of digital agricultural advice. For example, the research findings of Ortiz-Crespo et al. (2020) display that groundnut farmers dynami- cally engaged with user-centered interactive voice message response to agricultural advice in Tanzania. Furthermore, the study illustrates that user-centered interactive voice message minimized the workload of extension workers compared to traditional communication channels via sharing automated push-calls responses to a group of farmers at once for questions seeking similar answering raised from different farmers.

In the same analogous, the study results by Ochieng et al. (2013) in Kenya shows that participation in ICT relied market information ser- vices (MIS) project increased farmers' use of seeds and fertilizers signif- icantly and enhanced land and labor productivity. Similarly, the study results by Arouna et al. (2020) in Nigeria show that use of mobile appli- cation personalized advice on rice nutrient management enhanced farmers' rice yield and profit by 7% and 10% respectively with the same average amount of fertilizer application. Likewise, Sennuga et al. (2020) show that in Kaduna State, Nigeria, information provided via mobile phones (SMS text reminders) to farmers increased their farm productivity. Similarly, Quandt et al. (2020) in Iringa rural district, Tanzania indicates that the use of mobile phone for agricultural opera- tions by smallholder farmer has positive association with maize produc- tivity and increased the profit of the smallholder farmers obtained from maize production.

The 2017 After Access survey shows that only 29% have access to for- mal financial services among 10 surveyed countries in SSA (Gillwald and Mothobi, 2019). Moreover, among surveyed countries, mobile money services are merely fruitful in Kenya (85%), Ghana (55%) and Tanzania (45%), whereas very low in Nigeria (4%) and South Africa (8%). The low performance of mobile money in countries such as Nigeria is largely due to lack a good partnership among mobile phone service providers and banks. Despite their uneven adoption and use, mobile money services have had a positive effect on financial inclusion in Africa (Gillwald and Mothobi, 2019; Research ICT Africa, 2019).

The financial service has a crucial role in permitting agriculture to contribute to economic advancement and poverty alleviation (Mcintosh and Mansini, 2018). In particular, agriculture plays the signif- icant role in economic growth, poverty reduction and food security in SSA since the sector generates about 25% of GDP on average in the sub-region (Deutsche Bank Research, 2014). Despite agriculture offer employments for more than of half the population in SSA, the large mass of farmers still not have access to formal financial institutions and relinquish access to basic banking services, loans and pensions (Malabo Montpellier Panel, 2019; The World Bank Group, 2020).

transmissions. Another study investigated the access to financial ser- vices through mobile technology on agricultural income in Malawi (Montfaucon, 2020). According to the author, a higher number of mo- bile phones in a household significantly and positively affects the prob- ability of the household's access to financial capitals. Another similar study, Suri and Jack (2016) reveals that M-PESA (mobile money in Swa- hili), helped households to develop the habit of financial management and increased their savings particularly for female-headed households (Suri and Jack, 2016).

Digital payments are also potential to improve customer well-being both directly or indirectly (Karlan et al., 2016). For instance, M-PESA (mobile money in Swahili) improved per capita consumption levels and lifted 194,000 households out of poverty in Kenya (Suri and Jack, 2016). In addition, it provided alternative jobs, mostly for women, who engaged into business from agriculture (Suri and Jack, 2016).

In numerous developing countries, agricultural extension services are largely delivered in favor of men, with information focused mostly to male members of a farming household and in arrangements that are hardly adapted for women (Lecoutere et al., 2019). Moreover, in de- veloping countries, women have been inconclusive to the access and use of digital information and communication technologies so far (Hilbert, 2011).

household income, women empowerment, food security, and dietary quality (Sekabira and Qaim, 2017). The same study revealed that that female possessing mobile phones, increased household incomes and so- cial welfare in excess of male mobile phone users (Sekabira and Qaim, 2017). Thus, provided that women were capacitated to use mobile phones, they would be more benefited than men (Aker and Ksoll, 2016; Sekabira and Qaim, 2017).

The critics to digital connectivity in the region, suggest that connec- tivity may not benefit all, rather it leads to power and control among dif- ferent types of firms. Moreover, connectivity might empower stronger firms at the expense of weaker ones (Foster and Graham, 2017; Murphy et al., 2014). For instance, Foster et al. (2018) show that in Kenya and Rwanda, digital connectivity shifted modes of value chain governance, led to control of lead firms and data standards are leading to new challenges for firms looking to digitally integrate in tea and tour- ism GVC sub sectors. Their finding further indicates that Digital connec- tivity has mostly led to shrill integration, through which small firms be able to make little communication and productivity enhancements without more considerable advancement with exception to some small firms who are able to supply to emerging niche customers, and local or regional markets. However, their findings show nothing about the effect of digital connectivity on tea producers (Hartmann et al., 2020).

Numerous empirical evidences suggest that digital gender dispar- ities associate with years of education and income (Gillwald and Mothobi, 2019). Similarly, Deen-Swarray et al. (2013) found that a pos- itive and significant correlation between use of the Internet and level of education and income (more significantly, use of the Internet and years of education and income in Africa. By the same token, Deen-Swarray

On the other hand, the D4Ag solutions largely succeed in attracting youth but the average age of farmers in Africa exceeds 50 (Tsan et al., 2019). For example, in 2018, the share of youth (under 35 age) users was 65% (Tsan et al., 2019). The big portion of youth show that difficult of the solutions for old-aged group and a vital age divide that must be overwhelmed so as to involve the important share of farmers from older groups.

In Africa, the growing demand of food and nutrition security strive to increase more than double the current status of agricultural production over the next 30 years. The problem will be more worsen SSA, that has al- ready been facing the highest food insecurity than any other regions. The recent revolution of digital agriculture, therefore, will be the good news to SSA that help address their key challenges currently facing the region. Nu- merous studies have revealed that a few of successful digital services have changed the lives of several smallholder farmers in SSA.

Despite its clear benefits of digital breakthrough in supporting agri- cultural transformation there is also evidence that these innovations often fail to adopt and attain broader acceptance. Primarily, the digital technology scale-up remains low, and most of digital agricultural solu- tions have succeeded below 30% and struggle to scale in the region. In spite of the fact that low status of digital infrastructure in SSA, is not the vital cause for the relatively small numbers of people using digital solutions. For instance, at the end of 2019, about 49% of people across Sub-Saharan Africa were connected to the mobile Internet, but not using the Internet. The failure of policy strategy to create simple workarounds and universal-access mechanisms -that can circumvent digital barriers to D4Ag scale-up are only two of many constraints farmers face. For example, Ethiopia, which has lowest access to the in- ternet and nominal digital literacy among farmers relatively with other SSA, has addressed these challenges via heavily investing on 8028 Farmer Hotline deployment and agents who can address small- holder farmers' queries. The service offers a much wider reach than internet-based solutions, has shown rapid scaling in D4Ag, and odd from countries like Senegal, where the government policy fails to fully support D4Ag.

Accordingly, one strategy to realize their potential the SSA countries need to work to digitize their own systems or replicate and adopt suc- cessful interventions that match with their target populations' digital skill and infrastructure to fully harness the opportunities of digitaliza- tion in agriculture. Moreover, to address the problem of digital divide, balancing regulatory and delivery approaches will be essential to permit different categories of services to be offered by different kinds of opera- tors. Likewise, to ease and enhance the use of digital agricultural solu- tion and service, it is essential to ensure affordable access to digital tools for agriculture along with fair price for mobile-data baskets partic- ularly for the poor and women smallholder farmers. These may be real- ized via reducing data costs, and tax cuts or totally removing customs duty and exoneration of VAT on digital agriculture enabling tools. Sim- ilarly, countrywide allocated range not in use in remote areas must be made accessible via low-cost or license-exempt spectrum for communi- ties, non-profit providers or micro-networks.

