Original Article
A self-adaptive k-means classiﬁer for business incentive in a fashiondesign environment
O.R. Vincent⇑, A.S. Makinde, O.S. Salako, O.D. Oluwafemi
Department of Computer Science, Federal University of Agriculture, Abeokuta, Nigeria
article info
Article history:Received 18 January 2017Revised 25 April 2017Accepted 7 May 2017Available online 9 May 2017Keywords:Data miningK-meansclassiﬁcationFashion designClustering and fashion businessabstract
An incentive mechanism to target market for fashion designers is proposed. Recent researches have beenfocused on the art, style or the design; while a few were based on traditional practice. In this study, econ-omy is considered as a major liberation in the fashion world by analyzing six attributes, namely, style,color, fabric, brand, price and size that could bring about commercial success. Dataset of 1000 customers’records were used and categorized as original, combined and new designs using self-adaptive k-means algorithm, which extract common attributes that would foster better business from the dataset. Theresults would be useful to designers in knowing the type of designs usually ordered by customers withthe design code, and which combinations of the attributes have high patronage. In addition, customerswould have easy access to the best and current designs invoke from a combination of highest patronizeddesigns./C2112017 The Authors. Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of King Saud University. This is anopen access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ ).
1. IntroductionDesign encourages communication by representing ideas usu-ally through images. In today’s business world, design cuts acrossmany professions including architectural, interior decoration, foot-wear, graphics, landscape, furniture, fashion designs, etc. [39,29]. Over the years, the fashion industry has been engaged in differentmarketing strategies with traditional cataloguing being made ref-erenced to on proxy without adequate segmental provisioning[38]. Thus, fashion industry relies on previous data and mentalintuition on imaginations in order to predict and meet customers’demands. However, with the recent fast-dynamic fashion trends,the design market is highly competitive and therefore rendersthe present mechanism obsolete and irrelevant [33,13,17]. Traditional brainstorming on designs are time wasting andreduces productivity. Hence, it is difﬁcult for fashion designers toplace their designs on mannequins due to outdated styles [17]. Very recently, customers’ needs and demands have been analyzedusing different methods through comments, shares and re-tweets[6]. Mok et al.[29]proposed an Interactive Genetic Algorithm(IGA) to customised fashion design to enable customers createtheir preferred fashion designs in a user-friendly manner [29]. Unfortunately, busy customers would not have the time to startcreating new designs themselves. In these days of e-payment,some customers even send money to designers and expect thefashion designers to deliver appropriately. In another develop-ment, set-theoretic qualitative comparative analysis (QCA) wasused to discover patterns that hold reliably across some cases[27,26,15,17].Other researchers used expert systems, Computer Aided Design(CAD) and neural networks to focus mainly on creating garments,targeting garment appearance and ﬁttings without consideringcommercial success of the designers and satisfaction of the cus-tomers[21,36,7,28,37,39]. Consequently, there are no incentivemechanisms to entice customers to patronize fashion designerson frequent basis. Jacobs et al.[17]argued that the design art should be supported with business inclination. The business itselfshould be given the same attention as the style. This implies thatthe design mechanisms and other fabricates should be done withthe intent of bringing more gains to the designers and greater sat-isfaction to the customers[16].This paper proposes an incentive mechanism to target businesssuccess in fashion design using a novel self-adaptive k-means(SAk- means) by analyzing some attributes that would attract customers.K-meanswas used due to its ability to assume a balanced cluster
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.aci.2017.05.0022210-8327//C2112017 The Authors. Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of King Saud University.This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ ).⇑Corresponding author.E-mail addresses:vincent.rebecca@gmail.com,vincentor@funaab.edu.ng (O.R. Vincent).Peer review under responsibility of King Saud University.
Production and hosting by ElsevierApplied Computing and Informatics 14 (2018) 88–97
Contents lists available atScienceDirect
Applied Computing and Informatics
journal homepage: www.sciencedirect.com
size with the dataset. It also assumes that the joint distribution offeatures within each clusters is spherical; meaning that the fea-tures within a cluster have equal variance, and are independentof each other[14]. Each clusters have similar density. K-means is faster, because order of time complexity is linear with respect tothe number of data and efﬁcient in terms of computational cost.It uses unsupervised learning method to resolve known clusteringissues and work well with large datasets [25,44]. Six attributes considered as market incentives include style,color, fabric type (texture), brand, price and size. We categorizedfashion design in three ways: original, combine and new designs.A merging by extracting these attributes into signiﬁcant insightof market strategies was done using the proposed algorithm[19,31]. Though,k-meanshas been criticized as a result of its highstorage maintenance requirements and high computational cost,we argue that the proposed self-adaptive k-means is valuable and is dynamic by updating new classiﬁed contents and removingold unclassiﬁed contents from the dataset. By this, the problem ofhigh storage are resolved.Business challenges are met through meaningful analysisthrough possible combinations of these attributes. This was doneby ranking design’s databases for hidden patterns, ﬁnding predic-tive information that experts may miss because it lies outside theirexpectations. We used the proposed SAk-means to classify theoriginal designs and assign new designs from different combina-tions to a set of predeﬁned classes of the old designs on the basisof the available training designs. This helps in clustering of hetero-geneous designs into a number of more homogeneous sub-designs.New designs either emanated from a combination or modiﬁcationof the highest patronized designs. With this, the customers wouldmaximally allocate their resources in the right channel with time[1]. Hence, the challenge of not getting the proper designs invokeis addressed by continuous dynamic updating of the dataset ofnew creative designs as it unfolds from the system. In this study,customers are not to design their own clothes or designs asopposed to the work of Mok et al.[29], rather, the proposed model ensures automatic creation of new designs from the combinationsof frequently chosen designs, such that the new designs wouldautomatically replace the old ones.This paper also builds on the fact that fashion design could notonly be based on the style but commercial success implications.Jacobs et al.[17]states that fashion companies need to maintainbalance between artistic and economic considerations. In this per-spective, this paper analyses the attributes that would account formore and better business gains for designers as it helps designersto know the type of designs usually ordered for, by customers withthe design code, and which combinations have the highest patron-age. Our ﬁndings show that in order to attract more customers topatronize designers, the style, fabric, color combinations are con-sidered important as these revealed the level of projective creativ-ity in fashion design. In addition, it also projects the designers as acreative entrepreneur, balancing business and the art.The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2brieﬂy presents the literature overview of data mining and fashion world.Section3considers market incentives for fashion designers usingk-means. In Section4, implementation and result are presented,while section5discusses the results. Section6concludes the paper and provides pointers for future work.2. Overview of data miningData mining techniques involve decision tree, ensembles, linearregression, naïve Bayes,k-means, neural networks, logistic regres-sion, ﬁsher’s linear discriminant, Support Vector Machines (SVM)and quadratic classiﬁers[18,22,35,30]. These are classiﬁcationalgorithms used for extracting models to predict categorical classlabels; and are often much more accurate than human crafted rulessince it is data driven[20,24,23].A multiclass Support Vector Machine (SVM) with classiﬁerbased on a type-2 fuzzy C-means algorithm was used for the recog-
nition of control chart patterns due to its generalization capability[40]. In another perspective, naïve Bayes classiﬁer was used todevelop a prediction model of mutagenicity [34]. Analysis shows that the prediction performance of naïve Bayes classiﬁer yieldedaverage overall prediction accuracies [41]. However, there was a problem of space complexity and risk assessment emanated fromits lack of practical evaluation[9].Recently, data mining techniques have been applied to creativeindustries, namely, entertainment, advertising, architecture, ﬁlm,ﬁne art, software, data science, music, design and fashion, to men-tion but a few[32]. One palpable limitation of big data in fashiondesign is the difﬁculty encountered in accurate access and uncer-tainty during classiﬁcation processes. To address the problem,ensemble methods were proposed[19]. Ensemble has been proven to be highly effective but require repeated resampling of the train-ing data, making them inappropriate in a data mining context. Dueto imbalanced in datasets, which is based on oversampling, undersampling or cost-sensitive classiﬁcation, Bartosz et al. [5]intro- duced an effective ensemble of cost-sensitive decision trees forimbalanced classiﬁcation.Due to the failure encountered in the traditional Linear Regres-sion Classiﬁcation (LRC) method when the number of data in thetraining set is greater than their dimensions, Koç and Barkana[22]proposed a new form of LRC, which was proven to be balancedeven with low-dimensional excessive number of data. In addition,another work proposed a global linear regression coefﬁcient(GLRC) classiﬁer that uses the test sample vector and whole classsubspaces to calculate the GLRC rather than the use of test sampleand the class subspace to calculate the distance, which is used forclassiﬁcation[12]. Very recently,k-means was introduced to fash- ion design with a dynamic reduction through homogeneous clus-ters (dRHC)[31]. Therefore, data mining techniques are evolvingfrom modiﬁcations of the previous approaches with time.In this study, constant observations are needed with automaticupgrade of new fashion design. Therefore, k-meanswas used to perform the clustering because it represents an unsupervisedmethod, which permits the use of real numbers in the values ofthe vectors[10]. Though,k-meansis a well-known clustering algo-rithm that is frequently used in clustering of patterns, it wasemployed in this study because more recent studies have shownits usefulness in exploratory stage where information on initialknowledge of what obtains in the fashion design environment isnecessary[8].2.1. State of the art: mining fashion design environmentIndustrial design is the professional service of creating anddeveloping concepts and speciﬁcations that optimize the function,value, appearance of products and systems for the mutual beneﬁtof both users and manufactures. The roles of industrial designersare to create and execute design solutions for problem of form,usability, ergonomics, marketing, brand development and sales.Fashion design merges sketching and general visual skills withthe power of imaginations. The interest is in knowledge of materi-als creative designs with lay outs, ordering supervising and bud-geting[4].Catalogue, a systematic lists of names, books/pictures/designs,is a means by which designers keeps records. It is a list of the con-tents of a design library arranged according to various styles serv-ing as inventory to the designs’ contents. It involves collecting,abstracting, and coding of printed written information for futureO.R. Vincent et al. / Applied Computing and Informatics 14 (2018) 88–97 89purposes with instruction and references. Good decisions on whatdesign to document, invoking season, styles preferred and processsurrounding cataloguing are important. Therefore, targeting mar-ket interest involves segmental solutions. It encourages direct mar-keting and provides focus to all design marketing activities. Datamining can be used to improve targeting by selecting which peopleto contact, ﬁguring out what design, when to offer and to whom itshould be offered.In today’s competitive business environment, a typical fashioncatalogue contains exploding dataset as shown in Fig. 1. This con- tains very large image data of designs that requires classiﬁcations.For proper guidance, categorization of the designs, fabrics, brandand color combination are needed for better returns in marketing,investments and in order to enhance business management instrategizing and delving into other new designs [16].3. The proposed incentive mechanism to target market in afashion designA typical fashion business environment is considered. Thedesign consideration requires that a fashion designer should nor-mally have automated catalogue. Customers’ classiﬁcations werebased on three classes of objects: original, combine and newdesigns. There are also the ready or initial designs with the design-ers, called original in this case. In combined design, two or moredesigns from the catalogue can also be coupled to create/obtainnew design. A customer may also come up with his own entirelynew design.3.1. Data collectionDifferent fashion dresses were collected from Jumia Nigeria. Thedataset contains 1000 customers’ records. The data comprises ofcustomer ID, name, gender, preferred color, fabric, style, brand,and code. Due to some missing attributes from the 1000 data,938 were used. The dataset was randomly categorized using sixattributes: color, style, brand, fabric type, size and price. The ﬁrstfour are classiﬁed as major while size and price were consideredas minor attributes for effective selection and combination dueto their low impact on design selection and combination.3.2. Fashion design incentives procedureWe classiﬁed the customers under three categories in Fig. 2as users X, Y and Z using the following characteristics:3.2.1. USER XCustomers in this category chooses dresses from the fashiondesigner initial catalogue, negotiate with the fashion designerand choose from his existing database. The dresses are representedwith a name called ‘original design’ which symbolizes the fashiondesigners initial designs. InFig. 2, a mutual relationship is estab-lished between this user and the designer.3.2.2. USER YCustomers in this category choose from two or more differentoriginal designs to make up entirely new design. They eitherchoose original top with different original design of skirt and orcombine part of the designs. Any adjustment or addition to theoriginal design is considered as a combined design by the designerbecause a new design product will emerge from the existingdesigns.3.2.3. USER ZCustomers in this category brings in entirely different designsthat the fashion designer does not have in the catalogue.Fig. 3shows a fashion design business scenario where three setof customers are identiﬁed as customers X, Y, and Z. A Designer-Analyst-Customer relationship is presented where the analyststands as the middleman between the designer and the customer.In some cases, the analyst could also be the designer. An analyst, inthis case, is considered as the vendor who sells dresses and towhom payments are made. The analyst has an automated docu-mentation of his stock by categories of designers, styles, color,brand, size; and as expected, prices are given by these differentcadres. A Customer orders for dress, whether original, combinedor new. He pays for his dress and receives the dress from the ana-
Phone: 555-555-5555Fax: 555-555-5555E-mai l : someone@exampl e.comHOME CATEGORIESCLOTHS HELP ACCOUNT CARTFASHI ON WORLD
Never be the last
BUY NOW BUY NOW BUY NOWBUY NOW BUY NOWBUY NOWBUY NOW
BUY NOW BUY NOW BUY NOWBUY NOW BUY NOWBUY NOWBUY NOW
BUY NOW BUY NOW BUY NOWBUY NOW BUY NOWBUY NOWBUY NOW
BUY NOW BUY NOW BUY NOWBUY NOW BUY NOWBUY NOWBUY NOW
Never be the last
Product/Service Information
Tel: 555 555 5555FASHIONWORLD
Fig. 1.A typical fashion catalogue.90 O.R. Vincent et al. / Applied Computing and Informatics 14 (2018) 88–97lyst. The analyst on the other hand, receives the order, paymentand keeps record of sales. The designers, having supplied thedresses, received payment from the analyst and update his record.3.3. Cataloguing of homogeneous clusters using dynamic K-meansK-means is one of the simplest unsupervised learning algo-rithms that solve the well-known clustering problem, which workincredibly well in practice.K-meansclustering is a method of vec- tor quantization, originally employed in signal processing, and verypopular for cluster analysis in data mining. In this paper, k-meansis modiﬁed by introducing a novel self-adaptive approach for classi-ﬁcation of the identiﬁed six fashion attributes. If we let x
ipbe the ith discrete point of a dressP, andy
jpbe theith discrete point of dressQ, andi¼1;...;k, the classiﬁcation follows that of Euclidiandistance (D) given asDði;jÞ¼ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃjx i1/C0yj1j2þjx i2/C0yj2j2þ/C1/C1/C1þjx ip/C0yjpj2q :ð1Þ
These points represent the same features as measured andrecorded from bothPandQdresses. The setDof Euclidean dis- tances between dressxand all successive dressy2Yis calculated using Eq.(1). From the distances in the setD, the smallestkdis- tances are selected[11,43,42]. The veriﬁed designs are classiﬁedinto three: original, combined and new designs by the classiﬁer.The ﬁnal classiﬁcation are established on the basis of a voting scoreso as to reduce the noise, which depends on the number nof neigh- bors, given as
n¼c2/C18/C19þðc:dÞ/C18/C191=2"#;ð2Þ
belonging to any of the three classes [32,3]. The number of data is a function of the cluster number and the mean vector. For example, ifCustomer X Customer Y Customer Z Designer Analyst/Vendor
originalDesign()
sendDesign()
combinedDesign()
makeDesign()
newDesign()
makeDesign()
interpretDesult()
encoding()analysis()
Data mining 
tool
Fig. 2.A sequence of marketing strategy in fashion design.
Fig. 3.A fashion design business use case.O.R. Vincent et al. / Applied Computing and Informatics 14 (2018) 88–97 91the number of data is less than the number of clusters then weassign each data as the mean vector of the cluster. Therefore, eachmean vector will have a cluster number. However, if the numberof data is bigger than the number of clusters, for each data, we cal-culate the distance to all mean vector and obtain the minimum dis-tance. Thus, the data is said to belong to the cluster that hasminimum distance from this data[19,2,31].
Since the location of the mean vector cannot be predicted, themean vector is adjusted based on the current updated data. Thus,we assign all the data to the new mean vector and update the meanvector using a vector update law given as
VPðx 1;x2;x3;...;x kÞ¼Pki¼1x1st i
k;Pki¼1x2nd i
k;Pki¼1x3rd i
k;...;Pki¼1xnth i
k ! :ð3Þ
In Eq.(3),xrepresents the set of data for clustering. The clusterswere then evaluated using the Sum of Squared Error
SSE¼XKi¼1X
x¼Cidist2ðmi;xÞ:ð4Þ
For each point, the error accounts for the distance to the nearestcluster[19,31]. In order to get the SSE, the error is squared and sumtogether in Eq.(4). Let the dimension of the matrixXbelðc/C2dÞas given by Eq.(2),algorithm 1describes the generation of newx
i.Algorithm 1(Dynamic K-means for Fashion Design ).Input:(X;Y)Output:Y
i
1:fori=1tokd o2: compute distanceDðX
i;nÞ3: end for4: Compute set I containing indices for the ksmallest distancesDðX
i;nÞ5:Returnmajority label for {Y
iwherei2I} 6. Newdesign K-means(X, Y)7. For x
i= 1 to k do8. Update (X)8. End forAlgorithm 1classiﬁes a new designxby searching in the train- ing set for theknearest designs called neighbours to xaccording to the distance metric in Eq.(1). Then,xis assigned to the most patro- nised designs (common class) determined by calculating the per-centage patronage on designs of the retrieved knearest neighbours. Ties are settled using single nearest neighbour of thecolor, style, fabric type, and brand noting, the error rates. We placekpoints, that is, the initial group centroids, into the space repre-sented by the objects that are being clustered and assign eachobject to the group that has the closest centroid. When all objectshave been assigned, the position of kcentroids is re-calculated. This procedure is repeated until the centroids no longer changeor move. By this, clusters are constructed until all of them containitems that belong to only a particular class. This resulted in theseparation of the objects into groups from which the metric to beminimized is calculated. The result is then combined severallyand a dynamic upgrade forming a new dataset of designs isobtained.4. Implementation and resultsThe dataset was categorized into three classes: original, newand combined designs. The proposed self-adaptive k-means wasdeveloped in Java with every chosen design coded with a uniqueidentiﬁer. The coding was done to differentiate between the threedesigns withx, y, andzfor each design of original, combined andnew, respectively using ZeroR as the classiﬁer rule. Euclidean dis-tance was used for the determination of centroid on which theclustering was based. Each object was based on minimum Eucli-dean distance. Out of the six attributes of the dataset, four (color,style, size and price) were found to be mainly constraints for cate-gorizing the dataset, while brand and fabric could not be distinc-tively classiﬁed.Fig. 4shows the identiﬁed fashion attributeswhere a compilation of the six attributes are presented in theirclasses showing how size and price changes.Fig. 5shows how multiple original styles were combined andnew styles emerged. Dresses were identiﬁed by styles where twoor three styles were combined to form other new styles. The newlycreated styles were made to update design catalogue automati-cally. We classify the original designs and assign new designs fromdifferent combinations to a set of predeﬁned classes of the com-bined designs on the basis of the available training designs. FromFig. 5, new designs either originated from a combination or modi-ﬁcation of predeﬁned designs.4.1. Experimental evaluation of attributesThis section presents experimental results with four of the sixattributes to demonstrate the effect on customers’ choices. In thissection, we illustrate the behavior of our SAk -meansalgorithm on some of the fashion design attributes, which is seen as marketstrategy to foster improved economy on the designers, vendorand the customers.4.1.1. Color and style as marketing strategiesColor is always a baseline in fashion attraction, which could fos-ter customer’s interest and fashion design choice making. Wetherefore compared how color could be a main factor on price, sizeand style of designs. The goal of these experiments is to study theeffects of color and color combinations on customers’ choices ofdesigns and the impact on sales.Fig. 6shows a classiﬁer result when color and prices effect were examined.Fig. 6shows what happens when color was compared to price.Clearly, the increase in price inﬂuences the decision of color bycustomers. InFig. 6, it is shown that color, especially the scarceones, is a factor that determines what price a particular dress issold. To this end, customers choose dresses with lesser prices eventhough it may not be their color of choice. Hence, more customerschose red, multi-color and black because they are less costly andprobably as a result of easy combination with other colors. Thisis depicted in the bottom left corner of Fig. 6
where the clusters form around lower cost colors.Fig. 7shows the relationship between the style, color and size.InFig. 7, a distinguished grouping of original, combine and newdesigns are shown when style and color were considered. Fig. 7a shows that customers’ decisions of style clearly inﬂuence theircolor of choice. The clumsiness of the clusters at the left hand sideof the graph is an indication that customers prefers to choose styleover color. With respect to the impact of size on color and the deci-sion of design chosen by the customer, Fig. 7b illustrates cus- tomers’ choice with respect to size and color. The Figure showsthat choice of color does not depend on size. This implies that nomatter how attractive some colors are, customers would not selectbigger or smaller sizes than the actual choice of size. This isreﬂected in the disparity of customers’ choices as the clusters aregathered around some particular sizes regardless of the colors.We can therefore conclude that color and style are functions thatdetermined customer choices of dress selection and thereby deter-mines patronage.92 O.R. Vincent et al. / Applied Computing and Informatics 14 (2018) 88–97Fig. 8a shows the impact of size on price for new, combined andoriginal designs. It can be observed that increase in prices ofdresses increases customers’ interest towards a choice of combineddesigns. Observations fromFig. 8a and b also show that combineddesigns has the highest number of customers. Fig. 9shows the effect of color combinations on fashion. For the color strength,649 instances were used, out of which 212 were black dresschoices. This implies that black color would always invite highestpatronage in any fashion market. Multi-colors, white and blueare other colors that show closely related market attractions. How-ever, when it comes to making dresses to target customers’ choiceof colors such as pale-pink, blue-grey, black-orange, etc. can bedone away with as the market strength shows negligible sales.4.1.2. Validation of classiﬁerTo validate our classiﬁer, we studied the root mean squareerror, the Ignore Class Unknown Instance (ICUI) and the ReceiverOperator Characteristics (ROC) area curve measures. In Table 1, we illustrate the correlation of colors with price and size; andthe results clearly show that the correlations between the variablesare not signiﬁcant. Due to diverse input variations, correlation forstyle, fabric type and brand could not be examined. But when colorand size, color and price were examined, negative relationshipswere observed between the variables. While we could not establisha correlation for brand, style and fabric type, the correlation coef-ﬁcient of color and price is/C00.0937 and that of color and size is/C00.0467, which show that the degree of linear dependence
FASHIONINCENTIVES Phone: 555-555-5555Fax: 555-555-5555E-mail: someone@example.comF A S HIO N  IN C E N TIV E S
Never be the last
SStyleColourFabricTypeBrandSizePrice
BlueSky Blue
Yellow
GreenBlack10,00015,0005,0007,00010,000Cotton voileCotton lawnRayon challis
Chambray
DenimFashionDMGNice forever
EmagePooshS, M, L, XLXS, S, M, L, XL
S, M, L, XLXS, S, M, XL
S, M, XL, XXLTrendy
CasualExotic
VibrantPreppy
Acelloti Papaya S, M, XL
SportyRed10,000
Never be the last
Product/Service Information
Tel: 555 555 5555
Fig. 4.Mining fashion attributes.
Fig. 5.Styles’ combination.O.R. Vincent et al. / Applied Computing and Informatics 14 (2018) 88–97 93between the variables are in opposite directions. This reveals thatas color and size change, price increases or decreases. Therefore,the relationship between color and price, size and price lie onopposite directions as shown inFig. 6and this is clearly seen in Fig. 7b.Table 1shows the error values on color, size, and price. The rel-ative absolute error (RAE) and root relative squared error (RRSE) isvery high for the three attributes. The root mean squared ratio(RMSR) measures the average magnitude of the errors. The RMSRgives a relatively high weight to expensive errors, which makesthe RMSE most useful because of vast errors that are particularlyundesirable. The Mean absolute error (MAE) delineates the directscore and this implies that individual differences are weightedsimilarly on the average. Out of 1000 instances, 62 were ignored,which implies 938 instances were classiﬁed in all.Table 2shows the range, under a Receiver Operator Character-istics (ROC) curve measures, of the general capacity of the test todistinguish the effect of style, size, and color on designs’ sales.The result inTable 2describes the effect of the three attributeson sales. The ROC region likewise test for the level of precisionamong the three attributes, which shows high performance in rela-tion to sales.Next, we evaluate the accuracy of the clustering decision onfashion design based on new, combine and original design by com-paring the results achieved by the SA k-means, SVM, and Bayes methods. Using the optimal parameter values obtained on thetraining datasets, the accuracy was examined using independenttest datasets. The experimental results on datasets is given inTable 3. From the results inTable 3, it can be observed that SAk- means applied on the dataset improves the accuracy of the cluster-ing decision-making. Except for the combined design where SAk-means and Bayes method have no signiﬁcance performance mea-sure. Regarding the SVM method, results on combined and originaldesigns showed no signiﬁcance; whereas, better results on cluster-ing decision are obtained from Bayes and particularly, the pro-posed SAk-means methods.Finally, the impact of classiﬁcation time was examined by com-paring the time used by each method based on the fashion designdataset.Table 3presents the total running time based on learningand testing time using the original, combined and new designs. Itwas observed that the running time of the classiﬁers were signiﬁ-cantly reduced in the experiments. In general, SA k-means is faster than SVM and Bayes, due to space complexity of SVM methodwhich is proportional ton/C3Q2and Bayes method, which is OðpqrÞ, wherepis the number of features,qis values for each fea- ture, andris alternative values for the class.5. DiscussionAnalysis of the attributes that would account for more and bet-ter business gains for designers was carried out in this paper. Fig. 7 (a) shows the relationship between style and color. It can be clearlyseen that 54% of customers preferred combined designs becausethey have full customization control over the design, while 31%of the customers shows preference for new designs by the fashiondesigner, because new designs are produced based on the acquireddata from the original designs. However, 15% of the customers pre-ferred the original called old designs. This could be attributed tothe obsoleteness of the designs. From Fig. 7, it was found that more customers’ preferred combined designs than other two designs.
Red
Brown-blackNavy -blueArsh
Red-whiteMulti-colorBlack
Blue-greyPale-pink Blue-redMonochromeOrangeWhiteMaroonBrow nYellowGold
Color255075100125150200225250300325Price($)
Fig. 6.Effect of customers’ price decision on choice of color.
Fig. 7.Effect of (a) customers’ style decision on color and (b) customers designs (new, combine and original) on size and color.94 O.R. Vincent et al. / Applied Computing and Informatics 14 (2018) 88–97StyleNew desi n
Combined desi n
O r ii n a l d e s in
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.80.00.20.40.60.8
xySize
PriceNew desi n
Combined desi n
Ori inal desi n
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.80.00.20.40.60.8
xySize
(a) (b)ggg
gg
g
gg
Fig. 8.Self-adaptive clustering of designs. (a) Size against price and (b) size against Style.
92
11132121321041152135
3430
16
31111212
20
84201358
17
150
purple
light-purplemaroonpinksky-bluedark -brownwhite-greyarsh
black-greenBlackyellowred-brown
yel l ow-brownbeige
navy-bluewhitegreenblue
light-brown multi-colorblue-greypale-pink
black-orangewhite-red
monochromebrown-blackblack-redblack-greyivory
navy-ivoryorangeredYellow white-bluelight-green
yellow-green
ColorColor strength
Fig. 9.Customers’ decision on choice of color.
Table 1Cross validation of classiﬁer output for three attributes.
Attribute MAE RMSR RAE (%) RRSE (%) ICUIColor 0.0213 0.1029 96.87 100 8Size 0.0528 0.1619 96.56 100 0Price 3345.8867 5953.124 89.07 100 0
Table 2Detailed accuracy by attribute under the ROC curve.
Attribute TP Rate FP Rate Precision Recall F-measure ROC areaStyle 0.488 0.218 0.691 0.488 0.129 0.854Size 0.647 0.375 0.633 0.647 0.188 0.872Color 0.684 0.428 0.615 0.684 0.085 0.736O.R. Vincent et al. / Applied Computing and Informatics 14 (2018) 88–97 95This result is valuable for the fashion designer, enabling him to tar-get on producing more of the combined design rather than theother designs.Fig. 7a also shows that style is a major factor on any colorchoices. Consequently, design style should be given a major prior-ity during fabric consideration. This would address the challenge ofnot getting the proper designs invoke by continuous dynamicupdating of the dataset of new creative designs as it unfolds fromthe system. FromFig. 8, a fashion designer could deduce what colorand color combinations would attract customers’ interest. Black,multi colors, blue and white are seen in this case to be of highestinterest.Fig. 8shows that black color dominates the fashion worldmarket, hence design should not only be based on the style butcommercial success implications.6. ConclusionsA mechanism for commercial success in fashion design has beenproposed in this paper. Here, economy was considered as a majorliberation in the fashion world by analyzing six fashion attributes,which includes style, color, fabric, brand, price and size. The data-set of 1000 customers’ records used were categorized as original,combined and new designs using k-meansalgorithm to extract common attributes that would foster better business bargains.The dataset of the designs was ﬁrst ranked for hidden patterns.Then, SAk-meanswas used to classify the original designs andassign new designs from different combinations to a set of prede-ﬁned classes of the original designs on the basis of the availabletraining designs. This helps in clustering of heterogeneous designsinto a number of more homogeneous sub-designs categorized withthe six attributes. New designs emanated either from a combina-tion or modiﬁcation of the highest chosen designs.The SAk-meansis a system of automatic creation of new designsas a result of the combinations of frequently chosen designs. Thenew designs automatically replaced the old original designs. Inaddition, this study also builds on the fact that fashion companiesneed to maintain balance between artistic and economic consider-ations. From the study, it was found that in order to get more cus-tomers patronizing designers, the style and color combinations areconsidered important as these revealed the level of projective cre-ativity in fashion design. Hence, the study revealed that more cus-tomers would likely patronize fashion designers primarily becauseof the style and color combinations as creativity is projectedthrough these combinations.During the study, the computations were a little limited withthe number of data analyzed. When the data is increased, the resultis expected to be more precise. However, immediate next researchsteps should be to explore other criteria that would foster fashionbusiness development.AcknowledgmentThe authors acknowledge the anonymous reviewers for theirconstructive comments, which has tremendously improved thequality of the paper. We also acknowledge Dr. U. E. Vincent, Lan-caster University, United Kingdom for reading through and editingthe manuscript and providing valuable suggestions.References
[1]M.A. Abebe, A. Angriawan, Organizational and competitive inﬂuences ofexploration and exploitation activities in small ﬁrms, J. Bus. Res. 67 (2014)339–345
.[2]
D.A. Adeniyi, Z. Wei, Y. Yongquan, Automated web usage data mining andrecommendation system using K-Nearest Neighbor (KNN) classiﬁcationmethod, Appl. Comput. Inform. 12 (1) (2016) 90–108
. [3]
V.M. Aradhya, M.S. Pavithra, A comprehensive of transforms, Gabor ﬁlter andk-means clustering for text detection in images and video, Appl. Comput.Inform. 12 (2) (2016) 109–116
. [4]
B. Borukhovich, Fashion design: the work of art that is still unrecognized in theUnited States, Wake Forest Intell. Prop. LJ 9 (2009) 155–238
. [5]
K. Bartosz, W. Michał, S. Gerald, Cost-sensitive decision tree ensembles foreffective imbalanced classiﬁcation, Appl. Soft Comput. 14 (2014) 554–562
. [6]
B. Bury, M. Tiggemann, A. Slater, Disclaimer labels on fashion magazineadvertisements: impact on visual attention and relationship with bodydissatisfaction, Body Image 16 (2016) 1–9
. [7]
Y. Cho, T. Komatsu, S. Inui, M. Takatera, Y. Shimizu, H. Park, Individual patternmaking using computerized draping method for clothing, Text. Res. J. 76(2006) 646–654
.[8]
M. Capó, A. Pérez, J.A. Lozano, An efﬁcient approximation to the K-meansclustering for massive data, Knowl.-Based Syst. 117 (2017) 56–69
. [9]
E.O. Cannon, A. Amini, A. Bender, M.J. Sternberg, S.H. Muggleton, R.C. Glen, J.B.Mitchell, Support vector inductive logic programming outperforms the naiveBayes classiﬁer and inductive logic programming for the classiﬁcation ofbioactive chemical compounds, J. Comput. Aided Mol. Des. 21 (5) (2007) 269–280
.[10] Chévez, P., Barbero, D., Martini, I., Discoli, C., 2017. Application of the k-meansclustering method for the detection and analysis of areas of homogeneousresidential electricity consumption at the Great La Plata region, Buenos Aires,Argentina. Sustainable Cities and Society.[11]
I. Davidson, S.S. Ravi, M. Ester, Efﬁcient incremental constrained clustering, in:Proceedings of the 13th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on KnowledgeDiscovery and Data Mining, ACM, 2007, pp. 240–249
. [12]
Q. Feng, X. Zhu, J.-S. Pan, Global linear regression coefﬁcient classiﬁer forrecognition, Optik-Int. J. Light Electron Opt. 126 (2015) 3234–3239
. [13]
S. Guercini, A. Runfola, How western marketers respond to the new middleclass in emerging market cities: the case of Italian fashion marketers, Int. Bus.Rev. 25 (2016) 691–702
. [14]
I. Guyon, A. Elisseeff, An introduction to variable and feature selection, J. Mach.Learn. Res. 3 (Mar) (2003) 1157–1182
. [15]
D. Heuer, M. Brettel, J. Kemper, Brand competition in fashion e-commerce,Electron. Commer. Res. Appl. 14 (2015) 514–522
. [16]
K. Hjort, B. Lantz, The impact of returns policies on proﬁtability: a fashion e-commerce case, J. Bus. Res. 69 (11) (2016) 4980–4985
. [17]
S. Jacobs, B. Cambré, M. Huysentruyt, A. Schramme, Unraveling Belgian fashiondesigners’ high perceived success: a set-theoretic approach, J. Bus. Res. 69(2016) 1407–1411
.[18]
K. Kameshwaran, K. Malarvizhi, Survey on clustering techniques in datamining, Int. J. Comput. Sci. Inform. Technol. 5 (2014) 2272–2276
. [19]
S. Kanj, F. Abdallah, T. Denœux, K. Tout, Editing training data for multi-labelclassiﬁcation with the k-nearest neighbor rule, Pattern Anal. Appl. 19 (2016)145–161
.[20]
H. Kim, A. Stumpf, W. Kim, Analysis of an energy efﬁcient building designthrough data mining approach, Automat. Constr. 20 (2011) 37–43
. [21]
S. Kim, C.K. Park, Parametric body model generation for garment drapesimulation, Fibers Polym. 5 (2004) 12–18
. [22]
M. Koç, A. Barkana, Application of Linear Regression Classiﬁcation to low-dimensional datasets, Neurocomputing 131 (2014) 331–335
. [23]
B. Krawczyk, M. Woz´niak, G. Schaefer, Cost-sensitive decision tree ensemblesfor effective imbalanced classiﬁcation, Appl. Soft Comput. 14 (2014) 554–562
. [24]
S.H. Liao, P.H. Chu, P.Y. Hsiao, Data mining techniques and applications – adecade review from 2000 to 2011, Expert Syst. Appl. 39 (2012) 11303–11311
. [25]
J. Magidson, J. Vermunt, Latent class models for clustering: a comparison withK-means, Can. J. Market. Res. 20 (1) (2002) 36–43
. [26]
J.G. Martínez, Selling avant-garde: how Antwerp became a fashion capital(1990–2002), Urban Stud. 44 (2007) 2449–2464
. [27]
P. Matthyssens, K. Vandenbempt, L. Berghman, Value innovation in businessmarkets: breaking the industry recipe, Ind. Mark. Manage. 35 (2006) 751–761
.Table 3Accuracy and running time.
Design Accuracy (%) Running time (s)SAk-means SVM Bayes SA k-means (s) SVM (s) Bayes (s)New 0.87 0.76 0.81 1.2 8.7 5.77Combined 0.90 0.84 0.90 1.37 10.9 6.0Original 0.97 0.84 0.92 0.3 5.6 3.1496 O.R. Vincent et al. / Applied Computing and Informatics 14 (2018) 88–97[28]Y. Meng, P. Mok, X. Jin, Computer aided clothing pattern design with 3Dediting and pattern alteration, Comput. Aided Des. 44 (2012) 721–734
. [29]
P. Mok, J. Xu, X. Wang, J. Fan, Y. Kwok, J.H. Xin, An IGA-based design supportsystem for realistic and practical fashion designs, Comput. Aided Des. 45(2013) 1442–1458
.[30]
S.S. Nikam, A comparative study of classiﬁcation techniques in data miningalgorithms, Oriental J. Comput. Sci. Technol. 8 (2015) 13–19
. [31]
S. Ougiaroglou, G. Evangelidis, RHC: a non-parametric cluster-based datareduction for efﬁcient K-means classiﬁcation, Pattern Anal. Appl. 19 (2016)93–109
.[32]
P. Porwik, R. Doroz, T. Orczyk, The K-means classiﬁer and self-adaptive Hotelling data reduction technique in handwritten signatures recognition,Pattern Anal. Appl. 18 (2015) 983–1001
. [33]
F. Roubelat, J. Brassett, M. Mcallum, J. Hoffmann, D. Kera, Probing ephemeralfutures: scenarios as fashion design, Futures 74 (2015) 27–36
. [34]
I. Sushko, S. Novotarskyi, R. Körner, A.K. Pandey, A. Cherkasov, J. Li, P.Gramatica, K. Hansen, T. Schroeter, K.R. Müller, L. Xi, Applicability domains forclassiﬁcation problems: benchmarking of distance to models for Amesmutagenicity set, J. Chem. Inf. Model. 50 (12) (2010) 2094–2111
. [35]
V. Vagizova, K. Lurie, I.B. Ivasiv, Clustering of Russian banks: business modelsof interaction of the banking sector and the real economy, Probl. Perspect.Manage. 12 (2014) 83–93
.[36]C.C. Wang, Parameterization and parametric design of mannequins, Comput.Aided Des. 37 (2005) 83–98
. [37]
Y. Wu, Development of an Intelligent Patternmaking System for Skirt DesignDoctoral dissertation, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, 2012
. [38]
C.L. Yang, R.H. Huang, Key success factors for online auctions: analysis ofauctions of fashion clothing, Expert Syst. Appl. 38 (2011) 7774–7783
. [39]
Y. Yu, C.L. Hui, T.M. Choi, An empirical study of intelligent expert systems onforecasting of fashion color trend, Expert Syst. Appl. 39 (2012) 4383–4389
. [40]
A. Khormali, J. Addeh, A novel approach for recognition of control chartpatterns: Type-2 fuzzy clustering optimized support vector machine, ISATrans. 63 (2016) 256–264
. [41]
H. Zhang, Y.L. Kang, Y.Y. Zhu, K.X. Zhao, J.Y. Liang, L. Ding, T.G. Zhang, J. Zhang,Novel naïve Bayes classiﬁcation models for predicting the chemical Amesmutagenicity, Toxicol. In Vitro 41 (2017) 56–63
. [42]
N. Zhou, W.M. Gifford, J. Yan, H. Li, End-to-end solution with clusteringmethod for attrition analysis, in: Services Computing (SCC), 2016 IEEEInternational Conference on, IEEE, 2016, pp. 363–370
. [43] Yan, J., Ren, Z., Zha, H., Chu, S., 2016. A constrained clustering based approachfor matching a collection of feature sets. arXiv:1606.03731.[44]
O. Younis, S. Fahmy, HEED: a hybrid, energy-efﬁcient, distributed clusteringapproach for ad hoc sensor networks, IEEE Trans. Mob. Comput. 3 (4) (2004)366–379
.O.R. Vincent et al. / Applied Computing and Informatics 14 (2018) 88–97 97