Array 15 (2022) 100238
Available online 25 July 2022
2590-0056/© 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-
nc-nd/4.0/ ).
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Array
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/array
Application of Artificial Immune Systems in Advanced Manufacturing✩
Rui Pinto∗, Gil Gonçalves
SYSTEC - Research Center for Systems and Technologies, Rua Dr. Roberto Frias, s/n, office i219, 4200-465, Porto, Portugal
Faculty of Engineering, University of Porto, Rua Dr. Roberto Frias, s/n 4200-465, Porto, Portugal
A R T I C L E I N F O
Keywords:
Artificial Immune Systems
Autonomic Computing
Advanced Manufacturing SystemsA B S T R A C T
In recent years, the application of Advanced Manufacturing Technologies (AMT) in industrial processes
represents the introduction of different Advanced Manufacturing Systems (AMS), which encourage enterprises
to improve their core competitiveness and maintain sustainable development when facing the increasing
demand for personalized product customization. More recently, AMT led to a new Internet revolution, mostly
known as 4th Industrial Revolution. Considering the development and deployment of Artificial Intelligence
to enable smart and self-behaving industrial systems, autonomic approaches allow the system to adapt itself,
eliminating the need for human intervention for management. This paper presents a systematic literature
review regarding Artificial Immune Systems (AIS) approaches to tackle multiple AMS problems requiring levels
of autonomy. First, a systematic review of current industrial AIS applications in manufacturing environments
is presented. Then, a conceptual framework is proposed to bridge the gap between research in the AIS field
and the manufacturing industry while discussing key challenges and opportunities to be addressed by future
research. This study aims to build a body of knowledge for researchers and manufacturers regarding AIS
solutions under Advanced Manufacturing while suggesting directions for understanding the requirements for
designing and managing autonomic industry applications supported by AIS.
1. Introduction
The high global competitiveness between companies characterizes
the 21st century industry. Constant changes in demand by the consumer
side lead to a shorter lifetime of products. To remain competitive,
companies must be able to respond quickly to this rapid demand. The
big challenge is implementing new methodologies that allow system
adaptability and flexibility to mass production methods to obtain a high
product variability and, at the same time, large production volumes.
Since the beginning of industrialization, there has been considerable
interest from the industry side to innovate their production systems
and develop new ideas. The applicability of new technologies in the
industry, which lead to paradigm changes by allowing increased rev-
enues at lower costs, are usually known as industrial revolutions, and
the current one is the 4th Industrial Revolution or Industry 4.0 (I4.0)
[1].
I4.0 is based on the idea of converging the real and virtual worlds by
connecting every physical object to each other, to identify themselves
with other devices and communicate with each other. This is highly
✩This work was financially supported by: INDTECH 4.0 (SP4) - POCI-01-0247-FEDER-026653, co-funded by European Regional Development Fund (FEDER),
through Competitiveness and Internationalization Operational Program (POCI) and Base Funding - UIDB/00147/2020 of the Systems and Technologies Center
– SYSTEC – funded by national funds through the FCT/MCTES, and was part of the project ’’RECLAIM- RE-manufaCturing and Refurbishment LArge Industrial
equipMent’’ and received funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under grant agreement No 869884.
∗Corresponding author at: Faculty of Engineering, University of Porto, Rua Dr. Roberto Frias, s/n 4200-465, Porto, Portugal.
E-mail addresses: rpinto@fe.up.pt (R. Pinto), gil@fe.up.pt (G. Gonçalves).motivated by the Advanced Manufacturing Technology (AMT) progress
application in industrial scenarios, such as in Multi-Agent Systems
(MAS), the Internet of Things (IoT) and Cyber–Physical Systems (CPS).
Also, based on Artificial Intelligent (AI) principles, such as Machine
Learning (ML) and bio-inspired methods, it is emphasized the creation
of autonomic systems, which are smart and autonomic systems that
make decisions, react and adapt in real-time to changes during the
manufacturing process as human operators do. All these ideas paved the
way for Advanced Manufacturing Systems (AMS), which are supported
by intelligent and autonomic (Self-*) properties [ 2].
According to Qu et al. [ 3], extensive effort has been made to enable
autonomic proprieties in AMS. The research community’s increasing
attention is on using Information and Communication Technologies
(ICT), such as cognitive agents, swarm intelligence, and Cloud com-
puting, to integrate, organize, and allocate machine resources. On
the other hand, adaptive and intelligent manufacturing control is an-
other crucial area due to the emergence of self-organizing MAS. This
level of autonomy is only possible due to data-driven approaches and
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.array.2022.100238
Received 20 October 2021; Received in revised form 19 July 2022; Accepted 19 July 2022Array 15 (2022) 100238
2R. Pinto and G. Gonçalves
AI-supported decision-making and continuous improvement strategies
since they enable predictive product status awareness, manufacturing
process monitoring and prognostics, equipment prognostics, health
management and predictive maintenance.
However, the adoption of such properties by industry is still rel-
atively poor compared to academic research since the application of
proper solutions and technologies in real environments is complex,
i.e., there are unique and difficult challenges that may not exist in
controlled environments. Also, despite the interest from the industry
to update their production systems considering I4.0 principles, and
increase revenues at lower costs, the technology acceptance is still slow.
This is mainly because these are emergent technologies with low Tech-
nology Readiness Level (TRL), sometimes still immature and lacking
proper integration and validation among real industrial situations.
Machine intelligence has become the basis for executing manufac-
turing processes, which requires close integration of process intelli-
gence and machine controls. Allied with the introduction of autonomic
proprieties to these systems, it is expected that further inspirations
taken from biological systems are adopted for designing and maintain-
ing their operation. Thus, this biological transformation of manufactur-
ing systems induces cognition, learning capabilities, intelligence and
self-healing and self-organization capabilities into AMS [4]. Artificial
Immune Systems (AIS) are one of the most popular categories of bio-
inspired techniques. These approaches are inspired by the Biologic
Immune System (BIS), a remarkable information processing and self-
learning system. Thus, the AIS research field has gained popularity over
the years as one successful branch of AI [5].
For this purpose, this paper presents a Systematic Literature Review
(SLR) on AIS applications in AMS. The objective is two-fold. On the one
hand, the study collects and analysis the scientific contributions that
report industrial AIS applications in multiple research areas to tackle
different problems. On the other hand, these applications are assessed
based on the Level of Autonomy (LOA) introduced to the system,
considering a taxonomy of system autonomy presented by Peres et al.
[6]. To this end, the following research questions were formulated:
RQ 1. What is the research trend of AIS applications in AMS?
RQ 2. What is the status of AIS applications in AMS?
RQ 3. What are the main motivations for using AIS in AMS?
RQ 4. What are the research gaps and future areas within AMS based
on AIS solutions?
The paper is organized into five additional sections. In Section 2 the
main concepts addressed in this paper are introduced, namely AMS,
Autonomic Computing and the AIS field. It also presented existing
literature reviews on these topics and popular AIS applications in non-
industrial-related scenarios. Section 3 provides a detailed description
of the SLR methodology undertaken and subsequent assessment of the
selected body of literature. Section 4 characterizes the main results of
the SLR and tries to find answers to the research questions related to
the research trend, AIS applications status (research fields), AIS usage
motivation (conceptualization) and existing research gaps. Section 5
provides a detailed characterization of a proposed conceptual frame-
work regarding AIS applicability in AMS, based on the analysis of the
SLR results. Finally, Section 6 concludes the paper with final remarks
about the work presented, such as challenges and opportunities for
future research, considering autonomy maturity and AIS application
potential, main strengths and limitations of the SLR.
2. Related work
This section has a twofold objective. First, it starts by addressing
important theoretical concepts used in the SLR, namely the develop-
ment process of AMS and Advanced Manufacturing Technology (AMT),
Autonomic Computing, Biologic Inspired Computation, and the AIS
field (main techniques and widespread applications in non-industrialrelated scenarios). Second, it presents the main existing literature re-
views on one or more of these topics. The analysis of the existing
literature reviews and identified limitations leads to the justification of
development of this SLR, which focus in the merger of all the addressed
topics.
2.1. Advanced manufacturing
AMT [7] has been studied since the 1960s, when there was a move
from mechanical technology to digital circuits and systems as a result
of the introduction of Programmable Logical Controllers (PLC) and
computer numerically controlled (CNC) machine tools on the shop
floor. This was the start of the Third Industrial Revolution. Indeed,
AMT has always significantly impacted the growing process of manu-
facturing paradigms ranging from craft production to mass production
to mass customization and personalization. Before the 1960s, with the
development and deployment of early factory automation technolo-
gies and related automated production equipment, manufacturing shop
floors were progressively changed from the original craft production
manual workshop into rigid automated production lines. It helped
manufacturing enterprises achieve mass production and lower costs
since increasing affluent customers and matching personalized requests
required mass production. Numerous AMT were created and are still
widely used today, leading to the development of several AMS, includ-
ing Flexible Manufacturing, Computer Integrated Manufacturing, Lean
Production, among others. [8].
Along the way, these AMS supported the transition of manufac-
turing from mass production to mass customization by encouraging
enterprise information and process integration. Other related AMT have
been developed rapidly due to the increasing personalized demand,
enhancing manufacturing processes’ agility, globalization, and intelli-
gence. More recently, in the Industrie 4.0 era, networked devices enable
unprecedented data and information exchange by applying typical IoT
scenarios, Service-Oriented Architectures (SOA), and CPS to industrial
contexts. This can be explained by the remarkable progress in the
technological capability of computational (embedded) devices and net-
works. These technologies were developed in parallel with the general
emergence of AMT, which helped deploy the personalization paradigm
[9].
As a result, AMS represent non-traditional manufacturing technolo-
gies that enterprises may employ to preserve or increase their competi-
tiveness. These technologies incorporate all of the benefits of industrial
automation (CNC, Robot, and Automated Guided Vehicles (AGVs),
integrated and computerized control, Industrial Local Area Network
(LAN), distributed architecture (MAS, and holonic manufacturing), and
distributed AI techniques.
Germany has one of the most competitive manufacturing industries
in the world. Because of its vital machinery and plant manufacturing
industry, its global significance of ICT competencies and its know-
how in embedded systems and automation engineering, Germany has
the advantage of being the leader in the research, development and
production of innovative manufacturing technologies. Also, they al-
ready followed a structured and integrative approach for the AMT
implementation to take advantage of all their individual and systemic
benefits [10]. So, in 2011, the Industrie 4.0 term was first used at
the Hannover Fair, and, in 2013, the Industrie 4.0 Working Group
presented a final report [11], stating that I4.0 is the strategic initiative
to secure the future of the German manufacturing industry.
However, Germany was not the only country that have recognized
the trend to deploy AMS into the manufacturing industry. Similar ini-
tiatives are also found, such as the U.S. Smart Manufacturing Leadership
Coalition (SMLC) [12], the Chinese Made In China 2025 (MIC25) [13],
the French Usine du Futur [14], the British Catapult [15], the Korean
Industry Innovation 3.0 [16], etc.
Meanwhile, in 2015, at the World Economic Forum in Davos, the
German chancellor Angela Merkel urged all of Europe to embrace I4.0Array 15 (2022) 100238
3R. Pinto and G. Gonçalves
[17]. With this it was introduced to European industries the urgency
to deal with the fusion of the online world and the world of industrial
production. The paradigm is changing, and those who are the leaders
in the digital domain will take the lead in industrial production. The
support for research in this area increased dramatically over the years,
and I4.0 became a hot topic among practitioners and academics in
Europe and one of the top priorities for research centres, universities
and companies. For the first time in the history of the industrial
revolution, a revolution was announced before it actually happened
[18]. This provided various opportunities for companies and research
institutes to shape the future of I4.0 actively.
Most AMT nowadays relates to integrating computational and phys-
ical processes and connecting billions of objects over the internet. This
is often addressed by modern CPS, IoT, and other similar technologies.
Many conventional terminologies, such as Manufacturing and Supervi-
sory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA), Industrial Control Systems
(ICS), Robotics, among others, are commonly used to refer to the same
AMT. This ambiguity is especially apparent in the AMS paradigm when
numerous other technologies and concepts overlap, such as embed-
ded systems, IoT, MAS, CPS, industrial networks, Wireless Sensor &
Actuator Networks, Digital Twin (DT), among others.
This makes defining AMS and AMT difficult, especially when consid-
ering all of the application scenarios and research fields. Furthermore,
because research in some of these technologies is so vast and may
encompass multiple disciplines of knowledge, they eventually become
their own research domains. Next, it is presented a description of the
core AMT, which are paving the way for the development of recent
AMS and Industry 4.0-related application scenarios.
CPS CPS are a new generation of systems that have integrated compu-
tational and physical capabilities and can interact with humans
via various procedures. A CPS is generally a networked compu-
tation and physical process-integrated system with cooperating
computational elements and controlling physical entities. Its
roots are frequently seen as embedded systems, objects with spe-
cialized sensing and processing capabilities. Because a CPS is a
network of interacting embedded devices, it is feasible to process
data locally such that valuable information or abstracted data
may be transmitted through the network. CPS implementation
in industrial contexts is commonly referred to as Cyber–Physical
Production Systems (CPPS) or Industrial CPS [19,20].
SCADA/ICS SCADA/ICS play a vital role in managing and controlling
critical infrastructure. These are frequently defined as infrastruc-
tures that offer essential services and serve as the foundation
for a country’s security, economic, and healthcare systems. They
can include sectors such as agriculture, healthcare, nuclear re-
actors, transportation, the energy industry, civil and chemical
engineering, water plants, research, and so on. Technological
improvements have resulted in the SCADA/ICS evolution to
modern systems such as CPS [21].
IoTBecause of the fast expansion of Internet technology, many phys-
ical objects may now be linked to the Internet via embedded
electronics, software, sensors, and network devices. IoT often
refers to scenarios in which network connection is extended
to everyday physical things. The fundamental idea behind IoT
is to link devices to each other over the Internet, thanks to
recent developments in wireless technology. The Internet, in
this scenario, symbolizes the worldwide networking of linked
devices – or Things – that allow them to communicate with one
another by sharing and transforming information. In industry,
IoT is commonly referred to as the Industrial Internet of Things
(IIoT). By connecting all industrial systems and shop-floor equip-
ment to the Internet, a production manager or executive may
readily obtain production information from any location with
an Internet connection. Furthermore, they may remotely control
the events of production equipment [22–24].Industrial LAN In a traditional industrial context, there are primar-
ily two communication levels: process and control. Each has
unique network needs, such as round-trip time, determinism,
dependability, and the severity of failures, requiring different
communication methods. Thus, IP networks are often employed
at the process level, whereas field networks are used at the
control level. Field networks, namely fieldbus protocols, have
been utilized in industrial applications for some time. Industrial
Ethernet protocols were developed to bridge the gap between
fieldbus systems and IP networks [25,26].
MAS MAS is based on a society of intelligent, cooperative, proactive,
and autonomous entities called agents that represent physical
or logical things in the system. It is derived from the field
of distributed AI. The agents are dispersed across the environ-
ment, interacting with one another and with the environment
to achieve a specific or common objective, sharing information,
making choices, and modifying their behaviour as conditions
change [27].
DTTo accomplish digitalization, a more significant effort in standard-
ization is necessary to develop consistent interfaces. This will
foster open communication among a diverse set of entities. This
standardization is frequently achieved through the notion of DT,
which is often viewed as a wrapper used to connect any device
or process into a network where information can be readily ac-
cessed, processed, and shared. In the industrial environment, the
DT may be viewed as a software wrapper of physical equipment
or information systems, offering autonomous decision making,
standardized communication, sensorisation as a plug & play
approach, and smart control [28–30].
AIManufacturing processes should employ a computationally pro-
cessable model, such as data-based, physical-based, numerical-
based, or discrete-based, to realize the full potential of decision
support. Data-driven models involve the analysis of sensor data
to discover hidden patterns in the data. This is referred to as data
mining, and it can employ one or more AI algorithms to extract
relevant information from data. These approaches may be based
on hard computing, such as Machine Learning methods, or on
soft computing, such as Biologic Inspired Computation [6,31,
32].
WSAN Sensors are used to acquire data about physical processes to
monitor them. This data is then analysed and used to regulate
physical processes via actuators, resulting in the optimization
of a manufacturing process. WSAN has recently enabled sensors
and actuators using wireless communication. Sensor motes can
be utilized if industrial needs require the deployment of a large
number of sensors where the primary aim is to gather sensor
data at a reasonable cost or if sensor integration has proven chal-
lenging because of the lack of accessibility to remote physical
places. Motes are tiny devices commonly used to develop WSAN
and are equipped with a microcontroller, battery, radio, Analog
to Digital Converter (ADC), and some sensors [33–35].
Cloud/Edge Computing Because of advancements in Cloud comput-
ing, IoT has become appealing. Wireless devices are distin-
guished by their mobility and battery power, which present sev-
eral constraints for data process and storage needs for running
algorithms. This means that these capabilities can be relocated
out of the constrained devices to powerful remote servers as
long as a network connection is available (for information ex-
change). Cloud computing refers to the ability of hardware and
software systems to deliver data services over the Internet. Data
collected from the sensorisation layer can be further processed
remotely on the Cloud or the Fog. On the other hand, FogArray 15 (2022) 100238
4R. Pinto and G. Gonçalves
and Edge computing are characterized by an intermediate layer
between the end devices and the Cloud, which can be seen
as an extension of the Cloud. These layers are responsible for
providing computation, storage and networking services at the
edge of the network since sometimes the Cloud is not prepared
to provide mobility support, geo-distribution, local awareness or
low latency to end devices [36–39].
Big Data As more things, or smart devices, are linked to the Internet
of Things, more data is collected from them to perform analytics
to identify trends and relationships that lead to insights. Big
Data refers to the challenge of gathering, storing, querying,
analysing, and managing a massive volume of heterogeneous
data generated by many devices with different time and location
signatures [40,41].
Industrial Robots An industrial robot is a self-contained,
reprogrammable, multifunctional manipulator with three or
more axes that can be stationary or mobile, used in industrial au-
tomation applications. An industrial robot generally comprises
a manipulator that moves an end-effector to accomplish the
intended duties, a controller that actuates and regulates the
manipulator, and a teach pendant that programmes and super-
vises the operations. There are also Automated Guided Vehicles
(AGV), which are robots that transport goods in facilities. More
recently, collaborative robots emerged. Cobots are designed to
work safely alongside human workers in a shared, collaborative
workspace [42,43].
Despite this difficulty for many people and companies when it
comes to identifying and implementing AMS, which can be seen cur-
rently as I4.0 scenarios, right now, the concept is more transparent.
All the implemented I4.0 scenarios converge to very similar require-
ments and goals to achieve added value in different manufacturing
applications, based on ICT technological advances, such as IoT, AI,
Cloud/Edge, and CPS. Oztemel and Gursev [1] presents 12 goals to
achieve I4.0, namely:
•Standardization [STD] - Standardization of systems and creation
of a reference architecture;
•Optimized Management [OM] - Performing optimized manage-
ment of complex systems;
•Communication Network Infrastructure [NET] - Manage in-
dustrial network infrastructure for communication reliability;
•Safety & Security [SS] - On one hand, setting a safe and se-
cure environment to human operator. On the other hand, enable
system protection against misuse and unauthorized access;
•Human Management [HM] - Organizing and managing the
workplace in a human-centred way, by considering processes,
human, automation and environmental changes;
•Upskilling [UP] - Personnel training for upskilling the workforce
and management (Education 4.0);
•Regulatory Framework [RF]- Creating an organizational frame-
work for data organization, to ensure new technology is compli-
ant with the law;
•Resource Efficiency [RE] - Increasing the efficiency of resource
utilization (Green Manufacturing);
•Autonomy [AU] - Self-behaving systems (Self-*), where mini-
mum human interaction is required;
•Process Efficiency & Product Quality [PEQ] - Product an Pro-
cess interaction (due to autonomy behaviour);
•Data Analytics [DA] - Big data analysis, for data-driven auto-
nomic decision-making;
•Adaptability [AD] - Adaptability and flexibility, for responsive-
ness to changes in real time.2.2. Autonomic computing
Computer systems have reached a level of complexity where hu-
man intervention for operation and control is becoming increasingly
difficult. In the IoT paradigm, the visions of ubiquitous and perva-
sive computing will become true by surrounding us with embedded
technology and transforming every physical object into a CPS. These
CPS are connected to sensors and actuators to maintain communication
between physical and virtual worlds and are interconnected to other
CPS using communication systems. How can such a complex system
be managed in this scenario, considering all the actively interacting
heterogeneous devices and uncertainty involved? In 2001, the Inter-
national Business Machines Corporation (IBM) suggested the concept
of Autonomic Computing, referring to the need for new methods to
manage and control the behaviour of complex systems, where these
systems should be able to adapt themselves, eliminating the need for
human intervention [44].
According to IBM [44], a system is autonomic only if: (1) it knows
itself in terms of what resources it has access to, what are its capabilities
and limitations and how and why it is connected to other systems;
(2) it can automatically configure and reconfigure itself depending on
the changing computing environment; (3) can optimize its performance
to ensure the most efficient computing process; (4) can work around
encountered problems by either repairing itself or routing functions
away from the trouble; (5) can detect, identify and protect itself against
various types of attacks to maintain overall system security and in-
tegrity; (6) can adapt to its environment as it changes, interacting with
neighbouring systems and establishing communication protocols; (7)
relies on open standards and cannot exist in a proprietary environment;
(8) anticipates the demand on its resources while keeping transparent
to users.
The Autonomic Computing concept, later extended to Organic Com-
puting [45], has been inspired by the human autonomic nervous system
[46], which removes from the consciousness the tasks of coordinating
all our bodily functions (for regular maintenance and optimization)
by taking care of most of them. Kephart and Chess [47] warn that
system managers cannot anticipate, design and maintain the complexity
of the interactions among devices and computer systems, especially
in CPS. For this reason, computer systems should constantly adapt
themselves to changing environmental conditions in a logic loop that
monitors the context of execution. Such dynamics can be realized by
a Monitor–Analyse–Plan–Execute (MAPE) loop or a Monitor–Analyse–
Plan–Execute–Knowledge (MAPE-K) loop architecture [44,47], which
is illustrated in Fig. 1.
The essence of Autonomic Computing is the system capacity of Self-
Management, which, according to Ganek and Corbi [48], includes the
so-called Self-x, Self-* (Self-star) or Self-CHOP properties. According
to Berns and Ghosh [49], Self-Managing systems are systems that
maintain, improve and restore their functionality or properties without
external actions on the system. Self-Management is the generic property
that encompasses the various Self-* properties, which relies on Zadeh’s
concept of adaptivity [50]. Essential Self-* properties are:
•Self-configuration [ SC]
•Self-optimizing [ SOP]
•Self-healing [ SH]
•Self-organizing [ SOR]
•Self-awareness [ SAW ]
•Self-adaptive [ SAD]
•Self-immunity [ SI]
As seen before, one of the main goals of AMS is to target the
implementation of autonomic and collaborative manufacturing assets
with advanced self-capabilities [4]. With this in mind, and taking
into account the heterogeneous nature of industrial systems and their
applications, Peres et al. [6] presents a taxonomy of manufacturingArray 15 (2022) 100238
5R. Pinto and G. Gonçalves
Fig. 1. MAPE-K model for autonomic systems [47].
system autonomy, defining a six-level model of automated decision-
making based on industrial processes. The model contextualized with
industrial scenarios for each Level of Autonomy (LOA) is:
•Level 0: No autonomy. Human operators have complete control
without any assistance from an AI system.
•Level 1: Assistance with respect to select functions. Human oper-
ators have full responsibility and make all decisions.
•Level 2: Partial autonomy. Human operators have full responsi-
bility in clearly defined areas and define (some) goals.
•Level 3: Delimited autonomy. In larger sub-areas, the AI system
warns if problems occur, and human beings validate the solutions
recommended by the system.
•Level 4: Adaptability and autonomic functions. Human operators
can supervise or intervene in emergency situations within defined
system boundaries.
•Level 5: Full autonomy. The AI system operates autonomously
in all areas, including cooperation and fluctuating system bound-
aries. Human operators do not need to be present.
In this work, we seek to study the introduction of Self- * properties
in AMS, thanks to the implementation and application of techniques
that follow Autonomic Computing principles, such as AIS. AIS belong to
the broader paradigm of Biologic Inspired Computation [51] and will be
described next.
2.3. Biologic inspired computation
Biologic Inspired Computation refers to the study of biologically mo-
tivated computation, which belongs to the field of Natural Computing
and a sub-field of Computational Intelligence .Biologic Inspired Computa-
tionmain goal is to solve engineering and computation problems by
generating solutions inspired by different biological processes from the
natural world. Several sub-disciplines focus on adaptive and intelligent
systems, such as Evolutionary Computation ,Swarm Intelligence ,Fuzzy
Systems , Artificial Neural Networks (ANN), and AIS.
Regarding AIS, they are a category of biology-inspired computa-
tional methods that emerged in the ’90s, bridging different areas such
as immunology, computer science and engineering. AIS have been
developed by computationally modelling biological immune processes,
abstracting those models into algorithms and implementing them in the
context of engineering. The BIS is an immensely rich system, and many
immune processes are not well understood yet, generating discussionand little agreement among immunologists. This leads to a lack of
clarity of the functioning of immune processes and, regarding AIS
practitioners, a difficulty in properly model a computational system.
2.3.1. Biological immune system
The BIS is a robust and self-organized system with remarkable abil-
ities, such as recognition and discrimination, maintenance, inference
from danger/context and memory. To maintain a healthy state, the BIS
processes the state of the body and takes action accordingly through
healing processes [52,53]. The BIS is a multilayer system wherein
different types of defence mechanisms are active in each layer. There
are three main lines of defence: the anatomic barrier, innate immunity
and adaptive immunity. The anatomic barrier is constituted by physical
obstacles, such as skin, mucous membranes and skin secretions, to
prevent pathogens such as bacteria and viruses from entering the organ-
ism. If a pathogen breaches the first line of defence, innate immunity
provides an immediate but non-specific response, such as inflammatory
response and antimicrobial proteins. If pathogens successfully evade
the innate response, it will activate the adaptive immunity, which
adapts its response during an infection to improve its recognition skills
and kill the pathogen.
The BIS consists of a set of organs (central and peripheral lymphoid
organs), cells (lymphocytes or white blood cells and granulocytes)
and molecules (immunoglobulins or antibodies) [54,55]. The central
lymphoid organs, such as bone marrow and the thymus, are responsible
for producing and assisting lymphocytes. The purpose of peripheral
lymphoid organs, such as lymph nodes, spleen and mucosal tissues, is
to facilitate the interaction between lymphocytes and antigens.
An antigen is a molecule capable of inducing an immune response
on the part of the host organism, though sometimes antigens can be
part of the host itself. The lymphocyte population is constituted mainly
of B and 𝑇cells. B cells are responsible for recognizing particular
antigens and producing antibodies, which will bind to antigens. B cells
are activated in the presence of antigens, and the maturation process
begins. B cell maturation consists of becoming plasma cells or memory
cells. Plasma cells are the ones that actively secrete antibodies.
Antigens are characterized by bounding molecules called epitopes,
which are the part of an antigen that is recognized by B and 𝑇cells. In
the recognition process, the epitope bonds to the lymphocytes using the
paratope, which is the bonding molecule of the lymphocyte. Antibodies
are a particular type of molecule. They are the paratopes of the B
cells and are responsible for binding to the antigen. Antigens are
mostly known as non-self cells, while the host body cells are known
as self-cells. Epitopes are usually non-self if they are part of antigens,
or self since some proteins of the host body could be recognized by
lymphocytes.
2.3.2. Artificial immune systems
As mentioned before, AIS were created to computationally simu-
late immunologic processes in the BIS, abstracting the concepts into
algorithms and implementing them in engineering settings. Pinto et al.
[56] presents a deep review of AIS, focusing on anomaly detection
applications in CPS. As described next, four main immune mechanisms
have inspired most standard AIS techniques [5]. However, there are
ensemble methods, which represent approaches that combine more
than one basic technique. Finally, there are immune-inspired methods,
which do not follow exactly a specific immune model but use immune
principles.
Negative Selection Algorithms (NSA) [57] The main characteristics
of the NSA are described by Forrest et al. [57]. NSA rely on
theSelf/Nonself theory existing in the BIS. The main goal is for
𝑇cells to detect foreign and potentially dangerous pathogens
and respond adequately, ignoring harmless substances and their
own body cells. This can be done by only enabling cells that
distinguish between self and non-self cells. Different variationsArray 15 (2022) 100238
6R. Pinto and G. Gonçalves
of NSA have been proposed [5]. The algorithm generically con-
sists of 3 main steps: (a) Immature 𝑇cells with various antigen
receptors are produced in the bone marrow and migrate to the
thymus; (b) In the thymus, 𝑇cells that recognize self-antigens
undergo a programmed cell death process. On the other hand, 𝑇
cells that do not recognize any self-antigen are allowed to live;
(c) Mature 𝑇cells that do not recognize self-antigens are now
used to recognize any non-self antigen invading the body, such
as virus and bacteria.
Artificial Immune Network Models (AIN) [58,59] Jerne [60] pro-
posed the immune network theory, also known as idiotypic
network theory, in 1974, which suggests that the immune sys-
tem maintains an idiotypic network of interconnected B cells for
antigen recognition and immunological memory. An idiotype is
a group of antibodies that share a common characteristic. This
algorithm investigates the interconnectivity of different immune
cells, i.e., cell populations linked over successive generations, to
stimulate or suppress immune responses. The Artificial Immune
Network algorithm (aiNet) [61] is a well-known approach in-
spired by the AIN. In this technique, antibodies stimulate and
suppress each other to stabilize the network and the memory.
An idiotype is stimulated when the antibodies from the group
bind to idiotopes of other groups of antibodies. This results in
the increase of the concentration of antibodies from the idiotype,
and the concentration of antibodies from the recognized group
decreases, leading to the stimulation or suppression of a given
immune response.
Clonal Selection Algorithms (CSA) [62] The clonal selection theory
tries to explain how B and 𝑇cells improve their response in
the presence of antigens based on the antigen–antibody affinity.
This affinity is based on the binding level between a B cell
and an antigen. When a B cell is activated by the presence of
an antigen, the B cell matures into plasma cells and secretes
antibodies. The created antibodies with higher affinities are
cloned, and a mutation process differentiates the clones. If the
new antibodies react to self cells, then they are eliminated. In
these situations, the concentration of B cells with an improved
affinity builds up. Some B cells are retained as memory cells to
make a more effective immune response to antigens encountered
previously. The created antibodies bind to antigens to tag and
inactivate them. A well know technique of CSA is the CLONal
selection ALGorithm (CLONALG) [62,63]. Other theories were
proposed, such as Artificial Immune Recognition System (AIRS)
[64] and The B-Cell Algorithm (BCA) [65]. Haktanirlar Ulutas
et al. [66] summarizes the basic features of the CSA and its
variants and reviews the corresponding application areas.
Danger Theory (DT) [67] Matzinger [68] explains how an immune
response is initiated. She states that, contrary to the previous
theories, the ‘foreignness’ of a pathogen is not the important
feature that triggers a response, and ‘selfness’ is no guarantee of
tolerance. The immune response is initiated by a co-stimulatory
signal from specific Dendritic Cells (DCs). Injured cells, such
as those exposed to pathogens, emit danger/alarm signals that
activate DCs. These signals should not be emitted by healthy
cells or cells undergoing normal physiological death. Once acti-
vated, they provide a co-stimulatory signal to exhibit an immune
response in the danger zone around the injured cell. The most
notorious DT-based algorithm is the Dendritic Cell Algorithm
(DCA) [69], which captures the function of DCs [70], first iden-
tified by Steinman and Cohn [71]. In the tissue, when antigens
stimulate DCs, they mature and differentiate accordingly to
the specific danger context collected. The level of maturation
of a DC is facilitated by the detection of signals within the
tissue, namely danger signals (caused by damage to tissue cells),
pathogenic associated molecular patterns (pre-defines bacterial
signatures), safe signals (caused by regulated cell deaths) andinflammatory signals (general tissue distress). After maturing,
DCs migrate to local lymphoid nodes, where they stimulate or
tolerate an immune response according to the danger context.
2.3.3. AIS applications
Considering the nature of AIS techniques, they have already proven
to be suitable for solving real-world problems in computer science and
engineering. They can be found in different fields, such as machine
learning, pattern recognition and classification, computer virus detec-
tion, anomaly detection, optimization, robotics, etc. Aldhaheri et al.
[72] proposes six different properties of the AIS approaches:
1.Adaptive [AD]: has the ability to learn over time and develop
adaptive behaviours.
2.Robust [RO]: has the ability to process under imprecise and
uncertain data circumstances.
3.Resiliency [RES]: the immune system created with a bottom-up
approach of Agent based paradigm, to realize dynamic, hetero-
geneous and distributed environment.
4.Self-tolerance [ST]: has the ability to prevent the response to
self against a particular antigen.
5.Lightweight [LH]: has the ability to process with low computa-
tional complexity.
6.Distributed [DS]: has the ability to process in a distributed
manner not centralized.
This SLR focuses on the collection and analysis of AIS applications in
AMS scenarios. Some non-industrial scenario applications are described
next. Since detecting anomalies in computer systems greatly resembles
the BIS’s functionality, most AIS techniques applications are found
in computer security, namely virus detection, network security and
intrusion/anomaly detection systems. Greensmith et al. [73] used the
DT concept, namely the DCA, to develop an Intrusion Detection System
(IDS). The authors assessed the IDS in the port scan detection problem.
Later, the same DCA technique was applied in the bot detection prob-
lem [74], online break-in fraud for an Online Video on Demand System
[75] and Deny of Service Detection Problem in IEEE 802.11 Networks
[76]. More recently, Alsulami and Zein-Sabatto [77,78] applied AIS
techniques, namely the NSA, to CPS in the Aviation industry to detect
false data injection and sensor spoofing attacks.
The second great AIS application field is regarding optimization
problems. Cayzer and Aickelin [79] presents an AIS approach applied
to the task of film recommendation. Zand et al. [80] demonstrates how
the CSA can be used to solve the File Transfer Scheduling optimization
problem. A traffic signal control system was developed based on AIS
to supervise an isolated intersection and build a regulation strategy
as soon as a disturbance (such as congestion or an accident) is de-
tected [81]. Also, Chen and Zhang [82] presented an AIS approach for
scheduling wireless access networks in a 5G message service system.
Other proposals are more related to machine learning, pattern
recognition and classification problems. Takeda et al. [83] proposes a
biometric personal authentication method using the CSA as a classifier
training method. Xu et al. [84] used AIS for GPS data processing
to solve the nonlinear models and avoid the ill-conditions (single-
frequency precise point positioning). Finally, in wireless multimedia
sensor networks, AIS was used for energy-efficient, distributed and
collaborative image pattern recognition on camera sensors [85].
2.4. Comparison of the related work
To emphasize the need for this SLR, this section explores the previ-
ous literature review of both AMS and AIS approaches. Table 1 present
a comparison of the related work.
Regarding AMS, there are some review-type articles investigating
different perspectives of I4.0 already published. Zhong et al. [94] pro-
vide a survey of I4.0-related worldwide movements and governmentalArray 15 (2022) 100238
7R. Pinto and G. Gonçalves
Table 1
Comparison of the related work.
Work Year Study type AMS Self-* AIS Purpose
Timmis [86] 2007 Position ✗ ✗ ✓ Immune models
Shafi and Abbass [87] 2007 Survey ✗ ✓ ✓ Bio-inspired IDS
Timmis et al. [88] 2008 Survey ✗ ✗ ✓ Immune models
Zheng et al. [89] 2010 Survey ✗ ✗ ✓ AIS applications
Dasgupta et al. [5] 2011 Survey ✗ ✗ ✓ Immune models
Haktanirlar Ulutas et al. [66] 2011 Literature review ✗ ✗ ✓ CSA
Muhamad and Deris [90] 2013 Survey ✓ ✗ ✓ AIS in job-shop scheduling
Bayar et al. [91] 2015 Survey ✗ ✗ ✓ AIS in FDDR
Bere and Muyingi [92] 2015 Survey ✓ ✗ ✓ AIS for ICS security
Raza and Fernandez [93] 2015 Literature review ✓ ✗ ✓ AIS in robotics
Zhong et al. [94] 2017 Literature review ✓ ✗ ✗ Generic I4.0
Oztemel and Gursev [1] 2018 Literature review ✓ ✗ ✗ Generic I4.0
Qu et al. [3] 2019 Survey ✓ ✓ ✗ Smart manufacturing
Aldhaheri et al. [72] 2020 SLR ✗ ✗ ✓ AIS for IoT security
Al-Khatib and Doush [95] 2020 Survey ✗ ✗ ✓ AIS applications
Peres et al. [6] 2020 SLR ✓ ✓ ✗ AI in I4.0
Radanliev et al. [96] 2020 SLR ✓ ✓ ✗ AI in CPS
Stock et al. [2] 2020 Survey ✓ ✓ ✗ Self-* CPS
Alrubayyi et al. [97] 2021 Survey ✗ ✗ ✓ AIS for IoT security
This study 2022 SLR ✓ ✓ ✓ AIS in AMS
strategies while describing associated topics and critical technologies,
such as the IoT, CPS, Cloud Computing, Big Data and ICT, which are
used to enable AMS. This survey was performed at a time when the
I4.0 concept was still very immature. Later, Oztemel and Gursev [1]
provide a comprehensive review of I4.0 and related technologies by
defining clearly the concept and providing a taxonomy of I4.0, which
can be used to support the implementation of I4.0 design principles.
Also, Qu et al. [3] present a comprehensive study of the recent trend
of Smart Manufacturing Systems (SMS), which represent an AMS that
explores data-driven decision making, collaborative intelligence and
system autonomy. The authors summarize the evolution, definition,
objectives, functional requirements, business requirements, technical
requirements, and components of SMS. More recently, Stock et al.
[2] discuss how modern IT architectures and infrastructure for in-
dustrial CPS can enable their inherent Self-* capabilities to pave the
road towards higher levels of autonomy facilitated by data-driven
technologies.
Considering AMS-related SLRs, Peres et al. [6] present a systematic
review of current Industrial AI literature, focusing on its application in
real-world manufacturing environments. On the other hand, Radanliev
et al. [96] provide a literature review of current and future challenges
in using AI in CPS, and present a new conceptual framework for
analysing the evolution of AI decision-making in these type of systems.
Moreover, thus far, several review-type articles deserve attention in
the AIS field. To review available immune models and related inspired
methods, Timmis [86] survey the current state of the AIS approaches
and reflect on the field roadblocks for future development. In this work,
Timmis et al. [88] analyse AIS in a broader context of interdisciplinary
research, based on an established conceptual framework that encap-
sulates mathematical and computational modelling of immunology,
abstraction and then the development of engineered systems. Finally,
Dasgupta et al. [5] survey the significant works in the AIS field and,
in particular, it explores up-to-date advances in applied AIS during the
last few years.
Other proposals focus specifically on AIS application scenarios.
Zheng et al. [89] review immune applications of the AIS approach
and propose several suggestions to the AIS community that can be
undertaken to help move the area forward. On the other hand, Hak-
tanirlar Ulutas et al. [66] presents a literature review of the CSA, its
variants (basic and hybrid approaches), and the main applications.
More recently, Al-Khatib and Doush [95] extensively summarize re-
search of AIS and categorize them based on the application problem to
understand the current trend of the usage of this category of algorithms.
Related to the security field, there are several AIS review papers.
Shafi and Abbass [87] survey some key work in the Complex AdaptiveSystems field, with the primary focus on biologically-inspired adaptive
approaches, including AIS, to the Network Intrusion Detection problem.
Bayar et al. [91] provide a survey on biological immunity and highlight
the main concepts and mechanisms that are particularly relevant to
fault detection, diagnosis and recovery (FDDR) problems. More re-
cently, Aldhaheri et al. [72] and Alrubayyi et al. [97] present an SLR
and a survey with a comprehensive study of empirical research on AIS
approaches to secure IoT environments. Moreover, and also related to
AMS, Bere and Muyingi [92] presents an analysis of AIS solutions to
secure Industrial Control Systems (ICS) from persistent threats. Finally,
Muhamad and Deris [90] review the production scheduling problems,
focusing on ways AIS can be used to solve job-shop and flexible job-
shop scheduling problems. On the other hand, Raza and Fernandez [93]
present a detailed review of immuno-inspired robotic applications.
To the best of our knowledge, none of the previously identified re-
views formed insights into applying AIS approaches in AMS. Generally,
we find studies focusing only on the AMS domain or the AIS domain.
Some AMS-domain reviews also address autonomy in industrial systems
(Self-*), but do not include directly in the study AIS applications. On
the other hand, AIS-domain reviews have the purpose of surveying
the main immune models or specific AIS applications. However, these
application scenarios are not related to the industry.
Nevertheless, we encountered three reviews similar reviews, which
merge both AIS and AMS domains [90,92,93]. However, these reviews
are limited to specific application contexts and/or research categories,
such as ICT security, job-shop scheduling and robotics. Thus, there is
a need for this systematic review. The main contribution is a compre-
hensive study of AIS models applied to different application contexts
and research categories within AMS. This will provide readers with a
complete understanding of the role of AIS in industrial scenarios.
3. SLR methodology
An SLR was conducted following the guidelines outlined in the
Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis
(PRISMA) statement. The PRISMA flow chart reporting the different
phases of the systematic review is shown in Fig. 2.
In the Identification stage, a search string was constructed based
on the core concepts associated with AIS and AMS. Two groups of
keywords were defined, and at least one element of each of the groups
was present in the search string, using a combination of 𝑂𝑅and𝐴𝑁𝐷
operators. More detail about the groups of keywords can be found in
Appendix A. The search string was then adapted to each electronic
database included in this study. In this case, they were:
•IEEE XploreArray 15 (2022) 100238
8R. Pinto and G. Gonçalves
Fig. 2. PRISMA flowchart of study inclusions and exclusions for the SLR.
•Elsevier Scopus
•Elsevier ScienceDirect
•Springer
•ACM Digital Library
•Engineering Village (Inspec & Knovel)
•ISI Web of Knowledge
More information regarding the search strategy, i.e., the electronic
database search strings used, can be found in Appendix B. The search
was conducted between July and October 2021 and then updated in
July 2022. In both phases, it included academic research that: (i)
contained at least one term from each group (see Appendix A) in either
the abstract, title or keywords; (ii) published in peer-reviewed journals,
conference proceedings or book chapters; (iii) written in the English
language.
In the Screening stage, the records that resulted from the search were
aggregated, and the duplicated work was removed. Next, one indepen-
dent reviewer carried out a screening process, following the criteria
represented in Fig. 2 and Appendix C. First, the screening process was
performed based only on the publication metadata, i.e., title, abstract
and keywords. Next, in the Eligibility stage, all remaining articles from
the initial screening had their full text analysed in further detail, based
on the eligibility criteria represented in Fig. 2 and Appendix C. Finally,
in the Include stage, each of the articles eligible to be included in the
study, considering the screening results, were analysed based on the
research questions defined in Section 1.
4. Characterization of AIS applications in AMS
In this section, the results of the literature review are analysed
according to the research questions defined previously in Section 1. The
research questions are:RQ 1. What is the research trend of AIS applications in AMS?
RQ 2. What is the status of AIS applications in AMS?
RQ 3. What are the main motivations for using AIS in AMS?
RQ 4. What are the research gaps and future areas within AMS based
on AIS solutions?
Following the PRISMA guidelines and the steps described in Sec-
tion 3, a total of 1813 items were identified from database searches. Of
those, 113 internal & external duplicate items were excluded, resulting
in 1700 unique records. Those 1700 items were screened based on the
exclusion criteria represented in Fig. 2 and Appendix C. While screening
only titles/abstracts, 1609 items were excluded, resulting in 91 full-text
records to be reviewed. After the full-text screening, 41 items were
excluded, resulting in 50 publications included in this study. Table 2
summarizes the findings from this assessment, extracting from each
included publication the critical information required to address the
research questions defined previously.
4.1. Research trends
This section tries to answer the RQ 1. What is the research trend of
AIS applications in AMS? by presenting the analysis results of the papers
included in the SLR regarding year-wise publications, contributions
by publishers, high-contributing authors, contributions by country,
keywords statistics, contributions per research category, application
context and immune model.
4.1.1. Year-wise publication analysis
In order to achieve a general view of the literature work anal-
ysed, we mapped the publications based on a year-wise analysis, as
represented in Fig. 3.Array 15 (2022) 100238
9R. Pinto and G. Gonçalves
Table 2
Overview of publications included in the SLR.
ID Authors Application context Research category TRL LOA Algorithms
P01 Pinto et al. [ 98] Manufacturing Intrusion Detection 3–4 0 DT
P02 Rocha et al. [ 99] Manufacturing Autonomic Systems 3–4 3 NSA CSA; AIN
P03 Lokesh and Kumaraswamy [ 100] CPS Anomaly Detection 3–4 0 DT
P04 Xu et al. [ 101] Robotics Operations Research 4–5 4 CSA
P05 Igbe et al. [ 102] Electric Power Industry Intrusion Detection 3–4 0 DT
P06 Samigulina and Samigulina [ 103] SCADA/ICS Control Systems – – CSA
P07 Lokesh et al. [ 104] CPS Autonomic Systems 3–4 0 Ensemble
P08 Lokesh and Kumaraswamy [ 105] CPS Autonomic Systems 3–4 0 Ensemble
P09 Lima et al. [ 106] Electric Power Industry Anomaly Detection 3–4 2 NSA
P10 Li and Cai [ 107] Manufacturing Operations Research 5–6 3 Ensemble
P11 Lima et al. [ 108] Electric Power Industry Fault Diagnosis 3–4 2 NSA
P12 Ieao et al. [ 109] Electric Power Industry Anomaly Detection 4–5 2 CSA
P13 Ko et al. [ 110] Robotics Control Systems 5 4 Immune inspired
P14 Rammig et al. [ 111] CPS Autonomic Systems 3–4 3 DT
P15 Degeler et al. [ 112] Robotics Intrusion Detection 3–4 2 Ensemble
P16 Pinto et al. [ 113] Manufacturing Intrusion Detection 3–4 0 DT
P17 Clotet et al. [ 114] Manufacturing Intrusion Detection 4–5 0 NSA
P18 Guerrero et al. [ 115] Electric Power Industry Control Systems 3–4 3 CSA
P19 Guo and Yang [ 116] Manufacturing Anomaly Detection 5–6 1 Ensemble
P20 Semwal and Nair [ 117] CPS Operations Research 4–5 3–4 Ensemble
P21 Zhu et al. [ 118] CPS Fault Diagnosis 4–5 1–2 Ensemble
P22 Zhao et al. [ 119] SCADA/ICS Fault Diagnosis 4–5 1–2 Ensemble
P23 Kim [ 120] SCADA/ICS Control Systems 3–4 3 AIN
P24 Li et al. [ 121] Electric Power Industry Autonomic Systems 3–4 3 Immune inspired
P25 Aghaebrahimi et al. [ 122] Electric Power Industry Operations Research 4–5 2 CSA
P26 Lizondo et al. [ 123] Electric Power Industry Control Systems 3–4 3 AIN
P27 Kayama et al. [ 124] SCADA/ICS Fault Diagnosis 3–4 2 Ensemble
P28 Wang et al. [ 125] SCADA/ICS Control Systems 3–4 3 AIN
P29 Jun et al. [ 126] Robotics Control Systems 3–4 4 AIN
P30 Jin et al. [ 127] Electric Power Industry Control Systems 3–4 3 Immune inspired
P31 Huang [ 128] Robotics Control Systems 5 4 Ensemble
P32 Lau and Wong [ 129] Robotics Control Systems 3–4 4 Immune inspired
P33 Xiaobo and Guoqing [ 130] Electric Power Industry Operations Research 4–5 2 Ensemble
P34 Lee and Sim [ 131] Robotics Control Systems 3–4 4 Ensemble
P35 Lau and Ng [ 132] Robotics Control Systems 3–4 4 CSA
P36 Yin [ 133] Electric Power Industry Islanding Detection 3–4 1 Immune inspired
P37 Bhuvaneswari et al. [ 134] Electric Power Industry Control Systems 3–4 3 CSA
P38 Yuan et al. [ 135] Electric Power Industry Operations Research 3–4 1–2 Immune inspired
P39 Lau and Wong [ 136] Robotics Control Systems 3–4 4 Immune inspired
P40 Michelan and Von Zuben [ 137] Robotics Control Systems 3–4 4 AIN
P41 Hanumantha Rao and Sivanagaraju [ 138] Electric Power Industry Operations Research 3–4 2 CSA
P42 Gao and Luo [ 139] Robotics Operations Research 3–4 3–4 AIN
P43 Sun et al. [ 140] Robotics Control Systems 3–4 4 Ensemble
P44 Rimal and Belkacemi [ 141] Electric Power Industry Control Systems 3–4 3 Immune inspired
P45 Diez-Olivan et al. [ 142] CPS Anomaly Detection 4–5 0 Ensemble
P46 Khoie et al. [ 143] SCADA/ICS Control Systems 3–4 3 Ensemble
P47 Pinto et al. [ 56] CPS Anomaly Detection 3–4 0 Ensemble
P48 Pinto et al. [ 144] CPS Intrusion Detection 4–5 0 DT
P49 Kim et al. [ 145] Manufacturing Anomaly Detection 3–4 0 Ensemble
P50 Outa et al. [ 146] Manufacturing Fault Diagnosis 4–5 0 NSA
Fig. 3. Year-wise publications.The analysis shows a stable trend of published papers between 2000
and 2010, while there was an increasing number of publications after
2010 throughout recent years, especially in the range from 2015 and
2020. Between 1995 and 2010, there was a mean of 1 publication per
year, while from 2010 forward, until 2022, there was a mean of 3
publications per year. The AIS research field emerged in the ’90s, so it is
natural to find studies in the area since 1995. The academic community
was more active after 2010 because the emergence of the Industry 4.0
happened in 2011 and other national initiatives in the following years.
This implies that the topic of AIS applications in AMS is attracting more
and more attention from the academic community.
4.1.2. Contributions from publishers
Fig. 4 presents the distribution of contributions from different pub-
lishers. The Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE)
is the most contributing publisher, with a 66% share. This can be
explained since IEEE is currently one of the largest associations of tech-
nical professionals in electrical and electronic engineering, telecommu-
nications, computer engineering and similar disciplines. Next, we can
find Elsevier (14%) and Springer (10%) since they publish several arti-
cles in multiple journals and conferences in engineering-related fieldsArray 15 (2022) 100238
10R. Pinto and G. Gonçalves
Table 3
Journals encompassed in the study.
Journal SCImago classification
Journal of Intelligent Manufacturing Q1
IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics Q1
Electric Power Systems Research Q1
IET Generation, Transmission & Distribution Q1
IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics - Part A: Systems and Humans Q1
IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics Q1
Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research Q1
Journal of Loss Prevention in the Process Industries Q1
Computers in Industry Q1
Cybersecurity Q1
Applied Soft Computing Q1
Electric Power Systems Research Q1
International Journal of Critical Infrastructure Protection Q2
Algorithms Q2
Lecture Notes in Networks and Systems Q4
Lecture Notes of the Institute for Computer Sciences, Social Informatics and Telecommunications Engineering Q4
Acta Scientiarum. Technology Q4
Fig. 4. Contributions from publishers.
every year. Out of the top three, we can find contributions published
in the Institution of Engineering and Technology (IET), Power Systems
Computation Conference (PSCC), American Chemical Society (ACS),
and the State University of Maringá.
To ensure a comprehensive collection and analysis of publications
while understanding the article publication trend, both journal and
proceedings articles were considered. In this case, 62% of the paper
were published in conference proceedings, while 38% were published
in scientific journals. Considering the journals, according to SCImago,
73.6% are classified as Q1, 10.5% Q2 and 15.8% Q4. Table 3 presents
the journals considered and the SCImago classification. On the other
hand, conferences are rated using the H-Index metric, according to
SCImago, ranging from 2 to 71.
4.1.3. Affiliation-wise publication analysis
Fig. 5 presents the top contributing authors. The analysis consider
only two or more publications where the author is the corresponding
author. In this case, the most contributing author is Pinto, with 4
publications. The other top contributing authors are Lokesh andLau,
with 3 publications each, and Lima,LiandLeewith 2 publications each.
On the other hand, considering authors’ contributions by country,
the analysis shows that the top five contributing countries are China (40
authors), Brazil (19 authors), Portugal (16 authors) India (14 authors),
and South Korea (12 authors), as represented in Fig. 6.
4.1.4. Frequent keywords analysis
Keywords are used to classify the related literature. Fig. 7 represents
the distribution of top-rated keywords used in the selected publications.
Based on the keyword analysis, the top five frequent keyword encoun-
tered in the publications included in this study are Artificial Immune
Systems (20.6%), Distributed Control (9.9%), Multi-Agent Systems (9%),
Cyber–Physical Systems (9%) and Robot Systems (6.6%).
Fig. 5. Contributing authors.
Fig. 6. Contributions by country.
4.2. Research fields
This section tries to answer the RQ 2. What is the status of AIS
applications in AMS? by collecting and analysing data, such as the main
research categories and application areas found in selected papers, asArray 15 (2022) 100238
11R. Pinto and G. Gonçalves
Fig. 7. Frequently used keywords.
well as the work TRL and LOA introduced by the immune model to the
system.
Every paper selected in this SLR identifies a problem on a specific
research field and proposes a solution based on immune mechanisms.
This solution is also developed and/or validated in a given application
scenario. Thus, each paper was further categorized based on the re-
search field, application area and immune mechanisms, as shown in
Fig. 8. The characterization matrix displays data relationships between
research areas and application fields. These relationships consist mainly
in immune-based approaches. The research areas considered in the
selected papers are Autonomic Systems ,Control Systems ,Islanding ,IDS,
Anomaly Detection ,Fault Diagnosis and Operations Research . On the
other hand, the solutions application fields are Electric Power Industry ,
SCADA/ICS ,Manufacturing ,Robotics andCPPS . Finally, each solution
can be categorized based on the immune model used, i.e., DT,CSA,
NSA,AIN,Immune Inspired orEnsemble .
By inspecting Fig. 8 regarding the overall categorization of the five
application fields, it is possible to conclude that more attention has
been paid to the Electrical Power Industry (30% share) in comparison
to the other application areas. Selected research in this field includes
network communication protocol in Smart Grids, electrical distribution
systems, Distribution Management Systems (DMS), Distributed Gen-
eration (DG), power optimization and management. This is followed
by studies in the Robotics field (24% share), which includes mobile
robots, Autonomous Guided Vehicles (AGVs), robot manipulators and
distributed multi-robot systems. The third place belongs to the CPS
field (18% share), which includes different problems in cyber–physical
processes. Next, with a share of 16% and 12% are the Manufacturing
and Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA) fields, which
include problems primarily at the industrial process level and control.
On the other hand, there are seven research categories tackled by
the different contributions by inspecting Fig. 8 regarding the overall
categorization of the research fields. Most of the AIS applications
were used to develop Control Systems (38% share), such as overall
distributed and cooperative system control and Proportional Integral
Derivative (PID) controller tuning. Next, several topics within Oper-
ations Research (16% share) are addressed, such as meta-heuristic,
optimization, planning and scheduling. Anomaly/Intrusion Detection
(14% and 12% share) and Fault Diagnosis (10% share) are very similar
research categories since they all rely on similar solutions to detect
and analyse system attacks and/or failures. These can be used for
system state awareness, online diagnosis, and prognosis. Autonomic
Systems (10.% share) refer to the introduction of Self-* properties
in industrial systems (as discussed in Section 2.2). Finally, Islanding
Detection presents a 2% share only in the Electrical Power Industry.Finally, inspecting the actual immune mechanisms used to develop
solutions in these different research categories and application areas,
most of the contributions follow an ensemble method (32.7%), which
consists in using multiple learning algorithms to obtain better per-
formance when compared with the learning algorithms alone. In this
case, the ensemble methods can be a combination of two or more
different AIS techniques or with other Machine Learning or bio-inspired
techniques. The four main immune inspired mechanisms are used (both
basic or variants), namely Clonal Selection (CSA) - 17.3%, Immune
Network (AIN) - 13.5%, Danger Theory (DT) - 11.5% and Negative
Selection (NSA) - 9.6%. Finally, there are several immune-inspired
solutions (15.4%), i.e., solutions that follow one or more immune
principles but do not follow exactly the general guidelines of a specific
immune model.
4.2.1. Autonomic systems
As mentioned before, Autonomic Systems refer to the introduction
of Self-* properties in industrial systems (as discussed in Section 2.2).
The main applications areas found are CPS, Electric Power Industry and
Manufacturing. Overall, all the proposals were validated with datasets
for proof of concept, or small lab testbeds, achieving a TRL of 3–4. On
the other hand, the LOA of most proposals (dataset validated) is 0 since
the proposed solution is demonstrated in a simulated dataset (no system
autonomy achieved). Considering the work validated on testbeds, it is
possible to find LOA of 3, i.e., despite the predominant pre-programmed
functionality, the system is capable of self-adjusting its own behaviour
(within specific boundaries) considering the perceived environment
state.
Regarding the CPS application area, Rammig et al. [111] (P14)
proposed an online model checking technique that can be applied
to identify needs and adapt the currently running software system
proactively. In this case, a DT-based approach is used for continuous
system supervision. This way, achieving a lightweight solution for
Self-adaptation in Real-Time Operating Systems (RTOS) is possible.
The proposed solution is demonstrated in a paravirtualization context
(virtual machines) and tested in an abstracted emulation framework.
On the other hand, Lokesh et al. [104] (P07) propose a MAS-CPS model-
based integrated with an ensemble immune model (combination of DT
and AIN). This model introduces resiliency and self-adaptation to the
system by enabling state awareness, self-tolerance and self-healing. The
proposed solution is demonstrated as a generic framework and applied
to a simulated dataset containing data from several CPS layers, such
as monitor & actuator, communication and computation & control.
The authors propose a similar solution to the same problem [105]Array 15 (2022) 100238
12R. Pinto and G. Gonçalves
Fig. 8. Characterization matrix of the studies selected.
(P08). However, in this case, the ensemble immune model used was
a combination of DT and Artificial Immune Recognition System V2
(AIRS2), a technique from the CSA family.
In the Electric Power Industry, Li et al. [ 121] (P24) address the
distribution service restoration problem, in the event of a large-scale
blackout in a power distribution network with DGs, by proposing a
generic immune-inspired MAS, designated Multi-agent Immune Algo-
rithm (MIA). This solution introduces adaptability, resiliency, Self-
tolerance and Self-healing properties to the power system. The so-
lution is demonstrated using a power flow analysis software of a
simulated scenario with real-world conditions. More recently, but in
the Manufacturing application area, Rocha et al. [ 99] (P2) studied
industrial approaches to distributed machine diagnosis, using a MAS
paradigm combined with AIS. For this work, lightweight NSA, AIN and
CSA models are developed based on fuzzy logic, enabling distributed
system adaptability, resiliency and Self-tolerance. The models were
demonstrated and validated in simulation environments.
4.2.2. Control systems
Control systems manage the behaviour of other system devices
using control loops. In this case, it can be found mainly in Robotics,
SCADA/ICS, and the Electric Power Industry. Overall, most work is
validated in lab environments (mostly simulations) for proof of concept,
achieving a TRL of 3–4. However, two proposals in the robotics field
were validated in real industrial relevant environments, achieving a
TRL of 5. Regarding LOA, all robotics-related work achieve an LOAof 4 since the robot system can behave as an adaptive and autonomic
system and continuously self-learn within known system boundaries.
However, proposals related to SCADA/ICS and Electric Power Industry
achieve LOA of 3 since the system can self-adjust its own behaviour.
However, a human is responsible for overseeing system decisions.
Robotic immuno-based control systems are very popular. In the
early years, Lee and Sim [ 131], Jun et al. [ 126] and Sun et al. [ 140]
(P34, P29, P43) were already proposing an ensemble method, combin-
ing CSA and AIN and achieving cooperative control in a distributed
autonomic robotic system. Based on the MAS paradigm, the proposed
solution enables adaptive group control as a swarm strategy, where
robots can find and execute tasks that are spread out in the environ-
ment. Validation is performed in a simulated environment regarding a
collaborative robot search problem. On the other hand, Michelan and
Von Zuben [ 137] (P40) investigates an autonomic control system of a
mobile robot based (in this work, non-distributed), using an AIN model.
The robot navigates to solve a multi-objective task, namely, garbage
collection, while it adapts to environmental conditions to establish a
trajectory without colliding with obstacles. The authors used simulation
to validate the solution.
Moreover, considering mobile robots, Lau and Wong [ 129] (P32)
present a fully distributed and adaptive control framework, based on
generic immune theories, to manage, coordinate and schedule a fleet
of agents employed in an AGV system. The framework was validated
in a simulation study of an intelligent transport system operated by a
fleet of AIS agents in a warehousing environment. Later, the authors
presented a mathematical model of the control framework [ 136] (P39).Array 15 (2022) 100238
13R. Pinto and G. Gonçalves
On the other hand, Lau and Ng [132] (P35) reports the develop-
ment of the MAS-based control paradigm, inspired by the CSA, for
the distributive trajectory control of a robot manipulator. Authors
tried to enable cobot capabilities, such as adaptive, resiliency and
robustness. They validated the solution in a MATLAB simulation of
the Whole Arm Manipulator (WAM) system, a four degrees-of-freedom
robot installed at the Intelligent Systems Laboratory of the University
of Hong Kong. Ko et al. [110] (P13) propose a distributed control
system, based on the immuno-suppression theory, for a Modular Self-
Reconfigurable (MSR) robot arm. The proposed framework, designated
General Suppression Framework, is adaptive, resilient, robust and Self-
tolerance since it enables robot modules to generate emergent group
behaviours by exhibiting aggressive or tolerant behaviour based on
environmental changes. The framework is validated through computer
simulation (MATLAB) and in a hardware implementation of a seven-
module MSR manipulator. More recently, Huang [128] (P31) proposed
an online motion control of four-wheeled redundant Swedish mobile
robots by using a fuzzy system incorporated with the Bacterial Foraging
Optimization (BFO) metaheuristic technique and AIS, designated FS-
PBFOAIS. The solution was validated in an experimental four-wheeled
redundant mobile robot, with one FPGA, to self-adjust the polar-space
trajectory tracking. Results show Self-tolerance and robustness.
Considering the SCADA/ICS application area, Kim [120] (P23) and
Khoie et al. [143] (P46) proposed tuning approaches for PID con-
trollers. The first approach uses AIN to make the system adaptive
and Self-tolerant to its external environment while allowing a strong
parallel distributed processing network to complete patterns against
the environmental situation. The approach is validated in a simulated
power plant system. The second approach proposes a Genetic-AIS al-
gorithm using multi-objective optimization for PID tuning. The system
was also evaluated via simulation control test scenarios. Moreover,
Wang et al. [125] (P28) propose a distributed AIN-based algorithm
for complex industrial processes control. The algorithm can learn the
control knowledge of different operators and optimize the existing
control knowledge in an online fashion. Validation is performed in a
simulated environment (a beer fermentation process). More recently,
Samigulina and Samigulina [103] (P06) uses the CSA and the MAS
paradigm to develop distributed and Self-adaptive complex object con-
trol capabilities in Honeywell Distributed Control Systems. However, it
is not clear in what conditions solution experimentation and validation
were performed.
Finally, there is also some control-related work in the Electric Power
Industry. Considering distributed generators, Jin et al. [127] (P30)
propose an immune-inspired method for power system damping control
in DG systems. The solution was validated in a simulated example of
a power system with large-scale integration of distributed generation.
On the other hand, Bhuvaneswari et al. [134] (P37) presents the
implementation of a MAS distributed control system in a microgrid
operation to optimize local DG systems’ production. This control system
is based on the CSA and is validated in a simulated scenario by
mimicking realistic market prices for power and distributed generator
bids reflecting realistic operational costs. Rimal and Belkacemi [141]
(P44) propose an immune-inspired approach to model the automatic
generation control in a two-area power system. The idea is to introduce
system adaptability and self-tolerance to reduce the system’s mechan-
ical oscillations. The solution was validated in a simulated scenario.
More recently, Guerrero et al. [115] (P18) proposed a CSA for optimal
real-time solution of the Coordinated Volt/VAr Control (CVVC) prob-
lem in distribution networks composed of multiple control equipment.
The solution was validated in a simulated scenario, which emulated
the interoperability actions commonly established among the main
functions of a modern DMS during the real-time operation of a CVVC.
Finally, Lizondo et al. [123] (P26) tackles the Peak Load problem
in Smart Grid environments by proposing a MAS distributed control
system based on AIN. A simulated case (Air Conditioner devices) is used
to validate the solution.4.2.3. Islanding
Islanding Detection is a common research category in the Electrical
Power Industry, since it tries to detect islanding situations (a condition
in which a distributed generator continues to power a location even
though external electrical grid power is no longer present). Yin [133]
(P36) proposes a robust immune-inspired approach to detect islanding
of DG, based on digital signal processing and harmonic signature
recognition. The approach was validated in a simulated grid-connected
inverter based on a digital signal processor, achieving a TRL of 3–4 and
LOA of 1, i.e., the system may suggest goal-oriented improvements, but
a human always approves them in order to take effect.
4.2.4. Anomaly detection
Anomaly Detection is used to identify a system’s bad behaviour
compared to a predefined intended behaviour, which is considered
normal or baseline. The assumption is that anomalies, or faults, are
outliers in the dataset, which always differ from the ordinary behaviour
of a standard dataset. Anomaly Detection studies can be found in
CPS, Manufacturing, and the Electric Power Industry. Overall, TRLs
are relatively high when compared to other research areas since it is
possible to find several proposals validated and demonstrated in rele-
vant environments. However, some proposals are only validated in lab
scenarios (both dataset and simulation). On the other hand, the overall
LOA is relatively low. One can find work in the CPS field without
achieving system autonomy (LOA =0). Also, the manufacturing-related
proposal achieves an LOA of 1 (system decision-support, while in the
Electric Power Industry, it is found presented partial system autonomy
(LOA =2).
Regarding CPS applications, Lokesh and Kumaraswamy [100] (P03)
propose a DCA approach for anomaly detection towards CPS state
awareness. The main contribution was to model system resiliency using
a MAS paradigm on CPS (together with the DCA). Diez-Olivan et al.
[142] (P45) tackles industrial prognosis, i.e., the prediction of failures
of an industrial asset, by proposing an adaptive learning approach
based on an ensemble method (DCA for drift detection and a Deep
Neural Network — DNN that dynamically adapts to new operational
conditions). The solution is validated in a dataset containing opera-
tional data from an experimental benchmark comprising a real-world
industrial problem. Finally, Pinto et al. [56] (P47) propose an ensem-
ble approach, the Cursory Dendritic Cell Algorithm (CDCA), which
merges the DCA with a clustering algorithm for flexible monitoring and
anomaly detection in industrial processes. The CDCA tackles some DCA
original problems, such as manual characterization of signals (using a
K-Means approach), and online data analysis and classification. The
approach was validated in two industrial-oriented datasets regarding
physical and network-related data.
On the other hand, in manufacturing applications, Guo and Yang
[116] (P19) proposes an anti-jamming ensemble approach that com-
bines DT with AIN for distributed machine energy leakage diagnosis in
complex environments such as parallel-machine job shops. In order to
evaluate the proposed approach, several experiments were performed
on a tyre vulcanization shop floor in China to diagnose the steam
leakage of steam traps. Results show that the lightweight immune
approach introduces robustness and Self-tolerance. Moreover, Kim et al.
[145] (P49) propose an ensemble approach, merging the NSA with
the CSA, to enable a multiclass anomaly detection algorithm. The
proposed algorithm was validated using an intelligent maintenance
bearing dataset and a vacuum deposition equipment dataset.
In the Electric Power Industry, Ieao et al. [109] (P12) propose an
ensemble methodology based on the unconstrained binary program-
ming (UBP) model and the CSA to estimate fault sections in electric
power systems. The proposed methodology is tested in a simulated
environment, using part of the South-Brazilian electric power system.
On the other hand, mainly used in Smart Grid environments, Lima
et al. [106] (P09) propose a method of using a voltage and current
abnormality detector filter in electrical distribution systems based on
the NSA. The solution was validated in two simulated distribution
systems.Array 15 (2022) 100238
14R. Pinto and G. Gonçalves
4.2.5. Intrusion detection system
An IDS is a malicious activity monitoring software application. The
goal of an IDS is to detect intrusions by collecting and analysing data. A
generic IDS collects and analyses system data and then responds to the
results. The analysis, in this case, is performed using AIS methods. Also,
the approach to the detection analysis is anomaly-based (Anomaly-IDS).
This way, it is possible to say that intrusion detection, in this context, is
a sub-category of anomaly detection, where the anomalies are triggered
by malicious activity, such as cyber and physical attacks on the system.
IDS are used in Manufacturing, CPS, Robotics, and the Electric Power
Industry. Overall, most of the proposals were validated with datasets
for proof of concept, or small lab testbeds (sometimes data collected
from real industrial scenarios), achieving a TRL of 3–4 and 4–5. On the
other hand, the LOA of most proposals (dataset validated) is 0 since
no system autonomy was achieved. Considering the work validated
on lab testbeds (in the robot field), it is possible to find LOA of 2,
i.e., the system is capable of self-adjusting its own behaviour (limited
boundaries), but the human retains all decision-making power.
In manufacturing, Pinto et al. [98] (P01) presents an IDS approach
based on the deterministic version of the DCA (dDCA). To evaluate the
dDCA effectiveness, a testing dataset was generated by implementing
and injecting various attacks on an OPC UA-based CPS testbed. The
properties introduced by the immune model are adaptive, robustness
and Self-tolerance. Later, Pinto et al. [113] (P16) propose the Incremen-
tal Dendritic Cell Algorithm (iDCA) for online incremental detection in
an unsupervised manner. The iDCA was also validated using datasets.
Moreover, Clotet et al. [114] (P17) propose a MAS real-time IDS, based
on the NSA, to detect attacks targeting physical components at the
industrial process level. The solution was validated using a dataset from
a water treatment plant laboratory.
Regarding CPS applications, Pinto et al. [144] propose a Model-
based Engineering (MBE) approach to enable security-by-design during
the development of CPS, using the IEC 61499 standard. The security
features introduced rely on an IDS based on the iDCA. The authors used
a CPS testbed to validate the proposed approach. Results show that the
solution is very lightweight and can dramatically reduce design and
code complexity while improving application maintainability.
In the robotics field, Degeler et al. [112] (P15) propose a DT-based
IDS to protect AGVs against cyber-attacks that can cause severe physical
damage to the manufacturing system. The solution is validated in a
simulated factory floor with a distributed scenario (three AGVs oper-
ating simultaneously). Finally, related to the Electric Power Industry,
Igbe et al. [102] (P05) propose an IDS in industrial communication
scenarios based on the dDCA. In this case, the authors used the DNP3
protocol and proposed a dataset for a Smart Grid scenario to validate
the solution.
4.2.6. Fault diagnosis
Fault Diagnosis, or fault isolation, refers to the system monitoring
and identifying faults when they occur, and pinpointing the type of
fault and its location, along with one or more root causes of problems,
to the point where corrective action can be taken. Typically, Fault
Diagnosis includes anomaly detection. One can find Fault Diagnosis
in Electric Power Industry applications, SCADA/ICS, Manufacturing
and CPS. Overall, the LOA is 2, meaning that the proposals introduce
partial autonomy to the system, but humans are responsible for the
decision-making. On the other hand, one can find work validated in
lab scenarios (mostly simulations in SCADA/ICS and Electric Power
Industry applications for proof of concept), achieving a TRL of 3–4, and
validation in partially relevant environments (SCADA/ICS and CPS),
achieving a TRL of 4–5.
On SCADA/IDS applications, Kayama et al. [124] (P27) propose
an ensemble (combining AIN with Learning Vector Quantization —
LVQ) for distributed detection and diagnosis of faulty sensor outputs in
control plants. The solution is validated in a simulation environment
(temperature sensors for a heating furnace plant of a hot strip millline). On the other hand, Zhao et al. [119] (P22) propose an online
fault diagnosis system for safety in chemical processes by combining
Artificial Neural Networks (ANN) with an immune-inspired model. The
solution was developed for a lab-scale distillation process, achieving
adaptive, robust and Self-tolerance properties. Moreover, in CPS ap-
plication scenarios, Zhu et al. [118] (P21) also propose an artificial
immune system-based fault diagnosis, designated AISFD, combined
with Bayesian estimation, for controlling alarm floods during transi-
tions of chemical processes. A pilot-scale distillation process was used
to validate the solution.
On Manufacturing applications, Outa et al. [146] propose the NSA
for failure detection during the maintenance of pressure vessels. De-
tection relies on the recognition of vibration signals. The approach
was validated in a small lab testbed that represents the behaviour
of the flow of a fluid and the respective vibration of the system.
Experimental results show that the approach is robust in precision
and signal recognition and for classifying the degree of severity and
probability of failure. Finally, regarding Fault Diagnosis in Electric
Power Industry, Lima et al. [108] (P11) propose a new approach to
detecting and classifying voltage disturbances in electrical distribution
systems based on a combination of wavelet transform and NSA. Two
distribution systems were simulated to evaluate the proposed method’s
performance.
4.2.7. Operations research
Operations Research deals with developing and applying advanced
analytical methods to improve decision-making in complex problems,
where optimal or near-optimal solutions are typically found. In this
SLR context, Operations Research can be found in several applications,
mainly for optimization and scheduling problems. The AIS model is
used as a meta-heuristic method, such as in the Electric Power Industry,
Robotics, Manufacturing and CPS. Regarding TRL achievement, one
can find good results (TRL =4–5 or 5–6) since most of the work is
validated and demonstrated in real relevant environments. However,
some proposals in the Electric Power Industry and Robotics fields were
validated in simulation environments for proof of concept (TRL =3–4).
On the other hand, one can find very low and also very high LOA. For
example, the maximum LOA found in the Electric Power Industry was
2 since systems present only partial autonomy. In both manufacturing
and robotics fields, one can find LOA of 3 and 4 since the system
already presents several autonomic capabilities, including most of the
decision-making on its own.
In the Electric Power Industry, several optimization types of prob-
lems exist. Aghaebrahimi et al. [122] (P25) proposed an optimization
approach for solving the DG placement problem. The approach is based
on the CSA and validated in Tehran’s Khoda-Bande-Loo distribution test
feeder. Xiaobo and Guoqing [130] (P33) focused on the distribution
network multi-objective planning that takes into account minimizing
the investment cost of DG and the power loss of the distribution
network. The approach is based on the Particle Swarm Optimization
(PSO) combined with immune principles, designated IPSO algorithm.
Validation is performed in a distribution network. On the other hand,
Hanumantha Rao and Sivanagaraju [138] (P41) investigates the prob-
lem of multiple DG unit placement. A CSA-based model is proposed to
determine the optimal DG-unit size and location. The solution is vali-
dated in a simulated scenario. More recently, Yuan et al. [135] (P38)
proposed a multi-objective optimization immune-inspired algorithm to
coordinate the parameters of a distributed static synchronous series
compensator controller in power grids. The solution is validated in a
simulated scenario.
In the manufacturing field, Li and Cai [107] (10) propose an ensem-
ble solution (ANN combined with DT), designated Intelligent Immune
System (I2S), used to achieve optimized sustainability in manufacturing
systems. This sustainability optimization refers to optimizing manufac-
turing lifecycles for global energy consumption reduction, based on
adaptive re-scheduling of jobs. The (I2S) system has been validatedArray 15 (2022) 100238
15R. Pinto and G. Gonçalves
through real-world industrial deployment in some companies in Swe-
den, the U.K. and Spain. More recently, considering now the CPS field,
Semwal and Nair [117] (P20) presented a decentralized mechanism,
based on the combination of CSA, AIN and DT, applicable to multiple
distributed problems in CPS. Although being developed for CPS, the
solution is validated in both emulated (CPS) and real (robot) scenarios.
In this case, robots must discover the best path to follow in a real mobile
multi-robot system.
Finally, considering the robotics topic, Gao and Luo [139] (P42)
proposed an AIN model for efficient cooperative task allocation in a
multi-robot system with autonomously distributed architecture. The
dynamic allocation method for cooperative robots was demonstrated
and analysed in the simulation of emergency handling. On the other
hand, Xu et al. [101] (P04) proposed an AIS-fuzzy method (fuzzy
systems combined with CSA model) for a hybrid optimization technique
in order to accomplish distributed formation control. The System-on-
a-programmable-chip (SoPC) methodology is adopted for the solution
validation, where each robot is realized as an independent CPS in one
FPGA chip.
4.3. AIS conceptualization
This section tries to answer the RQ 3. What are the main motivations
for using AIS in AMS? , by collecting from the selected papers all the
Self-* and specific AIS properties (see more in Sections 2.2 and 2.3.3)
introduced by the implemented immune-models. This data is analysed
and correlated considering the primary AMS requirements (see more in
Section 2.1). This way, it is possible to understand if the desired AMS
requirements are met and what the introduced properties that make it
possible. Table 4 presents a summary of the AIS conceptualization.
In a previous review work, Oztemel and Gursev [1] presents 12
main goals to achieve I4.0 (see more detail in Section 2.1). From the
selected papers in this SLR, the most relevant goals addressed are: Data
Analytics (25.5%), Adaptability (19.4%), Autonomy (18.9%), Optimized
Management (14.3%) and Process Efficiency & Product Quality (10.2%).
In this context, Data Analytics refers to the capability to handle a
big amount of data and perform well-defined analyses to manage the
system and achieve target goals. This includes a strong system sensori-
sation for continuous data collection. On the other hand, Autonomy and
Adaptability refer to generating Self-behaving systems (minimum hu-
man interaction) and system responsiveness to the changes. These goals
are correlated since Adaptability is only possible by analysing Big Data.
Also, system adaptability is one of the most important properties when
trying to reach a Self-behaving system, which is the desired approach
to managing complex systems ( Optimized Management ). Finally, Process
Efficiency & Product Quality refers to the dynamic interaction that may
exist between devices involved in the process, in a Machine-to-Machine
(M2M) communication scenario (for process optimization) or between
equipment and product (for product quality control). This can only be
achieved with a strong digitalization component, mainly by enabling
MAS architectures.
A Self-behaving system consist of a system that implements one or
more Self-* properties, in order to achieve a certain LOA (see more
detail in Section 2.2). The top Self-* properties found in the selected
papers are Self-awareness (35.6%) and Self-adaptive (28.1%). Other less
popular properties are Self-healing (9.6%), Self-configuration (8.9%),
Self-optimization (6.7%), Self-immunity (5.9%) and Self-organizing
(5.2%). All these Self-* properties aim at introducing a certain level of
autonomy to the system, which is compliant with the Autonomy AMS
goal.
Self-awareness refers to the system’s awareness of its state and
surrounding environmental conditions to adjust and adapt to changes
and external actions. The Self-awareness property is introduced and
motivated by the Data Analytics AMS goal since sensor data is always
available and continuous system monitoring is possible. On the other
hand, Self-adaptive refers to a property where the system reacts toenvironmental changes by changing its internal properties accordingly.
This presents a strong synergy with the Adaptability AMS goal. Finally,
the other Self-* properties refer, in general, to systems that, when facing
a set of external actions, can change their configurations and/or system
topology to restore or improve their global state. These behaviours
are aligned with both Optimized Management andProcess Efficiency &
Product Quality AMS goals since the management of complex systems,
specially MAS-related, require a high level of adaptation (configuration
and settings update) to achieve an optimum global state. The relation-
ship between AIS approaches following MAS architectures is common
due to their similarities.
Looking closer to the main AIS properties ((see more detail in
Section 2.3.3)) found in all the immune models implemented, one
can find in the top-3, Self-tolerance (27.7%), Adaptive (23.5%) and
Robust (18.7%). In the BIS, Self-tolerance refers to eliminating auto-
reactive immune cells, ensuring that the immune system does not
attack its own body cells. In engineering scenarios, this property
means that the system clearly distinguishes what a normal system
behaviour/state/conditions is and what is abnormal while reacting only
to the abnormalities. Since human supervision and decision-making are
minimum, this property is essential to meet the AMS goal Autonomy . On
the other hand, the Adaptive AIS property refers to continuous learning
to develop adaptive behaviours, lining up with the Adaptability AMS
goal. Finally, the AIS Robust property refers to the capability of system
operation with data shortage or poor quality. This property is critical
to meet the AMS goal Data Analytics since the data collection process
may be imprecise in certain circumstances.
Based on the analysis, it is safe to say that the primary motivation
for using immune models is because they provide flexible decision-
making mechanisms for dynamic and complex environments such as
AMS. Considering the main AIS properties introduced and the Self-
* properties achieved, it is clear that there is a direct cause–effect
between the immune models and system autonomy. Most of this auton-
omy is found in state awareness and adaptability scenarios, which are
very aligned with the AMS goals Autonomy andAdaptability . Also, since
immune models provide Self-tolerance and robustness, they are a good
match with AMS applications. On the one hand, the desired capability
of no human intervention and supervision is only possible if the system
decision-making process is reliable by tolerating good conditions and
reacting to bad ones. Finally, data analysis results are only as good
as the data collected in the first place. So, a robust system operating
normally with uncertain data is an advantage for a systematic system
monitoring process.
4.4. Research gaps
This section tries to answer to the RQ 4. What are the research gaps
and future areas within AMS based on AIS solutions? , by analysing the
correlated data between Self-* and AIS properties, and AMS goals.
Considering Table 4 and continuing with the analysis provided in
Section 4.3, it is possible to identify research gaps, in terms of less
addressed AMS goals. The AMS requirements with less research work,
considering the application of AIS approaches, are Safety & Security
(6.1%), Resource Efficiency (2.6%), Communication Network Infrastruc-
ture(2%), Standardization (1%), Human Management (0.5%), Regulatory
Framework andUpskilling (both with 0%).
4.4.1. Safety & security
Safety refers to the absence of threats to human operators, i.e., to
the fact that machines, production facilities or products should not
pose a danger to people or the environment. On the other hand,
Security (IT security or cyber-security) refers to the protection of digital
systems, i.e., the system itself needs to be protected against misuse and
cyber-attacks.
Most of the approaches that tackle the security topic of this goal are
in the IDS and/or anomaly detection research fields, i.e., the problemArray 15 (2022) 100238
16R. Pinto and G. Gonçalves
Table 4
AIS conceptualization ( STD=Standardization, OM=Optimized Management, NET =Communication Network Infrastructure, SS=Safety & Security, HM=Human Management,
UP=Upskilling, RF=Regulatory Framework, RE=Resource Efficiency, AU=Autonomy, PEQ =Process Efficiency & Product Quality, DA=Data Analytics, AD=Adaptability
|SAD =Self-adaptive, SH=Self-healing, SAW =Self-awareness, =SI=Self-immunity, SOR =Self-organizing, SC=Self-configuration, SOP =Self-optimizing |AD=Adaptive,
RO=Robust, RES=Resiliency, ST=Self-tolerance, LH=Lightweight, DS=Distributed).
ID AMS requirements Self-* properties AIS properties
STD OM NET SS HM UP RF RE AU PEQ DA AD SAD SH SAW SI SOR SC SOP AD RO RES ST LH DS
P01 ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗
P02 ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
P03 ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗
P04 ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓
P05 ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗
P06 ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓
P07 ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗
P08 ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗
P09 ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗
P10 ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗
P11 ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗
P12 ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗
P13 ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
P14 ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗
P15 ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓
P16 ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗
P17 ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗
P18 ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗
P19 ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓
P20 ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓
P21 ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗
P22 ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗
P23 ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗
P24 ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗
P25 ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓
P26 ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓
P27 ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓
P28 ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓
P29 ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓
P30 ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓
P31 ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗
P32 ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓
P33 ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗
P34 ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓
P35 ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗
P36 ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗
P37 ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓
P38 ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗
P39 ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓
P40 ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗
P41 ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗
P42 ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓
P43 ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓
P44 ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗
P45 ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗
P46 ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗
P47 ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗
P48 ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗
P49 ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗
P50 ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗
of protecting a system by detecting attacks against it, usually by using
anomaly-based techniques. Pinto et al. [98] (P01), Pinto et al. [113]
(P16), Pinto et al. [144] (P48), and Igbe et al. [102] (P05) propose
network-based IDS (NIDS), i.e., the detection is performed based on the
network data analysis, in order to detect network attacks. On the other
hand, Clotet et al. [114] (P17), Degeler et al. [112] (P15) and Pinto
et al. [56] (P47) propose host-based IDS (HIDS), i.e., detection focus
on attacks targeting physical components at the industrial process level,
by analysing host data. Regarding the safe topic of this goal, Yin [133]
(P36) proposes a robust immune-inspired approach to detect islanding
scenarios that threaten people and the environment.
The tendency to use immune-related approaches for Safety & Se-
curity targets the detection instead of classical methods to preserve
the integrity of the equipment and assets (data encryption, digital
signatures, password authentication, public keys encryption, etc.). An
autonomic and adaptive attack/intrusion detection is crucial whenconsidering the complexity of AMS architectures and the global con-
nectivity of shop-floor systems, exposing these types of systems to much
more vulnerabilities than the already existing systems. Also, consider-
ing the similarities that the BIS functionalities have with the problem
of detecting attacks/intrusion in computer systems, AIS has incredible
potential to be used for autonomic IDS. However, this research is still in
its infancy. More detail about bio-inspired IDS and AIS-related security
in AMS enabler technologies, such as IoT and CPS, can be found in
previous work [72,87,92,147].
4.4.2. Resource efficiency
Resource utilization efficiency refers to the usage of new materials,
new processes, new technologies, and other measures that may improve
resource utilization efficiency while reducing and balancing environ-
mental pollution. Some work can be found regarding AIS application
for resource utilization efficiency in AMS, especially in Manufacturing
and Electric Power Industry application contexts.Array 15 (2022) 100238
17R. Pinto and G. Gonçalves
In the Manufacturing application area, Li and Cai [107] (10) pro-
poses the I2S solution to achieve optimized sustainability, i.e., opti-
mization of manufacturing lifecycles for global energy consumption
reduction. On the other hand, Guo and Yang [116] (P19) proposes an
approach for machine energy leakage diagnosis in complex environ-
ments. Considering the resource utilization goal, both proposals tackle
the global energy consumption reduction (job re-scheduling or energy
leakage detection).
Regarding the Electric Power Industry application area,
Bhuvaneswari et al. [134] (P37), and Lizondo et al. [123] (P26)
propose control solutions. The first work, the control of a microgrid
operation, aims to optimize the power production of local DG systems.
The second work proposes a control system to tackle the Peak Load
problem. Both proposals focused on energy demand management,
which dictates correct resource usage in different periods, such as the
size of generators, transmission lines, transformers and circuit breakers.
On the other hand, and also related, Xiaobo and Guoqing [130] (P33)
focused on planning distribution networks by considering the cost
minimization of DGs and the power losses.
Despite the previous work, more research is needed since the in-
dustrial sector is still among the top contributors to greenhouse gas
emissions worldwide. Developing lean/green approaches will allow
manufacturing companies to cut energy costs, enhance process effi-
ciency, and even provide a safer working environment for employees.
Also, by introducing immune approaches, it is possible to enable the
adaptation of resource usage considering energy consumption. More
detail about lean-green manufacturing can be found in previous work
[148–150].
4.4.3. Communication network infrastructure
Communication Network Infrastructure refer to the needed infras-
tructure that enables a higher volume or quality data exchange pro-
vided by communication networks. Overall, challenges associated with
this goal are related to (i) scalability, (ii) security and (iii) availability.
In the AMS context, all industrial assets are connected via the Internet,
according to IoT principles. Thus, wireless communication technologies
play a significant role since they allow ubiquitous internet access and
increased interaction (availability). Also, as the number of networked
connected devices increases, the network infrastructure should be scal-
able. Finally, the increased number of connections opens the surface of
harmful cyber-attacks to be deployed in the system (security).
In this SLR, four publications tackled network-related issues, namely
NIDS [98,102,113,144] (P01, P16, P05 and P48), focusing only on the
security aspects of the network infrastructure. This research work is not
enough to impact this AMS goal. Also, other approaches may be needed
for the other two challenges.
4.4.4. Standardization
Standardization and open standards for a reference architecture
refer to the normalization of cooperation mechanisms and information
exchange between system devices. Reference architectures are helpful
for the development, integration and operation of the technological
innovations introduced to the AMS. A common standardization effort
exists in networked devices in a manufacturing system, such as Edge
devices, related to the Communication Network Infrastructure AMS
goal.
In this SLR, [102] (P16) and [144] (P48) tackle standardization
goals. On the one hand, [102] focus on the HIDS on networks using
the Distributed Network Protocol 3 (DNP3) communication protocol,
which is part of the IEEE Standard for Electric Power Systems Com-
munications. On the other hand, [144] uses the IEC 61499 standard to
provide security-be-design features during the development of a CPS.
Moreover, Pinto et al. [98],Pinto et al. [113] (P01 and P16) provide
detection in field networks using OPC UA. Although having continu-
ous specification work, strong user support and implementations, and
considerable marketing efforts to support its adoption, OPC UA may
be considered a standardization attempt rather than an established
standard at this stage.4.4.5. Human management
Human management refers to the work organization and design,
considering the role of employees. AMS transformation should not focus
only on the innovation and implementation of technology. One should
also consider how employees will be part of the AMS transformation
and how the presence of technology in the work environment will
impact employees’ work processes, especially considering new scenar-
ios such as Human–Machine Interaction (HMI). This paradigm is also
known as Human-Centred Manufacturing [151] or Operator 4.0 [152].
Bio-inspired Human-Centred Manufacturing was the potential to be
a hot topic since there are several challenges regarding complex system
design (considering the human operator), or even the HMI scenarios for
collaborative tasks, where robots need to learn and adapt their own task
execution considering the operator work profile and task performance
within the overall collaboration.
4.4.6. Upskilling
Workforce and managers of manufacturing companies, such as pro-
fessionals and executives, need to develop high-demanding skills in
new transforming technologies within the AMS paradigm. These sys-
tems are changing the job requirements for several positions within
manufacturing companies. So, several manufacturing processes and
tasks are being adjusted to include this new paradigm’s demands. This
means that the existing workforce and management must face new
challenges regarding new skills development. Thus, the implementation
of AMS poses new challenges for new skills and academic training
for continuing professional development and upskilling, also known as
Education 4.0 [153].
4.4.7. Regulatory framework
Regulatory framework refers to the need for regulating new technol-
ogy to be implemented in AMS. This regulation considers the legality of
a new technology or the associated liability and data protection issues
that could inhibit its acceptance and slow the innovation process.
5. Conceptual framework for industrial AIS applications
Despite the rich research efforts and numerous implementations of
existing AIS models, its actual prevalence in AMS is still relatively low.
The results of this study suggest that most of the performed research
is implemented and validated as a proof of concept, using datasets,
simulation environments or, at most, demonstrated in laboratory en-
vironments since the average TRL is between 3 and 4. The impact of
such technologies on system autonomy is also disappointing since the
average LOA is between 2 and 3 (partially/limited autonomy).
On the one hand, over the last few years, some researchers claim
that AIS have not experienced the success of other bio-inspired ap-
proaches [154]. This explains why there are so many ensemble models
compared to basic models. Also, the strong stochastic aspect of immune
mechanisms makes them hard to explain and evaluate, which poses
a difficulty to the research field since it is hard to use these models
outside the field. This is not the case with several classical Machine
Learning techniques, especially the ones related to Explainable Arti-
ficial Intelligence (XAI) [155]. On the other hand, implementing AIS
in AMS scenarios may require a significant digital transformation in
the manufacturing industry, which involve time and money to deploy
several changes to existing systems. Those changes may be related to
the technological implementation of CPS, Edge devices manipulation,
embedded systems (SoPC FPGAs) and Big Data analysis for data-driven
scenarios, according to AMS vision. This may not even be possible in
some systems, such as Electrical Power Systems. That is the reason why
simulation and emulation are such essential technologies when it comes
to validating implementations.
Due to the lack of solid evidence of successful AIS applications
in AMS, the industrial adoption of the technology is thus very slow.
However, there is an enormous potential for the impact that suchArray 15 (2022) 100238
18R. Pinto and G. Gonçalves
Fig. 9. Industrial AIS applications conceptual framework.
bio-inspired technologies may have on the AMS paradigm. Industrial
companies must understand the enabling technologies of AIS imple-
mentation and deployment and the operational and organizational
requirements to realize the full autonomy vision in AMS. Thus, Fig. 9
represents a conceptual framework of industrial AIs applications, pro-
viding some guidelines for manufacturers to adapt AIS in their own
manufacturing applications to solve different problems. The authors
propose the conceptual framework by collecting the findings from the
study performed in this SLR in terms of the application areas, research
categories and immune models that drive AIS in AMS. Moreover, the
leading enabling technologies found in the literature review behind the
industrial application of AIS are described next:
•MAS: A Multi-Agent System is, by nature, a system that presents
autonomic behaviours by manifesting one or more Self-* proper-
ties. These type of systems consist of multiple interacting intel-
ligent software agents, which develop complex behaviours even
when each agent have a simple individual strategy (like a swarm).
Essential characteristics of such agents are the autonomy level
(self-aware), the knowledge of local views only and distributed
control. These characteristics greatly resemble the properties of
immune models, so the application development usage of both
technologies is widespread.
•Edge Devices : The Edge computing paradigm brings computation
and data processing together to the edge device level, i.e., devices
that collect sensor data. This way, achieving real-time processing
of real-time data generated by sensors is possible. In Edge com-
puting scenarios, data may travel between different distributed
nodes connected through the Internet, such as an IoT scenario.
These nodes may also be resource-constrained devices, like a
typical embedded system. Considering the AIS applications, Edge
Devices are found in the lab or relevant environment validation
scenarios. They work great together because immune models
are lightweight, robust, and distributed. This means they canbe executed in decentralized resource-constrained devices, where
real-time raw data needs to be analysed with low latency.
•Simulation/Emulation : Simulation models are representations
of the real physical systems, representing the key characteristics
or behaviours of the selected system or process. In the AIS context,
simulation was widely used to validate immune applications in
AMS (especially in Electric Power systems) since the real system
cannot be engaged because it may not be accessible, or it may be
dangerous or unacceptable to engage. These models simulate data
sources with specific behaviours, while the data is the main input
of immune models for analysis. Also, some immune proposals
may use their outputs to inject back into the simulation model to
determine the eventual real effects of alternative conditions and
courses of action. Finally, simulations may also be used to model
the immune model itself (as a natural system) and gain insight
into its functioning.
•Big Data : Big data refers to solutions for collecting and analysing
large and complex datasets. As mentioned before, if this collection
and analysis are performed at the Edge level, ‘‘instant data’’ is
generated by sensors, so real-time processing scenarios are re-
quired. Typical solutions that address big data problems may have
a multiple-layer and distributed architecture. These properties are
shared with some immune models, making them suitable for big
data scenarios.
Finally, and since several proposals are validated using datasets, the
main datasets found in the literature review for application validation
are:
•M2M using OPC UA [98,113,156]: This dataset was generated
by implementing and injecting various attacks on an OPC UA-
based CPPS testbed, and it aims to enable users to evaluate the
effectiveness of different techniques for developed IDS in the
manufacturing context. The dDCA and the iDCA models were
validated using this dataset.Array 15 (2022) 100238
19R. Pinto and G. Gonçalves
•Random number dataset [100,104,105]: This dataset contains sta-
tus monitoring measurements of different CPS layers within spe-
cific periods for anomaly detection purposes. The dDCA model
was validated using this dataset.
•DNP3 smart grid dataset [102]: Dataset generated after imple-
menting several security threats to the DNP3 communication
protocol for Smart Grids. The dDCA model was validated using
this dataset.
•KDD Cup99 [113,157]: This dataset is used for IDS purposes and
contains a standard set of data to be audited, which includes
a wide variety of intrusions simulated in a military network
environment. The dDCA and the iDCA models were validated
using this dataset.
•Secure Water Treatment (SWaT) testbed [114,158]: SWaT rep-
resents a scaled-down version of a real-world industrial water
treatment plant. The dataset contains network and physical (pro-
cess) data on the different number of sensors and actuators in all
stages of the SWaT testbed for anomaly-IDS purposes. The NSA
model was validated using this dataset.
•Skoltech Anomaly Benchmark (SKAB) Dataset [56,159]: The devel-
opment of SKAB is based on sensor readings deployed in a water
circulation system from an IoT testbed, located in the Skolkovo
Institute of Science and Technology (Skoltech). Anomalies are in-
troduced by inserting different physical faults in the system, such
as closing valves, increases in temperature, and rotor imbalances.
The CDCA model was validated using this dataset.
6. Conclusion
This study comprises a systematic literature review, restricted to
journal and related conference papers in Artificial Immune Systems and
Advanced Manufacturing Systems fields. By characterizing previous
surveys and reviews in terms of their purpose and topics addressed
(AMS, Self-* and AIS), the authors identified the need for this study.
The systematic review was conducted following PRISMA guidelines,
and the publications considered are indexed in the IEEE Xplore, Sco-
pus, ScienceDirect, Springer, ACM, Inspec, Knovel and Web of Science
databases.
This review has a few limitations considering the exclusion crite-
ria, i.e., some relevant publications might have been left out of the
study. First, limiting the inclusion to English language articles natu-
rally implies the exclusion of non-English documents. Secondly, some
publications were not included because authors could not access the
necessary metadata and/or the full text. Thirdly, and maybe the most
important reason, there were several publication exclusions because the
work was not directly industry-related. However, the work was related
(to some extent) to industrial enable technologies and/or other research
fields that were not applied in industrial contexts. Some examples are
identified in Section 2.3.3. Fourth, some publications were left out
simply because the paper did not show results, despite having solution
proposals. Finally, the general string queries for each database search
may limit the results achieved.
This study results in a comprehensive characterization of AIS appli-
cations in AMS. We start by analysing the research trend considering
these topics and then assess the status of such work. With this analysis,
it was possible to define the main motivations for using AIS in AMS
and identify the research gaps while commenting on possible future
research trends in these topics. Finally, based on the systematic review
of existing AIS in AMS literature and empirical evidence, a conceptual
framework is proposed, providing a holistic view of the core elements
of applying AIS in AMS, such as application areas, research categories,
and immune models developed.CRediT authorship contribution statement
Rui Pinto: Methodology, Data collection, Formal analysis, Inves-
tigation, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing, Project
administration, Validation, Visualization. Gil Gonçalves: Supervision,
Validation, Project administration, Resources, Writing – review & edit-
ing.
Declaration of competing interest
No author associated with this paper has disclosed any poten-
tial orpertinent conflicts which may be perceived to have impending
conflictwith this work.
Appendix A. General string queries
Group 1. :
Artificial Immune System, AIS,
Dendritic Cell Algorithm, DCA
Group 2. :
Cyber-Physical System, Cyber-Physical Systems,
CPS, Cyber-Physical Production System, CPPS,
Cyber-Physical Production Systems,
Industrial Cyber-Physical System,
Industrial Cyber-Physical Systems,
Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition,
SCADA, Distributed Control System,
Distributed Control Systems,
Industrial Internet of Things,
Internet of Industrial Things,
IIoT, Industry, Industry 4.0, I4.0,
Manufacturing, Manufacturing System
Manufacturing Systems, AVM
Added Value Manufacturing
Appendix B. Database search inputs
•IEEE Xplore:
("Document Title":“Artificial Immune Systems”
OR "Document Title":“AIS” OR "Document Title":
“Dendritic Cell Algorithm” OR "Document Title":
“DCA”) AND ("Document Title":“Cyber-Physical System”
OR "Document Title":“Cyber-Physical Systems” OR
"Document Title":“CPS” OR "Document Title":
“Cyber-Physical Production System” OR "Document Title":
“Cyber-Physical Production Systems” OR
"Document Title":“CPPS” OR "Document Title":
“Industrial Cyber-Physical System” OR "Document Title":
“Industrial Cyber-Physical Systems” OR "Document Title":
“Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition” OR
"Document Title":“SCADA” OR "Document Title":
“Distributed Control System” OR "Document Title":
“Distributed Control Systems” OR "Document Title":
“Industrial Internet of Things” OR "Document Title":
“IIoT” OR "Document Title":
“Internet of Industrial Things”) OR ("Abstract":
“Artificial Immune Systems” OR "Abstract":“AIS” OR
"Abstract":“Dendritic Cell Algorithm” OR "Abstract":
“DCA”) AND ("Abstract":“Cyber-Physical System” OR
"Abstract":“Cyber-Physical Systems” OR
"Abstract":“CPS” OR "Abstract":
“Cyber-Physical Production System” OR "Abstract":
“Cyber-Physical Production Systems” OR
"Abstract":“CPPS” OR "Abstract":
“Industrial Cyber-Physical System” OR "Abstract":
“Industrial Cyber-Physical Systems” OR "Abstract":
“Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition” ORArray 15 (2022) 100238
20R. Pinto and G. Gonçalves
"Abstract":“SCADA” OR
"Abstract":“Distributed Control System” OR "Abstract":
“Distributed Control Systems” OR "Abstract":
“Industrial Internet of Things” OR "Abstract":
“IIoT” OR "Abstract":“Internet of Industrial Things”)
OR ("Index Terms":“Artificial Immune Systems” OR
"Index Terms":“AIS” OR "Index Terms":
“Dendritic Cell Algorithm” OR "Index Terms":
“DCA”) AND ("Index Terms":“Cyber-Physical System”
OR "Index Terms":“Cyber-Physical Systems” OR
"Index Terms":“CPS” OR "Index Terms":
“Cyber-Physical Production System” OR
"Index Terms":“Cyber-Physical Production Systems”
OR "Index Terms":“CPPS” OR "Index Terms":
“Industrial Cyber-Physical System” OR
"Index Terms":“Industrial Cyber-Physical Systems”
OR "Index Terms":“Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition”
OR "Index Terms":“SCADA” OR "Index Terms":
“Distributed Control System” OR "Index Terms":
“Distributed Control Systems” OR "Index Terms":
“Industrial Internet of Things” OR
"Index Terms":“IIoT” OR "Index Terms":
“Internet of Industrial Things”)
•Scopus:
(Artificial Immune Systems OR AIS OR
Dendritic Cell Algorithm OR DCA) AND
(Cyber-Physical System OR Cyber-Physical Systems OR
CPS OR Cyber-Physical Production System OR
Cyber-Physical Production Systems OR CPPS OR
Industrial Cyber-Physical System OR
Industrial Cyber-Physical Systems OR
Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition OR SCADA OR
Distributed Control System OR
Distributed Control Systems OR
Industrial Internet of Things OR IIoT OR
Internet of Industrial Things)
•ScienceDirect:
(“Artificial Immune Systems” OR “Dendritic Cell Algorithm”)
AND (“Cyber-Physical System” OR
“Cyber-Physical Production System” OR
“Industrial Cyber-Physical System” OR SCADA OR
“Distributed Control System” OR
“Industrial Internet of Things” OR IIoT)
•Springer:
(Artificial Immune Systems OR AIS OR
Dendritic Cell Algorithm OR DCA) AND
(Cyber-Physical System OR Cyber-Physical Systems OR
CPS OR Cyber-Physical Production System OR
Cyber-Physical Production Systems OR CPPS OR
Industrial Cyber-Physical System OR
Industrial Cyber-Physical Systems OR
Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition OR
SCADA OR Distributed Control System OR
Distributed Control Systems OR
Industrial Internet of Things OR IIoT OR
Internet of Industrial Things)
•ACM:
[[[Publication Title: "artificial immune systems"]
OR [Publication Title: "ais"] OR [Publication Title:
"dendritic cell algorithm"] OR [Publication Title: "dca"]]
AND [[Publication Title: "cyber-physical system"] OR
[Publication Title: "cyber-physical systems"] OR
[Publication Title: "cps"] OR [Publication Title:
"cyber-physical production system"] OR [Publication Title:
"cyber-physical production systems"] OR
[Publication Title: "cpps"] OR [Publication Title:
"industrial cyber-physical system"] OR[Publication Title: "industrial cyber-physical systems"]
OR [Publication Title:
"supervisory control and data acquisition"] OR
[Publication Title: "scada"] OR [Publication Title:
"distributed control system"] OR [Publication Title:
"distributed control systems"] OR [Publication Title:
"industrial internet of things"] OR [Publication Title:
"iiot"] OR [Publication Title:
"internet of industrial things"]]] OR [[[Abstract:
"artificial immune systems"] OR [Abstract: "ais"] OR
[Abstract: "dendritic cell algorithm"] OR [Abstract:
"dca"]] AND [[Abstract: "cyber-physical system"] OR
[Abstract: "cyber-physical systems"] OR [Abstract:
"cps"] OR [Abstract: "cyber-physical production system"]
OR [Abstract: "cyber-physical production systems"] OR
[Abstract: "cpps"] OR [Abstract:
"industrial cyber-physical system"] OR [Abstract:
"industrial cyber-physical systems"] OR [Abstract:
"supervisory control and data acquisition"] OR
[Abstract: "scada"] OR [Abstract:
"distributed control system"] OR [Abstract:
"distributed control systems"] OR [Abstract:
"industrial internet of things"] OR [Abstract:
"iiot"] OR [Abstract: "internet of industrial things"]]]
OR [[[Keywords: "artificial immune systems"] OR
[Keywords: "ais"] OR [Keywords:
"dendritic cell algorithm"] OR [Keywords: "dca"]]
AND [[Keywords: "cyber-physical system"] OR
[Keywords: "cyber-physical systems"] OR [Keywords:
"cps"] OR [Keywords: "cyber-physical production system"]
OR [Keywords: "cyber-physical production systems"]
OR [Keywords: "cpps"] OR [Keywords:
"industrial cyber-physical system"] OR [Keywords:
"industrial cyber-physical systems"] OR [Keywords:
"supervisory control and data acquisition"] OR
[Keywords: "scada"] OR [Keywords:
"distributed control system"] OR [Keywords:
"distributed control systems"] OR [Keywords:
"industrial internet of things"] OR [Keywords:
"iiot"] OR [Keywords: "internet of industrial things"]]]
•Engineering Village:
("Artificial Immune Systems" OR "AIS" OR
"Dendritic Cell Algorithm" OR "DCA") AND
("Cyber-Physical System" OR "Cyber-Physical Systems"
OR "CPS" OR "Cyber-Physical Production System" OR
"Cyber-Physical Production Systems" OR "CPPS" OR
"Industrial Cyber-Physical System" OR
"Industrial Cyber-Physical Systems" OR
"Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition" OR
"SCADA" OR "Distributed Control System" OR
"Distributed Control Systems" OR
"Industrial Internet of Things" OR "IIoT" OR
"Internet of Industrial Things")
•ISI Web of Knowledge:
(ALL=(“Artificial Immune Systems” OR “AIS” OR
“Dendritic Cell Algorithm” OR “DCA”)) AND
ALL=(“Cyber-Physical System” OR
“Cyber-Physical Systems” OR “CPS” OR
“Cyber-Physical Production System” OR
“Cyber-Physical Production Systems” OR “CPPS”
OR “Industrial Cyber-Physical System” OR
“Industrial Cyber-Physical Systems” OR
“Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition”
OR “SCADA” OR “Distributed Control System”
OR “Distributed Control Systems” OR
“Industrial Internet of Things” OR “IIoT”
OR “Internet of Industrial Things” )Array 15 (2022) 100238
21R. Pinto and G. Gonçalves
Appendix C. Exclusion criteria
EC 1. Non-computer science related
EC 2. Non-industry related
EC 3. No access to publication metadata
EC 4. No access to publication full text
EC 5. Short or WIP Paper
EC 6. Reviews or surveys
EC 7. Seminar or keynote
EC 8. Book chapters preface or guest editorials
EC 9. Full Proceedings
EC 10. Non-AIS related
EC 11. No solution development to a problem
EC 12. No results presented
References
[1] Oztemel E, Gursev S. Literature review of industry 4.0 and related technologies.
J Intell Manuf 2018;31(1):127–82. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/S10845-018-
1433-8, 2018 31:1. URL: https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10845-
018-1433-8.
[2] Stock D, Bauernhansl T, Weyrich M, Feurer M, Wutzke R. System architectures
for cyber-physical production systems enabling self-x and autonomy. In:
IEEE symposium on emerging technologies and factory automation, ETFA,
Vol. 2020-Septe. 2020, p. 148–55. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ETFA46521.
2020.9212182, URL: https://www.scopus.com/inward/record.uri?eid=2-s2.0-
85093364574&doi=10.1109%2FETFA46521.2020.9212182&partnerID=40&
md5=c28471c7815e33fb58c4ee7c2f4f8c1b.
[3] Qu YJ, Ming XG, Liu ZW, Zhang XY, Hou ZT. Smart manufacturing systems:
state of the art and future trends. Int J Adv Manuf Technol 2019;103(9–
12):3751–68. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00170-019-03754-7, URL: http://
link.springer.com/10.1007/s00170-019-03754-7.
[4] Wegener K, Gittler T, Weiss L. Dawn of new machining concepts: Compensated,
intelligent, bioinspired. In: Procedia CIRP, Vol. 77. 2018, p. 1–17.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.procir.2018.08.194, URL: https://www.scopus.
com/inward/record.uri?eid=2-s2.0-85057394514&doi=10.1016%2Fj.procir.
2018.08.194&partnerID=40&md5=8764e8ffa84b47a5246b2cc7e8c928be.
[5] Dasgupta D, Yu S, Nino F. Recent advances in artificial immune systems: models
and applications. Appl Soft Comput 2011;11(2):1574–87.
[6] Peres RS, Jia X, Lee J, Sun K, Colombo AW, Barata J. Industrial
artificial intelligence in industry 4.0 -systematic review, challenges and
outlook. IEEE Access 2020. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2020.
3042874, URL: https://www.scopus.com/inward/record.uri?eid=2-s2.0-
85097938680&doi=10.1109%2FACCESS.2020.3042874&partnerID=40&md5=
fbff910a5e850300f34de6960330a155.
[7] Gunawardana K. Introduction of advanced manufacturing technology: a
literature review. Sabaragamuwa Univ J 2006;6(1):116–34.
[8] Tao F, Cheng Y, Zhang L, Nee AYC. Advanced manufacturing systems: social-
ization characteristics and trends. J Intell Manuf 2017;28(5):1079–94. http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10845-015-1042-8.
[9] Huang Z, Jowers C, Kent D, Dehghan-Manshadi A, Dargusch MS. The implemen-
tation of industry 4.0 in manufacturing: from lean manufacturing to product
design. Int J Adv Manuf Technol 2022;121(5):3351–67. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1007/s00170-022-09511-7.
[10] da Rosa Cardoso R, Pinheiro de Lima E, Gouvea da Costa SE. Identifying
organizational requirements for the implementation of advanced manufacturing
technologies (AMT). J Manuf Syst 2012;31(3):367–78. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1016/j.jmsy.2012.04.003, URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S0278612512000337.
[11] Kagermann H, Helbig J, Hellinger A, Wahlster W. Recommendations for
implementing the strategic initiative industrie 4.0: securing the future of
German manufacturing industry. Final report of the industrie 4.0 working
group, Forschungsunion; 2013.
[12] Tran J. SMLC - smart manufacturing leadership coalition. 2016, https://www.
smartmanufacturingcoalition.org/.
[13] Li L. China’s manufacturing locus in 2025: With a comparison of
‘‘made-in-China 2025’’ and ‘‘industry 4.0’’. Technol Forecast Soc Change
2018;135:66–74. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2017.05.028, URL: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0040162517307254.
[14] Athimon M. Usine du futur. 2016, http://industriedufutur.fim.net/.
[15] McKernan R. How catapults can help your business innovate. 2016,
https://www.catapult.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/How-Catapults-
can-help-your-business-innovate-2016.pdf.[16] Kim M. Innovation in manufacturing 3.0 strategy needs better focus with clearer
direction. 2015, http://www.businesskorea.co.kr/english/features/special-
reports/13060-smart-factory-innovation-manufacturing-30-strategy-needs-
better-focus.
[17] Zaske S. Germany’s vision for industrie 4.0: The revolution will be digi-
tised. 2015, http://www.zdnet.com/article/germanys-vision-for-industrie-4-0-
the-revolution-will-be-digitised/.
[18] Drath R, Horch A. Industrie 4.0: Hit or hype?[industry forum]. IEEE Ind
Electron Mag 2014;8(2):56–8.
[19] Liu Y, Peng Y, Wang B, Yao S, Liu Z. Review on cyber-physical systems.
IEEE/CAA J Autom Sin 2017;4(1):27–40. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/JAS.2017.
7510349.
[20] Sharma N, Awasthi LK, Mangla M, Sharma KP, Kumar R. Cyber-physical
systems: a comprehensive guide. CRC Press; 2022.
[21] Boyer SA. SCADA: Supervisory control and data acquisition. International
Society of Automation; 2009.
[22] Yang H, Kumara S, Bukkapatnam ST, Tsung F. The internet of things
for smart manufacturing: A review. IISE Trans 2019;51(11):1190–216.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/24725854.2018.1555383, arXiv:https://doi.org/10.
1080/24725854.2018.1555383.
[23] Asghari P, Rahmani AM, Javadi HHS. Internet of things applications: A sys-
tematic review. Comput Netw 2019;148:241–61. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
comnet.2018.12.008, URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S1389128618305127.
[24] Antão L, Pinto R, Reis J, Gonçalves G. Requirements for testing and validating
the industrial internet of things. In: 2018 IEEE international conference on
software testing, verification and validation workshops (ICSTW). 2018, p.
110–5. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ICSTW.2018.00036.
[25] Valenzuela-Valdés JF, Triantafyllou A, Sarigiannidis P, Lagkas TD. Network
protocols, schemes, and mechanisms for internet of things (IoT): Features,
open challenges, and trends. Wirel Commun Mob Comput 2018;2018:5349894.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1155/2018/5349894.
[26] Galloway B, Hancke GP. Introduction to industrial control networks. IEEE Com-
mun Surv Tutor 2013;15(2):860–80. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/SURV.2012.
071812.00124.
[27] Dorri A, Kanhere SS, Jurdak R. Multi-agent systems: A survey. IEEE Access
2018;6:28573–93. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2018.2831228.
[28] da Silva Mendonça R, de Oliveira Lins S, de Bessa IV, de Carvalho Ayres FA,
de Medeiros RLP, de Lucena VF. Digital twin applications: A survey of
recent advances and challenges. Processes 2022;10(4). http://dx.doi.org/10.
3390/pr10040744, URL: https://www.mdpi.com/2227-9717/10/4/744.
[29] Semeraro C, Lezoche M, Panetto H, Dassisti M. Digital twin paradigm: A sys-
tematic literature review. Comput Ind 2021;130:103469. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1016/j.compind.2021.103469, URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0166361521000762.
[30] Liu M, Fang S, Dong H, Xu C. Review of digital twin about concepts, technolo-
gies, and industrial applications. J Manuf Syst 2021;58:346–61. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.jmsy.2020.06.017, URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0278612520301072. Digital Twin towards Smart Manufacturing
and Industry 4.0.
[31] Arinez JF, Chang Q, Gao RX, Xu C, Zhang J. Artificial intelligence in
advanced manufacturing: Current status and future outlook. J Manuf
Sci Eng 2020;142(11). http://dx.doi.org/10.1115/1.4047855, 110804.
arXiv:https://asmedigitalcollection.asme.org/manufacturingscience/article-
pdf/142/11/110804/6594922/manu_142_11_110804.pdf.
[32] Javaid M, Haleem A, Singh RP, Suman R. Artificial intelligence applications
for industry 4.0: A literature-based study. J Ind Integr Manage 2022;07(01):83–
111. http://dx.doi.org/10.1142/S2424862221300040, arXiv:https://doi.org/10.
1142/S2424862221300040.
[33] Majid M, Habib S, Javed AR, Rizwan M, Srivastava G, Gadekallu TR,
Lin JC-W. Applications of wireless sensor networks and internet of things
frameworks in the industry revolution 4.0: A systematic literature review.
Sensors 2022;22(6). http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/s22062087, URL: https://www.
mdpi.com/1424-8220/22/6/2087.
[34] Ali A, Ming Y, Chakraborty S, Iram S. A comprehensive survey on real-time
applications of WSN. Future Internet 2017;9(4). http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/
fi9040077, URL: https://www.mdpi.com/1999-5903/9/4/77.
[35] Queiroz DV, Alencar MS, Gomes RD, Fonseca IE, Benavente-Peces C. Survey and
systematic mapping of industrial wireless sensor networks. J Netw Comput Appl
2017;97:96–125. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jnca.2017.08.019, URL: https://
www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1084804517302771.
[36] Durao F, Carvalho JFS, Fonseka A, Garcia VC. A systematic review on cloud
computing. J Supercomput 2014;68(3):1321–46. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/
s11227-014-1089-x.
[37] Askary Z, Kumar R. Cloud computing in industries: A review. In: Kumar H,
Jain PK, editors. Recent advances in mechanical engineering. Singapore:
Springer Singapore; 2020, p. 107–16.
[38] Cao K, Liu Y, Meng G, Sun Q. An overview on edge computing research. IEEE
Access 2020;8:85714–28. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2020.2991734.Array 15 (2022) 100238
22R. Pinto and G. Gonçalves
[39] Laghari AA, Jumani AK, Laghari RA. Review and state of art of fog computing.
Arch Comput Methods Eng 2021;28(5):3631–43. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/
s11831-020-09517-y.
[40] Chong D, Shi H. Big data analytics: a literature review. J Manage Anal
2015;2(3):175–201. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/23270012.2015.1082449, arXiv:
https://doi.org/10.1080/23270012.2015.1082449.
[41] Günther WA, Rezazade Mehrizi MH, Huysman M, Feldberg F. Debating big
data: A literature review on realizing value from big data. J Strat Inf Syst
2017;26(3):191–209. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jsis.2017.07.003, URL: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0963868717302615.
[42] Lynch KM, Park FC. Modern robotics. Cambridge University Press; 2017.
[43] Siciliano B, Khatib O. Robotics and the handbook. In: Springer handbook of
robotics. Cham: Springer International Publishing; 2016, p. 1–6. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1007/978-3-319-32552-1_1.
[44] IBM. Autonomic computing: ibm’s perspective on the state of information tech-
nology. 2001, http://people.scs.carleton.ca/~soma/biosec/readings/autonomic_
computing.pdf.
[45] Würtz RP. Organic computing. Springer Science & Business Media; 2008.
[46] Parashar M, Hariri S. Autonomic computing: An overview. In: Unconventional
programming paradigms. Springer; 2005, p. 257–69.
[47] Kephart JO, Chess DM. The vision of autonomic computing. Computer
2003;36(1):41–50.
[48] Ganek AG, Corbi TA. The dawning of the autonomic computing era. IBM Syst
J 2003;42(1):5–18.
[49] Berns A, Ghosh S. Dissecting self-* properties. In: 2009 third IEEE international
conference on self-adaptive and self-organizing systems. IEEE; 2009, p. 10–9.
[50] Zadeh LA. On the definition of adaptivity. Proc IEEE 1963;51(3):469–70.
[51] Brownlee J. Clever algorithms: Nature-inspired programming recipes. Jason
Brownlee; 2011.
[52] Cohen IR. Tending Adam’s garden: evolving the cognitive immune self.
Academic Press; 2000.
[53] Cohen IR. Immune system computation and the immunological homunculus. In:
International conference on model driven engineering languages and systems.
Springer; 2006, p. 499–512.
[54] Dasgupta D, Nino F. Immunological computation: theory and applications. CRC
Press; 2008.
[55] Janeway CA. How the immune system works to protect the host from infection:
a personal view. Proc Natl Acad Sci 2001;98(13):7461–8.
[56] Pinto C, Pinto R, Gon¸ calves G. Towards bio-inspired anomaly detection using
the cursory dendritic cell algorithm. Algorithms 2022;15(1). http://dx.doi.org/
10.3390/a15010001, URL: https://www.mdpi.com/1999-4893/15/1/1.
[57] Forrest S, Perelson AS, Allen L, Cherukuri R, et al. Self-nonself discrimination
in a computer. In: IEEE symposium on security and privacy, Oakland. 1994, p.
202–12.
[58] Timmis J, Neal M, Hunt J. An artificial immune system for data analysis.
Biosystems 2000;55(1):143–50.
[59] Knight T, Timmis J. AINE: An immunological approach to data mining. In:
Proceedings of the 2001 IEEE international conference on data mining. IEEE
Computer Society; 2001, p. 297–304.
[60] Jerne NK. Towards a network theory of the immune system. In: Annales
d’immunologie. 125, (1–2):1974, p. 373–89.
[61] Nunes de Casto L, Von Zuben F. An evolutionary immune network for
data clustering. In: Proceedings. Vol. 1. Sixth Brazilian symposium on neural
networks. 2000, p. 84–9. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/SBRN.2000.889718.
[62] De Castro LN, Von Zuben FJ. The clonal selection algorithm with engineering
applications. In: Proceedings of GECCO, Vol. 2000; 2000, p. 36–9.
[63] De Castro LN, Von Zuben FJ. Learning and optimization using the clonal
selection principle. IEEE Trans Evol Comput 2002;6(3):239–51.
[64] Watkins A, Timmis J, Boggess L. Artificial immune recognition system (AIRS):
An immune-inspired supervised learning algorithm. Genet Program Evol Mach
2004;5(3):291–317.
[65] Kelsey J, Timmis J. Immune inspired somatic contiguous hypermutation for
function optimisation. In: Genetic and evolutionary computation conference.
Springer; 2003, p. 207–18.
[66] Haktanirlar Ulutas B, Kulturel-Konak S, Ulutas BH, Kulturel-Konak S. A review
of clonal selection algorithm and its applications. Artif Intell Rev (Netherlands)
2011;36(2):117–38. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10462-011-9206-1,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10462-011-9206-1https://www.scopus.com/
inward/record.uri?eid=2-s2.0-80051553003&doi=10.1007%2Fs10462-011-
9206-1&partnerID=40&md5=a20b62e6c246a58caca3718ae8548a93.
[67] Aickelin U, Cayzer S. The danger theory and its application to artificial immune
systems. 2008, arXiv preprint arXiv:0801.3549.
[68] Matzinger P. The danger model: a renewed sense of self. Science
2002;296(5566):301–5.
[69] Greensmith J, Aickelin U, Cayzer S. Introducing dendritic cells as a novel
immune-inspired algorithm for anomaly detection. In: International conference
on artificial immune systems. Springer; 2005, p. 153–67.
[70] Greensmith J, Aickelin U, Twycross J. Articulation and clarification of the
dendritic cell algorithm. In: International conference on artificial immune
systems. Springer; 2006, p. 404–17.[71] Steinman RM, Cohn ZA. Identification of a novel cell type in peripheral
lymphoid organs of mice I. Morphology, quantitation, tissue distribution. J Exp
Med 1973;137(5):1142–62.
[72] Aldhaheri S, Alghazzawi D, Cheng L, Barnawi A, Alzahrani BA. Artificial
immune systems approaches to secure the internet of things: A systematic
review of the literature and recommendations for future research. J Netw
Comput Appl 2020;157:102537. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jnca.2020.102537,
URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1084804520300114.
[73] Greensmith J, Twycross J, Aickelin U. Dendritic cells for anomaly detection.
In: 2006 IEEE international conference on evolutionary computation. 2006, p.
664–71. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/CEC.2006.1688374.
[74] Al-Hammadi Y, Aickelin U, Greensmith J. DCA for bot detection. In: 2008 IEEE
congress on evolutionary computation (IEEE world congress on computational
intelligence). 2008, p. 1807–16. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/CEC.2008.4631034.
[75] Huang R, Tawfik H, Nagar AK. Artificial dendritic cells algorithm for online
break-in fraud detection. In: 2009 second international conference on devel-
opments in esystems engineering. 2009, p. 181–9. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/
DeSE.2009.59.
[76] Danziger M, Lacerda M, de Lima Neto FB. Danger theory and multi-agents
applied for addressing the deny of service detection problem in IEEE 802.11
networks. In: 2009 ninth international conference on intelligent systems design
and applications. 2009, p. 695–702. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ISDA.2009.136.
[77] Alsulami AA, Zein-Sabatto S. Detection and defense from false data injection
attacks in aviation cyber-physical systems using artificial immune systems. In:
2020 international conference on computational science and computational in-
telligence (CSCI). 2020, p. 69–75. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/CSCI51800.2020.
00019.
[78] Alsulami AA, Zein-Sabatto S. Resilient cyber-security approach for aviation
cyber-physical systems protection against sensor spoofing attacks. In: 2021
IEEE 11th annual computing and communication workshop and conference
(CCWC), Piscataway, NJ, USA. 2021, p. 0565–71, URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.
1109/CCWC51732.2021.9376158.
[79] Cayzer S, Aickelin U. A recommender system based on the immune network.
In: Proceedings of the 2002 congress on evolutionary computation. CEC’02 (cat.
no.02TH8600), Vol. 1. 2002, p. 807–12. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/CEC.2002.
1007029, vol.1.
[80] Zand MD, Kalantari M, Golzari S. File transfer scheduling optimization using
artificial immune system. In: 2013 14th ACIS international conference on
software engineering, artificial intelligence, networking and parallel/distributed
computing. 2013, p. 17–22. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/SNPD.2013.52.
[81] Moalla D, Elkosantini S, Darmoul S. An artificial immune network to control
traffic at a single intersectio. In: Proceedings of 2013 international conference
on industrial engineering and systems management (IESM); 2013, p. 1–7.
[82] Chen D, Zhang F. 5G message service system based on artificial immune
dynamic adaptive mechanism. IEEE Access 2019;7:91146–59. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2927271.
[83] Takeda T, Taniguchi K, Asari K, Kuramoto K, Kobashi S, Hata Y. Biometric
personal authentication by one step foot pressure distribution change by fuzzy
artificial immune system. In: International conference on fuzzy systems. 2010,
p. 1–6. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/FUZZY.2010.5584216.
[84] Xu C, Xu S, Chen W. Artificial immune system and its applications in gps
single frequency precise point positioning. In: 2008 3rd international conference
on intelligent system and knowledge engineering, Vol. 1. 2008, p. 180–3.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ISKE.2008.4730921.
[85] Wang H, Peng D, Wang W, Sharif H, Wegiel J, Nguyen D, Bowne R, Backhaus C.
Artificial immune system based image pattern recognition in energy efficient
wireless multimedia sensor networks. In: MILCOM 2008 - 2008 IEEE military
communications conference. 2008, p. 1–7. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/MILCOM.
2008.4753651.
[86] Timmis J. Artificial immune systems - today and tomorrow. Nat Comput
(Netherlands) 2007;6(1):1–18, URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11047-006-
9029-1.
[87] Shafi K, Abbass HA. Biologically-inspired complex adaptive systems approaches
to network intrusion detection. Inf Secur Tech Rep 2007;12(4):209–17. http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.istr.2007.09.001, URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S1363412707000416.
[88] Timmis J, Andrews P, Owens N, Clark E. An interdisciplinary perspective
on artificial immune systems. Evol Intell (Netherlands) 2008;1(1):5–26, URL:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s12065-007-0004-2.
[89] Zheng J, Chen Y, Zhang W. A survey of artificial immune applications. Artif
Intell Rev (Netherlands) 2010;34(1):19–34, URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/
s10462-010-9159-9.
[90] Muhamad AS, Deris S. An artificial immune system for solving pro-
duction scheduling problems: a review. Artif Intell Rev (Netherlands)
2013;39(2):97–108, URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10462-011-9259-1.
[91] Bayar N, Darmoul S, Hajri-Gabouj S, Pierreval H. Fault detection, diagnosis
and recovery using artificial immune systems: A review. Eng Appl Artif Intell
2015;46:43–57. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.engappai.2015.08.006, URL: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0952197615001840.Array 15 (2022) 100238
23R. Pinto and G. Gonçalves
[92] Bere M, Muyingi H. Initial investigation of industrial control system (ICS)
security using artificial immune system (AIS). In: 2015 international conference
on emerging trends in networks and computer communications (ETNCC).
Proceedings, Piscataway, NJ, USA. 2015, p. 79–84, URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.
1109/ETNCC.2015.7184812.
[93] Raza A, Fernandez BR. Immuno-inspired robotic applications: A review. Appl
Soft Comput (Netherlands) 2015;37:490–505, URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
j.asoc.2015.08.050.
[94] Zhong RY, Xu X, Klotz E, Newman ST. Intelligent manufacturing in the
context of industry 4.0: A review. Engineering 2017;3(5):616–30. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/J.ENG.2017.05.015, URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S2095809917307130.
[95] Al-Khatib R, Doush I. A survey for recent applications and variants of nature-
inspired immune search algorithm. Int J Comput Appl Technol (Switzerland)
2020;63(4):354–70, URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1504/IJCAT.2020.110417.
[96] Radanliev P, De Roure D, Van Kleek M, Santos O, Ani U. Artificial intelligence
in cyber physical systems. AI Soc 2020. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00146-
020-01049-0, URL: https://www.scopus.com/inward/record.uri?eid=2-s2.0-
85090061979&doi=10.1007%2Fs00146-020-01049-0&partnerID=40&md5=
90c718b0157dc5597a36ff8dbc6059c7.
[97] Alrubayyi H, Goteng G, Jaber M, Kelly J. Challenges of malware detection
in the IoT and a review of artificial immune system approaches. J Sens
Actuat Netw 2021;10(4). http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/jsan10040061, URL: https:
//www.mdpi.com/2224-2708/10/4/61.
[98] Pinto R, Gonçalves G, Tovar E, Delsing J. Attack detection in cyber-physical
production systems using the deterministic dendritic cell algorithm. In: 2020
25th IEEE international conference on emerging technologies and factory
automation (ETFA), Vol. 1. 2020, p. 1552–9.
[99] Rocha AD, Lima-Monteiro P, Parreira-Rocha M, Barata J. Artificial immune
systems based multi-agent architecture to perform distributed diagnosis. J Intell
Manuf 2019;30(4):2025–37. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10845-017-1370-y.
[100] Lokesh MR, Kumaraswamy YS. State awareness towards resiliency in cyber-
physical system: A modified danger theory based deterministic dendritic cell
algorithm approach. In: 2015 IEEE international conference on computer
graphics, vision and information security (CGVIS). 2015, p. 201–8. http://dx.
doi.org/10.1109/CGVIS.2015.7449922.
[101] Xu SS-D, Huang H-C, Kung Y-C, Chu Y-Y. A networked multirobot CPS
with artificial immune fuzzy optimization for distributed formation control of
embedded mobile robots. IEEE Trans Ind Inf 2020;16(1):414–22. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1109/TII.2019.2936045.
[102] Igbe O, Darwish I, Saadawi T. Deterministic dendritic cell algorithm application
to smart grid cyber-attack detection. In: 2017 IEEE 4th international conference
on cyber security and cloud computing (CSCloud). 2017, p. 199–204. http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1109/CSCloud.2017.12.
[103] Samigulina GA, Samigulina ZI. Development of smart-technology for
complex objects control based on approach of artificial immune systems. In:
Proceedings - 2018 global smart industry conference, GloSIC 2018, Piscataway,
NJ, USA. 2018, p. 6. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/GloSIC.2018.8570142,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/GloSIC.2018.8570142https://www.scopus.com/
inward/record.uri?eid=2-s2.0-85060726058&doi=10.1109%2FGloSIC.2018.
8570142&partnerID=40&md5=284e30bf2c42e419068f81ae53d5c930.
[104] Lokesh MR, Kumaraswamy YS, R LM, Kumaraswamy YS. Modified danger
theory based optimized artificial immune network on resiliency in cyber-
physical system. In: 2015 international conference on green computing and
internet of things (ICGCIoT). Proceedings, Piscataway, NJ, USA. 2015, p.
1228–35. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ICGCIoT.2015.7380651.
[105] Lokesh MR, Kumaraswamy Y. Healing process towards resiliency in cyber-
physical system: A modified danger theory based artifical immune recogization2
algorithm approach. In: 2015 IEEE international conference on computer
graphics, vision and information security (CGVIS). 2015, p. 226–32. http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1109/CGVIS.2015.7449926.
[106] Lima FP, Lotufo AD, Minussi CR. Disturbance detection for optimal database
storage in electrical distribution systems using artificial immune systems with
negative selection. Electr Power Syst Res 2014;109:54–62. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1016/j.epsr.2013.12.010, URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S0378779613003398.
[107] Li W, Cai X. Intelligent immune system for sustainable manufacturing. In: 2018
IEEE 22nd international conference on computer supported cooperative work
in design ((CSCWD)). 2018, p. 190–5. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/CSCWD.2018.
8465214.
[108] Lima FP, Lotufo ADP, Minussi CR. Wavelet-artificial immune system algorithm
applied to voltage disturbance diagnosis in electrical distribution systems. IET
Gener Transm Distrib 2015;9(11):1104–11. http://dx.doi.org/10.1049/iet-gtd.
2014.1102.
[109] Ieao FB, Pereira RAF, Mantovani JRS, Leão FB, Pereira RAF,
Mantovani JRS. Fault section estimation in electric power systems
using an artificial immune system algorithm. In: 16th power systems
computation conference, PSCC 2008, Strathclyde, UK. 2008, p. 7, URL:
https://www.scopus.com/inward/record.uri?eid=2-s2.0-84944097046&
partnerID=40&md5=c9465da4ebb5830b12931208567dfa95.[110] Ko A, Lau HYK, Lau TL. An immuno control framework for decentralized
mechatronic control. In: Nicosia G, Cutello V, Bentley PJ, Timmis J, editors.
Artificial immune systems. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg; 2004,
p. 91–105.
[111] Rammig FJ, Grösbrink S, Stahl K, Zhao Y. Designing self-adaptive embedded
real-time software – towards system engineering of self-adaptation. In: Proceed-
ings of the 2014 Brazilian symposium on computing systems engineering. SBESC
’14, USA: IEEE Computer Society; 2014, p. 37–42. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/
SBESC.2014.15.
[112] Degeler V, French R, Jones K. Combined danger signal and anomaly-based
threat detection in cyber-physical systems. In: Lecture notes of the institute
for computer sciences, social-informatics and telecommunications engineering.
LNICST, vol. 169, Cham: Springer; 2015, p. 27–39. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/
978-3-319-47063-4_3, URL: https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-
319-47063-4_3.
[113] Pinto R, Gonçalves G, Delsing J, Tovar E. Incremental dendritic cell algorithm
for intrusion detection in cyber-physical production systems. In: Arai K, edi-
tor. Intelligent computing. Cham: Springer International Publishing; 2021, p.
664–80.
[114] Clotet X, Moyano J, León G. A real-time anomaly-based IDS for cyber-attack
detection at the industrial process level of critical infrastructures. Int J Crit
Infrastruct Prot 2018;23:11–20. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ijcip.2018.08.002,
URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1874548217300884.
[115] Guerrero CAV, Silveira PM, Filho JMC. Adaptation of the clonal selection
algorithm to the real-time coordinated Volt/VAr control through a software-in-
the-loop strategy. Electr Power Syst Res 2021;194:107092. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1016/j.epsr.2021.107092, URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S0378779621000730.
[116] Guo J, Yang H. An anti-jamming artificial immune approach for energy leakage
diagnosis in parallel-machine job shops. Comput Ind 2018;101:13–24. http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.compind.2018.05.004, URL: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S016636151730756X.
[117] Semwal T, Nair SB. A decentralized artificial immune system for solution
selection in cyber–physical systems. Appl Soft Comput 2020;86:105920. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.asoc.2019.105920, URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S156849461930701X.
[118] Zhu J, Shu Y, Zhao J, Yang F. A dynamic alarm management strategy for
chemical process transitions. J Loss Prev Process Ind 2014;30:207–18. http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jlp.2013.07.008, URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S0950423013001393.
[119] Zhao J, Shu Y, Zhu J, Dai Y. An online fault diagnosis strategy for full
operating cycles of chemical processes. Ind Eng Chem Res 2014;53(13):5015–
27. http://dx.doi.org/10.1021/ie400660e, URL: https://www.scopus.com/
inward/record.uri?eid=2-s2.0-84897503835&doi=10.1021%2Fie400660e&
partnerID=40&md5=fb5a1bb394bf1bcea3590bba40e4d76b.
[120] Kim DH. Tuning of 2-DOF PID controller by immune algorithm. In: Proceedings
of the 2002 congress on evolutionary computation. CEC’02 (cat. no.02TH8600),
Vol. 1. 2002, p. 675–80. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/CEC.2002.1007007, vol.1.
[121] Li XD, Xu YQ, Zhang L. Distribution service restoration with DGs based on
multi-agent immune algorithm. In: 2009 2nd international conference on power
electronics and intelligent transportation system (PEITS), Vol. 1. 2009, p. 1–4.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/PEITS.2009.5407060.
[122] Aghaebrahimi MR, Amiri M, Zahiri SH. An immune-based optimization method
for distributed generation placement in order to minimize power losses. In:
2009 international conference on sustainable power generation and supply.
2009, p. 1–7. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/SUPERGEN.2009.5348235.
[123] Lizondo D, Araujo P, Will A, Rodriguez S. Multiagent model for distributed
peak shaving system with demand-side management approach. In: 2017 first
IEEE international conference on robotic computing (IRC). 2017, p. 352–7.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/IRC.2017.50.
[124] Kayama M, Sugita Y, Morooka Y, Fukuoka S. Distributed diagnosis system com-
bining the immune network and learning vector quantization. In: Proceedings
of IECON ’95 - 21st annual conference on IEEE industrial electronics, Vol. 2.
1995, p. 1531–6. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/IECON.1995.484178, vol.2.
[125] Wang B, Wang S-A, Zhuang J. A distributed immune algorithm for learn-
ing experience in complex industrial process control. In: Proceedings of the
2003 international conference on machine learning and cybernetics (IEEE
cat. no.03EX693), Vol. 4. 2003, p. 2138–41. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ICMLC.
2003.1259859, Vol.4.
[126] Jun J-H, Lee D-W, Sim K-B. Realization of cooperative strategies and swarm
behavior in distributed autonomous robotic systems using artificial immune
system. In: IEEE SMC’99 conference proceedings. 1999 IEEE international
conference on systems, man, and cybernetics (cat. no.99CH37028), Vol. 6. 1999,
p. 614–9. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ICSMC.1999.816622, vol.6.
[127] Jin X, Zhao J, Wang HF. On-line stability control of power systems integrated
with distributed generation systems. In: Proceedings of the 41st international
universities power engineering conference, Vol. 2. 2006, p. 472–6. http://dx.
doi.org/10.1109/UPEC.2006.367522.Array 15 (2022) 100238
24R. Pinto and G. Gonçalves
[128] Huang H-C. An evolutionary optimal fuzzy system with information fusion
of heterogeneous distributed computing and polar-space dynamic model for
online motion control of Swedish redundant robots. IEEE Trans Ind Electron
2017;64(2):1743–50. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TIE.2016.2562613.
[129] Lau HYK, Wong VWK. A strategic behavioral-based intelligent transport system
with artificial immune system. In: 2004 IEEE international conference on
systems, man and cybernetics (IEEE cat. no.04CH37583), Vol. 4. 2004, p.
3909–14. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ICSMC.2004.1400955, vol.4.
[130] Xiaobo T, Guoqing T. Risk distribution network planning including distributed
generation based on particle swarm optimization algorithm with immunity.
In: 2009 international conference on sustainable power generation and supply.
2009, p. 1–5. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/SUPERGEN.2009.5348246.
[131] Lee D-W, Sim K-B. Artificial immune network-based cooperative control in
collective autonomous mobile robots. In: Proceedings 6th IEEE international
workshop on robot and human communication. RO-MAN’97 SENDAI. 1997, p.
58–63. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ROMAN.1997.646953.
[132] Lau HYK, Ng AKS. Immunology-based control framework for multi-jointed
redundant manipulators. In: IEEE conference on robotics, automation and
mechatronics, 2004, Vol. 1. 2004, p. 318–23. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/
RAMECH.2004.1438938, vol.1.
[133] Yin G. A distributed generation islanding detection method based on artificial
immune system. In: 2005 IEEE/PES transmission distribution conference ex-
position: Asia and Pacific. 2005, p. 1–4. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TDC.2005.
1547072.
[134] Bhuvaneswari R, Srivastava SK, Edrington CS, Cartes DA, Subramanian S.
Intelligent agent based auction by economic generation scheduling for microgrid
operation. In: 2010 innovative smart grid technologies (ISGT). 2010, p. 1–6.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ISGT.2010.5434745.
[135] Yuan J, Tang A, Zhai X, Yan H, Zheng X, Zhao H. Coordination control strategy
of DSSC converter based on multi-objective optimal immune algorithms. In:
2019 IEEE 3rd advanced information management, communicates, electronic
and automation control conference (IMCEC). 2019, p. 1987–91. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1109/IMCEC46724.2019.8983846.
[136] Lau HYK, Wong VWK. An immunity-based distributed multiagent-control frame-
work. IEEE Trans Syst Man Cybern A 2006;36(1):91–108. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1109/TSMCA.2005.859103.
[137] Michelan R, Von Zuben FJ. Decentralized control system for autonomous
navigation based on an evolved artificial immune network. In: Proceedings of
the 2002 congress on evolutionary computation. CEC’02 (cat. no.02TH8600),
Vol. 2. 2002, p. 1021–6. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/CEC.2002.1004383, vol.2.
[138] Hanumantha Rao B, Sivanagaraju S. Optimum allocation and sizing of dis-
tributed generations based on clonal selection algorithm for loss reduction
and technical benefit of energy savings. In: 2012 international conference on
advances in power conversion and energy technologies (APCET). 2012, p. 1–5.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/APCET.2012.6302004.
[139] Gao Y, Luo Z. Dynamic task allocation method based on immune system
for cooperative robots. In: 2008 7th world congress on intelligent control
and automation. 2008, p. 1015–20. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/WCICA.2008.
4593060.
[140] Sun S-J, Lee D-W, Sim K-B. Artificial immune-based swarm behaviors of
distributed autonomous robotic systems. In: Proceedings 2001 ICRA. IEEE
international conference on robotics and automation (cat. no.01CH37164), Vol.
4. 2001, p. 3993–8. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ROBOT.2001.933241, vol.4.
[141] Rimal AN, Belkacemi R. CPS compliant adaptive immune based load frequency
control with varying wind penetrations. In: 2016 IEEE power energy society
innovative smart grid technologies conference (ISGT). 2016, p. 1–5. http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1109/ISGT.2016.7781032.[142] Diez-Olivan A, Ortego P, Del Ser J, Landa-Torres I, Galar D, Camacho D,
Sierra B. Adaptive dendritic cell-deep learning approach for industrial prognosis
under changing conditions. IEEE Trans Ind Inf 2021;1. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1109/TII.2021.3058350.
[143] Khoie M, Sedigh AK, Salahshoor K. PID controller tuning using multi-objective
optimization based on fused genetic-immune algorithm and immune feedback
mechanism. In: 2011 IEEE international conference on mechatronics and
automation. 2011, p. 2459–64. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ICMA.2011.5986338.
[144] Pinto R, Gonçalves G, Delsing J, Tovar E. Enabling data-driven anomaly detec-
tion by design in cyber-physical production systems. Cybersecurity 2022;5(1):9.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/s42400-022-00114-z.
[145] Kim YJ, Nam W, Lee J. Multiclass anomaly detection for unsupervised
and semi-supervised data based on a combination of negative selection
and clonal selection algorithms. Appl Soft Comput 2022;122:108838. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.asoc.2022.108838, URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S1568494622002332.
[146] Outa R, Chavarette FR, Gonçalves AC, Silva SLd, Mishra VN, Panosso AR,
Mishra LN. Reliability analysis using experimental statistical methods and
AIS: application in continuous flow tubes of gaseous medium. Acta Sci
Technol 2021;43(1):e55825. http://dx.doi.org/10.4025/actascitechnol.v43i1.
55825, URL: https://periodicos.uem.br/ojs/index.php/ActaSciTechnol/article/
view/55825.
[147] He H, Maple C, Watson T, Tiwari A, Mehnen J, Jin Y, Gabrys B. The security
challenges in the IoT enabled cyber-physical systems and opportunities for
evolutionary computing & other computational intelligence. In: 2016 IEEE
congress on evolutionary computation (CEC). IEEE; 2016, p. 1015–21.
[148] Leong WD, Lam HL, Ng WPQ, Lim CH, Tan CP, Ponnambalam SG. Lean and
green manufacturing—a review on its applications and impacts. Process Integr
Optim Sustain 2019;3(1):5–23.
[149] Abualfaraa W, Salonitis K, Al-Ashaab A, Ala’raj M. Lean-green manufacturing
practices and their link with sustainability: A critical review. Sustainability
2020;12(3):981.
[150] Rajput SP, Datta S. Sustainable and green manufacturing–A narrative literature
review. Mater Today Proc 2020;26:2515–20.
[151] Brandt D, Tschiersch I, Henning K. The design of human-centered manufac-
turing systems. In: The design of manufacturing systems. CRC Press; 2019,
108–163.
[152] Ruppert T, Jaskó S, Holczinger T, Abonyi J. Enabling technologies for operator
4.0: A survey. Appl Sci 2018;8(9):1650.
[153] Hariharasudan A, Kot S. A scoping review on digital english and education 4.0
for industry 4.0. Soc Sci 2018;7(11):227.
[154] Parrend P, Guigou F, Navarro J, Deruyver A, Collet P. For a refoundation
of artificial immune system research: AIS is a design pattern. In: 2018 IEEE
symposium series on computational intelligence (SSCI). 2018, p. 1122–9. http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1109/SSCI.2018.8628868.
[155] Adadi A, Berrada M. Peeking inside the black-box: A survey on explainable
artificial intelligence (XAI). IEEE Access 2018;6:52138–60. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1109/ACCESS.2018.2870052.
[156] Pinto R. M2M using OPC UA. 2020, http://dx.doi.org/10.21227/ychv-6c68.
[157] Bay SD, Kibler D, Pazzani MJ, Smyth P. The UCI KDD archive of large data
sets for data mining research and experimentation. ACM SIGKDD Explor Newsl
2000;2(2):81–5.
[158] Goh J, Adepu S, Junejo KN, Mathur A. A dataset to support research in
the design of secure water treatment systems. In: International conference on
critical information infrastructures security. Springer; 2016, p. 88–99.
[159] Katser ID, Kozitsin VO. Skoltech anomaly benchmark (SKAB). 2020, http:
//dx.doi.org/10.34740/KAGGLE/DSV/1693952, https://www.kaggle.com/dsv/
1693952.