Artiﬁcial  Intelligence  in the Life Sciences  3 (2023) 100057 
Contents  lists available  at ScienceDirect  
Artiﬁcial  Intelligence  in the Life Sciences  
journal  homepage:  www.elsevier.com/locate/ailsci  
Review  
Application  of AI techniques  and robotics  in agriculture:  A review  
Manas  Wakchaure  a , b , B.K. Patle b , ∗ , A.K. Mahindrakar  b 
a Department  of Mechano-Informatics,  Graduate School of Information  Science and Technology,  The University  of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan 
b Department  of Mechanical  Engineering,  MIT School of Engineering,  MIT ADT University,  Loni Kalbhor, Pune, Maharashtra,  412201, India 
a r t i c l e i n f o 
Keywords:  
Artiﬁcial intelligent  techniques  
Agriculture  robots 
Agriculture  engineering  
Smart farming 
Cultivation  
Monitoring  
Harvesting  a b s t r a c t 
The aim of the proposed  work is to review the various AI techniques  (fuzzy logic (FL), artiﬁcial  neural network  
(ANN), genetic algorithm  (GA), particle swarm optimization  (PSO), artiﬁcial  potential  ﬁeld (APF), simulated  an- 
nealing (SA), ant colony optimization  (ACO), artiﬁcial  bee colony algorithm  (ABC), harmony  search algorithm  
(HS), bat algorithm  (BA), cell decomposition  (CD) and ﬁreﬂy algorithm  (FA)) in agriculture,  focusing  on expert 
systems,  robots developed  for agriculture,  sensors technology  for collecting  and transmitting  data, in an attempt 
to reveal their potential  impact in the ﬁeld of agriculture.  None of the literature  highlights  the application  of 
AI techniques  and robots in (Cultivation,  Monitoring,  and Harvesting)  to understand  their contribution  to the 
agriculture  sector and the simultaneous  comparison  of each based on its usefulness  and popularity.  This work 
investigates  the comparative  analysis  of three essential  phases of agriculture:  Cultivation,  Monitoring,  and Har- 
vesting, by knowing  the depth of AI involved  and the robots utilized.  The current study presents  a systematic  
review of more than 150 papers based on the existing automation  application  in agriculture  from 1960 to 2021. It 
highlights  the future research  gap in making intelligent  autonomous  systems in agriculture.  The paper concludes  
with tabular data and charts comparing  the frequency  of individual  AI approaches  for speciﬁc applications  in the 
agriculture  ﬁeld. 
1. Introduction  
The ancient  culture of any country  deals with agricultural  activities  
for the overall development  for thousands  of years. Agricultural  activi- 
ties have an impact on human beings as per the energy requirements  in 
terms of healthy  foods are concerned.  The growth  cycle of any crop goes 
through  three fundamental  phases:  cultivation,  monitoring,  and harvest-  
ing phases,  and each phase have a number  of activities.  The cultivation  
phase deals with selecting  crops to be planted,  planning  of land, land 
preparation,  irrigation  planning,  seed preparation,  and seed sowing.  Af- 
ter the cultivation  phase, the main task of farming  is to monitor  and 
control the growth  of the crops. In this monitoring  phase, the activities  
depend  on time, such as scheduled  crop health monitoring,  fertilizer  
use, disease  identiﬁcation,  weed identiﬁcation,  and pesticide  spraying.  
At last, the most crucial phase of the crop cycle is the harvesting  phase 
which includes  the activities  such as crop cutting,  segmentation,  storing,  
and selling to the market.  
At present,  most agricultural  activities  are traditionally  practiced,  re- 
sulting in non-proﬁtable  and non-economic  farming.  Traditional  farm- 
ing without  AI and robotics  suﬀerers  from 
∗ Corresponding  author. 
E-mail address: balu_patle@rediﬀmail.com  (B.K. Patle) . • It is more time-consuming  and requires  much eﬀort to prepare  and 
plan land, irrigation,  and seed sowing.  
• Involves  more human resources  for handling  the various  agriculture  
processes.  
• Lack of accurate  information  on weather,  soil conditions,  and use of 
fertilizers.  
• It takes more time and eﬀort to monitor  crops’ health and disease  
identiﬁcation  manually.  
• It requires  more labor for weed identiﬁcation  and control.  
• Traditional  spraying  of pesticides  aﬀects the health of the farmers  as 
well as reduces  crop productivity.  
• Old ways of crop cutting and segmentation  of healthy  crops and 
fruits are tedious  tasks. 
• Poor practices  in storing harvested  food led to its degradation.  
Further,  due to a lack of knowledge,  experience,  and problems  in- 
volved in agriculture,  many of the young generations  are disconnecting  
themselves  from agricultural  activities,  which will undoubtedly  raise 
the question  of future food production  and the requirements.  The agri- 
cultural  development  revolution  took place from 1.0 to 4.0 (today)  to 
overcome  all these issues. It is replacing  the traditional  farming  system 
with the most advanced  AI-based  system in which the machine  itself 
makes the decisions  for solving  real-time  issues. At present,  young en- 
gineers  and scientists  are working  a lot to make the agriculture  process  
eﬀortless,  intelligent,  cost-eﬀective,  highly productive,  time-eﬃcient,  
sustainable,  healthy,  and wealthy  society.  AI-based  systems  include  sen- 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ailsci.2023.100057  
Received  21 November  2022; Accepted  5 January  2023 
Available  online 6 January  2023 
2667-3185/©2023  The Authors.  Published  by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/  ) M. Wakchaure, B.K. Patle and A.K. Mahindrakar Artiﬁcial Intelligence in the Life Sciences 3 (2023) 100057 
sors technology,  IoT, data management  technology,  intelligent  decision-  
making  algorithm,  robotics,  and advanced  mechanisms.  
There are very few review papers available  on the implementation  
of AI in the ﬁeld of agriculture  [1–7] . The available  papers highlight  
the speciﬁc  area of agriculture,  such as weed identiﬁcation  and pesti- 
cide spraying,  irrigation  planning,  crop yield monitoring  and prediction,  
greenhouse  automation,  navigation  and path planning,  disease  identi- 
ﬁcation,  segmentation,  harvesting  of crops and fruits, etc. None of the 
available  papers have considered  the agriculture  ﬁeld’s overall processes  
and activities  consisting  of various  phases such as cultivation,  moni- 
toring, and harvesting.  It is also seen that there is no systematic  re- 
view available  on the application  of AI in the diﬀerent  activities  of each 
phase. In most of the review works, the data is presented  neither  in tab- 
ular form nor graphically  for easy understanding.  The comparative  data 
is also missing  between  the various  cited papers.  The available  review 
papers do not provide  that depth as they have considered  minimal  pa- 
pers for reviewing.  The main drawback  of the available  review papers 
is the lack of explaining  the existing  research  gap qualitatively  as well 
as quantitatively  in agriculture  using AI. 
The proposed  review paper has been prepared  after reviewing  more 
than seven hundred  papers and citing more than 150 papers for review 
work. In this work, we have presented  a systematic  review of AI tech- 
niques over various  agricultural  phases,  including  the path planning  of 
agriculture  robots. The paper highlights  the major areas where AI is im- 
plemented  most commonly,  and it also highlights  the areas where the 
application  of AI is very much needed.  The paper identiﬁes  the areas 
of agriculture  where the improvement  of the existing  process  may be 
enhanced  using various  available  techniques.  The proposed  work shows 
the applications  of various  AI techniques  and algorithms,  which have 
been used widely,  and identiﬁes  the techniques  used as a hybrid model. 
Here, the analysis  of AI is studied  based on simulation  work, experimen-  
tal work, application  as a hybrid approach,  and application  for solving  
problems  in agriculture.  The detailed  tabular  analysis  and graphical  con- 
clusion are presented  year-wise  to make the review more understand-  
able. Using the in-depth  proposed  review,  one should be able to dif- 
ferentiate  the phases,  such as cultivation  and harvesting,  that are still 
practiced  traditionally.  Most of the AI implementation  is done in the 
monitoring  phase only. The AI techniques  such as fuzzy logic (FL), ar- 
tiﬁcial neural network  (ANN), genetic  algorithm  (GA), particle  swarm 
optimization  (PSO), artiﬁcial  potential  ﬁeld (APF), simulated  anneal-  
ing (SA), ant colony optimization  (ACO), artiﬁcial  bee colony algorithm  
(ABC), harmony  search algorithm  (HS), bat algorithm  (BA), cell decom-  
position  (CD) and ﬁreﬂy algorithm  (FA) have been proposed  for rigorous  
analysis.  
Here, the various  AI approaches  used so far in various  agriculture  
processes  are explained  in Section  2 . Section  3 of the paper provides  
a detailed  discussion  of the AI approaches.  The conclusion  and future 
scope are provided  in Section  4 . 
2. AI techniques  used in agriculture  
The problems  associated  with various  agricultural  activities  can be 
solved by implementing  AI techniques  ( Fig. 1 ). The research  work from 
the year 1960 to 2021 has provided  numerous  methodologies  in the ﬁeld 
of agriculture,  and it is presented  below. 
2.1. Fuzzy logic 
FL has many advantages  over traditional  decision  sets. FL is a set 
of rules that solve problems  with nonlinearity,  complexity,  and uncer- 
tainty. It was ﬁrst introduced  by L. Zadeh in 1965 [8] . The FL is the 
logical approach  that gives a precise decision  about the ongoing  condi- 
tion with the value called degrees  of truth. Like other traditional  sets, FL 
does not give true or false results.  FL, as an AI technique,  helps the con- 
troller understand  the correct changes  with the time of the system in the real world to take the precise steps to act upon with time. The develop-  
ment of FL in the last few years has evolved  the decision  power of con- 
trollers.  Nowadays,  the FL technique  is widely used in the agricultural  
domain  in various  processes  such as agricultural  UAV navigation,  aerial 
imaging,  crop-cutting  robot, farm monitoring,  harvesting,  and many 
more. 
Decision  and planning  are very important  in agriculture.  The sud- 
den change in climate  aﬀects the farmer’s  planning  in the crop growth  
cycle. Shahjalal  et al. [9] have worked  on the FL model to analyze  cli- 
mate change’s  consequences  on agricultural  production.  With this study, 
farmers  can make the right decision  to plant crops. Further,  the applica-  
tion of FL for an understanding  of carnation  seedlings  and their growth  
cycle parameters,  such as shape, is presented  by Fujiwara  [10] . His-work  
presents  the FL with an image processing  algorithm  and achieves  a 97% 
judgment  rate. The agriculture  processes  are complex,  and it requires  
much eﬀort to perform  them within time. By considering  this aspect, 
Nassiri et al. [11] have worked  on the packaging  of good tomatoes  us- 
ing FL based classiﬁcation  model. The mature tomatoes  were analyzed  
upon fruit color, size, and hardness.  The hardness  was tested by a fuzzy 
membership  function  and with an Instron compression  test. Further,  
Collewet  et al. [12] have proposed  the fuzzy adaptive  controller  as a 
perfect control technique  to help agricultural  robots work more eﬀec- 
tively in farming.  They have used meta-rules,  specialized  learning  ar- 
chitecture,  and cell-to-cell  mapping  algorithms  to achieve  their goals. 
One such FL-based  approach  is developed  and implemented  by Hagras 
et al. [13] on agriculture  robots to minimize  human eﬀort in harvest-  
ing crops. Hayashi  et al. [14] , Cho et al. [15] , and Xue et al. [16] also 
worked  towards  the development  of a vision-based  fuzzy feedback  sys- 
tem for agriculture  robots. The work is more focused  on the problems  
occurring  during the harvesting  of plants. They have used FL to help 
the robot arm to reach the fruit and provide  feedback  to control fur- 
ther tasks. While working  on the farm, autonomous  navigation  is the 
biggest challenge  for any mobile robot. Hence such a problem  is ad- 
dressed  by Borrero  et al. [17] , Kannan  et al. [18] , and Barakat  et al. 
[19] by developing  fuzzy-based  eﬃcient  steering  control action. The 
same problem  of autonomous  navigation  in the presence  of complexity  
of crop row lines is also solved using FL with the sensor technology  
by De Sousa et al. [20] . The robot equipped  with sonar-based  map- 
ping and FL was developed  by Toda et al. [21] to minimize  the ef- 
fort in monitoring  crops. In order to take proper care of crops, spray- 
ing pesticides  is an important  step in agriculture  engineering.  Abdel- 
latif et al. [22] presented  an unmanned  aerial vehicle based on FL to 
make fast and autonomous  spraying  of pesticides.  In their work, FL is 
used to control the input signals from sensors  to output to actuators.  
Cho et al. [23] have developed  an FL controller  to achieve  fast opera- 
tions of spraying  in the orchard  environment.  They used machine  vision 
and FL to control the operation  time of hydraulic  cylinders.  Similarly,  
one more application  of vision-based  navigation  for agriculture  robots 
is provided  by Zhou et al. [24] using reinforcement  learning  and fuzzy 
rules. 
The new concept  of E-farming  based on FL is given by Narendran  
et al. [25] . Their work is related to the agriculture  robot, which is de- 
signed and developed  using FL to control the microcontroller  for precise 
movement  of motors in performing  multiple  functions  in agriculture,  
such as ploughing,  seed dispensing,  watering,  pesticide  spraying,  and 
temperature  monitoring.  One more mild stone in the ﬁeld of agricul-  
ture engineering  is given by Prema et al. [26] . In their work, they have 
also provided  the application  of FL to control the robot from a remote 
location.  They proved that the PID controllers  are not eﬃcient  com- 
pared with FL. Any intelligent  systems  need precise and proper input 
data from the sensor, but multiple  vibrations  in the mechanical  systems  
disturb it. Paul et al. [27] have presented  an FL-tuned  PID controller  for 
the agriculture  manipulator  vibration  control to solve the problem.  The 
non-linearity  is controlled  by using Type-2 FL. The recent work in UAV 
is presented  by Nderu et al. [28] for perfect aerial images with the help 
of fuzzy technologies.  For precision  agriculture,  the data monitoring  of 
2 M. Wakchaure, B.K. Patle and A.K. Mahindrakar Artiﬁcial Intelligence in the Life Sciences 3 (2023) 100057 
Fig. 1. Implementation  of AI techniques  for agriculture  activities.  
crops is much needed  for proper controlling  of plant growth.  As per the 
authors,  the fuzzy technique  helps UAVs handle and overcome  vague- 
ness and ambiguity.  The FL is implemented  with many other techniques  
in order to get maximum  advantage  in the same input. One such hybrid 
approach  is presented  by Morimoto  et al. [29] . This work used FL, GA, 
and NN for greenhouse  automation  to reduce human eﬀort. Noguchi  
et al. [30] have presented  a hybrid approach  using the FL and GA for 
precision  farming.  In their work, they focused  on how to control weed as 
it aﬀects the growth  cycle of crops. The implementation  of FL and GA is 
used to classify  the plants and weeds separately.  Hagras et al. [31] have 
implemented  the FL and GA to develop  autonomous  agriculture  vehicles  
for navigation  based on crop lining, spray, ploughing,  and harvesting.  
The application  of the FL and GA-based  hybrid approach  is provided  for 
autonomous  speed spraying  by Cho et al. [32] . Hagras et al. [33] have 
focused  more on FL and GA to develop  an intelligent  agricultural  robot 
to independently  take their learning  decision  online while performing  
various  farming  tasks. The vital step in agriculture  is crop inspection  
which is addressed  by Camci et al. [34] using UAV. In that work, the AI 
algorithms  such as FL, PSO, and NN are used to solve UAVs’ real-time  
challenges  during an inspection  of the crop. 
The development  of FL has also been seen for yield prediction,  crop 
needs recommendation  systems  and irrigation  forecasting.  As we know, 
the growth  of crops majorly  depends  on humidity,  temperature,  and soil 
moisture.  Upsdhaya  et al. [35] have used FL with all these parameters  
to study the possibility  of vegetable  crop growth  and yield. With these 
results,  one can plan eﬀective  irritation  methods.  Similarly,  Parbakaran  
et al. [36] have worked  on FL and SVM agriculture  yield prediction  sys- 
tems. The system has a 95% of forecasting  accuracy  rate. Furthermore,  
the system also gives live crop needs recommendations  to increase  pro- 
duction.  To control the use and need for soil fertilizers,  Haban et al. 
[37] have developed  a soil fertilizer  recommendation  system using FL. 
The common  fertilizer  level data are used as the input to the system,  and 
then the system will recommend  the fertilizer  needed.  Likewise,  Alﬁn 
et al. [38] have presented  recommendations  system using FL and vari- 
ous soil parameters  to keep track of sugarcane  plant needs. The system 
provided  the perfect recommendation  of water and fertilizer  to use. As 
a control of action, Puspaningrum  et al. [39] have presented  FL-based  
Irrigation  forecasting  systems.  The system controls  the valve opening  as 
per the forecasted  needs of a crop. 
2.2. Artiﬁcial  neural network  
The ANN is the trending  area of research  at present  as multi-solution  
for complex  problems  is considered.  It is inspired  by the neural system of the human brain, which acts emergently  with the perfect action on the 
change by analyzing  the eﬀects. ANN is broadly  used to solve dynamic  
complex  problems  because  it works on the input, hidden,  and output 
layers. These layers are perfectly  organized  as per the complexity  of the 
problem.  This layer is formed  by an activation  function  called nodes. 
These nodes have diﬀerent  information  and data sets used to analyze  
new input characteristics.  The input layer continuously  recognizes  the 
set of input characteristics  with pre-learn  data sets. Afterward,  these sets 
of characteristics  are diagnosed  with the help of hidden layers to give 
the highest  matching  solution  from the data sets to the output layer. At 
last, the output layer provides  a ﬁnal solution.  
The application  of ANN is widely adopted  in the ﬁeld of agriculture  
for many aspects.  Elizondo  et al. [40] have presented  their work on the 
ANN for predicting  ﬂowering  and checking  the maturity  of soybean.  
Farmers  are not able to predict their yield due to a lack of information  
on crop parameters.  The authors  have used air temperature,  photope-  
riod, and days of ﬂowing  in this work as input to the ANN model. The 
ANN has been used in plant species classiﬁcation  using a deep convolu-  
tional neural network  by Dyrmann  et al. [41] . In that work, the ANN is 
used to identify  the images of seedlings  at early growth  stages. Behroozi-  
Khazaei  et al. [42] have presented  a robust algorithm  based on ANN and 
GA for the segmentation  of grapes.  Likewise,  the apple recognition  sys- 
tem based on a convolutional  neural network  was developed  by Liang 
et al. [43] . The harvesting  phase is the most critical phase, which de- 
pends on the product  conditions  and complexity  of the environment.  
The algorithm  aims to overcome  these problems.  They have used GA to 
optimize  ANN for segmentation  based on color. Similar  to the above, the 
ANN-based  sorting mechanism  was developed  by Kumar et al. [44] to 
decide between  healthy  or deceased  pomegranate  fruit. Dimililer  et al. 
[45] have developed  a system that will help farmers  identify  unwanted  
plants in their land within 0.2 s. The system is based on image pro- 
cessing and backpropagation  neural network  techniques.  The algorithm  
takes the images as input and provides  the analysis  as an output.  The 
results have proved that the system is eﬀective  and robust to use. One 
more diﬃcult  task is to cut and keep the required  path of garlic, on 
which Thuyet et al. [46] have worked  in which the process  of sorting 
garlic by using a convolutional  neural network  for autonomous  grad- 
ing is performed  successfully.  They have developed  a fully automated  
computer  system for garlic operation.  
Many researchers  in agriculture  have practiced  the implementation  
of the vision system with ANN. Cho et al. [15] , Zhao et al. [47] , Tang 
et al. [48] , and Dorrer et al. [49] have used standalone  ANN to provide  
vision intelligence  in precision  farming.  Weed monitoring  and control is 
a much-needed  task in agriculture.  The available  classiﬁcation  system 
3 M. Wakchaure, B.K. Patle and A.K. Mahindrakar Artiﬁcial Intelligence in the Life Sciences 3 (2023) 100057 
has some limitations,  such as being tested for each ﬁeld of operation.  
To overcome  this problem  Hall et al. [50] have come up with a classi- 
ﬁcation  model with low-dimensional  features  using deep convolutional  
neural network  data collection  (DCNN)  algorithms.  They have used it 
on cotton plants with a mobile platform  and found pure cotton groups 
and weed groups.  McCool  et al. [51] present  a similar work idea using 
lightweight  models for agricultural  robots based on lightweight  DCNN 
and Champ et al. [52] . The hybrid approach  using ANN-FL-GA  is dis- 
cussed by Noguchi  et al. [30] . They applied  vision intelligence  for weed 
control.  Sa et al. [53] used the UAV for weed mapping.  With the help of 
multispectral  imaging  and a deep neural network,  they have generated  
a weed map for precision  farming.  The application  of ANN to detect 
the state of the fruit (mature  or immature)  is one of the most challeng-  
ing tasks. Such a problem  of strawberries  is addressed  using ANN by 
Habaragamuwa  et al. [54] . The specialized  machine  vision system on 
an agriculture  robot for harvesting  such strawberries  is designed  using 
ANN by Ge et al. [55] . Path planning  of agriculture  robots is essential  
when moving  on to the farm to perform  a speciﬁc  task. By taking it 
into consideration,  the path-planning  problem  of agriculture  robots us- 
ing ANN is addressed  by Lulio et al. [56] . Bo et al. [57] have worked  
on path recognition  methods  for agricultural  mobile robots in a shadow  
environment.  In order to reduce the human eﬀort in the greenhouse,  the 
ANN approach  can play an important  role. To achieve  this, Morimoto  
et al. [29] have provided  experimental  work on apple and orange farms, 
and observed  results were up to the mark. 
Deep learning  models are very much eﬃcient  in decision-making,  
intelligent  prediction,  classiﬁcation,  and many more. Xenakis  et al. 
[58] have presented  a diagnosis  support  system implemented  on a 
robotics  system for plant disease  diagnosis  using CNN. The deep learn- 
ing algorithm  has performed  out of the box with a 98% classiﬁcation  
rate. Furthermore,  to keep a close eye on healthy  crops, Sharmila  et al. 
[59] have presented  an insect classiﬁcation  algorithm  based on the CNN 
and K-Means  clustering  algorithm.  The results helped farmers  to iden- 
tify the pest and take needed  actions in time. Singh et al. [60] have 
highlighted  the central problem  of weed identiﬁcation  and have pro- 
vided a system powered  by a region-based  convolutional  neural network  
(R-CNN)  deep learning  algorithm  for crop-weed  segmentation  and de- 
tection.  The system was also able to give the coordinates  of the weeds 
for easy actions.  Similarly,  Mary et al. [61] have developed  a weeding  
robot for weed control based on CNN. Using the deep learning  model, 
the robot identiﬁes  the weeds and then performs  drilling  actions to kill 
weeds. The presented  robot is eco-friendly  and cost-eﬀective.  A deep 
learning  model named as long short- term memory  to forecast  low tem- 
peratures  zone is presented  by Guillen-Navarro  et al. [62] . Mhango  et al. 
[63] have worked  on a potato plant mapping  model using Faster region- 
based CNN and input from UAV. The work is performed  in order to man- 
age and make essential  decisions  before harvesting  potatoes.  Further,  
Khan et al. [64] have developed  a deep learning  model for UAV’s pre- 
cise spraying  based on an R-CNN.  The live experiment  showed  the area 
in need of spraying  with 88.57%  accuracy.  Deep learning  models per- 
form excellently  for the classiﬁcation  problem  in the harvesting  phase. 
Munir et al. [65] have worked  on an Automatic  fruit detection  tool for 
easy harvesting  using deep learning  NN. They have used resNet-50  for 
transfer  learning  and have got results on 10% training.  
2.3. Genetic algorithm  
A GA is a met heuristic  (evolutionary)  algorithm  used as an optimiza-  
tion tool in AI. It was introduced  by John Holland  [66] in 1960. The GA is 
the AI technique  inspired  by genetic  principles  and the steps of the natu- 
ral section to give us an optimal  solution  for complex  problems.  The GA 
is used in many industrial  applications  for the optimization  of various  
processes.  The genetic  evaluation  can be stated in every new genera-  
tion that is evaluated  by crossover  and mutation  from old individuals.  
It will always have a new and mixed approach  with strong species of in- 
dividuals  as compared  to old-generation  individuals.  Here some species of individuals  pass all the genes where some do not. Those who pass 
the genes form new species of individuals,  and the process  is repeated  
for every new generation  of individuals.  In a GA, the random  popula-  
tion of individuals  has taken, who goes through  every individual  and 
ﬁnds the best individuals  with maximum  ﬁtness value. Here the condi- 
tion for solving  the problem  is there or not is checked.  If not, then the 
process  again goes for the new population  by adding the genetic  infor- 
mation (crossover)  of the old best individuals,  this individual’s  species 
go through  mutation,  then we go for the section of an individual  with 
the highest  ﬁtness value, this continues  till we get the best ﬁtness value 
of the solution  for complex  problems.  
The GA has been widely adopted  in the ﬁeld of agriculture  due to 
its eﬀective  working  and accuracy  in providing  optimal  results.  The ap- 
plication  of GA in the motion planning  of a mobile agriculture  robot is 
widespread.  Various  researchers  such as Makino  et al. [67] , Dohi et al. 
[68] , Ferentinos  et al. [69] , Ryerson  et al. [70] , Jihong [71] , and Pham 
et al. [72] have presented  the standalone  GA algorithm  for path planning  
of the agriculture  robot. The problem  of path planning  of the agriculture  
robot is also solved using a combination  of GA and other AI techniques  
as a hybrid approach.  One such eﬀort is provided  by Noguchi  et al. [73] . 
Moreover,  the comparison  of GA and PSO is shown by Mahmud  et al. 
[74] . The application  of a ﬂeet of robots to work on various  agriculture  
tasks and a multi-path  planning  approach  is presented  by Conesa-Munoz  
et al. [75] . 
The proposed  work aims to reduce the time required  and make it 
cost-eﬀective  to improve  the performance  in the path planning  of agri- 
cultural  robots. UAVs are very proﬁcient  in monitoring  remote farms, 
but it involves  multiple  planning  and problems.  Singh et al. [76] have 
presented  a new trajectory  whose parameters  are optimized  with GA’s 
help. The proposed  plan is a perfect projectile  trajectory  with the base 
station avoiding  all the obstacles.  It helps them to reduce energy require-  
ments. Coverage  Path Planning  of electric  tractors  depends  on several 
factors.  The new, improved  GA was presented  by Shang et al. [77] to op- 
timize all the factors aﬀecting  the path planning  of electric  tractors,  such 
as reducing  energy consumption,  improving  speed, and others. Some of 
the authors,  such as Gao et al. [78] and Meng et al. [79] , used a vision- 
based system with GA. They aimed to recognize  crop rows for better 
planning.  An improved  GA performed  the recognition  of the crop row 
lines method.  They found that GA is eﬀective  in ﬁnding  navigation  lines. 
Dacal-Nieto  et al. [80] have worked  on GA’s visual recognition  system 
for potato classiﬁcation.  They have tried a system to classify  potatoes  
based on their external  defects and disease.  
To improve  crop production,  weed control and soil nutrition  con- 
trol are crucial factors as it aﬀects crops’ growth  cycle. Noguchi  et al. 
[30] have presented  their study on precision  farming.  They have used 
FL with a GA to classify  the crop and weed. A genetic  algorithm  opti- 
mized the input and output membership  functions,  and they tested the 
model on a soybean  farm. Furthermore,  Feng et al. [81] have worked  on 
GA-optimized  nutrient  solution  formula  for cucumber  crops. The model 
gives an optimal  combination  of N, K, Ca, and Mg concentrations  in the 
solution.  The proposed  formula  helps in high-yield  and cucumber  farm- 
ing. The eﬀective  planning  of irrigation  systems  is equally  important  as 
other agriculture  processes.  Monis et al. [82] have developed  the GA to 
optimize  the design of photovoltaic  (PV) irrigation  pumping.  The aim 
is to optimize  the search space with the help of engineering  rules and 
GA. This method  is used to optimize  the benchmark  of a PV system for a 
real farm. Hence the total cost of the system was reduced.  Ahmed  et al. 
[83] have provided  the optimal  sizing and economic  analysis  of the PV- 
Wind Hybrid power system for water irrigation  using GA. The spraying  
of water or pesticides  is a very time-consuming  task, and hence automa-  
tion of such a task is very much needed.  Cho et al. [32] have devel- 
oped an improved  GA-fuzzy  controller  with GPS for spaying  operation.  
Recognition  systems  in agriculture  have been playing  an important  role 
nowadays.  Tao et al. [84] have demonstrated  the perfect recognition  
system using GA. In the presented  work, automatic  apple recognition  
and its picking  are done using the combination  of fusion of color and 
4 M. Wakchaure, B.K. Patle and A.K. Mahindrakar Artiﬁcial Intelligence in the Life Sciences 3 (2023) 100057 
3D features.  Like this, Behroozi-Khazaeiet  et al. [42] have given a robust 
algorithm  based on ANN and GA for the segmentation  of grapes.  The har- 
vesting  phase is the most critical phase, which depends  on the color and 
complexity  of the environment.  The algorithm  aims to overcome  these 
problems.  They have used GA to optimize  ANN for segmentation  based 
on color. They have found a success  rate of 99.4% in ﬁnding  grape clus- 
ters. Zou et al. [85] have studied  the inverse  kinematics  solution  for a 
precision  watermelon-picking  robot. They aimed to overcome  problems  
such as speed, low precision,  and not guaranteed  watermelon  yield rate. 
The model used is called Denavit-Hartenberg,  which is based on GA and 
a non-linear  genetic  algorithm.  For picking  the Agaricus  mushroom,  a 
unique robot with three picking  arms is being designed  and developed.  
Jia et al. [86] have worked  on an avoidance  algorithm  based on GA for 
the three picking  arms. The presented  algorithm  is eﬃcient  in perform-  
ing the picking  without  any collisions.  Intended  for automation  in the 
greenhouse  environment,  Tong et al. [87] have used GA. In both works, 
the control technique  is developed  to optimize  an unknown  agricultural  
non-linear  system.  
2.4. Particle  swarm optimization  
A PSO is a well-known  metaheuristic  algorithm  used in various  en- 
gineering  optimization  problems.  It was introduced  by James Kennedy  
and Russell Eberhart  in 1995 [88] . The natural  swarm behavior  inspires  
a PSO algorithm  to solve non-linear  problems.  The concept  of PSO came 
into existence  due to the remarkable  capacity  of birds and ﬁsh to under- 
stand and implement  communication  planning  to reach their goals, such 
as searching  for food when working  in a group. The ﬂock of birds does 
not need someone  to lead them in search of food. They just follow the 
neighborhood  birds and reach the goal with proper communication  and 
teamwork  with neighbors.  Here, one thing that must be understood  is 
that every bird has a valuable  experience  to support  the ﬂock in reaching  
its goal. The particle  swarm optimization  is based on this fundamental  
idea. Here the group of particles  follows  each other and helps to opti- 
mize the problem.  Every particle  has some value that contributes  to the 
team reaching  the target. The contribution  of each particle  by moving  
randomly  to attend the best position  with itself and with goal points is 
used to inﬂuence  each other. 
The PSO algorithm  has many applications  in various  ﬁelds, and agri- 
culture engineering  is one of them. Agricultural  machinery  needs ad- 
vanced control in order to face agricultural  challenges.  One of such chal- 
lenges of improving  the control system of mobile agriculture  robots by 
optimizing  PID parameters  using PSO is presented  by Gokce et al. [89] . 
The simulation  of the system was presented,  and the results were out- 
standing.  Wenhua  et al. [90] have presented  agriculture  extra-green  im- 
age segmentation  based on PSO and K-means  clustering.  The same kind 
of problem  is also addressed  by Shi et al. [91] . In that work, the complex  
environment  of the cotton ﬁeld has been studied  using PSO and K-means  
clustering  for the cotton picker robot. Weikuan  et al. [92] have used the 
PSO algorithm  and De-noising  algorithm  to remove  the noise from night 
vision images of the apple taken by an apple harvesting  robot. Many re- 
searchers  have developed  the hybrid approach  of PSO with other AI 
techniques  to get more beneﬁts  and make the system more eﬃcient.  In 
this regard, Li et al. [93] have come up with the hybrid approach  of PSO 
and GA for the path planning  of multiple  UAVs. The proposed  hybrid 
path planning  approach  aims to minimize  the time required  to cover 
the ﬁeld in doing various  agriculture  operations  such as ﬁeld inspec- 
tion, crop health monitoring,  and automated  spraying  of pesticides.  
Deep learning  models have many advantages  over other traditional  
models.  Mythili  et al. [94] have presented  the modiﬁed  DNN and PSO 
for crop recommendations  in the cultivation  phase. They used climate  
data and past crop production  data in this work. The PSO-MDNN  model 
was very eﬀective  in recommending  an appropriate  crop. The compar-  
ison of an approach  based on PSO and GA presented  by Mahmud  et al. 
[74] to solve the agriculture  robot routine  problem  by their invention.  
In this, the agriculture  robot has been tested for spraying  operations  in the greenhouse.  One more work on UAVs using the PSO-FL-NN  hy- 
brid approach  for monitoring  the rice farm is presented  by Camci et al. 
[34] . In their work, the whole mechanism  is dedicated  to analyzing  the 
quality inspection  of rice crops. Chaudhary  et al. [95] have presented  
a new PSO algorithm  named Ensemble  PSO for crop disease  identiﬁ-  
cation. The results of Ensemble  PSO are very impressive.  The applica-  
tion of PSO as an optimization  tool helps in decision-making.  Ji et al. 
[96] have demonstrated  their work on recognizing  green pepper in the 
greenhouse.  The method  is based on the least-squares  support  vector 
machine,  which is optimized  for better performance  with PSO. They 
have given the input of processed  green pepper’s  shape, and texture 
features  to PSO to get better and perfect green pepper parameters.  Sim- 
ilarly, Zou et al. [97] have used the PSO AI technique  to optimize  the 
support  vector machine  (SVM) classiﬁcation  and disease  identiﬁcation  
rate. The results under natural  background  were very eﬀective.  Fur- 
thermore,  Anam et al. [98] have also worked  on apple plant’s leaf spot 
disease  segmentation  optimization  using the PSO AI technique,  and K 
means algorithms.  With these systems,  farmers  can produce  more and 
earn more. The seedling  mechanism  plays an essential  role in the culti- 
vation phase to plant each crop in a particular  pattern  and reduce the 
same waste. The optimization  and improvement  of the design of a wheat 
centralized  seed deeding  device based on PSO are presented  by Wang 
et al. [99] . Various  seed and feeding  device parameters  were considered.  
They veriﬁed  the results by simulation  as well as by ﬁeld test. In order to 
stratify the water requirements  of the crop in all three phases of a crop 
growth  cycle, Bulbul et al. [100] have worked  on irrigation  optimiz-  
ing scheduling  systems  using PSO. The system optimizes  as per the crop 
type. 
2.5. Artiﬁcial  potential  ﬁeld 
The APF method  is used in a real-time  application  for the better and 
easiest way for planning  to resolve problems.  The APF method  is in- 
spired by electric  charge ﬁeld generation.  The Potential  Field method  
was introduced  by Khatib [101] in 1985. He considered  that a point in 
the workspace  is aﬀected  by the ﬁeld generation  from obstacles  and the 
goal. As per his research,  the obstacle  has high potential.  They behave 
like a positive  charge repeals the attractive  point (robot),  which is con- 
sidered  a positive  charge,  and the targeted  position  has low potential.  
They behave like negative  charges  to attract.  The use of this method  is 
observed  to a more considerable  for the path planning  of the agriculture  
robot. 
Longo et al. [102] have presented  their work on the navigation  of 
agriculture  robots in vineyards.  To achieve  this, APF and a laser range 
ﬁnder, and GPS are implemented  on a robot. Similar  to this work, 
other authors  such as Harik et al. [103] and Hou et al. [104] also used 
the autonomous  vehicle by using APF for farmland  work. Cheng et al. 
[105] have focused  their work on harvesting  robots. In his approach,  the 
APF approach  is implemented  on a manipulator  to perform  the picking  
operation  of an apple. Xie et al. [106] have also presented  APF method-  
ology for apple-picking  path planning,  but results are tested only in 
the simulation  environment.  Similarly,  Nemlekar  et al. [107] have pre- 
sented APF powered  robotic arm for picking  lime. They have used APF 
to reduce the time of ﬁnding  low-cost  paths to the destination  (lime). In 
order to develop  a mobile platform  for environmental  monitoring  and 
management,  Martinovic  et al. [108] have incorporated  sensor-based  
technology  with APF. In the proposed  work, the greenhouse  microcli-  
matic environment  is controlled  using a mobile measuring  environment.  
Jihong et al. [71] have provided  the APF-GA-based  compering  approach  
to address  a seeding  machine’s  path planning  in agriculture  applica-  
tions. The APF method  is mixed with other AI techniques  to develop  
hybrid approaches,  Tiexin et al. [109] have developed  a hybrid APF- 
ACO approach  for path planning  of agriculture  robots. The application  
of APF in UAVs for path planning  and inspections  of crops is shown by 
Yingkun  [110] . 
5 M. Wakchaure, B.K. Patle and A.K. Mahindrakar Artiﬁcial Intelligence in the Life Sciences 3 (2023) 100057 
2.6. Simulated  annealing  
The SA is known as the global optimization  AI technique,  which 
helps in solving  large complex  optimization  problems.  The SA is inspired  
by analogy  due to its capacity  to work on physical  annealing  and solids. 
The SA algorithm  was introduced  by S. Kirkpatrick  [111] in 1983. This 
SA is known as the probabilistic  technique  as it focuses  on the heat treat- 
ment methods  and the changes  happening  in the metal because  of heat 
treatment.  The metal in the heat bath is taken to the highest  tempera-  
ture, where it starts transforming  from a solid to a liquid phase. Here 
the particle  takes random  positions  in the liquid phase. After that, it 
cools down slowly and gradually  reduces  the temperature  of the heat 
bath. All the random  positions  were taken by particles  arranged  in such 
a way that they would be in a low-ground  energy state ( Fig. 12 ). 
In the agriculture  ﬁeld, the major application  of SA has been seen 
for the motion planning  of autonomous  agriculture  vehicles.  Ferentinos  
et al. [112] have proposed  a model to solve the real challenges  of the 
agriculture  ﬁeld by using the SA. They compared  the performance  of 
SA with GA. It is observed  that the SA gives a better solution  related to 
the problem  of multiple  path planning  [113] in agriculture  farm con- 
ditions,  and route planning  of multiple  agricultural  vehicles  [114] is 
addressed  by various  researchers  using SA. Whereas  in the cultivation  
phase, to optimize  aerating  (agricultural  machinery  used to lose the soil) 
performance  on salt-aﬀected  agricultural  lands, Zhang et al. [115] have 
designed  and developed  a ﬁve-bar  aerating  mechanism.  They have used 
SA to optimize  various  working  parameters.  The application  of SA as an 
eﬃcient  monitoring  technique  is introduced  by Andersen  et al. [116] . 
They have improved  the traditional  method  of monitoring  using SA with 
a stereo vision to get a perfect estimation  of plant properties.  Weed 
and pest controls  are critical issues in agriculture.  Gonzalez-De-Santos  
et al. [117] have addressed  such problems  in agriculture  using UAV and 
UGV. The planning  strategies  in the software  are developed  by using 
SA. The water irrigation  system has a critical role in agriculture.  Hence, 
the problem  of optimal  on-farm  irrigation  scheduling  using SA has been 
proposed  by Brown et al. [118] and Perez-Sanchez  et al. [119] . Cong 
et al. [120] have worked  on designing  the scheduling  model with the 
help of SA for agricultural  tractors  to work eﬃciently  in a particular  
area. They have considered  many factors,  such as farmland  area, agri- 
cultural  machinery,  etc., and found that the SA model is more eﬃcient  
than other AI techniques,  such as GA. Similarly,  the harvesting  activity  
scheduling  model using SA and GA is presented  by Qingkai  et al. [121] . 
The model was very stable and eﬀective  in performance.  
2.7. Ant colony optimization  
The study on ants has concluded  that ants have a natural  vision sys- 
tem like other insects.  However,  they plan their way very eﬃciently  by 
optimizing  the complexity  of the real world. The ACO algorithm  is help- 
ing many real-world  problems  to get optimum.  An ACO algorithm  is a 
metaheuristic  algorithm  used as an optimization  tool. ACO was intro- 
duced by Marco Dorigo on the way back in 1992 [122] . The algorithm  
works on the thinking  and idea of ants taking the shortest  possible  solu- 
tion. Ants are very brave in making  decisions,  such as shown in Fig. 14 . 
Whenever  they target the food, they plan their way to be short of their 
starting  location.  Every ant has a natural  ability to secrete on the ground  
the biological  substance  known as a pheromone,  which is the signal to 
be followed  by others as a pathway.  In this way, they guide each other 
to ﬁnd and follow the shortest  path. ACO is one of the advanced  swarm 
intelligence  algorithms,  and therefore  it is now adopted  in the ﬁeld of 
agriculture  engineering.  
The implementation  of the ACO algorithm  is increasing  day by day 
in agricultural  practices.  The operation  of route planning  of the agricul-  
ture ﬁeld using ACO is presented  by Bakhtiari  et al. [123] . Furthermore,  
Cao et al. [124] studied  the management  of agriculture  machinery  and 
proposed  an ACO model to perform  eﬃcient  task management.  They 
have performed  simulation  experiments  for dynamic  and static task as- signments.  The aim of both the study is to decrease  the operational  cost 
required  in the agriculture  sector. The agriculture  robot is one of the 
essential  pieces of equipment  nowadays  for improving  the performance  
of various  agricultural  processes.  The path planning  of such a robot by 
using the ACO algorithm  is presented  by Zhou et al. [125] . They have 
demonstrated  the path planning  of the robot using ACO in the presence  
of an obstacle.  The main aim of the proposed  work is to save time as 
well as the cost of farming  operations.  Jiang et al. [126] compared  the 
ACO’s performance  with the GA and standard  sequence  method  (CSM) 
for replugging  tour planning  of seedling  transplanter,  and it is observed  
that the ACO gives better results when compared  to GA and CSM. The 
application  of ACO for UAVs is presented  for agriculture  purposes  by 
Yang et al. [127] . This work proposed  that the path planning  approach  
is developed  for UAVs to take maximum  information  quickly  by using 
ACO. An intelligent  UAV irritation  system that implements  an ACO al- 
gorithm  to ﬁnd the optimal  path is developed  by Gao et al. [128] . The 
proposed  algorithm  had very eﬃcient  results.  To increase  the perfor- 
mance of agriculture  robots in path planning,  the hybrid ACO- APF ap- 
proach is presented  by Tiexin et al. [109] . On the adoption  of the hybrid 
approach,  performance  improvement  has been observed  as compared  to 
standalone  ACO. The application  of ACO as an optimizer  in the crop rec- 
ommendations  system is presented  by Mythili  et al. [129] . The ACO is 
used to optimize  network  inputs and the complexity  of training  weights  
of the crop recommendations  system.  
2.8. Artiﬁcial  bee colony algorithm  
The ABC algorithm  is one of the best-developed  swarm intelligence  
approaches  for solving  multiple  complex  problems.  It is a metaheuris-  
tic algorithm  used as an intelligent  combinatorial  tool. The algorithm  
was inspired  by the intelligent  behavior  of honeybees  in haunting  their 
way for food with proper communication  and dedicated  teamwork.  The 
ABC algorithm  was introduced  by Dervis Kharaboga  [130] in 2005 to 
solve complex  real-world  problems.  The colony of honeybees  has three 
types of bees named employed  bees, onlookers,  and scout’s bees. All of 
them have some jobs, which helps them collect food intelligently  in less 
time. The employed  bee visits the food sources,  looks for the status of 
the source, and saves the same information  ( Fig. 16 ). After completing  
the ﬁnding  process,  they inform the bee waiting  in the dance area by 
waggle dance. The bee waiting  in the dance area, known as onlooker  
bees, analyses  the food sources  by understanding  the waggle dance of 
employed  bees and selecting  the food source compared  to the initial one. 
If they identify  the food source as of no use, then the onlooker  bees send 
scout bees to ﬁnd new food sources.  
Selvakumar  et al. [131] have presented  an intelligent  system for the 
garlic advisory  system.  They have also compared  a rule-based  algorithm  
and found that implementing  the ABC algorithm  is better and more ef- 
fective.  The advisory  system is a web-based  application  with an ABC 
algorithm  and machine  learning.  Land planning  and preparation  play 
an essential  role in any crop growth  cycle. Bijandi et al. [132] have 
presented  a model based on the ABC algorithm  to improve  land par- 
titioning.  They have considered  the results on the irrigation  eﬃciency  
and found the layouts  obtained  from the model to be more eﬀective.  
The use of wireless  sensors  in the agricultural  sector to monitor  crops is 
increasing,  and so is the data. Sathish  et al. [133] have worked  on opti- 
mizing the data aggregation  of these sensors  using the ABC. They found 
out the ABC is more eﬃcient  than GA. The application  of the ABC algo- 
rithm for fruit image recognition  is presented  by Li et al. [134] . In their 
work, the machine  vision system with ABC has been implemented  for 
the recognition  of fruit, and results are demonstrated  using simulations.  
Navigating  agriculture  vehicles  is a challenging  issue in farm conditions;  
hence to avoid the error in accuracy,  Kumar et al. [135] have presented  
a comprehensive  Kalman-ﬁlter-based  ABC approach  for dynamic  turn- 
ing issues. The authors  also worked  on the precise positioning  of UAVs 
using ABC and GPS for additional  eﬀort in monitoring  and inspection  of 
crops [136] . 
6 M. Wakchaure, B.K. Patle and A.K. Mahindrakar Artiﬁcial Intelligence in the Life Sciences 3 (2023) 100057 
2.9. Harmony  search 
Musical  notes inspire the HS algorithm,  and it was introduced  
by Geem et al. [137] in 2001. The HS algorithm  is a metaheuristic  al- 
gorithm  based on audio processing  with a set of rules for optimizing  
the eﬀects of errors for better decision  output.  Audio processing  deals 
with pitch level control for one speciﬁc  harmony  as output.  The perfect 
audio pitch is stored, and the experience  is used to create perfect har- 
mony in the coming  time. The algorithm  selects the perfect solutions  
from all the available  information  and experience  for the ideal problem  
optimization.  
Mandal  et al. [138] have presented  a prediction  model based on the 
HS algorithm  of mustard  plant productivity.  To overcome  the challenge  
of predicting  the crop life cycle to ﬁnd its yield has been undertaken  in 
this paper. They had input as a short length of the crop. Also, they have 
compared  the approach  with other AI algorithms  for performance  eval- 
uation. Valente  et al. [139] have proposed  a new approach  using HS for 
aerial coverage  optimization  in precision  engineering  management.  The 
HS results were compared  with an approach  based on a wavefront  plan- 
ner, and they found the results of HS are better for optimizing  routes 
and time. The hybrid approach  of HS and NN is addressed  in precision  
agriculture  by Sabzi et al. [140] . The developed  approach  using a vi- 
sion system is used for weed identiﬁcation  in potato crops. Similarly,  
Pourdarbani  et al. [141] and Sabzi et al. [142] have also developed  a 
hybrid approach  using HS-NN to recognize  fruits in garden conditions  
and orchard  environments.  
2.10. Bat algorithm  
BA is a metaheuristic  algorithm  used as an optimization  tool based 
on swarm intelligence.  It was introduced  by Yang [143] in 2010. A BA 
is inspired  by the microbats  to ﬁnd their path with echolocation.  Mi- 
crobats  are very small; being so small, they produce  substantial  sound 
waves and hear back the echo that is reﬂected  from the assumed  ob- 
jects such as prey or food. Every bat uses a random  path and velocity  to 
ﬁnd the assumed  thing while emitting  diﬀerent  varying  frequencies  and 
wavelengths.  The distance  to reach the object is also calculated  by the 
bat in seconds.  They can control all the above parameters  based on their 
goal. The ability to control and assist frequency  is called frequency  tun- 
ing. So, the BA is sometimes  called a frequency-tuning  algorithm  also. 
There are very few papers that provide  the application  of the BA in 
agricultural  processes.  The application  of BA in crop image classiﬁca-  
tion is provided  by Senthilnath  et al. [144] to monitor  crops eﬃciently.  
Moreover,  understanding  the plant’s needs is very important  in the mon- 
itoring phase of any crop growth  cycle. One of the essential  parameters  is 
water stress. Azimi et al. [145] have used two data sets of plant shoot im- 
ages taken from diﬀerent  moisture  conditions  and used a BA-optimized  
model to get the optimal  values of water stress classiﬁcation.  They found 
that BA has very accurate  results as compared  with traditional  methods.  
Further,  Yaseen et al. [146] have explored  the problem  of water irriga- 
tion and have presented  a hybrid BA-PSO  AI technique  for optimization.  
In agriculture,  pipe network  planning  is very much important.  Accord-  
ingly, Lyu et al. [147] have demonstrated  the tree-type  irrigation  system 
using improved  BA. 
2.11. Cell decomposition  
It is one of the oldest methods  especially  used for the path planning  of 
automated  devices.  The process  of cell formation  inspires  it. The method  
takes a free area and allots a cell to that free area in the workspace.  
These allotted  cells then form a path to reach the destination,  which is 
represented  by a contacting  graph. If there are any obstacles,  those cells 
are further divided  into two sub-free  compartments  in that area, which 
again get added to all free cells to reach a goal in minimum  time. CD 
is very eﬀective  with a modern  algorithm  for optimizing  the problems,  
especially  for the vehicles  used in agriculture.  Linker et al. [148] have presented  their study on the navigation  
planning  of agricultural  vehicles  in the orchard  environment.  The nav- 
igation approach  is based on a modiﬁed  CD and A ∗ algorithm.  The 
work was shown for shortest  path planning  and to take care of soil 
compaction.  The same work using CD and D ∗ Lite algorithm  is pro- 
posed for robot path planning  for the oil palm plantation  environ-  
ment by Juman et al. [149] . Apart from this, the application  of CD 
and A ∗ for robot path planning  to save power and eﬀective  use is 
provided  by Santos et al. [150] . One more path-planning  approach  to 
avoid more soil compaction  is presented  in [151] . In this approach,  the 
strategy  is developed  using CD and A ∗ to make multiple  path strate- 
gies to avoid soil compaction  because  of repeated  movement  of the 
vehicle.  
2.12. Fireﬂy algorithm  
The development  of the ﬁreﬂy algorithm  is based on the ﬁreﬂy’s  
behavior.  The idea was proposed  by Yang [152] in 2008 as a newly 
inspired  natural  metaheuristic  algorithm.  It is a modern  natural  meta- 
heuristic  algorithm.  The behavior  of ﬁreﬂies,  as they have light-emitting  
power, they hunt the food by this light such that the blinking  of light in 
such a pattern  so that the food/prey  get attracted  towards  them. Also, 
they use it to communicate  with their friends in their group. The ﬁreﬂy 
is brilliant  in protecting  and uses the blinking  of light as a signal for 
protection.  The male-female  connection  is also made with the blinking  
of light in a speciﬁc  pattern.  Even the female ﬁreﬂy uses this advantage  
to hunt other species.  Communication  and food-ﬁnding  are based on 
blinking  light intensity.  The ﬁreﬂy algorithm  is a beneﬁcial  technique  
to optimize  a very complex  problem  such as agriculture  management.  
The agricultural  sector is dependent  on the irrigation  system.  Hos- 
seini et al. [153] have worked  on optimizing  the operation  of a reser- 
voir for agricultural  water supply.  They have used the ﬁreﬂy algorithm  
with the objective  function  based on demands  and supply of water. The 
results found by them were much better than those by using GA and 
PSO. Similar  work was presented  by Wang et al. [154] with NDFA (new 
dynamic  FA). Garousi-Nejad  et al. [155] have implemented  FA as an 
optimization  tool for irrigation  supply and hydropower  generation  man- 
agement  to improve  farmers’  income.  
3. Discussions  
The proposed  review paper provides  an in-depth  analysis  of more 
than 150 papers on the contribution  of intelligent  techniques  and de- 
vices in the agriculture  ﬁeld. The literature  on the agriculture  ﬁeld is 
classiﬁed  into three important  phases:  cultivation,  monitoring,  and har- 
vesting  ( Table 2 ). The cultivation  phase deals with the selection  of crops 
to be planted,  planning  of land, land preparation,  irrigation  planning,  
seed preparation,  and seed sowing.  After the cultivation  phase, the main 
task of farming  is to monitor  and control the growth  of the crops. In this 
monitoring  phase, the activities  are dependent  on time, such as sched- 
uled crop health monitoring,  fertilizers  use, disease  identiﬁcation,  weed 
identiﬁcation,  and pesticide  spraying.  At last, the most crucial phase of 
the crop cycle is the harvesting  phase which includes  the activities  such 
as crop cutting,  segmentation,  storing,  and selling to the market.  All 
these phases were studied  under the inﬂuence  of AI techniques  such as 
FL, ANN, GA, PSO, ACO, FA, BA, APF, ABC, HS, CD, and SA. Although  
there are various  AI techniques  available,  only a few AI techniques  have 
been shortlisted  based on their popularity  in agriculture  activities  and 
applications.  From the literature  review,  signiﬁcant  progress  is noticed  
in crop production,  quality of food, farmer’s  income  growth,  plant care, 
reduction  in manpower,  inspection,  and monitoring  of farms, and se- 
lective harvesting  by using AI and modern  tools. In some indoor appli- 
cations,  AI plays a vital role in automatically  controlling  temperature,  
humidity,  light, fertilization,  and phytosanitary  treatments.  The com- 
mercial  robot with AI implementation  can be used in dealing  with the 
7 M. Wakchaure, B.K. Patle and A.K. Mahindrakar Artiﬁcial Intelligence in the Life Sciences 3 (2023) 100057 
whole process  of agriculture,  from planting  to packaging.  All these ad- 
vantages  of AI over traditional  methods  improve  the technical  and eco- 
nomic eﬃciency  of farming.  A remarkable  change has been observed  in 
modern  agriculture  in improving  the health and safety concerns  of the 
farmers.  
The proposed  paper presents  a well-organized  study of various  avail- 
able research  papers in which AI is implemented  in the agriculture  ﬁeld. 
From the deep study of more than seven hundred  papers,  we have con- 
sidered  more than 150 research  papers for writing  reviews  on the con- 
tribution  of AI in the area of agriculture.  All the used papers have been 
classiﬁed  (like FL, ANN, GA, PSO, ACO, FA, BA, APF, ABC, HS, CD, and 
SA) and sequenced  properly  in Table 1 , as per the publication  year to 
understand  the development  of AI in agriculture.  In Table 1 , the exami- 
nation is done in several categories,  such as simulation  work, experimen-  
tal work, hybrid approach,  various  phases (cultivation,  monitoring,  har- 
vesting),  path planning,  and usage of agriculture  robots. Fig. 21 shows 
the number  of papers available  on 12 individual  techniques  and the fre- 
quency  of these techniques  used in the ﬁeld of agriculture.  It is clear 
from the ﬁgure that the implementation  of FL, ANN, and GA is more 
common  than other AI techniques.  The techniques  such as PSO, APF, 
SA, ACO, ABC, HS, BA, CD, and FA have limited papers in the agricul-  
ture ﬁeld. Therefore,  an enormous  scope is there to work on these tech- 
niques for future advancement  in agriculture.  Fig. 22 shows that nearly 
32% of work is done on the path planning  of agriculture  robots, 31% 
on monitoring,  19% on cultivation,  and 18% on harvesting.  It is crystal 
clear that the use of AI techniques  is more common  for path planning  
of agriculture  robots followed  by monitoring  applications,  and it also 
highlights  the phases such as harvesting  and cultivation  where more 
improvement  is much needed.  In a comparison  of experimental  and sim- 
ulation work done in agriculture  ( Fig. 23 ), it is noticed  that 46% of the 
work is presented  using simulation,  and only 54% of the work is done 
experimentally.  This exposes  that there is still a need for conversion  of 
simulation  work to experimental  work in various  agriculture  domains.  
In a comparison  of the standalone  AI approach  with the hybrid AI ap- 
proach from Fig. 24 , it is examined  that the standalone  techniques  are 
more common.  Nearly 78% of the papers are available  on standalone  
approaches  and 22% on hybrid approaches.  So, one should think about 
developing  hybrid approaches  to make a more optimized  and eﬃcient  
approach.  
The number  of papers available  on individual  techniques  to address  
applications  in the cultivation,  monitoring,  harvesting,  and path plan- 
ning of agriculture  robots is shown in Fig. 25 - 36 . From the given bar 
charts, we can analyze  that FL is the most preferred  AI technique  to 
solve agricultural  problems,  followed  by GA and ANN. Very few of the 
techniques,  such as FL and GA, are used more in all the phases of agricul-  
ture and path planning  agriculture  robots, followed  by ABC, ACO, PSO, 
and SA. A more signiﬁcant  number  of papers for the cultivation  phase 
is addressed  using FL, GA followed  by PSO, and SA; in the monitoring  
and harvesting  phases,  ANN followed  FL, and PSO is much preferred  by 
various  researchers.  The application  of AI to path planning  of agricul-  
ture robots is carried out majorly  using GA, followed  by FL. As per the 
research  concern,  there are no papers available  on the cultivation  phase 
using ANN, APF, and HS. The same case is observed  using CD and FA, 
as there is no work mentioned  in the monitoring  phase. Similarly,  the 
AI techniques  such as BA, CD, and FA have no more work available  in 
the harvesting  phase. From the graphical  analysis  of all techniques,  one 
thing is very clear: the application  to path planning  of agriculture  robots 
is addressed  by all the mentioned  techniques  except BA and FA. The 
tabular  and graphical  data mentioned  in the review paper clearly shows 
that the AI techniques  such as PSO, APF, SA, ACO, ABC, HS, BA, CD, and 
FA need more attention  to solving  agriculture  issues. These techniques  
can be upgraded  by hybridizing  with FL, ANN, and GA to get more no- 
ticeable  results.  This may be the future research  gap in the ﬁeld of agri- 
culture for performance  enhancement  and technological  development.  
Further,  the work must focus more on developing  more experimental  
work than market-ready  techniques.  From the analysis  of Fig. 37 , the application  of robots in the monitoring  phase is highlighted  by 43% of 
work, followed  by 38% in the harvesting  phase and only 19% in the 
cultivation  phase. More development  of agriculture  robots is needed  in 
the cultivation  phase. From Fig. 38 , it is clear that the application  of 
FL (21), GA (16), and ANN (16) to the development  of AI-based  agri- 
cultural  robots is signiﬁcant,  and the application  of APF, SA, CD, PSO, 
ACO, ABC, and HS is signiﬁcantly  less. No papers highlight  the applica-  
tion of BA and FA to the development  of AI-based  agricultural  robots. 
There will be a need to develop  robots for all phases with the fusion of 
various  advanced  AI techniques  and modern  technology  in the coming  
time. 
From the study, we can analyze  that the contribution  of FL, NN, and 
GA is very signiﬁcant.  Out of 148 research  papers,  31 research  papers 
highlight  the contribution  of the FL to agriculture.  In the late ’90s, the 
implementation  of FL was only seen for the monitoring  phase and the 
improvement  of robotics  technology.  Later on, from the 20 ′ s, FL con- 
tributed  signiﬁcantly  to agricultural  robotics  technology  to solve various  
agricultural  robot navigation  and control planning  problems.  The UAVs 
have been developed  and optimized  with the help of FL to monitor  the 
crops’ health and take necessary  control actions.  The recent develop-  
ment of FL also can be seen in the cultivations  phase. FL-based  crop- 
recommended  systems  and crop production  planning  are very much 
popular  now a day. Along with the time, the FL is signiﬁcantly  used 
in the harvesting  phase, especially  for fruit, lettuce plants, and tomato 
harvesting.  It is observed  that the available  research  on FL contributes  
more towards  the monitoring  phase as compared  to harvesting  and cul- 
tivation.  
The NN is one of the popular  AI techniques  used for various  agri- 
culture processes.  Out of 148 referred  papers,  29 research  papers are 
contributing  to various  agricultural  applications,  especially  in the mon- 
itoring phase. In the late 90 s, the application  of NN was focused  on mon- 
itoring phase activities  such as checking  maturity,  greenhouse  monitor-  
ing, and crop and weed classiﬁcation.  The implementation  of NN from 
the 20 ′ s, is not only seen in the monitoring  phase but also in the har- 
vesting  phase. Vision-based  navigation  using NN is one such example  of 
making  intelligent  robots for smart farming.  The segmentation,  classiﬁ-  
cation, and mapping  applications  are the more signiﬁcant  functions  of 
the NN that are now implemented  on agricultural  robots and various  in- 
telligent  equipment  of farming.  Deep learning  algorithms  such as deep 
convolutional  neural networks  and region-based  convolutional  neural 
networks  are very common  for solving  agricultural  crop classiﬁcation  
problems.  The deep learning  model named as long short-term  memory  
is also found to be in forecasting  low-temperature  zones. The develop-  
ment of NN and deep learning  models have signiﬁcantly  contributed  
to solving  the problem  associated  with the monitoring  and harvesting  
phase activities.  Many of the deep learning  models are majorly  imple- 
mented  on agriculture  robots to perform  precise agricultural  activities.  
The contribution  of NN and deep learning  models are not seen in the cul- 
tivations  phase activities,  and it is one of the areas where more attention  
is required.  
Similarly,  GA has been widely accepted  for the development  of over- 
all agriculture  activities  from cultivation  to monitoring  and monitoring  
to harvesting.  Among  148 research  papers,  24 research  papers are cited 
for the contribution  of GA in smart farming.  Like NN, the contribution  of 
GA is also seen to be remarkably  less before the 90 s. The primary  appli- 
cation in those times was only for crop care activities  and path planning  
of agricultural  robots. With the development  of modern  technology  and 
AI, the applications  of GA for the development  of agriculture  robots have 
been extraordinary  since the 20 ′ s. GA has been found to be very eﬃcient  
for various  agricultural  activities  and the associated  problems  such as 
path planning,  precision  fruit picking,  spraying,  classiﬁcation,  segmen-  
tation, and many more. The GA has also contributed  to the optimization  
problems  such as irrigation  pump benchmark  optimization,  nutrient  for- 
mula optimization,  and recommendation.  However,  the number  of pa- 
pers addressing  the implementation  of GA is less in all three phases of 
the crop growth  cycle compared  to FL and NN. 
8 M. Wakchaure,  B.K. Patle and A.K. Mahindrakar  Artiﬁcial Intelligence  in the Life Sciences 3 (2023) 100057 
Table 1 
Analysis  of research  paper according  to the publication  year. 
References  Year Simulation  
Work Experimental  
Work Hybrid 
methods  
used Robots 
Used Problems  Addressed  
Cultivation  
Phase Monitoring  
Phase Harvesting  
Phase Path 
planning  Application  
Fuzzy Logic 
[10] 1991 Yes Yes No √ √Carnation  seedling recognizing  
[29] 1998 No Yes FL-NN-GA  √Greenhouse  automation  
[30] 1998 Yes Yes FL- GA √Crop and weed classiﬁcation  for precision 
farming 
[12] 1998 Yes No FL-CMA √ √To control agricultural  robots 
[13] 1998 No Yes No √ √Harvesting  control to reduce eﬀorts 
[23] 1999 Yes Yes No √Fast operations  of spraying 
[21] 1999 Yes Yes No √ √Steering control of agricultural  robots 
[31] 1999 No Yes FL-GA √ √ √ √ √Navigation  based on crop lining 
[32] 2000 Yes Yes FL-GA √ √Spraying in orchard 
[14] 2000 No Yes No √ √
Fruit harvesting  
[15] 2002 No Yes No √ √Lettuce plants harvesting  
[33] 2002 No Yes FL-GA √ √Robot for sustainable  agriculture  
[16] 2012 Yes Yes No √ √Navigation  through crops row 
[26] 2012 Yes No No √ √
Agricultural  robot control 
[17] 2012 Yes No No √ √Steering control action 
[20] 2012 Yes No No √ √Navigation  through crops row 
[18] 2013 Yes Yes No √ √Steering control action 
[24] 2014 No Yes No √ √
Navigation  of agricultural  robot 
[22] 2015 Yes No No √ √Agricultural  UAV pesticide spraying 
[25] 2018 No Yes No √ √ √ √Multipurpose  agricultural  robot 
[34] 2018 Yes No FL-ANN √ √ √Agricultural  UAV controllers  
[19] 2019 Yes No No √ √Agricultural  mobile robot modeling  and control 
[28] 2020 Yes No FL √ √Agricultural  UAV aerial images optimization  
[27] 2020 Yes No No √ √ √ √Agriculture  manipulator  vibration  control 
[35] 2020 Yes No No √Vegetable  crop yield estimation  
[37] 2020 Yes No No √ √Soil fertilizer recommendation  system 
[38] 2020 Yes Yes No √ √Sugarcane  crop needs a recommendation  
system 
[39] 2021 No Yes No √ √Irrigation  forecasting  system 
[36] 2021 Yes Yes No √ √Agriculture  yield predication  system and crop 
needs recommendation  system 
[9] 2021 Yes No No √Analyzing  the eﬀects of climate change 
[11] 2021 Yes Yes No √Picking mature tomatoes 
Total 31 22 19 7 21 10 14 6 13 
Artiﬁcial  Neural network 
[40] 1994 Yes Yes No √Predicting  ﬂowering  and checking the maturity 
of soybean crops 
[29] 1998 Yes Yes NN-FL-GA  √Greenhouse  automation  
[30] 1998 Yes Yes NN-FL-GA  √
Crop and weed classiﬁcation  
[15] 2002 No Yes No √ √Crop and weed classiﬁcation  
[47] 2007 No Yes No √New method to calibrate the vision system 
[56] 2009 No Yes No √ √Segmentation  of JSEG-based  image for 
navigation  
[57] 2010 No Yes No √ √On-path recognition  method for a mobile 
agricultural  robot in a shadow environment  
[48] 2011 No Yes No √ √Navigation  of agricultural  robot 
[41] 2016 No Yes No √
Plant identiﬁcation  for easy weed control 
[50] 2017 No Yes No √ √Weed monitoring  and identiﬁcation  
[51] 2017 No Yes No √ √Weed monitoring  and identiﬁcation  
[42] 2017 Yes Yes ANN-GA √Segmentation  of grapes 
[44] 2017 No Yes No √Sorting pomegranate  fruits 
[45] 2017 No Yes No √To identify the unwanted  plant 
[43] 2018 No Yes ANN-GA √ √To recognition  of apples in an orchard 
environment  
[53] 2018 No Yes No √ √UAV weed mapping 
[54] 2018 No Yes No √ √Identiﬁcation  of greenhouse  strawberries  as 
mature or immature  
[55] 2019 No Yes No √ √Harvesting  of strawberries  
[52] 2020 No Yes No √ √Segmentation  and identifying  each plant 
parameter  
[49] 2020 Yes Yes No √Analyzing  complex plants 
[46] 2020 No Yes No √Sorting of garlic 
[58] 2020 No Yes No √ √Plant disease diagnosis  
[65] 2020 No Yes No √ √
Fruits classiﬁcation  system 
[62] 2020 No Yes No √Predication  crop frost 
[59] 2021 No Yes No √Pest classiﬁcation  and identiﬁcation  
[64] 2021 No Yes No √ √Spraying land recognition  
[60] 2021 No Yes No √ √
Crop- weed detection  
[61] 2021 No Yes No √ √Weed detection  and control 
[63] 2021 No Yes No √ √ √Mapping potato plants 
Total 29 5 29 4 16 0 19 8 4 
( continued  on next page ) 
9 M. Wakchaure,  B.K. Patle and A.K. Mahindrakar  Artiﬁcial Intelligence  in the Life Sciences 3 (2023) 100057 
Table 1 ( continued  ) 
References  Year Simulation  
Work Experimental  
Work Hybrid 
methods  
used Robots 
Used Problems  Addressed  
Cultivation  
Phase Monitoring  
Phase Harvesting  
Phase Path 
planning  Application  
Genetic algorithm  
[73] 1997 Yes No NN-GA √ √Path planning of agricultural  robot 
[30] 1998 Yes Yes GA-FL √Crop and weed classiﬁcation  
[67] 1999 Yes Yes No √ √Motion planning system 
[32] 2000 Yes Yes FL-GA √Spraying in orchard 
[68] 2000 Yes Yes No √ √Hexapod walking agricultural  robot 
[69] 2002 No Yes No √ √Motion planning of agricultural  robot 
[70] 2007 Yes No No √ √Path planning of agricultural  robot 
[78] 2008 Yes Yes No √ √Vision navigation  with crop row recognition  
[80] 2009 No Yes No √ √Potatoes classiﬁcation  based on defect and 
disease 
[75] 2012 No Yes No √ √Multi-path  planning robot to reduce time and 
cost 
[71] 2016 No Yes No √ √ √Navigation  of seedling machines  
[84] 2017 Yes Yes No √ √
Apple harvesting  
[72] 2017 Yes No No √ √Agricultural  UAV motion planning 
[42] 2017 Yes Yes GA-ANN √Segmentation  of grapes 
[87] 2017 Yes Yes No √Transplanter  in the greenhouse  
[85] 2017 Yes No No √ √
Precision  watermelon-picking  robot 
[83] 2017 Yes Yes No √Selection of power system for irrigation  
[74] 2018 Yes No No √ √To get the shortest path for an agricultural  
robot 
[79] 2018 No Yes No √ √Crop line following  the navigation  system of an 
agricultural  robot 
[82] 2020 No Yes No √To optimize the benchmark  of PV pumps for 
real farm 
[86] 2020 No Yes No √ √ √Picking agricus mushrooms  using three arms 
[76] 2020 Yes No No √ √ √UAV trajectory  planning 
[77] 2021 Yes No No √ √ √Path planning of electric tractors 
[81] 2021 No Yes No √ √Nutrient solution formula for cucumber  crop 
Total 24 16 17 4 16 6 5 5 14 
Particle Swarm Optimization  
[90] 2009 No Yes No √ √Extra green image segmentation  
[91] 2013 No Yes No √Cotton image segmentation  
[92] 2015 No Yes No √ √Apple image noise reduction  for harvesting  
[93] 2016 Yes No GA -PSO √ √ √
Agricultural  UAVs path planning 
[74] 2018 Yes No No √ √ √Path planning of agricultural  robot for 
automated  spraying 
[34] 2018 Yes No PSO-FL-ANN  √ √ √Agricultural  UAV control 
[96] 2019 Yes No NO √
Recognition  of green pepper 
[95] 2020 No Yes No √Disease Identiﬁcation  system 
[97] 2020 No Yes No √Disease Identiﬁcation  system 
[98] 2020 No Yes No √Disease Identiﬁcation  system 
[99] 2020 Yes Yes No √
Seed feeding 
[94] 2021 Yes No PSO-MDNN  √Crop recommendations  system 
[100] 2021 Yes No No √ √ √Irrigation  scheduling  system 
[89] 2021 Yes No No √ √ √ √ √PID Controller  for agricultural  robot 
Total 14 8 7 3 5 4 9 6 4 
Artiﬁcial  Potential  Field 
[102] 2010 Yes Yes No √ √Navigation  in vineyard 
[105] 2012 Yes Yes No √ √Apple picking manipulator  
[108] 2014 No No No √ √Mobile measuring  system navigation  
[71] 2016 No Yes No √ √Navigation  of seedling machines  
[109] 2016 Yes No APF-ACO  √ √Path planning of agricultural  robot 
[110] 2018 Yes No No √ √Path planning of agricultural  UAV 
[103] 2018 Yes Yes No √ √Navigation  in greenhouse  
[104] 2018 Yes No No √ √Unmanned  tractor motion planning 
[106] 2019 Yes No No √ √ √Apple picking path planning 
[107] 2021 Yes Yes APF- RRT ∗ √ √ √Harvesting  limes 
Total 10 8 5 2 9 0 1 3 9 
Simulated  annealing  
[112] 2000 Yes Yes No √ √Path planning of agricultural  vehicles 
[116] 2005 Yes Yes No √Perfect estimation  of plant properties  
[118] 2010 No Yes No √Irrigation  scheduling  
[113] 2015 Yes No No √ √
Multi-path  planning of agricultural  vehicles 
[114] 2016 Yes No No √ √Route planning of agricultural  vehicles 
[117] 2017 Yes No SA-GA √ √Weed and Pest control robot 
[119] 2018 Yes No No √Irrigation  scheduling  
[120] 2021 Yes Yes No √
Agriculture  machines  tasks scheduling  
[121] 2021 Yes No SA-GA √Agriculture  machines  tasks scheduling  
[115] 2021 Yes Yes No √Optimizing  aerator performance  
Total 10 9 5 2 4 4 2 1 3 
( continued  on next page ) 
10 M. Wakchaure,  B.K. Patle and A.K. Mahindrakar  Artiﬁcial Intelligence  in the Life Sciences 3 (2023) 100057 
Table 1 ( continued  ) 
References  Year Simulation  
Work Experimental  
Work Hybrid 
methods  
used Robots 
Used Problems  Addressed  
Cultivation  
Phase Monitoring  
Phase Harvesting  
Phase Path 
planning  Application  
Ant Colony Optimization  
[123] 2012 No Yes No √Route planning 
[125] 2014 Yes Yes No √Path planning to save cost and energy 
[126] 2015 Yes Yes No √Replugging  of the seedling transplanter  
[127] 2016 Yes No No √ √ √Routing planning of UAVs for taking farm 
information  
[109] 2016 Yes No ACO-PFM  √ √Path planning of agricultural  robot 
[128] 2021 Yes No No √ √ √Intelligent  UAV based irrigation  planning 
[129] 2021 No Yes ACO- 
IDCNN- 
LSTM √Crop recommendations  system 
[124] 2021 Yes No No √ √ √Agriculture  machines  tasks management  
Total 8 6 4 2 4 3 1 1 6 
Artiﬁcial  Bee Colony algorithm  
[131] 2011 No Yes No √Garlic separation  system 
[134] 2012 Yes No No √Fruit image recognition  
[135] 2016 Yes Yes No √ √Positioning  system for agricultural  vehicles 
[136] 2018 Yes No No √ √
Agricultural  UAV positioning  
[133] 2021 No Yes No √Eﬃcient monitoring  of crops 
[132] 2021 No Yes No √Land partitioning  
Total 6 3 4 0 2 1 2 1 2 
Harmony  Search 
[138] 2012 No Yes No √Prediction  of crop growth 
[139] 2013 Yes No No √ √Agricultural  UAVs coverage optimization  
[140] 2018 Yes Yes NN –HS √ √For weed identiﬁcation  in a potato crops ﬁeld 
[141] 2019 Yes Yes HS-ANN √ √Recognition  of plum fruits 
[142] 2020 No Yes ANN –HS √ √Identifying  fruits in the orchard environment  
Total 5 3 4 3 2 0 3 3 1 
Bat algorithm  
[144] 2016 Yes No No √Crop images classiﬁcation  
[146] 2019 No Yes BA-PSO √Optimizing  dam and reservoir problems  
[147] 2019 No Yes No √Irrigation  pipe network planning 
[145] 2021 No Yes No √Monitoring  water stress in plants 
Total 4 1 3 1 0 2 2 0 0 
Cell Decomposition  
[148] 2008 Yes No CD-A ∗ √ √Navigation  planning of agricultural  vehicles 
[149] 2017 Yes Yes CD-D ∗ Lite √ √ √Path planning of a robot for the oil palm 
plantation  
[150] 2017 Yes No CD-A ∗ √ √
Path planning of agricultural  robot to work 
eﬃciently  
[151] 2018 Yes No CD-A ∗ √ √Multiple path planning 
Total 4 4 1 4 4 1 0 0 4 
Fireﬂy Algorithm  
[153] 2014 No Yes No √Irrigation  supply and demands 
[155] 2016 No Yes No √Irrigation  supply and demands 
[154] 2018 No Yes No √Irrigation  supply and hydropower  generation  
Total 3 0 3 0 0 3 0 0 0 
Grand total 148 85 101 32 82 34 58 34 60 
Table 2 
Papers reviewed  per phase. 
Cultivation  Phase Monitoring  Phase Harvesting  Phase 
[10] [31] [25] [27] [35] [37] [38] [39] [36] [9] 
[71] [87] [83] [82] [77] [81] [99] [94] 
[100] [89] [118] [119] [120] [115] 
[126] [128] [129] [132] [146] 
[147] [149] [153] [155] [154] [29] [30] [23] [31] [32] [22] [25] [34] [28] [27] [37] 
[38] [39] [36] [40] [41] [50] [51] [45] [53] [54] [52] 
[49] [58] [62] [59] [64] [60] [61] [63] [80] [76] [81] 
[90] [93] [95] [97] [98] [100] [89] [108] [116] 
[117] [127] [131] [133] [138] [140] [141] [144] [145] [13] [31] [14] [15] [27] [11] [42] [44] [43] [54] 
[55] [46] [65] [63] [80] [84] [85] [86] [90] [79] 
[91] [92] [96] [100] [89] [105] [106] [107] 
[121] [124] [134] [140] [141] [142] 
4. Conclusion  
The main aim of the proposed  investigation  is to carry out a system-  
atic study of AI techniques  in the ﬁeld of agriculture.  The proposed  study 
considers  twelve popular  AI techniques  according  to their wide adoption  
in agriculture  and existing  paper available  such as fuzzy logic, genetic  
algorithm,  neural network,  particle  swarm optimization,  ant colony op- 
timization,  ﬁreﬂy algorithm,  bat algorithm,  artiﬁcial  potential  ﬁeld ap- 
proach,  artiﬁcial  bee colony algorithm,  harmony  search algorithm,  cell 
decomposition,  and simulated  annealing.  The ﬁndings  of the proposed  
work are presented  below • The applications  of various  AI techniques  for cultivation,  monitor-  
ing, and harvesting  phases are provided  in a systematic  way to un- 
derstand  the development  in the ﬁeld. In addition  to this, the ap- 
plication  of various  agriculture  robots and modern  devices  is also 
highlighted  for intelligent  farming  processes.  
• The application  of robots and autonomous  systems  in farm- 
ing has raised the standard  of farming  and becoming  more 
popular.  
• The AI techniques  provide  data frequently  in a real-time  manner,  
leading  to avoiding  human errors and improving  decision-making  
capabilities.  From the rigorous  review,  AI approaches  and modern  
11 M. Wakchaure, B.K. Patle and A.K. Mahindrakar Artiﬁcial Intelligence in the Life Sciences 3 (2023) 100057 
types of equipment  perform  better than traditional  practices  with a 
minimum  human eﬀort at the minimum  required  time. 
• Among  all AI techniques,  FL, ANN, and GA are widely accepted  in 
the ﬁeld of agriculture,  and the remaining  techniques,  such as PSO, 
SA, ACO, ABC, HS, BA, CD, APF, and FA, need more attention  and 
improvement  in the agriculture  ﬁeld. 
• AI techniques  have been applied  majorly  to solving  path planning  
problems  of the agriculture  robot rather than core agricultural  ac- 
tivities of the cultivation,  monitoring,  and harvesting  phases.  
• The contribution  of AI is signiﬁcantly  more in the monitoring  phase 
and less in the harvesting  phase, followed  by the cultivation  phase. 
• AI techniques  have been used particularly  in simulation  work, so 
there is a need to develop  them for more real-time  implementations.  
• Standalone  AI technique  has been used commonly  for solving  agri- 
culture problems  compared  to hybrid techniques;  hence, more AI 
techniques  can be mixed with each other to get an eﬀective  one. • The application  of the agriculture  robot in the monitoring  phase, 
followed  by the harvesting  phase, is more as compared  to the cul- 
tivation  phase. More focus on robotics  technology  can be given for 
the cultivation  phase activities.  
• Most of the robot application  in agriculture  is developed  using FL, 
GA, and ANN. Hence there is much scope for the development  of 
other AI techniques  for agriculture  robot applications.  
In the future, the work may be extended  by considering  upcoming  
tools such as IoT and advanced  digitized  equipment.  Many of the algo- 
rithms have been neglected  because  of their negligible  presence  in the 
agriculture  ﬁeld. These algorithms  can be updated  with the discussed  
AI algorithm  for hybridization.  The proposed  work may help other re- 
searchers  to ﬁnd the research  gap in the ﬁeld of agriculture  ( Fig 2 - 11 , 
13 , 15 , 17 - 20 ). 
Fig. 2. Fuzzy Inference  system [35] . 
Fig. 3. FL crop needs recommendations  system [38] . 
12 M. Wakchaure, B.K. Patle and A.K. Mahindrakar Artiﬁcial Intelligence in the Life Sciences 3 (2023) 100057 
Fig. 4. Neural Network  Topology  of Maize Detection  System [45] . 
Fig. 5. Architecture  diagram  for strawberries  location  ﬁnding [55] . 
Fig. 6. CNN classiﬁcation  model [59] . 
13 M. Wakchaure, B.K. Patle and A.K. Mahindrakar Artiﬁcial Intelligence in the Life Sciences 3 (2023) 100057 
Fig. 7. GA optimized  UAV trajectory  planning  [76] . 
Fig. 8. (a) Flowchart  for apple recognition  and (b) segmentation  steps using GA [84] . 
14 M. Wakchaure, B.K. Patle and A.K. Mahindrakar Artiﬁcial Intelligence in the Life Sciences 3 (2023) 100057 
Fig. 9. Multiple  UAV working  scenarios  [90] . 
Fig. 10. PSO optimizes  K-Means  segmentation  results of green pepper images [96] . 
Fig. 11. U-Go Robot test on the vineyard  [102] . 
Fig. 12. Working  of SA. 
15 M. Wakchaure, B.K. Patle and A.K. Mahindrakar Artiﬁcial Intelligence in the Life Sciences 3 (2023) 100057 
Fig. 13. RHEA system architecture  using SA [117] . 
Fig. 14. ACO mechanism.  
16 M. Wakchaure, B.K. Patle and A.K. Mahindrakar Artiﬁcial Intelligence in the Life Sciences 3 (2023) 100057 
Fig. 15. System structure  for farmland  monitoring  using ACO [127] . 
Fig. 16. ABC algorithm  working  mechanism.  
Fig. 17. (a) Orthophoto  of the vineyard  parcel and landscape  (b) Coverage  trajectories  obtained  using three quadrotors  [139] . 
17 M. Wakchaure, B.K. Patle and A.K. Mahindrakar Artiﬁcial Intelligence in the Life Sciences 3 (2023) 100057 
Fig. 18. (a) Water stress-tolerant  plant (left) and the stress-sensitive  plant (right) [145] . 
Fig. 19. Output (a) and process (b) of the tree detection  algorithm  [149] . 
18 M. Wakchaure, B.K. Patle and A.K. Mahindrakar Artiﬁcial Intelligence in the Life Sciences 3 (2023) 100057 
Fig. 20. Flowchart  of the ﬁreﬂy algorithm  as an optimization  tool [155] . 
Fig. 21. Papers available  in the agriculture  ﬁeld using AI. 
19 M. Wakchaure, B.K. Patle and A.K. Mahindrakar Artiﬁcial Intelligence in the Life Sciences 3 (2023) 100057 
Fig. 22. Papers available  on various phases of agriculture.  
Fig. 23. Simulation  analysis  versus experimental  analysis.  
Fig. 24. Standalone  approaches  versus hybrid approaches.  
Fig. 25. Papers available  on fuzzy logic. 
Fig. 26. Papers available  on neural network.  
Fig. 27. Papers available  on genetic algorithm.  
Fig. 28. Papers available  particle swarm optimization.  
Fig. 29. Papers available  on the artiﬁcial  potential  ﬁeld. 
20 M. Wakchaure, B.K. Patle and A.K. Mahindrakar Artiﬁcial Intelligence in the Life Sciences 3 (2023) 100057 
Fig. 30. Papers available  on simulated  annealing.  
Fig. 31. Papers available  ant colony optimization.  
Fig. 32. Papers available  on artiﬁcial  bee colony. 
Fig. 33. Papers available  harmony  search. 
Fig. 34. Papers available  on bat algorithm.  
Fig. 35. Papers available  on cell decomposition.  
Fig. 36. Papers available  on the Fireﬂy algorithm.  
Fig. 37. Robots used in each phase. 
21 M. Wakchaure, B.K. Patle and A.K. Mahindrakar Artiﬁcial Intelligence in the Life Sciences 3 (2023) 100057 
Fig. 38. Number  of papers on AI techniques  deployed  
with Robots. 
Declaration  of Competing  Interest  
The authors  whose names are listed immediately  below certify that 
they have NO aﬃliations  with or involvement  in any organization  or en- 
tity with any ﬁnancial  interest  (such as honoraria;  educational  grants; 
participation  in speakers’  bureaus;  membership,  employment,  consul-  
tancies,  stock ownership,  or other equity interest;  and expert testimony  
or patent-licensing  arrangements),  or non-ﬁnancial  interest  (such as per- 
sonal or professional  relationships,  aﬃliations,  knowledge  or beliefs)  in 
the subject matter or materials  discussed  in this manuscript.  
Data Availability  
No data was used for the research  described  in the article. 
Acknowledgment  
The above study and work are not funded and supported  by any 
organization  or institute.  It is a self-taken  initiative.  
References  
[1] Mendes JM, Oliveira PM, dos Santos FN, dos Santos RM. Nature inspired meta- heuristics and their applications in agriculture: a short review. In: EPIA Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence. Cham: Springer; 2019. p. 167–79 
. 
[2] Nielsen Kurt &, Appel Jakob &, Demazeau Yves. Applying AI to cooperating agricultural robots. IFIP Int Feder Inf Process 2006;204:262–70. doi: 
10.1007/ 0-387-34224-9_31 
. 
[3] R Shamshiri R, Weltzien C, Hameed IA, J Yule I, E Grift T, Balasundram SK, Chowd- hary G. Research and development in agricultural robotics: a perspective of digital farming; 2018 
. 
[4] Abdullayeva A. Impact of artiﬁcial intelligence on agricultural, healthcare and lo- gistics industries. Ann SpiruHaret Univ Econ Ser 2019;19:167–75 
. 
[5] Filip M, Zoubek T, Bumbalek R, Cerny P, Batista CE, Olsan P, Findura P. Advanced computational methods for agriculture machinery movement optimization with applications in sugarcane production. Agriculture, 2020;10(10):434 
. 
[6] Jha K, Doshi A, Patel P, Shah M. A comprehensive review on automation in agri- culture using artiﬁcial intelligence. Artif Intell Agric 2019;2:1–12 
. 
[7] Mousazadeh H. A technical review on navigation systems of agricultural au- tonomous oﬀ-road vehicles. J Terramech 2013;50(3):211–32 
. 
[8] Zadeh LA. Fuzzy sets. Inf Control 1965;8(3):338e53 . 
[9] Shahjalal M, Alam MZ, Miah SS, Chowdhury AH. Fuzzy logic approach for iden- tifying the eﬀects of climate change on agricultural production. Int J Agric Econ 2021;6(4):181 
. 
[10] Fujiwara H. Discriminating robot system for carnation seedling with fuzzy logic. IFAC Proc Vol 1991;24(11):231–5 
. 
[11] Nassiri SM, Tahavoor A, Jafari A. Fuzzy logic classiﬁcation of mature tomatoes based on physical properties fusion. Inf Process Agric 2021 
. 
[12] Collewet C, Rault G, Quellec S, Marchal P. Fuzzy adaptive controller design for the joint space control of an agricultural robot. Fuzzy Sets Syst 1998;99(1):1–25 
. 
[13] Hagras H, Callaghan V, Colley M, Carr-West M. Developing a fuzzy logic controlled agricultural vehicle. In: Third International Conference of Fuzzy Systems and Soft Computing Wiesbaden, Germany; 1998. p. 5–7 
. [14] Hayashi Shigehiko, Ganno Katsunobu, Ishii Yukitsugu. Visual feedback guidance of manipulator for eggplant harvesting using fuzzy logic. J SHITA 2000;12(2):83–92 
. 
[15] Cho SI, Chang SJ, Kim YY, An KJ. AE —automation and emerging technologies: development of a three-degrees-of-freedom robot for harvesting lettuce using ma- chine vision and fuzzy logic control. Biosystems Eng 2002;82(2):143–9 
. 
[16] Xue J, Zhang L, Grift TE. Variable ﬁeld-of-view machine vision based row guidance of an agricultural robot. Comput Electron Agric 2012;84:85–91 
. 
[17] Borrero GH, Becker M, Archila JF, Bonito R. Fuzzy control strategy for the adjust- ment of the front steering angle of a 4WSD agricultural mobile robot. In: 2012 7th Colombian Computing Congress (CCC). IEEE; 2012. p. 1–6 
. 
[18] Kannan P, Natarajan SK, Dash SS. Design and implementation of fuzzy logic con- troller for online computer controlled steering system for navigation of a teleoper- ated agricultural vehicle. Math Probl Eng 2013;2013 
. 
[19] Barakat MH, Azar AT, Ammar HH. Agricultural service mobile robot modeling and control using artiﬁcial fuzzy logic and machine vision. In: International Conference on Advanced Machine Learning Technologies and Applications. Cham: Springer; 2019. p. 453–65 
. 
[20] De Sousa RV, Tabile RA, Inamasu RY, Porto AJ. A row crop following behavior based on primitive fuzzy behaviors for navigation system of agricultural robots. IFAC Proc Vol 2013;46(18):91–6 
. 
[21] Toda M, Kitani O, Okamoto T, Torii T. Navigation method for a mobile robot via sonar-based crop row mapping and fuzzy logic control. J Agric Eng Res 1999;72(4):299–309 
. 
[22] Abdellatif BA. Fuzzy logic based pesticide sprayer for smart agricultural drone. Owner: Girne American University Editor: Asst. Prof. Dr. İ brahim Er ş an Advisory Board: Prof. Dr. Sad ı k ‹ lker Assoc. Prof. Dr. ZaferA ğdelen Cover Graphic Design: Asst. Prof. Dr. İ brahim Er ş an 2015:11 
. 
[23] Cho SI, Ki NH. Autonomous speed sprayer guidance using machine vision and fuzzy logic. Trans ASAE 1999;42(4):1137–43 
. 
[24] Zhou J, Chen Q, Liang Q. Vision navigation of agricultural mobile robot based on reinforcement learning. NongyeJixieXuebao = Trans Chin Soc Agric Mach 2014;45(2):53–8 
. 
[25] Narendran V, Edberg CPL, Gandhi GM. Autonomous robot for E-farming based on fuzzy logic reasoning. Int J Pure Appl Math 2018;118(20):3811–21 
. 
[26] Prema K, Kumar NS, Dash SS, Chowdary S. Online control of remote operated agricultural robot using fuzzy controller and virtual instrumentation. In: IEEE-In- ternational Conference On Advances In Engineering, Science And Management (ICAESM-2012). IEEE; 2012. p. 196–201 
. 
[27] Paul S, Arunachalam A, Khodadad D, Rubanenko O. Fuzzy tuned PID controller for vibration control of agricultural manipulator. In: 2020 International Congress on Human-Computer Interaction, Optimization and Robotic Applications (HORA). IEEE; 2020. p. 1–5 
. 
[28] Nderu L, Jouandeau N, Akdag H. Fuzzy Contrast Improvement for Low Altitude Aerial Images. 28th AIII International F Lorida Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research So- ciety Conference; 2015 
. 
[29] Morimoto T, Hashimoto Y. An intelligent control technique based on fuzzy controls, neural networks and genetic algorithms for greenhouse automation. IFAC Proc Vol 1998;31(5):61–6 
. 
[30] Noguchi N, Reid JF, Zhang Q, Tian LF. Vision intelligence for precision farming us- ing fuzzy logic optimized genetic algorithm and artiﬁcial neural network, St Joseph, MI: American Society of Agricultural Engineers; 1998. ASAE paper 
. 
[31] Hagras H, Callaghan V, Colley M, Carr-West M. A fuzzy-genetic based embedded-a- gent approach to learning and control in agricultural autonomous vehicles. In: Pro- ceedings 1999 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (Cat. No. 99CH36288C), 2. IEEE; 1999. p. 1005–10 
. 
[32] Cho SI, Lee JH. Autonomous speed sprayer using diﬀerential global positioning system, genetic algorithm, and fuzzy control. J Agric Eng Res 2000;76(2):111–119 
. 
22 M. Wakchaure, B.K. Patle and A.K. Mahindrakar Artiﬁcial Intelligence in the Life Sciences 3 (2023) 100057 
[33] Hagras H, Colley M, Callaghan V, Carr-West M. Online learning and adapta- tion of autonomous mobile robots for sustainable agriculture. Auton Robots 2002;13(1):37–52 
. 
[34] Camci E, Kripalani DR, Ma L, Kayacan E, Khanesar MA. An aerial robot for rice farm quality inspection with type-2 fuzzy neural networks tuned by particle swarm opti- mization-sliding mode control hybrid algorithm. Swarm Evol Comput 2018;41:1–8 
. 
[35] Upadhya SM, Mathew S. Implementation of fuzzy logic in estimating yield of a vegetable crop. Journal of Physics: Conference Series, 1427. IOP Publishing; 2020 
. 
[36] Prabakaran G, Vaithiyanathan D, Ganesan M. FPGA based eﬀective agriculture productivity prediction system using fuzzy support vector machine. Math Comput Simul 2021;185:1–16 
. 
[37] Haban JJI, Puno JCV, Bandala AA, Billones RK, Dadios EP, Sybingco E. Soil Fertil- izer Recommendation System using Fuzzy Logic. In: 2020 IEEE Region 10 Confer- ence (TENCON). IEEE; 2020. p. 1171–5 
. 
[38] Alﬁn AA, Ginardi RVH. Optimizing the fertility rate of sugarcane crops at precision agriculture using the fuzzy logic method. IPTEK J Technol Sci 2020;31(3):260–8 
. 
[39] Puspaningrum A, Ismantohadi E, Sumarudin A. Irrigation forecasting by using fuzzy logic on sensor data. IOP Conference Series: Materials Science and Engineer- ing, 1098. IOP Publishing; 2021 
. 
[40] Elizondo DA, McClendon RW, Hoogenboom G. Neural network models for predicting ﬂowering and physiological maturity of soybean. Trans ASAE 1994;37(3):981–8 
. 
[41] Dyrmann M, Karstoft H, Midtiby HS. Plant species classiﬁcation using deep convo- lutional neural network. Biosystems Eng 2016;151:72–80 
. 
[42] Behroozi-Khazaei N, Maleki MR. A robust algorithm based on color features for grape cluster segmentation. Comput Electron Agric 2017;142:41–9 
. 
[43] Liang Q, Long J, Zhu W, Wang Y, Sun W. Apple recognition based on Convolutional Neural Network Framework. In: 2018 13th World Congress on Intelligent Control and Automation (WCICA). IEEE; 2018. p. 1751–6 
. 
[44] Kumar RA, Rajpurohit VS, Nargund VB. A neural network assisted machine vision system for sorting pomegranate fruits. In: 2017 S International Conference on Elec- trical, Computer and Communication Technologies (ICECCT). IEEE; 2017. p. 1–9 
. 
[45] Dimililer K, Kiani E. Application of back propagation neural networks on maize plant detection. Procedia Comput Sci 2017;120:376–81 
. 
[46] Thuyet DQ, Kobayashi Y, Matsuo M. A robot system equipped with deep convolu- tional neural network for autonomous grading and sorting of root-trimmed garlics. Comput Electron Agric 2020;178:105727 
. 
[47] Zhao B, Zhu ZX, Mao ER, Song ZH. Vision system calibration of agricul- tural wheeled-mobile robot based on BP neural network. In: 2007 Interna- tional Conference on Machine Learning and Cybernetics, 1. IEEE; 2007. p. 340– 344 
. 
[48] Tang J, Jing X, He D, David F. Visual navigation control for agricultural robot using serial BP neural network. Trans Chin Soc Agric Eng 2011;27(2):194–8 
. 
[49] Dorrer MG, Popov AA, Tolmacheva AE. Building an artiﬁcial vision system of an agricultural robot based on the Dark Net system. IOP Conference Series: Earth and Environmental Science, 548. IOP Publishing; 2020 
. 
[50] Hall D, Dayoub F, Kulk J, McCool C. Towards unsupervised weed scouting for agricultural robotics. In: 2017 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Au- tomation (ICRA). IEEE; 2017. p. 5223–30 
. 
[51] McCool C, Perez T, Upcroft B. Mixtures of lightweight deep convolutional neural networks: applied to agricultural robotics. IEEE Robot Autom Lett 2017;2(3):1344–51 
. 
[52] Champ J, Mora Fallas A, Goëau H, Mata Montero E, Bonnet P, Joly A. Instance seg- mentation for the ﬁne detection of crop and weed plants by precision agricultural robots. Appl Plant Sci 2020;8(7):e11373 
. 
[53] .. & Sa I, Popovic M, Khanna R, Chen Z, Lottes P, Liebisch F, Siegwart R. Weedmap: a large-scale semantic weed mapping framework using aerial multispec- tral imaging and deep neural network for precision farming. Remote Sens (Basel) 2018;10(9):1423 
. 
[54] Habaragamuwa H, Ogawa Y, Suzuki T, Shiigi T, Ono M, Kondo N. Detecting green- house strawberries (mature and immature), using deep convolutional neural net- work. Eng Agric Environ Food 2018;11(3):127–38 
. 
[55] Ge Y, Xiong Y, Tenorio GL, From PJ. Fruit localization and environment perception for strawberry harvesting robots. IEEE Access 2019;7:147642–52 
. 
[56] Lulio LC, Tronco ML, Porto AJ. JSEG-based image segmentation in computer vision for agricultural mobile robot navigation. In: 2009 IEEE International Symposium on Computational Intelligence in Robotics and Automation-(CIRA). IEEE; 2009. p. 240–5 
. 
[57] Bo Z, Hua MW, He SZ, Rong ME. Path recognition method of agricultural wheeled–mobile robot in shadow environment. In: 2010 International Conference on E-Health Networking Digital Ecosystems and Technologies (EDT), 1. IEEE; 2010. p. 284–7 
. 
[58] Xenakis A, Papastergiou G, Gerogiannis VC, Stamoulis G. Applying a Convolutional Neural Network in an IoT Robotic System for Plant Disease Diagnosis. In: 2020 11th International Conference on Information, Intelligence, Systems and Applications (IISA. IEEE; 2020. p. 1–8 
. 
[59] Sharmila VC, Chauhan N, Kumar R, Barwal SK. Design of intelligent insect moni- toring system using deep learning techniques; 2021 
. 
[60] Singh K, Rawat R, Ashu A. Image segmentation in agriculture crop and weed de- tection using image processing and deep learning techniques. Int J Res Eng Sci Manage 2021;4(5):235–8 
. 
[61] Mary MF, Yogaraman D. Neural network based weeding robot for crop and weed discrimination. Journal of Physics: Conference Series, 1979. IOP Publishing; 2021 
. 
[62] Guillén-Navarro MA, Martínez-España R, Llanes A, Bueno-Crespo A, Cecilia JM. A deep learning model to predict lower temperatures in agriculture. J Ambient Intell Smart Environ 2020;12(1):21–34 
. [63] Mhango JK, Harris EW, Green R, Monaghan JM. Mapping potato plant density vari- ation using aerial imagery and deep learning techniques for precision agriculture. Remote Sens (Basel) 2021;13(14):2705 
. 
[64] Khan S, Tufail M, Khan MT, Khan ZA, Anwar S. Deep-learning-based spraying area recognition system for unmanned-aerial-vehicle-based sprayers. Turkish J Electr Eng Comput Sci 2021;29(1) 
. 
[65] Munir K, Umar AI, Yousaf W. Automatic fruits classiﬁcation system based on deep neural network. NUST J Eng Sci 2020;13(1):37–44 
. 
[66] J.H. Holland, “Adaptation in natural and artiﬁcial systems. Ann Aebor, ”MI: Uni- versity of Michigan Press. 
[67] Makino T, Yokoi H, Kakazu Y. Development of a motion planning system for an agricultural mobile robot. In: SICE’99. Proceedings of the 38th SICE Annual Conference. International Session Papers (IEEE Cat. No. 99TH8456). IEEE; 1999. p. 959–62 
. 
[68] Dohi M, Fujiura T, Ishizuka N, Nonami K. Gait control by genetic algorithm for agricultural hexapod walking robot. IFAC Proc Vol 2000;33(29):89–93 
. 
[69] Ferentinos KP, Arvanitis KG, Sigrimis N. Heuristic optimization methods for motion planning of autonomous agricultural vehicles. J Global Optim 2002;23(2):155–70 
. 
[70] Ryerson AF, Zhang Q. Vehicle path planning for complete ﬁeld coverage using genetic algorithms. Agric Eng Int: CIGR J 2007 
. 
[71] Jihong M. Path planning design of seeding machine based on artiﬁcial force ﬁeld and genetic algorithm. J Agric Mechaniz Res 2016;7:41 
. 
[72] Pham TH, Bestaoui Y, Mammar S. Aerial robot coverage path planning approach with concave obstacles in precision agriculture. In: 2017 Workshop on Research, Education and Development of Unmanned Aerial Systems (RED-UAS). IEEE; 2017. p. 43–8 
. 
[73] Noguchi N, Terao H. Path planning of an agricultural mobile robot by neural net- work and genetic algorithm. Comput Electron Agric 1997;18(2–3):187–204 
. 
[74] Mahmud MSA, Abidin MSZ, Mohamed Z. Solving an agricultural robot routing problem with binary particle swarm optimization and a genetic algorithm. Int J Mech Eng Robot Res 2018;7(5):521–7 
. 
[75] Conesa-Muñoz J, Ribeiro A, Andujar D, Fernandez-Quintanilla C, Dorado J. Mul- ti-path planning based on a NSGA-II for a ﬂeet of robots to work on agricultural tasks. In: 2012 IEEE Congress on Evolutionary Computation. IEEE; 2012. p. 1–8 
. 
[76] Singh R, Chaudhary HR, Dubey AK. Trajectory design for UAV-to-ground commu- nication with energy optimization using genetic algorithm for agriculture applica- tion. IEEE Sens J 2020 
. 
[77] Shang G, Liu G, Zhu P, Han J. Complete coverage path planning for horticul- tural electric tractors based on an improved genetic algorithm. J Appl Sci Eng 2021;24(3):447–56 
. 
[78] Gao F, Li Y, Minami M, Huang Y. Visual navigation method based on genetic algo- rithm for agricultural mobile robots. Nongye Jixie Xuebao /Trans Chin Soc Agric Mach 2008;39(6):127–31 
. 
[79] Meng Q, Hao X, Zhang Y, Yang G. Guidance line identiﬁcation for agricultural mobile robot based on machine vision. In: 2018 IEEE 3rd Advanced Information Technology, Electronic and Automation Control Conference (IAEAC). IEEE; 2018. p. 1887–93 
. 
[80] Dacal-Nieto A, Vázquez-Fernández E, Formella A, Martin F, Torres-Guijarro S, González-Jorge H. A genetic algorithm approach for feature selection in potatoes classiﬁcation by computer vision. In: 2009 35th Annual Conference of IEEE Indus- trial Electronics. IEEE; 2009. p. 1955–60 
. 
[81] Feng Q, Jiao Z, Junzheng W, Xueqiang M, Zixing G, Dongnian L, Xiaohui H. Genetic algorithm-based optimization of nutrient solution formula for substrate-cultivated cucumber. Trans Chin Soc Agric Eng 2021;37(2) 
. 
[82] Monís JI, López-Luque R, Reca J, Martínez J. Multistage bounded evolutionary al- gorithm to optimize the design of sustainable photovoltaic (PV) pumping irrigation systems with storage. Sustainability 2020;12(3):1026 
. 
[83] Ahmed NM, Farghally HM, Fahmy FH. Optimal sizing and economical analysis of pv-wind hybrid power system for water irrigation using genetic algorithm. Int J Electr Comput Eng (2088-8708) 2017;7(4) 
. 
[84] Tao Y, Zhou J. Automatic apple recognition based on the fusion of color and 3D feature for robotic fruit picking. Comput Electron Agric 2017;142:388–96 
. 
[85] Zou Z, Han J, Zhou M. Research on the inverse kinematics solution of a robot arm for watermelon picking. In: 2017 IEEE 2nd Information Technology, Network- ing, Electronic and Automation Control Conference (ITNEC). IEEE; 2017. p. 1399– 1402 
. 
[86] Jia B, Yang S, Yu T. Research on three picking arm avoidance algorithms for agaricus mushroom picking robot. In: 2020 IEEE International Conference on Ad- vances in Electrical Engineering and Computer Applications (AEECA). IEEE; 2020. p. 325–8 
. 
[87] Tong J, Wu C, Jiang H, Yu Y, Rao X. Optimizing the path of seedling low– density transplanting by using greedy genetic algorithm. Comput Electron Agric 2017;142:356–68 
. 
[88] Eberhart RC, Kennedy JA. A new optimizer using particle swarm theory. In: Pro- ceedings of the sixth international symposium on micro machine and human sci- ence. Piscataway, NJ, NAGOYA, Japan: IEEE service center; 1995. p. 39e43 
. 
[89] Gökçe B, Koca YB, Aslan Y, Gökçe CO. Particle swarm optimization-based opti- mal PID control of an agricultural mobile robot. Comptes Rendus De L Academie Bulgare Des Sciences 2021;74(4):568–75 
. 
[90] Wenhua ZBSZM, Xiaochao MEZ. Agriculture extra-green image segmentation based on particle swarm optimization and K-means clustering[J]. Trans Chin Soc Agric Mach 2009;8 
. 
[91] Shi H, Lai HC, Qin XZ. Image segmentation algorithm of cotton based on PSO and K-means hybrid clustering. Comput Eng Appl 2013;49(21):226–9 
. 
[92] Weikuan J, Dean Z, Chengzhi R, Tian S, Yu C, Wei J. De-noising algorithm of night vision image for apple harvesting robot. Trans Chin Soc Agric Eng 2015;31(10) 
. 
23 M. Wakchaure, B.K. Patle and A.K. Mahindrakar Artiﬁcial Intelligence in the Life Sciences 3 (2023) 100057 
[93] Li X, Zhao Y, Zhang J, Dong Y. A hybrid PSO algorithm based ﬂight path optimiza- tion for multiple agricultural UAVs. In: 2016 IEEE 28th international conference on tools with artiﬁcial intelligence (ICTAI). IEEE; 2016. p. 691–7 
. 
[94] Mythili K, Rangaraj R. Deep learning with particle swarm based hyper parameter tuning based crop recommendation for better crop yield for precision agriculture. Indian J Sci Technol 2021;14(17):1325–37 
. 
[95] Chaudhary A, Thakur R, Kolhe S, Kamal R. A particle swarm optimization based ensemble for vegetable crop disease recognition. Comput Electron Agric 2020;178:105747 
. 
[96] Ji W, Chen G, Xu B, Meng X, Zhao D. Recognition method of green pepper in green- house based on least-squares support vector machine optimized by the improved particle swarm optimization. IEEE Access 2019;7:119742–54 
. 
[97] Zou X, Zhang J, Huang S, Wang J, Yao H, Song Y. Recognition of tea diseases un- der natural background based on particle swarm optimization algorithm optimized support vector machine. In: 2020 IEEE 18th International Conference on Industrial Informatics (INDIN), 1. IEEE; 2020. p. 547–52 
. 
[98] Anam S. Segmentation of leaf spots disease in apple plants using particle swarm optimization and K-means algorithm. Journal of Physics: Conference Series, 1562. IOP Publishing; 2020 
. 
[99] Wang Q, Li Z, Wang W, Zhang C, Chen L, Wan L. Multi-objective optimization de- sign of wheat centralized seed feeding device based on particle swarm optimization (PSO) algorithm. Int J Agric Biol Eng 2020;13(6):76–84 
. 
[100] Bülbül MA, Öztürk C, I şı k MF. Optimization of climatic conditions aﬀecting deter- mination of the amount of water needed by plants in relation to their life cycle with particle swarm optimization, and determining the optimum irrigation sched- ule. Comput J 2021 
. 
[101] Khatib O. Real time obstacle avoidance for manipulators and mobile robots. In: IEEE international conference on robotics and automation, Missouri, 25e28; 1985. p. 500e5. volsMar 
. 
[102] Longo D, Pennisi A, Bonsignore R, Muscato G, Schillaci G. A multifunctional tracked vehicle able to operate in vineyards using GPS and laser range-ﬁnder technology. International Conference Ragusa SHWA2010-September 16-18 2010 Ragusa Ibla Campus-Italy" Work safety and risk prevention in agro-food and forest systems; 2010 
. 
[103] Harik EHC, Korsaeth A. Combining hector slam and artiﬁcial potential ﬁeld for autonomous navigation inside a greenhouse. Robotics 2018;7(2):22 
. 
[104] Hou K, Zhang Y, Shi J, Zheng Y. Motion planning based on artiﬁcial potential ﬁeld for unmanned tractor in Farmland. In: International Conference on Applied Human Factors and Ergonomics. Cham: Springer; 2018. p. 153–62 
. 
[105] Cheng F, Ji W, Zhao D, Lv J. Apple picking robot obstacle avoidance based on the improved artiﬁcial potential ﬁeld method. In: 2012 IEEE Fifth International Conference on Advanced Computational Intelligence (ICACI). IEEE; 2012. p. 909– 913 
. 
[106] Xie J, Zhang Z, Wei Z, Ma S. Simulation of apple picking path planning based on artiﬁcial potential ﬁeld method. IOP Conference Series: Earth and Environmental Science, 252. IOP Publishing; 2019 
. 
[107] Nemlekar, H., Liu, Z., Kothawade, S., Niyaz, S., Raghavan, B., & Nikolaidis, S. (2021). Robotic lime picking by considering leaves as permeable obstacles. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.13889. 
[108] Martinovi ćG , Simon J. Greenhouse microclimatic environment controlled by a mobile measuring station. Njas-wageningen J Life Sci 2014;70:61–70 
. 
[109] Tiexin Z, Guiju D, Bingxue Y, Kaimin G, Xuegang X, Zhiqiang G. Research for the path planning of the agricultural robot based on the improved ant colony algorithm. J Agric Mechaniz Res 2016(9):10 
. 
[110] Yingkun Z. Flight path planning of agriculture UAV based on improved artiﬁcial potential ﬁeld method. In: 2018 Chinese Control And Decision Conference (CCDC). IEEE; 2018. p. 1526–30 
. 
[111] Kirkpatrick S, Gelatt CD, Vecchi MP. Optimization by simulated annealing. Science 1983;220(4598):671–80 
. 
[112] Ferentinos KP, Arvanitis KG, Kyriakopoulos K, Sigrimis N. Heuristic motion planning for autonomous agricultural vehicles. IFAC Proc Vol 2000;33(29):325–330 
. 
[113] Conesa-Muñoz J, Bengochea-Guevara JM, Andujar D, Ribeiro A. Eﬃcient distri- bution of a ﬂeet of heterogeneous vehicles in agriculture: a practical approach to multi-path planning. In: 2015 IEEE International Conference on Autonomous Robot Systems and Competitions. IEEE; 2015. p. 56–61 
. 
[114] Conesa-Muñoz J, Bengochea-Guevara JM, Andujar D, Ribeiro A. Route planning for agricultural tasks: a general approach for ﬂeets of autonomous vehicles in site-spe- ciﬁc herbicide applications. Comput Electron Agric 2016;127:204–20 
. 
[115] Zhang Y, Li H, Zhang R, Ding S. Simulated annealing optimization and experiments of a ﬁve-bar aerating mechanism for vertically aerating on salt-aﬀected lands. Int J Biol Eng 2021;14(1):151–6 
. 
[116] Andersen HJ, Reng L, Kirk K. Geometric plant properties by relaxed stereo vision using simulated annealing. Comput Electron Agric 2005;49(2):219–32 
. 
[117] Gonzalez-de-Santos P, Ribeiro A, Fernandez-Quintanilla C, Lopez-Granados F, Brandstoetter M, Tomic S, Perez-Ruiz M. Fleets of robots for environmentally-safe pest control in agriculture. Precis Agric 2017;18(4):574–614 
. 
[118] Brown PD, Cochrane TA, Krom TD. Optimal on-farm irrigation scheduling with a seasonal water limit using simulated annealing. Agric Water Manage 2010;97(6):892–900 
. 
[119] Pérez-Sánchez M, Sánchez-Romero FJ, López-Jiménez PA, Ramos HM. PATs selec- tion towards sustainability in irrigation networks: simulated annealing as a water management tool. Renew Energy 2018;116:234–49 
. 
[120] Cong C, Jianping H, Qingkai Z, Meng Z, Yibai L, Feng N, Guangqiao C. Research on the scheduling of tractors in the major epidemic to ensure spring ploughing. Math Probl Eng 2021;2021 
. [121] Qingkai Z, Guangqiao C, Junjie Z, Yuxiang H, Cong C, Meng Z. Simulated annealing genetic algorithm-based harvester operation scheduling model. INMATEH-Agric Eng 2021;63(1) 
. 
[122] Macro D. Ant colony system: a Cooperative learning approach to the travelling salesman problem. IEEE Trans Evol Comput 1997;1(1):53e66 
. 
[123] Bakhtiari AA, Navid H, Mehri J, Bochtis DD. Optimal route planning of agricultural ﬁeld operations using ant colony optimization. Agric Eng Int: CIGR J 2012;13(4) 
. 
[124] .. & Cao R, Li S, Ji Y, Zhang Z, Xu H, Zhang M, Li H. Task assignment of multi- ple agricultural machinery cooperation based on improved ant colony algorithm. Comput Electron Agric 2021;182:105993 
. 
[125] Zhou K, Jensen AL, Sørensen CG, Busato P, Bothtis DD. Agricultural opera- tions planning in ﬁelds with multiple obstacle areas. Comput Electron Agric 2014;109:12–22 
. 
[126] Jiang Z, Zhou M, Tong J, Jiang H, Yang Y, Wang A, You Z. Comparing an ant colony algorithm with a genetic algorithm for replugging tour planning of seedling transplanter. Comput Electron Agric 2015;113:225–33 
. 
[127] Yang J, Wang X, Li Z, Yang P, Luo X, Zhang K, Chen L. Path planning of un- manned aerial vehicles for farmland information monitoring based on WSN. In: 2016 12th World Congress on Intelligent Control and Automation (WCICA). IEEE; 2016. p. 2834–8 
. 
[128] Gao Z, Zhu J, Huang H, Yang Y, Tan X. Ant Colony Optimization for UAV-based Intelligent Pesticide Irrigation System. In: 2021 IEEE 24th International Confer- ence on Computer Supported Cooperative Work in Design (CSCWD). IEEE; 2021. p. 720–6 
. 
[129] Mythili K, Rangaraj R. Crop recommendation for better crop yield for precision agriculture using ant colony optimization with deep learning method. Ann Rom Soc Cell Biol 2021:4783–94 
. 
[130] Karaboga D. Technical report-tr06. In: Technical report-tr06, 200. Erciyes univer- sity, engineering faculty, computer engineering department; 2005. p. 1–10 
. 
[131] Selvakumar AAL, Nazer GM. An implementation of expert system in garlic using (abc) algorithm. In: 2011 3rd International Conference on Electronics Computer Technology, 1. IEEE; 2011. p. 45–8 
. 
[132] Bijandi M, Karimi M, Farhadi Bansouleh B, van der Knaap W. Agricultural land partitioning model based on irrigation eﬃciency using a multi-objective artiﬁcial bee colony algorithm. Trans GIS 2021;25(1):551–74 
. 
[133] Sathish C, Srinivasan K. An artiﬁcial bee colony algorithm for eﬃcient opti- mized data aggregation to agricultural IoT devices application. J Appl Sci Eng 2021;24(6):927–35 
. 
[134] Li X, Li LJ. Preference multi-objective artiﬁcial bee colony and its application in camellia fruit image recognition. Appl Res Comput 2012;12:100 
. 
[135] Kumar NR, Nagabhooshanam E. An extended Kalman ﬁlter for low-cost positioning system in agricultural vehicles. In: 2016 International Conference on Wireless Com- munications, Signal Processing and Networking (WiSPNET). IEEE; 2016. p. 151– 157 
. 
[136] Kumar NR, Nagabhooshanam E. EKF with artiﬁcial bee colony for precise position- ing of UAV using global positioning system. IETE J Res 2018:1–14 
. 
[137] Geem ZW, Kim JH, Loganathan GV. A new heuristic optimization algorithm: har- mony search. Simulation 2001;76(2):60–8 
. 
[138] Mandal SN, Ghosh A, Choudhury JP, Chaudhuri SB. Prediction of productivity of mustard plant at maturity using harmony search. In: 2012 1st International Confer- ence on Recent Advances in Information Technology (RAIT). IEEE; 2012. p. 933–8 
. 
[139] Valente J, Del Cerro J, Barrientos A, Sanz D. Aerial coverage optimization in preci- sion agriculture management: a musical harmony inspired approach. Comput Elec- tron Agric 2013;99:153–9 
. 
[140] Sabzi S, Abbaspour-Gilandeh Y, García-Mateos G. A fast and accurate expert system for weed identiﬁcation in potato crops using metaheuristic algorithms. Comput Ind 2018;98:80–9 
. 
[141] Pourdarbani R, Sabzi S, Hernández-Hernández M, Hernández-Hernández JL, Gar- cía-Mateos G, Kalantari D, Molina-Martínez JM. Comparison of diﬀerent classiﬁers and the majority voting rule for the detection of plum fruits in garden conditions. Remote Sens (Basel) 2019;11(21):2546 
. 
[142] Sabzi S, Pourdarbani R, Kalantari D, Panagopoulos T. Designing a fruit identiﬁca- tion algorithm in orchard conditions to develop robots using video processing and majority voting based on hybrid artiﬁcial neural network. Appl Sci 2020;10(1):383 
. 
[143] Yang XS. A new metaheuristic bat-inspired algorithm. In: Nature inspired coopera- tive strategies for optimization (NICSO 2010). Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer; 2010. p. 65–74 
. 
[144] Senthilnath J, Kulkarni S, Benediktsson JA, Yang XS. A novel approach for mul- tispectral satellite image classiﬁcation based on the bat algorithm. IEEE Geosci Remote Sens Lett 2016;13(4):599–603 
. 
[145] Azimi S, Kaur T, Gandhi TK. BAT optimized CNN model identiﬁes water stress in chickpea plant shoot images. In: 2020 25th International Conference on Pattern Recognition (ICPR). IEEE; 2021. p. 8500–6 
. 
[146] Yaseen ZM, Allawi MF, Karami H, Ehteram M, Farzin S, Ahmed AN, El-Shaﬁe A. A hybrid bat–swarm algorithm for optimizing dam and reservoir operation. Neural Comput Appl 2019;31(12):8807–21 
. 
[147] Lyu S, Wu B, Li Z, Hong T, Wang J, Huang Y. Tree-type irrigation pipe network planning using an improved bat algorithm. Trans ASABE 2019;62(2):447–59 
. 
[148] Linker R, Blass T. Path-planning algorithm for vehicles operating in orchards. Biosystems Eng 2008;101(2):152–60 
. 
[149] Juman MA, Wong YW, Rajkumar RK, H’ng CY. An integrated path planning system for a robot designed for oil palm plantations. In: TENCON 2017-2017 IEEE Region 10 Conference. IEEE; 2017. p. 1048–53 
. 
[150] Santos L, dos Santos FN, Mendes J, Ferraz N, Lima J, Morais R, Costa P. Path plan- ning for automatic recharging system for steep-slope vineyard robots. In: Iberian Robotics Conference. Cham: Springer; 2017. p. 261–72 
. 
24 M. Wakchaure, B.K. Patle and A.K. Mahindrakar Artiﬁcial Intelligence in the Life Sciences 3 (2023) 100057 
[151] Santos L, Ferraz N, dos Santos FN, Mendes J, Morais R, Costa P, Reis R. Path planning aware of soil compaction for steep slope vineyards. In: 2018 IEEE Inter- national Conference on Autonomous Robot Systems and Competitions (ICARSC). IEEE; 2018. p. 250–5 
. 
[152] Yang XS. Nature-inspired metaheuristic algorithm. Luniver press; 2008 . 
[153] Hosseini MSM, Banihabib ME. Optimizing operation of reservoir for agricultural water supply using ﬁreﬂy algorithm; 2014 
. [154] Wang H, Wang W, Cui Z, Zhou X, Zhao J, Li Y. A new dynamic ﬁreﬂy al- gorithm for demand estimation of water resources. Inf Sci (Ny) 2018;438:95–106 
. 
[155] Garousi-Nejad I, Bozorg-Haddad O, Loáiciga HA, Mariño MA. Application of the ﬁreﬂy algorithm to optimal operation of reservoirs with the purpose of irrigation supply and hydropower production. J Irrig Drain Eng 2016;142(10):04016041 
. 
25 