BIOGRAPHIES OF CONTRIBUTORS
Professor Majed Abdullah Al-Mashari Al-Saudis the Chair-man of the Saudi Computer Society and Editor of the SaudiComputer Journal, the Business Process Management Journal(BPMJ) and a member of the editorial advisory board of sev-eral international, refereed journals in the ﬁeld of eGovern-ment, eCommerce, ERP, BPR and IT management. Heserved on the international scientiﬁc committees of more than14 IT conferences in the US and Europe, has also acted as areferee for more than 50 papers and has been published widely in internation-ally-recognized IT journals and conferences. The recipient of several awardsand certiﬁcates of recognition ; among these are 3 EMERALD Citation of Ex-cellence Awards for Outstanding Contribution to Knowledge for 3 of his journalarticles and one ANBAR Citation of Excellence Award for Outstanding Contri-bution to Knowledge for another journal article. Served as the chairman of theeGovernment Team of the National IT Plan and as a member of the eBusinessConsulting Team of the Ministry of Commerce. Professor of Electronic Govern-ment at the College of the Computer and Information Sciences of King SaudUniversity and the Chairman of the Computer and Information Sciences De-partment of Prince Sultan University. He was the Chief Conference Chair forthe 18th National Computer Conference in Riyadh 2006. Has a wide range ofconsulting experience for several government and private organizations in theareas of eCommerce, eGovernment, Internet deployment, Enterprise ResourcePlanning (ERP), Customer Relationship Management (CRM), Business ProcessRe-engineering (BPR), and IT management and strategic planning, amongothers. E-mail: malmashari@aci.org.sa
Peer review under responsibility of King SaudUniversity. Production and hosting by ElsevierApplied Computing and Informatics (2011) 9, xiii–xvi
King Saud University
Applied Computing and Informatics
www.ksu.edu.sawww.sciencedirect.com
Sid-Ahmed Selouanireceived his B.Eng. degree in 1987 and hisM.S. degree in 1991 both in electronic engineering from theAlgiers University of Technology (U.S.T.H.B). He joined theCommunication Langagie`re et Interaction Personne-Syste`me (CLIPS) Laboratory of Universite´Joseph Fourier of Greno-ble. He got a Docteur d’E´tat degree in the ﬁeld of signal pro-cessing and artiﬁcial intelligence in 2000. He is currentlyAssociate Professor and Chair of the Human-Machine Inter-action Laboratory at the Universite´de Moncton, Campus de Shippagan. Hismain areas of research include new models in E-Commerce, mobile communica-tions, ubiquitous systems, assistive technologies, and E-learning solutions. DrSelouani is actually the representative of Universite ´de Moncton, Shippagan campus, in the Alliance to Promote Fair Trade and Sustainable Development.Dr. Selouani received numerous grants from national and international institu-tions for his research projects. Dr. Selouani co-authored more than 50 peer-re-viewed scientiﬁc publications. His papers have been cited in numerous papers inthe scientiﬁc literature. E-mail: selouani@umcs.ca
Dr. Yousef Ajami Alotaibireceived his B.Sc. degree in compu-ter engineering from King Saud University, Riyadh, SaudiArabia in 1988. After that he received his M.Sc. degree andPh.D. degree in computer engineering from Florida Instituteof Technology, Florida, USA, in 1994 and 1997, respectively.From 1988 till 1992 and from 1998 till 1999 he joined Al-ELMResearch and Development Corporation, The National Infor-mation Center (NIC) Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, as research engi-neer. During his work at NIC he worked and participated in designing andimplementing encryption and communication systems for the NIC and for theprivate sectors. From 1999 till now he joined Computer Engineering Depart-ment, College of computer and information sciences, King Saud University asan assistant professor, His research interests are digital speech processing speci-ﬁcally speech recognition and Arabic language and speech processing. Also he iscurrently working on Arabic speech recognition projects with King AbdulazizCity for Science and Technology (KACST). E-mail: yalotaibi@ccis.ksu.edu.sa
Emad Abuelrubis an associate professor and dean of the Fa-culty of Science and Information Technology at Zarqa PrivateUniversity, Jordan. He received his Bachelor degrees in com-puter engineering and computer science from Oklahoma StateUniversity, USA, in 1984 and 1985, respectively. He thenjoined the Alabama A&M University, USA, where he ob-tained his MSc degree in computer science in 1987. He com-pleted his PhD degree in computer science from Louisianaxiv BiographiesState University, USA, in 1993. He is the Editor-in-Chief of the InternationalArab Journal of Information Technology (IAJIT) and the Secretary Generalof the Colleges of Computing and Information Society, Association of ArabUniversities. He is involved in the organization of many international confer-ences in computing and information technology. His areas of interest includeparallel and distributed systems, interconnection networks, fault-tolerance com-puting, parallel algorithms, parallel architectures, and e-commerce. He is amember of the IEEE, ACM, and JEA. E-mail: abuelrub@zpu.edu.jo
Layla Hasanis an instructor at the Department of Manage-ment Information Systems, Zarqa Private University, Jordan.She received her Bachelor degree in computer science and anMBA from the University of Jordan, in 1996 and 2004, respec-tively. Currently, she is pursuing her PhD in information sys-tems at Loughborourgh University, UK. Prior of joiningZarqa Private University, she worked as a manager for thecomputer center at the Association of Arab Universities, Jor-dan. Her research interests include e-commerce, user-usability, and quality ofwebsites. E-mail: l.hassan@zpu.edu.joKhlood Alserehi Alharbiis a PhD candidate at the Universityof Leicester, UK, Her research focuses on the use of web-based systems to enhance education and investigating the fac-tors contributing to a better use and adoption of e-learningsystems by the Saudi students at the university level. Shehad MAin Applied Linguistics and TESOL (2001) from theUniversity of Leicester, UK, andBA in English Literatureand Linguistics (1998) from King Abdul Aziz University.E-mail: ka41@le.ac.uk
Said S. Al-Gahtaniis a professor of computer information sys-tems in the Department of management information systemsat King Khalid University, Abha, Saudi Arabia. He earneda B.Sc. in Systems Engineering from King Fahad Universityof Petroleum & Minerals, M.Sc. in Computer Sciences fromAtlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia, and a PhD in Computer-Based Information Systems from Lougborough University,Loughborough, UK. His research interests include the useracceptance of information technologies, the modeling of IT acceptance, end-usercomputing, and organizational cross-cultural research. He has published journalresearch articles in theJournal of Global Information Management, Information& Management, Information Technology & People, Journal of Global InformationManagement, Journal of Global Information Technology Management, Informa-Biographies xvtion Technology for Development, Information Resources Management Journal,and theBehaviour & Information Technology.E-mail: ssalgahtani@kku.edu.sa
Basit Qureshireceived his Master of Science degree in Compu-ter Science from [Florida Atlantic University] in 2002 and hisBachelor of Science degree in Computer Science from [OhioUniversity], OH USA in 2000. He is currently working atPrince Sultan University as a faculty member in the Collegeof Computer and Information Sciences. He has taught numer-ous Computer Science Courses at the undergraduate level. Hisresearch interests include performance evaluation of wirelessnetwork protocols, Wireless Networks Security and implementation of applica-tions for Mobile Ad Hoc wireless Networks. To date he has published in variousreputable international journals and conferences. He received the best facultyteaching award from PSU in 2008/9. E-mail: qureshi@psu.edu.saxvi Biographies