ORIGINAL ARTICLE
Computer-aided assessment of aviationpilots attention: Design of an integratedtest and its empirical validation
Rosario Cannavo`a, Daniela Contib, Alessandro Di Nuovoc,d,*
aFlight Simulation and Training Devices Unit, Cognitive Technologies and Services SRL, Catania, Italy
bDoctorate School of Neuroscience, University of Catania, Catania, Italy
cFaculty of Engineering and Architecture, Kore University of Enna, Enna, Italy
dSchool of Computing and Mathematics, Plymouth University, Plymouth, United KingdomReceived 27 December 2014; revised 3 May 2015; accepted 19 May 2015
Available online 24 May 2015
KEYWORDSSoftware validation;Computer assistedperformance evalua-tion;Attention assessment;Aviation pilot selec-tion and trainingAbstract Attention has a key role in the ﬂight performance of the aviationpilot, therefore it is among human factors commonly used in the evaluation ofcandidate pilots. In this context, our work aims to deﬁne a single integratedinstrument able to measure all the distinctive attention factors and to assistthe assessment and the training of aviation pilots.
In this paper, we present a battery of seven computerized tests, encompassingclassical and innovative solutions inspired by the literature in the ﬁeld, for theintegrated measurement of the attention factors of aviation pilots. The computersoftware is validated by means of an experimental trial with 50 experienced avi-ation pilots and 50 untrained people as controls. Statistical analyzes conﬁrm that
*Corresponding author at: B109 Portland Square Building, Plymouth University Campus, Plymouth PL4 8AA,United Kingdom. Tel.: +44 1752586320.E-mail address:alessandro.dinuovo@plymouth.ac.uk(A. Di Nuovo). Peer review under responsibility of King Saud University.
Production and hosting by ElsevierApplied Computing and Informatics (2016) 12,1 6–26
Saudi Computer Society, King Saud University
Applied Computing and Informatics
(http://computer.org.sa)www.ksu.edu.sawww.sciencedirect.com
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.aci.2015.05.0022210-8327ª2015 The Authors. Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of King Saud University.This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ ).the instrument can effectively classify aviation pilots, and identify a subset of dis-tinctive attention factors that could be used for monitoring their duty.
ª2015 The Authors. Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of King SaudUniversity. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ ).
1. Introduction
In the typical routine, an aviation pilot has to switch rapidly between differentsources of information to construct a mental situation model of what the airplaneis doing and how to get it to go where he wants it to go. At the same time, he hasto listen to Air Trafﬁc Control (ATC) instructions, often delivered at sustainedspeed. Then, there is the requirement to interpret the instructions from ATCthrough the use of paper or electronic charts and to ﬂy, or program the autopilotto ﬂy, the desired route. At the same time, the pilot has to keep track of theweather at his current location, along his route and at his destination.
In this context, it is too crucial that the pilot develops Situation Awareness(SA) that is not speciﬁc to a particular type of aircraft and mission, but general-izes across many types of aircraft systems[9]. Many researchers recognize theessential role of attention in SA[8,16,18], as an example Schriver et al.[14]inves- tigated the behavior of pilots with different experience levels and presented resultsthat support the link between greater attention and more effective decision mak-ing of aviation pilots. Recently, Carretta[4]conﬁrmed that attention is amongfactors that have consistently shown a relation to ﬂying performance in a studyof the Pilot Candidate Selection Method (PCSM), while King et al. [11]proved that tests of cognitive functioning, that include attention, can predict the trainingoutcomes.
Previous work demonstrated that computerized tests are ideal to assess pilotaptitude[2]and, in particular, to measure attention factors[3]. In fact, many dif- ferent computerized instruments to measure attention factors are available, but tothe best of our knowledge none of these instruments was designed and testedspeciﬁcally for aviation pilots with validation results published in the scientiﬁc lit-erature. Moreover, commercially available computerized tests for aviation pilotsusually measure attention indirectly, e.g. via simpliﬁed ﬂight maneuver simula-tions, which involve several factors at the same time, and cannot give a speciﬁcattentional proﬁle that can highlight strengths and weaknesses of the candidatepilot. Indeed, the attentional proﬁle can be useful for ad-hoc training as theoreticaland empirical evidence exists in support of the argument that both the control ofattention and the ability to establish better attention management can be devel-oped with training[10].
We also underline that the training of an aviation pilot is particularly difﬁcultand expensive (the full process for a commercial license can cost up to a hundredthousand of US dollars) and ﬂight schools have a limited number of seats availableComputer-aided assessment of aviation pilots attention 17for each course, because the limited resources for the training (i.e. aircrafts or cer-tiﬁed simulators). For this reason, the selection processes are of fundamentalimportance and aim to favor those candidates that have the highest attitude, i.e.that show the highest potential to be successful.
Starting with this background, our research is aimed to design a specializedinstrument to effectively measure aviation pilot attention factors and to give thefollowing contribution: (i) as an objective instrument to assist the selection of mostpromising candidates; (ii) to identify the factors that they should improve duringthe training; (iii) to select a subset of variables that have the highest impact on theclassiﬁcation of aviation pilots.
To this end, we designed and implemented a battery of seven computerizedtests. The development of a novel battery was required to simplify the administra-tion of the different tests and data collection, and to evaluate some additional fac-tors, like the peripheral foveal vision, that were not studied before. Indeed, thebattery has been designed to allow a multidimensional assessment of attention.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2describes the tests bat- tery and details the software implementation. Section 3reports and discusses the experimental results of the empirical validation of the proposed instrumentthrough a trial with 50 experienced aviation pilots and 50 untrained people as acontrol group. Finally, Section4presents our conclusions.
2. Tests battery description and software implementation
In this section, we present the battery of seven tests designed to identify and assessthe distinctive factors of the aviation pilot attention, and we give examples of themapping with actual ﬂight routine tasks.
Here we deﬁne attention as ‘‘a concentration of mental activity that allows youto take in a limited portion of the vast stream of information available from bothyour sensory world and your memory’’[13].
Types of attention assessed include selective and divided attention, with audi-tory and visual stimuli. In particular, among visual stimuli, the emphasis is givento non-central stimuli. The tests differentiate among Central, Mid-peripheral andFar-peripheral focus of the visual attention. Peripheral vision is used to detectobjects that are located at an eccentricity of more than nine degrees with respectto the foveal vision[15]. ‘‘Far-peripheral’’ vision exists at the edges of the ﬁeld ofview; ‘‘mid-peripheral’’ vision exists in the middle of the ﬁeld of view. Test scenar-ios were designed using real-world pictures and videos to increase the level of eco-logical validity with real-life experience.
The software program presents a detailed introduction before beginning eachtest. Next a short interactive demo starts and then the subject is required to repeatuntil he is conﬁdent to go on with the real test. The battery of tests needs from50 min to 1 h to be completed. The duration was carefully chosen by means ofa preliminary pilot study (N= 4, 2 pilots, and 2 controls) in order to be18 R. Cannavo`et al.challenging enough for the aviation pilots. Tests are presented to the subject auto-matically in the order shown in the following.
We deﬁne:Reaction time, which is the time elapsed from the appearance of thestimulus on the screen to the key pressed by the subject; Error, which occurs when the subject reacts without any stimulus;Omission, which occurs when the subjectdoes not react to the stimulus. Note that in case of omission the reaction time isnot calculated.
Stimuli are presented randomly in a window of 2 seconds and they stay on thescreen for 2 seconds or until the key is pressed.
2.1. Test 1: simple reaction time
The test of simple reaction measures a purely psycho-physiological attention. Theparameter identiﬁed in this way deﬁnes a useful baseline for the analysis of subse-quent tests. The test is composed of two parts: the ﬁrst part ( 1A), in which the visual stimulus is proposed in the central part of the screen, thus stimulating theuse of the focused vision; in the second part (1B) of the test the same stimulusis proposed randomly in one of the four corners of the screen, to activate theFar-peripheral vision only.
For both subtests, the software records reaction times, errors and omissions.
2.2. Test 2: multiple search and memory
This test was to measure the attention shifting that, as an example, occurs when, inthe course of a ﬂight, the pilot has to execute steps out of the habitual tasksequence. The attention’s shifting factor can be measured via the multiple searchand memory tests, in a version involving the visual-spatial channel, in analogy tothe Toulouse-Pie´ron concentration test[17]. The task consists of the search andidentiﬁcation of random targets, among a set of similar stimuli represented by styl-ized hands, which show varying numbers of open ﬁngers differently orientated.The stimuli are presented in three blocks of twenty stimuli, for which the subjecthas to ﬁnd ﬁve targets. Targets’ shapes are different in different blocks, to forcethe continuous change of attentional focus. Total time elapsed and the numbersof errors made by the subjects are recorded.
2.3. Test 3: color-word interference
The ‘‘resistance to distraction’’ factor is investigated by two different adaptationsof the Stroop phenomenon, in which the attentional process counteracts andreduces the interference of automation. In the original version of this test, devel-oped by Stroop in 1935, dominant color words written in a different color (e.g. redwritten in blue) are presented to the subject, which who must name the color inwhich the word is written (blue), exceeding the interference resulting from theComputer-aided assessment of aviation pilots attention 19habit of reading the words. Ultimately, the test tends to measure the subject’s abil-ity to overcome, with a particular attentional effort, the distraction induced fromthe semantic meaning of the presented stimulus, which must instead be processedaccording to the color appearance.
Our software implements an adaptation of this test, which is split into twosequential tasks:
3A.In the ﬁrst task, which sets a baseline, the subject should recognize a colorby pressing on the keyboard the button that is coupled with the color that appearson the screen.
3B. In the second task, which is the real test of interference, words that indicatea color appear ﬁlled with a different color (e.g. RED in blue), the subject shouldneglect the automatic recognition of the word semantic and press the buttoncorresponding to the color in which the word is ﬁlled (i.e., in the example, blue).
To clearly identify the buttons to be pressed, colored stickers were applied tothe keyboard.
Correct answers, errors, and reaction times to individual stimuli are recorded.
2.4. Test 4: ground interference
This test is designed to measure the ability to discriminate a target from an activebackground through peripheral vision, resembling the actual scanning of the cock-pit instrumentation during the ﬂight duty. An active background gives the inter-ference by producing a distracting effect, which must be suppressed to correctlyidentify the target. The screen is divided into four quadrants and in each one avideo is played during the whole duration of the test. The subject is required toidentify the target among ﬁve different stimuli proposed. The stimuli are proposedin the peripheral area of the screen and they represent human ﬁgures, compatiblewith the position, size, and behavior with those that appear in the backgroundvideo.
The software measures the reaction times to stimuli proposed as targets, alongwith the number of errors and omissions.
2.5. Test 5: divided attention
This test focuses on two parallel tasks: a visual search and auditory recognition.This simulates the usual duty of the aviation pilot, as he should pay attentionto the onboard instrumentation and follow instructions from the ATC. This isan example of divided attention, which is the highest level of attention and refersto the ability to respond simultaneously to multiple tasks or multiple taskdemands. The investigation of this kind of attention is realized by means of amulti-tasking test. Combining two stimuli of different type in the same test wecan evaluate the subject’s ability to vary the attentional focus and, therefore, todistribute his attention to the management of many different stimuli.20 R. Cannavo`et al.In this test, the subject should press one of the two keys as soon as he perceivesthe target, which can be among the visual or auditory stimuli that are presentedsimultaneously.
Visual stimuli are different pictures that can appear randomly in one of the fourcorners of the screen, this way the subject must activate the Far-peripheral vision,while the background is neutral. In the meanwhile, to distract the subject, randomsentences that resemble possible ATC speech, are spoken. The auditory target isthe word ‘‘go’’, pronounced by the same voice that reads the ATC sentences.
The software records reaction times, number of correct responses, omissionsand errors for visual (5V) and auditory (5A) stimuli.
2.6. Test 6: digit span
This test aims to assess the domain-general working memory capacity, as this hasbeen identiﬁed among the fundamental components of pilots’ attention [12], which is involved in the integration of incoming information into the situation model ofthe ﬂight. We recall that a poor performance in this kind of sequential task is apredictor of failure in those learning tasks that require perception, retention andreproduction of symbols or sounds in a given order sequence [1].
To this end, the software proposes the classic digit span test: series of increasinglength of digits are presented to the subject and he is asked to repeat them bypressing the appropriate number keys. The test is divided into two parts: (i) thedirect, in which the subject should retype the digits as they appear on the screen;(ii) the inverse, in which the subject is required to retype from the last digitappeared to the ﬁrst one. The backward part starts right after the forward oneis ended.
At each step of the test, the number of digits that sequentially appear on thescreen is increased by one. The test begins with three digits and continues up toeight. To access to the following step, the subject should recall all the digits atthe current step. If the subject does not correctly recall all the digits, anothersequence of the same length is shown. After two faults, the test is ﬁnished.
For this test, the software calculates the omissions as the total number availableof digits (eight) minus the maximum number of digits correctly recalled by the sub-ject. The error is the total number of errors made (i.e. number of wrong sequencesinputted) by the subject.
2.7. Test 7: global vision
The objective of the ﬁnal test is to evaluate the quality and timing of discrimina-tion of an attentional process that uses the three visual channels and their interre-lation. This test extends the ground interference by presenting moving targets thatcan appear randomly anywhere in the screen.Computer-aided assessment of aviation pilots attention 21The active background interferes with the task and its distracting effect must be‘suppressed’ by the subject to correctly identify the target. The target is to be iden-tiﬁed within 5 different moving stimuli proposed. In this case, the shape of thestimuli is not the only discriminant factor, but the trajectory must be taken intoaccount: they can move randomly vertical and diagonal. The starting positionof the stimuli can more randomly in vertical and diagonal directions of the screen,which is divided into Central, Mid-peripheral and Far-peripheral.
The software records the response time to the targets, the number of errors andomissions (seeTable 1). Omissions are grouped according to their starting posi-tion: Central (7C), Mid-peripheral (7M) and Far-peripheral (7F). Note that errors occurring without stimuli cannot be counted in a specific area.
3. Validation experiment: results and discussion
3.1. Participants
The number of subjects that completed all the tests in the battery is N= 100, divided into two groups: 50 aviation pilots (all males) and 50 untrained healthypeople (all males) as a control group. Subject ages were in the range of 20–40 yearsold. Pilots were selected among subjects that have completed their training andexperienced at least 1200 real or simulated hours of ﬂight. Controls were recruited,after a preliminary selection from a wider sample, excluding those who underwentTable 1Summary of the data recorded by the software.
Test and variable name Test short ID No. of stimuli Omissions Errors Median reaction time (MEDTIME) Simple reaction timeCentral 1A 40UU U Peripheral 1B 40UU U Multiple search 2 20UU UTotal TIME Color-word interferenceColor discrimination 3A 40UU U Color-word 3B 40UU U Ground interference 4 16UU U Divided attentionAuditory 5A 16UU U Vision 5V 22UU U Digit spanDirect 6D 8UU– Inverse 6I 8UU– Global vision 7 18UU U Central 7C 6U–U Mid-peripheral 7M 6U–U Far-peripheral 7F 6U–U22 R. Cannavo`et al.particular trainings (e.g. sports or a professional car driving experience), but withat least an education history that allows them to be enrolled in a pilot trainingcourse, i.e. a high school degree. The participants gave written informed consentto use the data collected during the trial for research purposes. Descriptive statis-tics of age and experience are summarized inTable 2.
3.2. Setting and procedure
The experimental study was conducted in computer rooms, where the battery wasadministered to several subjects at the same time. All subjects were in good health,rested and comfortably seated in front of a computer monitor at such a distancethat the lateral area of the monitor coincided with the peripheral area of theirvision. Finally, in order to avoid auditory interference all subjects wore a headsetduring the whole duration of the test. Before each session, a collective brieﬁng wasdone to answer the general questions of the test battery.
The statistics presented in the results section were computed with the SPSS 21.
3.3. Trial results
First, we performed at-test comparison to verify the hypothesis that pilots andcontrols are two independent samples. Results oft-test analysis are summarizedinTable 3. Negative values of t are in favor of the pilots group. All tests haveat least one variable that rejects the hypothesis (i.e. that the two samples comefrom the same group) with a statistical signiﬁcance ( p< 0.01). The best result is achieved from the seventh test (Global vision) as all of its variables well differen-tiate between the pilots and the controls.
In order to investigate whether experience has some inﬂuence on the perfor-mance, we also executed a pairwise Pearson correlation analysis using the aviationpilots’ data, but none of the variables signiﬁcantly correlates to experience. Thispreliminary test conﬁrms that the proposed battery can be a suitable measurefor identifying candidate pilots, since it is not inﬂuenced by the ﬂight experience.
As further study, the linear discriminant analysis was applied to classify thepilots against the controls.Table 4reports the classiﬁcation matrix, showing a verygood discrimination between the two groups (92% overall), along with the cross-
Table 2Descriptive statistics.
Group Variable Min Max Mean St. Dev.Pilots Age 21 39 31.56 3.32Experience 1203 4300 1806.46 626.03Controls Age 20 40 29.84 6.88Experience 0 0 0.00 0.00Computer-aided assessment of aviation pilots attention 23validation with the leave-one-out procedure, which conﬁrmed the good predictivecapability of the tests battery (83% overall).
For further analysis, we applied the forward stepwise procedure to identify thecore subset of variables and the discriminant model is reported in Table 5, which also reports the standardized canonical discriminant function coefﬁcients. Thesubset was obtained after a forward stepwise procedure that used the Wilks’lambda as criterion used for controlling the stepwise entry of variables: at eachstep, the variable that minimizes the overall Wilks’ lambda is entered until no fur-ther minimization is possible. The Wilks’ lambda criterion is a measure of groupdiscrimination.
FromTable 5we can note that ﬁve out of seven variables are measures of errorsor omissions (i.e. low), which underline how accuracy of the answers can be moreimportant than a faster reaction time for aviation pilots. A greater importance forthe peripheral focus can be derived by the presence of 1B errors instead of 1A. InTable 3t-Test comparison for independent samples.
Test Omissions Errors Median timestptptp1A/C00.601 0.549/C00.345 0.730/C05.284<0.001 1B/C02.181 0.030/C01.083 0.280/C07.051<0.001 2/C02.157 0.032/C02.041 0.042/C03.1470.002 3A/C04.995<0.001/C04.952<0.001/C03.4590.001 3B/C04.636<0.001/C04.541<0.001/C01.998 0.047 4/C02.298 0.022/C03.0550.002/C00.208 0.835 5A/C01.994 0.047/C02.7060.0072.9150.004 5V/C02.260 0.025/C00.603 0.547/C00.836 0.404 6D/C03.692<0.001/C02.192 0.029 – – 6I/C05.544<0.001/C00.465 0.642 – – 7/C06.646<0.001/C03.701<0.001/C08.202<0.001 7C/C04.742<0.001 – –/C07.688<0.001 7M/C05.519<0.001 – –
/C05.360<0.001 7F/C05.399<0.001 – –/C04.686<0.001 Statistical signiﬁcance (p) is included. Note whenp< 0.01 the cell is evidenced in bold.
Table 4Results of the discriminant analysis.
Classiﬁcation matrix Cross-validation classiﬁcation matrixPilots Controls % Correct Pilots Controls % CorrectPilots 47 3 94 Pilots 43 7 86Controls 5 45 90 Controls 10 40 80Total 52 48 92 Total 53 47 83Cases in row categories are classiﬁed into columns.24 R. Cannavo`et al.light of this result, divided attention does not seem to be effective to discriminatepilots from common people. Therefore, the ﬁnal model does not include any vari-able of the test no. 5.
4. Conclusion
In this paper, we presented a battery of seven tests speciﬁcally designed for theassessment of the attention factors of aviation pilots. The battery was imple-mented in a computer software and validated by an experimental trial with 50experienced aviation pilots and 50 untrained people as controls. t-test analysis showed the potential of all the tests in the battery to distinguish between untrainednormal people and experienced aviation pilots, while discriminant analysis con-ﬁrmed the validity of the battery as an instrument that can effectively measureall the distinctive attention factors that characterize aviation pilots. Finally, thestepwise discriminant analysis identiﬁed several attention factors that can be usedto assist the selection of candidate aviation pilots and to focus their training.
In practice, the software presented in our paper allows setting a benchmark forone of the distinctive cognitive functions of aviation pilots. Candidate pilots canbe assessed against this benchmark and the results, along with other psycho-attitudinal tests, can be used to select the most promising candidate pilots. Theresults prove that our battery of tests addressed all the distinctive attention factorsof the aviation pilots as they are signiﬁcantly different than controls and they areenough to efﬁciently discriminate between the two groups. Furthermore, the soft-ware derives an attention proﬁle of the candidate that can be used to train thosefactors that are not fully developed at the level of the aviation pilot. Indeed, thecomputer software presented here is currently used in the evaluation of candidatepilots in several ﬂight schools where it is integrated with standard selection proto-cols and it is employed to develop personal training programs.
Further development will focus on the deﬁnition of a battery of tests that can beintegrated with onboard instrumentation (e.g. with augmented cognition systemslike the one proposed by Di Nuovo et al.[6,7]), in order to quickly evaluate thecurrent attention level before the start of a ﬂight duty, and to assure that aTable 5Standardized canonicaldiscriminant function coefﬁcients.
Variable Coeﬀ.1B_ERRORS 0.4953A_OMISS 0.4053B_ERRORS 0.4454_OMISS/C00.4244_MEDTIME/C00.5686D_ERRORS 0.3597C_MEDTIME 0.912Computer-aided assessment of aviation pilots attention 25sufﬁcient level is attained to fulﬁll with the highest safety requirements. Whilefuture work will study the application of the battery presented here in similar con-texts, for instance, air trafﬁc control, in which was also found that attention playsa major role[5].
References
[1]A. Baddeley, Working memory, Science 255 (1992) 556–559 .
[2]D. Bartram, Validation of the MICROPAT Battery, Int. J. Select. Assess. 3 (2) (1995) 84–95 .
[3]L.C. Boer, Taskomat: evaluation of a computerized test battery, Int. J. Select. Assess. 3 (2) (1995) 105–114 .
[4]T.R. Carretta, Pilot candidate selection method, Aviat. Psychol. Appl. Human Fact. 1 (1) (2011) 3–8 .
[5]K. Conzelmann, D. Keye, Which aspects of a semistructured interview, besides cognitive ability tests,contribute incrementally to predicting the training success of air trafﬁc controller trainees?, Int J. Select.Assess. 22 (3) (2014) 240–252
.
[6]A.G. Di Nuovo, R.B. Cannavo, S. Di Nuovo, An agent-based infrastructure for monitoring aviation pilot’ssituation awareness, in: IEEE Symposium on Intelligent Agent (IA), IEEE, 2011, pp. 1–7
.
[7]A.G. Di Nuovo, R.B. Cannavo`, S. Di Nuovo, An intelligent infrastructure for in-ﬂight situation awarenessof aviation pilots, in: Foundations of Augmented Cognition. Directing the Future of Adaptive Systems,Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2011, pp. 598–607
.
[8]M.R. Endsley, Theoretical underpinnings of situation awareness: a critical review, Situation Awareness Anal.Meas. (2000) 3–32
[9] M.R. Endsley, D.J. Garland, Pilot situation awareness training in general aviation, in: H. Factors, E. Society(Eds.), Human Factors and Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting Proceedings, Proceedings 2 – Training,2000, pp. pp. 357–360.
[10]D. Gopher, M. Well, T. Bareket, Transfer of skill from a computer game trainer to ﬂight, Hum. Factors: J.Hum. Factors Ergon. Soc. 36 (1994) 387–405
.
[11]R.E. King, T.R. Carretta, P. Retzlaff, E. Barto, M.J. Ree, M.S. Teachout, Standard cognitive psychologicaltests predict military pilot training outcomes, Aviat. Psychol. Appl. Human Factors 3 (1) (2013) 28
.
[12]E.I. Knudsen, Fundamental components of attention, Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 30 (2007) 57–78 .
[13]M.W Matlin, Cognition, eighth ed., Wiley, 2012, p. 640 .
[14]A.T. Schriver, D.G. Morrow, C.D. Wickens, D.A. Talleur, Expertise differences in attentional strategiesrelated to pilot decision making, Hum. Factors: J. Hum. Factors Ergon. Soc. 50 (6) (2008) 864–878
.
[15]H. Strasburger, I. Rentschler, M. Juttner, Peripheral vision and pattern recognition: a review, J. Vision 11(2011) 13
.
[16]K. Sulistyawati, Y.P. Chui, Y.M. Tham, Y.K. Wee, Evaluation of process tracing technique to assess pilotsituation awareness in air combat missions, in: Proceedings of the 7th International Conference onEngineering Psychology and Cognitive Ergonomics, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2007, pp. 824–833
.
[17]E. Toulouse, H. Pieron, Prueba perceptiva y de atencio ´n, TEA Ediciones SA, Madrid, 1986 .
[18] C.D. Wickens, J.S. McCarley, A.L. Alexander, L.C. Thomas, M. Ambinder, S. Zheng, Attention-situationawareness (A-SA) model of pilot error, in: David C. Foyle, Becky L. Hooey (Eds.), Human PerformanceModeling in Aviation, 2008, pp. 213–239.26 R. Cannavo`et al.