Customer relationship management and big data enabled:Personalization & customization of services
Muhammad Ansharia,⇑, Mohammad Nabil Almunawara, Syamimi Ariff Lima, Abdullah Al-Mudimighb
aUniversiti Brunei Darussalam, Brunei Darussalam
bDar Al Uloom University, Saudi Arabia
article info
Article history:Received 8 March 2018Revised 6 May 2018Accepted 8 May 2018Available online 9 May 2018Keywords:Big dataData analyticsCRMWeb 2.0Social networksabstract
The emergence of big data brings a new wave of Customer Relationship Management (CRM)’s strategiesin supporting personalization and customization of sales, services and customer services. CRM needs bigdata for better customers experiences especially personalization and customization of services. Big datais a popular term used to describe data that is volume, velocity, variety, veracity, and value of data bothstructured and unstructured. Big data requires new tools and techniques to capture, store and analyse itand is used to improve decision making for enhancing customer management. The aim of the research isto examine big data for CRM’s scenario. The method of collection of data for this study was literaturereview and thematic analysis from recent studies. The study reveals that CRM with big data has enabledbusiness to become more aggressive in term of marketing strategy like push notiﬁcation through smart-phone to their potential target audiences./C2112018 The Authors. Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of King Saud University. This is anopen access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ ).Contents1. Introduction.......................................................................................................... 9 42. Literature review . . . . . . . . . . . . .......................................................................................... 9 5 2.1. Big data . . . . . . . ................................................................................................. 9 52.2. Customer relationship management and social CRM . . . . . . . ............................................................. 9 6 3. Method . . . ........................................................................................................... 9 74. Discussion. ........................................................................................................... 9 74.1. Customer profiling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ............................................................................. 9 8 4.2. Value creation . . ................................................................................................. 9 95. Challenges. .......................................................................................................... 1 0 06. Conclusion .......................................................................................................... 1 0 0References .......................................................................................................... 1 0 1
1. IntroductionManaging good customer relationship in an organization refersto the concepts, tools, and strategies of customer relationship man-agement (CRM). CRM as a tools with Web/Apps technology pro-vides organizations ability to understand customers or potentialcustomers its usual practices and thus deliver a particular activitiesthat might convince them to make transactions and decisions [1]. CRM has been discussed in many ﬁelds such as business, healthcare, science, and other service industries. The massive adoption
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aci.2018.05.0042210-8327//C2112018 The Authors. Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of King Saud University.This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ ).⇑Corresponding author.E-mail addresses:anshari.ali@ubd.edu.bn(M. Anshari),nabil.almunawar@ubd. edu.bn(M.N. Almunawar),syamimi.ariff@ubd.edu.bn(S.A. Lim),almudimigh@ gmail.com(A. Al-Mudimigh).Peer review under responsibility of King Saud University.
Production and hosting by ElsevierApplied Computing and Informatics 15 (2019) 94–101
Contents lists available atScienceDirect
Applied Computing and Informatics
journal homepage: www.sciencedirect.com
of big data in any sectors has triggered assessment of frontend per-spective especially managing customer relationship [2]. It is piv- otal to examine the role of big data within CRM strategies.Big data have quantum leap to a digital era where public gener-ates a huge data in any sectors and industries. The amount of dataare captured, collected, and processed by organization through dig-ital sensors, communications, computation, and storage had cap-tured information which was valuable to businesses, sciences,government, and society at large [3]. A large amount of data streaming from smartphones, computers, parking meters, buses,trains, and supermarkets[4]. Search engine companies collectenormous amount of data per day and share these data to usefulinformation for others as well as their own used.Big data sources can come from structured or unstructured dataformats[5]. These data sources are gathered from multi channelslike social networks, voice recording, image processing, videorecording, open government data (OGD), and online customers’activities. Those activities are extracted for the business to under-stand the patterns or behavior of their customers [6]. Big data can help business to portray their behavior to gain its value especiallyin sales, customer service, marketing and promotion [7]. Public or private organization see the potential of big data andmining them into big value[8]. Many organizations have madehuge investments to collect, integrate, analyse data, and use it torun business activities. For instance in marketing activities as partof CRM’s module; customers are exposed with a lot of marketingmessages every day and many people is just ignore those messagesunless they ﬁnd a value from the messages received [9]. Email campaigning program are distributed to public or random cus-tomers about their new product so that customers might be inter-ested to have one. Email campaigning may turn into disappointingsituation because customers feel bombarded with the spam andlead to increase number of unsubscribes. Marketing strategy isabout understandingcustomers’ habit and behaviorabout product or service so that the messages are perceived valuable for them[10]. Unfortunately, many organizations may simplify marketingstrategies by focusing a short term relationship with their cus-tomers with no path in attracting, retaining, and extending for longterm relationship. Therefore, there is a need for personalizationand customization of marketing that ﬁts for each and every poten-tial customer.CRM as a frontline in organization requires extensive support-ing accurate data analytics to ensure potential customers to engagein transaction[11]. Since customers make buying decisions everyday and every decision depends on consideration of cost, beneﬁts,and value. At this point, big data aims to support CRM strategies sothat organization can quantify sales transactions, promotion, pro-duct awareness, building long term relationship and loyalty [12]. Furthermore, the paper address the following question: How can big data in CRM will enhance CRM strategies in delivering per-sonalization and customization of services for customer? The structure of this study is organized as follows. In the next section,a literature review of related work. Section 3explains the method- ology and results of our study. Section 4presents a discussion of our ﬁndings. Recommendations for suggested future researchdirections are presented in Section 5, and Section6concludes the paper.2. Literature reviewIn conventional business practice, data was collected as arecording activities to the business with no formal intention asan important asset, only collected for speciﬁc purposes such asretailers recorded sales for accounting, the number of visits inthe advertising banners for calculating advertisement revenueand so on. Since many organizations either privates or publics haverealized the value of data gathered as an asset, data no longer trea-ted as its initial purpose. With the capabilities of processing hugeamount of data, it has created a new industry of data analytic ser-vices. For example IBM and Twitter involved partnership on data
analytics for the purpose of selling analytical information to corpo-rate clients in order to provide businesses a real-time conversa-tions to make smarter decision. With IBM analytical skills andTwitter massive data source, the partnership had created an inter-esting strategic partnership as both partners leverage on theirrespective strength and expertise[13]. Big data is considered as the recent development of decision support data management[14]. Big data have big impact towards businesses ranging fromCRM, ERP, and SCM. In the next section is discussed recent litera-tures on CRM and big data[15].2.1. Big dataBig data is a huge amount of data that is hardly processed with atraditional processing tools for extracting its value [16]. It has an impact in various ﬁelds like business, healthcare, ﬁnancial, secu-rity, communication, agriculture, and even trafﬁc control [17]. Big data creates opportunities for business that can use it for gen-erating business value[6]. The purpose is intended to gain valuefrom volumes and a variety of data by allowing velocity of analysis[18]. It is known as 5 Vs model; volume, velocity, and variety,value, and veracity[19](Fig. 1). Volume means processing massivedata scale from any data type gathered. The explosive of data vol-umes improve a knowledge sharing and people awareness [20]. Big data is a particularly massive volume with a large data sets, andthose data cannot be analysed its content using traditional data-base tools, management, and processing. Velocity means real timedata processing, speciﬁcally data collection and analysis. Velocityprocesses very large data in real-time processing. In addition, bigdata escalates its speed velocity surpassing that of old methodsof computing. Variety is any types of data from various channelsincluding structured and unstructured data like audio, video,image, location data for example Google Map, webpage, and text,as well as traditional structured data. Some of the semi-structured data based can use Hadoop. It focuses on analysing vol-umes of data involved and mining the data and calculationsinvolved in large amount of computing. Finally, veracity refers todata authenticity with the interest in the data source of Web logﬁles, social media, enterprise content, transaction, data application.Date need a valid power of information to ensure its authenticityand safety.Many organizations have been deploying big data application inrunning their business activities to gain value from big data
Big Data Volume 
Variety 
Velocity Value Veracity 
Fig. 1.Big data’s components.M. Anshari et al. / Applied Computing and Informatics 15 (2019) 94–101 95analytics. Value is generated from big data processing that sup-ports the right decision. Organizations need to reﬁne and processit to gain value from big data analytic [21]. For instance, value gen- erated from big data analytic can help to reveal the conditions andsave life of a new born baby by recording, examining or analysingevery heart rate of an infant, data analytics help to ﬁnalize the indi-cators of the new born[22]. One of the applications on the use ofbig data is to optimize machine or device performance. Forinstance, Toyota Prius is installed with cameras, GPS and sophisti-cated computers and sensors to ensure safety precaution on theroad automatically[23].Big data also reduces the maintenance costs for instance, orga-nizations deploy cloud computing approach where data are storedin the cloud[24]. The emergence of cloud computing has enabledbig data analytics to be cost efﬁcient, easily accessed, and reliable.Cloud computing is robust, reliable and responsive when there areissues because it is responsible of cloud service provider. Since, ser-vice outrages are unacceptable at the business. Whenever dataanalytic goes down impacting marketing activities are disruptedand customers have to question whether to trust such a system.Therefore reliability is competitive advantage of cloud computingin big data application[25].In addition, businesses have aggressively built their organiza-tion on big data capabilities. Unfortunately the fact is only 8% ofthe marketers have comprehensive and effective solutions in col-lecting and analysing those data[26]. Evans Data Corporation con- ducted survey of big data and advanced analytics in organization(Fig. 2). Customer-cantered departments like as marketing, sales,and customer service are dominant users for 38.2% of all big dataand advanced analytical apps. While, marketing department hasthe most common users (14.4%) of the data analytics, followedby IT (13.3%), and research for 13% (Columbus, 2015).2.2. Customer relationship management and social CRMAny business requires Customer Relationship Management(CRM) to sustain and survive in the long term [27]. CRM is a tool and strategy for managing customers’ interaction using technologyto automate business processes. CRM consists of sales, marketing,and customer service activities (Fig. 3). The aims are to ﬁnd, attract new customers, nurture and retain them for future business. Busi-ness uses CRM in meeting customers’ expectations and aligningwith the organization’s mission and objectives in order to bringabout a sustainable performance and effective customerrelationships.The emergence of Web 2.0 has been based on collaborationplatform like wikis, blogs, and social media aiming to facilitate cre-ativity, collaboration, and sharing among users for tasks other thanjust emailing and retrieving information [28]. The concept of a
Fig. 2.Big data analytics usage in organization. Sources:Evans Data Corporation.
Sales 
Customer Service Marke/g415ng 
Fig. 3.CRM scope & module.96 M. Anshari et al. / Applied Computing and Informatics 15 (2019) 94–101social network deﬁnes an organization as a system that containsobjects such as people, groups, and other organizations linkedtogether by a range of relationships [29]. Web 2.0 is a tool that can be used to communicate a political agenda to the public viasocial networks. Users can gain access to the data on Web 2.0enabled sites and exercise control over such data [30]. Web 2.0 represents a revolution in how people communicate facilitatingpeer-to-peer collaboration and easy access to real-time communi-cation. The rapid growth in Web 2.0 has impacted organizationthat cannot their customer relationship by using traditional CRMtechniques. Social CRM is a recent approach and strategies toreveal patterns in customer management, behavior, or anythingrelated to the multi channels customers’ interactions as expressedatFig. 4. Social CRM makes more precise analysis possible based onpeople conversation in social media, and thus helps them to pro-vide more accurate programs or activities leading to customers’interests and preferences.Marketing is one of CRM’s activities or process of promoting andselling products or services, which also include research and adver-tisement. Social networks enables social marketing that is neces-sary efforts for marketing teams to expect going viral andreceiving customers’ attention[31]. ‘‘Marketing, is deﬁned an theactivity, set of institutions, and processes for creating, communi-cating, delivering, and exchanging offerings that have value forcustomers, clients, partners, and society at large.” [32]. Marketing should focus on building relationships and meanings [33]. It also applies to sales and customer services where organizations usesocial networks as a tool to make sales as much as possible of han-dling customers’ complaint at social media. Since social networksis part of big data source, the next question, how big data willimpact CRM strategies.Social media has empowered customers to make conversationand business organization may utilize an increasing amount ofdata through people conversations that is available to them forcompany’s beneﬁts such as understanding customer preference,complaining items, people expectations. Web 2.0 platform allowscustomers to express their opinions [34]. In the context of CRM, social networks provide a means of strengthening relationshipsbetween customers and service providers. It might be utilized tocreate long-term relationships between business organizationsand their customers and public in general. Adopting social net-works into CRM is known as Social CRM or a second generationof CRM (CRM 2.0) that empowers customers to express their opin-ions and expectations about product or services. Social CRM hasbecome ‘a must’ strategies for any organization nowadays tounderstand their customers better. By playing a signiﬁcant rolein the management of relationships, Social CRM stimulates funda-mental changes in customer’s behavior [35]. Social CRM has an impact towards multi channels relationships in all areas eitherpublic or private sectors is no exception.3. MethodThe study investigates the factors that an organization consid-ers to adopt big data. The objective of the study is to investigaterecent big data adoption in an organization. The methods consistedof in-depth analysis of the latest research on big data in businessorganization. The data for this report was through literature reviewof articles ranging from 2010 to 2015. The reason for choosing thistime period because of the velocity of big data, any older articlesmight have irrelevant information. Contents analysis is appliedfor reviewing literature reviews of big data published in peer-reviewed journals[36]. The review process then is clustered intoa thematic. We enhance and integrate various possible solutionsinto proposed model. We chose only English-language articlespublished in peer-reviewed journals. After removing duplicatesand articles beyond the scope of this study, these articles werereviewed to extract feature of CRM and big data capabilities atFig. 5.4. DiscussionBusiness realizes that their most valuable assets are relation-ships with customers and all stakeholders. In fact, building per-sonal and social relationships become important area inmarketing[37]. The importance of relationships as market basedassets that contribute to customers’ value [38]. With the amount of data increase, some business organizations use advanced power-ful computers with a huge storage to process big data analytics andto increase their performance resulting in tremendous cost saving[6]. Businesses manage structured and unstructured data sourcessuch as social marketing, retail databases, recorded customeractivity, logistics, and enterprise data to establish a quality level
Fig. 4.CRM 1.0 vs CRM 2.0.M. Anshari et al. / Applied Computing and Informatics 15 (2019) 94–101 97of CRM strategies by having the abilities or knowledge on how torecognize big data and its advantage. While, big data analytics isa process to reveal the variety of data types in big data itself. Thereare some CRM strategies that can happen through big data and bigdata analytics.Since big data can provide a pattern of customers’ information,businesses can predict and assume what are the needs of their cus-tomers nowadays.Fig. 5indicates basic framework on how bigdata can contribute to generating CRM strategy. Big data hadhelped shaped many industries and changed the way businessesoperated nowadays. Big companies deﬁnitely beneﬁted from thisshift especially companies such as technology giants such as Ama-zon and googles and would continue to serve these giants from thesheer volume of data they generated. Data Velocity showed howmarketers could have access to real-time data, for example realtime analytics of interactions on internet sites and also socialmedia interactions.CRM with the big data inﬂuence, a new paradigm had been cre-ated to allow accessibility and availability of information whichresult in greater take up by big or small business alike. Big dataoffers pervasive knowledge acquisition in CRM activities. Big datawill support long-term relationship through understanding cus-tomers’ life cycle and behavior in more comprehensive perspective.Customers voluntarily generate a huge amount of data daily bydetailing their interest and preference about products or servicesto the public through various channels. Therefore, big data analyticcan come up with a comprehensive views of customers so thatorganization can enhance service ﬁtting with customer attention,engagement, participation, and personalization. The study intro-duces several fundamental concept of marketing with big data thatare closely related to customer based CRM strategies in an organi-zation by engaging customer life cycle.CRM with big data brings a promise of big transformation thatcan affect organization in delivering CRM strategies. There weremany beneﬁts for using big data in CRM and the following werejust some of the beneﬁts such as accurate and update in proﬁlingof target costumers, predicting trend on customer reaction towardmarketing messages and product offerings, create personalise mes-sage that create emotional attachment and product offering, max-imizing value chain strategies, producing accurate assessmentmeasures, effective digital marketing and campaign-based strate-gies, customers retention which was a cheaper option, and createtactics and getting product insights [39]. The combination of usingbig data in CRM can certainly enhance long term relationship withcustomers[40]and manifest into an impressive set of CRM activi-ties[41]. There is an example of the successful usage of big data inCRM when Netﬂix used big data to run their streaming video ser-vice[42]. Instead of using traditional methods of data gathering,they were able to ﬁnd out what their customers want and mademeasurable marketing decisions. Big data can perform betterCRM strategies than any processes with double the speed.CRM with big data features becomes more aggressive in term ofmarketing strategy like push notiﬁcation through smartphone tothe potential target audiences. Web / Apps users who make com-ment, liking page, or comes back visiting Web or Apps are potentialcustomers are targeted for pushed notiﬁcation. Technically, thereare many third parties for Apps or Web that can help business toset up push notiﬁcation right to the users. For instance, there arealso many plugin supports web push facilities in CMS based web-site. Notiﬁcation can be set up auto generated or manual whenevernew contents are available directed at customer convenience in theform of text message, link sharing, or smartphone notiﬁcationoffering promotion at nearby shop. CRM aims to quantify salestransactions, promotion, product awareness, while its strategiesfor building long term relationship and loyalty. Businesses cannotsimplify marketing strategies only focusing a short term relation-ship with customers without any path in attracting, retaining,and extending for long term relationship.In addition, the organization can also create better customerpersonas by using the proﬁle data as the backbone of creatingaccurately personiﬁcations for the customers. Also the organiza-tion will have data on what the customers’ needs and preferencesand used this data to provide better content for the audiencewhere the content is relevant and valuable to them. All these datacan also provide valuable information for the management team toimprove marketing budget management by ensuring businessoperational process stayed on budget with the help of data andto be more focused and targeted.4.1. Customer proﬁlingWhenever business acquires a new customer through market-ing activities, the customer will determine what the value of eachactivity received from the business. When the customer perceivesthe value is positive they will be happy and satisﬁed. Otherwisethey can consider ﬁnding another business even from other
Fig. 5.Big data and marketing.98 M. Anshari et al. / Applied Computing and Informatics 15 (2019) 94–101competitors that may fulﬁl their requirements. Therefore, cus-tomer proﬁling for each and every customer becomes importantfor business to make sure that the whole CRM’ life cycle (sales,marketing, and customer service) are offering personalized andcustomized services so that each customer will experience differ-ently according to their needs and interest.Big data can help in delivering customer proﬁling since itincludes business activities monitoring. Big data analytics havethe abilities for tracking purchase histories and their online con-versations about their product or services. Business will gain morecomprehensive view of customer’s expectation and can understandbetter for potential customers’ interest. The impact of the big dataanalytics are signiﬁcant, especially on the distribution of marketingchannels between service providers and customers whereas sup-pliers or service providers are engaging with customers directly,threatening the sustainability of intermediaries marketingagencies.Customer proﬁling can gain invaluable insight from the big dataanalytic and create a competitive advantage. All of these organiza-tions derive business value from leveraging personalization. Someof the example for customers’ proﬁling of services; Amazon.comdeveloped a system of product recommendation based on theiranalysis on customers’ previous purchases data [43]. Target, the supermarket, is able to develop a predict model in tracking thepurchase made by the pregnant women [44]. UPS, the package delivery company created an application to redesign their drivers’daily routes to achieve ﬂeet optimization.Customers’ proﬁling are possible through big data analyticsbecause the organizations have access to more accurate data asbig data can discover value of the hidden data connections and pat-tern. In addition, it can improve business decisions because it pro-vides as much knowledge as possible [45]. CRM team generates customers’ knowledge proﬁling to enhance businesses and under-stand precisely target audience, personalize message for eachpotential customer, and tailoring message ﬁts with customers’interest and preferences. CRM with big data analytic can developcomprehensive knowledge of customers for decision making. RollRoyce applies big data analytics in aircraft engine-manufacturingsector and use the result to predict when and where breakdownof aircraft engine might occur by installing censors to collect data[46]. Hence, they does not only sell engines but also packages ofboth engines and monitoring services that generates proﬁt bycharging customers based on usage, repairs and replacements. Thisservice currently accounted for more than 70% of their annual rev-enue in their aircraft engine division by leveraging big data to cre-ate a competitive advantage[47].Personalization is important for the organizations to focus onthe user experience to boost digital marketing efforts by makingsure the targeted audience seeing advertisements, social mediapost, contest or creating events that have emotional relation tothe audience. These efforts will help to map the customer journeyeasier to tract since it is on digital marketing. These trending willbe able to provide accurate and real-time mapping of customers’choices and also locations. Hence the organization can use this datato create a more personalized leading nurturing process by makingthe loyal customers feel important and their relationship with thecompany is meaningful.While, customization enables business to sort out speciﬁc CRMactivities to the targeted audiences more precisely. Business strate-gies should transform customer strategies and systems to cus-tomer engagement and ability for customization. The one is morefocused on the conversation that is going on between organizationand customer and the collaborative models that cutting edge com-panies are carrying out for customer engagement. Customizationstrategies will improve customer services and great customer sup-port will increase loyalty, revenue, brand recognition, and businessopportunity. The aim of big data in CRM should target right marketsegment for the right product or services so that business improvemarket sharing, avoid access production, control budget, efﬁciencyand effective in business process. Furthermore, long term strategyfocuses on producing marketing materials for target customersthan trying to reach random customers. Customization is impor-tant in marketing because marketing should be ﬂexible in offeringtheir product or service. Flexibility in offering product showsempowerment for customer. Businesses can improve their senseof understanding for their customers’ behaviors. Marketing teamcan customize campaigning agenda that is expected to be ﬁt withthe patterns of potential customers.Customers’ proﬁling are also possible because big data withgeolocation analytic promotes quick and appropriate marketingstrategies. It can quicker than competitor in marketing product,appropriate in determine price by understanding purchasingpower of potential buyers from data of ﬁnancial abilities. Appropri-ate in displaying product means supplier has the best possibleplace to display the product which is easily reach by customers,the data come from geolocation. The Netﬂix detects trafﬁc detailsof customers’ view to spot problems in the area and add systemsthat can help the future demand. They are also able to get morevision of their customer’s desire[48].4.2. Value creationBig data brings new opportunities for discovering values, sinceit shows the behavior of customers’ trend or anything related tothe society, and leading to more precise analysis. Big data’s source
can come from geolocation of customers. Geolocation helps busi-ness to deliver right message to the right customers whereas busi-ness understands what can and cannot be delivered to the peopleat the localities. While, geolocation facility helps customers to ﬁndthe nearest place to reach the product or service. There are situa-tions that marketing strategies are inapplicable due to differentset of customs and conditions. Understanding local wisdom isimportant factor in delivering effective message to the target cus-tomers. Business organizations spend a huge amount of budget foradvertising without considering geolocation of potential customersturn into disappointment and rejection. Conventional marketingstrategy prompts any marketing contents to random audienceswhich is potentially costing inefﬁcient budget. These businessesdo the strategies to ﬁnd some marketing activities that work. Byeffectively marketing on the basis of geolocation to deliver valueto the target customers, business provide cost-effective marketingactivities of their desired objective to increase local based engage-ment. Promotions are based on users’ records and histories eitherfrom web visit, customer’s buying history, current GPS data, andconversation in social networks. Push notiﬁcation has to provideoption for users either allow or don’t allow notiﬁcation throughtheir smartphone or web visit[49].CRM strategy ventures potential customers, meeting expecta-tion, understanding their needs, and delivering value. While, gen-erating value can come from big data analytic. As described, bigdata grow an extraordinary rate huge amount of data sets contain-ing a variety of data types and come up with patterns, correlationsvariables, latest market trends, customers’ choices and preferencesand other valuable business information [50,51]. These big data analytics provides effective marketing, new revenue streams, cus-tomer relation services, improved value chain efﬁciency, sustain-able competitive advantages over rival organizations and manyother beneﬁts[52,53].CRM initiative needs to extract value from a variety of datasources gathered from customers to manage or analyses cus-tomers’ preferences. Big data generates value to understand peo-ple’s needs and preferences by having access to more accurateM. Anshari et al. / Applied Computing and Informatics 15 (2019) 94–101 99information as big data can discover hidden connections and pat-terns in customers’ behavior through multi sources and multichannels. Customers produce data voluntarily through variousmeans including click stream activities while visiting web site fore-commerce transaction[54]. More customers generate and sharedata in the public sphere means more value for can be extracted byan organization. Customers produce data and business organiza-tions capture those data for their marketing plan. In addition, cus-tomers make conversation in social media about products arebasically helping any audiences either customers or producers.Customers beneﬁts from the conversations and reviews becausethey understand product knowledge better. While producer under-stands better about products’ expectation.Big data has involved customers in delivering affective CRMactivities where marketing teams at the organizations ﬁne tunethe ideas into executable marketing program. For instance, Star-bucks uses social networks to understand the costumers’ on thenew product being introduced. This gives feedback faster as com-pared using a periodical method, waiting for the sale’s reports tocome in and evaluate its performances [6]. Social media analytics are the analysis of structured and unstructured data from socialmedia channels. Furthermore, Amazon.com utilizes big data ana-lytics in producing the marketing strategies. Amazon.com can rec-ognize the patterns in the customers’ shopping behavior thusoffering good bargain, advertisements, advertisements and dis-count to customers[55]. Big data helps e-commerce in gainingcompetitive advantage and business values, increasing the inﬂuxof customers, retaining the customers’ loyalty, improving the salesand revenues of the companies, ensuring customers’ satisfaction,creating a brand awareness, and building a reputation [56]. Offer- ing customized discount which is based on customers’ behaviorcan maximize sales and proﬁt.Value is added when customer is believe the information and isthen able to make the appropriate decisions in their marketingstrategy. Decision-making is important in marketing strategies.Decision making can improve because big data analytic providescomprehensive information from multi channels interactions. Forinstance, a marketing manager needs to understand customers’behaviors, expectations, and trends to deliver a favorable andimpression marketing campaign to potential customers. Decisionson the appropriate marketing contents in speciﬁc area can bederived from big data reports and then analysing these data to dis-cover trends and key issues. Marketers who can identify problemsand propose solutions are able to gain a greater understanding ofcustomers’ desires. Therefore, marketing campaign needs toextract the value from various data source of Web log ﬁles, socialmedia, enterprise content, transaction, and the team must ensureits authenticity and reliable a valid information derived from bigdata analytic. In short, CRM should support big data analytics. Inorder to mitigate the gap between expectation and delivery. How-ever, in order for big data to add value in marketing, marketersneed to access and understand the comprehensive customer’s pathfrom awareness to conversion so they can close the gap betweenonline and ofﬂine customer behavior and experience.All data sources either structured sources and unstructuredsources form customers proﬁling that portray comprehensive viewof potential customers. Customer proﬁling can come from geoloca-tion data analytic of customers through smartphone or any smartmobile devices, face recognitions, browsing behavior and onlineactivities, e-commerce histories, social networks, and so on [57]. Then, they are analysed to come up with the pattern, trend orbehavior of customer. For instance, marketing staffs who deal withcustomer directly are supplied a comprehensive and user friendlyreports of potential customers in the speed of data analytics (veloc-ity). The report shows pattern, behavior, and likelihood of cus-tomer so that the marketing staff can aggressively andconvincingly the value of product or service that ﬁt with his orher need. Fitting customer’s need can come from personalizationof marketing or treat each and every customer personally basedon their interest and need. Engaging customer in providing feed-back will make a product or service superior than competitor.Velocity is the feature of big data analytics. Therefore, quick andappropriate in response will make improve customer satisfactionwhich in turn to customer loyalty.Big data offers simplicity for CRM staffs since they are equippedwith customer’s pattern in advance so that they know how to han-dle each and every customer. CRM department can offer extra facil-ities to the potential customer based on their interest and behavior.Big data facilitates multi channels interaction. For instance, anautomotive manufacture releases a new sedan’s car and the man-ufacture concerns with the customers as well as competitors’responds. The manufacture can monitor all social networks andmedia to evaluate customers’ reactions to improve the product.At the end, big data provides cost efﬁcient for overall CRM activi-ties because they can pin point of effective CRM strategy forcustomer.5. ChallengesBig data in CRM has very much potential to offer, with its abilityto collect and produce a big amounts of data, big data could reallybe the downfall as well without the proper expertise and tools toobtain and analysed them. Many challenges must be managedbefore these potential can be fully optimized. Firstly, it may occurwhen organizations are shortage in technical supports and exper-tise. Secondly, it is difﬁcult to track customer behavior especially
trailing customers moving from brand awareness to conversion.It challenges to connect the dot from online to ofﬂine channelssuch as when and where customer see or read about a productto ﬁnally purchasing the product. Thirdly, CRM with big datamay need more user friendly data analytics tools in producingreport especially when it comes to utilizing the data appropriatelyacross the channels, especially when they do not understand theeffectiveness of their efforts in the process. There is no one sizeﬁt all solution, staffs need to integrate big data into their strategies,especially products lines, and content offering and customer jour-ney is unique. Until such tools is available many CRM staffs wouldcontinue to search for solutions to overcome this challenge. Thelast challenge refers to data authenticity with the interest in thedata source of Web log ﬁles, social media, enterprise content,transaction, data application may need a valid power of informa-tion to ensure its authenticity and safety. For examples, all the postor tweets we post on social networks are observed by the one whomanages the big data. Finally, there is a possibility that theresearch may lack of generalizability because it requires case studyand primary data collection from the business organizations, thisresearch will plan to reach a large number of participants in thefuture.6. ConclusionCRM is about understanding of human behavior and interests.Big data can be expected to improve customer relationship as itallows interactivity, multi-way communications, personalization,and customization. The recent developments of big data analyticshave optimized process, growth, and generate aggressive market-ing strategy and delivering value for each customer and potentialcustomer. CRM with big data enabled engage customers in deliver-ing affective CRM activities where marketing teams at the organi-zations tune the ideas into executable marketing program. Big dataenhance CRM strategies by understanding better customers’ habits100 M. Anshari et al. / Applied Computing and Informatics 15 (2019) 94–101and behaviors so that business can deliver CRM be more personal-ized and customized for each and every customers. Finally, CRMwith big data will make better tools and strategies more personal-ized and customized to the customers because they understandwell target audiences and intended message to send.References
[1]T. Nisar, G. Prabhakar, Trains and Twitter: ﬁrm-generated content, customerrelationship management and message framing, Transport. Res. Part A: PolicyPract. (2018) 1–43
.[2]
P. Zerbino, D. Aloini, R. Dulmin, V. Mininno, Big data-enabled customerrelationship management: a holistic approach, Inf. Process. Manage. (2018)
. [3] P.O. de Pablos, M. Lytras, W. Karwowski, R.W. Lee, Electronic GlobalizedBusiness and Sustainable Development through IT Management: Strategiesand Perspectives, Business science reference, Hershey New York, 2011.[4]
M. Anshari et al., Smartphone habit and behaviour in Brunei: personalization,gender, and generation gap, Comput. Hum. Behav. 64 (2016) 719–727
. [5]
W. Yuan, P. Deng, T. Taleb, J. Wan, C. Bi, An unlicensed taxi identiﬁcation modelbased on big data analysis, IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst. 17 (6) (2016) 1703–1713
.[6]
H.J. Watson, Tutorial: big data analytics: concepts, technologies, andapplications, Commun. Assoc. Inf. Syst. 34 (65) (2014) 1247–1268
. [7]
P.C. Verhoef, E. Kooge, N. Walk, Creating Value with Big Data Analytics: MakingSmarter Marketing Decisions, Routledge, 2016
. [8]
S. Akter, S.F. Wamba, Big data analytics in E-commerce: a systematic reviewand agenda for future research, Electron. Markets 26 (2) (2016) 173–194
. [9] S. Orenga-Roglá, R. Chalmeta, Social customer relationship management:taking advantage of Web 2.0 and Big Data technologies, SpringerPlus 5(1)(2016) 1462.[10]
J. Strauss, R.D. Frost, E-marketing: Instructor’s Review Copy, Routledge, 2016 . [11]
Z. Sun, K. Strang, S. Firmin, Business analytics-based enterprise informationsystems, J. Comput. Inf. Syst. 57 (2) (2017) 169–178
. [12] R.L. Angell, J.R. Kraemer, U.S. Patent No. 9,846,883, U.S. Patent and TrademarkOfﬁce, Washington, DC, 2017.[13] D. Clark, IBM and Twitter forge partnership in data analytics, Wall Street J.Retrieved April 15, 2016 from < http://www.marketwatch.com/story/ibm-and- twitter-forge-partnership-on-data-analytics-2014-10-29 >. [14] H.J. Watson, O. Marjanovic, Big data: the fourth data management generation,Bus. Intelligence J. 18(3) (2013) 4–8 (Chicago).[15] R.C. Härting, M. Moehring, R. Schmidt, C. Reichstein, B. Keller, What drivesusers to use CRM in a public cloud environment?-Insights from Europeanexperts, in: 49th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences (HICSS),IEEE, 2016, pp. 3999–4008.[16] F. Ohlhorst, Big data analytics: turning big data into money, 2013.[17] Y. Gahi, M. Guennoun, H.T. Mouftah, Big data analytics: Security and privacychallenges, in: IEEE Symposium on Computers and Communication (ISCC),2016, IEEE, pp. 952–957.[18] R.L. Villars, C.W. Olofson, M. Eastwood, Big data: what it is and why you shouldcare, White Paper, IDC, 2011.[19] Y. Demchenko, C. De Laat, P. Membrey, Deﬁning architecture components ofthe Big Data Ecosystem, in: International Conference on CollaborationTechnologies and Systems (CTS), IEEE, 2014, pp. 104–112.[20]
P.O. de Pablos, Knowledge management and organizational learning:typologies of knowledge strategies in the Spanish manufacturing industryfrom 1995 to 1999, J. Knowl. Manage. 6 (1) (2002) 52–62
. [21]
E. Dumbill, Making sense of big data, Big Data 1 (1) (2013) 1–2 . [22] S. Reddy, Big Data Saves Small Babies by Detecting Nosocomial InfectionsEarlier Than Clinicians, 2014. Retrieved March 31, 2016 from < http:// nuviun.com/content/big-data-saves-small-babies-by-detecting-nosocomial-infections-earlier-than-clinicians#sthash.s33ABAP8.dpuf >. [23] B. Marr, The awesome ways big data is used today to change our world, 2013.Retrieved from: <https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/20131113065157-64875646-the-awesome-ways-big-data-is-used-today-to-change-our-world>.[24]
B.M. Purcell, Big data using cloud computing, J. Technol. Res. 5 (2014) 1 . [25] D. Agrawal, S. Das, A. El Abbadi, Big data and cloud computing: current stateand future opportunities, in: Proceedings of the 14th International Conferenceon Extending Database Technology, ACM, 2011, pp. 530–533.[26]
Sunil Erevelles, Nobuyuki Fukawa, Linda Swayne, Big Data consumer analyticsand the transformation of marketing, J. Bus. Res. 69 (2) (2016) 897–904
. [27] I. Hargreaves, D. Roth, M.R. Karim, M. Nayebi, G. Ruhe, Effective customerrelationship management at ATB ﬁnancial: a case study on industry-academiacollaboration in data analytics, in: Highlighting the Importance of Big DataManagement and Analysis for Various Applications, Springer, Cham, 2018, pp.45–59.[28] M. Anshari, Y. Alas, N. Yunus, N.I. Sabtu, M.H. Hamid, Social customerrelationship management and student empowerment in online learningsystems, Int. J. Electronic Customer Relat. Manage. 9(2/3) (2015) 104–121.[29] S.S. Askool, K. Nakata, Scoping study to identify factors inﬂuencing theacceptance of social CRM, in: IEEE International Conference on Management ofInnovation and Technology (ICMIT), IEEE, 2010, pp. 1055–1060.[30] H. Hinchcliffe, The state of Web 2.0, 2006. Retrieved 12 May 2012 from<http://web2.socialcomputingmagazine.com/the_state_of_web_20.htm >. [31]I. Novo-Corti, M. Barreiro-Gen, Public policies based on social networks for theintroduction of technology at home: demographic and socioeconomic proﬁlesof households, Comput. Hum. Behav. 51 (2015) 1216–1228
. [32] AMA Deﬁnition of Marketing, American Marketing Association. Retrieved 1May 2018 from <https://www.ama.org/AboutAMA/Pages/Deﬁnition-of-Marketing.aspx>.[33] T. Duncan, S.E. Moriarty, A communication-based marketing model formanaging relationships, J. Marketing (1998) 1–13.[34] M.N. Almunawar, M. Anshari, Empowering customers in electronic health (e–health) through social customer relationship management, Int. J. ElectronicCustomer Relat. Manage. 8 (1/2/3) (2014).[35] P. Greenberg, CRM at the Speed of Light: Social CRM 2.0 Strategies, Tools, andTechniques for Engaging yOur Customers, fourth ed., McGraw-Hill OsborneMedia, 2009.[36]
B. Kitchenham, O.P. Brereton, D. Budgen, M. Turner, J. Bailey, S. Linkman,Systematic literature reviews in software engineering–a systematic literaturereview, Inf. Softw. Technol. 51 (1) (2009) 7–15
. [37]
S. Planalp, Relational communication and cognition, Rethinking Commun. 2(1989) 269–277
.[38]
R.K. Srivastava, T.A. Shervani, L. Fahey, Market-based assets and shareholdervalue: a framework for analysis, J. Marketing (1998) 2–18
. [39] Martin, Best use of big data in marketing, 2014. Retrieved 3 April 2016 from<http://www.cleverism.com/best-uses-big-data-marketing/ >. [40]
B. Brown, M. Chui, J. Manyika, Are you ready for the era of ‘big data’, McKinseyQ. 4 (2011) 24–35
.[41]
M. Minelli, M. Chambers, A. Dhiraj, Big Data, Big Analytics: Emerging BusinessIntelligence and Analytic Trends for Today’s Businesses, John Wiley & Sons,2012
.[42] J. Schectman, Netﬂix uses big data to improve streaming video, Wall Street J.(2012). Retrieved from <http://blogs.wsj.com/cio/2012/10/26/netﬂix-uses-big-data-to-improve-streaming-video >. [43] C. Dalén, F. Dahlblom, Big Data in the telecom industry: a study of how bigdata affects innovativeness and market dynamics, Master Thesis, StockholmSchool of Economics, Sweden, 2014. Retrieved April 15, 2016 from < http://arc. hhs.se/download.aspx?MediumId=2120 >. [44]
Yun Bae Kim, Big Data: A Temporary Thing? [PowerPoint Slide],Sungkyunkwan University, Republic of Korea, 2015
. [45] S. Fan, R.Y. Lau, J.L Zhao, Demystifying big data analytics for businessintelligence through the lens of marketing mix. Big Data Res. 2(1) (2015)28–32.[46] H. Wang, O.L. Osen, G. Li, W. Li, H.N. Dai, W. Zeng, Big data and industrialinternet of things for the maritime industry in northwestern Norway, in:TENCON 2015-2015 IEEE Region 10 Conference, IEEE, 2015, pp. 1–5.[47] M. Van Rijmenam, Rolls Royce shift in higher gear with big data. Data ﬂoo:connecting data and people, 2015. Retrieved April 15, 2016 from<https://dataﬂoq.com/read/rolls-royce-shifts-higher-gear-big-data/514 >. [48] S. Matteson, Big Data basic concepts and beneﬁts explained, Wall Street J.(2013). Retrieved March 23, 2015 from < http://www.techrepublic.com/blog/ big-data-analytics/big-data-basic-concepts-and-beneﬁts-explained/ >. [49]
I. Novo-Corti, M. Barreiro-Gen, Competition, oligopoly, barriers and searchingup new markets: do smartphones win the battle to digital cameras?, Int J.Knowl. Soc. Res. (IJKSR) 5 (4) (2014) 45–54
. [50] D. Bollier, C.M. Firestone, The promise and peril of big data, Aspen Institute,Communications and Society Program, Washington, DC:, 2010, p. 1.[51] M. Anshari, Y. Alas, Smartphones habits, necessities, and big data challenges, J.High Technol. Manage. Res. 26(2) (2015) 177–185 (Elsevier).[52] H. Chen, R.H. Chiang, V.C. Storey, Business intelligence and analytics: from bigdata to big impact, MIS Q. 36(4) (2012) 1165–1188.[53]
M. Anshari, Y. Alas, N.M. Yunus, N.I. Sabtu, M.S. Hamid, Online learning: trends,issues, and challenges in big data era, J. E-Learning Knowl. Soc. 12 (1) (2016)121–134
.[54]
J.H. Wu, S.C. Wang, What drives mobile commerce?: An empirical evaluationof the revised technology acceptance model, Inf. Manage. 42 (5) (2005) 719–729
.[55]
Hsinchun Chen, Roger H.L. Chiang, Veda C. Storey, Business intelligence andanalytics: from big data to big impact, MIS Q. (2012) 1165–1188
. [56]
Ya-Ling Wu, Eldon Y. Li, Marketing mix, customer value, and customer loyaltyin social commerce: a stimulus-organism-response perspective, Internet Res.28 (1) (2018) 74–104
.[57] J.H. Wu, Y.M. Wang, W.C. Tai, Mobile shopping site selection: the consumers’viewpoint, in: Proceedings of the 37th Annual Hawaii InternationalConference on System Sciences, 2004, IEEE, 2004, pp. 8.M. Anshari et al. / Applied Computing and Informatics 15 (2019) 94–101 101