 AASRI Procedia   1  ( 2012 )  569 – 575 
2212-6716 © 2012 Published by Elsevier Ltd. doi: 10.1016/j.aasri.2012.06.088 
 2012 AASRI Conference on Computational Intelligence and Bioinformatics  
Establishmentof Quality-SafetyTraceabilitySystemfor Navel Orange
Shihong Liua, b*, Huoguo Zhenga, b, Haiyan Hua, b, Pengju Hea, b, Yongqiang Guoa, b
aAgricultural Information Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Beijing, P.R.China 100081 
b Key Laboratory of Agri-information Service Technology, Ministry of Agriculture, China, 100081
Abstract 
Traceability system has been an import means in food quality and safetymanagement. Governments in many countries are putting increasing emphasis onestablishment of food traceability systems. According to production, processing, storage and distribution of the featureagricultural products----navel orange in the central mountain area of China,this article proposes the technology line and the main result of the research of traceability forqualitysafetyof navel orange. 
2012 Published by Elsevier B.V. Selection and/or  peer review under responsibility of American Applied Science Research Institute 
Keywords: feature agricultural products; navelorange; trace of quality; traceability 
1. Introduction Navel orange is a kind of feature agricultural products in the central mountain area of China. It mainly distributes in the Gannan area of Jiangxiprovince. Gannan navel orange is the most special product in Jiangxi citrus production and has been an import means in increasing income of peasants. But, the quality safety incidents of navel orange in recent years have dealt a blow to navel orange's reputation and cause great 
*Shihong Liu,Agricultural Information Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Beijing, P.R.China 100081.Email:lius@mail.caas.net.cn, Tel:+86-01-82103075 
AASRI
Procedia
www.elsevier.com/locate/procediaAvailable online at www.sciencedirect.com
Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.570   Shihong Liu et al.  /  AASRI Procedia   1  ( 2012 )  569 – 575 
economic loss. For example, the “dyedorange “incident made the navel orange of the 70% of Hong Kong market share reduce to zero in 2004;the “Bactrocera” incident in Sichuan Gung Yuan area was a great blow to the south citrus production in 2008.Market rate was below production cost. The bid of a part production was only 20% of production cost. The peasants suffered heavily loss.Typical of agricultural products of Central Mountain Gannan navel orange as the research object, we explore the monitor points of full traceability of quality and safety of the typical ofagricultural products in our country, and the retrospective business processes, relative standards and key technologies applied to safety and quality of typical of agricultural products in our country. Because of efficient risk control, food traceability systems receive muchattention by many countries. Food traceability systems mainly apply in animal husbandry in developed countries at present, and gradually cover into vegetablesǃfruit and so on.The United States issued the regulation for food safety, demanded all the companies which involve in food transportationǃfood distribution and food import establish and save the whole records about the food distribution indecember,2003(2). In 2008, the Canadian federal government reached an ambitious goal.The country has achieved tracing back 80 percent of agricultural products to its source, supporting the "Brand Canada strategy"(7).Th e Japanese Government has passed new legislations required meat processors to collect and save time in the slaughter of livestock per head DNA samples (9). In the past decade, a series of traceability system for quality and safety of agricultural products came into being, quality and safety monitored traceable system for chicken safety and quality production (YunfengBai, ChanghuaLu, 2005), quality tracking and traceability information system for the entire process of beef production in quality and safety (ShusenZan,TongchaoZheng, 2005) , Origin Digital System for Factory Pork Production Safety (ChanghuaLu, JufangXie, 2006), the main grain and oil product quality and traceability system (ShihongLiu, HuoguoZheng, etc., 2008), are all highly representative of the research results. 2. Methods And System Design 2.1. Methods The use of modern informationtechnology, the entire process of traceable digital management, fast tracking and traceability of product quality and safety, traceability application support and rapid traceability across the network platform construction and other major breakthroughs in key technologies help to construct a number of software and hardware platform of independent intell ectual property rights, and achieve demonstration and application in the mountains of central China to explore retrospective method for the quality of the typical of agricultural products suitable for China's national conditions.  2.2. System Design Quality and safety of Orange tracking and tracing technology decompose the overall architecture from three levels of the information collection, information processingand informati on services. In the information collection layer, through sorting out process from planti ng to harvesting and the process of production of the navel orange product, we investigate their business processes, analysis hazards, explore and determine factors which affects the quality and safety of navel orange, and get product processing, quality inspection, logistics and marketing and other aspects of quality and safety information which basedon processing and production of enterprises, build traceability data center of navel orange, and provide data support to achieve the ultimate traceability. In the information processing layer, using HACCP (1)and other quality management methods and tools toanalyze and determine key factors of the quality and safety indicators of navel orange. Using the encoding information technology, information exchange, management and hardware R & D of digital 571  Shihong Liu et al.  /  AASRI Procedia   1  ( 2012 )  569 – 575 
technology, we can complete traceable information portal of quality and safety of navel orange and research the technologies. In the information services layer, information services of quality and safety of orange could be provided to consumers, business managers and regulator s through the network platform, supermarket touch screen, original mobile terminals and other methods. Ov erall system framework is shown in Figure 1. The traceability data centered original solution is shown in Figure 2. 
Figure 1.System architecture diagram Figure 2: Data-center retrospective programs at the core 
2.3. System Function The traceability system for quality safety of navel oranges focuses on the whole process of information management which in the production and processing of navel orange, and provides services that consumers can get the safety information of navel orange from on line platform. Functional modules shown in Figure 3: 
User basic managementUser basic management
Origin of Environmental StandardsOrange Standard ManagementOrchard-based information managementOrchard management of environmental factorsManagement inputsBatch Management Package
Production Process ManagementPackaging Process ManagementTransportation Information Management
Standards for Grades of Orange
Orange physical and chemical standardsOrchard codesBasic information management orchardOrange trace code generation
Environmental indicators monitoring informationOrange back barcode printingTouch Screen backSite backTracing back mobile terminal
End Product Code ManagementProduct traceability management
Production recordsUse record inputProcess managementProcessing information management
Processing Batch Management
Growers Information Management
Picking process management
Picking Batch ManagementPicking Information ManagementMaterials management
Storage Information ManagementTransportation Information Management
Packaging Information ManagementPackaging Information Management
Figure3. The functional modules oftraceability system for quality safety of navel orange572   Shihong Liu et al.  /  AASRI Procedia   1  ( 2012 )  569 – 575 
3. Results 3.1. System architecture diagram for traceability system Using HACCP techniques, combined with China GAP, cananalysis quality and safety of the navel orange chain trace. Itcan also raise the quality and safety of major hazard sources and analysis to determine the quality and safety indicators and critical control points in the various aspects oforange source trace chain. It can not only establish the traceability for quality and safety of navel orangeindicator system, but also determine the key indicators of quality and safety orange.Navel orange elements of HACCP Hazard are shown in Table 1. 
Table 1. Navel orange HACCP Hazard Analysis Table 
Production  Program Safety hazards Hazard is Significant or notJudgments on the basis of the third column Preventive measures Whether the CCP
Parksite selection Biologicalhazards N   N 
Application ManagementBiologicalhazards Y Fertilizer Storage Separate fertilizer and fruit
Transportation Biologicalhazards YThe breeding of pathogens during transportControl of transport conditions&theenvironmentN
Sale Biologicalhazards N   N Chemical Hazards N   N 
Physical hazards N   N 
3.2. Orange trace chain quality and safety control an d controlling aspects of metadata elements standards According the safety indicators and their critical control points which are introduced in the framework of navel orange safety system,we describe the navel oran ge back chain standardly. On this basis of description,metadata standards which in the navel orange back control and the navel orange control elementsmust be designed. 573  Shihong Liu et al.  /  AASRI Procedia   1  ( 2012 )  569 – 575 
3.3. Orange retrospective coding system for quality and safety Based on place of origin code, EAN / UCC standards, a quality tracking and tracing of Orange coding system, combined with internal production processes, has beenstudied and designed. This includes raw materials, origin code, the batch production at the core of all aspects of code orange, and final product quality and safety traceability code.Itprovides the basis support with forming a complete retrospective navel oranges. 3.4. MobileTracing Terminal Adopting micro-electronic technology, we have developed Mobile traceability terminal hardware with ATmega128 microprocessor as the core and consisted by GPRS wireless communication module, LCD display, USB interface, random access memory, small keyboard, barcode scanning equipment and spare interface and so on . Meanwhile we have developed Data interactive software to communicate date with Mobile traceability terminal which is based on Windows Socket. 3.5. The Traceability System For Quality Safety Of Navel Orange With navel oranges for object and with navel oranges’ traceability chain for main, we have established a multi-level and multi-role traceability system for quality safety of navel oranges by information coding, multiple platform sources, hardware development and other technology. System functions include basic information management, standard management, orchard information management, processing process management, storing, transportation, marketing management and traceability management and so on ,there not only realize the information management of quality and safety  on production process, storage, and sales for enterprises, but also provide consumers and regulators with services by many kinds of ways such as network, supermarket touch screen, mobile traceability terminal and so on. 4. Discussion 1. Navel oranges in the central mountainous areas of agricultural production have the most representative features, which directly affect the quality and safety of agricu ltural products quality and safety of the entire region as a whole. Therefore, studying the traceability system for quality safety of navel oranges will have far-reaching social benefits. 2. The methods of the research, the development and app lication of the results of product demonstrations, will have a positive impact on fruit production quality management. R & D quality, safety traceability system and establish tracking and tracing information chain, largely to facilitate to the users of the products which are (anti) to the back. 3. Fruit production traceability system is applied to producing information and collecting real-time quality monitoring information, which will be difficult and key points of the tracing process. References [1] BaoDayueˊGuide to implementation of HACCPˊChemical Industry pressˈ2007 Chang XiangˊThe food quality and safety traceability systems for Beijing Olympic gameswill be put into use in Augustˊhttp://www.chinanews.com.cn/ 2007.07.09 [2] Cheng HaoˊAnimal product safety control and traceability technologiesˊModern Agriculture science 574   Shihong Liu et al.  /  AASRI Procedia   1  ( 2012 )  569 – 575 
and technologyˈ 2007(13)ˈ169-170 [3] Fan HongpingˈFengZhongzeˈYang LingˈRenAishengˊ Appliance and Discussion of Traceability System in Food Chain. Ecological Economy. 2007, 17(4): 30-33 [4] General Administration of Quality Supervision, Inspection and Quarantine of the People'sRepublic of ChinaˊGB/T 15425-2002ˈ2002 [5] Liu Shihong, ZhengHuoguo, Meng et alˊStudy of full-supply-chain quality and safety traceability systems for cereal and oil productsˊSpringer ifipˈUSAˈ2008 [6] Liu Yin, Chen LichengˊTraceability Production System of Beef in EU and USA, food science,2003(8),182-185 [7] Lu ChanghuaˈWang ChangjiangˈHu Sinong etc. Identification and Traceability System forAnimals and Animal ProductsˊChinese Agricultural science and technology press ,2007,35-36 [8] Shanghai agricultural committee. Notification in carrying out animal identification inShanghaiˊShanghai agricultural committee˄2001˅NO:126,2001-08-24 [9] Wang Lifang, Lu Changhua,XieJufang, Hu Yinong. Review of traceability system fordomestic animals and livestock products. Transactions of the Chinese Society ofAgricultural Engineering. 2005(07) [10] Zhou Yingheng, GengXianhui. Application of Traceability in Food Safety. Research ofAgricultural Modernization, 2002(06) [11] Zhu Haipeng, Research and implementation on traceability system of key cerealenterprise ˊChinese Academy of Agriculture Scienceˈ2007ˈ10-11 [12] Hobbs J E. Information Asymmetry and the Role ofTraceability Systems[J]. Agribusiness,2004 ˈ 20(4)˖397-415ˊ[13] Golan E, Krissoff B, Kuchler F, et al. Traceability in theU.S. food supply: economic theory and industriesstudies[R]. USDA: Agricultural Econom ic Report No.830,March 2004ˊ [14] Pettitt R G. Traceability in the food animal industry andsupermarket chains[J] . Scientific and Technical Review ,2001, 20( 2) : 584-597. [15] McKean J D. The importance of traceability for publichealth and consumer  protection [J] . Scientific andTechnical Review, 2001, 20( 2) : 363- 371. [16] Sharpe R, Barling D, Lang T. Ethical traceability in the UKwheat-flour- bread chain[M]. Ethical Traceability and Communicating Food (The International Library ofEnvironmental, Agricultural and Food Ethics). Springer,2008˖125-165ˊ[17]William H. Sperber. HACCP and transparency[J].FoodControl, 2005,16(6): 505- 509ˊ [18] Antoniol G, Caprile B, Potrich A, et al. Design-codetraceability recovery: selecting the basic linkage properties[J].Science ofComputerProgramming, 2001,40(2-3):213-234ˊ [19] EAN International and the Uniform Code Council.EANUCC,2002,European Article Numbering Association[EB/OL].http://www.ean.ucc.orgˊ[20] SébastienPouliot, Daniel
 A. Sumner. Traceability, liability,and incentives for food safety and quality[J]. AmericanJournal of Agricultural Economics, 2008, 90(1): 15-27. [21] Elise Golan, Barry Krissoff, Fred Kuchler, et al. Traceabilityin the U.S. foodsupply: economic theory and industrystudies[R]. Washington: United States Department ofAgriculture, 2004. [22] DimitrisFolinas. Traceability datamanagement for foodchains[J]. British Food Journal, 2006, 108(8): 622-633. [23] ShenGuangrong, Zhao Xiaodong, Huang Danfeng.Consideration of farm product safety system in China[Y].Journal of Shanghai Jiaotong University(Agricultural Science)ˈ2005ˈ23(1)˖77-83ˊ[24] Yang Xinting, Sun Chuanlaeng, QianJianpingˈet a1ˊDesign and implementation of quality traceable label for farmproducts based on UCC/EAN-128 bar code[J]ˊPackaging Engineering,2006,6(27):113-114ˊ575  Shihong Liu et al.  /  AASRI Procedia   1  ( 2012 )  569 – 575 
[25] Yang Xinting, QianJianping, Sun Chuanheng,et a1. Design and application of safe production and quality traceabilitysystem for vegetable[J].Transactions of the Chinese Society of Agricultural Engineering,2008,24(3):162-166. 