How artiﬁcial intelligence uses to achieve the agriculture sustainability:Systematic review
Vilani Sachithra, L.D.C.S. Subhashini ⁎
University of Sri Jayewardenepura, Sri Lanka
abstract article info
Article history:Received 3 February 2022Received in revised form 20 April 2023Accepted 25 April 2023Available online 28 April 2023The generation of food production that meets the rising demand for food and ecosystem security is a bigchallenge. With the development of Arti ﬁcial Intelligence (AI) models, there is a growing need to use them to achieve sustainable agriculture. The continuous enhancement of AI in agriculture, researchers have proposedmany models in agriculture functions such as prediction,weed control, resource management, advance care ofcrops, and so on. This article evaluates on a systematic review of AI models in agriculture functions. It also reviewshow AI models are used in identiﬁed sustainable objectives. Through this extensive review, this paper discusses considerations and limitations for building the next generation of sustainable agriculture using AI.© 2023 The Authors. Publishing servic es by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of KeAi Communications Co., Ltd. This is an openaccess article under the CC BY-NC-ND license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ ).
Keywords:AIAgricultureSustainabilityReviewRoboticsDeep learning
1. IntroductionThe agricultural sector in any nation plays a key role to address theone of universal challenges, provide sufﬁcient foods to survive people. As estimated (Alexandratos and Bruinsma, 2012), in 2050, there is a re- quirement to increase global food supply by 60% in order to feed nearly9 billion people (Padilla and Hudson, 2019). Growing population leads continuous farming with limited arable land ( Jayne et al., 2014). This issue is further aligning with the 17 Sustainable Development Goals(SDGs) which has been focused to eliminate poverty and eradicate hun-ger and malnutrition by 2030 and 2025 respectively. Growing popula-tion leads continuous farming with limited arable land ( Padilla and Hudson, 2019). It has been argued that food production process createsa foremost universal environmental degradation created through fertil-izer utilization, greenhouse gas emissions and biodiversity ( Tilman et al., 2011). Though intensive agriculture (known as intensive farming)and industrial agriculture have led to an increase in food production andeasing of food shortages, now bring disadvantages due to utilization ofhigh input of fertilizers, pesticides and fresh water ( Tian et al., 2021). In particular, climate changes such as global warming, aggravatingﬂooding and drought will in turn inﬂuence the food security (Wheeler and Von Braun, 2013). Consequently, how to feed the increasing popu-lation while decreasing the negative consequences on the environmentand mitigating atmospheric changes is the biggest global challenge inthe 21st century (Di Vaio et al., 2020). The terms“sustainability”and “sustainable”has gained substantial attention applied in varies contex-tual aspects (Bolis et al., 2014). Sustainability is deﬁned as a balanced combination of social, environmental and economic performance tobeneﬁt current and future generations (Geissdoerfer et al., 2017). To safeguard food and ecological security, the sustaining of performingmore of the same thing is commonly indicated as sustainable agricul-ture (Gaffney et al., 2019). Thus, to achieve sustainable growth in the ag-riculture sector has received greatest attention ( Castro and Swart, 2017), and there is an emerging consumer demand for sustainable qual-ity food products (Mangla et al., 2019). Sustainability lays in three pillarseconomic, social and environmental performance. Social performancefocuses on social troubles namely human rights, ethics in doingbusiness, environmental activities, identical opportunities concerns onwaste generation, greenhouse gas emission; economic performancequantiﬁes operational efﬁciency, shareholder value and transactioncosts (Ala-Harja and Helo, 2015;Panda, 2014). Subsequently, Sayer and CassmanSayer and Cassman (2013)opined that agricultural ﬁrms/farms require to obtain four objectives, which are often to becompeting each other, to be considered sustainable growth namely1) Ensure production of an adequate food supply; 2) Alleviate poverty;3) Achieve better health and nutrition for a growing population; and4) Conserve natural resources. These objectives are highly relevant tothe sustainable pillars, and they are aligned properly with the SDGs.To certify the sufﬁ
cient food productions to the growing population,technologically advanced inputs, cultivation techniques and soilArtiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 8 (2023) 46 –59
⁎Corresponding author.E-mail addresses:vilani@sjp.ac.lk(V. Sachithra),subhashini@sjp.ac.lk (L.D.C.S. Subhashini).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aiia.2023.04.0022589-7217/© 2023 The Authors. Publishing services by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of KeAi Communications Co., Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http:// creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ ).
Contents lists available atScienceDirect
Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture
journal homepage:http://www.keaipublishing.com/en/journals/artificial-intelligence-in-agriculture/management approaches become the vital sources ( Gaffney et al., 2019). High-yielding cropping systems must be concerned to convertresources to economic yield. Increasing protein obtainability of foodsources of food (beans, vegetables, wheat, rice), and of availability of vi-tamins and minerals through poise diet should require to ensurehealthy and afﬂuence over 9 billion people people to be fed by 2050.Soil degradation, low irrigation management, and a less productivitysludge farmers in poverty (Tittonell and Giller, 2013). To eradicate pov- erty, agricultural sector must be move forwarded the modernized andproductive agricultural transition where farmers are equipped withhighly resourceful and resilient. Conserving natural resources consistsof wide range of soil nutrient, quality of water, green-house gas,confrontation of pest and weed and reduction of aquifer. Preserving bio-diversity of natural settings,ﬂora and fauna are conservation challenges.Further, when underpinning technologies are infantile or improperlyused, agricultural expansion causes a serious environmental damage.This is why Mellor (Mellor, 2017) insisted that identifying and utilizingvigorous pattern of technology improvements and efforts should focusnot on just one aspect of sustainability objective, but rather on activa-tion of the whole system that representing the prevailing agriculturalenterprises. Yet, manyﬁrms/farms in the agricultural sector are stressedwith squat proﬁt and low productivity (Barth et al., 2021), hinders efforts to sustainable agriculture (McGuire, 2017). Gaffney et al. (Gaffney et al., 2019) further stressed that growth in emerging andrecently emerged markets (Asia and Africa) creates the de ﬁnitive re- straints to meet sustainability objectives. Regardless of the complexityto meet all four objectives simultaneously, agriculture sector is movingtowards sustainable agriculture (Tian et al., 2021). Realizing and utiliz- ing technological advancements, the commitment derive to agriculturesustainability must be accompanied with technological improvement(Mellor, 2017). Thus, to meet Sayer and Cassman's sustainable objec-tives and face the global food security challenges ahead, wider applica-tion of existing technologies and utilization of advanced technologicaltools and techniques soon would be the straightforward strategies(Franco, 2021). What we observed from present panorama is that thatCovid-19 pandemic emerges as a great crisis, leading to widen globalfood security issue. Although the generation of food production thatmeet the rising demand for food and ecosystem security is a bigchallenge, rapid developments in technology are making it possible. Re-searchers applied artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) to make sustainable agricul-ture (Li et al. 2021b;Mohapatra and Lenka, 2016). The recent application of the technologies of AI support to provide solutions toproblems in agricultural domain. These technologies are used to reducethe cost as well as increase the effectiveness and ef ﬁciency. There are surveys which conducted toﬁnd what people did to make sustainableagriculture using AI. However, investigations on how AI used to achievesustainable objectives are still under research-able area. Speci ﬁcally, this research aims to map and create an understanding of the varioustechnologies implement in agriculture sector with a special focus onthe sustainability growth objectives. Thus, the main purposes of thissystematic review are are to; 1) develop a more complete understand-ing of the enabling AI technologies currently applied in agriculture sec-tor, 2) explore a variety of AI technology initiatives to achievesustainability growth objectives, and 3) analyse how agriculture ﬁrms/ farms improve sustainable growth through technologies which arealready underway and new technologies are being developed. Thissystematic review would contribute to enhance the understanding ofthe present view of the agriculture sustainability and agriculturetechnology.2. Research methodology
Systematic Literature Review (SLR) permits identifying andobtaining relevant information on interesting subject area from theexisting literature (Kitchenham and Charters, 2007). The SLR pursuesto identify theﬁrsthand experiences on currently applied AI technolo-gies in agriculture sector and variety of AI technology initiatives toachieve sustainability growth objectives in agriculture sector. To carryout this SLR, we set up three stages namely, planning; implementingand reporting (Ferreras-Fernández et al., 2013). In the planning stage, described the key terms that could beconsidered relate to the study namely, agriculture, farming, protectedagriculture, smart farming, Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI), Deep Learning(DL), Machine Learning (ML), agricultural robot and robotics. The Bool-ean operators AND and OR were used to do more thorough searches, forexample,“AI”AND“agriculture”AND“crops”OR“farming”AND“Smart Agriculture”AND“smart farming”. The search was performed in thefour well-known data sources that encompass multidisciplinarypublications, google scholar, Scopus, Science Direct and Web of Science,following the process used by similar recent studies of AI and sustain-able agriculture (Traldi, 2021;Navarro et al., 2020). The scope of the publications was limited to documents such as journal and conferencearticles, published in English. The past ten years considered as thetime range to conform the objectives of the study.In the implementing phase, 1421 articles were selected with thesearch tool. A database review of publications about the desired key-words in Web of Science found 347 records since 2012. In the case ofScopus and Science Direct, there have been 256 and 244 documentspublished respectively. The total number of articles published in Googlescholar search engine was 574 from 2012 to 2021 December. The areasin which they have been published the most are agriculture, technology,computer and electronic, agronomy, agriengineering, computer sci-ences and sustainability. After getting the articles, they were manuallyreviewed through the title, keywords, abstract and text analysis adher-ent to the objectives proposed of the study. Number of record screenedwas 313. During this process, the list of documents was consequentlysorted to eliminate the duplicate articles ( Åstrand and Baerveldt, 2002). 131 articles were excluded due to irrelevant to agriculture indus-try. This analysis resulted in 115 articles deemed eligible which wereincorporated as a sample for this study. Out of 115 articles, 45 identi ﬁed through Web of Science, 37 Science Direct and 33 identi ﬁed through other sources listed above. The article list was ﬁnalized in December 2021 (ReferTable 1inAppendix 1).In the reporting stage, each of the articles retrieved was analyzedaccording to the AI component such as DL, ML, neutral network androbotics and agriculture activities namely harvesting, plant eco-phenotyping, grading system, weed and crop classi ﬁcation, disease detection and monitoring and soil management. The searched articleswere then listed on excel spreadsheet. The data sheet contained the de-tails of article namely name of author/s, year of published, study title,key AI technology used, main agriculture area, bene ﬁts obtained and limitations. Once the database was completed, a content analysis wasperformed to examine the review summary in-depth and summarisethe empirical experiences on currently applied AI technologies in agri-culture sector and variety of AI technology initiatives to achieve sustain-ability growth objectives in agriculture sector. Fig. 1illustrates the methodological chart applied in the SLR.3. AI methods use in agricultureAI is one of the emerging areas of research in recent generation.Today AI is used to solve the problems particularly to reduce the useof the labor force, to enhance efﬁcient utilization of resources and tofacilitate the development of sustainable business. With the rapid tech-nological advancement,people are more intend to developed these ap-plications (Bannerjee et al., 2018). With that, different AI approacheshave been suggested to solve the existing problems in the agricultureto improve the productivity.In our analysis we found that the main AI approaches used inagriculture are Neural Network (NN), DL, Fuzzy Logic, Support VectorV. Sachithra and L.D.C.S. Subhashini Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 8 (2023) 46 –59
47Table 1Agriculture functions and sustainability growth objectives.Reference AI technology Technology used in agriculture function Agriculture function category Sustainabilityobjective(Han et al., 2018) NN Prediction for agricultural output value Prediction 1(Almomani, 2020) ANN Prediction model for agriculture waste Prediction 1(Espejo-Garcia et al., 2020) DNN Weeds identi ﬁcation Weed control 1 (Yamaç, 2021) KNN, SVM, RF, AB Estimate sugar beet Etc for ef ﬁcient irrigation management Prediction 1 (Mohapatra and Lenka,2016)NN Crop monitoring Advanced care of crops 3(Buyrukoğlu et al., 2021) ANN Prediction of Generic Escherichia colipopulation based on Weather Station Measurements Prediction 1(Dargan et al., 2020) Machine learningapplicationsSustainable agriculture supply chain performance Supply chain 2(Nguyen et al., 2019) ANN Agricultural landscapes management Resource management 4(Liu et al., 2020) ANN Develop integrated agricultural drought index Prediction 1(Castro et al., 2017) ANN High-performance prediction of Macauba fruit biomass Prediction 1(Jung et al., 2021) AI Improve the resilience of agricultural systems Crop simulation models utilize input variables such as crop managementinformation, weather, and soil data to estimate crop productivityPrediction 1(Camaréna, 2020) AI Food production system Supply chain 2(Zhang et al., 2021) LSTM Weather radar echo prediction method Prediction 1(Dey and Shekhawat, 2021) AI Blockchain for sustainable e-agriculture Data management Supply chain 2(Albalasmeh et al., 2020) ANN Predict the quality of the biochar based on operational conditionsof biochar production (parent biomass type, particle size,pyrolysis temperature)Prediction 1(Khan et al., 2020) Deep Learning Fruit Prediction Prediction 1(Senocak and Goren, 2021) AI Forecasting the biomass-based energy potential Prediction 1(Emmi et al., 2014) Robotics Integration and assessment of a real ﬂeet Advanced care of crops 3 (Abdullahi et al., 2017) CNN Plant image recognition and classi ﬁcation Weed control 3 (McGuire, 2017) ANN Crop yield prediction Climate change impact assessment Prediction 1(Guillén et al., 2021) Deep Learning Performance evaluation of edge-computing platforms for the prediction of low temperatures Prediction 1(Sharma et al., 2020) Machine Learning Applications for precision agriculture Advanced care of crops 3(Espejo-Garcia et al., 2020) DNN Improving weeds identi ﬁcation Weed control 3
(Mohapatra and Lenka,2016)ANN, Fuzzy Logic Pattern classi ﬁcation and weather dependent Fuzzy Logic Modelfor irrigation control Resource management 4(Buyrukoğlu et al., 2021) ANN Prediction of Generic Escherichia coliPopulation in Agricultural Ponds Based on Weather Station Measurements Prediction 1(Giannakis et al., 2019) Cloud Environment Data sharing on production, diseases and weather Advanced care of crops 3(Ellaﬁet al., 2021) ANN Prediction of saturated hydraulic conductivity (Ksat) in order to enhance the efﬁcacy of drainage system design in data-poor areasutilizing existing and currently under-utilised datasets.Prediction 1(Monteiro et al., 2021) ANN Weed control Weed control 3(Santin et al., 2016) ANN Design of performance-oriented riparian buffer strips for the ﬁltering of nitrogen in agricultural catchments Advanced care of crops 3(Taghavifar et al., 2015) ANN and GeneticAlgorithmPrediction of the power provided by the agricultural tractors Prediction 1(Singh et al., 2012) ANN WPredicting sediment yield in the Nagwa agricultural watershed in Jharkhand, India prediction 1(Liu et al., 2021) ANN Predict rice growth rate Prediction 1(Grimstad and From, 2017) Robotic Using cameras sensitive to visual and near infrared parts of theelectromagnetic spectrum to study plants Advanced care of crops 3(Roshanianfard et al., 2021) Robotic arms andmanipulationsystemsSeeding, watering, fertilizing, weeding, and harvesting Advanced care of crops 3(Ireri et al., 2019) Machine learning Applied in real-time tomato post-harvesting procedures Low-cost tomato grading system based Harvesting 1(Birrell et al., 2020) Robotics Achieve a consistent harvesting cutting height, high-quality cuts Harvesting 1(Mehta and Burks, 2016) Robotic Harvesting fruit detection ef ﬁciency, picking efﬁciency and picking rate Harvesting 1(Navas et al., 2020) Robotic Suitability of the cutting tools for the plants to be harvested Harvesting 1(Navas et al., 2020) Robotic Suitability of the cutting tools for the plants to be harvested Harvesting 1(Booth et al., 2020) Machine learning 3D estimate of the plant bulb's growth direction from a triplet of 2D x-ray images Advanced care of crops 3(Raja et al., 2020) Robotic Crop signaling system Weed and crop classi ﬁcation Advanced care of crops, Weedcontrol 3(Kounalakis et al., 2019) Deep learning Weed visual recognition algorithms Weed control 1
(Magalhães et al., 2021) Deep learning,Harvesting robotAccurately identifying and detecting the mature fruit or fruitbunches Harvesting 1(Khort et al., 2021) Robotic 10 h of continuous operation in low-light conditions in various weather conditions. Advanced care of crops 3(Aguiar et al., 2021) Deep Learning Detect tree trunks is still an area quite underdeveloped Advanced care of crops 3(Vincent et al., 2019) Neural networksand Multi-LayerPerceptron (MLP)Agriculture land suitability analysis: Measurements of soilmoisture content, granular fragments (percentage of sandparticles in the soil), structure of the soil, compact andcementation, cnternal drainage, available water content,porousness, organic matter, cation exchange capacity, degreeResource management 4V. Sachithra and L.D.C.S. Subhashini Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 8 (2023) 46 –59
48Table 1(continued)Reference AI technology Technology used in agriculture function Agriculture function category Sustainabilityobjectivesaturation, pH value, salinity, and carbonates (Hespeler et al., 2021) Robotic Harvesting in the evening hours or low light situations Harvesting 1(Buzzy et al., 2020) Robotic Real-time leaf detection and counting Advanced care of crops 3(Schor and Attwood-Charles,2017)Robotic Disease detection and monitoring Advanced care of crops 3(Navas et al., 2020) Robotic Weed treatment with a ﬂaming and row crop cultivatorimplement. Weed treatment with a herbicide patch sprayer. Pestcontrol with a canopy sprayer.Weed control 3(Zapotezny-Anderson andLehnert, 2019)Robotic Harvesting Harvesting 1(Kwon et al., 2019) Deep convolutionalneural networks(DCNNs)Fruit monitoring and grading systems Advanced care of crops 3(Zujevs et al., 2015) Robotic Fruit detection, localizing, gripping and picking Quality measurements before picking Advanced care of crops 3(Mendes et al., 2019) Robotic pathplanningAgRob Vineyard DetectorAdvanced care ofcrops3(Paliwal et al., 2019) Robotic Soil data collection, disease detection, and ﬁeld classiﬁcation to provide the best solutions for mixed cropping. Resource management 4(Fue et al., 2020) Robotic Cotton harvesting Harvesting 1(Linaza et al., 2021) Machine learning Yield prediction Prediction 1(Bi et al., 2021) Slam robot Positioning system for agricultural environment Advanced care of crops 3(Väljaots et al., 2018) Robotic Soil sampling and storage apparatus Resource management 3(Jez et al., 2021) ANN, SVM, CNN Plant growth status, pest management, water and fertilizer management for plant breeders and plant physiologists Advanced care of crops 3(Porsch et al., 2019) Robotic Gantry pneumatic robotic manipulator for greenhouse automation Advanced care of crops 3(Zhang et al., 2021) Robotic Gripper developments to minimize the risk of damage to fruits, vegetables or food Harvesting 1(Jung et al., 2021) AI, Deep learning Irrigation management service Soil moisture monitoring system to control irrigation,ﬁght mildew, and deal with drought Imagerecognition application to identify potential defects and nutrientdeﬁciencies in soilResource management 4
(Kakani et al., 2020) Machine Learning Utilize the data collected from farms, irrigation, soil characteristics and meteorological data to formulate
ﬁeld level insights as recommendations for farmers to improve their overall yieldResource management 4(Sharma and Bisen, 2013) Electric NationalAgriculture Market(e-NAM) Deeplearninge-NAM envisages spatial market integration, reduction intransaction costs and has direct implications on price signals andprice discovery, farmer's income and market liberalizationPrediction 2
(Oliveira et al., 2021) Robotic Robotic applications for land preparation, sowing and planting, plant treatment, harvesting, yield estimation and phenotyping Resource management Advancedcare of crops, Harvesting 2(Beloev et al., 2021) Robotic Map or inspect a speci ﬁc farming area in accordance to thesituation and the surrounding environment Advanced care of crops 3(Isachsen et al., 2021) Robust robot-basedautomation inprimary productionand processingReal-time speed and high registration accuracy and resolutionenable the correct manipulation of food products without qualitydegradationPrediction 1
(Song et al., 2021) Robotic Greenhouse control system Advanced care of crops 3(Thomopoulos et al., 2021) Robotic Kiwifruit harvesting robot Harvesting 1(Seo and Umeda, 2021) Unmanned aerialvehicles (UAVs)UAVs are comparable to boom sprayers, showing similarpest-control costs and management ef ﬁciencyWeed control 3(Ishii et al., 2021) Robotic Store, transport and relocate the boxes of tomato to the assigned storage area Supply chain 2(Peteinatos et al., 2020) CNN Plant and weed classi ﬁcations Weed control 3 (Fahey et al., 2021) AI-based data fusiontechniqueIdentify and quantify disease and pest epidemics accurately and atthe earliest possible stage Advanced care of crops 3(ÖZLÜOYMAK et al.Özlüoymak et al., 2019)Robotic Weed control system Weed control 3(Balafoutis et al., 2017) Machine learning Autonomous plant classi ﬁcation Advanced care of crops 3 (Spanaki et al., 2021) AI AgriTech drones Collecting data from the ﬁelds, and support monitored humandecision making for everyday tasks (e.g. disease inspection, cropmonitoring) and AgriFood operations (e.g. irrigation, fertilizationetc.) of the farmPrediction 1
(Bi et al., 2020) Deep Learning Predict consumer Yogurt preferences based on sensory attributes Prediction 2(Kiourt et al., 2020) Deep Learning Automatic image-based food recognition Advanced care of crops 3(Dargan et al., 2020) Deep Learning Predict wine taste preference Prediction 2(Chukkapalli et al., 2020) AI Smart farming Cooperative ecosystem Advanced care of crops 3(Utstumo et al., 2018) Robotic Drop-on-Demand (DoD) weed control system Weed control 3(Lytridis et al., 2021) Robotic Land preparation Resource management 4(Hossain and Komatsuzaki,2021
)Robotic Weed management Weed control 3(continued on next page)V. Sachithra and L.D.C.S. Subhashini Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 8 (2023) 46 –59
49Machine (SVM), Random Forest, K-nearest and Robotics. As in Fig. 2 from the selected papers the most of researchers are applied roboticswhich is 44%. Thereafter, NN and DL is 26% and 15%, respectively.Robotics are used in agriculture to assist farmers. These robots aredeveloped with many operations such as weeding application, visualdetection and harvesting where they can be used to match the needsof various tasks (Zhang et al., 2020;Benos et al., 2020;Yorozu et al., 2021). Ghafar et al. (Ghafar et al., 2021) design a robot to spray pesti- cides and fertilizers in harvestingﬁeld at low operating cost and generalcrop monitoring. This model is used two-wheeled robot that included aa mobile base which is used a spewing mechanism with a controlling ofwireless tool that is used to manage the movements of the robot. There-after, crop growth conditions and health factors are monitored usingcameras. This process assists to detect the presence of pests in thecropﬁeld. This problem is solved using low-cost agricultural robot(Azmi et al., 2021). For agricultural cyber-physical systems, researchersproposes a suggest an intelligent management deign using robotictechnique(Huang et al., 2021). The robots can use in labour intensive,repetitive and physical demanding tasks in agricultural ﬁeld. The recent literature reveals that robots are being used to perform several special-ized tasks which were performed by experience farmers ( Marinoudi et al., 2019;Le et al., 2019;Zhang and Noguchi, 2017;Huang and Chang, 2019;Kim et al., 2021). As such, there are advantages using ro-botics in agriculture such as production increase, widening the pro ﬁt and saving time for performing repetitive tasks. It is estimated that pes-ticides usage can be reduced by 80% if the farmers use robots to sprayTable 1(continued)Reference AI technology Technology used in agriculture function Agriculture function category Sustainabilityobjective(Kultongkham et al., 2021) Robotic Tomato harvesting Harvesting 1(Ruigrok et al., 2020) Robotic Weed detection Weed control 3(Magomadov, 2019) Deep Learning Plant disease detection Advanced care of crops 3(Feng et al., 2018) Robotic robotic harvesting system for cherry tomato Harvesting 1(Grieve et al., 2019) Robotic Weed control Weed control 3(Midtiby et al., 2016) Robotic weeding application Weed control 3(Williams et al., 2019) Machine Vision,ConvolutionalNeural Networks,and RoboticKiwifruit Harvesting Harvesting 1
(Hespeler et al., 2021) Deep learning harvesting of chili peppers Harvesting 1(Gonzalez-de Santos et al.,2017)Robotic weed and pest control Weed control 3(Sudars et al., 2020) Robotic computer Annotated food crops and weed images Weed control 3(Ngugi et al., 2021) Machine learning leaf pest and disease recognition Advanced care of crops 3(Ghafar et al., 2021) Robotic Spraying fertilizers and pesticides Weed control 3(Azmi et al., 2021) Robotic Crop seeding Harvesting 1(Yorozu et al., 2021) Robotic Smooth and safe harvesting support in the ﬁeld Advanced care of crops 3 (Kim et al., 2021) Robotic Estimate crop height and detect the target crop region Prediction 1(Gai et al., 2021) Robotic Generating crop ﬁeld maps as occupancy grids and providinginter-row vehicle positioning data Prediction 1(Panarin and Khvorova,2021)Robotic Taking into account the physical environment conditions andbuild mathematical models Prediction 1(Rysz and Mehta, 2021) Robotic Fruit harvesting Harvesting 1(Zangina et al., 2021) Robotic Selective and variable spray of pesticides to the plants Weed control 3(Mohamed et al., 2020) Machine learning Spatial mapping analysis of soil characteristics Resource management 4(Gupta et al., 2020) Deep learning Soil parameters analysis Resource management 4(Mohammed and Jassim,2021)Robotic Seeding, fertilization and initial irrigation process Harvesting, Advanced care of crops 1,3(Villa-Henriksen et al.,2021)Robotic Harvesting Harvesting 1(Ünal et al., 2021) Robotic Soil penetration resistance and electrical conductivity Resource management 4(Li et al. 2021a) Deep learning Weed detection Weed control 3
Fig. 1.Methodological chart.V. Sachithra and L.D.C.S. Subhashini Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 8 (2023) 46 –59
50fertilizers. Moreover, since robots cab work around trees, rocks, lakesand other obstacle areas easily, crops can be cultivated more ﬁelds (Khare et al., 2021;Gai et al., 2021;Panarin and Khvorova, 2021;Rysz and Mehta, 2021).Artiﬁcial neural networks (ANN) are one of the most importanttechnique of AI. These models are developed using interconnectednodes which are performed functions as our human brain. The usageof NNs application is very wide, and it also includes in agriculture(Kujawa and Niedbala, 2021). (Almomani, 2020) was applied a NN to optimize the cumulative methane production. This NN model hasshowed signiﬁcant results in prediction. In addition, NN has employedto pattern classiﬁcation and soil moisture content prediction(Mohapatra and Lenka, 2016). Scaled Conjugate Gradient and BFGSQuasi-Newton based neural network algorithms used to take varioussoil and environmental parameters and predict hourly requirement ofsoil soil moisture content. The NN has become popular as a classi ﬁcation method in agricultural engineering. NNs are virtuous to formulate themodel using non-linear data and data represents with images.Therefore, this approach is good for crop classi ﬁcation using image data (Boniecki et al., 2020). The prediction of growth rate of rice is im-portant to obtain sustainability in agriculture. Researchers recom-mended rice growth rate modeling using NN which shows less errorscompared to regression algorithm and gene expression programming(Liu et al., 2021).With the training limitation of NN, researchers are used DL. DL dealswith recent and modern technique to process images and analyse data,which guarantees the potential results. Application of DL into agricul-tural domain is emerged instead of various domain that DL has beensuccessfully applied (Kamilaris and Prenafeta-Boldú, 2018;Zhu et al., 2018;Santos et al., 2019;Nguyen et al., 2020). Jiang et al. (Jiang et al., 2021) suggest a method to identify the disease in fruit like Apple andthe method is useful to prevent the disease without harming theenvironment. In the method, capability of image processing and classi-ﬁcation in DL were applied to classify the fruit image. Deep neuralnetwork with different convolution layers and different number of neu-rons are examined and evaluated. The results beat the performance ofbaseline models. DL stimulates multi-model approach to detect, dissem-inate and monitor the Active Fire Locations (AFL) in agricultural tasksand they are guaranteed the highly accurate results ( Sharma et al., 2021). We found that DL has applied to identify seeds and pest, monitornitrogen content in soil and leaf, detect irrigation and plants' waterstress level, assess erosion of water, detect usage of herbicide, defectson food and damage of crop hail and monitor greenhouse ( Bu and Wang, 2019;Li et al. 2021c;Zhou et al., 2021;Chen et al., 2020;Xue et al., 2019). However, DL models need comprehensive datasets as theinput to serve at the training procedure. Other than the above methods,researcher were also applied Fuzzy Logic, SVM, Random Forest andK-nearest (Kurniasih et al., 2018
;Center and Verma, 1998;Pujari et al., 2016;Jez et al., 2021;Yamaç, 2021). However, Robotic models a n dD Lm o d e l sh a v es h o w e ds i g n iﬁcant usage in the agricultureﬁeld. To develop a more complete understanding of the enabling AI tech-nologies currently applied in agriculture sector, Fig. 3further illustrates main AI approaches used in agriculture functions.Moreover, the study aligns the main agriculture functions withsustainability growth objective (Fig. 4) in order to provide contextual link with present view of the agricultural functions and sustainability.In here, the study focused on several functional areas highlighted inthe selected studies. As such, the research hots-pots of AI andagriculture in the past decades comprise mainly prediction, harvesting,advanced care crops, weed control, resource management and supplychain.4. Agriculture functions and AIThis section elaborates the inclusive review of the literature thatapplied automate functions in agriculture (e.g., prediction, harvesting,advanced care crops, weed control, resource management and supplychain) using AI techniques. Within the reviewed papers it was identi ﬁed that the most common applications of AI are predicting, harvesting,advanced care of crop and so onFig. 5.4.1. PredictionAs shown inFig. 5, of the total 115 studies, 36 (40%) articles reportedthat the most common applications of AI for agriculture is predictionmodel for total agricultural output value ( Tian et al., 2021;Kim et al., 2021;Han et al., 2018;Khan et al., 2020;Crane-Droesch, 2018;Kumar and Joshi, 2015;Isachsen et al., 2021), waste minimization (Almomani, 2020), irrigation control (Mohapatra and Lenka, 2016), weather index (Buyrukoğlu et al., 2021;Liu et al., 2020;Zhang et al., 2021), energy
Fig. 2.AI approaches used in agriculture.V. Sachithra and L.D.C.S. Subhashini Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 8 (2023) 46 –59
51optimization (Senocak and Goren, 2021;Guillén et al., 2021) and de- mand and consumer preference (Sharma and Bisen, 2013;Giannakis et al., 2019;Dargan et al., 2020;Monteiro et al., 2021). To cover these sce- narios, ANN and DL techniques are used by 95% of the reviewed papers.The ANN and DPare used to collect real-time data about multiple agricul-tural parameters, such as production quantity, waste, climate data,biomass, and land area to estimate yield, manage irrigation and landarea and develop drought index. The fact that this AI application in pre-diction model in agriculture is so common can be justi ﬁed by the com- plex and dynamic nature of the agricultural parameters, thus, it isperplexing to obtain accurate predictions. Thus, AI can be served as amethod to face the complexities in the dynamic nature of agricultural
Fig. 3.Main AI approaches used in agriculture functions.
Fig. 4.Agriculture functions and Sustainability growth objectives.V. Sachithra and L.D.C.S. Subhashini Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 8 (2023) 46 –59
52parameters. Interestedly, few papers (4) focused on predicting customerdemand and preference and market integration for few agriculturalproducts (e.g.: wine, yogurt). The studies focused on the the elementsin sensory functions and reveal the associations among evaluators scor-ing and latent features. These preference predictions provide widerchances to develop food product designs in future. What we can con-clude from these literature base is that agriculture sustainability is en-sure production of an adequate food supply.4.2. HarvestingHarvesting is a challenging task in agriculture because harvestersstrongly correlate to crop detection, quality cuts, damage, picking andpackaging. The labour assets utilize for harvesting is one of the maincost components in agriculture production. To overcome the high la-bour cost component, the prior studies pay wider attention to exploitcommercially doable AI applications for harvesting. As presented inFig. 5, the next most common application of AI is harvesting (28 articles;31%). Moreover, robotic technique (robot arm) has been identi ﬁed as an effective tool for assistance in the agriculture industry to harvest thefruit/vegetable while not harming the plant ( Hespeler et al., 2021). As a functional model, the robot could automatically move on the rail,identify, detect and locate the mature bunch, hold and separate the tar-get and collect the crop harvested. Precisely identifying and detectingthe mature crops encompass a key technique of harvesting robot. An ef-ﬁcient object detection and inspection algorithm are necessary for arobotic platform to be used in harvesting. Different types of sensor tech-nologies use to detect and locate crop in the tree branches, determinethe ripeness of the crop, determine the geometry of the tree canopyand locate the tree in orchard, andﬁnally to pick the crop from the tree. Computer vision is used for crop ripeness estimation ( Hespeler et al., 2021). In all cases, crops should be picked when they are ripe ormature without mechanical damage to the fruit. This action shouldtake place as be as quick and as cost-effective as possible. Thus, researchon harvesting robot mainly concentrations on ﬁve key areas; identifying targets under complex background; separating soft crop; level of con-suming energy to harvest, harvesting tools suitability and conformationdesign toﬁt with unshaped workﬁelds (Navas et al., 2020). Moreover, thermal imaging for real-time harvesting robot allow to harvest in theevening hours or low light situations ( Hespeler et al., 2021). Finally, vision-based crop detection is a critical component for robotic harvest-ing and it includes crop detection with dimension, mass estimation, andlocalization prior to pick or slice (Lee et al., 2020;Zujevs et al., 2015; Villa-Henriksen et al., 2021). Using a robotic system would enablecertain advantages such as minimum wastage, picking ef ﬁciency, high picking rate andﬂexible work force and nighttime operation. Develop-ment of timely, efﬁcient, and careful robotic harvesting solutions leadto complete the harvesting process while generating high quality yieldsat minimum time consuming and at minimum unrecuperative damagesin the harvesting process. Particularly, there have been signi ﬁcant developments of AI towards the sustainability agriculture objective ofensuring production of an adequate food supply. Besides researchprojects have been performed, very few have developed into the com-mercial world (Kiwi fruit; Tomato; Cotton; Apple; Rice).4.3. Advanced care of cropIt is essential to repetitive detection and monitoring on the plant'slife cycle in order to attain the yield with high quality and quantity.The plant growth and development could be detected with the numberof leaves and that would be the key phenotype of plant growth and cropdamage by attacks of bacteria, fungi, and other pests are threatening thelong-term viability of plant phenotyping. Thus, advanced care of crops isanother agricultural function where AI is mostly applied (26 articles;29%). AI technologies, such as DL, ANN, robotic and ML, provide themeans to automate disease detection, measure plants, monitoringplant growth status and applying fertilizer ( Zargar et al., 2020;Emmi et al., 2014;
Sharma et al., 2020;Santin et al., 2016;Grimstad and From, 2017;Raja et al., 2020;Magalhães et al., 2021;Buzzy et al., 2020;Schor and Attwood-Charles, 2017;Santos et al., 2020;Li et al. 2021b;Yorozu et al., 2021). Symptoms of diseases developed by attacksof bacteria, fungi, and other pests need to be identi ﬁed in an initial stage according to the changes in the physiological condition of plant parts(leaves, stems, andﬂowers) to provide treatment at the right time.Currently, labour intensive crop caring practices use vast amount ofagricultural chemical inputs (fertilizers, herbicides, fungicides, and in-secticides) cause to have high production cost and lead pollution mat-ters as well. In general, it is estimated that more than 100 kg areapplied per hectare in farm land. Unfortunately, majority of the nitrateapplied were either washout or loss in the air. The robotic disease-detection systems were commonly designed in whole inclusive patternto identify the results in infection and these results could be utilisedto detect precise diseases and and apply fertilizes appropriately(Schor and Attwood-Charles, 2017;Grimstad and From, 2017). In addition, ML technique was used to measure plants with sensors(Sharma et al., 2020) to estimate plant growth direction ( Booth et al., 2020) and plant classiﬁcation (Libertn et al., 2018), ANN to design performance-oriented riparian buffer strips for the ﬁltering of nitrogen
Fig. 5.AI usage in agriculture functions.V. Sachithra and L.D.C.S. Subhashini Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 8 (2023) 46 –59
53(Santin et al., 2016) and measure plant growth status (Li et al. 2021b), DL to detect underdeveloped plants (Aguiar et al., 2021) and to recog- nize the plant using image-based (Kiourt et al., 2020). Therefore, it is important to recognize the AI applications that favor both disease man-agement and to provide sufﬁcient, safe, and nutritious food to the globalpopulation. Particularly, there have been signi ﬁcant developments of AI towards the sustainability agriculture objective of achieving betterhealth and nutrition for a growing population.4.4. Weed controlIt is necessary to control weed in the cropﬁeld to increase the produc- tion of agriculture. The review (26 articles; 29%) highlights that AANN,DNN, CNN and DL to identify and classify the plants as weed usingimage processing. These techniques include the crop signaling compoundincludes distinctive characteristics that assure the detection of crop dis-eases and ensure the classiﬁcation of crop and weed (Zangina et al., 2021;Espejo-Garcia et al., 2020;Abdullahi et al., 2017;Monteiro et al., 2021;Raja et al., 2020;Kounalakis et al., 2019;Peteinatos et al., 2020). Next, the signal is transmitted to the robotic arm or Unmanned aerial ve-hicles (UAVs) to pluck the plant through serial communication or executeweed treatment with aﬂaming and row crop cultivator implement, weedtreatment with a herbicide patch sprayer or canopy sprayer ( Emmi et al., 2014;Seo and Umeda, 2021;Özlüoymak and Bolat, 2020;Kounalakis et al., 2019). Using AI in weed control enables to decrease unnecessaryplants within fewer time frames and minimize fertilizers and herbicidesutilization, which cause soil degradation and pollution.4.5. Resource managementAgriculture is naturally bounded with the resource constraints(e.g., land, water and soil). Primarily,womb of agriculture is soil andsoil management therefore serves as primal concern in agricultural re-source management. Thus, assessing the suitability of agricultural landbecomes the vital task in agriculture development. Moreover, in preci-sion agriculture, irrigation management plays a crucial role. The reviewemphasized that AI driven agriculture is focusing on methods to opti-mize land (Nguyen et al., 2019;Oliveira et al., 2021), soil (Nguyen et al., 2019;Moya-Rico et al., 2019;Paliwal et al., 2019;Väljaots et al., 2018) and water/irrigation (Mohapatra and Lenka, 2016;Jung et al., 2021;Kakani et al., 2020) considering the beneﬁt it brings to people linked with this profession. Moreover, the weather forecasts such assunlight, rainfall, humidity, and moisture guide by using AI leads tothe optimal use of water for scheduling and planning the crop. Tocover these scenarios, ANN, DL, ML and robotic techniques are widelyused by the reviewed papers. Ground robots and UAVs are more
precisely used to collect soil and water sample and land preparation/sowing. Neural networks, deep and ML techniques used to computedthe normalized soil moisture index to estimate the soil moisture contentand develop a model to assess the agriculture land for cultivation interms of four decision classes, namely more suitable, suitable,moderately suitable, and unsuitable. Since irrigation managementplays a critical role in quantity and quality of the crops, estimatingevapotranspiration, streamﬂows and real-time management of reser-voir release by using ML algorithms are highlighted in the review(Sharma et al., 2020). ML helps to process all data samples to constructa heuristic model that can predict factors resulting high yields. Whilethe use of UAVs and robots for sowing has advantages like large areacoverage and speed. However, uncertainty in ground measurementsand power requirements are restricting the number of task they canperform (Lytridis et al., 2021).4.6. Supply chainSupply chain (SC) in agriculture includes several tasks such as pre-production, production, storage, processing, distribution, retail, andreachﬁnal product the end consumers. In the process of SC also includesmultiple stakeholders such as farmers, producers, processors, certi ﬁca- tion agencies, traders, government, retailers, distributors, and ﬁnal consumers. Compared with other supply chains, agriculture SC iscomplex due to the nature of perishability and high supply-demandﬂuctuations of the products and high consumer awareness towards pro-duce provenance, quality, and safety. All these notes, the review insiststhat AI applications, especially ML, in agriculture SC enable farmers andother relevant organizations to draw valuable insights on agricultureprocess, leading to increase agricultural productivity while takingdecisions via data-driven platform ( Sharma et al., 2020;Camaréna, 2020). Data pays a crucial role in supply chains thus improvisation instorage, collection, visualization, privacy, security, accuracy, and accessof agriculture data can impact application of AI in agriculture supplychain. The common believe in agriculture is that farmer is classi ﬁed under low income group and manyﬁrms/farms in the agricultural are worried with low-proﬁtability. AI is widely used in SC to identify hiddenpatterns in the data, in this line, SC stakeholders consider to acceleratingAI in SC, leads to achieve the expectations of farmers as well as cus-tomers. Contextual factors that have been identi ﬁed as important inﬂuencers of AI in agriculture sustainability objective: alleviate povertyof farmers through formalize products sales to certi ﬁed markets and global commodity price trends, visualize the farm income prior to theintervention and the formalize the existence market structure. As re-view highlights although SC using AI platforms leads to sustainable ag-riculture objective, questions related to the mechanism of reaction andselectivity of matrices for AIs in consumer aspect are still unanswered.5. ConsiderationsFig. 6tabulates the contextual link of usage of AI techniques that aresupposed to address sustainable agriculture.The number of studies that address sustainable agriculture isincreasing; however less attention has been devoted to investigatingthe sustainability aspect of agriculture with regard to AI technology. Ob-viously, the sustainable agricultural is not a typical research ﬁeld for AI researchers to study; theﬁeld of AI research has a historical practiceto focus on the industries that involving with new products and ser-vices. Furthermore, researches related to agricultural food tend to ex-amine the way of increasing production rather that addressingsustainability issues. Moreover, most research within the agriculturefood industry tends to examine production rather than sustainable is-sues. Due to the vast and increasingly expanding body of literature onagri-technology, this review has focused on how AI technology canimprove the sustainability of agriculture industry. The aim of this reviewpaper is therefore to analyse and create an understanding of thedifferent types of AI applications in agriculture industry and howthose applications align to achieve the agriculture sustainability objec-tives. A systematic and quantitative evaluation of different agriculturalparameters is of vital importance to improve agriculture productionand ensure sustainable food supply. Unsustainable agricultural produc-tion practices such as food wastage and production shocks due to cli-mate changes can be minimized if the sector uses AI to get accuratepredictions. Our review therefore underscores the importance of AI pre-
diction driving the adoption of modern agricultural innovations to en-sure adequate food production and supply. Within the context of thedifferent concepts of sustainable agriculture objectives, AI applicationsin prediction speciﬁcally focus on the potential contribution towardssatisfying human needs for food. However, the vast majority of agricul-ture products remain unaddressed, and almost no fully automatedprediction models have been developed. Moreover, developing aspeciﬁc prediction model for market demand and preference of agricul-ture products is insufﬁcient. However, due to the low repeatability anddifﬁculties in corresponding, AI implementation in agriculture sectorbecome main challenge (Linaza et al., 2021) speciﬁcally in developing nations, which requires immediate solution/s.V. Sachithra and L.D.C.S. Subhashini Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 8 (2023) 46 –59
54Development of timely, efﬁcient, and careful robotic harvestingsolutions lead to obtain desired quality harvest at short-time periodand more interestedly at minimum unrecoverable loss. Particularly,t h e r eh a v eb e e ns i g n iﬁcant developments of AI towards the sustainabil-ity agriculture objective of ensuring production of an adequate foodsupply. Besides research projects have been performed, very few havedeveloped into the commercial world (Kiwi fruit; Tomato; Cotton;Apple; Rice). Moreover, the review revealed that disease detection sys-tems are mostly concerned on leaves and the lower area of leaves is notproperly sensed by the camera sensor. As said, besides leaves, AI tech-niques need to be expanded for a variety of plant parts. In line with that(Li et al. 2021b) insisted that AI technologies have been counted on a dif-ferent sensors and imaging technologies to gather a variety of plant data,whereas analyzing different sensor data also relies on different hardwaredevices, software systems, and different platforms and different monitor-ing scales used to analyse date. Such complex operation process mightslow down data acquisition and integration, leading to an informationlag. This implies the need for international harmonization and standardi-zation in phenotyping data. The phenotyping data collecting and analyz-ing then could lead to manage cultivating practices, plant breeding andoverall management in agricultural functions.Weeds destructively affect agricultural crop productions bycontending with crop plants for resources, including soil moisture andnutrients. Providing sufﬁcient and healthy foods for ever growingpopulation heavily depends on the ways we control weeds and applyfertilizers in efﬁcient manner. For future work, the review opines(Kounalakis et al., 2019) that more robust weed recognition approachescould be extended with additional data capturing conditions (like illu-mination, grass density) and sampling techniques could be synthetizedwith techniques like Synthetic Minority Over-sampling Technique(SMOTE) and Adaptive Synthetic Sampling (ADASYN).Natural resources were jeopardized and different forms of environ-mental degradation became apparent, thus conservation practices ofnatural resources using AI technologies lead to increased global cropyields. Meeting the fourth objective - conserving natural resources, is adaunting challenge. As we identiﬁed, it includes protection of soil healthand water quality and maintain biodiversity of ﬂora, fauna, and natural landscapes. The review sheds a light that AI technological developmentstaking consideration on these challenges while improving agri-foodproductivity with minimum effects to the environment. Particularly,there have been signiﬁcant developments of AI towards the sustainabil-ity agriculture objective of conserving natural resources. However, toimprove overall crop water productivity, AI technology has to be ad-vanced in irrigation technologies such as ef ﬁcient low pressure center pivot irrigation and micro-irrigation and weather-based and soil mois-ture sensor-based irrigation scheduling. Moreover, improving decisionsupport tools integrating weather, soil and crop information will ensureprogress towards the sustainable objectives of agriculture.Though AI helps to enhance the visibility of agriculture SC, more at-tention need to be focused on the food retailing phase for predictingconsumer demand, perception and buying patterns. A precise predictionof food requirements or food consumption behavior of buyers helps toavoid overstocking, overproduction, resources overutilization and guaran-tee the fair income and price to farmers and buyers respectively. Dey et al.(Dey and Shekhawat, 2021) enhance the back and forward linkages insupply chain, reduce transportation cost and delivery time, enhancefarmers' awareness on price, selling quotas, available stocks and onlineshowcases and reduce the risks involved in contract arrangement. Subse-quently, investments in AI applications in agriculture industry have exhib-ited the possibility of achieving four objectives in agriculture sustainabilitywhile enhancing the farmers' livelihood, minimizing food production cost,controlling food priceﬂuctuation and ensuring food choices to consumers.It is observable that AI application in achieving the second sustainableobjective–alleviate poverty of farming community, remains scantlyaddressed. On this note, there is a vital requirement to design comprehen-sive framework of AI that should be used in agriculture SC.
Fig. 6.AI techniques that are supposed to address sustainable agriculture.V. Sachithra and L.D.C.S. Subhashini Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 8 (2023) 46 –59
556. Conclusion and further research directionsAs sum in the literature consulted, we observed that AI applicationsare extensively adopted nowadays to enhance operational automationand performance of agricultural industry. We found that the mostcommon applications of AI for agriculture are prediction model fortotal agricultural output value, followed by harvesting applications.Though agriculture is naturally bounded with the resource constraints,AI applications in natural resources management (such as water, soil,land) are presently at unsatisfactory level. We were further able to iden-tify thatﬁnal consumer aspect in agriculture SC needs to be devouringextensive attention in order to achieve one of the key agriculture sus-tainability objective; alleviate poverty of farmers. Moreover, it waswitnessed in this review that in recent work the use of AI and imageprocessing techniques has become more common to improve the sus-tainable agriculture. When consider the DL models, these models aresuffer from task dependent since all the models are using generalword embedding vector. To overcome this problem attention-basedDL models can be developed. In the future researchers can consider de-veloping attention-based DL models. Likewise, the future studies shouldintend to address the gaps that identiﬁed in this systematic review such as under-utilised commercial crops appraisal, data capturing conditions,natural resource standards, functional areas and geographical locations.This study has provided useful information to understand the impli-cation of AI in agriculture sustainability. However, there can be limita-tions in this research. This work may extend by considering projectcosts, usability and regional challenges in AI applications. In addition,can explore how attention-based DL models are used in agriculturewith the newest AI improvements. Due to the growing application ofAI itself is not adequate to obtain sustainable objectives; it is requiredto assess the adaptability of AI together with other useful maneuverslike policy support for AI developers and programme intervention toimplementations.Credit authorship contribution statementVilani Sachithra: Conception and design of study, Acquisition of data,Analysis and/or interpretation of data, Writing –original draft, Writing– review & editing L.D.C.S. Subhashini: Conception and design of study,Acquisition of data, Analysis and/or interpretation of data, Writing – original draft, Writing–review & editing.Declaration of Competing InterestThe authors declare that they have no known competing ﬁnancial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to in ﬂu- ence the work reported in this paper.Appendix 1. AI, Agriculture functions and Sustainability growthobjectivesSustainable objectives1. Ensure production of an adequate food supply.2. Alleviate poverty.3. Achieve better health and nutrition for a growing population.4. Conserve natural resources.References
Abdullahi, H.S., Sheriff, R., Mahieddine, F., 2017. Convolution neural network in precisionagriculture for plant image recognition and classi ﬁcation. 2017 Seventh International Conference on Innovative Computing Technology (INTECH). IEEE ,pp. 100–125.https://www.researchgate.net/pro ﬁle/Halimatu-Abdullahi/public ation/320971643_Convolution_neural_network_in_precision_agriculture_for_plant_image_recognition_and_classiﬁcation/links/5a1d4fee4585153731898423/Convol ution-neural-network-in-precision-agriculture-for-plant-image-recognition-and-classiﬁcation.pdf.Aguiar, A.S., Magalhães, S.A., Dos Santos, F.N., Castro, L., Pinho, T., Valente, J., Martins, R.,Boaventura-Cunha, J., 2021. Grape bunch detection at different growth stages usingdeep learning quantized models. Agronomy 11, 1890. https://doi.org/10.3390/agron- omy11091890.Ala-Harja, H., Helo, P., 2015. Reprint of “green supply chain decisions-case-based perfor- mance analysis from the food industry ”. Transp. Res. Part E: Logist. Transp. Rev. 74, 11–21.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tre.2014.12.005 . Albalasmeh, A., Gharaibeh, M.A., Mohawesh, O., Alajlouni, M., Quzaih, M., Masad, M., ElHanandeh, A., 2020. Characterization and arti ﬁcial neural networks modelling of methylene blue adsorption of biochar derived from agricultural residues: effect ofbiomass type, pyrolysis temperature, particle size. J. Saudi Chem. Soc. 24, 811 –823. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jscs.2020.07.005 . Alexandratos, N., Bruinsma, J., 2012. World agriculture towards 2030/2050: the 2012revision. ESA Working Papers 12-03 https://doi.org/10.22004/ag.econ.288998 . Almomani, F., 2020. Prediction of biogas production from chemically treated co-digestedagricultural waste using artiﬁcial neural network. Fuel 280, 118573. https://doi.org/ 10.1016/j.fuel.2020.118573. Åstrand, B., Baerveldt, A.J., 2002. An agricultural mobile robot with vision-based percep-tion for mechanical weed control. Auton. Robot. 13, 21 –35.https://doi.org/10.1023/ A:1015674004201.Azmi, H.N., Hajjaj, S.S.H., Gsangaya, K.R., Sultan, M.T.H., Mail, M.F., Hua, L.S., 2021. Designand fabrication of an agricultural robot for crop seeding. Mater. Today: Proc. https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.matpr.2021.03.191 . Balafoutis, A.T., Beck, B., Fountas, S., Tsiropoulos, Z., Vangeyte, J., van der Wal, T., Soto-Embodas, I., Gómez-Barbero, M., Pedersen, S.M., 2017. Smart farming technologies – description, taxonomy and economic impact. Precision Agriculture: Technology andEconomic Perspectives. Springer, pp. 21 –77https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319- 68715-5_2.Bannerjee, G., Sarkar, U., Das, S., Ghosh, I., 2018. Artiﬁcial intelligence in agriculture: a lit- erature survey. Int. J. Sci. Res. Comp. Sci. Appl. Manag. Stud. 7, 1 –6. Barth, H., Ulvenblad, P., Ulvenblad, P.O., Hoveskog, M., 2021. Unpacking sustainable busi-ness models in the swedish agricultural sector –the challenges of technological, social and organisational innovation. J. Clean. Prod. 304, 127004. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. jclepro.2021.127004.Beloev, I., Kinaneva, D., Georgiev, G., Hristov, G., Zahariev, P., 2021. Arti ﬁcial intelligence- driven autonomous robot for precision agriculture. Acta Technol. Agric. 24, 48 –54. https://doi.org/10.2478/ata-2021-0008. Benos, L., Bechar, A., Bochtis, D., 2020. Safety and ergonomics in human-robot interactiveagricultural operations. Biosyst. Eng. 200, 55 –72.https://doi.org/10.1016/j. biosystemseng.2020.09.009. Bi, K., Qiu, T., Huang, Y., 2020. A deep learning method for yogurt preferences predictionusing sensory attributes. Processes 8, 518. https://doi.org/10.3390/pr8050518 . Bi, X., Tang, W., Gao, Z., 2021. A positioning system on robot for agricultural environment.Journal of Physics: Conference Series. IOP Publishing, p. 042024. https://doi.org/10. 1088/1742-6596/1865/4/042024 . Birrell, S., Hughes, J., Cai, J.Y., Iida, F., 2020. A ﬁeld-tested robotic harvesting system for ice- berg lettuce. J. Field Robot. 37, 225 –245.https://doi.org/10.1002/rob.21888 . Bolis, I., Morioka, S.N., Sznelwar, L.I., 2014. When sustainable development risks losing itsmeaning. Delimiting the concept with a comprehensive literature review and a con-ceptual model. J. Clean. Prod. 83, 7 –20.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2014.06.041 . Boniecki, P., Koszela, K.,Świerczyński, K., Skwarcz, J., Zaborowicz, M., Przybyl, J., 2020. Neural visual detection of grain weevil ( sitophilus granariusl.). Agriculture 10, 25. https://doi.org/10.3390/agriculture10010025 . Booth, B.G., Sijbers, J., De Beenhouwer, J., 2020. A machine learning approach to growthdirectionﬁnding for automated planting of bulbous plants. Sci. Rep. 10, 1 –11. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-57405-8 . Bu, F., Wang, X., 2019. A smart agriculture iot system based on deep reinforcement learn-ing. Futur. Gener. Comput. Syst. 99, 500 –507.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.future.2019. 04.041.Buyrukoğlu, G., Buyrukoğlu, S., Topalcengiz, Z., 2021. Comparing regression models withcount data to artiﬁcial neural network and ensemble models for prediction of genericescherichia coli population in agricultural ponds based on weather station measure-ments. Microb. Risk Anal., 100171. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mran.2021.100171 . Buzzy, M., Thesma, V., Davoodi, M., Mohammadpour Velni, J., 2020. Real-time plant leafcounting using deep object detection networks. Sensors 20, 6896. https://doi.org/ 10.3390/s20236896.Camaréna, S., 2020. Artiﬁcial intelligence in the design of transition to sustainable foodsystems. J. Clean. Prod. 271, 122574. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2020.122574 . Castro, N.R., Swart, J., 2017. Building a roundtable for a sustainable hazelnut supply chain.J. Clean. Prod. 168, 1398 –1412.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2017.08.239 . Castro, C.A.D.O., Resende, R.T., Kuki, K.N., Carneiro, V.Q., Marcatti, G.E., Cruz, C.D., Motoike,S.Y., 2017. High-performance prediction of macauba fruit biomass for agricultural andindustrial purposes using artiﬁcial neural networks. Ind. Crop. Prod. 108, 806 –813. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.indcrop.2017.07.031 . Center, B., Verma, B.P., 1998. Fuzzy logic for biological and agricultural systems. Arti ﬁcial Intelligence for Biology and Agriculture. Springer, pp. 213 –225.https://doi.org/10. 1007/978-94-011-5048-4_11
. Chen, H., Chen, A., Xu, L., Xie, H., Qiao, H., Lin, Q., Cai, K., 2020. A deep learning cnn archi-tecture applied in smart near-infrared analysis of water pollution for agricultural irri-gation resources. Agric. Water Manag. 240, 106303. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.agwat. 2020.106303.Chukkapalli, S.S.L., Mittal, S., Gupta, M., Abdelsalam, M., Joshi, A., Sandhu, R., Joshi, K.,2020. Ontologies and artiﬁcial intelligence systems for the cooperative smart farmingecosystem. IEEE Access 8, 164045 –164064.https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2020. 3022763.V. Sachithra and L.D.C.S. Subhashini Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 8 (2023) 46 –59
56Crane-Droesch, A., 2018. Machine learning methods for crop yield prediction and climatechange impact assessment in agriculture. Environ. Res. Lett. 13, 114003. https://doi. org/10.1088/1748-9326/aae159 . Dargan, S., Kumar, M., Ayyagari, M.R., Kumar, G., 2020. A survey of deep learning and itsapplications: a new paradigm to machine learning. Archiv. Comp. Methods Eng. 27,1071–1092.https://doi.org/10.1007/s11831-019-09344-w . Dey, K., Shekhawat, U., 2021. Blockchain for sustainable e-agriculture: literature review,architecture for data management, and implications. J. Clean. Prod., 128254. https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2021.128254 . Di Vaio, A., Boccia, F., Landriani, L., Palladino, R., 2020. Arti ﬁcial intelligence in the Agri- food system: rethinking sustainable business models in the covid-19 scenario. Sus-tainability 12, 4851.https://doi.org/10.3390/su12124851 . Ellaﬁ, M.A., Deeks, L.K., Simmons, R.W., 2021. Application of arti ﬁcial neural networks to the design of subsurface drainage systems in libyan agricultural projects. J. Hydrol.Reg. Stud. 35, 100832.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejrh.2021.100832 . Emmi, L., Gonzalez-de Soto, M., Pajares, G., Gonzalez-de Santos, P., 2014. New trends inrobotics for agriculture: integration and assessment of a real ﬂeet of robots. Sci. World J. 2014.https://doi.org/10.1155/2014/404059 . Espejo-Garcia, B., Mylonas, N., Athanasakos, L., Fountas, S., 2020. Improving weeds identi-ﬁcation with a repository of agricultural pre-trained deep neural networks. Comput.Electron. Agric. 175, 105593.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compag.2020.105593 . Fahey, T., Pham, H., Gardi, A., Sabatini, R., Stefanelli, D., Goodwin, I., Lamb, D.W., 2021. Ac-tive and passive electro-optical sensors for health assessment in food crops. Sensors21, 171.https://doi.org/10.3390/s21010171 . Feng, Q., Zou, W., Fan, P., Zhang, C., Wang, X., 2018. Design and test of robotic harvestingsystem for cherry tomato. Int. J. Agric. Biol. Eng. 11, 96 –100.https://doi.org/10.25165/ j.ijabe.20181101.2853.Ferreras-Fernández, T., Merlo-Vega, J.A., Garca-Peñalvo, F.J., 2013. Impact of scienti ﬁcc o n - tent in open access institutional repositories: a case study of the repository gredos.Proceedings of the First International Conference on Technological Ecosystem for En-hancing Multiculturality, pp. 357 –363.https://doi.org/10.1145/2536536.2536590 . Franco, S., 2021. Assessing the environmental sustainability of local agricultural systems:how and why. Curr. Res. Environ. Sustain. 3, 100028. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.crsust. 2021.100028.Fue, K.G., Porter, W.M., Barnes, E.M., Rains, G.C., 2020. An extensive review of mobile ag-ricultural robotics forﬁeld operations: focus on cotton harvesting. AgriEngineering 2,150–174.https://doi.org/10.3390/agriengineering2010010 . Gaffney, J., Bing, J., Byrne, P.F., Cassman, K.G., Ciampitti, I., Delmer, D., Habben, J., La ﬁtte, H.R., Lidstrom, U.E., Porter, D.O., et al., 2019. Science-based intensive agriculture: sus-tainability, food security, and the role of technology. Global. Food Secur. 23, 236.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gfs.2019.08.003 . Gai, J., Xiang, L., Tang, L., 2021. Using a depth camera for crop row detection and mappingfor under-canopy navigation of agricultural robotic vehicle. Comput. Electron. Agric.188, 106301.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compag.2021.106301 . Geissdoerfer, M., Savaget, P., Bocken, N.M., Hultink, E.J., 2017. The circular economy –a new sustainability paradigm? J. Clean. Prod. 143, 757 –768.https://doi.org/10.1016/ j.jclepro.2016.12.048
.Ghafar, A.S.A., Hajjaj, S.S.H., Gsangaya, K.R., Sultan, M.T.H., Mail, M.F., Hua, L.S., 2021. De-sign and development of a robot for spraying fertilizers and pesticides for agriculture.Mater. Today: Proc.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matpr.2021.03.174 . Giannakis, M., Spanaki, K., Dubey, R., 2019. A cloud-based supply chain management sys-tem: effects on supply chain responsiveness. J. Enterp. Inf. Manag., 585 –607.https:// doi.org/10.1108/JEIM-05-2018-0106 . Gonzalez-de Santos, P., Ribeiro, A., Fernandez-Quintanilla, C., Lopez-Granados, F.,Brandstoetter, M., Tomic, S., Pedrazzi, S., Peruzzi, A., Pajares, G., Kaplanis, G., et al.,2017. Fleets of robots for environmentally-safe pest control in agriculture. Precis.Agric. 18, 574–614.https://doi.org/10.1007/s11119-016-9476-3 . Grieve, B.D., Duckett, T., Collison, M., Boyd, L., West, J., Yin, H., Arvin, F., Pearson, S., 2019.The challenges posed by global broadacre crops in delivering smart agri-robotic solu-tions: a fundamental rethink is required. Glob. Food Secur. 23, 116 –124.https://doi. org/10.1016/j.gfs.2019.04.011. Grimstad, L., From, P.J., 2017. The thorvald ii agricultural robotic system. Robotics 6, 24.https://doi.org/10.3390/robotics6040024 . Guillén, M.A., Llanes, A., Imbernón, B., Martnez-España, R., Bueno-Crespo, A., Cano, J.C.,Cecilia, J.M., 2021. Performance evaluation of edge-computing platforms for the pre-diction of low temperatures in agriculture using deep learning. J. Supercomput. 77,818–840.https://doi.org/10.1007/s11227-020-03288-w . Gupta, M., Abdelsalam, M., Khorsandroo, S., Mittal, S., 2020. Security and privacy in smartfarming: challenges and opportunities. IEEE Access 8, 34564 –34584.https://doi.org/ 10.1109/ACCESS.2020.2975142 . Han, S.Z., Pan, W.T., Zhou, Y.Y., Liu, Z.L., 2018. Construct the prediction model for China ag-ricultural output value based on the optimization neural network of fruit ﬂy optimi- zation algorithm. Futur. Gener. Comput. Syst. 86, 663 –669.https://doi.org/10.1016/j. future.2018.04.058.Hespeler, S.C., Nemati, H., Dehghan-Niri, E., 2021. Non-destructive thermal imaging forobject detection via advanced deep learning for robotic inspection and harvestingof chili peppers. Artiﬁc. Intellig. Agric. 5, 102 –117.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aiia. 2021.05.003.Hossain, M.Z., Komatsuzaki, M., 2021. Weed management and economic analysis of a ro-botic lawnmower: a case study in a japanese pear orchard. Agriculture 11, 113.https://doi.org/10.3390/agriculture11020113 . Huang, C.C., Chang, C.L., 2019. Design and implementation of bio-inspired snake bone-armed robot for agricultural irrigation application. IFAC-PapersOnLine 52, 98 –101. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ifacol.2019.12.504 .Huang, C.H., Chen, P.J., Lin, Y.J., Chen, B.W., Zheng, J.X., 2021. A robot-based intelligentmanagement design for agricultural cyber-physical systems. Comput. Electron.Agric. 181, 105967.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compag.2020.105967 . Ireri, D., Belal, E., Okinda, C., Makange, N., Ji, C., 2019. A computer vision system for defectdiscrimination and grading in tomatoes using machine learning and image process-ing. Artiﬁc. Intellig. Agric. 2, 28–37.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aiia.2019.06.001 . Isachsen, U.J., Theoharis, T., Misimi, E., 2021. Fast and accurate gpu-accelerated, high-resolution 3d registration for the robotic 3D reconstruction of compliant food objects.Comput. Electron. Agric. 180, 105929. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compag.2020. 105929.Ishii, K., Matsuo, T., Takemura, Y., Sonoda, T., Nishida, Y., Yasukawa, S., Fujinaga, T., 2021.Tomato-harvesting-robot competition towards smart agriculture. Proceedings of In-ternational Conference on Artiﬁcial Life & Robotics (ICAROB2021), ALife Robotics ,pp. 1–5.https://alife-robotics.co.jp/ICAROB2021-PS1.pdf . Jayne, T.S., Chamberlin, J., Headey, D.D., 2014. Land pressures, the evolution of farmingsystems, and development strategies in africa: a synthesis. Food Policy 48, 1 –17. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodpol.2014.05.014 . Jez, J.M., Topp, C.N., Yao, L., van de Zedde, R., Kowalchuk, G., 2021. Recent developmentsand potential of robotics in plant eco-phenotyping. Emerg. Top. Life Sci. 5, 289 –300. https://doi.org/10.1042/ETLS20200275 . Jiang, H., Li, X., Safara, F., 2021. Iot-based agriculture: deep learning in detecting apple fruitdiseases. Microprocess. Microsyst., 104321. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.micpro.2021. 104321.Jung, J., Maeda, M., Chang, A., Bhandari, M., Ashapure, A., Landivar-Bowles, J., 2021. Thepotential of remote sensing and arti ﬁcial intelligence as tools to improve the resil- ience of agriculture production systems. Curr. Opin. Biotechnol. 70, 15 –22.https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.copbio.2020.09.003 . Kakani, V., Nguyen, V.H., Kumar, B.P., Kim, H., Pasupuleti, V.R., 2020. A critical review oncomputer vision and artiﬁcial intelligence in food industry. J. Agric. Food Res. 2,100033.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jafr.2020.100033 . Kamilaris, A., Prenafeta-Boldú, F.X., 2018. Deep learning in agriculture: a survey. Comput.Electron. Agric. 147, 70 –90.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compag.2018.02.016 . Khan, T., Qiu, J., Qureshi, M.A.A., Iqbal, M.S., Mehmood, R., Hussain, W., 2020. Agriculturalfruit prediction using deep neural networks. Proc. Comp. Sci. 174, 72 –78.https://doi. org/10.1016/j.procs.2020.06.058 . Khare, D., Cherussery, S., Mohan, S., 2021. A novel design for an autonomous mobile agri-cultural fruit harvesting robot. IFToMM Symposium on Mechanism Design for Robot-ics. Springer, pp. 38–49.https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-75271-2_5 . Khort, D., Kutyrev, A., Filippov, R., Semichev, S., 2021. Development control system roboticplatform for horticulture. E3S Web of Conferences, EDP Sciences, p. 01024. https:// doi.org/10.1051/e3sconf/202126201024 . Kitchenham, B., Charters, S., 2007. Guidelines for performing Systematic Literature Re- views in Software Engineering, Technical Report EBSE 2007-001. Keele Universityand Durham University Joint Report.Kim, W.S., Lee, D.H., Kim, Y.J., Kim, T., Lee, W.S., Choi, C.H., 2021. Stereo-vision-based cropheight estimation for agricultural robots. Comput. Electron. Agric. 181, 105937.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compag.2020.105937 . Kiourt, C., Pavlidis, G., Markantonatou, S., 2020. Deep learning approaches in food recog-nition. Machine Learning Paradigms. Springer, pp. 83 –108.https://doi.org/10.1007/ 978-3-030-49724-8_4.Kounalakis, T., Triantafyllidis, G.A., Nalpantidis, L., 2019. Deep learning-based visual recog-nition of rumex for robotic precision farming. Comput. Electron. Agric. 165, 104973.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compag.2019.104973 . Kujawa, S., Niedbala, G., 2021. Arti ﬁcial Neural Networks in Agriculture. https://doi.org/ 10.3390/agriculture11060497. Kultongkham, A., Kumnon, S., Thintawornkul, T., Chanthasopeephan, T., 2021. The designof a force feedback soft gripper for tomato harvesting. J. Agric. Eng. 52. https://doi. org/10.4081/jae.2021.1090. Kumar, P., Joshi, V., 2015.Applications of hydrological model swat on the upper water-shed of river subarnarekha with special reference to model performance and its eval-uation. J. Basic Appl. Eng. Res. 2, 1128 –1134. Kurniasih, D., Jasmi, K.A., Basiron, B., Huda, M., Maseleno, A., 2018. The uses of fuzzy logicmethod forﬁnding agriculture and livestock value of potential village. Int. J. Eng.Technol. 7, 1091
–1095.https://doi.org/10.14419/ijet.v7i3.12495 . Kwon, O.Y., Lee, M.H., Guan, C., Lee, S.W., 2019. Subject-independent brain –computer in- terfaces based on deep convolutional neural networks. IEEE Trans. Neural Netw.Learn. Syst. 31, 3839–3852.https://doi.org/10.1109/TNNLS.2019.2946869 . Le, T., Gjevestad, J.G.O., From, P.J., 2019. Online 3D mapping and localization system foragricultural robots. IFAC-PapersOnLine 52, 167 –172.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ifacol. 2019.12.516.Lee, J., Nazki, H., Baek, J., Hong, Y., Lee, M., 2020. Arti ﬁcial intelligence approach for tomato detection and mass estimation in precision agriculture. Sustainability 12, 9138.https://doi.org/10.3390/su12219138 . Li, J., Yin, J., Deng, L., 2021a. A robot vision navigation method using deep learning in edgecomputing environment. EURASIP Journal on Advances in Signal Processing 2021,pp. 1–20.https://doi.org/10.1186/s13634-021-00734-6 . Li, Q., Zeng, J., Lin, L., Zhang, J., Zhu, J., Yao, L., Wang, S., Du, J., Wu, Z., 2021b. Mid-infraredspectra feature extraction and visualization by convolutional neural network forsugar adulteration identiﬁcation of honey and real-world application. LWT 140,110856.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lwt.2021.110856 . Li, W., Wang, D., Li, M., Gao, Y., Wu, J., Yang, X., 2021c. Field detection of tiny pests fromsticky trap images using deep learning in agricultural greenhouse. Comput. Electron.Agric. 183, 106048.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compag.2021.106048 . Libertn, M., Kvaček, J., Bek, J.,Žárskỳ,V . ,Štorch, P., 2018. Sporophytes of polysporangiate land plants from the early silurian period may have been photosynthetically autono-mous. Nat. Plants 4, 269 –271.https://doi.org/10.1038/s41477-018-0140-y .V. Sachithra and L.D.C.S. Subhashini Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 8 (2023) 46 –59
57Linaza, M.T., Posada, J., Bund, J., Eisert, P., Quartulli, M., Döllner, J., Pagani, A., Golaizola, I.,Barriguinha, A., Moysiadis, T., et al., 2021. Data-driven arti ﬁcial intelligence applica- tions for sustainable precision agriculture. Agronomy 11, 1227. https://doi.org/10. 3390/agronomy11061227.Liu, X., Zhu, X., Zhang, Q., Yang, T., Pan, Y., Sun, P., 2020. A remote sensing and arti ﬁcial neural network-based integrated agricultural drought index: index developmentand applications. Catena 186, 104394. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.catena.2019.104394 . Liu, L.W., Ma, X., Wang, Y.M., Lu, C.T., Lin, W.S., 2021. Using arti ﬁcial intelligence algo- rithms to predict rice (oryza sativa l.) growth rate for precision agriculture. Comput.Electron. Agric. 187, 106286.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compag.2021.106286 . Lytridis, C., Kaburlasos, V.G., Pachidis, T., Manios, M., Vrochidou, E., Kalampokas, T.,Chatzistamatis, S., 2021. An overview of cooperative robotics in agriculture. Agron-omy 11, 1818.https://doi.org/10.3390/agronomy11091818 . Magalhães, S.A., Castro, L., Moreira, G., Dos Santos, F.N., Cunha, M., Dias, J., Moreira, A.P.,2021. Evaluating the single-shot multibox detector and yolo deep learning modelsfor the detection of tomatoes in a greenhouse. Sensors 21, 3569. https://doi.org/10. 3390/s21103569.Magomadov, V., 2019. Deep learning and its role in smart agriculture. Journal of Physics:Conference Series. IOP Publishing, p. 044109. https://doi.org/10.1088/1742-6596/ 1399/4/044109.Mangla, S.K., Sharma, Y.K., Patil, P.P., Yadav, G., Xu, J., 2019. Logistics and distribution chal-lenges to managing operations for corporate sustainability: study on leading indiandiary organizations. J. Clean. Prod. 238, 117620. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro. 2019.117620.Marinoudi, V., Sørensen, C.G., Pearson, S., Bochtis, D., 2019. Robotics and labour in agricul-ture. A context consideration. Biosyst. Eng. 184, 111 –121.https://doi.org/10.1016/j. biosystemseng.2019.06.013. McGuire, A.M., 2017. Agricultural science and organic farming: time to change our trajec-tory. Agric. Environ. Lett. 2, 170024. https://doi.org/10.2134/ael2017.08.0024 . Mehta, S., Burks, T., 2016. Adaptive visual servo control of robotic harvesting systems.IFAC-PapersOnLine 49, 287 –292.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ifacol.2016.10.053 . Mellor, J.W., 2017. Agricultural Development and Economic Transformation: PromotingGrowth with Poverty Reduction. Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319- 65259-7.Mendes, J.M., dos Santos, F.N., Ferraz, N.A., do Couto, P.M., dos Santos, R.M., 2019. Localiza-tion based on natural features detector for steep slope vineyards. J. Intell. Robot. Syst.93, 433–446.https://doi.org/10.1007/s10846-017-0770-8 . Midtiby, H.S., Åstrand, B., Jørgensen, O., Jørgensen, R.N., 2016. Upper limit for context – based crop classiﬁcation in robotic weeding applications. Biosyst. Eng. 146,183–192.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biosystemseng.2016.01.012 . Mohamed, E., Ali, A., El-Shirbeny, M., Abutaleb, K., Shaddad, S.M., 2020. Mapping soilmoisture and their correlation with crop pattern using remotely sensed data in aridregion. Egypt. J. Remote Sens. Space Sci. 23, 347 –353.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejrs. 2019.04.003.Mohammed, I.I., Jassim, A.R.A.L., 2021. Design and testing of an agricultural robot to oper-ate a combined seeding machine. Ann. Roman. Soc. Cell Biol. 25, 92 –106.https:// annalsofrscb.ro/index.php/journal/article/view/9180 . Mohapatra, A.G., Lenka, S.K., 2016. Neural network pattern classi ﬁcation and weather de- pendent fuzzy logic model for irrigation control in WSN based precision agriculture.Proc. Comp. Sci. 78, 499 –
506.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procs.2016.02.094 . Monteiro, A.L., de Freitas Souza, M., Lins, H.A., da Silva Teó ﬁlo, T.M., Júnior, A.P.B., Silva, D.V., Mendonça, V., 2021. A new alternative to determine weed control in agriculturalsystems based on artiﬁcial neural networks (anns). Field Crop Res. 263, 108075.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fcr.2021.108075 . Moya-Rico, J., Molina, A.E., Belmonte, J.F., Tendero, J.C., Almendros-Ibanez, J.A., 2019. Char-acterization of a triple concentric-tube heat exchanger with corrugated tubes usingartiﬁcial neural networks (ann). Appl. Therm. Eng. 147, 1036 –1046.https://doi.org/ 10.1016/j.applthermaleng.2018.10.136 . Navarro, E., Costa, N., Pereira, A., 2020. A systematic review of iot solutions for smart farm-ing. Sensors 20, 4231.https://doi.org/10.3390/s20154231 . Navas, E., Fernandez, R., Sepúlveda, D., Armada, M., Gonzalez-de Santos, P., 2020. A designcriterion based on shear energy consumption for robotic harvesting tools. Agronomy10, 734.https://doi.org/10.3390/agronomy10050734 . Ngugi, L.C., Abelwahab, M., Abo-Zahhad, M., 2021. Recent advances in image processingtechniques for automated leaf pest and disease recognition –a review. Inform. Proc. Agric. 8, 27–51.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.inpa.2020.04.004 . Nguyen, T.H., Nong, D., Paustian, K., 2019. Surrogate-based multi-objective optimizationof management options for agricultural landscapes using arti ﬁcial neural networks. E c o l .M o d e l .4 0 0 ,1–13.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolmodel.2019.02.018 . Nguyen, T.T., Hoang, T.D., Pham, M.T., Vu, T.T., Nguyen, T.H., Huynh, Q.T., Jo, J., 2020. Mon-itoring agriculture areas with satellite images and deep learning. Appl. Soft Comput.95, 106565.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.asoc.2020.106565 . Oliveira, L.F., Moreira, A.P., Silva, M.F., 2021. Advances in agriculture robotics: a state-of-the-art review and challenges ahead. Robotics 10, 52. https://doi.org/10.3390/robot- ics10020052.Özlüoymak, Ö.B., Bolat, A., 2020. Development and assessment of a novel imaging soft-ware for optimizing the spray parameters on water-sensitive papers. Comput. Elec-tron. Agric. 168, 105104.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compag.2019.105104 . Özlüoymak, Ö.B., Bolat, A., Bayat, A., Güzel, E., 2019. Design, development, and evaluationof a target oriented weed control system using machine vision. Turk. J. Agric. For. 43,164–173.https://doi.org/10.3906/tar-1803-8 . Padilla, J.E., Hudson, A., 2019. United nations development programme (undp) perspec-tives on asian large marine ecosystems. Deep-Sea Res. II Top. Stud. Oceanogr. 163,127–129.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dsr2.2019.05.011 .Paliwal, N., Vanjani, P., Liu, J.W., Saini, S., Sharma, A., 2019. Image processing-based intel-ligent robotic system for assistance of agricultural crops. Int. J. Soc. Human. Comp. 3,191–204.https://doi.org/10.1504/IJSHC.2019.101602 . Panarin, R.N., Khvorova, L.A., 2021. Software development for agricultural tillage robotbased on technologies of machine intelligence. International Conference on High-Performance Computing Systems and Technologies in Scienti ﬁc Research, Automa- tion of Control and Production. Springer, pp. 354 –367.https://doi.org/10.1007/978- 3-030-94141-3_28.Panda, S., 2014. Coordination of a socially responsible supply chain using revenue sharingcontract. Transp. Res. Part E: Logist. Transp. Rev. 67, 92 –104.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tre.2014.04.002.Peteinatos, G.G., Reichel, P., Karouta, J., Andújar, D., Gerhards, R., 2020. Weed identi ﬁca- tion in maize, sunﬂower, and potatoes with the aid of convolutional neural networks.Remote Sens. 12, 4185.https://doi.org/10.3390/rs12244185 . Porsch, M.R.M.H., Rasia, L.A., Thesing, N.J., Pedrali, P.C., Valdiero, A.C., 2019. Low cost ro-botic manipulator for family agriculture. J. Agric. Stud. 7, 225 –239.https://ideas. repec.org/a/mth/jas888/v7y2019i2p225-239.html . Pujari, D., Yakkundimath, R., Byadgi, A.S., 2016. Svm and ann based classiﬁcation of plant diseases using feature reduction technique. IJIMAI 3, 6 –14. Raja, R., Nguyen, T.T., Slaughter, D.C., Fennimore, S.A., 2020. Real-time weed-crop classi ﬁ- cation and localisation technique for robotic weed control in lettuce. Biosyst. Eng.192, 257–274.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biosystemseng.2020.02.002 . Roshanianfard, A., Mengmeng, D., Nematzadeh, S., 2021. A 4-dof scara robotic arm for var-ious farm applications: designing, kinematic modelling, and parameterization. ActaTechnol. Agric. 24, 61–66.https://doi.org/10.2478/ata-2021-0010 . Ruigrok, T., van Henten, E., Booij, J., van Boheemen, K., Kootstra, G., 2020. Application-speciﬁc evaluation of a weed-detection algorithm for plant-speci ﬁc spraying. Sensors 20, 7262.https://doi.org/10.3390/s20247262 . Rysz, M., Mehta, S.S., 2021. A risk-averse optimization approach to human-robot collabo-ration in robotic fruit harvesting. Comput. Electron. Agric. 182, 106018. https://doi. org/10.1016/j.compag.2021.106018 . Santin, F., Da Silva, R., Grzybowski, J., 2016. Arti ﬁcial neural network ensembles and the design of performance-oriented riparian buffer strips for the ﬁltering of nitrogen in agricultural catchments. Ecol. Eng. 94, 493 –502.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecoleng. 2016.06.008.Santos, L., Santos, F.N., Oliveira, P.M., Shinde, P., 2019. Deep learning applications in agri-culture: a short review. Iberian Robotics Conference. Springer, pp. 139 –151.https:// doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-35990-4_12 . Santos, L., Santos, F., Mendes, J., Costa, P., Lima, J., Reis, R., Shinde, P., 2020. Path planningaware of robot’s center of mass for steep slope vineyards. Robotica 38, 684 –698. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0263574719000961 . Sayer, J., Cassman, K.G., 2013. Agricultural innovation to protect the environment. Proc.Natl. Acad. Sci. 110, 8345 –8348.https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1208054110 . Schor, J.B., Attwood-Charles, W., 2017. The “sharing”economy: labor, inequality, and so- cial connection on for-proﬁt platforms. Sociol. Compass 11, e12493. https://doi.org/ 10.1111/soc4.12493.Senocak, A.A., Goren, H.G., 2021. Forecasting the biomass-based energy potential using ar-tiﬁ
cial intelligence and geographic information systems: a case study. Eng. Sci.Technol. Int. J. 26, 100992.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jestch.2021.04.011 . Seo, Y., Umeda, S., 2021. Evaluating farm management performance by the choice of pest-control sprayers in rice farming in Japan. Sustainability 13, 2618. https://doi.org/10. 3390/su13052618.Sharma, A.K., Bisen, U.K., 2013. Taxonomic documentation of insect pest fauna of vegeta-ble ecosystem collected in light trap. Int. J. Environ. Sci. Develop. Monitor. (IJESDM) 4,4–10 URLhttps://www.ripublication.com/ijesdmspl/ijesdmv4n3_01.pdf . Sharma, A., Jain, A., Gupta, P., Chowdary, V., 2020. Machine learning applications for pre-cision agriculture: a comprehensive review. IEEE Access 9, 4843 –4873.https://doi. org/10.1109/ACCESS.2020.3048415 . Sharma, A., Kumar, H., Mittal, K., Kauhsal, S., Kaushal, M., Gupta, D., Narula, A., 2021. Iotand deep learning-inspired multi-model framework for monitoring active ﬁre loca- tions in agricultural activities. Comput. Electr. Eng. 93, 107216. https://doi.org/10. 1016/j.compeleceng.2021.107216 . Singh, A., Imtiyaz, M., Isaac, R., Denis, D., 2012. Comparison of soil and water assessmenttool (swat) and multilayer perceptron (mlp) arti ﬁcial neural network for predicting sediment yield in the nagwa agricultural watershed in Jharkhand, India. Agric.Water Manag. 104, 113 –120.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.agwat.2011.12.005 . Song, Z., Zhou, Z., Wang, W., Gao, F., Fu, L., Li, R., Cui, Y., 2021. Canopy segmentation andwire reconstruction for kiwifruit robotic harvesting. Comput. Electron. Agric. 181,105933.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compag.2020.105933 . Spanaki, K., Karaﬁli, E., Sivarajah, U., Despoudi, S., Irani, Z., 2021. Arti ﬁcial intelligence and food security: swarm intelligence of agritech drones for smart agrifood operations.Prod. Plan. Control, 1–19https://doi.org/10.1080/09537287.2021.1882688 . Sudars, K., Jasko, J., Namatevs, I., Ozola, L., Badaukis, N., 2020. Dataset of annotated foodcrops and weed images for robotic computer vision control. Data Brief 31, 105833.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dib.2020.105833 . Taghavifar, H., Mardani, A., Hosseinloo, A.H., 2015. Appraisal of arti ﬁcial neural network- genetic algorithm based model for prediction of the power provided by the agricul-tural tractors. Energy 93, 1704 –1710.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2015.10.066 . Thomopoulos, V., Bitas, D., Papastavros, K.N., Tsipianitis, D., Kavga, A., 2021. Developmentof an integrated iot-based greenhouse control three-device robotic system. Agron-omy 11, 405.https://doi.org/10.3390/agronomy11020405 . Tian, Z., Wang, J.W., Li, J., Han, B., 2021. Designing future crops: challenges and strategiesfor sustainable agriculture. Plant J. 105, 1165 –1178.https://doi.org/10.1111/tpj. 15107.V. Sachithra and L.D.C.S. Subhashini Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 8 (2023) 46 –59
58Tilman, D., Balzer, C., Hill, J., Befort, B.L., 2011. Global food demand and the sustainable in-tensiﬁcation of agriculture. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 108, 20260 –20264.https://doi.org/ 10.1073/pnas.1116437108. Tittonell, P., Giller, K.E., 2013. When yield gaps are poverty traps: the paradigm of ecolog-ical intensiﬁcation in african smallholder agriculture. Field Crop Res. 143, 76 –90. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fcr.2012.10.007 . Traldi, R., 2021. Progress and pitfalls: a systematic review of the evidence for agriculturalsustainability standards. Ecol. Indic. 125, 107490. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolind. 2021.107490.Ünal, I., Topakci, M., Çanakci, M., Karayel, D., Yilmaz, E., Kabas, Ö., 2021. Development of amobile robot-based combined sensor platform to determine the corre-lation be-tween soil penetration resistance and electrical conductivity. Turk. J. Agric. For. 45,365–379.https://doi.org/10.3906/tar-2007-43 . Utstumo, T., Urdal, F., Brevik, A., Dørum, J., Netland, J., Overskeid, Ø., Berge, T.W., Gravdahl,J.T., 2018. Robotic in-row weed control in vegetables. Comput. Electron. Agric. 154,36–45.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compag.2018.08.043 . Väljaots, E., Lehiste, H., Kiik, M., Leemet, T., 2018. Soil sampling automation using mobilerobotic platform. J. Agron. Res. 16 (3), 917 –922.https://dspace.emu.ee/bitstream/ handle/10492/4000/Vol16No3_30.pdf?sequence=4isAllowed=y . Villa-Henriksen, A., Edwards, G.T.C., Green, O., Sørensen, C.A.G., 2021. Evaluation of grainquality-based simulated selective harvest performed by an autonomous agriculturalrobot. Agronomy 11, 1728.https://doi.org/10.3390/agronomy11091728 . Vincent, D.R., Deepa, N., Elavarasan, D., Srinivasan, K., Chauhdary, S.H., Iwendi, C., 2019.Sensors driven ai-based agriculture recommendation model for assessing land suit-ability. Sensors 19, 3667.https://doi.org/10.3390/s19173667 . Wheeler, T., Von Braun, J., 2013. Climate change impacts on global food security. Science341, 508–513.https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1239402 . Williams, H.A., Jones, M.H., Nejati, M., Seabright, M.J., Bell, J., Penhall, N.D., Barnett, J.J.,Duke, M.D., Scarfe, A.J., Ahn, H.S., et al., 2019. Robotic kiwifruit harvesting using ma-chine vision, convolutional neural networks, and robotic arms. Biosyst. Eng. 181,140–156.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biosystemseng.2019.03.007 . Xue, W., Hu, X., Wei, Z., Mei, X., Chen, X., Xu, Y., 2019. A fast and easy method forpredicting agricultural waste compost maturity by image-based deep learning.Bioresour. Technol. 290, 121761. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2019.121761 . Yamaç, S.S., 2021. Artiﬁcial intelligence methods reliably predict crop evapotranspirationwith different combinations of meteorological data for sugar beet in a semiarid area.Agric. Water Manag. 254, 106968. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.agwat.2021.106968 .Yorozu, A., Ishigami, G., Takahashi, M., 2021. Human-following control in furrow for agri-cultural support robot. International Conference on Intelligent Autonomous Systems.Springer, pp. 155–164.https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-95892-3_12 . Zangina, U., Buyamin, S., Abidin, M., Mahmud, M., 2021. Agricultural rout planning withvariable rate pesticide application in a greenhouse environment. Alexandr. Eng. J.60, 3007–3020.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aej.2021.01.010 . Zapotezny-Anderson, P., Lehnert, C., 2019. Towards active robotic vision in agriculture: adeep learning approach to visual servoing in occluded and unstructured protectedcropping environments. IFAC-PapersOnLine 52, 120 –125.https://doi.org/10.1016/j. ifacol.2019.12.508.Zargar, G., Tanha, A.A., Parizad, A., Amouri, M., Bagheri, H., 2020. Reservoir rock properties
estimation based on conventional and nmr log data using ann-cuckoo: a case study inone of superﬁelds in Iran southwest. Petroleum 6, 304 –310.https://doi.org/10.1016/ j.petlm.2019.12.002.Zhang, C., Noguchi, N., 2017. Development of a multi-robot tractor system for agricultureﬁeld work. Comput. Electron. Agric. 142, 79 –90.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compag. 2017.08.017.Zhang, B., Xie, Y., Zhou, J., Wang, K., Zhang, Z., 2020. State-of-the-art robotic grippers,grasping and control strategies, as well as their applications in agricultural robots: areview. Comput. Electron. Agric. 177, 105694. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compag. 2020.105694.Zhang, L., Huang, Z., Liu, W., Guo, Z., Zhang, Z., 2021. Weather radar echo predictionmethod based on convolution neural network and long short-term memory net-works for sustainable e-agriculture. J. Clean. Prod. 298, 126776. https://doi.org/10. 1016/j.jclepro.2021.126776. Zhou, Z., Majeed, Y., Naranjo, G.D., Gambacorta, E.M., 2021. Assessment for crop waterstress with infrared thermal imagery in precision agriculture: a review and futureprospects for deep learning applications. Comput. Electron. Agric. 182, 106019.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compag.2021.106019 . Zhu, N., Liu, X., Liu, Z., Hu, K., Wang, Y., Tan, J., Huang, M., Zhu, Q., Ji, X., Jiang, Y., et al., 2018.Deep learning for smart agriculture: concepts, tools, applications, and opportunities.Int. J. Agric. Biol. Eng. 11, 32 –44.https://doi.org/10.25165/j.ijabe.20181104.4475 . Zujevs, A., Osadcuks, V., Ahrendt, P., 2015. Trends in robotic sensor technologies for fruitharvesting: 2010-2015. Proc. Comp. Sci. 77, 227 –233.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procs. 2015.12.378.V. Sachithra and L.D.C.S. Subhashini Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 8 (2023) 46 –59
59