ORIGINAL ARTICLE
Image watermark detection techniquesusing quadtrees
Nidaa A. Abbas
Software Dept., College of IT – University of Babylon, IraqReceived 11 November 2013; revised 22 July 2014; accepted 31 July 2014
Available online 12 August 2014
KEYWORDSCDMA;DCT;DWT;LSB;Quadtree decomposi-tion;Subjective metricsAbstract The quadtree, a hierarchical data structure for the representation ofspatial information based on the principle of recursive decomposition, is widelyused in digital image processing and computer graphics. This paper demonstratesthe detection of invisible watermarked images generated by popular watermark-ing techniques, including CDMA, DCT, DWT, and Least Signiﬁcant Bit (LSB)using quadtree. Results corresponding to typical (512 ·512) pixel images show differences among these methods when they are used. Each time we use the sameimage, the original images and invisible watermarked image to test the fourmethods in conjunction with quadtree decomposition. In addition to the subjec-tive method represented by quadtree, many objective evaluations such as Pear-son correlation, mean square error (MSE), Structural SIMilarity Index (SSIM)and false positive and false negative were used to give the comparison criteriabetween original and watermarked images. In results, the quadtree decomposi-tion considered a promise subjective method to recognize among these water-mark techniques.
ª2014 King Saud University. Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
E-mail address:drnidaa_muhsin@ieee.orgPeer review under responsibility of King Saud University.
Production and hosting by ElsevierApplied Computing and Informatics (2015) 11, 102–115
Saudi Computer Society, King Saud University
Applied Computing and Informatics
(http://computer.org.sa)www.ksu.edu.sawww.sciencedirect.com
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.aci.2014.07.0032210-8327ª2014 King Saud University. Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.1. Introduction
Digital image watermarking has attracted the attention of many researchers overthe past decade. The motivation behind this work is the achievement of informa-tion security, information concealment, authentication, and ﬁngerprinting. Severalapproaches to digital image watermarking have been proposed, one of which is thediscrete wavelet transform (DWT). The DWT has become highly popular in theﬁeld of watermarking due to its ability to decompose available images into sub-bands in which watermarks can be embedded selectively. There are many pub-lished studies on this approach and its combination with other approaches, suchas quadtrees, DCT, and CDMA approaches. A semi-blind algorithm proposed[4]that embeds a binary sequence watermark into signiﬁcant wavelet coefﬁcientsusing quadtree decomposition. A random location table is used to identify thecoefﬁcient in which the watermark bit is embedded. In [12], an algorithm for digi- tal watermarking based on the discrete cosine transform (DCT) and the discretewavelet transform (DWT) was presented. Mistry[13]provides a comparison (in terms of spatial and frequency domains) of digital watermarking methods includ-ing the LSB, the DCT, and the DWT. Copyright protection is an important issuein the ﬁeld of watermarking. In Satyanarayana Murty and Rajesh Kumar [17], the authors presented a hybrid watermark scheme using DWT, DCT, and SVD. InGunjal[7], a comprehensive overview of digital image watermarking was providedthrough performance evaluation metrics such as PSNR and correlation factors.Abdallah et al.[1]applied blind image watermarking using wavelets that requiredneither the original image nor any additional information for watermark recovery.In the medical ﬁeld[3]combined reversible watermarking with CDMADWT andCDMA-sp, in a study of three security properties (integrity, authenticity and con-ﬁdentiality) of medical data and patient information. Khalili [9]proposed a secure and robust cryptographic CDMA watermark algorithm with DWT, YIQ colorspace, and the Arnold transform against JPEG compression and various noiseattacks. Digital media content protection and copyright protection were discussedin Sharma and Prashar[18]with regard to DWT.
Many papers deal with the direction of objective metrics, few of them concen-trated on the subjective metric especially for invisible watermark.
The most accurate tests of accuracy and quality are subjective tests involvingthe human observers. Those tests have been developed by psychophysics, scientiﬁcdisciplines, which aim to identify the relationship between the physical world andpeople’s subjective experience of this world. An accepted measure for evaluationof the level of distortion is a Just Noticeable Difference (JND), and it representsa level of distortion that can be perceived in 50% of experimental trials. One JNDthus represents a minimum distortion that is generally perceptible [15]. Survey of watermarking techniques and applications was given in Muharemagic and Furht[15]. Marini et al.[11]proposed to use a Double Stimulus Impairment Scale(DSIS) protocol. In this protocol, the original and the watermarked images areImage watermark detection techniques 103presented explicitly to the observer. The observer is asked to rate the impairmentson a scale of ﬁve categories: imperceptible corresponding to score 5, perceptiblebut not annoying/score 4, slightly annoying/score 3, annoying/score 2 and veryannoying/score 1.
These subjective tests can provide very accurate measure of perceptibility of anembedded watermark. However, they can be very expensive to administer, theyare not easily repeatable, and they cannot be automated.
The quadtrees have many applications such as image segmentation, datasmoothing, edge enhancement and image compression [19,20,10,8,2].
Quadtree decomposition is used in this paper as an analytical technique to sub-divide an image into blocks that are more homogeneous than the image itself. Thistechnique reveals information about the structure of the image. We use this datastructure to examine differences among watermarking methods such as DWT,DCT, LSB, and CDMA in relation to watermark insertion.
This paper is organized as follows: Section2provides an overview of relatedtheories. Section3presents the subjective and objective performance evaluation.Section4depicts the proposed system. In Section5, we present experimental results and a discussion of the proposed system. Finally, Section 6concludes the paper.
2. Related theories
2.1. Code division multiple access (CDMA)
CDMA is an application of a direct sequence spread spectrum. Its purpose is tocombine multiple signals that, despite overlapping in both time and frequency,remain separable. This separability is achieved by projecting individual messagesonto near-orthogonal PN sequences prior to carrier modulation. The number ofsimultaneous users in the system dictates the choice of a particular sequence. Max-imal length, Kasami, and Gold sequences have been widely used for many reasons.
For example, m-sequences provide the longest period but do not offer as manyorthogonal choices as the other two do[14].
Spread spectrum (SS) watermarking is accomplished by embedding every water-mark bit over many samples of the cover image using a modulated pseudo-randomspreading sequence. SS watermark embedding is analyzed mathematically asfollows:2.1.1. Watermark insertion
LetBdenote the string of binary-valued watermark bits as a sequence of Nbits.
B¼b 1;b2;b3;...;b i fg ;b i2f1;0g:ð1Þ104 N.A. AbbasIfIdenotes the image block of lengthL(i.e., image transformation coefﬁcientsof lengthL), a binary-valued code pattern of lengthMis used to spread each watermark bit. Therefore, a setPofNcode patterns, each of lengthM, is gener- ated to form watermark sequenceWthrough the following operation.
½WM/C138¼XNi¼1
bi½PM/C138i ð2Þ
The watermarked imageI wis obtained by embedding watermark informationWinto image blockI. The data embedding operation can be mathematicallyexpressed as follows:
½ðIWÞM/C138¼½I M/C138þa/C1½W M/C138ð3Þ
Here,ais the modulation index, and its proper choice will optimize the maximum
amount of allowed distortion and minimum necessary watermark energy for reli-able detection.amay or may not be a function of image coefﬁcients. Accordingly,SS watermarking schemes can be categorized as signal adaptive or non-adaptive[5].
2.2. Discrete wavelet transform
The fundamental idea of the discrete wavelet transform (DWT) in image process-ing is to decompose the image into sub-images of different spatial domains andindependent frequency districts. Next, the coefﬁcient of the sub-image is trans-formed. After the original image has been DWT-transformed, it is decomposedinto four frequency districts: one low-frequency district (LL) and three high-frequency districts (LH, HL, and HH). If information from the low-frequencydistrict is DWT-transformed, information about the sub-level frequency districtcan be obtained. A two-dimensional image after three iterations of DWT decom-position is shown inFig. 1, where L represents the low-pass ﬁlter and H representsthe high-pass ﬁlter[18,21].
An original image can be decomposed into frequency districts HL1, LH1, andHH1. The information from the low-frequency district also can be decomposed
LL3 HL3  HL2 HL1 
LH3 HH3 
LH2 HH2 
LH1 HH1 
Figure 1Image after DWT decomposition.Image watermark detection techniques 105into sub-level frequency districts LL2, HL2, LH2, and HH2. Thus, the originalimage can be decomposed fornlevel wavelet transformation.2.2.1. Watermark insertion
The original image and the watermark are ﬁrst decomposed using the waveletpyramid structure. Next, the wavelet coefﬁcients (W
W) of the low-resolution rep- resentation of the watermark (W) are embedded in the largest wavelet coefﬁcients(I
W) of the low-resolution representation of the original image ( I), withlas a scal- ing parameter, as follows:
I0W¼IWð1þlW WÞð 4Þ
2.3. Discrete cosine transform
Resembling the discrete Fourier transform (DFT) in character, the discrete cosinetransform (DCT) turns over the edge of the image to transform the image into theform of an even function. The DCT is one of the most commonly used lineartransformations in digital signal process technology[12]. The two-dimensional dis- crete cosine transform (2D-DCT) is deﬁned as follows:
Cðu;vÞ¼aðuÞaðvÞXN/C01x¼0XN/C01y¼0
fðx;yÞcosð2xþ1Þup2N/C20/C21cosð2yþ1Þvp2N/C20/C21ð5Þ
The corresponding inverse transformation (2D-IDCT) is deﬁned as follows:
fðx;yÞ¼XN/C01x¼0XN/C01y¼0
aðuÞaðvÞCðu;vÞcosð2xþ1Þup2N/C20/C21cosð2yþ1Þvp2N/C20/C21ð6Þ
Here,Cis the DC-transformed block,fis the inverse DCT block, andu=0 ,1 ,2 , ...,K/C01,v=0 ,1 ,2 ,...,L/C01;KandLare the length and breadth of the image;a(u) anda(v) are deﬁned in the following equation.
aðuÞ¼1ﬃﬃﬃ
Kp ;u¼0ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2K;q16u6K/C018<:
;aðvÞ¼1ﬃﬃﬃ
Lp ;v¼0ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2L;q16v6L/C018<:
Not only can the 2D-DCT concentrate the information contained in the origi-
nal image into the smallest low-frequency coefﬁcient, it can also minimize theimage blocking effect to achieve a good compromise between the demands of cen-tralizing information and computing complications. Thus, the 2D-DCT is widelyapplied in compression coding.2.3.1. Watermark insertion
The embedding process is implemented in the following three steps:106 N.A. AbbasStep 1: The original image is transformed into the DCT domain to calculateDCT components using (5):Step 2: The watermark is embedded in n higher-magnitude coefﬁcients in thetransform matrix, excluding the DC component. This step ensures that thewatermark is embedded in the most signiﬁcant perceptual components of theimage. A watermark embedded in the less signiﬁcant components may bedestroyed by compression or other attacks. When the watermark X(n) is embed- ded into DCT componentsC(u,v) to obtain new watermarked DCT coefﬁcientsC
*(u,v), we specify a scaling parameterathat determines the extent to whichX(n) altersC(u,v), as shown in the following equation:
Cðu;vÞ/C3¼Cðu;vÞ½1þaXðnÞ/C138 ð7Þ
Step 3:nmodiﬁed DCT componentsC*(u,v) are reinserted, and the inverseDCT transform is taken to obtain the watermarked image I
*(u,v)[6].
2.4. Least Signiﬁcant Bit (LSB)
LSB coding is one of the earliest used methods in watermarking and steganogra-phy. It can be applied to any form of watermarking. In this method, the LSB ofthe carrier signal is substituted with the watermark. The bits are embedded in asequence that acts as the key. To retrieve the signal, this sequence must be known.The watermark encoder ﬁrst selects a subset of pixel values in which the water-mark must be embedded. Then, the watermark information is embedded on theLSBs of the pixels from this subset. While LSB coding is a very simple technique,the robustness of the watermark tends to be insufﬁcient. When using LSB coding,it is usually impossible to retrieve the watermark without noise [13]. 2.4.1. Watermark insertion
Procedure for Invisible Watermarking (Least Signiﬁcant Bit Watermarking). Araw bitmap image ‘A’ is selected from the set of standard test images. Let thisbe the base image onto which the watermark will be added.
(1) A raw bitmap image ‘B’ is selected from the set of standard test images. Thisis the watermark image to be added to the base image.(2) The most signiﬁcant bit (MSB) of the watermark image ‘B’ is read and writ-ten onto the Least Signiﬁcant Bit (LSB) of the base image ‘A’.
Thus, ‘A’ is watermarked with ‘B’, resulting in a combined image ‘C’. Thus, ‘C’now contains an image ‘A’ that has its LSBs replaced with the MSBs of ‘B’. TheImage watermark detection techniques 107LSB is a form of the spatial domain technique. This technique is used to add aninvisible or visible watermark to an image.
3. Performance evaluation
This section demonstrates the subjective and objective performance evaluation.
3.1. Quadtree for the detection of watermarking techniques (QT)
A natural gray-level image usually can be divided into differently sized regionswith variable amounts of details and information. Such segmentation of the imageis useful for the efﬁcient coding of image data. QT decomposition is a powerfultechnique that divides the image into 2-D homogeneous regions, thereby produc-ing the segmentation.
The decomposition builds a tree. Each tree node has four children and is asso-ciated with a uniquely deﬁned region of the image. The root of the tree is associ-ated with the entire image[19].
A quadtree representing a picture is a tree in which successively deeper levelsrepresent successively ﬁner subdivisions of picture areas. Each node representsthe quadrant of its parent. The tree is ﬁlled through the process of recursively sub-dividing an image matrix into four quadrants until a quadrant is one solid color. Aquadtree is a tree with nodes that are either leaves or have four children. The chil-dren are ordered: 1, 2, 3, and 4.3.1.1. Quadtree types
Quadtrees may be classiﬁed based on the type of data they represent, includingareas, points, lines and curves. Quadtrees may also be classiﬁed by whether theshape of the tree is independent of the order in which the data are processed. Somecommon types of quadtrees are:
(1) The region quadtree: The region quadtree represents a partition of space intotwo dimensions that decomposes a region into four equal quadrants, sub-quadrants, and so on. Each leaf node contains data corresponding to a speci-ﬁc subregion. Each node in the tree has either exactly four children or nochildren (a leaf node).
The region quadtree is not strictly a ‘tree’ (more precisely, ‘trees’) because thepositions of subdivisions are independent of the data. A region quadtree with adepth ofnmay be used to represent an image of 2
n·2npixels, with each pixel val- ued 0 or 1. The root node represents the entire image region. If the pixels in anyregion are not entirely 0 s or 1 s, that region is subdivided.
In this application, each leaf node represents a block of pixels that are all 0 s orall 1 s. A region quadtree may also be used as a variable resolution representationof a data ﬁeld. In this paper, the region quadtree is assumed.108 N.A. Abbas(2) Point quadtree: The point quadtree is an adaptation of a binary tree used torepresent two-dimensional point data. It shares the features of all quadtreesbut is a true tree because the center of a subdivision is always on a point. Theshape of the tree depends on the order in which the data are processed. Thepoint quadtree is typically very efﬁcient at comparing two-dimensionalordered data points, usually operating inO(logn) time.
Therefore, a node contains the following information:
/C15Four pointers: quad [‘NW’], quad [‘NE’], quad [‘SW’], and quad [‘SE’]./C15A point that, in turn, contains:
/C0A key, usually expressed asxandycoordinates./C0A value, e.g., a name.(1) Edge quadtree: Edge quadtrees are speciﬁcally used to store lines rather thanpoints. Curves are approximated by subdividing cells until a very ﬁne resolu-tion is reached. This procedure can result in extremely unbalanced trees,which may defeat the purpose of indexing.Fig. 2demonstrates the decompo-sition of an image[20,10].
The sparse matrix is used to save the data of quadtree decomposition. If Sis a sparse matrix,S(m,n) has the value of the block size at the location (m,n) such that only non-zero elements are given as {(mn),value}.
3.2. Objective performance evaluation3.2.1. Pearson correlation coefﬁcient
Pearson’s correlation coefﬁcient,r, is widely used in statistical analysis, patternrecognition, and image processing. Applications include comparing two imagesfor the purposes of image registration, object recognition, and disparity measure-ment. For monochrome digital images, the Pearson correlation coefﬁcient isdeﬁned as[16]:
Figure 2Image and its quadtree.Image watermark detection techniques 109r¼P
iðxi/C0x mÞðyi/C0ymÞﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃP
iðxi/C0x mÞ2ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃP
iðyi/C0ymÞ2qr ð8Þ
wherex iis the intensity of theith pixel in image 1,y iis the intensity of theith pixel
in image 2,x mis the mean intensity of image 1, andy mis the mean intensity of image 2.
The correlation coefﬁcient has the valuer= 1 if the two images are absolutelyidentical,r= 0 if they are completely uncorrelated, andr=/C01 if they are com- pletely anti-correlated, for example, if one image is the negative of the other.3.2.2. The Structural SIMilarity Index (SSIM)
SSIM index is a method for measuring the similarity between two images. Struc-tural information is the idea that the pixels have strong inter-dependencies espe-cially when they are spatially close. These dependencies carry importantinformation about the structure of the objects in the visual scene. The SSIM metricis calculated on various windows of an image. The measure between two windowsxandyof common sizeN·Nis[22]:
SSIMðx;yÞ¼ð2lxlyþc1Þð2r xyþc2Þðl
2xþl2yþc1Þðr2xþr2yþc2Þð9Þ
wherel xandl yare the average ofxandy,respectively,r2xandr2yare the variance
ofxandyrespectively, andr xyis the covariance ofxandy.c 1=(k 1L)2and c
2=(k 2L)2are two variables to stabilize the division with weak denominator, L isthe dynamic range of the pixel-values (typically this is 2
#bits per pixel/C01), and k
1= 0.01 andk 2= 0.03. The resultant SSIM index is a decimal value between/C01 and 1, and value 1 is only reachable in the case of two identical sets of data.3.2.3. Mean square error (MSE)
The MSE is the expected value of the squared error
MSE¼1MNXMy¼1XNx¼1
Iðx;yÞ/C0I0ðx;yÞ½/C1382ð10Þ
whereI(x,y) is the original image,I0(x,y) is the approximated version and (M,N)
are the dimensions of the images. A lower value for MSE means less error.3.2.4. Confusion matrix
This matrix provides a quantitative performance representation for each classiﬁerin terms of class recognition or detection. Values along the main diagonal give thetotal number of correct classiﬁcations for each class. Values other than those onthe main diagonal represent classiﬁcation errors.110 N.A. Abbas4. Proposed system for detection of watermarking techniques
The proposed system was implemented on a Dell Laptop (Windows 7, ProcessorCore 2 Duo and 2.00 GB RAM) using MATLAB. In this section, we describe adetection system using a quadtree.Fig. 3is a conceptual diagram of the proposedsystem.
The system operates on the basis of the steps below:
1. Read a gray BMP-type image S.
2. Read a black and white image for use as the watermark w (the watermarkimage, 50·20).3. Embed the image using CDMA, DWT, DCT, and LSB techniques.4. Performance Evaluation which is divided into two criteria, subjective andobjective.
4.1. Run a quadtree for each technique individually as subjective criterion.
4.1.1. The quadtree divides a square image into four equal-sized squareblocks.4.1.2. Each block is tested against a speciﬁed criterion of homogeneity (thequadtree is based on the successive subdivision of a bound image arrayinto four equal-size quadrants. If the array does not consist entirely of1 s (black) or entirely of 0 s (white), then it is subdivided into quadrants,subquadrants, and so on, until blocks are obtained that consists entirelyof 1 s or entirely of 0 s; that is, each block is entirely contained in theregion or entirely disjoint from it).4.1.3. If a block meets the criterion.
/C15It is not further divided./C15If it does not meet the criterion, it is further subdivided into fourblocks; go to 4.1.3.
Original Image SEmbedding Techniques  
CDMA 
DWT 
DCT 
LSB Watermark Image wPerformance Evaluation  Quadtree Decomposition Quadtree Decomposition 
Plot the decomposition for each technique Subjective 
Evaluation
Pearson Correlation 
MSE 
SSIM Objective 
Evaluation Tables of ResultConfusion Matrix 
Figure 3The proposed system.Image watermark detection techniques 1114.2. Plot the quadtree decomposition for each watermarking technique.4.3. Plot the quadtree decomposition for the original image.4.4. Compare the results of the two plots.5. Objective Evaluation.
5.1. Pearson correlation.5.2. MSE.5.3. SSIM.5.4. Confusion matrix.
5. Experimental results
This section presents the results of the implementation of different watermarktechniques.Fig. 4shows the original images (512·512 in size) used in the experi-ment and the black and white watermark image (50·20 in size).
In experimental results, we want to show the difference between the commonoriginal image (like Lena) and if this image was watermarked with another imageusing four distinct watermark techniques CDMA, DWT, DCT, and LSB. Quad-tree decomposition is a subjective method to reveal the difference between the ori-ginal and the watermark images using the histogram.
The quadtree decomposition of distinct images was illustrated using originalimages like Lena, Alaine, Boat and House (seeSupplementary Figs. S1–S4).
We examine the quadtree decomposition as subjective metrics with comparewith originals images which show the difference between the histogram for distinctwatermark techniques: CDMA, DWT, DCT, and LSB (see Supplementary Figs. S1–S4).
In accordance with the histograms of subjective evaluation using quadtree, themetric should provide a quantitative evaluation of watermark image techniquesthat conform to subjective assessment which are given in Tables 1–4.
Table 1presents the results for SSIM between original and watermarkedimages. The result shows that the compare between original images are identical.It also is observed from the comparison of the original image with watermarkedimages that there ﬂuctuate depending on methods that used to image watermark-
Lena 
 Alai ne 
 Boat 
House 
a.The original images  (512 × 512) 
b.The watermark image (50 × 20) 
Figure 4Original and watermark image.112 N.A. Abbasing with nearly equal to the values resulting from each method, suggesting a wayto differentiate from other.Table 2gives the resultant of the correlation betweenthe original images and the watermarked images. The results seen for the sameimages show that the output correlation is equal to 1, which means that the twoimages are identical. As mentioned earlier in SSIM index, there is variation inthe results of each method of image watermarking.Table 3shows MSE results, which indicate no error between the same images. A lower value for MSE meansless error as noted in the LSB method.
Depending on the results of these assessments, another comparison between theoriginal images and watermarked images achieved in Table 4through the confu- sion matrix and theSupplementary Fig. S5using the false positive and false nega-tive. The confusion matrix is given inTable 4; numbers shown in bold font arecorrect classiﬁcations.
Results were evaluated from the confusion matrices to calculate percentageaccuracy measurements for each classiﬁcation.
All tested images used watermarked images. Note that the results reported inSupplementary Fig. S5show that the false negative decreases as false positiveincreases. Fortunately, this action reduces the chance of false negative conditionswhich occurs when a watermark detector fails to detect a watermark.Table 1Structural SIMilarity index (SSIM) between original and watermarked images.Original image DCT DWT CDMA LSBLena (original image) 1 0.86 0.66 0.77 0.99Alaine (original image) 1 0.86 0.66 0.77 0.99Boat (original image) 1 0.86 0.66 0.77 0.99House (original image) 1 0.86 0.66 0.77 0.99
Table 2Correlation between original and watermarked images.Original image DCT DWT CDMA LSBLena (original image) 1 0.993 0.976 0.987 0.999Alaine (original image) 1 0.993 0.976 0.987 0.999Boat (original image) 1 0.993 0.976 0.987 0.999House (original image) 1 0.993 0.976 0.988 0.999
Table 3Mean square error (MSE) between original and watermarked images.Original image DCT DWT CDMA LSBLena (original image) 0 27.4 105.2 52.4 0.4Alaine (original image) 0 27.2 105.1 52.4 0.4Boat (original image) 0 27.8 104.2 52.4 0.4House (original image) 0 27.1 105.1 52.4 0.4Image watermark detection techniques 1136. Conclusion
In this work, we have presented quadtree decomposition as a subjective metric andobjective metrics based on SSIM, MSE, Pearson correlation and false positive andfalse negative. We tested its performance in the context of four distinct watermarktechniques: CDMA, DWT, DCT, and LSB. Quadtree is usually used in segmen-tation process; in this paper, we beneﬁt of quadtree decomposition to recognizethe method of image watermark. The results reveal differences between the water-marked image and the original image across the four techniques; this was con-ﬁrmed by the results of the quantitative evaluation. This research demonstratesthe effectiveness of the quadtree as a detector of watermarked images and showsthe differences in the performance of various techniques.
Appendix A. Supplementary material
Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online ver-sion, athttp://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.aci.2014.07.003.
References
[1]H.A. Abdallah, M.M. Hadhoud, A.A. Shaalan, F.E. Abd El-samie, Blind wavelet-based image watermark-ing, Int. J. Signal Process. Image Process. Pattern Recogn. 4 (1) (2011)
.
[2]X. Bai, Y. Zhang, F. Zhou, B. Xue, Quadtree-based multi-focus image fusion using a weightedfocusmeasure, Information Fusion 22 (2015) 105–118
.Table 4Confusion matrix for Lena original image and watermark embedding methods.114 N.A. Abbas[3]S. Bekkouche, A. Chouarﬁa, A new watermarking approach based on combination of reversiblewatermarking and CDMA in spatial and DWT domain, Int. J. Sec. 5 (1) (2011)
.
[4]H.-S. Chu, A. Batgerel, C.-K. An, A semi-blind digital watermarking scheme based on the triplet ofsigniﬁcant wavelet coefﬁcients, J. Elect. Eng. Technol. 4 (4) (2009) 552–558
.
[5]T.S. Das, A.K. Sau, S.K. Sarkar, Spread Spectrum Image Watermarking for Secured Multimedia DataCommunication, World Academy of Science, Engineering and Technology, 2007
.
[6]P. Dhar, M. Khan, S. Chowdhury, An efﬁcient image watermarking system based on error correcting codesin DCT domain, MIST J. 3 (2011)
.
[7]L.B. Gunjal, An overview of transform domain robust digital image watermarking algorithms, J. Emerg.Trends Comput. Inf. Sci. 2 (1) (2010)
.
[8]Q. Han, R. Zhang, W.-K. Cham, Y. Liu, Quadtree-based non-local Kuan’s ﬁltering in video compression, J.Visual Commun. Image Represent. 25 (2014) 1044–1055
.
[9]M. Khalili, A secure and robust CDMA digital image watermarking algorithm based on DWT2 YIQ colorspace and ARNOLD transform, Signal Image Process.: Int. J. (SIPIJ) 2 (2) (2011)
.
[10]A. Kumar, Image rotation using quad tree, J. Eng. Comp. Appl. Sci. (JEC&AS) 1 (1) (2012) .
[11] E. Marini, F. Autrusseau, P. Le Callet, P. Campisi, Evaluation of standard watermarking techniques, in:Proc. SPIE 6505, Security, Steganography, and Watermarking of Multimedia, 2007.
[12] J. Mei, S. Li, X. Tan, A digital watermarking algorithm based on DCT and DWT, in: Proceedings of the2009 International Symposium on Web Information Systems and Applications (WISA’09), Nanchang, PRChina, May 22–24, 2009, pp. 104–107.
[13]D. Mistry, Comparison of digital water marking methods, Int. J. Comp. Sci. Eng. 2 (9) (2010) .
[14] B.G. Mobasseri, Exploring CDMA for watermarking of digital video, in: Proc. SPIE, Security andWatermarking of Multimedia Contents, vol. 3657, 1999, pp. 96–102.
[15]E. Muharemagic, B. Furht, Survey of watermarking techniques and applications, in: MultimediaWatermarking Techniques and Applications, Auerbach Publications, 2006 (Chapter 3)
.
[16]J. Rodgers, W. Alan Nicewander, Thirteen ways to look at the correlation coefﬁcient, Am. Stat. 1 (42) (1988)59–66
.
[17]P. Satyanarayana Murty, P. Rajesh Kumar, Robust digital image watermarking scheme using hybrid DWT-DCT-SVD technique, Int. J. Comp. Sci. Netw. Sec. 10 (10) (2010)
.
[18]C. Sharma, D. Prashar, DWT based robust technique of watermarking applied on digital images, Int. J. SoftComput. Eng. (IJSCE) 2 (2) (2012)
.
[19]E. Shusterman, M. Feder, Image compression via improved quadtree decomposition algorithms, IEEETrans. Image Process. 3 (2) (1994)
.
[20]G.J. Sullivan, R.L. Baker, Efﬁcient quadtree coding of images and video, IEEE Trans. Image Process. 3 (3)(1994)
.
[21] D. Taskovski, S. Bogdanova, M. Bogdanov, Digital watermarking in wavelet domain, in: First IEEE BalkanConference on Signal Processing, Communication, Circuits, and Systems, 2000.
[22]Z. Wang, A.C. Bovik, H.R. Sheikh, E.P. Simoncelli, Image quality assessment: from error visibility tostructural similarity, IEEE Trans. Image Process. 13 (4) (2004)
.Image watermark detection techniques 115