Implementation of artiﬁcial intelligence in agriculture for optimisation ofirrigation and application of pesticides and herbicides
Tanha Talaviyaa, Dhara Shaha,N i v e d i t aP a t e lb,H i t e s h r iY a g n i kc,M a n a nS h a hd,⁎
aDepartment of Computer Engineering, Indus University Ahmedabad, Gujarat, India
bDepartment of Computer Engineering, Nirma University Ahmedabad, Gujarat, India
cGujarat Info Petro Limited (GIPL), Gandhinagar, Gujarat, India
dDepartment of Chemical Engineering School of Technology, Pandit Deendayal Petroleum University, Gandhinagar, Gujarat, India
abstract article info
Article history:Received 25 August 2019Received in revised form 10 April 2020Accepted 11 April 2020Available online 22 April 2020
Keywords:Artiﬁcial intelligenceHerbicidePesticideAutomationIrrigationAgriculture plays a signiﬁcant role in the economic sector. The automation in agriculture is the main concern andthe emerging subject across the world. The population is increasing tremendously and with this increase the de-mand of food and employment is also increasing. The traditional methods which were used by the farmers, werenot sufﬁcient enough to fulﬁll these requirements. Thus, new automated methods were introduced. These newmethods satisﬁed the food requirements and also provided employment opportunities to billions of people. Ar-tiﬁcial Intelligence in agriculture has brought an agriculture revolution. This technology has protected the cropyield from various factors like the climate changes, population growth, employment issues and the food securityproblems. This main concern of this paper is to audit the various applications of Arti ﬁcial intelligence in agricul- ture such as for irrigation, weeding, spraying with the help of sensors and other means embedded in robots anddrones. These technologies saves the excess use of water, pesticides, herbicides, maintains the fertility of the soil,also helps in the efﬁcient use of man power and elevate the productivity and improve the quality. This paper sur-veys the work of many researchers to get a brief overview about the current implementation of automation inagriculture, the weeding systems through the robots and drones. The various soil water sensing methods arediscussed along with two automated weeding techniques. The implementation of drones is discussed, the variousmethods used by drones for spraying and crop-monitoring is also discussed in this paper.© 2020 The Authors. Publishing services by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of KeAi Communications Co. Ltd. This is an openaccess article under the CC BY license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ ).Contents1 . I n t r o d u c t i o n...............................................................5 92 . I m p a c t o f A I o n a g r i c u l t u r e .........................................................5 92 . 1 . I m a g e r e c o g n i t i o n a n d p e r c e p t i o n..................................................6 02 . 2 . S k i l l s a n d w o r k f o r c e........................................................6 02 . 3 . M a x i m i z e t h e o u t p u t ........................................................6 02 . 4 . C h a t b o t s f o r f a r m e r s........................................................6 03 . R o b o t s i n a g r i c u l t u r e ...........................................................6 03 . 1 . I r r i g a t i o n .............................................................6 03 . 1 . 1 . D i e l e c t r i c m e t h o d.....................................................6 13 . 1 . 2 . N e u t r o n m o d e r a t i o n ....................................................6 13 . 2 . W e e d i n g ..............................................................6 23 . 2 . 1 . C h e m i c a l b a s e d......................................................6 33 . 2 . 2 . P u l s e h i g h v o l t a g e d i s c h a r g e m e t h o d .............................................6 44 . D r o n e s i n a g r i c u l t u r e...........................................................6 44 . 1 . C r o p s p r a y i n g...........................................................6 44 . 1 . 1 . H y d r a u l i c e n e r g y s p r a y e r ..................................................6 54 . 1 . 2 . G a s e o u s e n e r g y s p r a y e r ...................................................6 6Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 4 (2020) 58 –73
⁎Corresponding author.E-mail address:manan.shah@spt.pdpu.ac.in(M. Shah).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aiia.2020.04.0022589-7217/© 2020 The Authors. Publishing services by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of KeAi Communications Co. Ltd. This is an open access article under the C C BY license (http:// creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ ).
Contents lists available atScienceDirect
Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture
journal homepage:http://www.keaipublishing.com/en/journals/artificial-intelligence-in-agriculture/4 . 1 . 3 . C e n t r i f u g a l e n e r g y s p r a y e r................................................. 6 64 . 1 . 4 . K i n e t i c e n e r g y s p r a y e r ................................................... 6 64 . 2 . C r o p m o n i t o r i n g .......................................................... 6 64 . 2 . 1 . Y i e l d m a p p i n g a n d m o n i t o r i n g............................................... 6 74 . 2 . 2 . P r o g r a m m i n g o f t h e s o f t w a r e ................................................ 6 84 . 2 . 3 . Y i e l d c a l c u l a t i o n a n d c a l i b r a t i o n ............................................... 6 84 . 2 . 4 . P r o c e s s i n g y i e l d m a p s................................................... 6 95 . C h a l l e n g e s a n d f u t u r e s c o p e ........................................................ 6 96 . C o n c l u s i o n ................................................................ 7 0A u t h o r s c o n t r i b u t i o n .............................................................. 7 0A c k n o w l e d g m e n t .............................................................. 7 0R e f e r e n c e s.................................................................. 7 0
1. IntroductionThe world's population is assumed to be nearly 10 billion by 2050,boosting agricultural order-in a situation of humble ﬁnancial devel- opment by somewhere in the rang e of 50% contrasted with 2013 (FAO, 2017). At present, about 37.7% of total land surface is usedfor crop production. From employment generation to contributionto National Income, agriculture is important. It is contributing a sig-niﬁcant portion in the economic prosperity of the developed nationsand is playing an active part in the economy of the developing coun-tries as well. The augmentation of agriculture has resulted in a signif-icant increase in the per-capita income of the rural community. Thus,placing a greater emphasis on agricultural sector will be rational andapposite. For countries, like India, the agricultural sector accounts for18% of GDP and provides employment to 50% of the country's work-force. Development in the agricultural sector will boost the rural de-velopment, further leading toward rural transformation andeventually resulting in the structural transformation ( Mogili and Deepak, 2018;Shah et al., 2019).With the advent of technology, there has been observed a dramatictransformation in many of the industries across the globe ( Kakkad et al., 2019). Surprisingly, agriculture, though being the least digitized,has seen momentum for the development and commercialization of ag-ricultural technologies. Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) has begun to play amajor role in daily lives, extending our perceptions and ability to modifythe environment around us (Kundalia et al., 2020;Gandhi et al., 2020; Ahir et al., 2020).Plessen (2019)gave a method for harvest planningbased on the coupling of crop assignment with vehicle routing is pre-sented. With this emerging technologies the workforce which were re-stricted to only a minimal industrial sectors are now contributing tonumerous sectors. AI is based on the vast domains like Biology, Linguis-tics, Computer Science, Mathematics, Psychology and engineering. Jha et al. (2019)a brief overview of the current implementation of agricul-tural automation. The paper also addresses a proposed system forﬂower and leaf identiﬁcation and watering using IOT to be implementedin the botanical farm (Patel et al., 2020; Albaji et al., 2010). The basic concept of AI to develop a technology which functions like a humanbrain (Parekh et al., 2020;Jani et al., 2019) This technology is perpe- trated by studying how human brain thinks, how humans learn, makedecisions, and work while solving a problem, and on this ground intel-ligent software and systems are developed. These softwares are fedwith training data and further these intelligent devices provide uswith desired output for every valid input, just like the human brain.Vast domains including Machine Learning and Deep learning are corepart of AI (Patel et al., 2020a, 2020b;Pandya et al., 2019;Sukhadia et al., 2020). While AI is the science of making intelligent machinesand programs, ML is the ability to learn something without being explic-itly programmed and DL is the learning of deep neural networks ( Kodali and Sahu, 2016;Kulkarni and Deshmukh, 2013). The main subjective of AI is to make problem solving facile which may include the use of ANN(Shah et al., 2020a, 2020b).ANN is a processing algorithm or a hardware whose functioning isinspired by the design and functioning of a human brain ( Shah et al., 2020a, 2020b). Neural networks have a remarkable ability of self-organization, and adaptive learning. It has replaced many traditionalmethods in numerous
ﬁelds like Computer Science, Mathematics, Phys-ics, Engineering image/signal processing, Economic/ Finance, Philoso-phy, Linguistics, Neurology. ANN undergoes the process of learning.Learning is the process of adapting the change in itself as and whenthere is a change in environment. There are two learning techniques, su-pervised learning and unsupervised learning. The work of Jha et al., 2019, encloses the connected relations between the various embeddedsystems and the AI technology coherent with the agricultural ﬁeld, it gave a brief about the various applications of neural networks, ML inthis sector for precision farming (Yang et al., 2007). AI is an emerging technology in theﬁeld of agriculture. AI-based equipment and machines, has taken today's agriculture system to a dif-ferent level. This technology has enhanced crop production and im-proved real-time monitoring, harvesting, processing and marketing(Yanh et al., 2007). The latest technologies of automated systemsusing agricultural robots and drones have made a tremendous contribu-tion in the agro-based sector. Various hi-tech computer based systemsare designed to determine various important parameters like weed de-tection, yield detection and crop quality and many other techniques(Liakos et al., 2018). This paper encompasses the technologies used forthe automated irrigation, weeding and spraying to enhance the produc-tivity and reduce the work load on the farmers. Various automated soilsensing techniques are discussed (Wall and King, 2004).Hemalatha and Sujatha (2015)brought together temperature and moisture sensors toclose the loop holes of the vehicle predictions. The robots used in sens-ing were localized by GPS modules and the location of these robots wastracked using the google maps. The data from the robots was fetchedthrough Zigbee wireless protocol. The readings were displayed on the16 × 2 LCD display which was integrated to the LPC2148 microcontrol-ler. The latest automated weeding techniques are discussed and the im-plementation of drones for the purpose of spraying in the ﬁelds is discussed followed by the types of sprayers utilized on UAVs. Furtherspeaking about drones, yield mapping and monitoring is discussed be-ginning with the an outline of the yield mapping processs followed bythe programming of the software and brie ﬁng about the calculation as well as calibration process. Finally the processing of these yield mapsis illuminated.2. Impact of AI on agricultureThe technologies which are AI-based help to improve ef ﬁciency in all theﬁelds and also manage the challenges faced by various industries in-cluding the variousﬁelds in the agricultural sector like the crop yield, ir-rigation, soil content sensing, crop- monitoring, weeding, cropestablishment (Kim et al., 2008). Agricultural robots are built in orderto deliver high valued application of AI in the mentioned sector. Withthe global population soaring, the agricultural sector is facing a crisis,59 T. Talaviya et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 4 (2020) 58 –73but AI has the potential to deliver much-needed solution. AI- basedtechnological solutions has enabled the farmers to produce more outputwith less input and even improved the quality of output, also ensuringfaster go-to- market for the yielded crops. By 2020, farmers will beusing 75 million connected devices. By 2050, the average farm is ex-pected to generate an average of 4.1 million data pointsevery day. Thevarious ways in which AI has contributed in the agricultural sector areas follows:2.1. Image recognition and perceptionLee et al. (2017)said that in recent years, an increasing interest hasbeen seen in autonomous UAVs and their applications including recog-nition and surveillance, human body detection and geolocalization,search and rescue, forestﬁre detection (Bhaskaranand and Gibson, 2011;Doherty and Rudol, 2007;Tomic et al., 2012;Merino et al., 2006). Because of their versatility as well as amazing imaging technol-ogy which covers from delivery to photography, the ability to be pilotedwith a remote controller and the devices being dexterous in air whichenables us to do a lot with these devices, drones or UAVs are becomingincreasingly popular to reach great heights and distances and carryingout several applications.2.2. Skills and workforcePanpatte (2018)said that artiﬁcial intelligence makes it possible forfarmers to assemble large amount of data from government as well aspublic websites, analyze all of it and provide farmers with solutions tomany ambiguous issues as well as it provides us with a smarter wayof irrigation which results in higher yield to the farmers. Due to arti ﬁcial intelligence, farming will be found to be a mix of technological as well asbiological skills in the near future which will not only serve as a betteroutcome in the matter of quality for all the farmers but also minimizetheir losses and workloads. UN states that, by 2050, 2/3rd of world'spopulation will be living in urban areas which arises a need to lessenthe burden on the farmers. AI in agriculture can be applied whichwould automate several processes, reduce risks and provide farmerswith a comparatively easy and efﬁcient farming.2.3. Maximize the outputFerguson et al. (1991)said in his wok that Variety selection and seedquality set the maximum performance level for all plants. The emergingtechnologies have helped the best selection of the crops and even haveimproved the selection of hybrid seed choices which are best suited forfarmer's needs. It has implemented by understanding how the seedsreact to various weather conditions, different soil types. By collectingthis information, the chances of plant diseases are reduced. Now weare able to meet the market trends, yearly outcomes, consumer needs,thus farmers are efﬁciently able to maximize the return on crops.2.4. Chatbots for farmersChatbots are nothing but the conversational virtual assistants whoautomate interactions with end users. Arti ﬁcial intelligence powered chatbots, along with machine learning techniques has enabled us to un-derstand natural language and interact with users in away more person-alized way. They are mainly equipped for retail, travel, media, andagriculture has used this facility by assisting the farmers to receive an-swers to their unanswered questions, for giving advice to them and pro-viding various recommendations also.3. Robots in agricultureRobotics and Autonomous Systems (RAS) are introduced in largesectors of the economy with relatively low productivity such as Agri-Food. According toUK-RAS White papers (2018)the UK Agri-Food chain, from primary farming through to retail, generates over £108bnp.a., and with 3.7 m employees in a truly international industry yielding£20bn of exports in 2016. Robotics has played a substantial role in theagricultural production and management. The researchers have nowstarted emphasizing on technologies to design autonomous agriculturaltools as the conventional farming machineries lacked in ef ﬁciency (Dursun and Ozden, 2011). The main purpose of coming up with thistechnology is to replace human labor and produce effective bene ﬁts on small as well as large scale productions ( Manivannan and Priyadharshini, 2016). In this sector, the room for robotic technologieshas ampliﬁ
ed productivity immensely (Pedersen et al., 2008). The ro- bots are performing various agricultural operations autonomouslysuch as weeding, irrigation, guarding the farms for delivering effectivereports, ensuring that the adverse environmental conditions do not af-fect the production, increase precision, and manage individual plantsin various unfamiliar ways.The idea of coming up with such a technology came with the intro-duction of a machine called Eli Whitney's cotton gin. It was invented in1794 by U.S. - born inventor Eli Whitney (1765 –1825), a device which revolutionized cotton production by signi ﬁcantly accelerating the pro- cess of extracting seed from cottonﬁber.It created 50 pounds of cottonin one day. Thus this gave birth to the autonomous agricultural robots.A basic automated model was introduced to determine the actual posi-tion of seeds (Griepentrog et al., 2005). Ultra high precision placementof seed was also established. Mechanisms that ensure that the seedsplanted has zero ground velocity (Griepentrog et al., 2005). This is im- portant as it ensures that the seed does not bounce from its actual posi-tion after the soil impact. The status or the development of plant wasrecorded by automated machines. Various biosensors were establishedto monitor the plant growth and also to detect plant diseases ( Tothill, 2001).The process of manual weeding was replaced by the laserweeding technology, where a mobile focused infra-red light disruptsthe cells of the weeds, this beam was controlled by computers(Griepentrog et al., 2006). For the effective use of water, automated irri-gation systems were also established.3.1. IrrigationThe agriculture sector consumes 85% of the available freshwater re-sources across the world. And this percentage is increasing rapidly withthe population growth and with the increase in food demand. Thisleaves us with the need to come up with more ef ﬁcient technologies in order to ensure proper use of water resources in irrigation. The man-ual irrigation which was based on soil water measurement was replacedby automatic irrigation scheduling techniques. The plant evapotranspi-ration which was dependent on various atmospheric parameters suchas humidity, the wind speed, solar radiations and even the crop factorssuch as the stage of growth, plant density, the soil properties, and pestwas taken into consideration while implementing autonomous irriga-tion machines.Kumar (2014)discusses about the different irrigation methods withthe primary motive of developing a system with reduced resource usageand increased efﬁciency. Devices like fertility meter and PH meter areset up on theﬁeld to determine the fertility of the soil by detectingthe percentage of the primary ingredients of the soil like potassium,phosphorous, nitrogen. Automatic plant irrigators are planted on theﬁeld through wireless technology for drip irrigation. This method en-sures the fertility of the soil and ensures the effective use of waterresource.The technology of smart irrigation is developed to increase the pro-duction without the involvement of large number of man power by de-tecting the level of water, temperature of the soil, nutrient content andweather forecasting. The actuation is performed according to the micro-controller by turning ON/OF the irrigator pump. The M2M that is, Ma-chine to Machine technology is been developed to ease the60 T. Talaviya et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 4 (2020) 58 –73communication and data sharing among each other and to the server orthe cloud through the main network between all the nodes of the agri-culturalﬁeld (Shekhar et al., 2017). They (2017) developed an auto-mated robotic model for the detection of the moisture content andtemperature of the Arduino and Raspberry pi3. The data is sensed atregular intervals and is sent to the microcontroller of Arduino (whichhas an edge level hardware connected to it), it further converts theinput analog to digital. The signal is sent to the Raspberry pi3 (embed-ded with KNN algorithm) and it sends the signal to Arduino to startthe water source for irrigation. The water will be supplied by the re-source according to the requirement and it will also update and storethe sensor values.Jha et al. (2019)also developed an automated irriga-tion system with the technology of Arduino for reducing the man powerand time consumption in the process of irrigation.Savitha and UmaMaheshwari (2018)also developed the idea of efﬁ- cient and automated irrigation system by developing remote sensorsusing the technology of Arduino which can increase the production upto 40%.Another system for automated irrigation was given by Varatharajalu and Ramprabu (2018). In this approach different sensors were built fordifferent purposes like the soil moisture sensor to detect the moisturecontent in the soil, the temperature sensor to detect the temperature,the pressure regulator sensor to maintain pressure and the molecularsensor for better crop growth. The installation of digital cameras. Theoutput of all these devices is converted to digital signal and it is sentto the multiplexer through wireless network such as Zigbee andhotspot.Theﬁrst technique was the subsurface drip irrigation process, whichminimized the amount of water loss due to evaporation and runoff as itis directly buried beneath the crop. Later researchers came with differ-ent sensors which were used to detect the need of water supply to theﬁelds as soil moisture sensor and rain drop sensor, which wereinstructed through wireless broadband network and powered by solarpanels. The rain drop sensor and soil moisture sensor informs thefarmer about the moisture content in the soil through SMS in their cellphone using GSM module. Accordingly the farmer can give commandsusing SMS to ON and OFF the water supply. Thus we can consider thatthis system will detect part or area in the ﬁelds which required more water and could hold off the farmer from watering when it's raining.Soil moisture sensors use one of the several technologies used tomeasure the soil moisture content. It is buried near the root zones ofthe crops (Dukes et al., 2009). The sensors help in accurately determin-ing the moisture level and transmit this reading to the controller for ir-rigation. Soil moisture sensors also help in signi ﬁcantly conserving water (Quails et al., 2001). One technique of moisture sensors is thewater on demand irrigation in which we set the threshold accordingto the soil'sﬁeld capacity and these sensors permits your controller towater only when required. When the scheduled time arrives, the sensorreads the moisture content or level for that particular zone, andwatering will be allowed in that zone only if the moisture content isbelow the threshold. The other was the suspended cycle irrigationwhich requires irrigation duration unlike the water on demand irriga-tion. It requires the start time and the duration for each zone ( Yong et al., 2018).3.1.1. Dielectric methodThe moisture in the soil is calculated by the sensors which basicallyevaluate the moisture content in the soil based on the dielectric con-stant (soil mass permittivity) of the soil. The amount of irrigationneeded can also be determined on the basis of the dielectric constant(Gebregiorgis and Savage, 2006).Kuyper and Balendonck (2001)pro- poses an automated system that uses dielectric soil moisture sensorsfor real time irrigation control. The measurement method based onthe dielectric properties is considered to be the most potential one(Zhen et al., 2010).Hanson et al. (2000)gave the information regarding how soil types affect the accuracy to dielectric moisture sensors. Thedielectric steady is only the capacity of soil to transfer power or electric-ity. The soil is comprised of various parts like minerals, air and water,subsequently the estimation of its dielectric consistent is determined
by the general commitment of every one of these segments. Since theestimation of the dielectric value of water (Kaw = 81) is a lot biggerthan the estimation of this consistent for the other soil parts, the esti-mated value of permittivity is primarily represented by the nearnessof moisture in the soil. One method to calculate the relationship be-tween the dielectric constant (Ka
b) and volumetric soil moisture(VWC) is the equation of Topp et al.:VWC¼−5:3/C210
−2þ2:29/C210−2Kab−5:5/C210−4Kab2þ4:3 /C210
−6Kab3 ð1ÞThe other method used for determining the dielectric constant is theby the Time Domain Reﬂectometry (TDR). It is determined on the basisof the time taken by an electromagnetic wave to propagate along atransmission line that is surrounded by the soil. As we probably areaware, the propagation velocity (V) is an element of the dielectric con-stant (Kab), therefore it is legitimately corresponding to the square ofthe transmission time (t in aﬂash) down and back along the transmis-sion line:K
ab¼c=vðÞ2¼ctðÞ=2LðÞðÞ2 ð2Þwhere c is the speed of electromagnetic waves in a vacuum (3·108 m/sor 186,282 mile/s) and L is the length of the TL in the soil (in m or ft).3.1.2. Neutron moderationThis is another technique for deciding the moisture content in thesoil. In this strategy fast neutrons are launched out from a decomposingradio dynamic source like 241Am/9Be ( Long and French, 1967)a n d when these neutrons slam into particles having a similar mass astheirs(protons, H+), they drastically slow down, making a “cloud”of “thermalized”neutrons. As we already know that water is the primarywellspring of hydrogen in soil, the thickness of thermalized neutronsaround the test is about corresponding to the division of water presentin the soil. The arrangement of the test is as a long and limited chamber,comprising of a source and aﬁnder. The estimations are taken in thistest by bringing the test into an entrance tube, which is as of now pre-sented in the soil. One can decide soil amount of moisture in the soilat various profundities by balancing the test in the cylinder at variousprofundities. The moisture substance is gotten with the assistance ofthis gadget dependent on a direct alignment between the check paceof thermalized neutrons read from the test, and the soil moisture sub-stance got from adjacentﬁeld tests.The installation of sensors plays an important role in the ef ﬁcient im- plementation of irrigation robotics. One can use a single sensor to con-trol the irrigation of multiple zones in the ﬁelds. And one can also set multiple sensors to irrigate individual zones. In the ﬁrst case where one sensor is utilized for irrigating multiple zones, the sensor is placesin the zone which is the driest of all or we can say the zone which re-quires maximum irrigation in order to ensure adequate irrigation inthe wholeﬁeld. The placement of the sensors should be in the rootzone of the crops (ensuring that there are no air gaps around the sensor)from where the crops extract water. This will ensure the adequate sup-ply of water to the crops. Later, we need to connect the SMS controllerwith the sensor. The controller will control the working after the sensorresponds. After making this connection the soil water threshold needsto be selected. Then water is applied to the area where the sensor is bur-ied and it is left as it is for a day. The water content now is the thresholdfor the sensor for scheduled irrigation as described earlier.After fetching the data through the sensors the microcontrollerscome into work. It is the major component of the entire automated irri-gation process. The whole circuit is supplied with power up to 5 V withthe help of transformer, a bridge rectiﬁer circuit (which is a part of61 T. Talaviya et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 4 (2020) 58 –73electronic power supplies which rectiﬁes AC input to DC output) and voltage regulator. Then the microcontroller is programmed. The micro-controller receives the signals from the sensors. The OP-AMP acts as aninterface between the sensors and the microcontroller for transferringthe sensed soil conditions. The irrigator pumps thus operates on the in-formation of the soil properties at run time ( Fig. 1).The irrigation pro- cess can therefore be automated with the help of moisture sensorsand microcontrollers (Rajpal et al., 2011). (SeeTable 1.)3.2. WeedingZimdahl (2010)in his report on“A History of Weed Science in theUnited States”stated about Thomas K. Pavlychenko, a pioneer weed ex-perimentalist, who did a study on the competition among plants. Afterhis detailed research on the same, he came concluded that the competi-tion among the plants for water begins when their roots in the soil over-lap to absorb water and nutrients and weeds were the strongestcompetitors for water. The water requirement for the aerial parts ofthe plant is the number of pounds of water used to produce a poundof dry matter. The wild mustard plant ( Brassica kabervar.pinnatiﬁda) requires four times as much water as a well-developed oat plant, andthe common ragweed plant (Ambrosia artemisiifol ia) requires threetimes as much water as a corn plant to reach maturity. One can calculatethe water requirement per acre is determined by multiplying the pro-duction of the plant in pounds of dry matter per acre times the plant'swater requirement. Light is also an essential component for the growthof the plants. Weeds which grow tall, generally blocks the way of light tothe plants. Sometimes weeds like green foxtail and redroot pigweed areintolerant of shade but may times weeds like ﬁeld bindweed, common milkweed spotted spuroe, and Arkansas rose are shade tolerant. Accord-ing to a study by researchers of the Indian Council for Agricultural Re-search, the country India, loses agricultural produce worth over $11billion—more than the Centre's budgetary allocation for agriculturefor 2017–18 annually due to weeds. So to remove these weeds fromtheﬁelds is of great importance otherwise it will not only occupy theland space but will also adversely affect the growth of other plants(Bak and Jakobsen, 2003).LieTang et al. (2000)brought up a vision based weed detection tech-nology in natural lighting. It was created utilizing hereditary calculationdistinguishing a locale in Hue-Saturation-Intensity (HSI) shading space(GAHSI) for open airﬁeld weed detecting. It utilizes outrageous condi-tions like radiant and shady and these lightning conditions weremosaicked to discover the likelihood of utilizing GAHSI to ﬁnd the locale or zones in theﬁeld in shading space when these two boundaries aredisplayed at the same time. They came about given by the GAHSI gaveproof to the presence and severability of such a locale. The GAHSI execu-tion was estimated by contrasting the GAHSI-portioned picture and acomparing hand sectioned reference picture. In this, the GAHSI achievedequivalent performance.Before developing a weed control automated system we need to dif-ferentiate between the crop seedlings and the weeds ( Bhagyalaxmi et al., 2016;Chang and Lin, 2018). A method was applied for recognitionof carrot seedlings from those of ryegrass. Aitkenhead et al. (2003)im- plemented this method by the simple morphological characteristicmeasurement of leaf shape. This method has varying effectivenessmostly between 52 and 75% for discriminating between the plants andweeds, by determining the variation in size of the leaf. Another methodfor weeding was implemented using digital imaging. This idea involveda self-organizing neural network. But this method did not give appropri-ate results which were expected for commercial purposes, it was foundthat a NN based technology already existed which allows one to ﬁ
nd the differences between species with an accuracy exceeding 75%.In the contemporary world many automated systems are developed(SeeTable 2.) but earlier various physical methods were used which re-lied on the physical interaction with the weeds. Nørremark and Griepentrog (2004)proposed that weeding depends on the positionand the number of weeds. Classical spring or duck foot tines wereused to perform intra row weeding by breaking the soil and the inter-face of roots by tillage and thus promote the witling of the weeds. Butthis is not advisable method as tillage can destruct the interface
Fig. 1.(a) Soil Water Balance Components for Evapotranspiration Model Source: University of Minnesota (b) Flowchart for Evapotranspiration Reference ( Jha et al., 2019)( c )F A OP e n m a n - Monteith method.62 T. Talaviya et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 4 (2020) 58 –73between the crop and the soil. Thus, further no contact methods like thelaser treatments (Heisel et al., 2001) and micro spraying, which do notaffect the contact between the roots and the soil was developed. Nakai and Yamada (2014)explained the method of the use of agricultural ro-bots for the suppression of weeds and developing methods of control-ling the postures of robots in case of uneven ﬁelds in the rice cultivation. It used the method of Laser Range Fielder (LRF) for sup-pressing the weeds and controlling robot's posture. Åstrand and Baerveldt (2002)presented a robotic weed control system. The robotwas embedded with different vision systems. One was the gray- levelvision which was used in developing a row structure in order to guidethe robot along the rows and the other vision was color-based whichwas most important and used to differentiate a single among theweeds. The row recognition system was developed with a novel algo-rithm with an accuracy of ±2 cm. Theﬁrst trial of this system was im- plemented in a greenhouse for weed control within a row of crops.The same technology was mentioned in the research done byFennimore et al. (2016). The vision based technologies which wereused to guide the robots along the row structure to remove weeds andto differentiate the single crop among the weed plants. The variousweeding systems are:3.2.1. Chemical basedIn this technology, the system consisted of 8 nozzles at the backwhich were used for spraying herbicides. The whole system dividedthe images captured in 8 × 18 small rectangles or we can say blocks,each of these blocks covered an area of 8128 sq. mm. Later, each rowwhich consisted of these blocks corresponding to number of nozzleswas examined and processed one after the other. After examining theblocks, each box containing weeds are sprayed.On can also divide the images into 16 × 40 blocks, in this case eachblocks covers an area of approximately 8768 sq. mm. Thus, in this casewe need 16 nozzles instead of 8. The further processing, that is, thetask of spraying was done on the basis of the conditions mentioned.The conditions are:1. 1 If the block examined consisting of weed pixels exceeding 10% ofthe total area of the block, then it is categorized into a weed block.2. 2 All the blocks examined are sprayed with herbicides.3. 3 Then after these two conditions, the weeds whose area equal to ormore than 30% is sprayed are supposed to be destroyed.4. 4 The herbicide which is sprayed in this method is a selective herbi-cide, which destroys only the weeds and not the other plants.Theﬁrst two conditions mentioned above de ﬁnes the where the herbicides are to be sprayed, that is, de ﬁnes the areas which requires spraying. Theﬁrst condition mentioned reduces theareas which contains very small amount of weeds and whichdoes not require spraying. This is an important part of weeding.To destroy weeds, all the parts of the weeds does not requireTable 1Summary of Irrigation Automation Using Various Arti ﬁcial Intelligence Technologies.No. Algorithms Method of evapotranspiration/desired calculationOther Technologies Advantages/Results References
1. PLSR and other regressionAlgorithms EvapotranspirationmodelSensors for data collection, IOTHardware Implementation Increased efﬁciency and economic feasibility Choudharyet al. (2019) 2. Artiﬁcial Neural Network based controlsystem EvapotranspirationmodelSensors for measurement ofsoil,temperature,wind speed, etc. Automation Umair andUsman (2010) 3. Fuzzy Logic FAO Penman- Monteith method– Optimization Kia et al.(2009) 4. ANN (multilayer neural model),Levenberg Marquardt, Backpropagation Penman–Monteithmethod– Evaporation decreased due to schedule andsavings observed in water and electrical energy Karasekreteret al. (2013) 5. Fuzzy Logic –WSN, Zigbee Experimental results veri ﬁcation. Can be appliedto home gardens and grass Al-Ali et al.(2015) 6. ANNFeed Forward, Backpropogation –– Optimization of water resources in a smart farm. Dela Cruzet al. (2017) 7. Fuzzy Logic Controller Penman –MonteithmethodWireless sensors Drip irrigation prevents wastage of water and evaporation Anand et al.(2015) 8. Machine Learning algorithm –Sensors, Zigbee, Arduinomicrocontroller Prediction and tackles drought situations Arvind et al.(2017)
Table 2Summary of applications of AI in weeding operations.No. Application Crop Algorithms for Weed Detection Weed Removal Methods Accuracy Reference1. Precision WeedManagementPepper plants,artiﬁcial plantsMachine Vision, Artiﬁcial Intelligence A smart sprayer –Partel et al.(2019) 2. Autonomous WeedingRobot.Sugar beet Machine vision algorithm High power lasers for intra-row weeding proposed. –Bakker et al.(2006) 4. Weeds Detection inAgricultural Fields –Data augmentation for image preprocessing;Convolutional neural networks for weed detection Herbicide Spray 70.5%Ngo et al. (2019)5. Robot for weed control Sugar Beets Machine Vision Rotatory hoe/ Mechanical removal 92%(detection)Åstrand andBaerveldt (2002) 6. Weeding Robot Rice – Motion of robot prevents weedgrowth –Nakamura et al.(2016) 7. Weed PreventionRobotRice– Motion of robot –Maruyama andNaruse (2014) 8. Weed Detection Sugarcane Color Based and Texture Based algorithms; Greenness Identiﬁcation; Fuzzy Real Time ClassiﬁerRobotic arms for mechanicalremoval 92.9%Sujaritha et al.(2017) 9. Weed Control System Lettuce Machine Vision Electrical Discharge 84% (detection)Blasco et al.(2002) 10. Robotic Weed Control Cotton Machine Vision algorithm based on Mathematical morphology Chemical spraying 88.8% sprayedLamm et al.(2002)63 T. Talaviya et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 4 (2020) 58 –73spraying, but only spraying enough areas is important as whenspraying is done on one part of weeds it is absorbed by differentparts of the weeds ultimately destroying the weeds. But oneneeds to take care that enough areas in a weed are sprayed be-cause if the sprayed areas are too small then, in that case theweeds may not destroy. Thus we de ﬁne a minimum spraying area in the condition 3.The deﬁned condition 4 is there to calculatethe reduction in the amount of herbicides used as compared withthe spraying in the overall area. The evaluation of this weedingmethod requires the calculation of the destroyed weed rate, thecorrect spray rate, the false spray rate and the herbicide reductionrate. The following data is to be calculated as follows:Destroyed weed rate¼N
K=NW ðÞ /C2100Correct spray rate¼N
CSR=NSNWB ðÞ /C2100False spray rate¼N
FSB=NSB ðÞ /C2100Herbicide reduction rate¼1−N
SB=NB ðÞ /C2100Here N
Kis the number of weeds killed, N Wis the total number of weeds in the block, N
CSBis the number of sprayed weed blocks, N FSBis the number of sprayed non-weed blocks,
NSBis the total number of sprayed blocks and N
Bis the total number of blocks examined.3.2.2. Pulse high voltage discharge methodThere is an increase in the desire to implement non-chemicalweeding methods as the pressure to reduce chemical costs on the en-vironment and farming increases. The interest in organic farming hasalso led to the rise in interest of non-chemical weed management(Bond and Grundy, 2001). Non-chemical weed control methodswere studied (Parish, 1990) and include mechanical, electrical, andbiological methods. The pulse high voltage discharge method is onesuch non- chemical weed control method that was implementedmainly to destroy small weeds. These small weeds (of an approxi-mate size of about 5 cm tall and stem diameter of about 2 mm) canbe destroyed with just one spark with energy of 153 mJ and a15 kV. Whereas the large weeds (which vary in size from about80 cm to 120 cm tall and a stem diameter of about 10 –15 mm) can be destroyed with a charge of 20 Hz. Because of these spark charges,the stem and the roots of the weeds gets adversely affected, thusleading to a disruption in the transportation of waiter to the variousparts of the weeds. Thus, the weeds wilt within a few days after thespark. In this weeding method, spark discharging devices are set upo nt h es y s t e mi np l a c eo ft h en o z z l e si nt h ep r e v i o u sc h e m i c a lbased method. Here the system is designed to apply spark only onthe areas where weeds are detected. Once the sites having weedsare detected, the selection of weed points is done by the system forspark discharge, these weed points represent the weed areas. Likethe above discussed chemical method, in this method also some con-ditions are deﬁned. The conditions are as follows:1. The average of all the coordinates of the pixels in the images is calcu-lated and it is deﬁned as the center of that region.2. The spark discharge applied for weeding is applied at this center.3. If a weed receives the spark discharge, then that particular weed isconsidered as destroyed.Theﬁrst two conditions are established in order to select the spardischarging points in theﬁelds and the third condition is for settingthe potential of weed destruction. In this method some more factorsare evaluated along with the three factors calculated in the previousmethod, the correct spark rate and the false spark rate.Correct spark rate¼N
CSK=NSK ðÞ /C2100False spark rate¼NFSK=NSK ðÞ /C2100Here N
CSKis the number of sparked weed pixels, N FSKis the number of sparked non-weed pixels and N
SKis the total number of sparked points.4. Drones in agricultureUnmanned aeronautical vehicles (UAVs) or unmanned etherealframeworks (UAS), otherwise called automatons, in a mechanical set-ting are unmanned aircrafts that can be remotely controlled (Mogliand Deepak, 2018). They work in conﬂuence with the GPS and others sensors mounted on them. Drones are being implemented in agriculturefor crop health monitoring, irrigation equipment monitoring, weedidentiﬁcation, herd and wildlife monitoring, and disaster management(Veroustraete, 2015;Ahirwar et al., 2019;Natu and Kulkarni, 2016). Re- mote Sensing with the use of UAVs for image capturing, processing, andanalysis is making a huge impact on agriculture. ( Abdullahi et al., 2015). The rural business appears to have grasped ramble innovation withgreat enthusiasm, utilizing these propelled instruments to change cur-rent agricultural methods (Pederi and Cheporniuk, 2015). The complete addressable estimation of automation fueled arrangements in every sin-gle relevant industry is critical –more than USD 127 billion, as indicatedby an ongoing PwC analysis. They can be contrasted with a normal sim-ple to use camera for unmistakable pictures, yet while a standard cam-era can give some data about plant development, inclusion and differentthings, a multispectral sensor extends the utility of the procedure andenables farmers to see things that can't be found in the noticeablerange, for example, moisture content in the soil, plant health monitor-ing. These could help defeat the different restrictions that obstructagrarian production. The development of the UAS is incorporated withWireless Sensor Networks (WSN). The data recovered by the WSN en-ables the UAS to advance their utilization for instance to restrict itsspraying of synthetic compounds to carefully assigned regions. Sincethere are abrupt and continuous changes in ecological conditions thecontrol circle must almost certainly respond as fast as could reasonablybe expected. The reconciliation with WSN can help toward that path(Costa et al., 2012). In precision agriculture, UAVs are mainly applicablefor agriculture operations such as soil and ﬁeld analysis (Primicerio et al., 2012), crop monitoring (Bendig et al., 2012), crop height estima- tions (Anthony et al., 2014), pesticide Spraying (Faiçal et al., 2017;Faiçal et al., 2014a, b, c;Huang et al., 2009). (SeeTable 4.) However, their hard- ware implementations (Maurya, 2015) are purely adherent on critical aspects like weight, range ofﬂight, payload, conﬁguration and their costs. A research involving technologies, methods, systems and limita-tions of UAVs are examined (Huang et al., 2013). About more than 250 models are analyzed as well as summarized in order to choose anappropriate UAV in agriculture (S.R. Kurkute et al., 2018) (See Table 3.). The agricultural drone market is expected to grow over 38%in coming years. It is believed that the need for ef ﬁcient agriculture is only going to become more important due to increasing populationlevels and changing climate patterns ( Puri et al., 2017).4.1. Crop sprayingThe UAV
S, otherwise called drones, are chieﬂy established on the in- novations of sensors and microcontrollers which are grown especiallywith an expectation to make up for the nonattendance of the pilot andaccordingly empower the trip of unmanned vehicles and their indepen-dent conduct (Spoorthi et al., 2017). These drones have been utilized assubstance sprayers by farmers since numerous years now and they areconsidered as effective and of great importance in the situations ofcloudy climate and has also solved the problem of inaccessibility to aﬁeld of tall crops, for example, maize (Sugiura et al., 2005;Simelli and Tsagaris, 2015). Additionally, they are likewise accepted to have a64 T. Talaviya et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 4 (2020) 58 –73solid favorable position contrasted with satellite airborne sensors ofhigh picture resolution (Jannoura et al., 2015;Simelli and Tsagaris, 2015).Giles et al., 1987retroﬁtted an air-carrier plantation sprayerwith a microcomputer based sprayer control framework. A foliage vol-ume estimation framework, in view of ultrasonic range transducerswas interfaced to a PC which controlled the 3-nozzle manifolds oneach side of the sprayer by the utilization of control calculations depen-dent on the amount of spray deposited. Kale et al. (2015)utilized drones for spraying synthetic substances on the yield where the drones arejoined to actualize a control circle for horticulture applications. Thesedrones were implemented with sensors conveyed on the crops in theﬁeld known as remote sensor networks (WSN) which controlled theway toward applying the synthetic compounds. The data recovered bythese remote sensors limited drones to spray the synthetic substancesonly into the assigned regions.Huang and Reddy (2015)built up a low volume sprayer for an unmanned helicopter. The helicopter utilizedin this investigation has a principle rotor distance across of 3 m and amost extreme payload of 22.7 kg. For like 45 min one gallon of gaswas involved. This technique and the systematic outcomes from thismethodology gives a precursor that could be utilized in creating UAVﬂying application frameworks for higher yields which has a higher tar-get rate and bigger VMD droplet size.Xue et al. (2016)built up an unmanned airborne vehicle based pro-grammedﬂying praying framework. The framework utilized a pro-foundly coordinated and ultra-low power MSP430 single-chipminiaturized scale PC with a free practical module. This permittedcourse was programmed to coordinate the UAV for spraying at therequired or the desired areas on theﬁelds. The spray consistency for these UAV tests was better than the Standard Requirement for ultra-low volume spraying variety coefﬁcient.Zhu et al. (2010)developed a PWM Precision Spraying Controller for Unmanned Aerial Vehicles.This paper shows another Pulse Width Modulation (PWM) controllerfor Unmanned Aerial Vehicle (UAV) accuracy sprayer for farming utiliz-ing a TL494ﬁxed-recurrence beat width modulator together with an in-formation obtaining board and created programming. A UAV can beremotely controlled or automated by pre-modi ﬁedﬂight plans. There- fore to this examination, PWM controller develops as a high exactnesssystem for the spraying applications.Zhang et al. (2015)assessed pow- erful swath width and bead circulation of aeronautical showeringframeworks on M-18B and Thrush 510G planes. In this examinationthey assessed the powerful swath width and consistency of the dropletdispersion of two agrarian planes, M-18B and Thrush 510G, which ﬂew at 5 m and 4 m tallness, individually. The consequence of this examina-tion expresses that theﬂight stature prompts the distinction in swathwidth for both the farming planes.The sprayer is the one which crumbles the sprayed liquid which ispossibly a suspension, an emulsion or an answer into tiny drops andlaunch it with negligible power for circulating it appropriately(Nørremark et al., 2008). It is additionally in charge of the guideline ofthe measure of pesticide in order to maintain a strategic distance fromextreme application. Intemperate use of pesticides may demonstrate in-efﬁcient or harmful to the dirt too the yield. Likewise, the residue de ﬁ- nitions of pesticides are disseminated with the assistance of dusters.Based on vitality required to atomize and to toss out the shower liquid,sprayers are arranged into four categories namely: The hydraulic energysprayer, the gaseous energy sprayer, the centrifugal energy sprayer andthe kinetic energy sprayer (Fig. 2).4.1.1. Hydraulic energy sprayerIn Hydraulic Energy Sprayer, the material to be sprayed is pressur-ized up to 40
–1000 psi in any of the two potential ways. Either straight-forwardly by utilizing a positive uprooting siphon or by utilizing avacuum apparatus which will make the gaseous tension over theshower material noticeable all around tight holder. This pressurized ma-terial is shot out through the splash spout. Here, the siphon supplies thevitality which conveys the material to the plant foliage. Water drivenSprayers produce a splash with most beads in the 200 –400μm widthTable 4Summary of various applications of drones in agriculture.No. Application Technologies/algorithms used Results Reference1. Pesticide Spraying Wireless Sensor Networks,Gyroscope and AccelerometersensorsN/A Garre and Harish(2018)2. Crop Monitoring,Mapping, andSprayingDJI Phantom 3 Advanced UAVand other softwares UAVs could be used in order to detect abnormalities and identify potential problems. Psirofonia et al.(2017)3. Crop Monitoring Multispectral sensor Linear regressions between NDVI and plant nitrogen, aerial biomass, etc. were signi ﬁcant. This has the potential to provide insight to good management practices and techniques. Vega et al. (2015)4. Pesticide Spraying Spray motor Worked satisfactorily when tested on groundnuts and paddy crops Yallappa et al.(2017) 5. Remote Sensing Multispectral camera The UAV remote sensing system was tested on a turf grass ﬁeld and was capable of monitoring the temporal changes in the ﬁeld. Xiang and Tian(2011) 6. Remote Sensing Spectral Spatial classi ﬁcation,Bayesian information criterion(BIC)Manual Tomato detection is difﬁcult so using this technology, the areas could be classi ﬁed into tomato and non tomato regions. Detection was carried out successfully on tworepresentative images.Senthilnath et al.(2016)7. Crop Monitoring Hyperspectral Frame Camera Camera ﬂight campaign successfully delivered the hyperspectral data. This enables themonitoring of the leaf nitrogen concentration in rice. Zheng et al. (2016)8. Crop Monitoring Camera and Softwares Accurate way to monitor various aspects of the farm like creating digital map of ﬁeld, detecting problems with crop health, etc. Reinecke andPrinsloo (2017a,2017b) 9. PrecisionAgricultureMonitoring– Provides an approach for the segregation of sparse and dense areas within a sugarcaneﬁeld.It makes use of satellite data. Accuracy was 87% for testing.Murugan et al.(2017)10. Spraying Fertilizersand PesticidesAccelerometer and GyroscopeSensors, Arduino It has the ability to reduce time and human effort. Pharne et al.(2018)
Table 3Classiﬁcation of Drones for Agricultural Application.UAV ROTARY WINGS FIXED WINGSFlight duration Fly upto 20 min Fly up to an hourWind pressure Can beﬂown from in windsgusting from 20 to 50 mph Fly in and out of the wind forsatisfactory images Flexibility inchangingdirectionAllow new direction duringﬂight for re-direction Allow new direction uploadduringﬂight for re-directionPrice range $500 to $100,000 $500 to $100,000DeployableoptionHighly deployable Highly deployable65 T. Talaviya et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 4 (2020) 58 –73extend. As the beads framed are very little the structure a fog or hazewhich results in uniform inclusion and better contact with the bug or ill-ness. In spite of the fact that, if the beads are little, they will in generalvanish immediately when the mugginess is low and probably won't ar-rive at the objective. A water driven sprayer contains the accompanyingparts: tank, siphon with instigator, weight measure, controlling valve,help valve, control valves, funneling and spouts, control source and bol-ster outline.4.1.2. Gaseous energy sprayerIn Gaseous Energy Sprayer a blower produces a high speed airstream. This air stream is coordinated through the pipe toward the ﬁn- ish of which spray liquid will be available which will be permitted to bestreamed by the activity of gravity through a diffuser plate. A ﬂuid or residue is sustained into air stream to be conveyed to the objective.4.1.3. Centrifugal energy sprayerThe Centrifugal Energy Sprayer consists of a fast turning devise, forexample, level, a concave or a convex plate, a wire mesh cage or abucket, a puncture strainer or chamber or a brush. At the focal point ofthis gadget, the shower liquid is nourished under low weight which isadditionally atomized by diffusive power as it leaves the outskirts ofthe atomizer. The droplets are conveyed by the air stream created bythe blower of the sprayer or by the common breeze, if the sprayerisn't furnished with a fan.4.1.4. Kinetic energy sprayerIn Kinetic Energy Sprayer the spray liquid streams by gravity to a vi-brating or swaying spout which delivers a coarse fan like spray design.This is explicitly utilized for the spraying of herbicides.The spray effectiveness of any of the above utilized showers can bedetermined by utilizing the equation given underneath:Spray proficiency%ðÞ ¼Minimum spray volume required/C2100%The plant foliage which is tainted by a pest or weed or any other rea-son has to be sprayed. The region which is required to be sprayed differswith separation between the lines of plants, separation between theplants in a similar line just as the development of the harvest. In addi-tion, it is important to complete sprayer alignment practice beforeembraced real spraying work to guarantee uniform use of pesticideson the yields. We can process the spraying volume by utilizing theformula:Application Rate in Liter per Acre or Hecter¼ðConstant fig:495 or 600 British Matric/C3Nozzle Discharge Rate in Liter every Minute Þ =ðEffective Swath Width in Feet or Meters/C3Spraying speed in Mile or Kilometer every hour ÞPesticides are for the most part connected on the objective of thesprayed droplets which comprises of both, ﬁne and coarse drops. They are characterized in term of their distance across and thickness on theobjective. In fact, now and again the objective leaf area which is requiredto be secured might be a lot more prominent than the ground region.The Leaf Area Index (LAI) is the proportion of Leaf Area to GroundArea. LAI tents to shift with various yields and only from time to timesurpasses around 6–7. Henceforth this is the reason behind per sectionof land requirement of water in a sprayer changing from harvest to yieldcontingent on the complete leaf territory to be secured. However nu-merous advances are being made in the sprayers which are to be uti-lized alongside the UAVs which give high inclusion also is effectivespraying.4.2. Crop monitoringThe advanced sensors and imaging capabilities have provided thefarmers with many new ways to increase yields and reduce crop dam-age (SeeTable 5.). Unmanned airplanes which are used for practicalpurposes in recent years have taken a bizarre ﬂight. New sensors mounted on UAV, with high-tech cameras being the eyes of the clienton the ground and optimal procedures for survey, data acquisition andanalysis are continuously developed and tested. As a matter of fact,the use of aerial surveys is not new to the agricultural world. Satelliteshave been used for a decade to inspect large croplands and forestrybut a new level of precision andﬂexibility has been obtained with theuse of UAVs. To carry out UAVﬂights, one does not need to depend onthe position of the satellite or having the correct weather conditionsand as UAV pictures are taken 400
–500 ft. from the ground level, theyresult in better quality and provide precision.
Fig. 2.Types of agricultural drones.Source: modern agriculture drones ( Unpaprom et al., 2018).66 T. Talaviya et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 4 (2020) 58 –73ERHunt et al. (2005)evaluated Digital Photography from Model Air-craft for Remote Sensing of Crop Biomass and Nitrogen Status. In theirexamination, they advanced an aerobatic model airplane for capturingimages utilizing a buyer arranged computerized camera and the huedcanvases were utilized to adjust the images. They watched huge con-trasts in computerized number (DN) for a similar re ﬂectance and that was a result of contrasts in the introduction settings chosen by the ad-vanced camera. Further they utilized Normalized Green –Red Difference Index (NGRDI) and directly related it to the standardized contrast of thegreen and red reﬂectances, individually. The aftereffects of this investi-gation mirrored that for soybeans, horse feed and corn, dry biomassfrom zero to 120 g·m
−2was straightly corresponded to NGRDI, how-ever for biomass more noteworthy than 150 g·m
−2in corn and soy- bean, NGRDI did not increment further. Sun et al. (2010) demonstrated the achievability of utilizing a continuous kinematic(RTK) worldwide situating framework (GPS) to consequently delineatearea of transplanted column crops. They utilized a positive-situationvegetable harvest transplanter retroﬁtted with a RTK GPS recipient, plant, tendency, and odometry sensors, and an on-board ongoing infor-mation lumberjack for transplant mapping in the ﬁeld during planting. Field test outcomes demonstrated that the mean blunder between theplant map areas anticipated by the planting information and the overviewed areas in the wake of planting was 2 cm, with 95% of the antici-pated plant areas being inside 5.1 cm of their real areas. Sonaa et al. (2016)showed UAV multi spectral overview to guide soil and harvestfor exactness cultivating applications. Multi spectral and multi temporalorthomosaics were delivered over a test ﬁeld, which was a 100 m × 200 m plot inside a maizeﬁeld, to delineate and soilﬁles, just as yield statures, with reasonable ground goals.A low cost multispectral imaging system was designed and devel-oped for application to crop monitoring ( De Oca et al., 2018). It consists of a microcontroller along with two cameras embedded into the drone.One camera is sensitive to Infrared radiation while the other is a com-mon RGB camera. This system provides images and information whichare used by a software to compute the NDVI and subsequently thehealth status of a crop.Reinecke and Prinsloo (2017a, 2017b) studied the beneﬁts of drones in agriculture, and their limitations, illustrating from examples howdrones operate on farms. They discussed different features of deonesand speciﬁcally how they assist farmers in maximizing their harvestby detecting problems early, and managing the crops by using speci ﬁc cameras to detect pests and water shortages. (S. Nema et al., 2018)p e r - formed a detailed study on Spatial Crop Mapping and Accuracy Assess-ment Using Remote Sensing and GIS in Tawa Command. They didspecial crop mapping using satellite Landsat * data for Hoshangabad dis-trict of Madhya Pradesh and also carried out a Satellite data classi ﬁca- tion accuracy which resulted in overall accuracy as 87.60%.4.2.1. Yield mapping and monitoringOne of the key segments of the unprecedenting progressions in ex-actness cultivating frameworks, yield mapping, enables the farmer tosee spatial variety over theﬁeld perceiving zone for future activitiesand outcome of the past sessions, management. It alludes for the mostpart to the way toward gathering geo-referenced information on har-vest yield and qualities, for example, showing in- ﬁeldﬂuctuation, and the soil moisture content of the yield giving a benchmarking apparatus,when the yield is being harvested. In combination with soil examiningdata, yield maps empowers the arrangement of variable compostTable 5Summary of the literature of the weeding, soil moisture detection, spraying and crop yield monitoring.Srno.Function Method Description Challenges and future scope References1. Weeding BradleyMethodThe Bradleys used their approach to successfullyremove weeds in Ashton Park, part of SydneyHarbor National Park, NSW, from a 16-hectare(40-acre) reserve.The word‘bush regeneration‘currently includes practices other than weed removal, such asreplanting and adding species to anenvironment where soil, water, or ﬁre regimes have transferred the correct type of plant to theregion.Buchanan (1989).
2. Weeding Computervision assistedsystemThe mechanically weeding actuator consists ofan integrated servo motor coupled with thecomputer vision aided system to detect plantsites and direct the weeding actuator to performmechanical weeding operations withoutharming crops.The accuracy of the system is found to be 93.6%using haar cascade classiﬁer using OpenCV opensource framework. Hence, it can be continuedusing in future.Nanda and Reddy (2018)
3 SoilmoisturedetectionMoistureAnalyzers andMETTLERTOLEDOPrecise temperature control with halogenheating technology and outstanding weighingtechnologyRobust construction, built-in performance testsand a comprehensive service offering (Hanson et al., 2007)
4 Spraying Teleroboticnavigation andtargetselectionTargeted selection focuses on the developmentof a user interface suitable for targeted spraying,while simultaneously telerobotic navigationacknowledges the robot along the rows, so thefarmer will be at a safe place away fromhazardous materials during the sprayingprocess.Operator has to guide the robot in any givenenvironment; it may be harsh, mild, etc. Aims todevelop further for making it applicable inAgriRobot Project.George Adamides et al. UserInterface Design Principles forRobotics in Agriculture: The Case ofTelerobotic Navigation and TargetSelection for Spraying5 Spraying Filter-paperratio assuredmethods forsprayingdropletsIn this method, the spraying droplet is measuredthroughﬁlter paper ratio-assumed titration,andworks out the corresponding functionrelationship between the diameter of colouredspots and diameter of liquid drops withregression analysisProvides simpler way for gathering data,sampling, measuring spraying droplet andresearch on new type of plant protectionmachine.Chen Zhenyu et al. (1996) Shanget al. (2004)
6 Crop YieldMonitoringSystemsGrainﬂowsensors forcrop yieldmonitoringIt includes massﬂow and volumeﬂow methods which are located below the pivoted augerunder the grain tank and in the middle of theelevator respectively. Massﬂow methods useweighing type, impact-type, andradiometric-type units while Volume ﬂow methods include paddle wheel type and opticaltype units.Design and fabrication of any particular cropmight be affected by the sensing approachwhich is employed. Signal processing as wellcorrection approaches should be implementedfor accurate monitoringSun-Ok-Chung et al. (2016)Kormann et al. (1998)67 T. Talaviya et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 4 (2020) 58 –73maps which considers soil supplement levels just as the supplementwhich was expelled in the collected harvest. Last result of yield mappingis typically a tonal or shaded guide showing scopes of yield inside a ﬁeld. Fundamental segments of grain yield mapping framework incorporategrain fow sensor (determines grain volume gathered), grain moisturecontent sensor (remunerates for grain moisture variability), GPS an-tenna (receives satellite sign), Yield screen show with a GPS receiver(geo-reference and records information), header position sensor(distin-guishes estimations logged during turns), travel speed sensor (deter-mines the separation the join goes during a speci ﬁc logging interim) (Fig. 3).4.2.2. Programming of the softwareFor yield mapping, there are basically 5 errands which are to bemanaged; information procurement, information preparing, LCDdisplayingbcontact screen info and information sparing. The detailsof each one of them can be alluded from the Fig. 4: These 5 undertakings inside and out, structures in performing vari-ous tasks sometimes bring about clashes. Predominantly these conten-tions are identiﬁed with the time arrangement. To conquer thesecontentions and to mull over every one of the undertakings we utilizefour interfere with wellsprings of P80C592 in the framework, whichare the clock intrude on source, the outer intrude on source, the ADCend-of-transformation intrude on source and the UART sequential I/Oport intrude on source.4.2.3. Yield calculation and calibrationYield is characterized as harvest weight (lbs for cotton) or volume(bu for grains) reaped per unit region, which is in a roundabout way es-timated by the yield sensor stream rate/(speed x swath width). Yieldstream rate is commonly determined each 1 –2 s during collecting. The begin and end times for each line pass are balanced relying upon themeasure of time the harvest takes to travel through sifting, isolating,and cleaning to the area of the yield sensor. The deferrals for beginningof-pass and end-of-pass will rely upon the yield and speed of the consol-idate. Scientiﬁc interjection systems have been utilized to expel com-motion because of blunders and regular spikes in the crude sensor andarea information (Searcy et al., 1989;Birrell et al., 1996). Yield is by implication estimated as a mass power or volume estima-tion by the yield sensors. Presently the yield count needs to join an
Fig. 3.Yield mapping devices - (a) diagram (b) ( Plant et al., 2000) (c) yield mapping harvester equipped to do both tasks ( Kormann et al., 1998).68 T. Talaviya et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 4 (2020) 58 –73adjustment factor because of the way that the yield ﬁguring that changes over to weight relies upon the harvest. To acquire an exactyield information a legitimate sensor alignment is imperative. Contrast-ing the scale loads of four withﬁve burdens with the determined yielddecides an alignment bend. Yield sensors ought to be recalibrated as fac-tors change, for example, dampness substance or half breed. However,utilizing the Yield Sense screen evacuates the requirement for recalibra-tion after the underlying alignment toward the start of the period (Pre-cision Planting).4.2.4. Processing yield mapsWith the utilization of a Geographic Information System (GIS) pro-gramming, the yield determined at each ﬁeld area can be shown. The raw log document, contains focuses which are recorded during turnsand as the grain move through a consolidate is a deferred process (un-less ongoing amendment is connected), the sensor estimations neglectto compare to the careful gather areas. To dispense with these conspic-uous mistakes, the crude information is moved to make up for the join-ing delay. Increasinglyﬁnished, the focuses which compare to theheader up position are evacuated. Settings for grain stream postpone-ment are join and some of the time even harvest explicit, yet run ofthe mill esteems for grain yields extend from around 10 to 12 s.Typically a couple of focuses toward the start and toward the ﬁnish of a pass ought to be expelled too. These focuses are alluded to asbegin and end-pass delays. Begin pass postponements happen whenthe grain stream has not balanced out in light of the fact that the lift isbit by bit topping off yet the consolidate begins gathering the yield.Thus, end-pass deferrals happen when the join moves out of the yieldand grain stream progressively decreases to zero when the lift is totallyexhausted. Moving of raw information to address for grain streampostponement and exclusion of focuses that speak to header status upand begin and end-pass deferrals is the essential information separatingmethod incorporated with programming provided with yield mappingframeworks.5. Challenges and future scopeAgriculture has been tackling signiﬁcant difﬁculties like absence of irrigation system, change in temperature, density of groundwater,food scarcity and wastage and substantially more. The fate of cultivatingdepends to a great extent on reception of various cognitive solutions.While large scale research is still in progress and some applicationsare already available in the market, the industry is still highly under-served (Shobila and Mood, 2014). When it comes to handling realisticchallenges faced by farmers and using autonomous decision makingand predictive solutions to solve them, farming is still at a nascentstage. In order to explore the enormous scope of AI in agriculture, appli-cations need to be more robust (Slaughter et al., 2008). Only then will it be able to handle frequent changes in external conditions, facilitate real-time decision making and make use of appropriate framework/platformfor collecting contextual data in an efﬁcient manner. Another important aspect is the exorbitant cost of different cognitive solutions available inthe market for farming. The solutions need to become more affordableto ensure that the technology reaches the masses. An open source plat-form would make the solutions more affordable, resulting in rapidadoption and higher penetration among the farmers. The technologywill be useful in helping farmers in high yielding and having a betterseasonal crop at regular interval. Many countries, including India, thefarmers are dependent on monsoon for their cultivation. They mainlydepend on the predictions from various departments over the weather
Fig. 4.Yield Mapping (a) Sensing for yield (Source: Utah State University) and (b) example of raw yield map versus interpolated yield map using GIS (Source: Cillis et al., 2018).69 T. Talaviya et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 4 (2020) 58 –73conditions, especially for rain-fed cultivation. The AI technology will beuseful to predict the weather and other conditions related to agriculturelike land quality, groundwater, crop cycle, and pest attack, etc. The accu-rate projection or prediction with the help of the AI technology will re-duce most of the concerns of the farmers. AI-driven sensors are veryuseful to extract important data related to agriculture. The data will beuseful in enhancing production. In agriculture, there is a huge scopefor these sensors. Agriculture scientist can derive data like quality ofthe soil, weather and groundwater level, etc.; these will be useful to im-prove the cultivation process. AI empowered sensors can also beinstalled in the robotic harvesting equipment in order to get the data.It is speculated that AI-based advisories would be useful to increase pro-duction by 30%. The biggest challenge to farming is the crop damage dueto any kind of disasters including the pest attack. Most of the time due tolack of the proper information farmers lose their crops. In this cyber age,the technology would be useful for the farmers to protect their cultiva-tion from any kind of attacks. AI-enabled image recognition will be use-ful in this direction. Many companies have implemented drones tomonitor the production and to identify any kind of pest attacks. Such ac-tivities have been successful many times, which gives the inspiration tohave a system to monitor and protect crops. A robotic lens zooms in onthe yellowﬂower of a tomato seedling. Images of the plant ﬂow into an artiﬁcial intelligence algorithm that predicts precisely how long it willtake for the blossom to become a ripe tomato ready for picking, packing,and the produce section of a grocery store. The technology is being de-veloped and researched at NatureFresh Farms, a 20-year-old companygrowing vegetables on 185 acres between Ontario and Ohio. Knowingexactly how many tomatoes will be available to sell in the futuremakes the job of the sales team easier and directly bene ﬁts the bottom line, said Keith Bradley, IT Manager for NatureFresh Farms. It's only oneexample of AI transforming agriculture, an emerging trend that willhelp spur an agricultural revolution. From detecting pests to predictingwhat crops will deliver the best returns, arti ﬁcial intelligence can help humanity confront one of its biggest challenges: feeding an additional2 billion people by 2050, even as climate change disrupts growing sea-sons, turns arable land into deserts, andﬂoods once-fertile deltas with seawater. The United Nations estimates we will need to increase foodproduction 50% by the middle of the century. Agricultural productiontripled between 1960 and 2015 as the world's population grew from 3billion people to 7 billion. While technology played a role in the formof pesticides, fertilizers, and machines, much of the gains can be attrib-uted to simply plowing more land —cutting forests and diverting freshwater toﬁelds, orchards, and rice paddies. We will have to be more re-sourceful this time around. AI is likely to transform agriculture and themarket in the next few years. The technology has been useful for thefarmers to understand various types of hybrid cultivations whichwould yield them more income within the limited time frame. Theproper implementation of AI in agriculture will help the cultivation pro-cess and to create an ambiance for the market. As per the data with lead-ing institutions, there is a huge wastage of the food across the world andusing the right algorithms, this problem can also be addressed whichwill not only save the time and money but it will lead to sustainable de-velopment. There are better prospects for digital transformation in agri-culture backed by leveraging technologies like AI. But, it all depends onthe huge data which is quite difﬁcult to gather because of the produc-tion process which happens once or twice in a year. However, thefarmers cope up with changing scenario to bring digital transformationin the agriculture by implementing AI. It's only one example of AItransforming agriculture, an emerging trend that will help spur an agri-cultural revolution. We will have to be more resourceful this timearound.6. ConclusionThe agricultural industry faces various challenges such as lack of ef-fective irrigation systems, weeds, issues with plant monitoring due tocrop height and extreme weather conditions. But the performance canbe increased with the aid of technology and thus these problems canbe solved. It can be improved with different AI driven techniques like re-mote sensors for soil moisture content detection and automated irriga-tion with the help of GPS. The problem faced by farmers was thatprecision weeding techniques overcome the large amount of cropsbeing lost during the weeding process. Not only do these autonomousrobots improve efﬁciency, they also reduce the need for unnecessarypesticides and herbicides. Besides this, farmers can spray pesticidesand herbicides effectively in their farms with the aid of drones, andplant monitoring is also no longer a burden. For starters, shortages of re-sources and jobs can be understood with the aid of man-made brainpower in agribusiness issues. In conventional strategies huge amountof labor was required for getting crop characteristics like plant height,soil texture and content, in this manner manual testing occurredwhich was tedious. With the assistance of various systems examined,quick and non-damaging high throughput phenotyping would occurwith the upside of adaptable and advantageous activity, on-request ac-cess to information and spatial goals.Authors contribution
All the authors make substantial contribution in this manuscript. TT,DS NP HY and MS participated in drafting the manuscript. TT, DS, NP andHY wrote the main manuscript, all the authors discussed the results andimplication on the manuscript at all stages.AcknowledgementsThe authors are grateful to Department of Computer Engineering,Nirma University, Indus University, Gujarat Info Petro Limited (GIPL)and Department of Chemical Engineering, School of Technology, PanditDeendayal Petroleum University for the permission to publish thisresearch.Availability of data and materialAll relevant data and material are presented in the main paper.Declaration of competing interestThe authors declare that they have no known competing ﬁnancial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to in ﬂu- ence the work reported in this paper.FundingNot applicable.Consent for publicationNot applicable.Ethics approval and consent to participateNot applicable.References
Abdullahi, H.S., Mahieddine, F., Sheriff, R.E., 2015. Technology Impact on Agricultural Pro- ductivity: A Review of Precision Agriculture Using Unmanned Aerial Vehicles. LectureNotes of the Institute for Computer Sciences, Social Informatics and Telecommunica-tions Engineering, pp. 388 –400. Ahir, K., Govani, K., Gajera, R., Shah, M., 2020. Application on virtual reality for enhancededucation learning, military training and sports. Augmented Human Research (2020)5:7.Ahirwar, S., Swarnkar, R., Bhukya, S., Namwade, G., 2019. Application of drone in agricul- ture. Int. J. Curr. Microbiol. App. Sci. 8 (1), 2500 –2505.70 T. Talaviya et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 4 (2020) 58 –73Aitkenhead, M.J., McDonald, A.J.S., Dawson, J.J., Couper, G., Smart, R.P., Billett, M., Hope, D.,Palmer, S., 2003.A novel method for training neural networks for time-series predic-tion in environmental systems. Ecol. Model. 162 (1 –2), 87–95. Al-Ali, A.R., Qasaimeh, M., Al-Mardini, M., Radder, S., Zualkernan, I.A., 2015. ZigBee-basedirrigation system for home gardens. 2015 International Conference on Communica-tions, Signal Processing, and Their Applications (ICCSPA ’15).https://doi.org/ 10.1109/iccspa.2015.7081305. Albaji, M., Shahnazari, A., Behzad, M., Naseri, A., BoroomandNasab, S., Golabi, M., 2010.Comparison of different irrigation methods based on the parametric evaluation ap-proach in Dosalegh plain: Iran. Agric. Water Manag. 97 (7), 1093 –1098. Anand, K., Jayakumar, C., Muthu, M., Amirneni, S., 2015. Automatic drip irrigation systemusing fuzzy logic and mobile technology. 2015 IEEE Technological Innovation in ICTfor Agriculture and Rural Development (TIAR). https://doi.org/10.1109/ tiar.2015.7358531.Anthony, D., Elbaum, S., Lorenz, A., Detweiler, C., 2014. On crop height estimation withUAVs. 2014 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems.https://doi.org/10.1109/iros.2014.6943245 . Arvind, G., Athira, V.G., Haripriya, H., Rani, R.A., Aravind, S., 2017. Automated irrigationwith advanced seed germination and pest control. 2017 IEEE Technological Innova-tions in ICT for Agriculture and Rural Development (TIAR). https://doi.org/10.1109/ tiar.2017.8273687.Åstrand, B., Baerveldt, A.-J., 2002. Auton. Robot. 13 (1), 21 –35. Bak, T., Jakobsen, H., 2003.Agricultural robotic platform with four wheel steering forweed detection. Biosyst. Eng. 87, 2125 –2136. Bakker, T., van Asselt, K., Bontsema, J., Müller, J., van Straten, G., 2006. An autonomous weeding robot for organic farming. Field and Service Robotics 579 –590. Bendig, J., Bolten, A., Bareth, G., 2012. INTRODUCING A LOW-COST MINI-UAV FOR THERMAL- AND MULTISPECTRAL-IMAGING. XXII ISPRS Congress 345 –349. Bhagyalaxmi, K., Jagtap, K.K, Nikam N.S., Nikam K.K, Sutar S.S., 2016. “Agricultural robot”(Ir- rigation system, weeding, monitoring of ﬁeld, disease detection). International Journal of Innovative Research in Computer and C ommunication Engineering. 4(3), 4403 –4409. Bhaskaranand, M., Gibson, J.D., 2011. Low-complexity video encoding for UAV reconnais- sance and surveillance. Proc. IEEE Military Communications Conference (MILCOM),pp. 1633–1638.Birrell, S.J., Sudduth, K.A., Borgelt, S.C., 1996. Comparison of sensors and techniques for crop yield mapping. Comput. Electron. Agric. 14 (2-3), 215 –233. Blasco, J., Aleixos, N., Roger, J.M., Rabatel, G., Molto, E., 2002. Robotic weed control using machine vision. Biosyst. Eng. 83 (2), 149 –157. Bond, W., Grundy, A.C., 2001. Non-chemical weed management in organic farming sys-t e m s .W e e dR e s .4 1( 5 ) ,3 8 3 –405. Buchanan, R.A., 1989.Bush Regeneration: Recovering Australian Landscapes. The OpenTraining and Education Network, Redfern, pp. 242 –246. Chang, C.-L., Lin, K.-M., 2018. Smart agricultural machine with a computer vision-basedweeding and variable-rate irrigation scheme. Robotics 7, 38. https://doi.org/ 10.3390/robotics7030038.Choudhary, S., Gaurav, V., Singh, A., Agarwal, S., 2019. Autonomous crop irrigation system
using artiﬁcial intelligence. International Journal of Engineering and Advanced Tech-nology. 8 (5S), 46–51.Chung, S., Choi, M., Lee, K., Kim, Y., Hong, S., Li, M., 2016. Sensing Technologies for Grain Crop Yield Monitoring Systems: a review. Journal of Biosystems Engineering 201641 (4), 408–417.Cillis, D., Pezzuolo, A., Marinello, F., Sartori, L., 2018. Field-scale electrical resistivity pro ﬁl- ing mapping for delineating soil condition in a nitrate vulnerable zone. Appl. Soil Ecol.123, 780–786.Costa, F.G., Ueyama, J., Braun, T., Pessin, G., Osorio, F.S., Vargas, P.A., 2012. The use of un-manned aerial vehicles and wireless sensor network in agricultural applications.2012 IEEE International Geoscience and Remote Sensing Symposium. https://doi. org/10.1109/igarss.2012.6352477 . De Oca, A.M., Arreola, L., Flores, A., Sanchez, J., Flores, G., 2018. Low-cost multispectral im-aging system for crop monitoring. 2018 International Conference on Unmanned Air-craft Systems (ICUAS).https://doi.org/10.1109/icuas.2018.8453426 . Dela Cruz, J.R., Baldovino, R.G., Bandala, A.A., Dadios, E.P., 2017. Water usage optimizationof smart farm automated irrigation system using arti ﬁcial neural network. 2017 5th International Conference on Information and Communication Technology (ICoIC7).https://doi.org/10.1109/icoict.2017.8074668 . Doherty, P., Rudol, P., 2007. A UAV Search and Rescue Scenario with Human Body Detec-tion and Geolocalization. In: Orgun, M.A., Thornton, J. (Eds.), AI 2007: Advances in Ar-tiﬁcial Intelligence. AI 2007. Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Vol 4830. Springer,Berlin, Heidelberg, pp. 1 –13.https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-76928-6_1 . Dukes, Michael D., Shedd, M., Cardenas-Lailhacar, B., 2009. Smart irrigation controllers: how do soil moisture sensor (SMS) irrigation controllers work? IFAS Extension 1 –5. Dursun, M., Ozden, S., 2011.A wireless application of drip irrigation automation sup-ported by soil moisture sensors. Sci. Res. Essays 6 (7), 1573 –1582. Faiçal, B.S., Costa, F.G., Pessin, G., Ueyama, J., Freitas, H., Colombo, A., Braun, T., 2014a. The use of unmanned aerial vehicles and wireless sensor networks for spraying pesti-cides. J. Syst. Archit. 60 (4), 393 –404. Faiçal, B.S., Costa, F.G., Pessin, G., Ueyama, J., Freitas, H., Colombo, A., Fini, P.H., Villas, L.,Osório, F.S., Vargas, P.A., Braun, T., 2014b. The use of unmanned aerial vehicles and wireless sensor networks for spraying pesticides. J. Syst. Archit. 60, 393 –404. Faiçal, B.S., Costa, F.G., Pessin, G., Ueyama, J., Freitas, H., Colombo, A., Braun, T., Fini, P.H.,Villas, L., Osório, F.S., Vargas, P.A., 2014c. The use of unmanned aerial vehicles andwireless sensor networks for spraying pesticides. J. Syst. Archit. 60 (4), 393 –404. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sysarc.2014.01.004 . Faiçal, B.S., Freitas, H., Gomes, P.H., Mano, L.Y., Pessin, G., de Carvalho, A.C.P.L.F.,Krishnamachar, B., Ueyama, J., 2017. An adaptive approach for UAV-based pesticide spraying in dynamic environments. Comput. Electron. Agric. 138, 210 –223.FAO. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, 2017, 2017. THE STATE OF FOOD AND AGRICULTURE LEVERAGING FOOD SYSTEMS FOR INCLUSIVE RURALTRANSFORMATION. 978-92-5-109873-8pp. 1 –181. Fennimore, S.A., Slaughter, D.C., Siemens, M.C., Leon, R.G., Saber, M.N., 2016. Technology for Automation of Weed Control in Specialty Crops. Weed Technol. 30 (04), 823 –837. Ferguson, R.B., Shapiro, C.A., Hergert, G.W., Kranz, W.L., Klocke, N.L., Krull, D.H., 1991. Ni-trogen and Irrigation Management Practices to Minimize Nitrate Leaching from Irri-gated Corn. Jpa 4 (2), 186.https://doi.org/10.2134/jpa1991.0186 . Gandhi, M., Kamdar, J., Shah, M., 2020. Preprocessing of non-symmetrical images forEdgedetection. Augment Hum Res 5, 10.https://doi.org/10.1007/s41133-019-0030-5 . Garre, P., Harish, A., 2018. Autonomous Agricultural Pesticide Spraying UAV. IOP Confer-ence Series: Materials Science and Engineering 455, 012030. https://doi.org/ 10.1088/1757-899x/455/1/012030 . Gebregiorgis, M.J., Savage, M.F., 2006. Soil-plant-atmosphere continuum research unit, School of Environmental Sciences, University of KwaZulu-Natal. South African Journalof Plant and Soil 23 (3), 145 –151. Giles, D.K., Delwiche, M.J., Dodd, R.B., 1987. Control of orchard spraying based on elec- tronic sensing of target characteristics. Trans. ASAE 1987 (30), 1624 –1630 (1636). Griepentrog, H.W., Nørremark, M., Nielsen, H., Blackmore, B.S., 2005. Seed Mapping of Sugar Beet. Precision Agriculture Journal 6, 2157 –2165. Griepentrog, H.W., Nørremark, M., Nielsen, J., Soriano, J.F., 2006. Close-to-crop thermal weed control using a CO2 laser. Proc. Proceedings of CIGR World Congress, 3-7 Sep-tember. EurAgEng, CIGR, Bonn Germany.Hanson, B., Peters, D., Orloff, S., 2000. Effectiveness of tensiometers and electrical resis- tance sensors varies with soil conditions. Calif. Agric. 54 (3), 47 –50. Hanson, B., Orloff, S., Sanden, B., 2007. Monitoring Soil Moisture for Irrigation Water Man- agement. Regents of the University of California, p. 21.Heisel, T., Schou, J., Christensen, S., Andreasen, C., 2001. Cutting weeds with a CO2 laser. Weed Res. 41 (1), 19–29.Hemalatha, T., Sujatha, B., 2015. Sensor based autonomousﬁeld monitoring agriculture robot providing data acquisition & wireless transmission. International Journal of In-novative Research in Computer and Communication Engineering. 3 (8), 7651 –7657. Huang, Y., Reddy, K.N., 2015. Unmanned aerial vehicles: a unique platform for low-altitude remote sensing for crop management. Pages 185 –192 in Rao AN. In: Yaduraju, N.T. (Ed.), Weed Science for Sustainable Agriculture, Environment and Bio-diversity: Proceedings of the Plenary and Lead Papers of the 25th Asian-Paci ﬁc Weed Science Society Conference. Indian Society of Weed Science, Madhya Pradesh, India.Huang, Y., Hoffmann, W.C., Lan, Y., Wu, W., Fritz, B.K., 2009. Development of a Spray Sys- tem for an Unmanned Aerial Vehicle Platform. Appl. Eng. Agric. 25 (6), 803 –809. Huang, Y., Thomson, S.J., Hoffmann, W.C., Lan, Y., Fritz, B.K., 2013. Development and pros- pect of unmanned aerial vehicle technologies for agricultural production manage-ment. International Journal of Agricultural and Biological Engineering 6 (3), 1 –10. Hunt, E.R., Cavigelli, M., Daughtry, C.S.T., Mcmurtrey, J., Walthall, C.L., 2005. Evaluation of digital photography from model aircraft for remote sensing of crop biomass and ni-trogen status. Precis. Agric. 6, 359 –378. Jani, K., Chaudhuri, M., Patel, H., Shah, M., 2019. Machine learning in ﬁlms: an approach towards automation inﬁlm censoring. J. Data. Inf. Manag. 2019. https://doi.org/ 10.1007/s42488-019-00016-9. Jannoura, R., Brinkmann, K., Uteau, D., Bruns, C., Joergensen, R.G., 2015. Monitoring of crop biomass using true colour aerial photographs taken from a remote controlledhexacopter. Biosyst. Eng. 129, 341 –351. Jha, K., Doshi, A., Patel, P., Shah, M., 2019. A comprehensive review on automation in ag- riculture using artiﬁcial intelligence. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture. 2, 1 –12. Kakkad, V., Patel, M., Shah, M., 2019. Biometric authentication and image encryption forimage security in cloud framework. Multiscale and Multidiscip. Model. Exp. and
Des., 1–16https://doi.org/10.1007/s41939-019-00049-y . Kale, S.D., Khandagale, S.V., Gaikwad, S.S., Narve, S.S., Gangal, P.V., 2015. Agriculture drone for spraying fertilizer and pesticides. International Journal of Advanced Research inComputer Science and Software Engineering. 5 (12), 804 –807. Karasekreter, N., Başçiftçi, F., Fidan, U., 2013.A new suggestion for an irrigation schedule with an artiﬁcial neural network. Journal of Experimental & Theoretical Arti ﬁcial In- telligence 25 (1), 93–104.Kia, P.J., Far, A.T., Omid, M., Alimardani, R., Naderloo, L., 2009. Intelligent control based fuzzy logic for automation of greenhouse irrigation system and evaluation in relationto conventional systems. World Appl. Sci. J. 6 (1), 16 –23. Kim, Y.J., Evans, R.G., Iversen, W.M., 2008. Remote sensing and control of an irrigation sys- tem using a distributed wireless sensor network. IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas. 57 (7),1379–1387.Kodali, R.K., Sahu, A., 2016.An IoT based soil moisture monitoring on Losant platform. 2ndInternational Conference on Contemporary Computing and Informatics. IEEE,pp. 764–768.Kormann, G., Demmel, M., Auernhammer, H., 1998. Testing stand for yield measurement systems in combine harvesters. ASAE Paper No. 983102. 1998. ASAE, St. Joseph, MI.Kulkarni, V.A., Deshmukh, A.G., 2013. Advanced agriculture robotic weed control system. International Journal of Advanced Research in Electrical, Electronics and Instrumenta-tion Engineering. 2 (10), 5073 –5081. Kumar, G., 2014.Research paper on water irrigation by using wireless sensor network. In-ternational Journal of Scientiﬁc Engineering and Technology, IEERT conference Paper,pp. 123–125.Kundalia, K., Patel, Y., Shah, M., 2020. Multi-label movie genre detection from aMovieposter using knowledge transfer learning. Augment Hum Res 5 (2020), 11. https:// doi.org/10.1007/s41133-019-0029-y . Kurkute, S.R., Deore, B.D., Kasar, Payal, Bhamare, Megha, Sahane, Mayuri, 2018. Drones forSmart Agriculture: A Technical Report. Retrieved from: International Journal for Re-search in Applied Science & Engineering Technology (IJRASET). IC Value: 45.98; SJ Im-pact Factor: 6.887. 2321-9653 6 Issue IV, April 2018- Available at.
www.ijraset.com.71 T. Talaviya et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 4 (2020) 58 –73Kuyper, M.C., Balendonck, J., 2001. Application of dielectric soil moisture sensors for real- time automated irrigation control. Acta Hortic. 562, 71 –79. Lamm, R.D., Slaughter, D.C., Giles, D.K., 2002. Precision weed control system for cotton. Trans. ASAE 45 (1), 231–238.Lee, J., Wang, J., Crandall, D., Sabanovic, S., & Fox, G. (2017). Real-time, cloud-based objectdetection for unmanned aerial vehicles. 2017 First IEEE International Conference onRobotic Computing (IRC). doi:https://doi.org/10.1109/irc.2017.77 . Liakos, K., Busato, P., Moshou, D., Pearson, S., Bochtis, D., 2018. Machine Learning in Agri-culture: A Review. Sensors 18 (8), 2674. https://doi.org/10.3390/s18082674 . Long, I.F., French, B.K., 1967.Measurement of soil moisture in the ﬁeld by neutron mod- eration. J. Soil Sci. 18 (1), 149 –166. Manivannan, L., Priyadharshini, M.S., 2016. Agricultural robot. International Journal of Ad- vanced Research in Electrical, Electronics and Instrumentation Engineering 153 –156. Maruyama, A., Naruse, K., 2014. Development of small weeding robots for rice ﬁelds. 2014 IEEE/SICE International Symposium on System Integration. https://doi.org/10.1109/ sii.2014.7028019.Merino, L., Caballero, F., Martínez-de Dios, J.R., Ferruz, J., Ollero, A., 2006. A cooperative perception system for multiple UAVs: application to automatic detection of forestﬁres. Journal of Field Robotics 23 (3 –4), 165–184. Mogili, U.M.R., Deepak, B.B.V.L., 2018. Review on application of drone systems in precision agriculture. International Conference on Robotics and Smart Manufacturing. ProcediaComputer Science 133, pp. 502 –509. Murugan, D., Garg, A., Singh, D., 2017. Development of an adaptive approach for precision agriculture monitoring with drone and satellite data. IEEE Journal of Selected Topicsin Applied Earth Observations and Remote Sensing 10 (12), 5322 –5328. Maurya, P., 2015. IIT Kanpur. Hardware implementation of a ﬂight control system for an un- manned aerial vehicle . Kanpur, Kanpur, India. Retrieved 06 01, 2015, from Computerscience and engineering.
http://www.cse.iitk.ac.in/users/moona/students/Y2258.pdf . Nakai, S., Yamada, Y., 2014.Development of a Weed Suppression Robot for Rice Cultiva-tion: Weed Suppression and Posture Control. International Journal of Electrical, Com-puter, Electronics and Communication Engineering. 8 (12), 1658 –1662. Nakamura, K., Kimura, M., Anazawa, T., Takahashi, T., Naruse, K., 2016. Investigation ofweeding ability and plant damage for rice ﬁeld weeding robots. 2016 IEEE/SICE Inter- national Symposium on System Integration (SII). https://doi.org/10.1109/ sii.2016.7844114.Nanda, A., Reddy, S., 2018. Autonomous Weed Removal Robot. https://www.hackster.io/ amitash-nanda/autonomous-weed-removal-robot-8c7189 . Natu, A.S., Kulkarni, S.C., 2016. Adoption and utilization of drones for advanced precisionfarming: a review. International Journal on Recent and Innovation Trends in Comput-ing and Communication. 4 (5), 563 –565. Nema, S., Awasthi, M.K., Nema, R.K., 2018. Spatial crop mapping and accuracy assessment using remote sensing and GIS in Tawa command. Int. J. Curr. Microbiol. App. Sci. 7 (5),3011–3018 2018.Ngo, H.C., Hashim, U.R., Sek, Y.W., Kumar, Y.J., Ke, W.S., 2019. Weeds detection in agricul- turalﬁelds using convolutional neural network. International Journal of InnovativeTechnology and Exploring Engineering. 8 (11), 292 –296. Nørremark, M., Griepentrog, H.W., 2004. Analysis and deﬁnition of the close-to-crop area in relation to robotic weeding. 6th EWRS Workshop on Physical and Cultural WeedControl, pp. 127–140.Nørremark, M., Griepentrog, H.W., Nielsen, J., Søgaard, H.T., 2008. The development and assessment of the accuracy of an autonomous GPS-based system for intra-row me-chanical weed control in row crops. Biosyst. Eng. 101 (4), 396 –410. Pandya, R., Nadiadwala, S., Shah, R., Shah, M., 2019. Buildout of Methodology for Meticu-lous Diagnosis of K-Complex in EEG for Aiding the Detection of Alzheimer's by Arti-ﬁcial Intelligence. Augmented Human Research. https://link.springer.com/article/ 10.1007/s41133-019-0021-6. Panpatte, D.G., 2018.Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture: An Emerging Era of Research.Intutional Science, CANADA, pp. 1 –8. Parekh, V., Shah, D., Shah, M., 2020. Fatigue detection using artiﬁcial intelligence frame- work. Augmented Human Research 2020 (5), 5.Parish, S., 1990.A review of non-chemical weed control techniques. Biol. Agric. Hortic. 7(2), 117–137.Partel, V., Charan Kakarla, S., Ampatzidis, Y., 2019. Development and evaluation of a low- cost and smart technology for precision weed management utilizing arti ﬁcial intelli- gence. Comput. Electron. Agric. 157, 339 –350. Patel, D., Shah, D., Shah, M., 2020a. The Intertwine of Brain and Body: A Quantitative Anal-ysis on How Big Data Inﬂuences the System of Sports. Annals of Data Science. https:// doi.org/10.1007/s40745-019-00239-y . Patel, D., Shah, Y., Thakkar, N., Shah, K., Shah, M., 2020b. Implementation ofArti ﬁcial intel- ligence techniques for Cancer detection. Augmented HumanResearch 5 (1). https:// doi.org/10.1007/s41133-019-0024-3 . Pederi, Y.A., Cheporniuk, H.S., 2015. Unmanned aerial vehicles and new technologicalmethods of monitoring and crop protection in precision agriculture. 2015 IEEE Inter-national Conference Actual Problems of Unmanned Aerial Vehicles Developments(APUAVD).
https://doi.org/10.1109/apuavd.2015.7346625 . Pedersen, S.M., Fountas, S., Blackmore, S., 2008. Agricultural robots–applications and eco- nomic perspectives. Service Robot Applications. 369 –382. Pharne, I.D., Kanase, S., Patwegar, S., Patil, P., Pore, A., Kadam, Y., 2018. Agriculture drone sprayer. International Journal of Recent Trends in Engineering & Research 4 (3),181–185.Plant, R., Pettygrove, G., Reinert, W., 2000. Precision agriculture can increase pro ﬁts and limit environmental impacts. Calif. Agric. 54 (4), 66 –71.https://doi.org/10.3733/ca. v054n04p66.Plessen, M.G., 2019.Freeform Path Fitting for the Minimisation of the Number of Transi-tions between Headland Path and Interior Lanes within Agricultural Fields. Arxiv1910.12034v1, 1–7.Primicerio, J., Di Gennaro, S.F., Fiorillo, E., Genesio, L., Lugato, E., Matese, A., Vaccari, F.P.,2012.Aﬂexible unmanned aerial vehicle for precision agriculture. Precis. Agric. 13(4), 517–523.Psirofonia, P., Samaritakis, V., Eliopoulos, P., Potamitis, I., 2017. Use of Unmanned Aerial Vehicles for Agricultural Applications with Emphasis on Crop Protection: ThreeNovel Case-studies. International Journal of Agricultural Science and Technology. 5(1), 30–39.Puri, V., Nayyar, A., Raja, L., 2017. Agriculture drones: a modern breakthrough in precisionagriculture. Journal of Statistics and Management Systems 20 (4), 507 –518. Quails, R.J., Scott, J.M., DeOreo, W.B., 2001. Soil moisture sensors for urban landscape irri- gation: effectiveness and reliability. J. Am. Water Resour. Assoc. 37 (3), 547 –559. Rajpal, A., Jain, S., Khare, N., Shukla, A.K., 2011. Proc. of the International Conference on Science and Engineering. pp. 94 –96. Reinecke, M., Prinsloo, T., 2017a. The in ﬂuence of drone monitoring on crop health and harvest size. 2017 1st International Conference on Next Generation Computing Appli-cations (NextComp).https://doi.org/10.1109/nextcomp.2017.8016168 . Reinecke, M., Prinsloo, T., 2017b. The inﬂuence of drone monitoring on crop health and harvest size. IEEE 1st International Conference in Next Generation Computing Appli-cations (NextComp), pp. 5 –10. Savitha, M., UmaMaheshwari, O.P., 2018. Smart cropﬁeld irrigation in IOT architecture using sensors. Int. J. Adv. Res. Comput. Sci. 9 (1), 302 –306. Searcy, S.W., Schueller, J.K., Bae, Y.H., Borgelt, S.C., Stout, B.A., 1989. Mapping of spatially variable yield during grain combining. Trans. ASAE 32 (3), 826 –829. Senthilnath, J., Dokania, A., Kandukuri, M., K.N., R., Anand, G., & Omkar, S. N., 2016. Detec- tion of tomatoes using spectral-spatial methods in remotely sensed RGB images cap-tured by UAV. Biosyst. Eng. 146, 16 –32. Shah, D., Dixit, R., Shah, A., Shah, P., Shah, M., 2020a. A comprehensive analysis regardingseveral breakthroughs based on computer intelligence targeting various syndromes.Augment Hum Res 5, 14 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1007/s41133-020-00033-z . Shah, G., Shah, A., Shah, M., 2019. Panacea of challenges in real-world application of bigdata analytics in healthcare sector. Data Inf. Manag., 1 –10https://doi.org/10.1007/s42488-019-00010-1.Shah, K., Patel, H., Sanghvi, D., Shah, M., 2020b. A comparative analysis of logistic regres-sion, random Forest and KNN models for the text classi ﬁcation. Augment Hum Res 5, 12 (2020).https://doi.org/10.1007/s41133-020-00032-0 . Shang, Q.Q., Zhang, Y.Q., Sun, Z.W., Zheng, J.D., Zhao, B.G., Pan, Y.C., 2004. Study on Droplet Deposition and Penetrability in Tree Crown by the Wind Tunnel. Journal of NanjingForestry University 28 (5), 45 –48. Shekhar, Y., Dagur, E., Mishra, S., Tom, R.J., Veeramanikandan, M., Sankaranarayanan, S.,2017.Intelligent IoT based automated irrigation system. Int. J. Appl. Eng. Res. 12(18), 7306–7320.Shobila, P., Mood, V., 2014.Automated irrigation system using robotics and sensors. Int.J. Sci. Eng. Res. 3 (8), 9–13.Simelli, I., Tsagaris, A., 2015. The use of unmanned aerial systems (UAS) in agriculture. 7thInternational Conference on Information and Communication Technologies. In Agri-culture. 730-736.Slaughter, D.C., Giles, D.K., Downey, D., 2008. Autonomous robotic weed control systems: a review. Comput. Electron. Agric. 61 (1), 63 –78. Sonaa, G., Passonia, D., Pintoa, L., Pagliaria, D., Masseroni, D., Ortuani, B., Facchib, A., 2016.UAV multispectral survey to map soil and crop for precision farming applications. Theinternational archives of the photogrammetry, remote sensing and spatial informa-tion sciences. 1023-1029.Spoorthi, S., Shadaksharappa, B., Suraj, S., Manasa, V.K., 2017. Freyr drone: pesticide/fertil-izers spraying drone - an agricultural approach. 2017 2nd International Conferenceon Computing and Communications Technologies (ICCCT). https://doi.org/10.1109/ iccct2.2017.7972289.Sugiura, R., Noguchi, N., Ishii, K., 2005. Remote - sensing technology for vegetation mon- itoring using an unmanned helicopter. Biosyst. Eng. 90 (4), 369 –379. Sujaritha, M., Annadurai, S., Satheeshkumar, J., Kowshik Sharan, S., Mahesh, L., 2017.Weed detecting robot in sugarcane ﬁelds using fuzzy real time classiﬁer. Comput. Electron. Agric. 134, 160 –171.Sukhadia, A., Upadhyay, K., Gundeti, M., Shah, S., Shah, M., 2020. Optimization of smarttrafﬁc governance system using arti ﬁcial intelligence. Augment Hum Res 5, 13 (2020).https://doi.org/10.1007/s41133-020-00035-x . Sun, H., Slaughter, D.C., Ruiz, M.P., Gliever, C., Upadhyaya, S.K., Smith, R.F., 2010. RTK GPS mapping of transplanted row crops. Comput. Electron. Agric. 71 (1), 32 –37. Tang, L., Tian, L., Steward, B.L., 2000. Color image segmentation with genetic algorithm for in-ﬁeld weed sensing. Transactions of the ASAE - American Society of Agricultural En-gineers 43, 41019–41028.Tomic, T., Schmid, K., Lutz, P., Domel, A., Kassecker, M., Mair, E., Grixa, I.L., Ruess, F., Suppa,M., Burschka, D., 2012. Toward a fully autonomous UAV: research platform for indoorand outdoor urban search and rescue. IEEE Robotics & Automation Magazine 19 (3),46–56.https://doi.org/10.1109/mra.2012.2206473 . Tothill, I.E., 2001.Biosensors Developments and Potential Applications in the AgriculturalDiagnosis Sector. Comput. Electron. Agric. 30, 205 –218. UK-RAS White papers, 2018.Agricultural Robotics: The Future of Robotic Agriculture. Ag-ricultural Robotics 1–36.Umair, S.M., Usman, R., 2010.Automation of irrigation system using ANN based control-ler. International Journal of Electrical & Computer Sciences. 10 (2), 45 –51. Unpaprom, Yuwalee, Dussadeeb, Natthawud, Ramaraj, Rameshprabu, 2018.
Modern Ag- riculture Drones The Development of Smart Farmers. p. 2018.Varatharajalu, K., Ramprabu, J., 2018. Wireless Irrigation System via Phone Call & SMS. In- ternational Journal of Engineering and Advanced Technology. 8 (2S), 397 –401. Vega, F.A., Ramírez, F.C., Saiz, M.P., Rosúa, F.O., 2015. Multi-temporal imaging using an un- manned aerial vehicle for monitoring a sun ﬂower crop. Biosyst. Eng. 132, 19 –27. Veroustraete, F., 2015.The rise of the drones in agriculture. Ecronicon 2 (2), 1 –3.72 T. Talaviya et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 4 (2020) 58 –73Wall, R.W., King, B.A., 2004. Incorporating plug and play technology into measurementand control systems for irrigation. Management, 2004, Ottawa, Canada August 1 –4. Xiang, H., Tian, L., 2011.Development of a low-cost agricultural remote sensing systembased on an autonomous unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV). Biosyst. Eng. 108 (2),174–190.Xue, X., Lan, Y., Sun, Z., Chang, C., Hoffmann, W.C., 2016. Develop an unmanned aerial ve- hicle based automatic aerial spraying system. Comput. Electron. Agric. 128, 58 –66. Yallappa, D., Veerangouda, M., Maski, D., Palled, V., Bheemanna, M., 2017. Developmentand evaluation of drone mounted sprayer for pesticide applications to crops. 2017IEEE Global Humanitarian Technology Conference (GHTC). https://doi.org/10.1109/ ghtc.2017.8239330.Yang, H., Liusheng, W., Junmin, X. Hongli, Jan. 2007. Wireless Sensor Networks for Inten- sive Irrigated Agriculture, Consumer Communications and Networking Conference,2007. CCNC 2007. 4th IEEE. pp. 197 –201 Las Vegas, Nevada. Yong, W., Shuaishuai, L., Li, L., Minzan, L., Arvanitis, K.G., Georgieva, C., Sigrimis, N., 2018.Smart sensors from ground to cloud and web intelligence. IFAC-Papers OnLine 51(17), 31–38.Zhang, D., Chen, L., Zhang, R., Hoffmann, W.C., Xu, G., Lan, Y., Wang, X., Xu, M., 2015. Eval- uating effective swath width and droplet distribution of aerial spraying systems onM-18B and Thrush 510G airplanes. nt J Agric & Biol Eng. 8 (2), 21 –30. Zhen, X., Wengang, Z., Changjun, S., Qing, Y., Gang, S., 2010. The measurement of soil water content using the dielectric method. World Automation Congress, Kobe2010, 241–245.Zheng, H., Zhou, X., Cheng, T., Yao, X., Tian, Y., Cao, W., Zhu, Y., 2016. Evaluation of a UAV-based hyperspectral frame camera for monitoring the leaf nitrogen concentration inrice. 2016 IEEE International Geoscience and Remote Sensing Symposium (IGARSS).https://doi.org/10.1109/igarss.2016.7730917 . Zhenyu, Chen, Quanmin, Ye, Meixiang, Zhao, et al., 1996. The Elementary Study of Spraying Droplets with Filter Paper Ratio-Assured Methods. Journal of Shanxi Agri-cultural University 16 (4), 422 –425. Zhu, H., Lan, Y., Wu, W., Hoffmann, W.C., Huang, Y., Xue, X., Fritz, B., 2010. Development of a PWM precision spraying controller for unmanned aerial vehicles. Journal of BionicEngineering 7 (3), 276–283.Zimdahl, R.L., 2010.Ethics for weed science. Pak. J. Weed Sci. Res. 16 (2), 109 –121.73 T. Talaviya et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 4 (2020) 58 –73