Machine learning in nutrient management: A review
Oumnia Ennajia,b, Leonardus Vergütza, Achraf El Allalib,⁎
aChair of Soil Science, University Mohammed VI Polytechnic, Lot 660, Hay Moulay Rachid, Benguerir 43150, Morocco
bAfrican Genome Center,University Mohammed VI Polytechnic, Lot 660, Hay Moulay Rachid, Benguerir 43150, Morocco
abstract article info
Article history:Received 13 September 2022Received in revised form 6 April 2023Accepted 13 June 2023Available online 20 June 2023In agriculture, precise fertilization and effective nutrient management are critical. Machine learning (ML) has re-cently been increasingly used to develop decision support tools for modern agricultural systems, including nutri-ent management, to improve yields while reducing expenses and environmental impact. ML based systemsrequire huge amounts of data from different platforms to handle non-linear tasks and build predictive modelsthat can improve agricultural productivity. This study reviews machine learning based techniques for estimatingfertilizer and nutrient status that have been developed in the last decade. A thorough investigation of detectionand classiﬁcation approaches was conducted, which served as the basis for a detailed assessment of the key chal-lenges that remain to be addressed. The research ﬁndings suggest that rapid improvements in machine learning and sensor technology can provide cost-effective and thorough nutrient assessment and decision-making solu-tions. Future research directions are also recommended to improve the practical application of this technology.© 2023 The Authors. Publishing servic es by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of KeAi Communications Co., Ltd. This is an openaccess article under the CC BY-NC-ND license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ ).
Keywords:FertilizationNutrient managementMachine learning
Contents1 . I n t r o d u c t i o n ................................................................ 12 . M a c h i n e l e a r n i n g............................................................. 22 . 1 . M a c h i n e l e a r n i n g a l g o r i t h m s ..................................................... 22 . 2 . F e a t u r e s e l e c t i o n.......................................................... 32 . 3 . P e r f o r m a n c e m e t r i c s ......................................................... 43 . M L b a s e d a l g o r i t h m s f o r n u t r i e n t m a n a g e m e n t a n d f e r t i l i z e r r e c o m m e n d a t i o n .................................. 43 . 1 . M o s t c o m m o n f e a t u r e s ....................................................... 43 . 2 . N i t r o g e n m a n a g e m e n t b a s e d s y s t e m s ................................................. 43 . 3 . N P K m a n a g e m e n t b a s e d s y s t e m s ................................................... 74 . S u m m a r y a n d o u t l o o k........................................................... 9R e f e r e n c e s .................................................................. 1 0
1. IntroductionAgriculture is the main source of food, income, and employment fordeveloping countries and their rural populations, especially in AfricaPreethi et al. (2020);Tapsoba et al. (2020);Collier and Dercon (2014); Rejeb et al. (2022). Given current population growth, pressure on agri-cultural systems will continue to increase Kamilaris et al. (2017);Bharath et al. (2022). Many countries are agrarian and their economiesare based primarily on agricultural productivity Salami et al. (2010); Livingston et al. (2011). African agriculture, for example, is inﬂuenced by various factors such as climate, geography, water scarcity, spatial var-iability of soils, and policiesAworka et al. (2022);Diao et al. (2010); Olanipekun et al. (2019);Jayne et al. (2010). Despite the population ex- plosion and increasing demand in the last century, farmers still sufferfrom large economic losses due to under-fertilization Chivenge et al. (2022);Jha et al. (2019). Although the amount and quality of experi-mental data is constantly increasing, researchers are still unable tointegrate it, analyze it, and make the best decisions possible. ModernArtiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 9 (2023) 1 –11
⁎Corresponding author.E-mail address:achraf.elallali@um6p.ma(A. El Allali).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aiia.2023.06.0012589-7217/© 2023 The Authors. Publishing services by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of KeAi Communications Co., Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http:// creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ ).
Contents lists available atScienceDirect
Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture
journal homepage:http://www.keaipublishing.com/en/journals/artificial-intelligence-in-agriculture/agriculture proves that the introduction of new technologies has solvedmany problems that farmers have faced in the last decades Liakos et al. (2018);Patrício and Rieder (2018);Adnan et al. (2019);Elavarasan et al. (2018);Babaie Sarijaloo et al. (2021). Technology transfer centers that promote the adoption of new agricultural management practicesand the use of sensors, drones, and low-cost satellite imagery for pestcontrol and better fertilization should help improve the welfare ofsmallholder farmersKuijpers and Swinnen (2016);Holzworth et al. (2015). The rise of new data-intensive scientiﬁcﬁelds has led to this modern agriculture, which now generates large amounts of data dueto the multitude of sensors deployed in experimental ﬁelds. Traditional data processing techniques are not up to the ever-increasing demandsof smart agriculture, making it difﬁcult to extract useful informationfrom numerousﬁeld experiments and soil tests.Machine learning (ML) is an emerging technology that can help dis-cover patterns in large data setsSarker (2021). This technology makes predictions directly from given data Ayodele (2010);Singh et al. (2016). ML Algorithms can predict yields using fertilizer rates, geneticdata, and environmental and land management variables. Advances inmachine learning, a subﬁeld of artiﬁcial intelligence, are beneﬁting agri- culture. The digital transformation of agriculture is evolving in parallelwith artiﬁcial intelligence systems in various aspects, optimizing theever-growing data coming from numerous sources, not only in crop dis-ease detection, which has received the most attention from data scien-tistsBarbedo (2019). In the area of nutrient management, it is possibleto integrate and interpolate various pieces of information that havenever been explored for this purpose before. This improves the overallunderstanding of agricultural systems, including nutrient requirements,and also allows economic aspects to be incorporated into decisions.Accurate diagnosis of current crop nutritional status and nutrient re-quirements plays a critical role in overall farm management and im-pacts not only the environment, but also the economic sustainabilityof the farmGoulding et al. (2008);Monaghan et al. (2007);Fairhurst et al. (2007);Dhal et al. (2022). Yield loss, under-utilization of naturalresources, decline in soil organic carbon content (OC), lower carbonuse, and other problems can be caused by either nutrient excess or de-ﬁciency. Accurate diagnosis would beneﬁt farmers on many levels, in- cluding yields, fertilizer recommendations, and revenue.In this paper, we review ML based fertilizer estimation and nutrientstatus algorithms developed in the last decade. Commonalities in thisarea are identiﬁed, weaknesses are discussed, and possible solutionsand future perspectives are proposed. A thorough review of detectionand classiﬁcation approaches was conducted, which served as thebasis for a detailed assessment of key challenges that remain to beaddressed. This review is organized as follows: Section 2presents the most common machine-learning algorithms, feature selection
approaches, and performance metrics used in the reviewed work. InSection 3, the most common features for nutrient management and fer-tilizer recommendation studies and the methodology for study selec-tion are presented, along with the ML-based algorithms used by eachapproach. Finally,Section 4discusses the advantages and disadvantagesof using ML in nutrient management.2. Machine learningMachine learning is a branch of artiﬁcial intelligence in which the computer, referred to as a machine, learns to perform various tasks au-tomaticallyVenkataraju et al. (2023). ML combines mathematical modeling and complex algorithms to perform tasks by learning fromexisting data. ML has been successfully applied in many ﬁelds that re- quire classiﬁcation, prediction, and recommendations Abioye et al. (2022). For example, it provides farmers with soil quality monitoringtools and personalized recommendations based on experimental andﬁeld data. ML uses features extracted from known experimental inputdata to develop models capable of predicting the desired outcomefrom new data. Machine learning can be divided into three maincategories supervised learning, unsupervised learning and Reinforce-ment learning depending on the desired outcome El Allali et al. (2021). In supervised learning, an input is mapped to an output based on atraining datasetVenkataraju et al. (2023),a ss h o w ni nFig. 1.I nt h e case of regression, the output is a value, while the output of classi ﬁca- tion is a class. Unlike supervised learning, which is task-oriented, unsu-pervised learning is data-oriented, meaning that the goal is to identifypatterns in data sets based on a set of features Rainville et al. (2014). One of the most common applications of unsupervised learning modelsis clustering, where data with similar patterns are grouped into clusters.Recently, Deep Learning (DL) has gained traction in the machinelearning world as computational power is no longer a hurdle Ahmad et al. (2022);Durai and Shamili (2022). DL is used in either supervised, unsupervised or semi-supervised environments. Unlike the algorithmsof classical ML, which often require pre-processing of data, Deep Learn-ing can bypass this step and is therefore better suited for unstructureddata such as images. The data is often used directly, eliminating thehuman factor and automating the feature extraction step. A key advan-tage of DL is its ability to analyze huge unlabeled datasets, making it aninvaluable tool for Big Data Analytics Najafabadi et al. (2015).2.1. Machine learning algorithmsWith advances in machine learning algorithms, even the most com-plicated regression and classiﬁcation problems can now be solvedTesfaye et al. (2021). In addition, many of the algorithms are availableon a number of open source platforms designed speci ﬁcally for ML. Re- gression is a part of supervised learning that provides a prediction of anoutput variable as a function of input variables that are usually knownand available in these subcategories. There are many algorithms usedin almost allﬁelds, e.g., linear regression (LR), least absolute shrinkageand selection operator (lasso), logistic regression, and stepwise regres-sion. Many complex algorithms have seen the light of day to solve muchmore complex problems, such as multivariate adaptive regressionsplines.Classiﬁcation is another important type of supervised learning thatuses models to predict a discrete label instead of a continuous output.Support Vector Machine (SVM) is an algorithm that classi ﬁes data instances by constructing a linear separation hyperplane John et al. (2020);Karimi et al. (2006).T oi m p r o v ec l a s s iﬁcation, SVMs use akernel function to transform the original feature space into a higher-dimensional feature space. Classiﬁcation, regression, and groupinghave all been performed with SVMs. SVMs are useful in a variety ofapplications because they overcome the dif ﬁculties of overﬁtting that occur in high-dimensional spaces and are based on global optimization.Support Vector Regression, Least Squares Support Vector Machine andSuccessive Projection Algorithm Support Vector Machine are the mostcommonly used SVM algorithms.Decision tree (DT) based algorithms use trees to gradually group thedataset into smaller homogeneous subsets (subpopulations) while cre-ating an associated tree graph. Each branch of the tree graph displaysthe result of a particular pairwise comparison for a particular attribute,while each internal node represents the comparison itself. After follow-ing the path from root to leaf, the leaf nodes show the ﬁnal judgment or prediction (expressed as a classiﬁcation rule). The classiﬁcation and re- gression trees, the automatic chi-square interaction detector, and the it-erative dichotomizer are the most common learning techniques in thiscategory.The Random Forest algorithm (RF) is also widely used and consistsof a sequence of decision trees. The result predictions are combinedfor better predictive performance. DT can be either a regression algo-rithm or a classiﬁcation algorithm and represents many suboptimalsolutions. Based on a set of decision rules that follow a tree-like architec-ture, it can make recommendations based on classi ﬁed data. Artiﬁcial neural networks (ANNs) are also supervised models com-monly used for regression and classiﬁcationZupan (1994);Zou et al.O. Ennaji, L. Vergütz and A. El Allali Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 9 (2023) 1 –11
2(2008). ANNs use radial basis function networks, perceptron algo-rithms, and backpropagation to build predictive models Griffel et al. (2022). Deep ANNs, also called deep learning (DL) or deep neural net-works (DNNs), are a relatively new branch of machine learning researchthat enables computer models to represent complex data at multiplelevels of abstraction by using numerous processing operations Dharani et al. (2021). The Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) is also a well-known Deep Learning algorithm that was ﬁrst used to classify images Wu (2017);Kattenborn et al. (2021). CNN creates an artiﬁcial neural network that can autonomously learn and make intelligent decisionsby automatically extracting the most appropriate features from inputsequences and layering techniques Al-Ajlan and El Allali (2018a); Farooque et al. (2023). One of the most attractive features of DeepLearning is that feature extraction is often performed by the model it-self. DL Models have greatly improved prediction in several ﬁelds, in- cluding agricultureSubeesh et al. (2022);Raouhi et al. (2022);Bedi and Gole (2021);Paymode and Malode (2022).2.2. Feature selectionTheﬁrst step in any ML experiment is to extract impactful featuresfrom the raw dataChandrashekar and Sahin (2014);Dash and Liu (1997). The goal of feature extraction is toﬁnd the most informative group of features (unique patterns) to improve the effectiveness ofthe classiﬁer. Feature extraction, also called feature engineering, ex-tracts features from the original data to achieve accurate classi ﬁcation. Feature extraction is an important step in ML as classi ﬁcation perfor- mance can decrease if features are not carefully selected Kebonye et al. (2022).Feature selection, commonly known as dimensionality reduction(DR), is a technique used in supervised and unsupervised learning toconstruct a reduced dimensional representation of a dataset whilemaintaining as much discriminative information as possible. To preventthe implications of excessive dimensionality, it is frequently used beforebuilding classiﬁcation or regression models. There are many feature se-lection methods in supervised learning, classi ﬁed into three categories, as shown inFig. 2. The most commonly used DR techniques are princi-pal component analysis (PCA), Partial Least Squares Regression (PLS),and linear discriminate analysis (LDA). However, algorithms based onmetaheuristic approaches such as genetic algorithms (GA) are gainingground in theﬁeld of feature selection.The goal of feature selection is to extract all useful information fromthe data. The features are then used in the training phase to build the MLmodel. Feature selection chooses the smallest possible subset of featuresfrom the original set of features to maximize generalizability. Givenmany independent variables, the feature selection function selects asubset of variables on which to focus a learning algorithm. The model-based approach considers the correlation structure among predictorsand assigns a value to each feature indicating how useful or importantit is for model construction. The performance of the model would notbe affected if features of little or no importance were eliminated. Toreduce dimension and select the most acceptable features for classi ﬁca- tion, dimension reduction can be paired with a feature extraction
algorithmAl-Ajlan and El Allali (2018b). On the other hand, Deep Learning uses an alternative architecture that incorporates the processof feature extraction from the data into the learning phase LeCun et al. (2015);Al-Ajlan and El Allali (2018a). This crucial step has a signiﬁcant impact on the results, as it can improve the performance of the model byremoving unnecessary and redundant features. The model becomes lesscomplicated and the likelihood of bias and error is decreased by reduc-ing overﬁtting. The model gives more realistic recommendations byselecting the most relevant features.
Fig. 1.A general supervised machine learning work ﬂow.
Fig. 2.Different approaches to feature selection with examples for each type.O. Ennaji, L. Vergütz and A. El Allali Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 9 (2023) 1 –11
32.3. Performance metricsIn order to measure the performance of machine learning algo-rithms, several performance metrics such as Accuracy, Recall, PrecisionF-Measure, and the area-under-the-curve (AUC) are commonly usedas performance metrics. In this section, we describe the metrics thathave been used in most studies included in this review such as the coef-ﬁcient of determinationR
2, the mean absolute error (MAE), and the rootmean square error.R
2, or the coefﬁcient of determination, evaluates the proportion ofthe variance of the target variable that is explained by the model, ass h o w ni nE q .(1):R
2¼1/C0∑ni¼1yi/C0byi/C0/C12
∑ni¼1yi/C0 yiðÞ2ð1ÞYiis the observed value of the target variable, byiis the predicted value of the target variable, and
yirepresents the mean of the observedtarget variables. The highest possible value for R
2is one, which means that the model is 100% accurate. However, this value can also be nega-tive if the model produces slightly worse predictions. In the case ofR
2¼0, the model is constant and always predicts the expected valueof y, ignoring the input feature. Most often, values above 0.5 are consid-ered good.MAEor Mean Absolute Error is the average of the absolute differencebetween the observation and the predicted value, as shown in Eq. (2):MAE¼
1n∑ni¼1yi/C0byi/C12/C12/C12/C12 ð2ÞThe root-mean-square error (RMSE), as shown in Eq.(3), assigns a high weight to large errors due to squaring. When the value is equalto 0, the model is considered to have the best ﬁt.MAEis less sensitive to large errors thanR
2andRMSEbecause equal weight is given toeach error.RMSE¼ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ ﬃ
1n∑ni¼1yi/C0byi/C0/C12s ð3Þ3. ML based algorithms for nutrient management and fertilizerrecommendationThis section describes various machine learning algorithms used inthe area of nutrient management and fertilizer recommendations. Thisreview focuses primarily on the current state-of-the-art ML techniquesfor nutrient management and fertilizer recommendation. It addressesthe many factors that inﬂuence yield and how machine learning couldhelp predict fertilizer recommendations. Table 1andTable 2show a se- lection of articles from the literature on this topic. An extensive searchwas conducted to select relevant studies that use machine learning fornutritional management of cropping systems. In the ﬁrst step, keywords such as“nutrient management”,“machine learning in agriculture”,“fer- tilizer forecasting”were used in various combinations including “ma- chine learning in nutrient management ”,“fertilizer recommendation tools with machine learning”for a broad search through Science Direct,Pubmed, and Scopus. At aﬁrst level, publications were classiﬁed into two general categories: Nitrogen Management and Nitrogen Phospho-rous Potassium (NPK) Management. Only articles published in peer-reviewed journals were selected. Although climate prediction is criticalto agricultural productivity, it is not covered in this review because ma-chine learning applications to climate prediction are part of a separatearea of study. Finally, all articles covered here were selected for the pe-riod from 2010 to July 2022 and found to be all within the scope ofthis work.3.1. Most common featuresThe best nutrient management strategies are predicted based on aset of characteristicsKhanal et al. (2018);Jian et al. (2020). For example, 17 nutrients are necessary for optimal crop development, including ni-trogen, phosphorus, and potassium. They are all equally important tocrops, although their proportions are constantly changing. Because ofthese variations, the availability of nutrients in the soil affects plantgrowth, as the soil is the most important source of these nutrients forplants. If any of these nutrients are lacking, crop yield is reduced. In ad-dition to the nutrients already mentioned, the following section dis-cusses some other common features that can be divided into threecategories:Climate is one of the most misunderstood factors in crop develop-mentCrane-Droesch (2018);Cai et al. (2019);Newlands et al. (2014). Although it may not appear so atﬁrst glance, water availability has a sig-niﬁcant impact on agricultural productivity. Even low levels of rainfallcan have a detrimental effect on crops, and production can ﬂuctuate sig- niﬁcantly due to extreme variations in rainfall amounts and periods. Onthe other hand, weather conditions are more complicated than just arainy or dry climate. There are a number of climate features to consider.Total daily and annual precipitation, high-yield and well-distributedprecipitation, and the Shannon diversity index (SDI) for precipitationare some of the most common. Other characteristics include daily max-imum and minimum temperatures and total solar radiation, pest infes-tation under various atmospheric conditions and weather patterns.Algorithms for nutrient management include soil type and texture,organic matter, pH, accessible and exchangeable nutrients, total inor-ganic and organic carbon, and the total capacity of a soil to hold ex-changeable cations (CEC).Qin et al. (2018)created two additional characteristics: a water table-adjusted available water capacity(AWCwt) and a ratio of cumulative seasonal precipitation to AWCwt(RAWCwt). Both features are used to reﬂectﬁeld-level hydrologic con- ditions and are dependent on conditions that are meant to showcasehow soil hydrology impacts nitrogen dynamics. Taking into consider-ation that the amount of nitrogen lost under wet conditions is consid-ered signiﬁcantly negative for a soil's ability to store water beyond thesaturated zone, which is generally equal to the depth of the water table.Several soil management variables are considered and used as har-vest management features: Planting date and density, date of nitrogenapplication (both at planting and side-dress application), grain yield,harvest key, fresh and dry biomass, fertilizer rate, and nutrient uptakeAhmed et al. (2021). The information contained in the red and near-infrared (NIR) canopy radiances is used mainly in common vegetationindices: Ratio Vegetation Index (RVI)[4] and Normalized DifferenceVegetation Index (NDVI)[5].RVI¼
ρREDρNIR ð4ÞNDVI¼
ρNIR/C0ρREDρNIRþρRED ð5ÞWhereρREDandρNIRrepresent the spectral radiances in the redand NIR regions, respectively. These indices increase the contrast be-tween the ground and vegetation while reducing illumination effects.3.2. Nitrogen management based systemsIn recent years, many applications of nutrient management modelshave surfaced, especially regarding nitrogen recommendations, as it isconsidered very important for yield estimation Puntel et al. (2016); Dai et al. (2013);Castaldi et al. (2016);Shi et al. (2021). In the present time, the implementation of ML techniques for N management can bedivided into different approaches such as EONR and NNI determination,remote sensing and spectroscopy.O. Ennaji, L. Vergütz and A. El Allali Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 9 (2023) 1 –11
4Determining the economically optimal amount of nitrogen can beinﬂuenced by various factors such as rainfall and management practices.Advances in ML paved the way for better Economic Optimum NitrogenRate (EONR) predictions that take these various parameters into ac-count.Qin et al. (2018)looked at the prediction of EONR fromﬁeld trial data at two different time points: i) seeding, ii) split applicationtime points. Model-derived features such as AWCwt and RAWCwt andweather data were used to build the prediction algorithm. RR providedbetter results compared to LR, LASSO and Gradient Boosted RegressionTrees (GBRT). However, the results of this study cannot be generalizeddue to the limited data sets.Ransom et al. (2019)evaluated the ability of a set of machine learning and statistical algorithms to improveTable 1Summary of machine learning tools for nitrogen management:AUTHOR ALGORITHM CROP DATASET FEATURES OUTPUT VALIDATION RESULTSKou et al.(2022)LR/SVMCNNCotton RGB images 25 visible-band vegetation indexes TheHSI color model, Image texture Meanstandard deviation Angular secondmoment, Entropy Contrast and inversedifferential moment under gray levelco-occurrence matrices Hue, Saturationand Intensity.Leaf Nitrogen Content IdependenttestingR2 = 0.80 RMSE = 1.67 g per Kg
Wang et al.(2021a)RTM-RF LAIPLSRMaize HyperspectralimagesSoil brightness BSM model parameterslatitude BSM model parameterslongitude Volumetric Soil MoistureContent Leaf chlorophyll content, Leafcarotenoid content Leaf anthocyanincontent, Leaf dry matter per areaEquivalent Leaf Water Thickness,Senescent Material Mesophyllstructure parameter, Canopy leaf areaindex Averaged leaf slope, Distributionbimodality.Leaf nitrogen,Chlorophyll, Vmax,Leaf Area Index,Harvested grain yieldIndependenttestingCanopy chlorophyll (R2 = 0.80)Nitrogen (R2 = 0.85) Vmax,27(R2 = 0.82) Canopy chlorophyll(R2 = 0.80) Nitrogen(R2 = 0.85) Vmax,27(R2 = 0.82)
Qiu et al.(2021)RF Rice RGB images Fertilizer treatments Vegetation indexes. NNI AVAILABLE N–R2 = 0.88–0.97RMSE = 0.03–0.07 Correndo et al.(2021)XGBoost Maize maizeobservationsPrevious crop, tillage system, irrigation,SOM, clay, sand, silt, Precipitations,Mean Temperature, SDI Extreme PPEvents, Vapor Pressure Deﬁcit Incidentradiation, Photothermal quotient,Extreme T Events.Feature contribution:Yield without Nfertilizer B0 (YEONR),EONR N fertilizerefﬁciency at the EONRFolds CV RMSE medians of 1.90 Mg per hafor B0 (RRMSE = 24%),1.68 Mg per ha for YEONR(RRMSE = 14%),52 kg N per ha for EONR(RRMSE = 34%),10.2 kg yield kg fertilizer N forNFE (RRMSE = 40%).R2 ranged from 0.08 to 0.71 Barbosa et al.(2020b)CNN Maize 9 on-farmexperimentsN and seed rates prescription maps,Elevation map, Soil's shallowelectroconductivity, Soil ECmeasurements, Texture, Bulk density,Soil organic C, water content, Salinity,and CEC.Yield responce tocrop management5 Folds Cv RMSE = 6,8
Wang et al.(2021b)RF Maize 12 site-yeardataSite Soil type, Soil texture, pH, SOM,Total N, Available P, Exchangeable K,Planting density, Base N rate Side-dressN rate.In-season EONR(NNI) and grain yield–R2 = 0,49 RMSE = 17 kg/ha
Tavakoli andGebbers(2019)PLSR RF Wheat 3 years ﬁelddigital imagesand sensordataPlant nitrogen content Fresh and drybiomasses Water content. Fresh biomass, Drybiomass, Watercontent, N content,Crop yield10 Folds CV RMSE = 0.24 R2 = 0.76
Escalante et al.(2019)Adaboost Barley 72 aerial RGBPicturesBarley variety, Fertilizer rate,Vegetation indexes. N fertilization CropyieldLOLO Acc = 83.3%Ransom et al.(2019)
RF Maize 49ﬁeldsweather andsoil dataTexture, Bulk density, pH salt, pHwater, CEC, Total N, Total carbon,Inorganic carbon, Organic carbon,Organic Matter, Total precipitationGrowing degree days, Corn heat unitsSDI of precipitation, Abundantly andwell-distributed rainfall.EONR 10 Folds CV *5R2 = 0,84 RMSE = 94 kg/ ha
Qin et al.(2018)RR Maize 47ﬁeldsweather andsoil dataWeather Features Soil FeaturesManagement Features (AWCwt) (RAWCwt).EONR LOLO LOYO R2 = 0,46 MAE = 33,6 kg/haYu et al.(2018)SAE-FNN Rapeseed hyperspectralleaf imagesN concentration (%) of leaf Thereﬂectance mean spectra Red-edge ofleaf reﬂectence The overtones of O\\H functional groups related to water inleaf The overtones of N\\H functionalgroups related to nitrogen in leaf.Detection andquantiﬁcation of leaf(N) concentration–R 2 = 0.903 RMSEP = 0.307%RPD = 3.238
MontesCondoriet al. (2017)CNN Maize 1152 maizeleaf imagesDifferent Growth Stages. N de ﬁcency detection 4 Folds Acc = 93.5%Morellos et al.(2016)CUBIST–140 soilsamplesSoil spectral results. MC, OC, TN LOO RMSED = 0.071 RPD = 1.96O. Ennaji, L. Vergütz and A. El Allali Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 9 (2023) 1 –11
5nitrogen recommendations for corn using measured soil propertiesalong with weather variables from 49 sites in the Midwestern UnitedStates. The authors examined different modeling scenarios for improv-ing three different nitrogen recommendation tools and tested whetheradjustments for multicollinearity and accounting for the interaction be-tween soil and weather parameters would result in improvements. Per-formance was evaluated using the out-of-sample RMSE and includedsoil and weather data prior to each nitrogen recommendation tool. RFprovided better nitrogen recommendations, but compared to the per-formance of the models in terms of number of variables, the decisiontree provided the bestﬁt with the smallest number of variables. Theresults showed that reducing multicollinearity slightly improved theperformance of the different ML algorithms.The objective of a study byCorrendo et al. (2021)was deﬁning the importance of soil, weather conditions, and cropping management inestimating and magnifying uncertainty in key components affectingthe nitrogen response of corn yield. When yield without fertilizer,Yield at Economic Optimum N Rate (YEONR), and nitrogen fertilizer ef-ﬁciency (NFE) are considered in EONR. Bayesian statistics were used forthe N response curvesﬁtting along with Extreme Gradient Boosting thatevaluates the importance of the traits in the predictability process.EONR was the most difﬁcult attribute to estimate, with an average un-certainty of 50 kg N ha-1. Weather accounted for about two-thirds ofthe variation in estimated values for YEONR, EONR, and NFE. Uncer-tainty in all aspects of the N response mechanism was also in ﬂuenced by weather conditions (72% to 81%). With a constant but moderate con-tribution, soil factors explained both the predicted N response and theassociated uncertainty (10% to 23%). Model uncertainty as a form ofrisk, potential seasonal weather predictions, and the development ofprobabilistic frameworks to optimize this data-driven decision processfor corn nitrogen application should be considered in improving nitro-gen decision support systems.Wang et al. (2021b)investigated the possibility of improving in-season N-nutrient index (NNI) along with corn grain yield predictionby combining management, soil, and weather data with ’GreenSeeker’ data, an optical sensor that instantaneously measures crop health andvigor using NDVI. RFR was compared to Lasso linear regression (LLR),which contains similar combined data from multiple sources, and tothe simple regression model, which uses only plant data. Studies ofcorn nitrogen fertilization and crop density were conducted at foursites in northeastern China. Using the RFR model to predict grain yieldto simulate the response of corn grain yield response to a range of nitro-gen fertilizer applications at different growth stages is an innovativemethod for seasonal nitrogen fertilizer recommendations that havebeen developed. The simulated results were as good as the measuredresults. The RFR model-based recommendation technique, whichTable 2Summary of machine learning tools for nutrient management.AUTHOR ALGORITM CROP DATASET FEATURES OUTPUT VALIDATION RESULTSYan et al.(2021)RF Maize 7025ﬁeldexperimentdataSoil type, pH Olsen-P, Organic Matter Ava-N, Ava-K varietyplanting system Most important factoraffecting YRP and AEPIndependenttestingMaize varietyTimsina et al.(2021)RF LME MaizeWheatRice600ﬁeldexperimentdataCobs m2 (for maize) Straw yield RoI, PFP of N grain Nuptake Total N uptake IE and PNB of N PFP of P2O5 Grain Puptake Total P uptake IE and PNB of P PFP of K2O Grain Kuptake Total K uptake IE and PNB of K.Partial nutrientbalance Bestmanagement practiceYield PredictionIndependenttestingR2 = 0.99
Archana andSaranya(2020)VBClassiﬁerMany–Soil Nutrient level Crop data pH, EC, T. Yield Prediction Crop recommendationfertilizerrecommendationIndependenttestingAcc = 94%
Coulibali et al.(2020)KNN RFR Potato 273ﬁeldexperimentsdataCumulative precipitation Shannon Diversity Index Numberof growing degree days Cultivar and Weather data Soilproﬁles Soil properties and texture.EONR Crop yieldPrediction70% Training30% TestingR2 = 0,490Suchithra andPai (2020)GaussianRadialbasis–Soil testingdataAvailable (P) Available (K) Organic Carbon (OC) Boron (B),(pH). pH level FertilizationindexIndependenttestingAcc = 80%Moreno et al.(2018)ANN Pasturecrops44 SoilsamplesMajor soil Nutrients pH CEC OM Salts saturationAmendments. Fertilizers andAmendmentsrecommmendations3, 5 k-folds R2 = 0.75Ghosal et al.(2018)CNN Soybean 65,768 RGBImagesColor-based features related to visual stress symptoms. Potassium de ﬁciency 80% Training10% Validation10%TestingAcc = 94%Kouadio et al.(2018)
ELM Robustacoffee44ﬁeldexperimentsdataAvailable B,K,P,S Zn Exchangeable Ca, Mg Total NitrogenOM, pH. Crop yield 80% Training20% TestingRMSE = 0.13MAE = 7.9%Culman et al.(2017)MLPNN Oil Palm 52 RGBImagesHistoricaldataVisual leaf nutrient deﬁciency symptoms. Fertilizer recommendation60% Training,10% Modelselection 20%TestingAcc = 87%
Cholissodinet al. (2016)ANNBISPOMaize 180 FertilizertrialsUrea, SP36, KCL Biochar, Dry Weight Weight of 1000 seedsDiameter of the cob Cob hight Harvest Production. Fertilizerrecommmendation10-Folds 100iterationsMSE = 8.60Chen et al.(2014)SVFSFisher DARice RGB Images Leaf color characteristics Shape characteristics Lightness. N,P,K nutrient deﬁciency–Acc = 90%Asraf et al.(2012)SVM Oil Palm 420 RGBImagesColor feature extraction Histogram-based texture Mean(R,G,B) Variance(R,G,B) Skewness(R,G,B) Kurtosis(R,G,B)Energy(R,G,B) Entropy (R,G,B) Gray level co-occurrenceMatrix(G).Nutrient deﬁciency IndependenttestingAcc = 95%
Backhaus et al.(2011)SVM Tobacco 60,000 HSimagesVein Epidermis. Generic nutrient deﬁciency5-Folds Acc = 80%Yu et al. (2010)K-meansLagrangemultiplierMaize Soil NutrientlevelsFertilizationrate dataSoil(NPK) concentration NPK fertilizer input. Crop yield Independent testingRMSE = 0.98O. Ennaji, L. Vergütz and A. El Allali Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 9 (2023) 1 –11
6combines crop sensing data with soil data, is a promising avenue forcorn nitrogen management. To improve machine learning-based N rec-ommendation for seasonal seeding, additional data from the year of thesite, varying conditions on the farm, and sensors with more spectralranges are needed. Similarly, data from the RapidSCAN active canopysensor was also combined with Genetic*Environmental*Management(G*E*M) information to increase the accuracy of NNI estimation in theMidwestern U.S. under a variety of weather, management and soilvariablesLi et al. (2022);Qiu et al. (2021)presented that conventional methods for monitor-ing nitrogen nutrient index (NNI) require manual real ﬁeld measure- ment data, which is time-consuming and costly, red-green-blue (RGB)imagery from unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) is an alternative. Inthis study, six machine learning algorithms were used to extract rele-vant data for predicting the NNI and vegetation index (VI). The resultsof predicting the NNI of rice using these algorithms showed that themethods of RF performed the best in each growing season, with thebest NNI prediction occurring during the ﬁlling and early maturity stages. At the early maturity stage, rice NNI was found to be signi ﬁcantly related to both available nitrogen in the soil (AN) and yield. CombiningRGB imagery from UAVs with ML algorithms provided a robust and sim-ple solution for instant validation of rice NNI that improved nitrogen useefﬁciency and provided suggestions for precise fertilization in rice cropsdespite its limited accuracy.Modern remote sensing methods for precise nutrient managementand fertilization could then be divided into two approaches: Deep learn-ing methods for predictions based on multiple remote sensing data ormultivariate regressionsWang et al. (2021a).Barbosa et al. (2020a) usedﬁve input variables (nitrogen rate, seed rate, elevation map, soilelectrical conductivity, and the NDVI index) to estimate corn yield pro-duction using a deep-learning approach, and the results were comparedwith other machine learning approaches (Fully connected neural net-work (FNN), multiple linear regression (MLR), SVM, and RF regressionmodels). Although a reduction in RMSE of up to 29% was validated com-pared to the random forest, it should be noted that the deep learningmodel, satellite data, required a total of 1800 plots to be de ﬁned.This study also shows that the most beneﬁt comes from the higher variability of the spatial structure of the data. In their study, Escalante et al. (2019) investigated the recognition performance of a set of classi ﬁers and deep learning convolutional neural networks for evaluating optimal fertiliza-tion using RGB images as input. The average LOO cross-validation per-formance was presented for each of the studied classi ﬁers and each of the pre-trained models. The percentage of correctly identi ﬁed images is used to quantify the performance. ANN, SVM and Adaboost per-formed the best with an accuracy of 81.9%, 80.5% and 83.3%, respec-tively. Considering that only visual features (Barley variety, Fertilizerrate, Vegetation indexes) extracted from RGB images were used, theseare promising results (random guessing leads to an accuracy of 33%).This could be due to the fact that sophisticated models are more speci ﬁc to the target they were created for, while a simple model can be moregeneral and captures relevant information for the representation ofimages.Yu et al. (2018)used a deep learning-based regression model with afully connected neural network (FNN) and stacked autoencoders (SAE)to quantify nitrogen concentration in canola leaves. SAE was used toinfer deep spectral features in the visible and near-infrared regionsfrom a hyperspectral image of a canola leaf, which in turn were usedas input data for the FNN to predict N content. With R
2¼0:903, RMSEP = 0.307%, and a residual prediction error RPDp = 3.238 for Nconcentration, the model SAE-FNN performed quite well. The resultsshow that with a combination of hyperspectral imaging and deep learn-ing, it is possible to quickly and non-destructively detect N concentra-tion in canola leaves to provide better fertilizer recommendations.In another study, Deep Learning was used to detect nitrogen de ﬁ- ciency in corn. For this purpose, four CNN models were pre-trained byapplied transfer learning, considering (V4, V6 and R1) as growth stages.The leaf samples were then digitized to generate 384 images represent-ing the 16 nitrogen treatments considered in the study. The resultsshowed signiﬁcant differences with respect to each growth stage. How-ever, CNNs built using RGB images provided great results (average61.8%) compared to traditional text-based methods (average 50 –60%) Montes Condori et al. (2017).Similarly, in the study byKou et al. (2022), RGB images of the cotton canopy were acquired using a UAV digital camera. The nitrogen contentof the cotton canopy was predicted using two cotton cultivars and sixnitrogen gradients. Forty-six features were extracted from the imageafter image preprocessing, and CNN were used to extract deep features.Pearson and partial least squares were used feature selection. For accu-rate prediction of nitrogen content of cotton crowns, manual featureswere used as input to build linear regression models, support vectormachines, and one-dimensional CNN regression models. Deep learningbased features were used as inputs to build a two-dimensional CNN re-gression model. The results wereR2¼0:80 and RMSE = 1.67 g kg-1 for Xinluzao 45 andR
2¼0:42 and RMSE = 3.13 g kg-1 for Xinluzao 53, in-dicating that cotton nitrogen content can be predicted on a large scaleusing UAV RGB images and machine learning. However, the accuracyand stability of the prediction model still need to be improved due toinsufﬁcient data samples.In addition, soil properties such as total nitrogen can be determinedby combining ML algorithms and spectroscopy. These algorithms are anexcellent alternative to simple regression models when the goal is to in-crease the accuracy of the regression. Partial least square regression(PLSR) is a widely used approach for processing multivariable inputs,extracting successive linear combinations of the spectra to achieve thecoupled goals of effectively explaining response variation and optimallyexplaining predictor variation. This is the most commonly used methodin soil spectroscopy and chemometrics and has proven successful inassessing water and nitrogen status. The availability of large data setscoupled with better training and the provision of highly accuratemodels is one of the major challenges for this system when applied tonutritional management. Predictive models have been developedusing several technologies, including PLSR, which reduces the numberof features required, and neural networks, which compensate for non-linearityWang et al. (2021a);Tavakoli and Gebbers (2019);Morellos et al. (2016).Table 1summarizes and includes brief descriptions ofthe above studies.3.3. NPK management based systemsThe development of NPK management based systems follows twogeneral approaches based the type of input, namely ﬁeld data (soil tests, fertilization trials, etc.) or RGB and hyperspectral images. Yu et al. (2010)developed a fertilizer model with data points from 10experimentalﬁelds with 4 fertilizer rates and 14 treatments. A neuralnetwork ensemble was presented to calculate the fertilizer rate moreaccurately. The authors used K-means clustering to select the best net-works individually and then combined the models using a Lagrangemultiplier. A fertilizer model was created using the ensemble methodfor neural networks described above. In this model, soil nutrient contentand fertilizer rate are used as inputs to the neural network, while yield isconsidered as an output. With this approach, the calculation of fertilizerrates becomes a programming problem and can be used to determinethe fertilizer rate with the highest yield and pro ﬁt and to predict the yield. This fertilizer model was also validated using data on the effectof fertilizers. The results show that using an ensemble of neuralnetworks to predict yield is more accurate than using individual neuralnetworks.According toCholissodin et al. (2016), the integrated artiﬁcial neural network (ANN) can not only optimize fertilizer rates for corn, but alsowhen used in conjunction with Bidirectional Improved Particle SwarmO. Ennaji, L. Vergütz and A. El Allali Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 9 (2023) 1 –11
7Optimization (BIPSO), the fusion provides better results. The ANN ap-proach provided good results in predicting recommendations usingﬁeld trial data as training data, while BIPSO optimized multiple featuressimultaneously, which accelerated the operation of the system. Thesmallest mean square error (MSE) value was obtained by 10-foldcross-validation, repeating CV hundreds of times. The goal of the studywas to initially use ML in pasture and rotational cropping and then ex-tend it to other crops based on the results, which could lead to new in-sights when used as input by other researchers. Kouadio et al. (2018) investigated the use of Extreme Learning Machines (ELM) to analyzesoil fertility parameters and produce an effective yield estimate. The ef-fectiveness of different ELM-based models based on Soil organic matter(SOM), accessible exchangeable nutrients, and pH was tested with sin-gle and multiple combinations of predictor variables. The results of theELM model were compared with those of existing predictive techniquessuch as MLR and RF. The authors believe that the ELM model makes aunique contribution to the agricultural sector, particularly in terms ofselecting optimal soil parameters for predicting coffee yields. The re-search demonstrates the potential value of combining machine learningwith biophysical crop models.Moreno et al. (2018)found that they could determine the fertilizers and amendments needed for pastureproduction based on the major nutrients in the soil. They used a multi-layer perceptron network trained with the backpropagation algorithm.For fertilizers and additives, a multilayer arti ﬁcial neural network was trained with an input layer consisting of soil test variables and an outputlayer with many simultaneous outputs. The MSE of the test data and itsstandard deviation, and the MSE of the training data and its standarddeviation were used to determine the quality of each neural network.The objective of the study was to develop a recommendation systemsuitable for pasture cropping despite the limited amount of data.Suchithra and Pai (2020)developed a system based on soil test re-sults to classify and predict soil fertility indices and pH values basedon various soil characteristics. The algorithm used in this study was anExtreme Learning Machine (ELM) for classi ﬁcation and prediction. This algorithm provides better-generalized results by feeding forwardNN with a single hidden layer (SLFNs). The potassium fertility indexhad an accuracy of up to 78%, while the pH classi ﬁcation was up to 89%. The activation function in this NN that had the best classi ﬁcation, accuracy, and kappa values was the GRB function. Similarly, Timsina et al. (2021)also compared three different nutrient management strat-egies for common cereals considering various factors such as nutrientuse efﬁciency (NUE). A developed site-speciﬁc decision support system Nutrient Expert (NE) was used to evaluate the nutrient balance of theﬁeld by analyzing past yields or costs. RF algorithm showed that NUEfor rice and P and K uptake for wheat and maize were the most impor-tant factors contributing to grain yield. Random Forest was used in thestudy byYan et al. (2021)to quantify the relative importance of differ-ent traits (Phosphorous (P) fertilization practices, region, soil proper-ties, variety, and cropping system) on yield response to P andagronomic efﬁciency of P in maize. Although this algorithm producedvery good results, Maize variety was selected as the most important fac-tor affecting yield. The study encountered several limitations thatshould be considered in future studies, such as the differences in yieldand agronomic efﬁciency between regions, the different release offertilizer-P in soil dynamics, and the fact that only top soil sampleswere used rather than the entire soil proﬁle. Coulibali et al. (2020)investigated and compared machine learningand probabilistic models with site-speciﬁc predictive models for fertili- zation of potato crops in eastern Canada. Using statistical models, potato(Solanum tuberosumL.) performance is often associated with fertilizerrequirements. Because of the many variables involved, such as soil,land management, genotypes, weather, and pests and diseases, it is dif-ﬁcult to predict appropriate nutrient levels. This study compared differ-ent models for evaluating NPK requirements for high quality and yieldas a function of soil, land management, and weather. They used datafrom 273ﬁeld trials conducted in Quebec between 1979 and 2017.Predictions from k-nearest neighbors, RF, NN, hierarchical Mitscherlichmodel, and Gaussian processes were created, tested, and compared. Fort h ep r e d i c t i o no fm a r k e t a b l et u b e ry i e l d ,t h eM Lm o d e l sg a v e R
2values of 0.49–0.59, which were higher than the R
2of the Mitscherlich model (0.37). Some models did not agree in obtaining optimal rates fromdose-response surfaces under constant conditions. Gaussian processesproved to be a promising method for site-speci ﬁc fertilizer recommenda- tions that can reduce economic or agronomic risks because of their abilityto make suggestions in the context of probabilistic risk assessment.RGB or hyperspectral images can be used to detect nutrient de ﬁcien- cies at early growth stages non-destructively. In their study, Backhaus et al. (2011)investigated whether supervised approaches for predictingplant nutritional status using classiﬁcation models are robust enough tohandle large data sets with signiﬁcant variance, such as leaf age or pixelposition in the leaf. The learning algorithms tested were SVM, General-ized Relevance Learning Vector Quantization (GRLVQ), Supervised Rel-evance Neural Gas (SRNG), and a Radial Basis Function (RBF) Network.Leaf growth stage had the greatest impact on classi ﬁcation accuracy, with SVM and RBF providing reliable results and SRNG and GRLVQ tech-niques falling to nearly determinable values. The importance of spectralbands in predicting nutrient content was estimated using three camerascovering the visible and shortwave infrared spectrum (VIS /SWIR). Thesimple separation of pixels of veins and epidermis proved to be a sourceof confounding variance for nutrient categorization in this work, but hadlittle effect on actual classiﬁcation performance. Leaf age had a muchstronger effect on GRLVQ, SRNG, and SVM classi ﬁcation performance (simple spectra) for nutrient states, such that it was close to the rate.Automatic detection of nutrient deﬁciencies in leaves of oil palm usinga visual system and pattern recognition was presented by Asraf et al. (2012). In this study, Support Vector Machine (SVM) is also used as aclassiﬁer using three different kernels: a linear kernel, hard edge poly-nomial kernel and a soft edge polynomial kernel. According to the pre-liminary data, the SVM classiﬁers were able to detect oil palm leaves.The soft-edge polynomial kernel was able to accurately classify nutri-tional disorders in oil palm leaves with 95% correctness. Support vectorfeature selection (SVFS), as a variant of SVM, showed great potential inselecting relevant features for nutritional de ﬁciencies. Images of the top three leaves of a rice plant (Oryza sativaL.) and associated leaf sheaths were acquired using static scanning techniques. Thirty-two spectraland shape features were identiﬁed from these images by fusion of anRGB mean function and a Matlab region-prop function. NPK de ﬁciencies were effectively detected using hierarchical identi ﬁcation. The overall accuracy of NPK deﬁciencies for the four growth stages was 86.15,87.69, 90.00, and 89.23%, respectively. Validation was performed withdata from different years, and the accuracies were 83.08, 83.08, 89.23,and 90.77%, respectivelyChen et al. (2014). In the study byGhosal et al. (2018)individual soybean leaves that exhibited a range of deﬁciency symptoms such as potassium and ironwere manually selected and collected in the ﬁeld by destructive sam- pling. The leaves and charts were manually recorded with a digital cam-era. In this way, 25,000 images were collected and labeled to create adataset of leaf images. The authors used a CNN classi ﬁer and were able to achieve an accuracy of 94%. In this study, a deep machine visionbased approach was used to detect early symptoms of stress. The pre-sented method is widely applicable in modern agriculture and providesaccurate and not time-consuming immediate stress detection. Thismethod has been shown to be relatively insensitive to illumination var-iations, making it a simple technique for large-scale stress detection. An-other deep-learning approach was developed by Culman et al. (2017),
who presented PalmHand, a unique smart-device application that al-lows farmers to detect instant oil palm de ﬁciencies using leaf images. The developed app works as an IoT device that stores and analyzes his-torical data collected from numerous users simultaneously in the cloud.A single MLP was used to classify oil palms into one of four possible cat-egories. The MLP classiﬁed the image into four categories correspondingO. Ennaji, L. Vergütz and A. El Allali Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 9 (2023) 1 –11
8to a healthy palm or a specimen deﬁcient in potassium (K), magnesium(Mg), or nitrogen (N). The average macroprecision and accuracy were0.67 and 0.50, respectively. Considering the limited dataset availablefor training the classiﬁer, these results were considered promising evi-dence for the concept. However, no information was provided on thecircumstances under which the 52 RGB images were acquired. Similarlyno details concerning the data were shared in the work of Archana and Saranya (2020)that proposed a method focusing on macronutrients(NPK), soil pH and electrical conductivity, and temperature to providethe best crop recommendations. Crop rotation, fertilizer recommenda-tions, forecasting, and crop production prediction were part of the col-laborative proposed system. The objective of this study was to developa system that combines an agricultural dataset and uses a voting-based ensemble as a classiﬁcation algorithm to recommend suitablecrops. It was found that yield prediction could be of great help tofarmers in increasing their yields. Crop rotation has shown good resultsin improving soil fertility when applied regularly. This technique helpsin making fertilizer decisions that are bene ﬁcial to farmers. This system had an accuracy of 92%.Although machine learning is widely used in agriculture in generaland in nutrient management and fertilizer recommendations in partic-ular, the literature shows that research needs to focus on the availabilityof data, including all the important factors that need to be used to over-come the limitationsRansom et al. (2019);Wang et al. (2021b);Yu et al. (2010);Cholissodin et al. (2016).Table 2summarizes the above work for the case of nutrient management subcategory.4. Summary and outlookThe development of a nutrient management tool using machinelearning generated a great deal of interest in the scienti ﬁc community, which recognized the importance of food security and the sustainabilityof its processesThompson et al. (2015). With the revolution that our modern agriculture is experiencing today, the use of various sensors,smart irrigation systems, and remote sensing, more and more datasetsare becoming availableChlingaryan et al. (2018). These large datasets have emerged simultaneously with major advances in computerscience such as machine learning, which has led to incredible break-throughs in this research area. In this paper, we collected and reviewedvarious machine learning approaches in the ﬁeld of nutrient manage- ment. Analysis of these articles revealed that in the nitrogen manage-ment category, Random Forests was the most frequently used MLalgorithm. The popularity of RFs correlated with better results ( R
2was up to 0.97Qiu et al. (2021)). In the NPK category, many models suchas SVMs were used, but an RF-based algorithm gave the best R
2score Timsina et al. (2021).In the Nitrogen category, we can see a high presence of image inputs,reﬂecting the emerging trend and the wide use of multi-source images(HS, RGB, NIR, etc.). This has been enabled by the development and af-fordability of this technology along with high computational power.By integrating machine learning with IoT data, farm management sys-tems are evolving into true artiﬁcial intelligence systems that providebetter recommendations and insights for future decisions and actions,with the goal of increasing productivity. To this end, it is envisionedthat the use of machine learning models will become even more popu-lar over time, enabling the development of integrated and applicabletechnologies. Despite the great strides that have been made recentlyin theﬁeld of nutrient management, actual practical/accurate applica-tion is currently a challenge. Many limitations have come to light thatare related to the methods used and are both intrinsically and extr-insically related to the target problem. The current state of nutrientmanagement using digital imagery and machine learning was alsodiscussed to provide an in-depth analysis of the various challengesfaced by many researchers working on this topic. Collecting datasetswith such precise factors and for a speciﬁc crop is usually not an easytask, considering that not all available datasets are representativeenough of the variation found in theﬁeld.To determine suitability for practical application, basic data fromstudies of crop response to nutrients inﬁelds with cross-validation are needed. Soil propertiesJohn et al. (2020), plant density, weather indi- ces, plant variety, plant growth stage and N, P, and K fertilizer rates,are all very important and should be considered in data collection be-cause they can directly affect the model output Trontelj ml and Chambers (2021). Yield response can vary by plant variety in additionto the fertilizer rate proposed by recommendation systems. In addition,ﬁeld trials would directly impact yield and improve not only biomass,but also solution sustainability and soil health. This practice wouldshed light on forgotten features such as SOM and tillage systems, lead-ing to a better understanding of soil dynamics and better recommenda-tions. For example,Ransom et al. (2019)andQin et al. (2018)tested several models and algorithms to improve nitrogen requirement forcorn. In the case ofRansom et al. (2019), theR2was up to 0.94, with data sets collected from 49 experimental sites in the MidwesternUnited States. WhileR
2inQin et al. (2018)was only 0.46, using data from a limited number of sites. Both studies tested the effect of ML algo-rithms on nutrient management but reached different conclusions dueto the quality and size of the data they used.The most critical point to mention is that many people see machinelearning as a solution to future needs in agriculture. On the other hand,machine learning only provides the best recommendations based on theinputs. In practice, various soil parameters need to be considered toachieve greater or higher yields and better environmental performancethan traditional fertilizer management systems. However, to fullyunderstand this system, a standardized research technique based onsite-speciﬁc parameters is required. We believe that a comprehensiveknowledge of what accuracy means is insuf ﬁcient. As a result, different technologies, procedures, and criteria for accuracy and good resultshave been used, leading to a scenario of con ﬂicting results. We also ﬁnd that all approaches look at single procedures and solutions andare not sufﬁciently linked to the decision process as is the case inother application areas. The real problem is understanding the rightpath to the best nutrient management recommendations and makingthem accessible and understandable to farmers. Researchers shouldalso focus on the transition between great modeling results and tangiblepractices to achieve them. From most of the articles reviewed, we canconclude that there were strong correlations between model accuracyand dataset size and quality. Compiling comprehensive data sets thataccount for all the different scenarios and variabilities is the most dif ﬁ- cult taskBarbedo (2019), but is considered key to accurate results. Theﬁrst step would be to identify the data source, which could includeﬁeld studies and research. Second, we need to collect data on soil typeand climate from research studies and APIs. We also need data oncrop type, crop yield, and management data that can be obtained fromfarmers, extension services, and government agencies. Finally, the col-lected data needs to be cleaned and preprocessed. This includes remov-ing outliers and normalizing the data to combine them into a single dataset that can be used by the ML algorithm.However, we believe that data availability is the bottleneck when itcomes to taking full advantage of what ML can offer to the ﬁeld of fertil- izer recommendations. We encourage researchers to share their datawith the community to enhance the capabilities and impact of theresearch. We also encourage researchers developing ML-based recom-mendation systems to suggest the best suitable features and developother features that can be collected at a large scale. In addition, it iscrucial to standardize the methodological approach to nutrient manage-ment systems based on a detailed description of the entire system sothat results from different experiments and parts of the world can belogically compared.The accessibility of powerful machine learning tools and techniqueson many open source platforms is certainly bene ﬁcial to the researchO. Ennaji, L. Vergütz and A. El Allali Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 9 (2023) 1 –11
9community. However, this also leads to many misleading publicationsby researchers who either do not know exactly what ML expertise is re-quired or do not have the proper soil and plant nutrient knowledge. Thisphenomenon has led to a great pipe dream Schut and Giller (2020); Lischeid et al. (2022);Paudel et al. (2021)in which scientists conﬁrm the accuracy of their models while considering the wrong parameters.Given the rapid progress ML has made in recent decades, it is verylikely that the world will see an increase in the applications of MLmodels. The integration and applications are becoming more andmore remarkable. ML algorithms show great potential when properlyused for support or decision-making. The fusion of spectral and spatialfeatures and unique hybrid processing systems that complement eachother's limitations would deﬁnitely improve the understanding of soildynamics. This success will likely be paired with better yields leadingto a more food-secure world.Declaration of Competing InterestThe authors declare that they have no known competing ﬁnancial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to in ﬂu- ence the work reported in this paper.References
Abioye, E.A., Hensel, O., Esau, T.J., Elijah, O., Abidin, M.S.Z., Ayobami, A.S., Yerima, O.,Nasirahmadi, A., 2022.Precision irrigation management using machine learningand digital farming solutions. AgriEngineering 4, 70 –103. Adnan, A.A., Diels, J., Jibrin, J.M., Kamara, A.Y., Craufurd, P., Shaibu, A.S., Mohammed, I.B.,Tonnang, Z.E., 2019.Options for calibrating CERES-maize genotype speci ﬁcp a r a m e - ters under data-scarce environments. PLoS One 14, 1 –20. Ahmad, A., Saraswat, D., El Gamal, A., 2022. A survey on using deep learning techniques for plant disease diagnosis and recommendations for development of appropriatetools. Smart Agricult. Technol. 100083.Ahmed, U., Lin, J.C.W., Srivastava, G., Djenouri, Y., 2021. A nutrient recommendation sys- tem for soil fertilization based on evolutionary computation. Comput. Electron. Agric.189, 106407.Al-Ajlan, A., El Allali, A., 2018a. CNN-MGP: convolutional neural networks for metagenomics gene prediction. Interdisciplin. Sci.: Comput. Life Sci. 11, 628 –635. Al-Ajlan, A., El Allali, A., 2018b. Feature selection for gene prediction in metagenomic frag-ments. BioData Minin. 11.Archana, K., Saranya, K., 2020. Crop yield prediction, forecasting and fertilizer recommen-dation using voting based ensemble classi ﬁer. SSRG Int. J. Comput. Sci. Eng 7, 1 –4. Asraf, H.M., Nooritawati, M., Rizam, M.S., 2012. A comparative study in kernel-based sup- port vector machine of oil palm leaves nutrient disease. Proced. Eng. 41, 1353 –1359. Aworka, R., Cedric, L.S., Adoni, W.Y.H., Zoueu, J.T., Mutombo, F.K., Kimpolo, C.L.M., Nahhal,T., Krichen, M., 2022.Agricultural decision system based on advanced machine learn-ing models for yield prediction: case of east african countries. Smart Agricult. Technol.2, 100048.Ayodele, T.O., 2010.Types of machine learning algorithms. New Adv. Mach. Learn. 3,19–48.Babaie Sarijaloo, F., Porta, M., Taslimi, B., Pardalos, P.M., 2021. Yield performance estima- tion of corn hybrids using machine learning algorithms. Artif. Intell. Agricult. 5,82–89.Backhaus, A., Bollenbeck, F., Seiffert, U., 2011. Robust classiﬁcation of the nutrition state in crop plants by hyperspectral imaging and arti ﬁcial neural networks. 2011 3rd Work- shop on Hyperspectral Image and Signal Processing: Evolution in Remote Sensing(WHISPERS). IEEE, pp. 1–4. Barbedo, J.G.A., 2019.Detection of nutrition deﬁciencies in plants using proximal images and machine learning: a review. Comput. Electron. Agric. 162, 482 –492. Barbosa, A., Trevisan, R., Hovakimyan, N., Martin, N.F., 2020a. Modeling yield response to crop management using convolutional neural networks. Comput. Electron. Agric.170, 105197.Barbosa, A., Trevisan, R., Hovakimyan, N., Martin, N.F., 2020b. Modeling yield response to crop management using convolutional neural networks. Comput. Electron. Agric.170, 105197.Bedi, P., Gole, P., 2021.Plant disease detection using hybrid model based on convolutionalautoencoder and convolutional neural network. Artif. Intell. Agricult. 5, 90 –101. Bharath, S.M., Manoj, S., Adhappa, P., Patagar, P.L., Bhaskar, R., 2022. Crop yield prediction with efﬁcient use of fertilizers. Lectu. Notes Elect. Eng. 783, 937 –943. Cai, Y., Guan, K., Lobell, D., Potgieter, A.B., Wang, S., Peng, J., Xu, T., Asseng, S., Zhang, Y.,You, L., Peng, B., 2019.Integrating satellite and climate data to predict wheat yieldin Australia using machine learning approaches. Agric. For. Meteorol. 274, 144 –159. Castaldi, F., Castrignanò, A., Casa, R., 2016.
A data fusion and spatial data analysis approach for the estimation of wheat grain nitrogen uptake from satellite data. Int. J. RemoteSens. 37, 4317–4336.Chandrashekar, G., Sahin, F., 2014. A survey on feature selection methods. Comput. Electr. Eng. 40, 16–28.Chen, L., Lin, L., Cai, G., Sun, Y., Huang, T., Wang, K., Deng, J., 2014. Identiﬁcation of nitro- gen, phosphorus, and potassium de ﬁciencies in Rice based on static scanning technol- ogy and hierarchical identiﬁcation method. PLoS One 9, e113200. Chivenge, P., Zingore, S., Ezui, K., Njoroge, S., Bunquin, M., Dobermann, A., Saito, K., 2022.Progress in research on site-speciﬁc nutrient management for smallholder farmers in sub-saharan africa. Field Crop Res. 281, 108503.Chlingaryan, A., Sukkarieh, S., Whelan, B., 2018. Machine learning approaches for crop yield prediction and nitrogen status estimation in precision agriculture: a review.Comput. Electron. Agric. 151, 61 –69. Cholissodin, I., Dewi, C., Surbakti, Eunike Endariahna, 2016. Integrated ANN and Bidirec- tional improved PSO for optimization of fertilizer dose on Palawija plants. 2016 2ndInternational Conference on Science in Information Technology (ICSITech). IEEE,pp. 193–197.Collier, P., Dercon, S., 2014.African Agriculture in 50years: Smallholders in a RapidlyChanging World? World Development. 63. Economic Transformation in Africa,pp. 92–101.Correndo, A.A., Tremblay, N., Coulter, J.A., Ruiz-Diaz, D., Franzen, D., Nafziger, E., Prasad, V.,Rosso, L.H.M., Steinke, K., Du, J., et al., 2021. Unraveling uncertainty drivers of the maize yield response to nitrogen: a bayesian and machine learning approach. Agric.For. Meteorol. 311, 108668.Coulibali, Z., Cambouris, A.N., Parent, S.É., 2020. Site-speciﬁc machine learning predictive fertilization models for potato crops in eastern Canada. PLoS One 15, e0230888.Crane-Droesch, A., 2018.Machine learning methods for crop yield prediction and climatechange impact assessment in agriculture. Environ. Res. Lett. 13.Culman, M.A., Gomez, J.A., Talavera, J., Quiroz, L.A., Tobon, L.E., Aranda, J.M., Garreta, L.E.,Bayona, C.J., 2017.A novel application for identiﬁcation of nutrient deﬁciencies in oil palm using the internet of things. 2017 5th IEEE International Conference on Mo-bile Cloud Computing, Services, and Engineering (MobileCloud). IEEE, pp. 169 –172. Dai, X., Zhou, X., Jia, D., Xiao, L., Kong, H., He, M., 2013. Managing the seeding rate to im- prove nitrogen-use efﬁciency of winter wheat. Field Crop Res. 154, 100 –109. Dash, M., Liu, H., 1997.Feature selection for classiﬁcation. Intell. Data Anal. 1, 131 –156. Dhal, S.B., Bagavathiannan, M., Braga-Neto, U., Kalafatis, S., 2022. Nutrient optimization for plant growth in aquaponic irrigation using machine learning for small trainingdatasets. Artif. Intell. Agricult. 6, 68 –76. Dharani, M., Thamilselvan, R., Natesan, P., Kalaivaani, P., Santhoshkumar, S., 2021. Review on crop prediction using deep learning techniques. Journal of Physics: Conference Se-ries. IOP Publishing, p. 012026.Diao, X., Hazell, P., Thurlow, J., 2010. The Role of Agriculture in African Development. World Development 38, 1375 –1383. The Future of Small Farms Including Special Sec- tion: Impact Assessment of Policy-Oriented International Agricultural Research.pp. 1453–1526.Durai, S.K.S., Shamili, M.D., 2022. Smart farming using machine learning and deep learn-ing techniques. Decis. Analyt. J. 3, 100041.El Allali, A., Elhamraoui, Z., Daoud, R., 2021.Machine learning applications in RNA modi- ﬁcation sites prediction. Comput. Struct. Biotechnol. J. 19, 5510 –5524. Elavarasan, D., Vincent, D.R., Sharma, V., Zomaya, A.Y., Srinivasan, K., 2018. Forecasting yield by integrating agrarian factors and machine learning models: a survey. Comput.Electron. Agric. 155, 257–282. Escalante, H.J., Rodríguez-Sánchez, S., Jiménez-Lizárraga, M., Morales-Reyes, A., De LaCalleja, J., Vazquez, R., 2019.Barley yield and fertilization analysis from UAV imagery:a deep learning approach. Int. J. Remote Sens. 40, 2493 –2516. Fairhurst, T., Witt, C., Buresh, R., Dobermann, A., Fairhurst, T., 2007. Rice: A practical guide to nutrient management. Int. Rice Res. 1, 2 –4. Farooque, A.A., Hussain, N., Schumann, A.W., Abbas, F., Afzaal, H., McKenzie-Gopsill, A.,Esau, T., Zaman, Q., Wang, X., 2023. Field evaluation of a deep learning-based smart variable-rate sprayer for targeted application of agrochemicals. Smart Agricult.Technol. 3, 100073.Ghosal, S., Blystone, D., Singh, A.K., Ganapathysubramanian, B., Singh, A., Sarkar, S., 2018.An explainable deep machine vision framework for plant stress phenotyping. Proc.Natl. Acad. Sci. 115, 4613–4618. Goulding, K., Jarvis, S., Whitmore, A., 2008. Optimizing nutrient management for farm sys- tems. Philosoph. Trans. Royal Soc. B: Biol. Sci. 363, 667 –680. Griffel, L., Delparte, D., Whitworth, J., Bodily, P., Hartley, D., 2022. Evaluation of artiﬁcial neural network performance for classi ﬁcation of potato plants infected with potato virus y using spectral data on multiple varieties and genotypes. Smart Agricult.Technol. 100101.Holzworth, D.P., Snow, V., Janssen, S., Athanasiadis, I.N., Donatelli, M., Hoogenboom, G.,White, J.W., Thorburn, P., 2015. Agricultural production systems modelling and soft- ware: current status and future prospects. Environ. Model. Softw. 72, 276 –286. Jayne, T.S., Mather, D., Mghenyi, E., 2010. Principal challenges confronting smallholder ag- riculture in sub-saharan africa. World Dev. 38, 1384 –1398. Jha, K., Doshi, A., Patel, P., Shah, M., 2019. A comprehensive review on automation in ag- riculture using artiﬁcial intelligence. Artif. Intell. Agricult. 2, 1 –12. Jian, J., Du, X., Stewart, R.D., 2020. A database for global soil health assessment. Sci. Data 7,3–10.John, K., Abraham Isong, I., Michael Kebonye, N., Okon Ayito, E., Chapman Agyeman, P.,Marcus Afu, S., 2020.Using machine learning algorithms to estimate soil organic car-bon variability with environmental variables and soil nutrient indicators in an alluvialsoil. Land 9, 487.Kamilaris, A., Kartakoullis, A., Prenafeta-Boldú, F.X., 2017. A review on the practice of big data analysis in agriculture. Comput. Electron. Agric. 143, 23 –37. Karimi, Y., Prasher, S., Patel, R., Kim, S., 2006. Application of support vector machine tech- nology for weed and nitrogen stress detection in corn. Comput. Electron. Agric. 51,99–109.O. Ennaji, L. Vergütz and A. El Allali Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 9 (2023) 1 –11
10Kattenborn, T., Leitloff, J., Schiefer, F., Hinz, S., 2021. Review on convolutional neural net- works (cnn) in vegetation remote sensing. ISPRS J. Photogramm. Remote Sens. 173,24–49.Kebonye, N.M., Agyeman, P.C., Biney, J.K., 2022. Optimized modelling of countrywide soil organic carbon levels via an interpretable decision tree. Smart Agricult. Technol.100106.Khanal, S., Fulton, J., Klopfenstein, A., Douridas, N., Shearer, S., 2018. Integration of high resolution remotely sensed data and machine learning techniques for spatial predic-tion of soil properties and corn yield. Comput. Electron. Agric. 153, 213 –225. Kou, J., Duan, L., Yin, C., Ma, L., Chen, X., Gao, P., Lv, X., 2022. Predicting leaf nitrogen con- tent in cotton with uav rgb images. Sustainability 14, 9259.Kouadio, L., Deo, R.C., Byrareddy, V., Adamowski, J.F., Mushtaq, S., Phuong Nguyen, V.,2018.Artiﬁcial intelligence approach for the prediction of Robusta coffee yieldusing soil fertility properties. Comput. Electron. Agric. 155, 324 –338. Kuijpers, R., Swinnen, J., 2016. Value chains and technology transfer to agriculture in de-veloping and emerging economies. Am. J. Agric. Econ. 98, 1403 –1418. L e C u n ,Y . ,B e n g i o ,Y . ,H i n t o n ,G . ,2 0 1 5 . Deep learning. Nature 521, 436 –444. Li, D., Miao, Y., Ransom, C.J., Bean, G.M., Kitchen, N.R., Fernández, F.G., Sawyer, J.E.,Camberato, J.J., Carter, P.R., Ferguson, R.B., et al., 2022. Corn nitrogen nutrition index prediction improved by integrating genetic, environmental, and management factorswith active canopy sensing using machine learning. Remote Sens. 14, 394.Liakos, K.G., Busato, P., Moshou, D., Pearson, S., Bochtis, D., 2018. Machine learning in ag- riculture: a review. Sensors (Switzerland) 18, 1 –29. Lischeid, G., Webber, H., Sommer, M., Nendel, C., Ewert, F., 2022. Machine learning in crop yield modelling: a powerful tool, but no surrogate for science. Agric. For. Meteorol.312, 108698.Livingston, G., Schonberger, S., Delaney, S., 2011. Sub-saharan africa: the state of small- holders in agriculture, in: paper presented at the IFAD conference on new directionsfor smallholder agriculture. Citeseer. p. 25.Monaghan, R., Hedley, M., Di, H., McDowell, R., Cameron, K., Ledgard, S., 2007. Nutrient management in New Zealand pastures —recent developments and future issues. N. Z. J. Agric. Res. 50, 181–201.Montes Condori, R.H., Romualdo, L.M., Martinez Bruno, O., de Cerqueira Luz, P.H., 2017.Comparison between traditional texture methods and deep learning descriptors fordetection of nitrogen deﬁciency in maize crops. 2017 Workshop of Computer Vision(WVC). IEEE, pp. 7–12.Morellos, A., Pantazi, X.E., Moshou, D., Alexandridis, T., Whetton, R., Tziotzios, G.,Wiebensohn, J., Bill, R., Mouazen, A.M., 2016. Machine learning based prediction of soil total nitrogen, organic carbon and moisture content by using Vis-nir spectros-copy. Biosyst. Eng. 152, 104 –116. Moreno, R.H., Garcia, O., Arias, R.L.A., 2018. Model of neural networks for fertilizer recom- mendation and amendments in pasture crops. 2018 ICAI Workshops (ICAIW). IEEE,pp. 1–5.Najafabadi, M.M., Villanustre, F., Khoshgoftaar, T.M., Seliya, N., Wald, R., Muharemagic, E.,2015.Deep learning applications and challenges in big data analytics. J. Big Data 2, 1.Newlands, N.K., Zamar, D.S., Kouadio, L.A., Zhang, Y., Chipanshi, A., Potgieter, A., Toure, S.,Hill, H.S., 2014.An integrated, probabilistic model for improved seasonal forecastingof agricultural crop yield under environmental uncertainty. Front. Environ. Sci. 2,1–21.Olanipekun, I.O., Olasehinde-Williams, G.O., Alao, R.O., 2019. Agriculture and environ- mental degradation in africa: the role of income. Sci. Total Environ. 692, 60 –67. Patrício, D.I., Rieder, R., 2018.Computer vision and artiﬁcial intelligence in precision agri- culture for grain crops: a systematic review. Comput. Electron. Agric. 153, 69
–81. Paudel, D., Boogaard, H., de Wit, A., Janssen, S., Osinga, S., Pylianidis, C., Athanasiadis, I.N.,2021.Machine learning for large-scale crop yield forecasting. Agric. Syst. 187,103016.Paymode, A.S., Malode, V.B., 2022. Transfer learning for multi-crop leaf disease image classiﬁcation using convolutional neural network vgg. Artif. Intell. Agricult. 6, 23 –33. Preethi, G., Rathi Priya, V., Sanjula, S.M., Lalitha, S.D., Vijaya Bindhu, B., 2020. Agro based crop and fertilizer recommendation system using machine learning. Eur. J. Mol.Clin. Med. 7, 2043–2051.Puntel, L.A., Sawyer, J.E., Barker, D.W., Dietzel, R., Poffenbarger, H., Castellano, M.J., Moore,K.J., Thorburn, P., Archontoulis, S.V., 2016. Modeling long-term corn yield response to nitrogen rate and crop rotation. Front. Plant Sci. 7, 1 –18. Qin, Z., Myers, D.B., Ransom, C.J., Kitchen, N.R., Liang, S., Camberato, J.J., Carter, P.R.,Ferguson, R.B., Fernandez, F.G., Franzen, D.W., Laboski, C.A., Malone, B.D., Nafziger,E.D., Sawyer, J.E., Shanahan, J.F., 2018. Application of machine learning methodologies for predicting corn economic optimal nitrogen rate. Agron. J. 110, 2596 –2607. Q i u ,Z . ,M a ,F . ,L i ,Z . ,X u ,X . ,G e ,H . ,D u ,C . ,2 0 2 1 . Estimation of nitrogen nutrition index in rice from uav rgb images coupled with machine learning algorithms. Comput. Elec-tron. Agric. 189, 106421.Rainville, D., Durand, A., Fortin, F.A., Tanguy, K., Maldague, X., Panneton, B., Simard, M.J., etal., 2014.Bayesian classiﬁcation and unsupervised learning for isolating weeds in rowcrops. Pattern. Anal. Applic. 17, 401 –414. Ransom, C.J., Kitchen, N.R., Camberato, J.J., Carter, P.R., Ferguson, R.B., Fernández, F.G.,Franzen, D.W., Laboski, C.A., Myers, D.B., Nafziger, E.D., Sawyer, J.E., Shanahan, J.F.,2019.Statistical and machine learning methods evaluated for incorporating soil andweather into corn nitrogen recommendations. Comput. Electron. Agric. 164, 104872.Raouhi, E.M., Lachgar, M., Hrimech, H., Kartit, A., 2022. Optimization techniques in deep convolutional neuronal networks applied to olive diseases classi ﬁcation. Artif. Intell. Agricult. 6, 77–89.Rejeb, A., Rejeb, K., Zailani, S., Keogh, J.G., Appolloni, A., 2022. Examining the interplay be- tween artiﬁcial intelligence and the agrifood industry. Artif. Intell. Agricult. 6,111–128.Salami, A., Kamara, A.B., Brixiova, Z., 2010. Smallholder Agriculture in East Africa: Trends, Constraints and Opportunities. African Development Bank Tunis, Tunisia.Sarker, I.H., 2021.Machine learning: algorithms, real-world applications and research di-rections. SN Comput. Sci. 2, 1 –21. Schut, A.G., Giller, K.E., 2020. Soil-based,ﬁeld-speciﬁc fertilizer recommendations are a pipe-dream. Geoderma 380, 114680.Shi, P., Wang, Y., Xu, J., Zhao, Y., Yang, B., Yuan, Z., Sun, Q., 2021. Rice nitrogen nutrition estimation with rgb images and machine learning methods. Comput. Electron.Agric. 180, 105860.Singh, A., Thakur, N., Sharma, A., 2016. A review of supervised machine learning algo- rithms. 2016 3rd International Conference on Computing for Sustainable Global De-velopment (INDIACom). IEEE, pp. 1310 –1315. Subeesh, A., Bhole, S., Singh, K., Chandel, N., Rajwade, Y., Rao, K., Kumar, S., Jat, D., 2022.Deep convolutional neural network models for weed detection in polyhouse grownbell peppers. Artif. Intell. Agricult. 6, 47 –54. Suchithra, M., Pai, M.L., 2020.Improving the prediction accuracy of soil nutrient classi ﬁca- tion by optimizing extreme learning machine parameters. Informat. Process. Agricult.7, 72–82.Tapsoba, P.K., Aoudji, A.K.N., Kabore, M., Kestemont, M.P., Legay, C., Achigan-Dako, E.G.,2020.Sociotechnical context and Agroecological transition for smallholder farms inBenin and Burkina Faso. Agronomy 10, 1447.Tavakoli, H., Gebbers, R., 2019. Assessing nitrogen and water status of winter wheat usinga digital camera. Comput. Electron. Agric. 157, 558 –567. Tesfaye, A.A., Osgood, D., Aweke, B.G., 2021. Combining machine learning, space-time cloud restoration and phenology for farm-level wheat yield prediction. Artif. Intell.Agricult. 5, 208–222.Thompson, L.J., Ferguson, R.B., Kitchen, N., Frazen, D.W., Mamo, M., Yang, H., Schepers, J.S.,2015.Model and sensor-based recommendation approaches for in-season nitrogenManagement in Corn. Agron. J. 107, 2020 –2030. Timsina, J., Dutta, S., Devkota, K.P., Chakraborty, S., Neupane, R.K., Bishta, S., Amgain, L.P.,Singh, V.K., Islam, S., Majumdar, K., 2021. Improved nutrient management in cereals using nutrient expert and machine learning tools: productivity, pro ﬁtability and nu- trient use efﬁciency. Agric. Syst. 192, 103181.Trontelj ml, J., Chambers, O., 2021. Machine learning strategy for soil nutrients prediction using spectroscopic method. Sensors 21, 4208.Venkataraju, A., Arumugam, D., Stepan, C., Kiran, R., Peters, T., 2023. Ar e v i e wo fm a c h i n e learning techniques for identifying weeds in corn. Smart Agricult. Technol. 3, 100102.Wang, S., Guan, K., Wang, Z., Ainsworth, E.A., Zheng, T., Townsend, P.A., Liu, N., Nafziger, E.,Masters, M.D., Li, K., et al., 2021a. Airborne hyperspectral imaging of nitrogen de ﬁ- ciency on crop traits and yield of maize by machine learning and radiative transfermodeling. Int. J. Appl. Earth Obs. Geoinf. 105, 102617.Wang, X., Miao, Y., Dong, R., Zha, H., Xia, T., Chen, Z., Kusnierek, K., Mi, G., Sun, H., Li, M.,2021b.Machine learning-based in-season nitrogen status diagnosis and side-dressnitrogen recommendation for corn. Eur. J. Agron. 123, 126193.Wu, J., 2017.Introduction to Convolutional Neural Networks. National Key Lab for NovelSoftware Technology. vol. 5. Nanjing University, China, p. 495.Yan, X., Chen, X., Ma, C., Cai, Y., Cui, Z., Chen, X., Wu, L., Zhang, F., 2021. What are the key factors affecting maize yield response to and agronomic ef ﬁciency of phosphorus fer- tilizer in China? Field Crop Res. 270, 108221.Yu, H., Liu, D., Chen, G., Wan, B., Wang, S., Yang, B., 2010. A neural network ensemble method for precision fertilization modeling. Math. Comput. Model. 51, 1375 –1382. Yu, X., Lu, H., Liu, Q., 2018.Deep-learning-based regression model and hyperspectral im-aging for rapid detection of nitrogen concentration in oilseed rape (Brassica napus L.)leaf. Chemom. Intell. Lab. Syst. 172, 188 –193. Zou, J., Han, Y., So, S.S., 2008. Overview of artiﬁcial neural networks. Artif. Neural Net. 14–22.Zupan, J., 1994.Introduction to artiﬁcial neural network (ann) methods: what they are and how to use them. Acta Chim. Slov. 41, 327 –352.O. Ennaji, L. Vergütz and A. El Allali Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 9 (2023) 1 –11
11