Principles, developments and applications of laser-induced breakdownspectroscopy in agriculture: A review
Keqiang Yua,b,c,⁎, Jie Rena, Yanru Zhaoa,b,c
aCollege of Mechanical and Electronic Engineering, Northwest A&F University, 22 Xinong Road, Yangling, Shaanxi 712100, PR China
bKey Laboratory of Agricultural Internet of Things, Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs, Yangling, Shaanxi 712100, PR China
cShaanxi Key Laboratory of Agricultural Information Perception and Intelligent Service, Yangling, Shaanxi 712100, PR China
abstract article info
Article history:Received 17 June 2020Received in revised form 17 July 2020Accepted 17 July 2020Available online 22 July 2020
Keywords:Laser-induced breakdown spectroscopySoil elementsPlantsDetection methodsAgricultureConsidering the diversity of soil contents, quality and usability, a systematic scienti ﬁc study on the elemental and chemical composition (major and minor nutrients elements, trace elements, heavy metals, etc.) of soil is very im-portant. Rapid and accurate detection and prevention of soil contamination (mainly in pollutants of heavymetals) is deemed to be a concerned and serious central issue in modern agriculture and agricultural sustainabledevelopment. In order to study the chemical composition of soil, laser induced breakdown spectroscopy (LIBS)has been applied recently. LIBS technology, a kind of atomic emission spectroscopy, is regarded as a future “Su- perstar”in theﬁeld of chemical analysis and green analytical techniques. In this work, the research achievementsand trends of soil elements detection based on LIBS technology were reviewed. The structural composition andoperating principle of LIBS system was brie ﬂy introduced. The paper offered a review of LIBS applications, includ- ing detection and analysis of major element, minor nutrient element and heavy metal element. Simultaneously,LIBS applications to analysis of the soil related materials, plants-related issues (nutrients, pesticide residues, andplants disease) were brieﬂy summarized. The research tendency and developing prospects of LIBS in agriculturewere presented at last.© 2020 The Authors. Publishing services by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of KeAi Communications Co. Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ ).
Contents1 . I n t r o d u c t i o n .............................................................. 1 2 72 . S y n o p s i s o f L I B S t e c h n o l o g y ....................................................... 1 2 92 . 1 . S y s t e m a t i c s t r u c t u r e o f L I B S .................................................... 1 2 92 . 2 . A n a l y t i c a l m e t h o d s o f L I B S.................................................... 1 2 93 . A p p l i c a t i o n s o f L I B S f o r r e v e a l i n g s o i l e l e m e n t s.............................................. 1 2 93 . 1 . D e t e c t i o n o f m a j o r , m i c r o n u t r i t i o n a l e l e m e n t s ........................................... 1 2 93 . 2 . T r a c e a b i l i t y o f h e a v y m e t a l e l e m e n t s i n s o i l ............................................. 1 3 03 . 3 . L I B S c o m b i n e d w i t h n e w m e t h o d s a n d t e c h n i q u e s f o r s o i l d e t e c t i o n ................................. 1 3 34 . L I B S a p p l i c a t i o n s t o s o i l r e l a t e d m a t e r i a l s a n d p l a n t s - r e l a t e d i s s u e s..................................... 1 3 54 . 1 . L I B S f o r d e t e c t i n g t h e s o i l r e l a t e d m a t e r i a l s ............................................. 1 3 54 . 2 . L I B S d e t e c t i o n i n p l a n t m a t e r i a l s .................................................. 1 3 54 . 3 . L I B S f o r p l a n t d i s e a s e s d i a g n o s i s .................................................. 1 3 65 . C o n c l u s i o n s a n d f u t u r e p e r s p e c t i v e s................................................... 1 3 6A c k n o w l e d g e m e n t s............................................................. 1 3 6R e f e r e n c e s................................................................. 1 3 6Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 4 (2020) 127 –139
⁎Corresponding author at: College of Mechanical and Electronic Engineering,Northwest A&F University, 22 Xinong Road, Yangling, Shaanxi 712100, PR China.E-mail address:keqiang_yu@163.com(K. Yu).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aiia.2020.07.0012589-7217/© 2020 The Authors. Publishing services by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of KeAi Communications Co. Ltd. This is an open access article under the C C BY-NC-ND license (http:// creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ ).
Contents lists available atScienceDirect
Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture
journal homepage:http://www.keaipublishing.com/en/journals/artificial-intelligence-in-agriculture/1. IntroductionSoil is a synthesis with extremely complex chemical and elementalcomposition, as it mainly contains minerals, air water, living organisms,organic matters, fossils, and so on. Meanwhile, soils are an importantcomponent in the biogeochemical cycle of carbon, storing about fourtimes more carbon than biomass plants and nearly three times morethan the atmosphere. In fact, the carbon content in soil is directly relatedon the capacity of water retention, fertility, among other properties.Thus, soil carbon quantiﬁcation inﬁeld conditions is an important chal-lenge related to carbon cycle and global climatic changes. Major nutri-ent elements (N, P, K, Si, Ca, Mg, S, etc.) and microelements (Fe, Cu,Mn, Zn, B, Mo, Ni, etc.) are essential material for plant growth and phys-iological activities (Pieruschka and Schurr, 2019). Recently, with the rapid development of the economy and technology, a lot of man-made pollution materials, especially heavy metals (Cu, Pb, Cd, Cr, etc.),are entered into the soil, water and ecosystem within the differentform (Nicolodelli et al., 2019;Mowry et al., 2017). Heavy metals in soil are particularly dangerous pollutants, which can be easily trans-ferred to the food chain through absorption by plants and the pollutionof ground water. Heavy toxic metals in the soil can accumulate in thehuman body through the food chain and threaten health eventually.The monitoring of concentration of elements such as heavy toxic metals,nutrient elements and microelements in soil is of great importance toenvironmental research, agriculture, and public health.For the determination of soil elements, a variety of chemical analyt-ical techniques are employed (Kim et al., 2013), such as atomicﬂuores- cence spectrometry (AFS), inductively coupled plasma-optical emissionspectrometry (ICP-OES), X-rayﬂuorescence spectrometry (XRFS),inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometry (ICP-MS), ﬂame atomic absorption spectrometry (FAAS), and gas chromatography –mass spec- trometry (GC–MS), etc. However, those methods are time consuming,complicated, and normally need a chemical laboratory for quantitativeresults and expensive equipment (Lee et al., 2004). Therefore, the anal- ysis of many samples is usually expensive and last for a long time.Laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy (LIBS), also sometimescalled laser-induced plasma spectroscopy (LIPS) or laser spark spectros-copy (LSS) has developed rapidly as an analytical technique over thepast several decades. LIBS technology is a rapid, in situ, less-destructive, cost-effective and reliable technique suitable for the simul-taneous qualitative and quantitative analysis of major and trace ele-ments in the solid, liquid, or gas samples ( Cremers and Chinni, 2009; Cremers and Radziemski, 2013;Fortes et al., 2013;Miziolek et al., 2006;Noll, 2012). In LIBS technology, a laser pulse is focused preciselyonto the surface of a target sample, ablating a certain amount of sampleto create plasma. The spectrum is collected by plotting intensity versuswavelength from light emissions generated from atomic, ionic, and mo-lecular fragments. The detected LIBS spectrum contains two kinds of in-formation about the composition and content of the sample, thewavelength of the characteristic spectrum corresponds to the type ofthe element, and the relative strength of the characteristic spectrumcorresponds to the concentration of the element. Due to the instrumen-tal features of LIBS, the advanced analysis can be achieved and the lim-itations of chemical analytical techniques are overcome, including non-preparative or little sample treatment, real-time analysis, in situ ﬁeld application, and remote detection of hazardous materials ( Cremers and Chinni, 2009;Hahn and Lunden, 2000;Hahn and Omenetto, 2012). Based on these unique abilities, LIBS has been widely used in
Fig. 1.The process of LIBS for determining the soil types and measuring the content of several elements (such as Al, Ca, Fe) in soil. (a) The schematic diagram o f a representative LIBS system; (b) the collected LIBS data of soil; (c) the characteristic emission lines of several elements in soil located in LIBS curve; (d) classi ﬁcation of the soil types using PCA; (e) prediction of Al, Ca, Fe content in soil using PLSR ( Yu et al., 2016).128 K. Yu et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 4 (2020) 127 –139industry, environmental monitoring, biological medicine, archaeology,identiﬁcation of antique, aerospace, agricultural and food, etc. Only inagriculture, LIBS could be used in many aspects, like soil, soil pollution,plant nutrients, cereals and seeds, fruits and vegetables, agri-foods,plant stressed by heavy metals, pesticide residues, etc. At present, sev-eral excellent reviews of LIBS theory and various applications were pro-vided byNicolodelli et al. (2019),Fortes et al. (2013),Fantoni et al. (2006),Gehl and Rice (2007),Santos et al. (2012),Singh and Rai (2011),Tognoni et al. (2002);Wallin et al. (2009),Miziolek (2012), andEl Haddad et al. (2014). Meanwhile, readers were encouraged toread some books and monographs edited by Noll (2012),Miziolek et al. (2006),Musazzi and Umberto (2014),Cremers and Radziemski (2013), etc. Those books provided extensive coverage of LIBS funda-mental principles, experimental parameters, plasma dynamics, themodeling of plasma emission, LIBS achievements in variety ﬁelds, com- bination of tutorial discussions ranging from basic principles to moreadvanced descriptions of equipment, methods, and techniques.The objectives of this paper were to present the applications and rel-evant developments of LIBS in soil detection, and to provide the workingprinciple of LIBS instruments, relevant techniques with regard to soilapplication. Simultaneously, some studies on soil related materials andpotential applications were brieﬂy stated. The future trends and focusesof LIBS are summarized at last. The review mainly focused on researchover the past 10–15 years.2. Synopsis of LIBS technology2.1. Systematic structure of LIBSFig. 1(a) shows the schematic of the LIBS system employed in manystudies. The most commonly used LIBS system includes these parts: thepulsed laser, the detection device composed of a spectrometer and a de-tector, the optical system composed of mirror, focusing lens and opticalﬁber, the personal computer (PC) used to control parameters of instru-ments and analyse data, some additional devices such as delay genera-tor, sample holder, etc.The LIBS technique is a laser based surface analytical technique thatdetermines the elemental composition of sample. A pulsedNeodymium-doped Yttrium Aluminium Garnet (Nd: YAG) laser withsufﬁcient energy is focused through a focusing lens to generate aspark on the surface of the tested sample, the surface of the sample isheated and melted due to the absorption of laser energy. When the out-ermost electrons in the sample absorb enough energy, they can get ridof the bondage and form free electrons, so the sample is ionized. The ac-celerated free electrons collide with each other and bombard atoms,resulting in avalanche ionization of a large number of atoms. Manykinds of particles, such as free electrons, ions and atoms et al., combineto form a high-temperature laser plasma, which contains about 1% high-speed free electrons, ions and a large number of high-energy atoms.With the end of laser action, a large number of excited atoms and ionswill gradually transition to the low-energy or ground state and generatespectral lines of speciﬁc wavelength corresponding to the element com-position (Ciucci, 1997;Harmon et al., 2005;Hahn and Omenetto, 2010). In other words, LIBS can induce the vaporization of a small volume ofsample with sufﬁ
cient energy for optical excitation of the elementalspecies in the resultant sample plume. The vaporized species then un-dergo de-excitation and optical emission on a microsecond time scales,and time-dependent spectroscopyﬁngerprints the elements associatedwith the spectral peaks (Miziolek et al., 2006;Musazzi and Umberto, 2014;Noll, 2012). In LIBS system, the high-temperature laser plasmaemits light that is collected by an optical ﬁber which is delivered to a spectrometer. The spectrometer separates out the white light of theplasma into different wavelengths and is made incident on an intensi-ﬁed charge coupled device (ICCD) detector which converts the opticalsignal into an electronic signal. Then, the computer software is used topresent a spectrum (intensity of wavelengths) which represents the el-ement composition and content of the sample under test.2.2. Analytical methods of LIBSFor analyzing LIBS data, the soil samples were ﬁrst simply processed (air-dried, impurity separated, grinded, sieved, etc.) to form powder,which was made into a round tablet with uniform thickness by usinga tablet presser. After obtaining the LIBS data of the tested sample, qual-itative and quantitative analysis were conducted to ﬁnish further study. For qualitative analysis, when no line was detected in the LIBS spec-trum for a given element, it meant that the element is absent from thesample's composition. Identiﬁcation of each spectral line was helpfulto strictly know each individual line and chemical element of the testedsamples. The most popular atomic database is the one of the National In-stitute of Standards and Technology (NIST), and some complementarydata, like Kurucz database etc., could be noticed. Sometimes, for enhanc-ing the conﬁdence of classiﬁcation, chemometric methods, machinelearning methods, or artiﬁcial intelligence algorithms were employedto determine the substance's elemental composition, type, level, or se-quence, such as principal component analysis (PCA), independent com-ponent analysis (ICA), K-Means, partial least square-discriminantanalysis (PLS-DA), support vector machine (SVM), least-squares sup-port vector machine (LS-SVM), hierarchical cluster analysis (HCA),soft independent modeling of class analogy (SIMCA).On the other hand, quantitative analysis with LIBS was de ﬁned here as the determination of concentrations of chemical elements in a spec-imen. Calibration curve and calibration free LIBS approaches were stud-ied to complete a quantitative measurement. In order to improve theaccuracy and repeatability of the measurement, the chemometricmethods, machine learning methods, or arti ﬁcial intelligence algo- rithms had become the latest hotspot in the quantitative analysis ofLIBS, such as partial least squares regression (PLSR), arti ﬁcial neural net- works (ANN), logistic regression (LR), multivariate linear regression(MLR), Extreme Learning Machine (ELM), random forest (RF), deeplearning. Those algorithms were widely used in the analysis and calcu-lation of the measured substance content. Fig. 1illustrates the analytical process of determining the soil types and measuring Al, Ca, Fe content insoil using LIBS technology.3. Applications of LIBS for revealing soil elements3.1. Detection of major, micro nutritional elementsThe mass nutritional elements in soil mainly include carbon (C), ni-trogen (N), phosphorus (P), potassium (K), silicon (Si), sulfur (S), cal-cium (Ca), magnesium (Mg), and so on. To a large extent, thoseelements can reﬂect the soil fertility, and they are also considered asthe basic elements for guaranteeing the plants growth and maintainingnormal physiological activities (de Carvalho et al., 2014). Rühlmann et al. (2018)calculated the Ca mass fractions in 60 soilsfrom different testing grounds in Germany with univariate and multi-variate approaches. The multivariate approach consisted of a principalcomponent analysis (PCA) of adequately pre-treated data for classi ﬁca- tion and identiﬁcation of outliers, followed by partial least squares re-gression (PLSR) for quantiﬁ cation. For validation, the soils were alsocharacterized with inductively coupled plasma optical emission spec-troscopy (ICP-OES) and X-rayﬂuorescence (XRF) analysis. The experi-mentﬁnd that the LIBS results obtained with multivariate dataanalysis are in better agreement with ICP OES than the results obtainedwith univariate data analysis.Glumac et al. (2010)analyzed 6 dried and pelletized soil samplescontaining from 0.5% to 3% of organic C (OC) by LIBS. A strategy basedon the optimized combination of high dispersion and appropriate timegating parameters was developed to minimize the interference ofatomic and ionic Fe I and Fe II lines adjacent to the C I line at129 K. Yu et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 4 (2020) 127 –139247.8 nm. A high correlation (r2= 0.94) was obtained between the in-tensity of the C I line at 247.8 nm and the OC content measured by drycombustion. Thus, the research would represent an important resultfor the development of low-power portable LIBS instruments for ﬁeld, on-site analysis of soil C.Nicolodelli et al. (2016)evaluated macronutrients (Ca, Mg, K, P),micronutrients (Cu, Fe, Na, Mn, Zn) and in soil fertilizer using LIBS in sin-gle pulse (SPLIBS) and double pulse (DPLIBS) con ﬁgurations. The limit of detection (LOD) values obtained by DPLIBS increased up to seventimes as compared to SPLIBS. The results presented in this study showthe promising potential of the DP LIBS technique for a qualitative anal-ysis in soil fertilizers about nutritional elements, without requiring sam-ple preparation with chemical reagents.Hussain et al. (2007)determined appropriate spectral signatures ofvital nutrients. From the calibration curves, the concentrations of im-portant nutrients such as Ca, K, P, Mg, Fe, S, Ni and Ba in the soil werepredicted. The measurements proved that the LIBS method rapidlyand efﬁciently measures soil nutrients with excellent detection limitso f1 2 ,9 ,7 ,9 ,7 ,1 0 ,8a n d1 2m g∙kg
−1for Ca, K, P, Mg, Fe, S, Ni and Ba re-spectively with a precision about 2%. The unique features of LIBS forrapid sample analysis demonstrated by this study suggested that thismethod offers promise for precision measurements of soil nutrients ascompared to conventional methods in short span of time.Erler et al. (2020)used a commercially available handheld LIBS spec-trometer for a spatially resolve determination of nutrients and varioussoil parameters in two agriculturalﬁelds. Most measurements were conducted in the laboratory. Three different multivariate regressionmethods (PLSR, Lasso, GPR) were characterized and compared for mea-suring soil parameters. Lasso and GPR yielded better regression resultsthan PLSR. Several nutrients, such as Ca, Mg, K and Fe, could be deter-mined with good accuracy. Other nutrients, such as Mn and P, couldonly be determined qualitatively with the handheld instrument.He et al. (2018)compared the detection ability of single-pulse (SP)and collinear double-pulse (DP) laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy(LIBS) for soil nutrient elements. 63 soil samples were collected for SPand collinear DP signal acquisition, respectively. Macro-nutrients (K,Ca, Mg) and micro-nutrients (Fe, Mn, Na) were analyzed. The results in-dicated that the DP-LIBS technique coupled with PLSR could be an accu-rate and reliable method in the quantitative determination of soilnutrient elements.For carbon detection,Bricklemyer et al. (2011)evaluated the accu- racy of LIBS in measuring soil proﬁle C forﬁeld-moist, intact soil cores by interrogating 78 intact soil cores from three Montana agriculturalﬁelds. Samples were analyzed in the laboratory for total C (TC), inor-ganic C (IC), and soil organic C (SOC). PLS methods were applied to de-rive and validate the samples and best LIBS validation predictions for IC(R
2= 0.66, standard error of prediction SEP = 5.3 g ∙kg−1, ratio product differential RPD = 1.7), TC (R
2= 0.63, SEP =6.0 g∙kg−1, RPD = 1.6), and SOC (R
2= 0.22, SEP = 3.2 g∙kg−1,R P D=1 . 1 )w e r eo b t a i n e d .Bricklemyer et al. (2018)reported theﬁrst rigorous integration of visible-near infrared diffuse reﬂectance spectroscopy (vis–NIRS) and LIBS, evaluating the precision of vis –NIRS, LIBS, and combined vis– NIRS-LIBS spectra for simulated in situ soil pro ﬁle total C (TC), inorganic C (IC) and SOC measurement. The highest soil C prediction accuracieswere observed using multivariate regression with covariance estima-tion (MRCE). Inorganic C was best predicted by LIBS, vis –NIRS pro- vided better SOC predictions, and TC was best predicted using combinedvis–NIRS-LIBS data. Soil C prediction accuracy wasn't consistently in-c r e a s e db yc o m b i n e dv i s–NIRS-LIBS.Nicolodelli et al. (2014)developed a method for separating the Alinterference from the C emission line in LIBS measurements. 43 sam-ples from two typical forest Brazilian soils rich in Al were collectedand analyzed using a low-resolution LIBS apparatus to measure theintensities of C lines. As a result, two C lines at 193.03 and247.86 nm were evaluated due to the strong interference of Fe, Si.Using the developed method, a strong correlation ( RN0.91) wasfound between the C content measured by LIBS and elemental anal-ysis in a set of forest soils.Martin et al. (2010)discussed that how LIBS spectra collected on dif-ferent types of soil varied according to laser wavelength (532 and1064 nm) and excitation energy (45, 90, and 135 mJ), and then multi-variate approaches were used to explore whether calibration modelscould be developed for LIBS that were independent of the soil chemicaland physical properties. Finally, a set of operational parameters and sta-tistical analysis techniques were located, which would produce a robustcalibration model or models for predicting the C concentration in soilsby LIBS.Additionally,Martin et al. (2013)used LIBS combined with multivar-iate analysis to differentiate between the total carbon (C), inorganic C,and organic C in a set of 58 different soils from 5 soil orders. The resultswere compared to the laboratory standard technique (e.g. combustionon a LECO-CN analyzer) to determine the true values for total C, inor-ganic C, and organic C concentrations.da Silva et al. (2008)calibrated a portable LIBS system to carry outquantitative measures of carbon in six soil samples from the BrazilianCerrado region (Argisoil). Using methods of statistical analysis as a sim-ple linear regression, multivariate linear regression and cross validationwere possible to obtain correlation coefﬁcients higher than 0.91.Knadel et al. (2017)used LIBS technology to determine the contentof organic carbon, clay, silt and sand in Danish agricultural soil, andcompared it with vis NIRS method. The results showed that LIBSmodel was similar to vis NIRS model in all soil properties, but the differ-ence was not signiﬁcant (pN0.05), except for the prediction ability ofsand (p= 0.0305). Therefore, using LIBS can get lower predictionerror of soil properties.Belkov et al. (2009)compared two advanced laser-induced break-down spectroscopy (LIBS) techniques to determine the total carbon(C) content in soils. The calibration curves in both modes have a nonlin-ear trend in the actual range of carbon contents and present a good R2
value (0.97).Izaurralde et al. (2013)employed three advanced technologies tomeasure soil carbon (C) density and the results compared againstthose obtained by the dry combustion (DC) method. The advancedmethods are Laser Induced Breakdown Spectroscopy (LIBS), Diffuse Re-ﬂectance Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy (DRIFTS), and Inelas-tic Neutron Scattering (INS).Glumac et al. (2010)examined the 247.8 nm line of atomic C (C I) indetail to assess the effect of potential elemental interferences. A combi-nation of high dispersion and appropriate time gating of the LIBS signalwas found to generate very high signal/noise ratio spectra using lowlaser powers and therefore, allowed accurate determination of the Ccontent down to the sub-percent level in the presence of Fe interfer-ences. A strong correlation of the LIBS C signal with measurementsmade by the thermal oxidation, dry combustion method was observed.The total nitrogen (TN) and total phosphorus (TP) in soil were deter-mined by Laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy (LIBS) technique ( Lu et al., 2013). The relationship between line intensity of analyte elementand its concentration was established and conducted to obtain calibra-tion model. Then, the strong linear correlations (0.981 for N and 0.868for P) were acquired from calibration curves.From those studies above, most of studies based on LIBS techniquewere conducted in laboratory conditions, only a few of works were ﬁn- ished using the developed portable andﬁeld-able LIBS instrument for completing the farmland soil in situ rapid analysis and detection.3.2. Traceability of heavy metal elements in soilHeavy metal refers to the element that its proportion or density isgreater than 5 or 4.5 g∙cm
−3. The trace heavy metal elements in soilmainly include cadmium (Cd), lead (Pb), chromium (Cr), copper (Cu),zinc (Zn), nickel (Ni), mercury (Hg) and arsenic (As), etc. As we allknown, the moderate content of metal elements is useful to living130 K. Yu et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 4 (2020) 127 –139things. However, along with enrichment of the food chain and the un-able biodegradation, heavy metal content was gradually accumulatedin soil, which could cause biotoxication of living things when the con-tent of heavy metal reached to a certain degree.Gu et al. (2018)applied LIBS to analyse the spatial concentration dis-tribution of toxic heavy metals in soils around a smelter. The spectrallines of copper (Cu), lead (Pb) and chromium (Cr) were used to directlyanalyse the concentration distribution in soils around the smelter(Fig. 2). The calibration-free LIBS (CF-LIBS) method combined withSaha equation was used to improve the analysis accuracy, because therelevance between the spectral line intensities of Cr and the total con-centrations detected by inductively coupled plasma optical emissionspectrometry (ICP-OES) was poor. Compared with the preliminary anal-ysis result of spectral line intensities, the concentration ratios of Cr/Siobtained from CF-LIBS showed a good correlation with the totalconcentrations.Wang et al. (2018)studied practical use of LIBS for rapid quanti ﬁca- tion of 4 (Cu, Ni, Cr, Pb) heavy metal elements in 169 agricultural soilsamples. The objective is to conclude an appropriate method to reducethe interference of matrix effect in soils within the scope of data analy-sis, by comparing several univariate and multivariate methods of LIBSdata interpretation (full spectrum and emission lines). The proposedmultivariate methods (Fig. 3), such as the least absolute shrinkage andselection operator and principal components regression were found tobe effective in reducing the matrix interference and the predictive per-formance was stable in our experiment, approaching normalized rootmean squared error of 6.84%, 8.87%, 9.71%, and 10.76% for Cu, Ni, Cr,and Pb, respectively. Meanwhile, the performance of univariate analysissuffered from such effect.Meng et al. (2017)employed two working methods: a mobile labora-tory mode and a handheld mode of LIBS system to ﬁnish in situ analysis of heavy metals in soil samples. For the mobile laboratory mode, simplesample pretreatment was needed and the whole testing time for a sam-ple was within 10 min. It was able to achieve semi-quantitative measure-ment by the traditional calibration curve method. The LODs of Pb, Cu, andZn were all below 10 mg∙kg
−1, which can satisfy the need for rapidscreening of soil heavy-metal pollution. However, by using the internalstandard method, the stability of LIBS data was improved signi ﬁcantly to around 6%. For soil samples with serious heavy-metal pollution, themeasurement errors were less than 12%, which indicates that handheldLIBS is effective to monitor the heavy-metal pollution in soil.Ding et al. (2019)proposed LIBS technique combined with intervalpartial least squares (iPLS) to determine Cu, Zn, Cr and Ni in oily soilsamples. The full spectrum was divided into 10, 20, 30, 40, 50, 60, 70,80, and 90 subintervals for iPLS model optimization. Compared to thePLS model using the full spectrum, the iPLS model with the 30thsubinterval from the 80-interval case as the input variable has higherR2and lower RMSE for Cu, Zn, Cr, and Ni. The R2improved from 0.96 to 0.99, and the RMSE reduced from 0.03 to 0.01. The calculationspeed increased about 5 times.Zhao et al. (2019)used the method of combining principal compo-nent analysis and deep learning to classify the LIBS data of soil sampleswith different levels of lead added to two to four weeks of tobacco plant-ing. The robustness of the method was veri ﬁed through a comparison with the results of a support vector machine and partial least squaresdiscriminant analysis. A confusion matrix of the different algorithmsshowed that the DBN achieved satisfactory classi ﬁcation performance on all samples of contaminated soil.Senesi et al. (2009)demonstrated that new developments in LIBStechnique were able to provide reliable qualitative and quantitative an-alytical evaluation of several heavy metals in soils, with special focus onthe element chromium (Cr), and with reference to the concentrationsmeasured by conventional inductively coupled plasma (ICP) method.The preliminary qualitative LIBS analysis of ﬁve soil samples and one sewage sludge sample had allowed. The quantitative analysis was alsopossible for the elements Cr, Cu, Pb, V, and Zn by the proportionality be-tween the intensity of the LIBS emission peaks and the concentration ofeach heavy metal in the sample measured by ICP. In particular, a tripletof emission lines for Cr could be used for its quantitative measurement.Barbaﬁeri et al. (2011)explored a transportable and on-site remedi-ation system based on the LIBS for rapid on-site measurement of heavymetal concentrations. Pb concentrations in soil and plant samples fromcontaminated areas were measured using the portable LIBS analyzer.Results obtained from LIBS showed an excellent correlation with datacompared with atomic absorption spectrometry (AAS).Capitelli et al. (2002)employed LIBS technique to detect total con-tents of the heavy metals Cr, Cu, Fe, Mn, Ni, Pb, and Zn in a number ofreference soil samples. The conventional ICP method was used to vali-date the LIBS technique. The results suggested that detection limits ofCr, Cu, Fe, Mn, Ni, Pb, and Zn concentrations were 30, 30, 500, 100, 30,50, and 30 mg∙kg
−1, which were similar within 6% to the correspondingdata obtained by ICP.Essington et al. (2009)evaluated the capabilities of LIBS for deter-mining the qualitative and quantitative elemental content of soil.Srungaram et al. (2013)compared two potential spectroscopic methodsLIBS and spark induced breakdown spectroscopy (SIBS) at their opti-mum experimental conditions for mercury monitoring. The limits of de-tection (LODs) of Hg in soil were calculated from the Hg calibrationcurves. The LOD for mercury in soil calculated using LIBS and SIBSwere 483 ppm and 20 ppm, respectively. LIBS analysis offered better re-sults at higher concentrations, while SIBS was more suitable at lowerconcentrations.
Fig. 2.The map of the spatial concentration ratio distribution of Cu, Cr/Si and Pb superposed on the aerial view of the locations around the smelter ( Gu et al., 2018).131 K. Yu et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 4 (2020) 127 –139Lu et al. (2011)analyzed the content of element Cr in the nationalstandard soil samples using LIBS. The calibration curve of element Cr ismeasured by studying the characteristics of laser-induced breakdownspectroscopy of element Cr in soil under optimal conditions. The exper-imental results demonstrate that the element content (60 –400) × 10
−6
and the spectral line intensity are in good linear relation, and the rela-tive standard deviation of element analysis of concentration measure-ment from the standard value is 7.89%. The relative deviation of thequantitative analytic result from the standard value is 5.3%, and the de-tection limit of Cr in soil is 16.3 × 10
−6. The relative deviation by the in- ternal standard method is 2.7%, which indicates that the internalstandard method can improve the accuracy of the measurement.Yuan et al. (2016)measured the elemental concentration of Crcontained in soil with laser induced breakdown spectroscopy (LIBS).The laser wavelength was 1064 nm, pulse width is 8 ns, repetition fre-quency was 10 Hz, and the analysis line of LIRS was 4 nm. The resultsshowed that the relative standard deviation (RSD) of the detected con-tent of Cr was 12.1% at the delay time of 4.78 us and the soil sample sur-face 1 mm behind lens focal point. The limit of detection (LOD) of LIBS is2.01 ppm. The measured relative deviation between the measured valueand the nature value is 5.15%.Khan et al. (2013)reported the use of LIBS to determine the chro-mium contamination of soil due to efﬂuents from leather tanning indus- try in Pakistan. Calibration curves were constructed by indigenouslyprepared standard sample andﬁtting of curves by linear regression.The limit of detection (LOD) was found to be 23.71 mg ∙kg−1. The con- centration of chromium in the soil is up to 839 mg ∙kg
−1in vicinity of ef- ﬂuent drain and 1829 mg∙kg
−1in the area of old stagnant pool.Gondal et al. (2009)used LIBS technique to monitor the remediationprocess of soil contaminated with chromium metal. Evaluating optimalexperimental conditions, the LIBS system offered the minimum detec-tion limit of chromium (2 mg∙kg
−1) in soil matrix. Meanwhile, the po-tential and capabilities of LIBS as a rapid tool for remediation processof contaminated sites is discussed in detail.Ferreira et al. (2008)used artiﬁcial neural network (ANN) as calibra-tion strategy for LIBS, aiming Cu determination in soil samples. Twostrategies of simple linear regression (SLR) and wrapper approachwere employed to select a set of wavelengths for ANN learning.
Fig. 3.Multi-element analysis of heavy metal content in soils using LIBS in eastern China ( Wang et al., 2018).
Fig. 4.The processingﬂow for determining Cr in different valence states using LIBS ( Fu et al., 2020).132 K. Yu et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 4 (2020) 127 –139Following ANN training, cross validation was applied for veri ﬁcation of prediction accuracy. The ANN showed good ef ﬁciency for Cu predictions although the features of portable instrumentation employed. The pro-posed method presented a limit of detection (LOD) of 2.3 mg ∙dm
−3of Cu and a mean squared error (MSE) of 0.5 for the predictions.Ambushe et al. (2015)applied the LIBS technique for quantiﬁcation of total Cr in soil samples collected from polluted areas of Brits, NorthWest Province, South Africa. The concentrations of Cr in soil samplesvaried from 111 to 3180 mg∙kg
−1. In order to test the validity of theLIBS results, inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometry (ICP-MS)was also employed for determination of Cr.Fu et al. (2020)proposed a new method for rapid determination ofCr in different valence states (total Cr, Hexavalent chromium (Cr(VI)),trivalent chromium (Cr(III))) in soil by LIBS, and the experimentalsteps were revealed inFig. 4. The regression coefﬁcients for the total Cr, Cr(III), and Cr(VI) calibration curves were all over 0.99. The total Crand Cr(VI) limits of detection were 19.34 and 35.18 mg ∙kg
−1, respec- tively. The total Cr and Cr(VI) relative standard deviations for repeatanalyses were 7.69% and 12.98%, respectively. A portable laser-induced breakdown spectrometric method was developed for the de-termination of chromium in soil. The regression coef ﬁcient of total chro- mium concentration in soil was 0.993.Lu et al. (2013)employed LIBS for detection of Pb in slurry samplesfor developing an in-situ sensor for monitoring heavy metal. From theLIBS data of slurry samples, the signals at Pb I 405.78 nm and Mn I403.07 nm were investigated. The intensity ratio of I (Pb)/ I (Mn) in-creased as a linear function of the concentration of Pb with correlationcoefﬁcient R
2of 0.9949.Motto-Ros et al. (2008)presented an artiﬁcial neural network (ANN)-based advanced analytical method for automated identi ﬁcation of elements and measurements of seven elements (Fe, Mg, Si, Mn, Al,Ca, and Ti) concentrations in rocks and soils, as well as its experimentalvalidation. Results demonstrated that the ANN method worked success-fully for all major elements of the tested natural rock and soil samples.Dell'Aglio et al. (2011)analyzed soil samples of various origins byLIBS using the calibration curve method. The total concentrations ofCr, Cu, Pb, V, and Zn were determined, and compared with those ob-tained by ICP-OES. Furthermore, an anthropogenic index (AI) was eval-uated for Cr (AI
Cr) and Zn (AI Zn), and proposed as a simple and fastindicator of soil pollution by heavy metals.Huang et al. (2009)reported a LIBS system for soil analysis and pre-sented optimum experimental conditions for quantitatively measure-ment of Sr and other heavy metals in soil. Calibration curve forquantitative measurement of Sr has been built and limits of detection(LOD) of Sr in soil were determined to be 15.0 μg∙g
−1.3.3. LIBS combined with new methods and techniques for soil detectionIn order to improve the detection precision of the elements and limitof detection of LIBS instrument, the researchers used the LIBS techniquecombined with new data analysis methods or new physical and chem-ical techniques to enhance the performance of the technologies.Pareja et al. (2013)compared the performances of LIBS and laser ab-lation LIBS (LA-LIBS) by quantifying the total elemental concentration ofpotassium in highly heterogeneous solid samples, namely soils. The LA-LIBS approach (Fig. 5) produced a superior linear response differentthan the traditional LIBS scheme. The analytical response of LA-LIBSwas tested with a large set of different soil samples for the quanti ﬁca- tion of the total concentration of Fe, Mn, Mg, Ca, Na, and K. Resultsshowed an acceptable linear response for Ca, Fe, Mg, and K while poorsignal responses were found for Na and Mn.Yi et al. (2017)applied LIBS-assisted by laser-inducedﬂuorescence (LIES-LIP) to selectively enhance the spectral intensities of the inter-fered lines. The determination coefﬁcient (R
2) of calibration curve (Pb concentration range = 14–94 ppm), the relative standard deviation(RSD) of spectral intensities, and the limit of detection (LOD) for Pbelement were improved from 0.6235 to 0.9802, 10.18% to 4.77%, and24 ppm to 0.6 ppm using LIBS-LIF, respectively.Du et al. (2013)analyzed the heavy metal elements (Mn, Cr, Cu, andPb) in contained soil samples by using the orthogonal dual laser pulsesinduced breakdown spectroscopy (DP-LIBS).Liu et al. (2012)used microwave-assisted LIBS (MA-LIBS) to mea-sure the copper content in soil samples showing a 23-fold improvementof the sensitivity compared with the conventional LIBS. The signal en-hancement obtained with MA-LIBS allowed for the detection of spectrallines related to concentration values as low as 30 mg •kg−1for copper and 23.3 mg∙kg
−1for silver.Li et al. (2010)demonstrated a signiﬁcant signal increment of soil sample using laser ablation-spark induced breakdown spectroscopy(LA-SIBS) technique over using single pulse (SP) LIBS ( Fig. 6). Also in same research team,Li et al. (2012)developed a laser abla- tion fast pulse discharge plasma spectroscopy (LA-FPDPS) techniquefor analysis of Pb, Mg and Sn in soil. LA-FPDPS employed a periodical os-cillating discharge plasma generation method on samples instead of thesecond laser beam in DP-LIBS. Based on the calibration curves, the Pb,Mg and Sn contents in soil were derived and the limits of detectionwere 1.5μg∙g
−1,3 4μg∙g−1, and 0.16μg∙g−1, respectively. Idris et al. (2007)conducted direct analysis of soil samples utilizing aspecial advantage of transversely excited atmospheric (TEA) CO
2laser- induced plasma generated at atmospheric pressure on a metal target. Anew method using micromoles structured intentionally on a metal sub-target was developed. A linear calibration curve was obtained with a de-tection limit of approximately 50 mg∙kg
−1. Preliminary quantitative studies were carried out for a quartz sand sample containing Cr andHg, resulting in linear calibration curves with detection limits of approx-imately 25 mg∙kg
−1and 10 mg∙kg−1,r e s p e c t i v e l y .Nicolodellia et al. (2015)have used dual-pulse excitation setup inorder to improve LIBS's sensitivity. The key parameters as excitationwavelength, delay time and inter pulse, that in ﬂuence the double pulse (DP) LIBS technique in the collinear beam geometry were opti-mized when applied to the analysis at atmospheric air pressure of soilsamples of different origin and texture from extreme regions of Brazil.The collinear DP LIBS system improved the analytical performances ofthe technique by enhancing the intensity of emission lines of some ele-ments up to about 5 times, when compared with conventional SP-LIBS,and reduced the continuum emission.Kim et al. (2013)employed LIBS technique coupled with the chemo-metric method (PCA and PLS-DA) to discriminate between soils con-taminated with heavy metals or oils and clean soils. Meanwhile, theeffects of the water contents and grain sizes of soil samples on LIBSemissions were also investigated. The LIBS emission lines decreased by59%–75% when the water content increased from 1.2% to 7.8%, and soilsamples with a grain size of 75 μm displayed higher LIBS emissionlines with lower relative standard deviations than those with a 2 mmgrain size.Chatterjee et al. (2019)collected a total of 20 soil samples both fromnear the thermal discharges as well as away from the thermal manifes-tations in the Manuguru geothermal area. LIBS spectra were recordedfor all the collected soil samples and principal component analysis(PCA) was applied to easily identify the emission lines majorly respon-sible for variety classiﬁcation of the soil samples.Akhtar et al. (2018)has used a combination of magneticﬁeld and LIBS to improve the detection limit of heavy elements in different Soilsamples. The emission intensity enhancement factor up to about 8 hasbeen observed and the limit of detection (LOD) of Cr has been improvedfrom 18.2 mg/kg-7.7 mg/kg in the presence of magnetic ﬁeld. A modi- ﬁed PCA was developed which is based on the spectral truncationmethod to reduce the huge number of spectral data obtained fromLIBS. The PCA bi-plot on the LIBS data reveals the presence of two differ-ent clusters.Ma et al. (2011)applied LIBS to quantitative analysis of heavy metalpollution elements in soil. A new algorithm using weight iteration in the133 K. Yu et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 4 (2020) 127 –139artiﬁcial neural network was developed, which decreased the trainingepochs remarkably. Based on the new method, the LODs for several el-ements Cu and Cd in soil were determined to be 42 and 5 ppm,respectively.Chen et al. (2012)investigated the quantitative analysis of traceCd in polluted soil with LIBS techni que by calibration. Radial Basis Function (RBF) neural network and Lorentz function were intro-duced to optimize the LIBS spectral data for improving the detectionsensitivity and limit of detection (LOD). The calibration curve of Cd insoil was obtained, its linear correlation is 0.9998, and the LOD of Cdin soil is 16.5 mg∙kg
−1.Bousquet et al. (2007)used the LIBS (Nd: YAG laser delivering 10-nspulses at 1064 nm, 20 mJ laser pulse, and 10 Hz repetition rate) tech-nique to conduct a quantitative analysis of chromium (Cr) in soil sam-ples and proposed a method for classifying soils by applying principalcomponents analyses (PCA) to LIBS data. To reduce the dataset's dimen-sionality, relevant spectral lines related to major elements wereselected.Bricklemyer et al. (2013)tested for soil C predictions and the identi-ﬁcation of wavelengths important for soil C prediction by two regres-sion shrinkage and variable selection approaches, the least absoluteshrinkage and selection operator (LASSO) and sparse multivariate re-gression with covariance estimation (MRCE). Predictive multi-response partial least squares (PLS2) models using full and reducedspectrum LIES were compared for directly determining soil total C(TC), IC, and SOC. The result showed that complete spectrum LIES is su-perior to UV spectrum LIES for predicting soil C for intact soil cores with-out pre-treatment; LASSO and MRCE approaches provide improvedcalibration prediction accuracy over PLS2 but require additional testingwith increased soil and target analyte diversity.Kim et al. (2014)used LIBS to determine Zn concentrations in vari-ous types of soil samples. For enhancing the performance of the LIBSanalysis and minimizing the factors affecting LIBS results, the data pro-cessing methods of discarding and Kriging interpolation methods werecombined. The discarding method decreased the precision of pulse-to-pulse variation and the interpolation methods improved the sample-
Fig. 5.Experimental setup for modiﬁed LA-LIBS approach (Pareja et al., 2013).
Fig. 6.(a) The interface between the sample, laser beam and the electrodes, (b) plasma from SP-LIBS, (c) plasma from LA-SIBS ( Li et al., 2010).134 K. Yu et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 4 (2020) 127 –139to-sample precision and accuracy of Zn concentration compared to ICP-OES analysis. It is expected that the suggested data analysis methodwith high performance and convenience could be applied in the envi-ronmental monitoringﬁeld for the determination of hazardous ele-ments in soil.Fu et al. (2018)developed a new method for the determination ofcadmium in soils using LIBS. The heavy metals were enriched by the cat-ion exchange resins. And then, the LIBS signal levels were further en-hanced by a sample container with spatial con ﬁnement. During this process, the soil only needs to be treated with water to achieve slurrystatus, rather than any complex pre-treatments. The detection limitfor cadmium in soils is 0.132 mg/ kg by using this method.El Haddad et al. (2013)exploited a transportable LIBS system for on-site LIBS measurements of soil samples. Quantitative analysis wasachieved by artiﬁcial neural network (ANN) to overcome the matrix ef-fects and the nonlinear behaviour of the calibration. Results demon-strated that the relative error of prediction (REP) was found to bebelow 20% for matrix elements like Ca and Fe, for major element likeAl (in the % range) and also for trace element like Cu (in the mg ∙kg
−1
range).Mukhono et al. (2013)employed the multivariate chemometricmethods to deal with the LIBS spectra of soils and rocks samples froma geothermalﬁeld lying in a high background radiation area (HBRA).Multivariate calibration strategies (PLS and ANN) were developed andapplied for prediction of the trace elements. Then, principal componentsanalysis (PCA) and soft independent modeling of class analogy (SIMCA)were utilized to classify and identify the HBRA geothermal samples,HBRA non geothermal sources and NBRA geothermal samples.As mentioned above, the soil in different types, sources and compo-sitions, a large number of exploratory studies have been achieved. Re-searchers should focus on developing the more novel techniques toobtain the more robust models and results. It can provide a theoreticalguidance for detecting and controlling heavy metal pollution.4. LIBS applications to soil related materials and plants-relatedissues4.1. LIBS for detecting the soil related materialsBesides these studies above, some researchers used LIBS technologyto detect soil related materials (ore, soil on other planets, chemical, coal,and agricultural products, etc.). The fruitful results were achieved,which also revealed the powerful ability of LIBS technology in chemicalanalysisﬁeld.Deng et al. (2020)used LIBS to test the coal quality. The PLS modelwas established based on the adaptive reweighted sampling (CARS)and the successive projections algorithm (SPA). The results show thatLIBS combined with spa-pls technology has a good prospect in the de-tection of N and S content in coal.Ma et al. (2020)adopted the technology of indirect laser-inducedbreakdown spectroscopy (ID-LIBS) to improve the detection sensitivityof Cl and S elements in water. The method detected Cl in water by indi-rectly detecting the excess silver (Ag) after the precipitation reaction ofAg and chloride,and detected S in water by detecting the excess barium(Ba) after the precipitation reaction of Ba and sulfate. The resultsshowed that the technique of indirect LIBS can achieve the sensitive de-t e c t i o no fC la n dSi nw a t e r .Li et al. (2020)proposed LIBScombined with laser-induced ﬂuores- cence (LIF) technology to enhance the spectral intensity of uranium inores and eliminate spectral interference. The study demonstrates thatLIBS-LIF has excellent potential in the exploration of uranium resources.Judge et al. (2013)used LIBS to analyse depleted uranium (U) andthorium (Th) oxide powders and uranium ore sample as both pressedpellets and powders. The acquired results proved that LIBS as a potentialrapid in situ analysis technique can be widely used in nuclearproduction facilities, environmental sampling, and in- ﬁeld forensic applications.Schroder et al. (2013)used LIBS technology and the multivariateanalysis methods to detect and identify the eight different salts (CaCl2, CaSO
4,K C l ,K 2SO4,M g C l 2,M g S O 4,N a C l ,N a 2SO4), pure and frozen salt so- lutions under Mars soil. PCA, SIMCA and PLS-DA models were built,tested and optimized for both, the pure salts and the frozen salt solu-tions.Gottfried et al. (2009)employed both single- and double-pulseLIBS technology combined with PCA and PLS-DA algorithm to distin-guish the natural carbonate,ﬂuorite and silicate geological materials.4.2. LIBS detection in plant materialsIn addition, many researchers employed LIBS technology to analyseto agricultural goods (Yao et al., 2013), plants (Kumar et al., 2014; Pouzar et al., 2009;Santos et al., 2012;Trevizan et al., 2009;Yao et al., 2010), wood (Uhl et al., 2001;Solo-Gabriele et al., 2004;Martin et al., 2005), food (Schroder et al., 2013), etc. and fruitful academic achieve-ments are made.In detail,Arantes de Carvalho et al. (2015)used for theﬁrst time a femtosecond (fs)-LIBS system in a systematic study aiming to deter-mine quantitatively the macronutrients Ca, Mg and P and themicronutrients Cu, Fe, Mn and Zn in pelletized leaves of 31 differentcrop plants of economic value covering a wide range of matrices.Kim et al. (2012)proposed the use of LIBS combined with PLS-DA toquantify the nutrients Mg, Ca, Na and K and discriminate between non-contaminated and pesticide-contaminated spinach leaves.Han et al. (2012)employed CF-LIBS to investigate the trace elementsFe, Ca, Al, Cu, K, Li, Mg, Mn, Na, Sr, Ti, and Zn in cigarette tobacco leavesand ashes.Nicolodelli et al. (2017)provided a further advance in nutrient anal-ysis of plants by applying to soybean leaves double pulse (DP)-LIBS atthe wave-lengths of 532 and 1064 nm in orthogonal beam geometryu s i n gar e h e a t i n gc o nﬁguration.Peng et al. (2017a, 2017b)investigated the effects of moisture af-fected dramatically the intensity and stability of LIBS signals of heavymetals, especially Cr, in rice leaves. To reduce the moisture, a simpleand efﬁcient approach was proposed based on a preliminary fast dryingof samples followed by the application of an exponential model to cor-rect the actual element concentration in the analyte and the PLSR modelto compensate the prediction deviations. By using this approach, thecalibration performance was greatly improved yielding a correlation co-efﬁcient r
2= 0.967 and a RMSE of 4.75 mg∙kg−1for the prediction set. Rehan et al. (2016)identiﬁed by CF-LIBS in ambient air at atmo-spheric pressure the presence of 11 elements, i.e. C, Ca, Cl, Fe, H, K, Li,Mg, N, Na and O, in theﬂesh of red skin potato, whereas white skin po-tato contained the same elements except Li and Cl.Tripathi et al. (2016)used LIBS and biochemical analysis to evaluatethe effect of Si on Pb toxicity in roots and shoots of wheat seedlings bycomparing the Pb content both in original samples treated with Si andin samples added with both Pb and Si.Ferreira et al. (2010)proposed the use of LIBS as an efﬁcient tool for assessing the nutrient distribution in commercial breakfast cereals. TheCa content declared by the manufacturers in 16 cereals samples wasveriﬁed by ICP-OES analysis.Liu et al. (2018)evaluated quantitatively by LIBS the elemental nu-trients content and the level of Cu contamination in 270 samples ofthree kinds of rice. The contents of the nutrient elements C, K and Mgin the various kinds of rice as resulting from PCA analysis of LIBS datashowed the feasibility of LIBS for classifying rice types and evaluatingtheir quality.Ma and Dong (2014)explored the potential of LIBS for the fast, real-time, on site measurement of P, S and Cl spectral lines of the pesticidechlorpyrifos residues on apple surfaces. The results of PCA highlightedsigniﬁcant spectral differences between untreated apples and applessprayed with chlorpyrifos at various concentrations. In the same team,135 K. Yu et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 4 (2020) 127 –139Du et al. (2015)explored further the LIBS performance in analyzing thepesticide chlorpyrifos and omethoate residues on apple and pearsurfaces.4.3. LIBS for plant diseases diagnosisBesides above, LIBS could be employed to conduct an early diagnosisof plant diseases, especially for citrus, soybean and tobacco. Sankaran et al. (2015)applied LIBS to citrus leaves for analysis of various anoma-lies, including diseases, such as the Huanglongbing(HLB) bacterial de- structive disease and citrus cancer, and nutrient de ﬁciencies from Fe, Mn, Mg, and Zn. First, pre-processing methods including baseline cor-rection, WT multivariate de-noising and normalization were employedto deal with the LIBS spectra. And then, the spectral features were ex-tracted by PCA and quadratic discriminant analysis (QDA) and SVMwere used to distinguish the healthy and infected samples. As a result,a high average classiﬁcation accuracy (97.5%) was obtained.Ranulﬁet al. (2017)used LIBS to citrus leaves as an alternative toconventional methods to discover the possible presence of the HLB dis-ease by identifying the nutritional elemental composition pro ﬁle related to the citrus health state. In this research, citrus leaves collected fromadult citrus trees were separated into 3 groups, named healthy, HLB-symptomatic and HLB-asymptomatic samples. From the LIBS spectra,the largest variations among the 3 groups were measured for Ca, Mgand K, which were considered the most relevant elements for HLB diag-nosis. Then, a PLS-DA model was developed, which offered an accuracyof 73% in distinguishing the 3 groups of leaves. Thus, LIBS analyses offresh citrus leaves conﬁrmed the visual symptomology and appearedto be a fast and reproducible tool for the early diagnosis of HLB in citrus.Rao et al. (2018)explored a diagnostic method based on LIBS to dis-tinguish between healthy and HLB-infected navel oranges originatedfrom China. The LIBS spectra (200 nm –1050 nm) of the epidermis of the fruit were pre-processed by smoothing and multiple scattering cor-rection (MSC). A random forest (RF) based on the wavelet transform(CWT) and PCA was employed to identify and discriminate HLB-infected samples from healthy ones. As a result, both the training setand the validation set provided an average accuracy higher than 96%.Ponce et al. (2018)employed LIBS combined with PCA to classify 6citrus varieties (Macrophylla, Valencia orange, Sugar Belle, Ray Rubygrapefruit, Meyer lemon and honey Murcott). Here, a multi-pulse lasersetup coupled with a microscope was employed to collect the LIBS spec-tra of the plant phloem. And those LIBS spectra revealed the emissionlines of the elements Ca, Na, N, H and Fe and the molecules CN and C
2. The results of PCA on LIBS data allowed to discriminate healthy fromHLB-infected samples with a high level of accuracy (about 90%). The re-search indicated that LIBS combined with chemometric methods wasconsidered to be a rapid, low-cost and efﬁcient tool to discriminate be- tween healthy and HLB-infected citrus plants.Peng et al. (2017a, 2017b)investigated an approach based on LIBS toclassify tobacco leaves infected by the mosaic virus (TMV) from healthyleaves. The moisture content (MC) in fresh leaves apparently affectedthe stability of analysis resulting in a detrimental result on classi ﬁcation. The PLS-DA model established using LIBS spectral data of fresh anddried pelletized leaves provided a good classi ﬁcation (Fig. 7). Mean- while, SVM approach was used and provided an oppositely result. Thenegative effect of MC was reduced and the classi ﬁcation results were improved.5. Conclusions and future perspectivesAt present, LIBS technology is undergoing a rapid technical develop-ment for using laboratorial, man-portable, robotic-based, and standoffmethods in chemical analysisﬁeld.Further research could focus on several aspects as follows: (1) noveltechniques (data processing or signal enhancement) should be devel-oped to enhance LIBS signal and improve the reliability, accuracy andrepeatability of LIBS analytical results; (2) LIBS technology should becombined with other analytical techniques (Raman, ﬂuorescence, etc.) to reinforce the analytical ability of laser spectrometer and extend theapplicability of the chemical apparatus; (3) portable and customisedLIBS instrument should be developed to cope with the in situ, online de-tection in emergencies, environmental monitoring, history cultural her-itage, and so on; (4) LIBS core parts must be researched and developed,contributing to the rapid development of the LIBS industry.AcknowledgementsThis work was supported by the National Natural Science Founda-tion of China (Program No: 61705188), China Postdoctoral ScienceFoundation (2017M613218), Shaanxi Province Postdoctoral ScienceFoundation (2017BSHYDZZ61), the Fundamental Research Funds forthe Central Universities (2452017125), and the Key Laboratory of Agri-cultural Internet of Things, Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs ofthe People's Republic of China.ReferencesAkhtar, M., Jabbar, A., Mehmood, S., Ahmed, N., Ahmed, R., Baig, M.A., 2018. Magneticﬁeld enhanced detection of heavy metals in soil using laser induced breakdown spectros-copy. Spectrochim. Acta Part B. 148, 143 –151. Ambushe, A.A., du Plessis, A., McCrindle, R.I., 2015. Laser-induced breakdown spectros- copy and inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometry for determination of Cr insoils from Brits District. South Africa. B. Chem. Soc. Ethiopia. 29 (3), 357 –366. Arantes de Carvalho, G.G., Moros, J., Santos Jr., D., Krug, F.J., Laserna, J.J., 2015. Direct deter- mination of the nutrient proﬁle in plant materials by femtosecond laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy. Anal. Chim. Acta 876, 26 –38. Barbaﬁeri, M., Pini, R., Ciucci, A., Tassi, E., 2011. Field assessment of Pb in contaminated soils and in leaf mustard (Brassica juncea): the LIBS technique. Chem. Ecol. 27,161–169.Belkov, M.V., Burakov, V.S., De Giacomo, A., Kiris, V.V., Raikov, S.N., Tarasenko, N.V., 2009.Comparison of two laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy techniques for total car-bon measurement in soils. Spectrochim. Acta Part B 64, 899 –904. Bousquet, B., Sirven, J.B., Canioni, L., 2007. Towards quantitative laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy analysis of soil samples. Spectrochim. Acta Part B. 62, 1582 –1589. Bricklemyer, R.S., Brown, D.J., Bare ﬁeld, J.E., Clegg, S.M., 2011.Intact soil core total, inor- ganic, and organic carbon measurement using laser-induced breakdown spectros-copy. Soil Sci. Soc. Am. J. 75, 1006 –1018. Bricklemyer, R.S., Brown, D.J., Turk, P.J., Clegg, S.M., 2013. Improved intact soil-core carbon determination applying regression shrinkage and variable selection techniques tocomplete spectrum laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy (LIBS). Appl. Spectrosc.67 (10), 1185–1199.Bricklemyer, R.S., Brown, D.J., Turk, P.J., Clegg, S., 2018. Comparing vis–NIRS, LIBS and combined vis-NIRS-LIBS for intact soil core soil carbon measurement. Soil Sci. Soc.A m .J .8 2( 6 ) ,1 4 8 2–1496.Capitelli, F., Colao, F., Provenzano, M.R., Fantoni, R., Brunetti, G., Senesi, N., 2002. Determi- nation of heavy metals in soils by laser induced breakdown spectroscopy. Geoderma.106, 45–62.Chatterjee, S., Singh, M., Biswal, B.P., Sinha, U.K., Patbhaje,S., Sarkar, A., 2019. Applicationof laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy (LIBS) coupled with PCA for rapid classi ﬁ- cation of soil samples in geothermal areas. Anal. Bioanal. Chem. 411(13), 2855 –2866. Chen, S.Q., Ma, X.H., Zhao, H.F., Lv, H., 2012. Research of laser induced breakdown spec- troscopy for detection of trace Cd in polluted soil, in: Liao, Y., Jin, W., Sampson,D.D., Yamauchi, R., Chung, Y., Nakamura, K., Rao, Y. (Eds.), 22nd International Confer-ence on Optical Fiber Sensors, pp. 1 –4. Ciucci, A., 1997.LIBS Technique for Environmental Measurements. In Spectroscopy andDynamics of Collective Excitations in Solids. Springer US.Cremers, D.A., Chinni, R.C., 2009. Laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy - capabilitiesand limitations. Appl. Spectrosc. Rev. 44, 457 –506. Cremers, D.A., Radziemski, L.J., 2013. Handbook of Laser-induced Breakdown Spectros- copy. Second edition. John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.da Silva, R.M., Milori, D., Ferreira, E.C., Ferreira, E.J., Krug, F.J., Martin-Neto, L., 2008. Total carbon measurement in whole tropical soil sample. Spectrochim. Acta Part B. 63,1221–1224.de Carvalho, G.G.A., Santos Jr., D., da Silva Gomes, M., Nunes, L.C., Guerra, M.B.B., Krug, F.J.,2014.In
ﬂuence of particle size distribution on the analysis of pellets of plant mate-rials by laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy. Spectrochim. Acta Part B. 105,130–135.Dell'Aglio, M., Gaudiuso, R., Senesi, G.S., De Giacomo, A., Zaccone, C., Miano, T.M., DePascale, O., 2011.Monitoring of Cr, Cu, Pb, V and Zn in polluted soils by laser inducedbreakdown spectroscopy (LIBS). J. of Environ. Monitor. 13, 1422 –1426. Deng, F., Ding, Y., Chen, Y.J., Zhu, S.N., 2020. Quantitative analysis of the content of nitro- gen and sulfur in coal based on laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy: effects ofvariable selection. Plasma Sci. Technol. 22 (7), 074005.Ding, Y., Xia, G.Y., Ji, H.W., Xiong, X., 2019. Accurate quantitative determination of heavy metals in oily soil by laser induced breakdown spectroscopy (LIBS) combined withinterval partial least squares (IPLS). Anal. Methods-UK. 11 (29), 3657 –3664.136 K. Yu et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 4 (2020) 127 –139Du, C., Gao, X., Shao, Y., Song, X.W., Zhao, Z.M., Hao, Z.Q., Lin, J.Q., 2013. Analyses of heavy metals by soil using dual-pulsed laser induced breakdown spectroscopy. Acta Phys.Sin-Ch Ed 62 045202-1-045202-6.Du, X., Dong, D., Zhao, X., Jiao, L., Han, P., Lang, Y., 2015. Detection of pesticide residues on fruit surfaces using laser induced breakdown spectroscopy. RSC Adv. 5,79956–79963.El Haddad, J., Villot-Kadri, M., Ismael, A., Gallou, G., Michel, K., Bruyere, D., Laperche, V.,Canioni, L., Bousquet, B., 2013. Artiﬁcial neural network for on-site quantitative anal- ysis of soils using laser induced breakdown spectroscopy. Spectrochim. Acta Part B.79–80, 51–57.El Haddad, J., Canioni, L., Bousquet, B., 2014. Good practices in LIBS analysis: review and advices. Spectrochim. Acta Part B. 101, 171 –182. Erler, A., Riebe, D., Beitz, T., Lohmannsroben, H.G., Gebbers, R., 2020. Soil nutrient detec- tion for precision agriculture using handheld laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy(LIBS) and multivariate regression methods (PLSR, Lasso and GPR). Sensors-Basel. 20(2), 418–434.Essington, M.E., Melnichenko, G.V., Stewart, M.A., Hull, R.A., 2009. Soil metals analysis using laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy (LIBS). Soil Sc. Soc. Am. J. 73,1469–1478.Fantoni, R., Caneve, L., Colao, F., Fornarini, L., Lazic, V., Spizzichino, V., 2006. Laser induced breakdown spectroscopy (LIBS) —the process, applications to artwork and environ- ment. In: Bartolo, B.D., Forte, O. (Eds.), Advances in Spectroscopy for Lasers and Sens-ing, pp. 229–254.Ferreira, E.C., Milori, D., Ferreira, E.J., Da Silva, R.M., Martin-Neto, L., 2008. Artiﬁcial neural network for Cu quantitative determination in soil using a portable laser inducedbreakdown spectroscopy system. Spectrochim Acta Part B. 63, 1216 –1220. Ferreira, E.C., Menezes, E.A., Matos, W.O., Milori, D.M.B.P., Nogueira, A.R.A., Martin-Neto,L., 2010.Determination of Ca in breakfast cereals by laser induced breakdown spec-troscopy. Food Control 21, 1327 –1330. Fortes, F.J., Moros, J., Lucena, P., Cabalin, L.M., Laserna, J.J., 2013. Laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy. Anal. Chem. 85, 640 –669. Fu, X.L., Li, G.L., Tian, H.W., Dong, D.M., 2018. Detection of cadmium in soils using laser- induced breakdown spectroscopy combined with spatial con ﬁnement and resin en- richment. RSC Adv. 8 (69), 39635 –39640. Fu, X.L., Ma, S.X., Li, G.L., Guo, L.B., Dong, D.M., 2020. Rapid detection of chromium in dif- ferent valence states in soil using resin selective enrichment coupled with laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy: from laboratory test to portable instruments.Spectrochim. Acta Part B. 167, 105817.Gehl, R.J., Rice, C.W., 2007.Emerging technologies for in situ measurement of soil carbon.Climatic Change. 80 (1-2), 43 –54. Glumac, N.G., Dong, W.K., Jarrell, W.M., 2010. Quantitative analysis of soil organic carbon using laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy: an improved method. Soil Sci. Soc. Am.J. 74 (6), 1922–1928.Gondal, M.A., Hussain, T., Yamani, Z.H., Baig, M.A., 2009. On-line monitoring of remedia- tion process of chromium polluted soil using LIBS. J. Hazard. Mater. 163, 1265 –1271. Gottfried, J.L., Harmon, R.S., De Lucia, F.C., Miziolek, A.W., 2009. Multivariate analysis of laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy chemical signatures for geomaterial classi ﬁ-
cation. Spectrochim. Acta Part B. 64, 1009 –1019. Gu, Y.H., Zhao, N.J., Ma, M.J., Meng, D.S., Jia, Y., Fang, L., Liu, J.G., Liu, W.Q., 2018. Mapping analysis of heavy metal elements in polluted soils using laser-induced breakdownspectroscopy. Spectrosc. Spectr. Anal. 38 (03), 982 –989. Hahn, D.W., Lunden, M.M., 2000. Detection and analysis of aerosol particles by laser- induced breakdown spectroscopy. Aerosol Sci. Technol. 33, 30 –48. Hahn, D.W., Omenetto, N., 2010. Laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy (LIBS), part I: re-view of basic diagnostics and plasma-particle interactions: still-challenging issueswithin the analytical plasma community. Appl. Spectrosc. 74, 335A –366A. Hahn, D.W., Omenetto, N., 2012. Laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy (LIBS), part II:review of instrumental and methodological approaches to material analysis and ap-plications to differentﬁelds. Appl. Spectrosc. 66, 347 –419. Han, J., Sun, D., Su, M., Peng, L., Dong, C., 2012. Quantitative analysis of metallic elements in tobacco and tobacco ash by calibration free laser-induced breakdown spectros-copy. Anal. Lett. 45, 1936–1945. Harmon, R.S., Delucia, F.C., Lapointe, A., 2005. Discrimination and identiﬁcation of plastic landmine casings by single-shot broadband LIBS. Proc. SPIE Int. Soc. Opt. Eng. 5794(1), 92–101.He, Y., Liu, X.D., Lv, Y.Y., Liu, F., Peng, J.Y., Shen, T.L., Zhao, Y., Tang, Y., Luo, S.M., 2018.Quantitative analysis of nutrient elements in soil using single and double-pulselaser-induced breakdown spectroscopy. Sensors-Basel. 18 (5), 1526 –1541. Huang, J., Zhou, W., Ying, C., Chen, Q., 2009. Quantitative determination of toxic metals in soil by laser induced breakdown spectroscopy. Proc. of SPIE-International Conferenceon Optical Instruments and Technology: Optoelectronic Measurement Technologyand Applications, 7160, pp. 1 –8.
Fig. 7.Predicted values plot for PLS-DA classi ﬁcation of different symptoms of the infected plants based on LIBS spectra of (a) fresh samples and (b) dried samples ( Peng et al., 2017a, 2017b).137 K. Yu et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 4 (2020) 127 –139Hussain, T., Gondal, M.A., Yamani, Z.H., Baig, M.A., 2007. Measurement of nutrients in green house soil with laser induced breakdown spectroscopy. Environ. Monit. Assess.124 (1–3), 131–139.Idris, N., Kagawa, K., Sakan, F., Tsuyuki, K., Miura, S., 2007. Analysis of heavy metal pollu- tion in soil using transversely excited atmospheric CO
2laser-induced plasma by trap- ping the soil in microstructured holes on metal subtargets. Appl. Spectrosc. 61,1344–1351.Izaurralde, R.C., Rice, C.W., Wielopolski, L., Ebinger, M.H., Reeves, J.B., Thomson, A.M.,Harris, R., Francis, B., Mitra, S., Rappaport, A.G., Etchevers, J.D., Sayre, K.D., Govaerts,B., McCarty, G.W., 2013.Evaluation of threeﬁeld-based methods for quantifying soil carbon. PLoS One 8, 1.Judge, E.J., Bareﬁeld, J.E., Berg, J.M., Clegg, S.M., Havrilla, G.J., Montoya, V.M., Le, L.A., Lopez,L.N., 2013.Laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy measurements of uranium andthorium powders and uranium ore. Spectrochim. Acta Part B. 83 –84, 28–36. Khan, S.A., Ibrahim, M., Jamil, Y., Islam, M.S., Abbas, F., 2013. Spectrochemical analysis ofsoil around leather tanning industry using laser induced breakdown spectroscopy.J. Chem.https://doi.org/10.1155/2013/894020 . Kim, G., Kwak, J., Choi, J., Park, K., 2012. Detection of nutrient elements and contamination by pesticides in spinach and rice samples using laser-induced breakdown spectros-copy (LIBS). J. Agric. Food Chem. 60, 718 –724. Kim, G., Kwak, J., Kim, K.R., Lee, H., Kim, K.W., Yang, H., Park, K., 2013. Rapid detection of soils contaminated with heavy metals and oils. By laser induced breakdown spectros-copy (LIBS). J. Hazard. Mater. 263, 754 –760. Kim, K.R., Kim, G., Kim, J.Y., Park, K., Kim, K.W., 2014. Kriging interpolation method for laser induced breakdown spectroscopy (LIBS) analysis of Zn in various soils. J. Anal.Atom. Spectrom. 29, 76–84.Knadel, M., Gislum, R., Hermansen, C., Peng, Y., Moldrup, P., de Jonge, L.W., Greve, M.H.,2017.Comparing predictive ability of laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy to visi-ble near-infrared spectroscopy for soil property determination. Biosyst. Eng. 156,157–172.Kumar, R., Tripathi, D.K., Devanathan, A., Chauhan, D.K., Rai, A.K., 2014. In-situ monitoring of chromium uptake in different parts of the wheat seedling (Triticum aestivum)using laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy. Spectrosc. Lett. 47, 554 –563. Lee, W.B., Wu, J., Lee, Y.I., Sneddon, J., 2004. Recent applications of laser-induced break- down spectrometry: a review of material approaches. Appl. Spectrosc. Rev. 39, 27 –97. Li, K.X., Zhou, W.D., Shen, Q.M., Ren, Z.J., Peng, B.J., 2010. Laser ablation assisted spark in- duced breakdown spectroscopy on soil samples. J. Anal. Atom. Spectrom. 25,1475–1481.Li, X.F., Zhou, W.D., Li, K.X., Qian, H.G., Ren, Z.J., 2012. Laser ablation fast pulse discharge plasma spectroscopy analysis of Pb, Mg and Sn in soil. Opt. Commun. 285, 54 –58. Li, Q.Z., Zhang, W., Tang, Z.Y., Zhou, R., Yan, J.L., Zhu, C.W., Liu, K., Li, X.Y., Zeng, X.Y., 2020.Determination of uranium in ores using laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy com-bined with laser-inducedﬂuorescence. J. Anal. Atom. Spectrom. 35 (3), 626 –631. Liu, Y., Bousquet, B., Baudelet, M., Richardson, M., 2012. Improvement of the sensitivity for the measurement of copper concentrations in soil by microwave-assisted laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy. Spectrochim. Acta Part B. 73, 89 –92. Liu, F., Ye, L., Peng, J., Song, K., Shen, T., Zhang, C., He, Y., 2018. Fast detection of copper content in rice by laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy with uni- and multivariateanalysis. Sensors 18, 705.Lu, C.P., Liu, W.Q., Zhao, N.J., Liu, L.T., Chen, D., Zhang, Y.J., Liu, J.G., 2011. Quantitative anal-ysis of chrome in soil samples using laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy. ActaPhys. Sin-Ch Ed., 60https://doi.org/10.1007/s11630-011-0439-8 . Lu, C.P., Wang, L.S., Hu, H.Y., Zhuang, Z., Wang, Y., Wang, R.J., Song, L.T., 2013. Analysis of total nitrogen and total phosphorus in soil using laser-induced breakdown spectros-copy. Chin. Opt. Lett. 11, 053004 –053007. Ma, F., Dong, D., 2014.Measurement method on pesticide residues of apple surface basedon laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy. Food Anal. Method. 7, 1858 –
1865. Ma, X.H., Zheng, Z.K., Zhao, H.F., Zhang, M., Liao, Y.B., 2011. Laser induced breakdown spectroscopy algorithm using weights iteration arti ﬁcial neural network. 21st Inter- national Conference on Optical Fiber Sensors. 7753, pp. 77532k1 –77532k4. Ma, S.X., Tang, Y., Zhang, S.Y., Ma, Y.Y., Sheng, Z.Q., Wang, Z., Guo, L.B., Yao, J., Lu, Y.F., 2020.Chlorine and sulfur determination in water using indirect laser-induced breakdownspectroscopy. Talanta 214, 120849.Martin, M.Z., Labbé, N., Rials, T.G., Wullschleger, S.D., 2005. Analysis of preservative treated wood by multivariate analysis of laser-induced breakdown spectroscopyspectra. Spectrochim. Acta Part B. 60, 1179 –1185. Martin, M.Z., Nicole, L., André, N., Wullschleger, S.D., Harris, R.D., Ebinger, M.H., 2010.Novel multivariate analysis for soil carbon measurements using laser-induced break-down spectroscopy. Soil Sci. Soc. Am. J. 74 (1), 87 –93. Martin, M.Z., Mayes, M.A., Heal, K.R., Brice, D.J., Wullschleger, S.D., 2013. Investigation of laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy and multivariate analysis for differentiatinginorganic and organic C in a variety of soils. Spectrochim. Acta Part B. 87, 100 –107. Meng, D., Zhao, N., Ma, M., Gu, Y., Yu, Y., Fang, L., Wang, Y., Jia, Y., Liu, W., Liu, J., 2017.Rapid soil classiﬁcation with laser induced breakdown spectroscopy. Spectrosc.Spect. Anal. 37 (1), 241–246.Miziolek, A.W., 2012.Progress inﬁeldable laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy (LIBS). Proc. of SPIE Next-Generation Spectroscopic Technologies. 8374 (02), 1 –13. Miziolek, A.W., Palleschi, V., Schechter, I., 2006. Laser-induced Breakdown Spectroscopy- fundamentals and Applications. Cambridge University Press.Motto-Ros, V., Koujelev, A.S., Osinski, G.R., Dudelzak, A.E., 2008. Quantitative multi- elemental laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy using arti ﬁcial neural networks. Journal of the European Optical Society-Rapid Publications 3, 08011-1 –08011-5. Mowry, C., Milofsky, R., Collins, W., Pimentel, A.S., 2017. Laser-induced breakdown spec- troscopy for qualitative analysis of metals in simulated martian soils. J. Chem. Educ.94, 1507–1511.Mukhono, P.M., Angeyo, K.H., Dehayem-Kamadjeu, A., Kaduki, K.A., 2013. Laser induced breakdown spectroscopy and characterization of environmental matrices utilizingmultivariate chemometrics. Spectrochim. Acta Part B. 87, 81 –85. Musazzi, S., Umberto, P., 2014. Laser-induced Breakdown Spectroscopy-Theory and Ap-plications. Springer-Verlag, Berlin Heidelberg.Nicolodelli, G., Marangoni, B.S., Cabral, J.S., Villas-Boas, P.R., Senesi, G.S., dos Santos, C.H.,Romano, R.A., Segnini, A., Lucas, Y., Montes, C.R., Milori, D.M.B.P., 2014. Quantiﬁcation of total carbon in soil using laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy: a method to cor-rect interference lines. Appl. Opt. 53, 2170 –2176. Nicolodelli, G., Senesi, G.S., Perazzoli, I.L.D., Marangoni, B.S., Benites, V.D., Milori, D.M.B.P.,2016.Double pulse laser induced breakdown spectroscopy: a potential tool for theanalysis of contaminants and macro/micronutrients in organic mineral fertilizers.Sci. Total Environ. 565 (15), 1116 –1123. Nicolodelli, G., Senesi, G.S., Ranulﬁ, A.C., Marangoni, B.S., Watanabe, A., de Melo Benites, V.,de Oliveira, P.P.A., Villas-Boas, P., Milori, D.M.B.P., 2017. Double-pulse laser induced breakdown spectroscopy in orthogonal beam geometry to enhance line emission in-tensity from agricultural samples. Microchem. J. 133, 272 –278. Nicolodelli, G., Cabral, J., Menegatti, C.R., Marangoni, B., Senesi, G.S., 2019. Recent advances and future trends in libs applications to agricultural materials and their food deriva-tives: an overview of developments in the last decade (2010 –2019). Part I. Soils and fertilizers. Trac-Trend Anal. Chem. 115, 70 –82. Nicolodellia, G., Senesib, G.S., Romano, R.A., Perazzoli, I.L.D., Milori, D.M.B.P., 2015. Signalenhancement in collinear double-pulse laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy ap-plied to different soils. Spectrochim. Acta Part B. 111, 23 –29. Noll, R., 2012.Laser-induced Breakdown Spectroscopy Fundamentals and Applications.Springer-Verlag, Berlin Heidelberg.Pareja, J., Lopez, S., Jaramillo, D., Hahn, D.W., Molina, A., 2013. Laser ablation-laser induced breakdown spectroscopy for the measurement of total elemental concentration insoils. Appl. Opt. 52 (11), 2470 –2477. Peng, J., He, Y., Ye, L., Shen, T., Liu, F., Kong, W., Liu, X., Zhao, Y., 2017a. Moisture inﬂuence reducing method for heavy metals detection in plant materials using laser-inducedbreakdown spectroscopy: a case study for chromium content detection in rice leaves.Anal. Chem. 89, 7593–7600.Peng, J., Song, K., Zhu, H., Kong, W., Liu, F., Shen, T., He, Y., 2017b. Fast detection of tobacco mosaic virus infected tobacco using laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy. Sci. Rep.7, 44551.Pieruschka, R., Schurr, U., 2019. Plant Phenotyping: Past, Present, and Future. PlantPhenomics.https://doi.org/10.34133/2019/7507131 . Ponce, L., Etxeberria, E., Gonzalez, P., Ponce, A., Flores, T., 2018. Rapid identiﬁcation of Huanlongbing-infected citrus plants using laser-induced breakdown spectroscopyof phloem samples. Appl. Opt. 57, 8841 –8844. Pouzar, M.,Černohorský, T., Průšová, M., Prokopčáková, P., Krejčová, A., 2009.LIBS analy- sis of crop plants. J. Anal. Atom. Spectrom. 24, 953 –957. Ranulﬁ, A.C., Romano, R.A., Magalhães, A.B., Ferreira, E.J., Villas-Boas, P.R., Milori, D.M.B.P.,2017.Evaluation of the nutritional changes caused by Huanglongbing (HLB) to citrusplants using laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy. Appl. Spectrosc. 71, 1471 –1480. Rao, G., Huang, L., Liu, M., Chen, T., Chen, J., Luo, Z., Xu, F., Xu, X., Yao, M., 2018. Identiﬁca- tion of Huanglongbing-infected navel oranges based on laser-induced breakdownspectroscopy combined with different chemometric methods. Appl. Opt. 57,8738–8742.Rehan, I., Rehan, K., Sultana, S., Oun ul Haq, M., Zubair Khan Niazi, M., Muhammad, R.,2016.Spatial characterization of red and white skin potatoes using nano-secondlaser induced breakdown in air. Eur. Phys. J. Appl. Phys. 73, 10701.Rühlmann, M., Büchele, D., Ostermann, M., Bald, I., Schmid, T., 2018. Challenges in the quantiﬁcation of nutrients in soils using laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy –A case study with calcium. Spectroc. Acta Part B. 146, 115 –121. Sankaran, S., Ehsani, R., Morgan, K.T., 2015. Detection of anomalies in citrus leaves using laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy (LIBS). Appl. Spectrosc. 69, 913 –919. Santos, D., Nunes, L.C., de Carvalho, G.G.A., Gomes, M.d.S., de Souza, P.F., Leme, F.d.O., dosSantos, L.G.C., Krug, F.J., 2012. Laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy for analysis of plant materials: a review. Spectrochim. Acta Part B. 71 –72, 3–13. Schroder, S., Pavlov, S.G., Rauschenbach, I., Jessberger, E.K., Hubers, H.W., 2013. Detection and identiﬁcation of salts and frozen salt solutions combining laser-induced break-down spectroscopy and multivariate analysis methods: a study for future martian ex-
ploration. Icarus 223, 61–73.Senesi, G.S., Dell'Aglio, M., Gaudiuso, R., De Giacomo, A., Zaccone, C., De Pascale, O., Miano,T.M., Capitelli, M., 2009.Heavy metal concentrations in soils as determined by laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy (LIBS), with special emphasis on chromium. Envi-ron. Res. 109 (4), 413–420.Singh, V.K., Rai, A.K., 2011.Prospects for laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy for bio-medical applications: a review. Lasers Med. Sci. 26, 673 –687. Solo-Gabriele, H.M., Townsend, T.G., Hahn, D.W., Moskal, T.M., Hosein, N., Jambeck, J.,Jacobi, G., 2004.Evaluation of XRF and LIBS technologies for on-line sorting of CCA-treated wood waste. Waste Manag. 24, 413 –424. Srungaram, P.K., Ayyalasomayajula, K.K., Yu-Yueh, F., Singh, J.P., 2013. Comparison of laser induced breakdown spectroscopy and spark induced breakdown spectroscopy fordetermination of mercury in soils. Spectrochim. Acta Part B. 87, 108 –113. Tognoni, E., Palleschi, V., Corsi, M., Cristoforetti, G., 2002. Quantitative micro-analysis by laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy: a review of the experimental approaches.Spectrochim. Acta Part B. 57, 1115 –1130. Trevizan, L.C., Santos, D., Samad, R.E., Vieira, N.D., Nunes, L.C., Ru ﬁni, I.A., Krug, F.J., 2009. Evaluation of laser induced breakdown spectroscopy for the determination ofmicronutrients in plant materials. Spectrochim. Acta Part B. 64, 369 –377. Tripathi, D.K., Singh, V.P., Prasad, S.M., Dubey, N.K., Chauhan, D.K., Rai, A.K., 2016. LIB spec- troscopic and biochemical analysis to characterize lead toxicity alleviative nature of138 K. Yu et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 4 (2020) 127 –139silicon in wheat (Triticum aestivum L.) seedlings. J. Photochem. Photobiol. B Biol. 154, 89–98.Uhl, A., Loebe, K., Kreuchwig, L., 2001. Fast analysis of wood preservers using laser in- duced breakdown spectroscopy. Spectrochim. Acta Part B. 56, 795 –806. Wallin, S., Pettersson, A., Ostmark, H., Hobro, A., 2009. Laser-based standoff detection of explosives: a critical review. Anal. Bioanal. Chem. 395, 259 –274. Wang, T., He, M.J., Shen, T.T., Liu, F., He, Y., Liu, X.M., Qiu, Z.J., 2018. Multi-element analysis of heavy metal content in soils using laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy: a casestudy in eastern China. Spectrochim. Acta Part B. 149, 300 –312. Yao, M., Liu, M., Zhao, J., Huang, L., 2010. Identiﬁcation of nutrition elements in orange leaves by laser induced breakdown spectroscopy. Third International Symposiumon Intelligent Information Technology and Security Informatics, pp. 398 –401. Yao, M., Huang, L., Zheng, J., Fan, S., Liu, M., 2013. Assessment of feasibility in determining of Cr in Gannan Navel Orange treated in controlled conditions by laser inducedbreakdown spectroscopy. Opt. Laser Technol. 52, 70 –74.Yi, R.X., Li, J.M., Yang, X.Y., Zhou, R., Yu, H.W., Hao, Z.Q., Guo, L.B., Li, X.Y., Zeng, X.Y., Lu, Y.F.,2017.Spectral interference elimination in soil analysis using laser-induced break-down spectroscopy assisted by laser-induced ﬂuorescence. Anal. Chem. 89 (4), 2334–2337.Yu, K., Zhao, Y., Liu, F., He, Y., 2016. Laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy coupled withmultivariate chemometrics for variety discrimination of soil. Sci. Re-UK. 6, 27574.https://doi.org/10.1038/srep27574 . Yuan, D., Gao, X., Yao, S., 2016. The detection of heavy metals in soil with laser inducedbreakdown spectroscopy. Spectrosc. Spect. Anal. 36 (8), 2617 –2620. Zhao, Y., Guindo, M.L., Xu, X., Sun, M., Peng, J.Y., Liu, F., He, Y., 2019. Deep learning associ- ated with laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy (LIBS) for the prediction of lead insoil. Appl. Spectrosc. 73 (5), 565 –573.139 K. Yu et al. / Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Agriculture 4 (2020) 127 –139