Rapid identiﬁcation of high-quality marine shale gas reservoirs based on theoversampling method and random forest algorithm
Linqi Zhua,b, Xueqing Zhoua,b,*, Chaomo Zhangc
aInstitute of Deep-sea Science and Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Sanya, 57200, China
bKey Lab of Marine Georesources and Prospecting, Hainan Province, Sanya, 572000, China
cKey Laboratory of Exploration Technologies for Oil and Gas Resources, Ministry of Education, Yangtze University, Wuhan, 430100, China
ARTICLE INFO
Keywords:Marine shale gasOversamplingRandom forestHigh-quality reservoir identiﬁcationABSTRACT
The identiﬁcation of high-quality marine shale gas reservoirs has always been a key task in the exploration anddevelopment stage. However, due to the serious nonlinear relationship between the logging curve response andhigh-quality reservoirs, the rapid identi ﬁcation of high-quality reservoirs has always been a problem of low ac- curacy. This study proposes a combination of the oversampling method and random forest algorithm to improvethe identiﬁcation accuracy of high-quality reservoirs based on logging data. The oversampling method is used tobalance the number of samples of different types and the random forest algorithm is used to establish a high-precision and high-quality reservoir identi ﬁcation model. From the perspective of the prediction effect, the reservoir identiﬁcation method that combines the oversampling method and the random forest algorithm hasincreased the accuracy of reservoir identi ﬁcation from the 44% seen in other machine learning algorithms to 78%, and the effect is signiﬁcant. This research can improve the identi ﬁability of high-quality marine shale gas res- ervoirs, guide the drilling of horizontal wells, and provide tangible help for the precise formulation of marineshale gas development plans.
1. IntroductionEnergy is an eternal necessity, and fossil energy accounts for a hugeproportion of total energy usage (Huang et al., 2018;Pang et al., 2021; Aldhuhoori et al., 2021). Conventional oil and gas reserves have becomeincreasingly lower with continuous exploration and development. Un-conventional reservoirs represented by shale gas have received growingattention. Countries led by the United States and China have begun toextract natural gas from shale (Zhu et al., 2021a–c;Pang et al., 2021; Aldhuhoori et al., 2021). Research on marine shale gas reservoirs hasbegun in earnest and the corresponding research understanding hasdeveloped rapidly.Shale gas reservoirs are too tight, requiring natural gas extractionbased on horizontal well technology ( Sheng et al., 2020;Hou et al., 2021; Wilson et al., 2016). Correspondingly, the efﬁcient and accurate identi- ﬁcation of high-quality reservoirs has become a critical step. It is dif ﬁcult to accurately evaluate the vertical changes of the entire well using onlycore data, so it is necessary to use logging data for reservoiridentiﬁcation.At present, the most common high-quality reservoir identi ﬁcationmethods are still biased towards qualitative analysis. For example, Ma et al. (2020)proposed the use of the T
2geometric mean value to evaluate Longmaxi shale gas reservoirs.Wang et al. (2016)analysed and clariﬁed special logging responses such as geochemical logging and nuclearmagnetic resonance logging for high-quality shale gas reservoirs in theNiutitang Formation.Yan et al. (2014)discussed the possibility of qualitatively identifying high-quality reservoirs using log response. He et al. (2016)analysed the logging response characteristics of variousshale facies and distinguished favourable facies. Although there are manyqualitative studies, qualitative identiﬁcation methods obviously cannot meet the needs of the shale development stage. Quantitative and rapidreservoir identiﬁcation is more important. Some scholars have proposeda quantitative identiﬁcation method for linear reservoirs based on maps(Liu and Sun, 2015;Li et al., 2020;Zhu et al., 2021a); however, the relationship between the logging response of most shale reservoirs andthe reservoir type has nonlinear characteristics, and the chart methodobviously does not meet this demand. Tahmasebi et al. (2017)used data mining and machine learning methods to identify shale dessert layers andperformed purely data-driven shale dessert layer recognition. Zhang et al. (2021)used the IPSO-SVM algorithm combined with element logging
* Corresponding author. Institute of Deep-sea Science and Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Sanya, 57200, China.E-mail address:Zhouxq@idsse.ac.cn(X. Zhou).
Contents lists available atScienceDirect
Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Geosciences
journal homepage:www.keaipublishing.com/en/journals/artiﬁcial-intelligence-in-geosciences
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aiig.2021.12.001Received 22 July 2021; Received in revised form 23 November 2021; Accepted 1 December 2021Available online 6 December 20212666-5441/©2021 The Authors. Publishing Services by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of KeAi Communications Co. Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND
license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ ).Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Geosciences 2 (2021) 76 –81curves to identify sweet spots in shale formations. Amosu et al. (2021) used support vector machines to effectively identify high-quality reser-voirs in the Eagle Ford Shale.Vikara et al. (2020)used the machine learning-informed ensemble framework to solve the effective classi ﬁca- tion of Marcellus shale reservoirs. Although a variety of high-qualityreservoir identiﬁcation methods for shale have been proposed, thereare still some problems in the identiﬁcation of sweet beds. First, the biggest problem is that the sample set used for modelling is unbalanceddue to the unavoidable biases of core sampling. This will lead to sometypes of reservoirs that are not easy to predict and is worse whenhigh-quality reservoirs are not easy to identify. Second, the nonlinearapproximation capabilities of different algorithms are also different,resulting in differences in prediction effects. This paper proposes a rapididentiﬁcation framework for high-quality marine shale reservoirs thatcombines the oversampling method and random forest algorithm toquickly identify high-quality reservoirs in shale gas wells. This methodsigniﬁcantly improves the identiﬁcation effect of high-quality reservoirsand can provide help for the exploration and development of marineshale gas reservoirs.2. MethodIn this study, there are two main techniques applied to the task ofreservoir identiﬁcation: oversampling methods (Tao et al., 2020;Sol- tanzadeh and Hashemzadeh, 2021) to solve unbalanced data and randomforest algorithms (Ao et al., 2020;Feng et al., 2021) to solve classiﬁcation problems. Combining these can achieve the purpose of quickly identi-fying high-quality reservoirs and mitigate reservoir identi ﬁcation accu- racy problems due to inexperienced formation evaluation personnel anddifferences in reservoir identiﬁcation models.2.1. Random forestRandom forest is an ensemble learning algorithm based on decisiontrees. It uses bootstrap technology to extract randomized samples fromoriginal samples to construct a single decision tree. At each node of thedecision tree, a random feature subspace is used to select a sorting point.Finally, these decision trees are combined to obtain the ﬁnal prediction result through a majority vote. Before we have a deeper understanding ofrandom forests, we need to introduce decision trees ﬁrst because it is the basic classiﬁer in the random forest algorithm.Decision trees are a widely used tree-like classi ﬁer. It starts from theroot node of the tree and continuously splits by selecting the optimalcolumn attributes to construct the tree nodes one by one until the stop-ping condition for tree building is reached; for example, the data in theleaf nodes are all of the same category. Compared with algorithms suchas neural networks, decision trees are very interpretable. Each path fromthe root node to the leaf node represents a rule, and the decision tree isbased on these rules for classiﬁcation or prediction. When making pre-dictions, the decision tree starts from the root node to determine the onlypath to the leaf node. The majority category the samples in the leaf nodebecomes the predicted value of the decision tree. According to thedifferent criteria applied when selecting the attributes for classi ﬁcation, common decision tree generation algorithms are ID3 and C4.5, based onShannon entropy splitting, and CART, based on Gini coef ﬁcient classiﬁ- cation (Tewari and Dwivedi, 2019). When used for classi
ﬁcation tasks, the C4.5 algorithm is the most commonly used algorithm. Decision treesplitting uses the information gain ratio as the splitting criterion, calcu-lated as:g
rðX;YÞ¼gðX;YÞHðYÞ (1)gðX;YÞ¼HðYÞ/C0HðYjXÞ (2)where g(X, Y) refers to the information gain and the degree of uncertaintyof the event, which is calculated by subtracting conditional entropy fromentropy. The information gain ratio adds a penalty term H(Y|X) on thebasis of the information gain. The calculation formula for the penalty is:H YjXÞ¼X
ni¼1piHðYjX¼x i! (3)Correspondingly, the calculation formula of entropy is:HðpÞ¼ /C0X
ni¼1pilog2pi (4)The greater the entropy, the greater the amount of information con-tained, and the greater the uncertainty. The establishment of a decisiontree essentially differentiates the data layer by layer by formulating rulesso that the uncertainty of the data after classi ﬁcation is gradually reduced.A decision tree is a single classiﬁer. Although it is very interpretable,due to the limitations of its own model, there is a bottleneck in itsInstance
…Random Forest
Tree-2 Tree-3 Tree-1
Class-A Class-C Class-B
Majority-Voting
Final-Class
Fig. 1.Random forest prediction process.L. Zhu et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Geosciences 2 (2021) 76 –81
77performance improvement, which leads to unsatisfactory training andprediction accuracy. To solve this problem, an ensemble learning algo-rithm is used to integrate multiple decision trees. Bagging and boostingare two categories of algorithms in ensemble learning. Bagging algo-rithms uniformly randomly sample from the original data so that thetraining of each basic classiﬁer in the ensemble is independent of theothers. The process of the random forest algorithm can be divided intothree parts:①Bootstrap sampling of samples, that is, at the beginning of con-structing the tree (training the model), random sampling withreplacement is performed from the training dataset D
n, sampling the same number of n data points.②Carry out the selection of random feature subspace. Each newsubdataset formed by sampling is used to construct the corre-sponding random forest decision tree. When splitting tree nodes,ﬁrst randomly sample m features (m<D) from the most primitive D features, then select split features and split points from thefeature subspace formed by these m features. The selection cri-terion is a decrease in the information gain ratio. The aboveprocess is repeated to construct the tree nodes one by one until thestopping conditions are met. These stopping conditions can bethat all the data in the subdatasets are distinguished or the numberof samples in the leaf nodes is less than a preset threshold.③Voting predictions. The decision tree of each basic classi ﬁer is used to make independent predictions ﬁrst to obtain the discriminative category of the new data, then the results fromeach tree are used to output theﬁnal separate results by means ofmajority voting.Fig. 1shows the prediction process of randomforest.2.2. The oversampling method for unbalanced datasetsAn unbalanced dataset is a very difﬁcult problem in actual machine learning prediction, especially when the total number of samples isinsufﬁcient or the cost of obtaining samples is too high. In the classi ﬁ- cation task, if the number of samples in different categories in the pro-cessed dataset is quite unequal, the direct use of machine learningalgorithms for training will lead to poor prediction results. Such atraining dataset is called unbalanced. In the unbalanced dataset, thecategory with a large sample size is called the majority category, and thecategory with a small sample size is called the minority category. In manypractical scenarios, the number of minority types is small and dif ﬁcult to identify, but these samples may contain critical information. If there are alarge number of discriminative errors in the classi ﬁcation of these sam- ples, it may cause a very serious impact, especially when the categories ofthese samples are the categories we care about most. Traditional machinelearning algorithms will assume that the sample sizes of different cate-gories are similar. What these algorithms care about is how to ensure theclassiﬁcation accuracy of the entire dataset, which will bias the modeltowards categories with the most samples during the classi ﬁcation pro- cess. Based on these factors, when dealing with the problem of imbal-ance, the data need to be specially processed to improve the balance ofthe dataset.Oversampling alleviates the imbalance between the categories byexpanding the size of the samples of the minority categories whilemaintaining the original scale for the samples of the majority categories.Oversampling methods include nonheuristic and heuristic algorithms.The typical nonheuristic method is random oversampling. In this way,the size of the minority types of samples is increased by simply copyingsome of the minority types of samples. The random oversampling methodis relatively simple and convenient to apply and can help the predictionresult. In this paper, the oversampling method is selected to rebalancedatasets in the reservoir identiﬁcation problem based on logging as muchas possible.3. Data3.1. BlockBlock X in the study area, located in the southern part of the SichuanBasin, is a marine overmature shale gas reservoir. High-quality reservoirsare located in the Lower Ordovician Longmaxi Formation-Upper SilurianWufeng Formation, with a burial depth of approximately 3500 m ormore, and belong to deep shale gas reservoirs ( Zhu et al., 2019). The shale in the study area belongs to the main shale gas development ho-rizon in China and is dominated by black shale with relatively developednanoscale organic pores. The total organic carbon content in the studyarea is 0–8%, the porosity ranges from 0 to 9.44%, and the clay contentranges from 10 to 59%. The total gas content of high-quality reservoirscan be higher than 6 m
3/t. Since most of the shale gas reservoirs in theSichuan Basin will be constructed in horizontal wells during the devel-opment stage, this makes the rapid determination of high-quality reser-voirs of great signiﬁcance, so this paper attempts to quickly identifyhigh-quality reservoirs using our algorithms.3.2. Data characteristicsWe selected the logging data and core data of 3 key wells for rapididentiﬁcation of high-quality reservoirs. A total of 76 cores in these 3wells were subjected to helium porosity experiments, TOC content ex-periments, and X-ray diffraction experiments. The results of these ex-periments are usually used to divide high-quality reservoirs. We combinethe high-quality reservoir classiﬁcation standards in the study area givenin the literature and core data to give the high-quality reservoir typescorresponding to all cores, as shown in Table 1. Among them, the selected standards are TOC content, porosity, and clay mineral content.Combined with the standards in this table, the reservoir types cor-responding to the 76 cores can be determined. After this classi ﬁcation, the number of cores corresponding to different reservoir types is counted.The statistical results are shown inTable 2. Two key pieces of information can be obtained from the classi ﬁcation results of reservoir categories in different wells. The ﬁrst point is that there are certain differences in the distribution of reservoir types be-tween different wells. For Well B, type I reservoirs account for the largestproportion of all reservoirs. This is consistent with the current under-standing of the block. Well B has a higher single-well production and isalso the most studied well. The difference in the proportion of Type Ireservoirs between different wells is large, which also emphasizes thetask of reservoir identiﬁcation, especially for high-quality reservoirs thathave a small number of cores and are relatively short for developmentplans. Recognition is a very meaningful work. The second point is thatthere are differences in the number of different reservoir types in anyTable 1Relationship between reservoir types and corresponding reservoir parameters.
Reservoir type TOC content Porosity Clay contentType I/C214/C216/C2035 Type II 3–45–63 5–45 Type III 2–33–54 5–55 Type IV<2<3/C2155
Table 2Core classiﬁcation results of different reservoir types in different wells.
Reservoir type Total Well A Well B Well CType I 8 1 4 3Type II 13 1 5 7Type III 25 5 8 12Type IV 30 2 2 26Type I proportion 10.5% 11.10% 21.05% 6.25%L. Zhu et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Geosciences 2 (2021) 76 –81
78well, and the number of core samples corresponding to Type I reservoirsis relatively small. This is because the thickness of the highest qualityreservoirs in the study area is relatively lower than that of other types ofreservoirs. They are thin, so it is very important to ﬁnd Type I reservoirs and drill horizontal wells. The small number of core samples corre-sponding to Type I reservoirs leads to the fact that when modelling thereservoir identiﬁcation process, the model tends to classify Type I res-ervoirs as other types of reservoirs, resulting in the inability to accuratelyﬁnd Type I reservoirs. The exploration and development of shale gas isvery challenging.In this study, Well A was used as the predicted well, and Wells B and Cwere used as for model training. Because the amount of core data fordifferent reservoir types is unequal, the sample needs to be expanded.According to the oversampling method, the number of cores in Type I,Type II, and Type III reservoirs was expanded by randomly selectedmethods in the datasets from Wells B and C, and the total number of coresin the four types of reservoirs was increased to 30. The correspondingcore intersection diagram for the expanded dataset is shown in Fig. 2. The different types of reservoirs clearly cannot be directly divided by linearmodels and the traditional method based on intersection graphs cannotobtain reliable results.4. ResultThe random forest algorithm is used to try to build a model based onthe core data of Wells B and C. Well A is used as a blind well that does notparticipate in the modelling process to test the algorithm. This is alsobecause the data volume of Well A is smaller than those of Wells B and Cand is relatively unsuitable for modelling. The sample numbers of WellsA, B, and C are 9, 19, and 48, respectively, so the number of samplesinvolved in modelling is 67 and in testing is 9. This is also shown inTable 2. Since the split criteria of the basic classiﬁer-decision tree algo- rithm are relativelyﬁxed, in a strict sense, the parameters that need to bedetermined most should be the number of random forest trees and theselected logging curve characteristics. We use the out-of-bag error as atest of the modelling effect to analyse the selection of hyperparameters(Otchere D. A., 2021). The calculation method for out-of-bag error is touse the established decision tree to predict the samples that were notdrawn when each decision tree was established and count the predictionresults of these samples. We used the data of Wells B and C to model andexplore the best combination of input logging curves and the best numberof decision trees. We used all logging curves to model, chose a log curveto remove, then and remodelled to compare the results. The corre-sponding out-of-bag error results are shown in Fig. 3. Out-of-bag error is actually a method of model validity testing because out-of-bag data donot participate in the establishment of each decision tree in the randomforest.It is clear fromFig. 3that for the random forest algorithm, the AClogging curve has a negative effect on the accuracy of the model. Whenthe AC curve is removed, the prediction accuracy of the model improves.Current research shows that sonic logging in the study area is not closelyrelated to the TOC content of the reservoir, the porosity of the reservoir,or the clay content of the reservoir (Zhu et al., 2021a). It is suspected to be caused by factors such as pore pressure and fractures. The informationprovided by the CNL logging curve is not helpful for improving the ac-curacy of the model. Other curves have played a positive role in theprediction results, especially DEN and RMSF logging. Therefore, wechoose the 5 curves of density log (DEN), gamma ray log (GR), micro-sphere focused resistivity logging (RMSF), RD, and RS to establish theﬁnal model. Combining the results of out-of-bag errors, we can determinethat as the number of decision trees in the random forest increases, theout-of-bag errors basically decrease or remain stable. Results also showthat random forest is very suitable for the task of high-quality reservoiridentiﬁcation and there is no obvious overﬁtting phenomenon. Based on
Fig. 2.The difference between different types of data after data expansion.
Fig. 3.Display of the results of out-of-bag errors under different model-ling conditions.
Table 3The prediction results of different methods in Well A.
Accuracy RFþoversampling RF Bayes þoversampling Bayes KNN þoversampling KNNType 1 100% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0%Type 2 100% 100% 0% 0% 100% 100%Type 3 60% 60% 60% 40% 20% 20%Type 4 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100%Total 78% 66% 56% 44% 44% 44%L. Zhu et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Geosciences 2 (2021) 76 –81
79these results, we chose 300 decision trees for modelling. After modelling,the Well A data were predicted ( Table 3). The corresponding RFþoversampling prediction results are shown in Fig. 4. It can be seen fromTable 3andFig. 4that the model obtained byusing the modelling method proposed in this paper has a prediction ac-curacy of 78% for the core sample of Well A and an error rate of 22%.Moreover, the type of misjudgement mainly appears between Type II andType III, and the accuracy of identifying Type I reservoirs is 100%. Tofacilitate the comparison, we use the original sample set and the over-sampled set as the training data for the KNN algorithm, the supportvector machine, and the random forest algorithm, then predict the core ofWell A with each model. The results of the reservoir types predictedbased on the logging data of the entire interval of Well A are shown inFig. 5.It can be seen fromFig. 5that the prediction results of the whole wellsection of different methods are still very different. Compared with otheralgorithms, KNN may be less suitable for the identi ﬁcation of high- quality marine shale gas reservoirs. The prediction results given willjump throughout the depth section, especially for Type III and Type IVreservoirs. The problem with Bayes' prediction results is that its evalua-tion effect is not good for the best quality reservoir section. From the corereservoir classiﬁcation results of Well A, it can be seen that high-qualityreservoirs are mainly concentrated at the bottom of the entire reservoir,and this depth section is also the place where the reservoir type changesmost frequently. When drilling a horizontal well, the best drilling depth islikely to come from this depth section. Using the prediction results of theBayes algorithm to determine the drilling position of a horizontal well isless likely to be accurately determined. The random forest algorithmcombined with the oversampling method and the random forest algo-rithm without the oversampling method have more reliable prediction
Fig. 4.Confusion matrix of all data prediction results of Well A.
Fig. 5.Reservoir type prediction results of Well A based on logging.L. Zhu et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Geosciences 2 (2021) 76 –81
80results. Of the two prediction results, the random forest algorithm com-bined with the oversampling method is more reliable than the core result.Moreover, it also predicted the existence of Type I reservoirs at3762.49–3763.02 m, showing higher accuracy and having higher guid-ing signiﬁcance for the drilling of horizontal wells. Using the randomforest algorithm with the oversampling method, the potential optimalhorizontal well drilling horizons can be quickly determined as3762.49–3763.02 m, 3764.5–3765.03 m, 3765.3–3765.83 m, and 3766.09–3766.62 m.5. ConclusionAn increasing number of blocks of shale gas reservoirs have passedthe exploration stage and have begun to enter the development stage.This puts forward high requirements for the rapid identi ﬁcation of high- quality marine shale gas reservoirs based on logging. This article con-ducts research on this task and proposes a rapid identi ﬁcation study of high-quality marine shale gas reservoirs based on the oversamplingmethod and random forest algorithm. Through a series of studies in thisarticle, the following conclusions can be drawn:①Since the thickness of high-quality reservoirs is usually smallerthan that of general reservoirs, training sample sets under-represent these critical samples and model predictions tend to bemore accurate for general reservoirs. In this paper, the over-sampling method is used to make the number of training samplesof each type of reservoir equal and 67 core samples wereexpanded to 112 samples. The increase in the number of samplesreduces the bias of model building.②Using the random forest algorithm, nearest neighbour algorithm,and support vector machine algorithm to predict high-qualityreservoirs, we showed that the random forest algorithm ach-ieved the best prediction results. In addition to the predictionaccuracy of the other algorithms being lower than that of therandom forest algorithm, they also have relatively poorer pre-diction effects for the highest quality Type I reservoirs. Therandom forest algorithm can achieve the best prediction results,increasing the prediction accuracy from 44% to 78%.Finally, this research showed that the combination of the over-sampling method and random forest algorithm can quickly identify high-quality marine shale gas reservoirs and thereby provide tangible help forthe development of marine shale gas reservoirs.Declaration of competing interestWe declare that we have noﬁnancial and personal relationships withother people or organizations that can inappropriately in ﬂuence our work, there is no professional or other personal interest of any nature orkind in any product, service and/or company that could be construed asinﬂuencing the position presented in, or the review of, the manuscriptentitled,“Rapid identiﬁcation of high-quality marine shale gas reservoirsbased on oversampling method and random forest algorithm ”.AcknowledgementsThis project was funded by the Laboratory for Marine Geology,Qingdao National Laboratory for Marine Science and Technology,(MGQNLM-KF202004); China Postdoctoral Science Foundation(2021M690161, 2021T140691); Postdoctoral Funded Project in HainanProvince (General Program); Chinese Academy of Sciences- SpecialResearch Assistant Project; the Open Fund of Key Laboratory of Explo-ration Technologies for Oil and Gas Resources (Yangtze University),Ministry of Education (No.K2021–03, K2021-08). The authors would liketo express their sincere thanks to the editor Prof. Hua Wang for hisenthusiasm, patience, and tireless efforts. The authors are very grateful tothe anonymous reviewers for their constructive advice on how toimprove the paper.References
Aldhuhoori, M.A., Belhaj, H., Alkuwaiti, H.K., Ghosh, B., Fernandes, R., Qaddoura, R.,2021. Role of viscous, diffusion and inertial mechanisms in modeling ﬂuidﬂow through unconventional reservoir. J. Petrol. Sci. Eng. 205, 108772 . Amosu, A., Imsalem, M., Sun, Y., 2021. Effective machine learning identi ﬁcation of TOC- rich zones in the Eagle Ford Shale. J. Appl. Geophys. 188, 104311 . Ao, Y., Zhu, L., Guo, S., Yang, Z., 2020. Probabilistic logging lithology characterizationwith random forest probability estimation. Comput. Geosci. 144, 104556 . Feng, R., Grana, D., Balling, N., 2021. Imputation of missing well log data by randomforest and its uncertainty analysis. Comput. Geosci. 152, 104763 . He, J., Ding, W., Jiang, Z., Li, A., Wang, R., Sun, Y., 2016. Logging identi ﬁcation and characteristic analysis of the lacustrine organic-rich shale lithofacies: a case studyfrom the Es
3Lshale in the Jiyang Depression, Bohai Bay Basin, Eastern China. J. Petrol.Sci. Eng. 145, 238–255.Hou, L., Yu, Z., Luo, X., Lin, S., Zhao, Z., Yang, Z., Wu, S., Cui, J., Zhang, L., 2021. Keygeological factors controlling the estimated ultimate recovery of shale oil and gas: acase study of the Eagle Ford shale, Gulf Coast Basin, USA. Petrol. Explor. Dev. 48 (3),762–774.Huang, S., Wu, Y., Meng, X., Liu, L., Ji, W., 2018. Recent advances on microscopic porecharacteristics of low permeability sandstone reservoirs. Adv. Geo-Energy Res. 2 (2),122–134.Li, J., Wang, M., Lu, S., Chen, G., Tian, W., Jiang, C., Li, Z., 2020. A new method forpredicting sweet spots of shale oil using conventional well logs. Mar. Petrol. Geol.113, 104097.Liu, Z., Sun, Z., 2015. New brittleness indexes and their application in shale/clay gasreservoir prediction. Petrol. Explor. Dev. 42 (1), 129 –137. Ma, X., Wang, H., Zhou, S., Feng, Z., Liu, H., Guo, W., 2020. Insights into NMR responsecharacteristics of shales and its application in shale gas reservoir evaluation. J. Nat.Gas Sci. Eng. 84, 103674. Otchere, D.A., Ganat, T.O.A., Gholami, R., Lawal, M., 2021. A novel custom ensemblelearning model for an improved reservoir permeability and water saturationprediction, 91, p. 103962. Pang, X., Shao, X., Li, M., Hu, T., Chen, Z., Zhang, K., Jiang, F., Chen, J., Chen, D.,Peng, J., Pang, B., Wang, W., 2021. Correlation and difference between conventionaland unconventional reservoirs and their uni ﬁed genetic classiﬁcation. Gondwana Res. 97, 73–100.Sheng, G., Su, Y., Zhao, H., Liu, J., 2020. A uni ﬁed apparent porosity/permeability model of organic porous media: coupling complex pore structure and multi-migrationmechanism. Adv. Geo-Energy Res. 4 (2), 115 –125. Soltanzadeh, P., Hashemzadeh, M., 2021. RCSMOTE: range-Controlled synthetic minorityover-sampling technique for handling the class imbalance problem. Inf. Sci. 542,92–111.Tahmasebi, P., Javadpour, F., Sahimi, M., 2017. Data mining and machine learning foridentifying sweet spots in shale reservoirs. Expert Syst. Appl. 88, 435 –447. Tao, X., Li, Q., Guo, W., Ren, C., He, Q., Liu, R., Zou, J., 2020. Adaptive weighted over-sampling for imbalanced datasets based on density peaks clustering with heuristicﬁltering. Inf. Sci. 519, 43–73. Tewari, S., Dwivedi, U.D., 2019. Ensemble-based big data analytics of lithofacies forautomatic development of petroleum reservoirs. Comput. Ind. Eng. 128, 937 –947. Vikara, D., Remson, D., Khanna, V., 2020. Machine learning-informed ensembleframework for evaluating shale gas production potential: case study in the MarcellusShale. J. Nat. Gas Sci. Eng. 84, 103679 . Wang, R., Ding, W., Wang, X., Cui, Z., Wang, X., Chen, E., Sun, Y., Xiao, Z., 2016. Loggingidentiﬁcation for the lower Cambrian Niutitang shale reservoir in the Upper Yangtzeregion, China: a case study of the Cengong block, Guizhou Province. J. Nat. GasGeosci. 1 (3), 231–241.Wilson, M.J., Wilson, L., Shaldybin, M.V., 2016. Clay mineralogy and unconventionalhydrocarbon shale reservoirs in the USA. II. Implications of predominantly illiticclays on the physico-chemical properties of shales. Earth Sci. Rev. 158, 1 –8. Yan, W., Wang, J., Liu, S., Wang, K., Zhou, Y., 2014. Logging identi ﬁcation of the Longmaxi mud shale reservoir in the Jiaoshiba area, Sichuan Basin. Nat. Gas. Ind. B1, 230–236
.Zhu, L., Ma, Y., Cai, J., Zhang, C., Wu, S., Zhou, X., 2021a. Key factors of marine shaleconductivity in southern China—Part II: the inﬂuence of pore system and the development direction of shale gas saturation models. J. Petrol. Sci. Eng. 109516 . Zhu, L., Ma, Y., Zhang, C., Wu, S., Zhou, X., 2021b. New parameters for charactering thegas-bearing properties of shale gas. J. Petrol. Sci. Eng. 201, 108290 . Zhu, L., Ma, Y., Cai, J., Zhang, C., Wu, S., Zhou, X., 2021c. Key factors of marine shaleconductivity in southern China—Part I: the inﬂuence factors other than porosity. J. Petrol. Sci. Eng. 205, 108698 . Zhu, L., Zhang, C., Zhang, Z., Zhou, X., Liu, W., 2019. An improved method for evaluatingthe TOC content of a shale formation using the dual-difference ΔlogR method. Mar. Petrol. Geol. 102, 800–816.L. Zhu et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Geosciences 2 (2021) 76 –81
81