Artiﬁcial  Intelligence  in the Life Sciences  1 (2021) 100002 
Contents  lists available  at ScienceDirect  
Artiﬁcial  Intelligence  in the Life Sciences  
journal  homepage:  www.elsevier.com/locate/ailsci  
Editorial  
Reproducibility,  reusability,  and community  eﬀorts  in artiﬁcial  intelligence  
research  
Artiﬁcial  Intelligence  in the Life Sciences  ( AILSCI ) supports  open sci- 
ence, data sharing,  and good practices  to ensure reproducibility  of scien- 
tiﬁc investigations.  Thus, for publication  of original  research  in AILSCI , 
primary  data that are not in the public domain  must be made available  
as well as custom  code that is essential  for the main results of a study. 
However,  proprietary  data constraints  in the industry  are also appre- 
ciated and should not preclude  publication  of interesting  science  from 
commercial  environments.  Therefore,  AILSCI oﬀers a variety of article 
categories.  
Currently,  we consider  the following  types of manuscripts  (for fur- 
ther details,  see the Guide for Authors  ): 
1 Research  Articles communicate  original  research  yielding  novel ﬁnd- 
ings. Reports  of novel computational  methods  with life science  im- 
pact as well as studies combining  AI and experimental  work are 
highly encouraged.  
2 Communications  report preliminary  research  that is novel and scien- 
tiﬁcally  sound and may give rise to a larger-scale  investigation.  
3 Reviews  comprehensively  cover an area of AI with high relevance  
for the life sciences  or AI applications  in a particular  life science  
discipline  or interdisciplinary  research.  
4 Perspectives  have the character  of mini reviews  of a given topic or 
area of research  with an explicit  personal  outlook.  
5 Conceptual  Analysis  articles  cover AI concepts  for the life sciences  or 
re-evaluate  existing  theories  from a life science  viewpoint.  
6 Methods  & Protocols  concisely  introduce  a method,  workﬂow,  soft- 
ware, or study protocol  that is readily applicable  and fully repro- 
ducible,  including  open source software.  Presenting  exemplary  ap- 
plications  is encouraged.  
7 Controversial  Views discuss research  results or scientiﬁc  issues that 
may be controversially  rated such as current  methodological  lim- 
itations,  frequently  overlooked  problems,  or provocative  concepts  
charting  new territory,  even if preliminary.  Such contributions  might 
also be solicited  by the editors to present  opposing  viewpoints  of dif- 
ferent investigators  side-by-side.  
8 Opinions  are commentaries  or reﬂections  on a particular  topic, ﬁnd- 
ing, or trend in the ﬁeld, with emphasis  on personal  views and/or 
recommendations.  
Articles  such as Perspectives,  Conceptual  Analysis,  Methods  & Protocols,  
Controversial  Views , or Opinions  provide  a variety of formats  for commu-  
nicating  new scientiﬁc  approaches,  case studies,  and personal  views or experiences,  without  the need for data disclosure.  Hence, these types 
of manuscripts  can be readily considered  for presenting  new scientiﬁc  
developments  in the industry  in diﬀerent  ways. 
Naturally,  there might occasionally  be borderline  situations  requir- 
ing decisions  on a case-by-case  basis. For example,  in a Methods  paper, a 
new algorithm  developed  in the industry  might be presented  as pseudo-  
code, without  providing  the software,  if the description  is suﬃciently  
detailed  to enable re-implementation  by others. However,  if a software  
vendor would aim to benchmark  proprietary  software  against  publicly  
available  programs  and claim superior  performance,  the study would 
not be publishable  in AILSCI , regardless  of the manuscript  type, unless 
the software  is made available  to the public. 
In the following,  we specify further opportunities  for diﬀerent  types 
of contributions  that fall within the scope of AILSCI . 
Reusability  and adaptability  of algorithms  and code 
The use or extension  of published  methods  and source code for dif- 
ferent applications  is important  for the further development  of the ﬁeld 
and also supports  our quest for reproducibility.  
Inspired  by the recent introduction  of Reusability  Reports in Nature 
Machine  Intelligence  [1 , 2] , publication  of such studies as Methods  & Pro- 
tocols contributions  in AILSCI is strongly  encouraged.  It is essential  that 
calculations  and workﬂows  reported  in these papers are fully repro- 
ducible.  Hence, they should be provided  as open source scripts, Jupyter  
notebooks,  or in another  suitable  format.  
Furthermore,  we note that computer  science  and the life sciences  
have diﬀerent  publication  cultures.  In computer  science,  new algorithms  
and methods  are preferentially  published  in conference  proceedings  that 
are typically  not considered  in the life sciences.  If AI approaches  origi- 
nally reported  in conference  proceedings  have potential  for life science  
applications  AILSCI invites re-publication  of such contributions  in mod- 
iﬁed form as Conceptual  Analysis  or Methods  & Protocols  papers.  In such 
cases, the life science  relevance  of the reported  algorithm  or method  
should be brieﬂy discussed  in the manuscript  and additional  explana-  
tions and/or a summary  should be provided  that render the work acces- 
sible to an interdisciplinary  life science-oriented  audience.  
We also note that Methods  & Protocols  manuscripts  cover studies pub- 
lished as Application  Notes, Software  , or equivalent  reports published  by 
other journals.  
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ailsci.2021.100002  
Received  15 March 2021; Accepted  16 March 2021 
Available  online 24 March 2021 
2667-3185/©2021  The Authors.  Published  by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND  license 
( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/  ) Editorial Artiﬁcial Intelligence in the Life Sciences 1 (2021) 100002 
Educational  and community  eﬀorts 
AILSCI also oﬀers the opportunity  to publish  thematic  Article Collec- 
tions resulting  from community  initiatives  such as method  evaluations  
or blind test predictions.  Article Collections  may involve  all of AILSCI’s  
manuscript  categories  and are introduced  by invited Editorials  . This op- 
portunity  is also available  to scientiﬁc  organizations  or societies  for pub- 
lishing papers originating  from conferences  or organization-speciﬁc  ini- 
tiatives.  
For an evolving  scientiﬁc  community  engaging  in interdisciplinary  
AI research,  paying attention  to educational  eﬀorts, at diﬀerent  levels, is 
also highly relevant.  For example,  a new teaching  concept  integrating  AI 
and life science  components  may be presented  as a Conceptual  Analysis.  
Moreover,  educational  viewpoints  might also aim to provide  guidance  
for addressing  critical issues in a fast-moving  scientiﬁc  ﬁeld such as, for 
example,  the gap between  hype and reality in AI applications,  for which 
Controversial  Views provide  an excellent  discussion  forum. 
Open access and preprint  servers  
In the spirit of promoting  open science,  AILSCI articles  are published  
either under the Creative  Commons  Attribution  (CC BY) license or under 
the Creative  Commons  Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs  (CC-BY-NC-  
ND) license.  This will ensure that all articles  are immediately  and per- 
manently  free for everyone  to read, download,  copy, and distribute.  For 
further details,  see the Open Access information  on the Journal  website.  
We additionally  recognize  the value of preprint  servers such as arXiv, 
bioRxiv,  and ChemRxiv  for rapid dissemination  of research  results in 
parallel  with peer review.  For all manuscript  categories,  authors  can 
share their preprints  anywhere  at any time. For further details,  see shar- 
ing policies  of the Journal.  
We look forward  to receiving  many interesting  and thematically  
diverse  contributions  that will help to further support  the development  
of AI-driven  interdisciplinary  science  in various  ways! 
Declaration  of Competing  Interest  
The authors  declare  that they have no known competing  ﬁnancial  interests  or personal  relationships  that could have appeared  to inﬂuence  
the work reported  in this paper. 
Jürgen Bajorath  ∗ 
Department  of Life Science Informatics  and Data Science,  B-IT, Rheinische  
Friedrich-Wilhelms-Universität,  Friedrich-Hirzebruch-Allee  6, D-53115  
Bonn, Germany  
Connor  W. Coley 
Department  of Chemical  Engineering,  Massachusetts  Institute  of 
Technology,  77 Massachusetts  Avenue,  Cambridge,  MA 02139, United 
States 
Melissa  R. Landon  
Cyclica,  207 Queens Quay West, Suite 420, Toronto,  Ontario,  M5J 1A7, 
Canada  
W. Patrick Walters  
Relay Therapeutics,  399 Binney Street, 2nd Floor, Cambridge,  MA 02139, 
United States 
Mingyue  Zheng 
State Key Laboratory  of Drug Research,  Shanghai  Institute  of Materia  
Medica,  Chinese  Academy  of Sciences,  555 Rd., Zuchongzhi,  Shanghai,  
China 
∗ Correspondence  author.  
E-mail address:  bajorath@bit.uni-bonn.de  (J. Bajorath)  
References  
[1] Research, reuse, repeat (editorial). Nat Mach Intell 2020;2:729 . [2] Mohapatra S , Yang T , Gómez-Bombarelli R . Reusability report: designing organic pho- toelectronic molecules with descriptor conditional recurrent neural networks. Nat Mach Intell 2020;2:749–52 . 
2 