 AASRI Procedia   3  ( 2012 )  732 – 738 
2212-6716 © 2012 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. Selection and/or peer review under responsibility of American Applied Science Research Institutedoi: 10.1016/j.aasri.2012.11.116 
 
 2012 AASRI Conference on Modelling, Identification and Control 
Study on precision agriculture knowledge presentation with ontology 
Gelian Song a,*, Maohua Wang a, Xiao Ying a, Rui Yang a, Binyun Zhang a 
a Public information industry of Zhejiang province Co., LTD   
Abstract 
Agriculture is a complex system science and the knowledge of it is consisting of much concepts and relationships. In order to find out the important domain knowledge from complex agriculture knowledge system, we need to concept modelling effectively, so as to better supporting distributed information retrieval, analogy inference and data mining based on knowledge system. As a kind of classical knowledge theory of the ontology, it can be used to solve the knowledge presentation problem. 
 © 2012. Published by Elsevier B.V. Selection and/or peer review under responsibility of American Applied Science Research Institute  
Keyword:Precision Agriculture, Ontology, knowledge presentation  
1. BACKGROUND  Precision agriculture is a kind of modern agriculture concept and it was an emerging interdisciplinary  science in the early stage. It means that through the vari able scale difference between field management way, it can determine the economic, reasonable investment, efficient use of agricultural resources, so as to achieve economic, environment and other aspects of the highest returns a management strategy and technology system 
 
 
* Corresponding author. Tel.:0086-13735529866. E-mail address: fsj_1987@126.com. 
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
© 2012 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. Selection and/or peer review under responsibility of American Applied Science Research Institute Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.733  Gelian Song et al.  /  AASRI Procedia   3  ( 2012 )  732 – 738 
 it is through the variable scale difference between field management way, to determine the economic, reasonable investment, efficient use of agricultural resources, so as to achieve economic, environment and other best aspects return a management tactics and a system for technology [1-2].With the development of internet and computer information technology, the reasons  for the weakness of the industry changing turn to the degree of difference the highly fragmented agriculture, spatial and temporal variation of large-scale quantitative and, small scale production, low level of stability and controllability. The combination of internet and computer information technology is changing the weakness of the industry due to the highly fragmented agriculture, small scale production, spatial and temporal variation of large-scale quantitative and the degree of difference, low level of stability and controllability. There have been many researches on agricultural ontol ogy field at domestic and overseas.The organization FAO started an agricultural ontology service plan in the year 2001[3], and the original ontology consisted of three parts that the safety food, the fishery and nu trition. A bio-security ontology model was proposed by Lauser [5], and at the first, the core ontology was construc ted, then according to the heuristic method, the core ontology was extended. A research of Kokla and Kavour as is about geographic information ontology, which emphasized on heterogeneous geographic data heterogeneity’s building in the aspects of classification and integration [4] made research. The first Ministry of Ag riculture Ontology research monographs, Study and Application of Agricultural Ontology [6], introduced the researches and applications of agricultural ontology from three points: system of basic theory, technical methods and practical application respectively. National Academy of Agricultural Information Institute has done some prospective studies on Agricultural Ontology, and published many papers. In this paper, we firstly review the related theory, and then propose the knowledge representation of agriculture method in the foundation of ontology, which including several steps. At last, we make an application on Tomato; it shows that in the foundation of ontology, knowledge representation of agriculture is a useful way to represent the knowledge of agriculture.  2. R
ELATED THEORY -- ONTOLOGY  Ontology is a concept of philosophy in the first time, and then with the development of computer, ontology has been widely applied to the semantic web, in telligent information processing, information integration, etc. Gruber [7] thought ontology is equal with the sharing concept. Sharing concepts include domain knowledge modeling to the conceptual framework, the related agreements of interoperability need the interaction between the subjects and contents, and the theory is used to represent specific areas of common agreement. Studer [8] and other scholars thought that the ontology has four characteristics: explicit, formal, shared, and conceptualization. Define agricultural ontology as "the science of agricu ltural have a set of identity, the concept of system clear and formal specification". Agricultural ontology mainly  by the agricultural knowledge of the concept, the relationship between the concept and the computer  can identify the formalization description language composition. Building agricultural ontology goal is to form for agricult ural information organization structure of the common understanding, understanding and analysis  of the agricultural domain knowledge, in order to further the establishment agriculture semantic network laid the foundation. Therefore, agricultural ontology is about computer language of agriculture concept of knowledge representation, carrying on the agricultural knowledge organization, developing agriculture knowledge service of scientific methodology. Define the agricultural Ontology as follows [9]: Agri_Onto= (Onto_Info, Agri_Concept, Agri_ConRelation, Axiom) 734   Gelian Song et al.  /  AASRI Procedia   3  ( 2012 )  732 – 738 
 the ontology name, design time, creator and othe r information as the ontology’s basic information description are all involved in Onto_Info; Agri_C oncept is a set of agricultural knowledge concept; Agri_ConRelation, the ontology concepts’ relationship set, involves hierarchical and non-hierarchical relationship; A collection of existing ontology is contained by Axiom.  3. K
NOWLEDGE REPRESENTATION OF AGRICULTURE BASED ON ONTOLOGY  3.1. Knowledge representation  1. Concept presentation of AO: modeling the agricultural system based on the ontology In order to model the agricultural system based on the ontology, we need to classify the agricultural knowledge according to certain criteria. In this paper we divide the agricultural knowledge into three parts: the subject of labor, the means of labor and the agricultural production process, as shown in figure 1.Among them, the subject of labor is the center of the agricultur al ontology system, it’s a kind of static knowledge and entrenched generally. The means of labor, it means that the material and the material conditions which can influence the subject of labor in the agricultural production process. The agricultural production process can be regarded as production cycle combination of the subject of labor in different stages. 
 
Figure 1 agricultural knowledge system 
With labor object for system center connected other agricultural knowledge thro ugh the relationship. In other words, starting from the labor object, we can fi nd out the relevant knowledge, such as corresponding policy, regulations and well-known experts. 2. Attribute presentation of AO Attribute of AO is used to describe the concept of agriculture ontology; it has a function of limiting concept and examples. Attribute of AO can be summarized from different knowledge as follows: first of all, the crop belong to plant, it inherits related properties of plant, such  as genetic property class, shape and structure property class, distribution property class and so on; besides, the crop have their ow n property class, for example, the growth environment property class including weather and other growing conditions. Each properties class including several properties, so they can fo rm a full property description of the crop in a sense. In order to manage ontology expediently and reflect the hierarchy relationship among the properties, we describe the property and relationship as an ontology system and called it the crop property ontology. The 735  Gelian Song et al.  /  AASRI Procedia   3  ( 2012 )  732 – 738 
 structure of the crop property ontology can be shown in the following figure 2.Except considering the definition of properties from domain ontology, we must  consider the relationship among properties from the total ontology base at the time of implement a property class, so that the property can be reused, classified, integrated and combined. 
 
Figure 2. Crop attribute classes 
3. Relationships and functions of agriculture ontology The relationships among ontology express the releva nce among the concept; it can be describe as the hierarchical structure such as typical binary relations. Generally, we use 
nC C C2 1 : R  to express the relationship among classes
nC C C2 1. The functions are special relationships; we use 
n 12 1C: FnC C C  to express the function, in which the nth element is the only map to the former n- 1th elements. The mapping relation whom the function de fines can make reasoning from a concept point to another concept. The agriculture ontology has following relationships: part_of: it can express the relation between parts and whole; kind_of: it can describe the inheritance relationship among the concepts, it is similar to the relation among super class and subclasses whom defined by object-oriented; instance_of: it can express the relation between instance of concept and the concept; attribute_of: it can describe a concept is a property of another concept; is_a: it can be used to express the relation of a instance to the concept, it can combines the class and the instance, so as to form a tree hierarchy structure; cause_by: it can express the cause relationships among concepts. There are following functions in agriculture ontology: 
Table 1 function in agriculture ontology 736   Gelian Song et al.  /  AASRI Procedia   3  ( 2012 )  732 – 738 
              4. Axioms of the agriculture ontology After building the agriculture ontology and the agriculture knowledge-base, there is a very important work we need to do, that is checking and reasoning on the knowledge. But it will be fantastic based on the existing ontology. So we should construct a consistency of axiom base.  The axiom of the agriculture ontology is tautologies in logic which do not need to be proved. There are many axioms in the agriculture ontology; some of them can be composite a set to explain the specific class, relationship, connection and restriction among attributes in the agriculture science. Some of the axioms will be used to check and reason on the ontology knowledge. We list following axioms in table 2. 
Table 2 Axioms of the agriculture ontology  
               5. Application If the knowledge representation for agricultural production wants to achieve the service of the integration knowledge level, with no ambiguous existing and same  information in the same field and the diffidence application system, the help of ontology is necessary. The organization Agriculture Ontology (AO) manages the system resources and makes foundation for inform ation exchanging. [10] As the knowledge resources of agricultural classification and description of the concep tual system, AO is defined as the five elements of ontology approach{c, a
c, r, ar, h}, and  c stands for a set of concept; ac stands for a set of each attributes of concept; r stands for relationship set; a
r stands for a set of each attributes of relationship; h stands for Concept hierarchy. Take tomato pest control ontology for example:                    Tomato_AO={c
t, ac,rt, ar,ht} c
t ={thing, biology, chemistry, plants, insects, Solanaceae plants, pests, pesticides, gall mite tomato, Function Meaning 
Reciprocal(A) work out the reciprocal of A 
Cardinal(A) work out the number of elements the set A contains 
Equals(A,B) the value of A and B are the same Belongs(x,A) The element x belongs to the set A Greater/lesser(A,B) The value A isgreater/lesser than B Earier/later(A,B) Time A is earier/laterthan the time B 
Synonymy(A,B) A and B have the same meaning Completely_contains(A,B) set A  completely contains the set B 
Axiom 1 All crops X, existing pest Y, Belongs(Y, insect_pests(X))
 Belongs(X, insect_pests(X)) 
Axiom 2 All crops X, all character strings Y, existing  character string Z,  Belongs(Y, yieldly(X))Belongs(Z, cultivation_technique(X))
 Belongs(Y,adapt_place(Z)) Axiom 3 All crop X, all character strings Y, existing  character string Z, Belongs (Y, insect_pests(X))
 Belongs(Z, control_method(Y) Axiom  4 All crops X, all character strings Y, existing  character string Z, Belongs(Y, insect_pests(X))
 Belongs(Z, control_method(Y)) Axiom 5 All pests X,  Equals(years(X), Reciprocal(Generation_long(X))) Axiom 6 All crops F,O,C, List_belongs(F,O)
klass_belongs(F,C)  klass_belongs(O,C) Axiom 7 All crops X, Synonymy(X, scientific name(X)) 737  Gelian Song et al.  /  AASRI Procedia   3  ( 2012 )  732 – 738 
 yellow tea mite, tomato, eggplant no net aphids, mites special cream} r
t ={kill(pesticides, pests), damage (pest, tomato)} h
t ={( Tomato, Solanaceae), (Solanaceae plants, plant), (yellow tea mite, insect), (tomato gall mites, pests), (EC special mites, pesticides), (organic phosphorus insecticides, pesticides)} When describe the relationship of properties and c oncepts belonging to the tomato pest ontology concepts, use RDF / RDFS constructor and get the basic contents of the resource model. 4. 
  CONCLUSIONS  This paper puts forward a kind of agriculture  domain knowledge ontology representation method. Agricultural ontology is a include agriculture terms,  definitions and regulate the relationship between terms system, is the agricultural field concept, the conc ept and the concept of the relationship between formal representation of each other. Through the crop plantin g information that expression and integration unity, transform the natural language description or unstructured information into formal, structured knowledge records. And use that knowledge to support agricultur al problem solving and decision support effectively. United ontology evaluation standards’ building and extracting the universal ontology knowledge are significant. By studying methods with the adjusting ability, it can increase It is can increased the adaptive learning efficiency. Acknowledgment This research is supported by Major Technology Plan Project of Hangzhou(Grand No. 20112311A09). References [1] Piao Xianshu, Ma Chenglin. Precision Agriculture ——A New Management Technique of  Agricultural Production [J]. Transactions of the Chinese Society of Agricultural Machinery, 1999, 30(5):112-118. [2] Wang maohua. Development of Precision Agriculture  and Innovation of Engineering Technologies [J].Transactions of the Chinese Society of Agricultural Engineering, 1999,15(1):1-8. [3] Sini M, Salokhe G,Pardy C,etal. Ontology-based Navigation of Bibliographic Metadata: Example from the Food, Nutrition and Agriculture[J].In Proceedings of the International Conference on the Semantic Web and Digital Libraries,Rome,Italy,2007.64-76 [4] Kokla M, Kavouras M.Semantic Information in Geo-Ontologies: Extraction, Comparison, and Reconciliation[M].Journal on Data Semantics III,Heidelberg: Springer Press,2005.125-142 [5] Lauser B, Keizer J.A Comprehensive Framework for Building Multilingual Domain Ontologies: Creating Prototype Biosecurity Ontology. In Proceedings of  the International Conference on Dublin core and Metadata Applications:Metadata for E-communities: Supporting Diversity and Convergence,Germany,Dublin,2002.31-41 [6] Qian Ping, Zheng Yelu, Study and Application of Agricultural Ontology [M].Beijing:  China Agricultural Science and Technology Publishing House, 2006 [7] Xia Qingming. Strategy and counter measures of Agricultural Information Application in Poor Area [J].Rural Economy,2005.(7):91-93 [8] Dai Qiwei .Modern Rural Distance Education and Farmer  Training[J].Journal of Library and Information Sciences in Agriculture,2008,20(1):8-10 [9] Xie Nengfu, Wang Wensheng. Ontology and acquiring of agriculture knowledge [J].Agriculture Network Information,2007(8):13-14. 738   Gelian Song et al.  /  AASRI Procedia   3  ( 2012 )  732 – 738 
 [10] Zhang Weiming. Model and Application of Semantic Information [M].Beijing. Electronic Industry Press, 2002:77-79. 