The beneﬁts and dangers of using artiﬁcial intelligence in petrophysics
Steve Cuddy
Petrophysicist, Petro-Innovations, Aberdeen, Scotland, United Kingdom
ARTICLE INFO
Keywords:Artiﬁcial intelligenceFuzzy logicPetrophysicsABSTRACT
Artiﬁcial Intelligence, or AI, is a method of data analysis that learns from data, identify patterns and makespredictions with the minimal human intervention. AI is bringing many bene ﬁts to petrophysical evaluation. Using case studies, this paper describes several successful applications. The future of AI has even more potential.However, if used carelessly there are potentially grave consequences.A complex Middle East Carbonateﬁeld needed a bespoke shaly water saturation equation. AI was used to ‘evolve’an ideal equation, together withﬁeld speciﬁc saturation and cementation exponents. One UKCS gas ﬁeld had an‘oil problem’. Here, AI was used to unlock the hidden ﬂuid information in the NMR T1 and T2 spectra and successfully differentiate oil and gas zones in real time. A North Sea ﬁeld with 30 wells had shear velocity data (Vs) in only 4 wells. Vs was required for reservoir modelling and well bore stability prediction. AI was used topredict Vs in all 30 wells. Incorporating high vertical resolution data, the Vs predictions were even better than therecorded logs.As it is not economic to take core data on every well, AI is used to discover the relationships between logs, core,litho-facies and permeability in multi-dimensional data space. As a consequence, all wells in a ﬁeld were popu- lated with these data to build a robust reservoir model. In addition, the AI predicted data upscaled correctly unlikemany conventional techniques. AI gives impressive results when automatically log quality controlling (LQC) andrepairing electrical logs for bad hole and sections of missing data.AI doesn’t require prior knowledge of the petrophysical response equations and is self-calibrating. There are noparameters to pick or cross-plots to make. There is very little user intervention and AI avoids the problem of‘garbage in, garbage out’(GIGO), by ignoring noise and outliers. AI programs work with an unlimited number ofelectrical logs, core and gas chromatography data; and don ’t‘fall-over’if some of those inputs are missing. AI programs currently being developed include ones where their machine code evolves using similar rules usedby life’s DNA code. These AI programs pose considerable dangers far beyond the oil industry as described in thispaper. A‘risk assessment’is essential on all AI programs so that all hazards and risk factors, that could cause harm,are identiﬁed and mitigated.
IntroductionAlan Turingﬁrst considered the question, ‘Can machines think?’in his seminal paper, Computing Machinery and Intelligence, published in1950. AI is about getting computers to imitate human intelligence.AI is intelligence demonstrated by machines, in contrast to the naturalintelligence displayed by humans. If when leaving home, you notice thatit is raining, you may decide to take an umbrella. That is natural intel-ligence. If your smart phone ‘knows’you are leaving and that it is raining,it may suggest that you take an umbrella. This is a simple illustration ofartiﬁcial intelligence.The development of AI started at a workshop at Dartmouth College in1956, where the term ‘Artiﬁcial Intelligence’was coined (Crevier 1993).Articles and papers have been since published concerning the nature ofAI; byMinsky (1961),Newell (1963),Winston (1976),Davis et al. (2002) and many others. In the last decade, the petrophysics community hasbegun to make robust efforts to apply data-driven techniques to thechallenges of petrophysical evaluation, including the application of AI.These come under the heading of machine learning techniques and ap-plications include carbonate characterisation ( Bigoni 2019), log depth matching (Le 2019), enhanced formation evaluation (Posenato-Garcia 2020) and resistivity inversion (Li 2019).I discuss three generations of AI and how these have been applied inpetrophysics and elsewhere.
E-mail address:steve.cuddy@btinternet.com.
Contents lists available atScienceDirect
Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Geosciences
journal homepage:www.keaipublishing.com/en/journals/artiﬁcial-intelligence-in-geosciences
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aiig.2021.04.001Received 8 February 2021; Received in revised form 31 March 2021; Accepted 26 April 2021Available online 2 May 20212666-5441/©2021 The Authors. Publishing Services by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of KeAi Communications Co. Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND
license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ ).Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Geosciences 2 (2021) 1 –10AI requirementsAI systems only require two things –The Data and a ‘Fitness Func- tion’. In addition, AI software should run with the minimal of humanintervention. There are no parameters to pick or cross-plots to make.DataAll AI generations have access to n-dimensional data, where n is thenumber of logs or types of data, usually recorded against depth or time.These could include:Electrical logs - GR, Rhob, caliper, drho etc.Core data - porosity, core Sw, SCAL etc.Depth - measured and TVDss.Gas - chromatography dataDrilling data - ROP, Dexp etc.NMR - T1&T2 spectral distributionsFitness FunctionThis is the goal or criteria that the AI attempts to solve. It is called theFitness Function because of its analogy to ‘Survival of the Fittest’,a phrase that originated from Darwinian evolutionary theory as a way ofdescribing the mechanism of natural selection in his book ‘On the Origin of Species’(Darwin 1859). If the AI makes progress to attaining its goal,the Fitness Function ensures the algorithm survives and propagates. If itfails to make progress the algorithm is ignored and becomes extinct.SoftwareThe software used in the case studies discussed in this paper includeCþþ, MATLAB®, FORTRAN and Geolog®loglan code. The mathematical techniques used by the AI include neural networks,genetic algorithms and fuzzy logic, as described in this paper and byCuddy (2013)andBrown (2000).First generation AIThese are‘Expert’or‘Rule based’systems consisting of computer algorithms. An algorithm being a set of unambiguous instructions, rep-resented mainly as ‘if–then’rules, that a computer can execute. These AIalgorithms were developed by consulting experts in the relevant ﬁeld. For instance, theﬁrst computers that could play chess involvedattempting to write algorithms that replicated the logic used by the chessGrand Masters. Alan Turing was theﬁrst to publish a program that was capable of playing a full game of chess and in 1951 his colleague, DietrichPrinz, wrote theﬁrst actual automated chess playing program. The ﬁrst major application of heuristic programming and the application of expertsystems to solve real world problems was the DENDRAL Project ( Lindsay 1993).In petrophysics, Expert Systems enables the log analyst to performcomplex analyses which, in the past, could only be done with the assis-tance of a human expert. An example of a ‘Rule’determined by an
‘Expert’is:IF GR>90 GAPI ANDφ<3 P.U. THEN Matrix¼Shale In 1997, IBM’s supercomputer called Deep Blue, beat chess Grand-master Garry Kasparov, using a search method called “alpha-beta prun- ing”(Knuth 1975;Hsu 1995). At the time this win was seen as a sign thatAI was catching up to human intelligence, by defeating one of humanity ’s great intellectual champions. However, many commentators playeddown the AI signiﬁcance by saying Kasparov was merely defeated bybrute force. They said it was like comparing a farmer with a tractor. Thetractor may be more powerful but lacks the ‘insight and creativeﬂare’of the farmer.Second generation AISecond generation AI, often called Machine Learning, involves givingthe program access to the data. Rather than the AI being given rulesdeveloped by an expert the AI is expected to discover these rules itself. Itdoes this by using an iterative loop shown in Fig. 1. The computer randomly changes the variables in code and checks if itsolves the problem better, as deﬁned by the‘Fitness Function’. Most of these changes will fail and will be ignored, but as the computer is capableof making thousands of iterations per second it will, by chance, pro-gressively improve itself and ‘evolve’the best answer.In this paper,ﬁve case studies, are discussed, where second-generation AI has solved petrophysical problems:- Evolution of shaly water saturation equations- NMR T1&T2 spectra analysis- Prediction of shear velocities- Litho-facies and permeability prediction- The log quality control and repair of electrical logsContinuing with the chess comparison, in 2017 an AI program calledAlphaZero (Zhang 2020), using neural networks and set of rules whichsearch for hyperparameters, learned chess by playing itself (Silver,2017). Within 24 h of training, this program achieved a superhumanlevel of play, convincingly beating allﬁrst-generation AI chess programs. Cheating by humans, in chess tournaments, can be a serious problem ifplayers have concealed access to a chess computer. However, as chesscompanions demonstrate their skill by having an excellent memory of avast number of past games, one-way to detect cheating is to look for‘insight and creativeﬂare’.Case study 1. shaly water saturation equationWater saturation is used with porosity to determine the hydrocarbonsinitially in place in a reservoir and to select the best production scenario.The derivation of water saturations from resistivity logs involves inac-curacies due to the difﬁculty of measuring formation resistivity and theerrors inherent in shaly water saturation equations that invert resistivityto water saturation.We use second-generation AI to evolve a shaly water saturationequation for speciﬁcﬁelds by calibrating to core water saturation mea-surements. This method derives the form of the shaly water saturationequation and gives an independent estimate of SCAL parametersincluding the cementation exponent ‘m’and the saturation exponent ‘n’. In the presence of conductive shales, the resistivity measurement will bedepressed. Shaly sand equations, such the Indonesia equation, include acomponent related to shaliness to allow for this. The AI used core forcalibration of the Fitness Function and the core water saturations ( Sw) came from high quality Dean and Stark measurements. The virgin coresamples were taken from the centre of the core. The drilling mud wasdoped to correct for any contamination.The Fitness Function is deﬁned as‘determine a functionf(φ, Sw, Vsh) which reconstructs Rt givenφ,Sw,Vshand at each depth’. The next step
Fig. 1.Second generation AI, machine learning.S. Cuddy Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Geosciences 2 (2021) 1 –10
2is to provide a method for determining the accuracy of a given f(φ,Sw, Vsh) as a predictor ofRt. The approach we adopted was to sum absolute errorsin prediction over all depth levels for a given borehole. Mathe-matically, the problem can be stated as:Minimise
f:X
i/C12/C12/C12/C12/C181Rt
i/C19/C0fðϕ
i;Sw i;Vsh iÞ/C12/C12/C12/C12(1)Eq.(1)minimizes this sum. The standard way to do this might be touse least squares rather than absolute values of residuals. As explainedlater in this paper, we have taken this approach because the boreholedata is often noisy and includes many ‘outliers’. These can only be removed by extensive manual editing of the data and rechecking ofmeasurements. By using the absolute value of residuals, one diminishesthe effect of noise and outliers, and produces more appropriate predictorfunctions.The AI was constructed as follows. An initial population of individualsis picked randomly in the solution space. Each individual has randomlychosen constantsm, n, bandc. Theﬁtness criterion of each of these in- dividuals is determined by Eq.(1). The best existing algorithm for minimizing Eq.(1)starts with a randomly generated fand uses local search by mutating the coefﬁcients one at a time. The mutation range isinitially set very high to ensure a complete search of the solution space.After several generations, a pool of individuals is selected, by linearranking, for mutating and cloning. Mating is achieved by coef ﬁcient merging. Some of the best individuals are cloned to add more individuals,where solutions are most promising. After several generations, the per-centage change in mutated coefﬁcients is gradually reduced. The algo-rithm stops when the percentage improvement in evaluation reaches apredeﬁned lower limit, or a maximum number of iterations has beenreached.In genetic terms, each chromosome is a vector of length 4. The allelesareﬂoating point values that represent the constants m, n, b,andc. The initial population is generated by creating chromosomes, with randomﬂoating-point numbers for the constants. The alleles are modi ﬁed by multiplication by a value randomly picked from the range 0.8 –1.2. This range decreases in value as the number of generations increases. Thisprovides a method that allows the search to become more local towardsthe end of the algorithm as better solutions emerge.This AI technique was applied to a complex Middle East carbonateﬁeld which needed a bespoke shaly water saturation equation. AI wasused to‘evolve’an ideal equation, together withﬁeld speciﬁc saturation and cementation exponents. A typical well is shown in Fig. 2. The AI produced the following equation:
1Rt¼φmSwn
RwþbVshc(2)Where:Sw¼water saturationφ¼porosityRt, Rw¼resistivitiesVsh¼shale volumeb, c¼constantsSpecial Core Analysis from AI gave a cementation exponent ( m)o f 2.214 and a saturation exponent (n) of 1.751. The results are shown inFig. 2.The core water saturations are shown as the red circles in track 4, andthe predicted water saturations computed using Eq. (2)are shown as the continuous blue curve. As these wells were used to calibrate the watersaturation equation, it is not unexpected that the average predicted watersaturations agree with the average core derived and predicted watersaturations. However, there is a good match between core and predictedsaturations across the range of water saturation values. This match is alsoindependent of the shaliness content. These observations suggest that Eq.(2), together with its associated parameters, provide a good method ofcomputing water saturations in the shaly carbonate from the resistivitylog.Using core water saturations, avoids the empirical problems ofderiving SCAL parameters at reservoir conditions in the laboratory. ThisAI technique is dependent on the quality of the core water saturations,which is mitigated by ensuring one of the coring objectives is to providequality core saturations.Case study 2 NMR pattern recognitionThis case study describes the use of AI to optimise production from acomplex gas reservoir which had long been recognised but was notdeveloped due to a variety of technical challenges including the thin-bedded nature of the sediments and the presence of both mobile andimmobile viscous residual oil. The oil is a highly viscous liquid, which ifproduced, could block production tubing due to the shallow depth of thereservoir and associated low pressures. To successfully produce dry gas,identiﬁcation of both oil and gas zones was necessary to enable gas zonesto be perforated, and oil zones to be excluded.During the development drilling campaign, the reservoir wasappraised by using a formation evaluation programme designed toaddress the presence of oil within the thinly bedded reservoir. Inconjunction with core data and high-resolution electrical logs (incl.MSFL), nuclear magnetic resonance tools (NMR) were used to identifyand avoid perforating zones with higher oil saturations. The mainobjective of running an NMR tool was to help identify intervals of highresidual oil saturation. These intervals were then con ﬁrmed at the wellsite by selectively using the MDT-LFA (Modular Formation DynamicsTester-Live Fluid Analyser) to conﬁrm the composition of theﬂuids and check for mobility. Borehole gas chromatography data was also used toconﬁrm these interpretations.
Fig. 2.Using AI to derive a Shaly Sand Equation.S. Cuddy Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Geosciences 2 (2021) 1 –10
3The NMR results were calibrated to high quality Dean and Stark oil,gas and water saturations and high-resolution wireline logs from thecored wells. AI techniques applied to the NMR curves enabled the pre-diction ofﬂuid types in uncored sections and oil mobility was predictedthroughout the reservoir section. Conventionally, Dean and Stark watersaturation measurements are made in reservoir zones where oil-baseddrillingﬂuid has been used. The development wells were cored using awater-based mud system and the objective of performing Dean and Starkwas to infer residual oil saturation (Sor) from the gravimetric mass bal-ance of the residualﬂuids present. Where possible the measurementswere performed on a one per foot basis.Conventional NMR interpretation techniques, like in permeabilityestimation, use very little of the wealth of information contained in the T
2
distribution. The Coates method (1991) compares two areas, Free Fluid Index, and Bound Volume Irreducible, beneath the T
2distribution separated by an arbitrary cut-off whereas the Schlumberger DowellResearch (SDR) method only uses a single piece of information, thelogarithmic mean T
2.Rather than using a single value from the T
2distribution, such as the ratio of areas or the logarithmic mean value, AI analyses the entire shapeof the T
2distribution, attempting to unlock any that could be related tothe poreﬂuid type. This technique is similar to AI facial recognitiontechniques which are capable of identifying a person from a digitalimage.The results of this study are shown in Fig. 3. The T1, T2 (short), T2 (long) spectra are shown in tracks 5, 6 and 7 ofFig. 3respectively. AI analysis of these spectra gives a good prediction ofthe oil and gas intervals as shown in tracks 8 and 9 respectively. Theseresults were conﬁrmed by the MDT-LFA and the borehole gas chroma-tography data shown in track 4. This analysis was then used to design theperforation program that avoided oil bearing sands. Consequently, usingAI, operational decisions were made quickly to choose perforationintervals. The perforation strategy on all development wells appears tohave been successful, and no oil was produced during well testing. Gassands that lie below the oil sands were also perforated successfully.Further information of this technique is described by Cuddy (2004).Case study 3. shear velocity prediction using AIShear velocities are useful for enhanced seismic evaluation and tounderstand and control wellbore stability whilst drilling. AI was appliedto a North Seaﬁeld consisting of 30 wells, where only 5 had recordedborehole shear velocities. The objective of this study was to populate all30 wells with shear velocity data in order to improve the reservoirmodelling and aid future well drilling.The available logs for thisﬁeld included the conventional electricallogs, drilling and gas chromatography data. The gamma-ray, compres-sional and shear electrical logs are shown in Fig. 4. The shear log, show in blue track 3, is missing above 13,200 ft. Consequently, an additionalobjective for this well is to provide the shear log for the gap in this well.The AI asserted that there was a continuous functional relationshipbetween the log values and shear velocities and attempted to evolve thisrelationship based on or calibrated to the data from the ﬁve wells with good shear velocities. The AI provided the functional form of the equa-tion as well as the constant parameters of the relationship. Analysis usingAI consists of two parts, the evolution of an equation relating Dts (Vs) tothe electrical logs and the use of this equation to predict Dts throughouttheﬁeld. Statistical analysis suggested that the shear velocities are
Fig. 3.NMR Spectra Analysis using AI.
 Fig. 4.Shear Velocity Prediction using AI.S. Cuddy Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Geosciences 2 (2021) 1 –10
4mainly related to compressional transit time Dtc, total porosityPhit, and the mineralogy ratioMlith.The objective of the AI was to construct empirically a function f (Dtc,Phit, Mlith) that predicts shear velocities at each depth i,givenφ,Phit andMlithat each depth. Therefore, we were searching for an appropriatefunction of the form:Dts¼fðDtc;Phit;MlithÞ¼/C0aDtc
b/C1/C15
1/C0cPhitd/C1/C15
2ðeMlithgÞ/C153h(3)where/C15
1,/C152,/C153,etc. represent the algebraic operators addition andmultiplication; a, c, e, and h are unknown constants; and b, d, and g areunknown constant exponents.The AI Fitness Function for this application is ‘Determine a relation- ship so that the predicted shear velocities are as close as possible to logderived shear velocities’, which is expressed mathematically as:Minimise
f:X
ijDts i/C0fðDtc i;Phit i;Mlith iÞj(4)The approach we adopted was to sum absolute errors in predictionover all depth levels for a given borehole. Eq. (4)minimizes this sum. The conventional way to do this is to use least squares rather than absolutevalues of residuals. The reason for the approach that we have taken is thatthe borehole data are noisy and include many ‘outliers.’These can only be removed by extensive manual editing of the data sets and recheckingof measurements. By using the absolute value of residuals, one di-minishes the effect of noise and outliers and produces more appropriatepredictor functions.The genetic algorithms were constructed as follows. An initial pop-ulation of individuals is picked randomly in the solution space. Eachindividual has randomly chosen constants a, b, c, d, e, g, h and operators/C15
1,/C152,/C153. Eq.(4)determines theﬁtness criterion of each of these in-dividuals. The best existing algorithm for minimizing this equation startswith a randomly generatedfand uses local search by mutating the co-efﬁcients one at a time orﬂipping the operator between an addition and amultiplication. The mutation range is initially set very high in order thatthe individuals search all of the solution space. After a number of gen-erations, a pool of individuals is selected by linear ranking for mutatingand cloning. Mating is achieved by coefﬁcient merging. Some of the best individuals are cloned to add more individuals where solutions are mostpromising. After a number of generations, the mathematical operatorsareﬁxed and the percentage change in mutated coef ﬁcients is gradually reduced. The algorithm stops when the percentage improvement inevaluation reaches a predeﬁned lower limit or a maximum number ofiterations have been reached.Each chromosome is a vector of length 10. Three alleles are binaryinteger values that represent the mathematical operators /C15
1,/C152,/C153. The rest of the alleles areﬂoating point values that represent the coefﬁcients a, b, c, d, e, g, h. The initial population is generated by creating chro-mosomes with random binary numbers for /C15
1,/C152,/C153and randomﬂoating- point numbers for the coefﬁcients a, b, c, d, e, g, h. If the allele representsthe operator/C15, its value is binary, and it will be switched. If the allelerepresents one of the real variables, it will be modi ﬁed by multiplication by a value randomly picked. The AI evolved an equation for the predic-tion of Dts. To improve the derived equation ’s predictive ability, separate coefﬁcients a, b, c, d, e, g, h were separately determined for each zone inthe reservoir.The comparison between recorded and predicted Dts, shown in track4o fFig. 4are extremely good. Surprisingly, for the thin-bedded intervals,where there is a mismatch between the measured and predicted veloc-ities, it is thought that the measured log values are incorrect. This isbecause the vertical resolution of the shear velocity measurement toolprohibits a correct measurement in thin beds. However, the AI had accessto all measurements, including ones with better vertical resolution thanthe shear velocity tool. As a result, the measurements with good verticalresolution pick the facies type before the techniques predict the appro-priate shear velocity, and the predicted shear velocity in the thin beds islikely to be a more appropriate value than that actually measured by theshear velocity tool. The predicted Dts therefore appear to repair locallypoor Dts readings and are therefore an improvement on the boreholeacquired electrical log.Case study 4. permeability prediction using AIKnowledge of permeability is important in determining the wellcompletion strategy and the resulting productivity. The problem withpermeability prediction is derived from the fact that permeability isrelated more to the aperture of pore throats rather than pore size, whichlogging toolsﬁnd difﬁcult to measure. Determining permeability fromwell logs is further complicated by the problem of scale, well logs havinga vertical resolution of typically 2 feet compared to the 2 inches of coreplugs. AI has been used in severalﬁelds to obtain better estimates of permeability compared to conventional techniques.A case study in permeability prediction in shown in Fig. 5for a large North Seaﬁeld with 15 cored wells.The gamma-ray (GR) and differential caliper logs are shown in track1. The standard porosity logs; density (RHOB), neutron porosity (NPHI)and sonic compressional velocity (DT) are show in track 3. Track 7, onthe far right, shows a computer processed interpretation for this well,where the shale volume is shown in green, sandstones in yellow, oil inred, the bulk volume of water in dark blue, coal beds in black and calcitestringers in cyan.The AI Fitness Function for this application is; ‘Determine a rela- tionship so that the predicted permeabilities are as close as possible tocore derived permeabilities’. The AIﬁrst determined the litho-facies type as shown in track 6, and then based on this result predicts the perme-ability shown as a continuous black line in track 4. This comparesfavourably with the core derived permeability shown as green dots alsoin track 4. The prediction conﬁdence is shown in track 5, with the highestconﬁdence shown in red and the lowest in blue.For comparison, permeability was also predicted using conventionalleast squares linear regression. These predictions were compared as
Fig. 5.Permeability Prediction using AI.S. Cuddy Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Geosciences 2 (2021) 1 –10
5shown in the frequency distribution histograms ( Fig. 6). The left-hand histogram shows the core permeability distribution forthisﬁeld. The colours represent each of the 15 wells. Notice that thepermeability distribution is bimodal. The AI prediction is shown as thecentre histogram and shows a similar bimodal distribution. The leastsquares linear regression, shown on the right, shows a good prediction ofthe average permeabilities but is poor at the upper and lower ends. Theupper and lower permeability predictions are important, in the reservoirmodel, as these represent that barriers toﬂow and conduits to production respectively. Whereas least squares regressed towards the mean, AIpreserved the dynamic range of the core permeability data. An incorrectpermeability distribution will not upscale correctly in the 3D reservoirmodel (Cuddy 2013).Case study 5. the quality control and repair of electrical logsBorehole electrical logs are acquired in a dif ﬁcult environment, often at high temperatures and pressures. Although most modern electricaltools are designed to compensate for limited borehole washouts andrugosity, virtually every well contains sections of log with poor or un-acceptable quality. In addition to poor logs there are often sections wherethe measurement has completely failed due to telemetry problems withthe surface equipment or because of tool failure due to adverse condi-tions. These problems have increased in recent years with the introduc-tion of Logging Whilst Drilling (LWD). The oil industry is to becommended for the development of sensors that take measurementswhilst the well is being drilled. These real-time measurements are a realbeneﬁt to the industry as they enable quick decisions, but these mea-surements are taken in an extremely adverse environment, which in-cludes drill string vibration and high-pressure drilling mud. Wireline andLWD measurements are further compromised by calibration errors,which occur because of human error or through electronic tool drift dueto temperature. The log quality control (LQC) and repair of electrical logsis therefore essential before petrophysical analysis can take place. This isa very useful exercise even when the LQC merely con ﬁrms that the logs are good.The LQC and repair of electrical logs is based on the premise that alllogs are related. A skilled petrophysicist can verify an anomaly on oneelectrical log simply through visual comparison with other curves. Thepresentation scales of printed or digital electrical logs are chosen basedon their relationship to porosity. Consequently, the logs will de ﬂect to the left or right at the same depths. If the logs do not respond in this mannerit prompts further investigation. For instance, the density log may mea-sure extremely low densities when the tool is separated from the bore-hole wall, causing it to read the mud density, or because of the presenceof a coal bed. In the former case, the log needs repair and in the latter, thelog is correct. The petrophysicist would normally check the soniccompressional velocity, gamma-ray reading and resistivity log at thesame depth in the reservoir to conﬁrm either interpretation. AI is used ina similar manner to uncover the relationships between all electrical logsso that anomalies can be identiﬁed, and the correct log can be predicted.Fig. 7shows an example from the North Sea Heather ﬁeld explains the process. Recent inﬁll wells in the Heatherﬁeld suffered from bad sections of LWD log data in the Brent reservoir. Well geosteering required loggingin sliding mode at times, which tends to degrade log quality because thetool is not rotating and does not ‘see’all around the borehole. Unex- pected overpressure was encountered in parts of the reservoir, particu-larly Ness Formation sands and shales, caused by injection water. Tocontrol pressures, mud weight was increased to very high densities. This,in turn, caused differential sticking and hole washouts. AI was applied torepair defective density log curves as shown in Fig. 7. The recorded density log, shown in green, is reading the mud densityaround X80 feet. The predicted density log, shown in red, was derived byfrom all the other logs as if the density log was not run in this well.Although the LQC is automatic theﬁnal step of replacing the poor log bythe predicted log is currently left to the petrophysicist. Further infor-mation on the use of the technique in the Heather Field is discussed inKay (2002)
.The advantages of using AI in petrophysical analysisAI doesn’t require prior knowledge of the petrophysical responseequations and is self-calibrating. We just give it the data. There is verylittle user intervention as there are no parameters to pick or cross-plots tomake. AI can work with an unlimited number of electrical logs, core andgas chromatography data; and don ’t‘fall-over’if some of those inputs are missing. It is not a Black Box as it provides insights into how it makespredictions.Least squares regressionAI avoids the problem of ‘garbage in, garbage out’(GIGO), by ignoring noise and outliers as shown by Fig. 8. The least squares regression line is the black line that makes the redvertical distances from the data points to the regression line as small aspossible by minimizing the sum of squares of the errors as shown inFig. 8. This type of regression is often referred to as being ‘undemocratic’
Fig. 6.Core and predicted permeability distributions.
Fig. 7.The Quality Control and Repair of Electrical Logs using AI.S. Cuddy Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Geosciences 2 (2021) 1 –10
6as outliers unfairly inﬂuence the result. For example, a point 10 timesfurther from the line has a 100/C2the weighting. It is exceedingly difﬁcult to manually remove these and if attempted would introduce human bias.Outliers may be valid data such as coal beds, calcite stringers or fractures.Our AI programs keep all data points and minimise the linear distance(Mean Absolute Error) rather than the squared distance. We ﬁnd any random noise is often swamped by valid data. It is important to stress thatAI is only capable of solving problems where it is given suf ﬁcient good quality data.The mathematical techniques used by the AI include neural networks,genetic algorithms, random forests and fuzzy logic. The petrophysicalcase studies described in this paper use fuzzy logic, for the reasons I willexplain.What is fuzzy logic?When the computers arrived with their machine-driven binary sys-tem, Boolean logic was adopted as the natural reasoning mechanism forthem. Conventional logic forces the continuous world to be describedwith a coarse approximation; and in so doing, much of the ﬁne detail is lost. Classical logic is useful, but we are left with a feeling that there issomething missing. The real world is not made up of bivalent blacks andwhites; there is a grey scale out there. By only accepting the two extremepossibilities, the inﬁnite number of possibilities in between is lost. Re-ality does not work in black and white, but on a grey scale. Not only doestruth exist fundamentally on a sliding scale, it is also perceived to varygradually because of the uncertainties in measurements and in-terpretations. Hence, a grey scale can be a more powerful tool comparedto just using the two end points. Once the reality of the grey scale hasbeen accepted, a system is required to cope with the multitude of pos-sibilities. Probability theory helps quantify the greyness or fuzziness.Fuzzy logic asserts that any interpretation is possible, but some are morelikely than others (Cuddy 2013).The AI has access to n-dimensional data, where n is the number of logsor types of data, usually recorded against depth or time. One method usedby AI for pattern recognition, classiﬁcation and regression is the k- nearest neighbours algorithm (k-NN). Fig. 9shows petrophysical data points in green and their association with 3 red litho-facies, (e.g. sand,shale or carbonate). The k-NN algorithm assumes that similar things existin close proximity and are near to each other in n-dimensional data space.Determining which litho-facies for each data point can be determined byits proximity in this n-dimensional space. It is therefore necessary todetermine the distance between points. The straight-line distance, calledthe Euclidean distance, is used. In addition, fuzzy logic weights theselines depending on the likelihood of the association. For instance, if thegamma-ray is highly correlated with shaliness, this vector will have moreinﬂuence on the AI’s decision compared to say the caliper reading at thesame depth.Narrow AI VS. General AIMost AI programs developed to date have Narrow AI which canhandle just one particular task. They are good at petrophysical analysis,playing chess, forecasting the weather and even ordering coffee for you.General AI is where we are going, where like humans, can do manythings. They can do petrophysical analysis andplay chess. General AI learns from one specialist area and applies it in another. For instance, apetrophysicist who also plays chess may use chess decision tree analysisin petrophysical analysis. They will, by deﬁnition, be genuinely creative with the ability to produce something original. General AI is True AI andwill be able to‘think out of the‘box’. Third generation AI is making thispossible.Third generation AIAI programs currently being developed include ones where theirmachine code evolves using similar rules used by life ’s DNA code. CharlesDarwin (1859)explained evolution using natural selection.We now know this can be explained by changes to our DNA code through
mutation and sexual selection. The DNA code a language of 4 charactersrepresented by 4 nucleotides, ‘A’paired with‘T’and‘C’with‘G’repre- sented by the 4 colours inFig. 10. The evolution loop, shown inFig. 10, can take millions of years.Because of the spectacular success of this process, as demonstrated byevolution of life on Earth, some third-generation AI developers areattempting to mimic it as shown inFig. 11. Whereas the DNA code is a
Fig. 8.The problem with least squares regression.
Fig. 9.Nearest Neighbours in n-dimensional Data Space.S. Cuddy Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Geosciences 2 (2021) 1 –10
7language of 4 characters, computer code is a language of 2 characters, thebinary digits‘0’and‘1’.The mutation and mating used by the evolution of DNA code isreplicated by similar changes to the computer code. Mutation is simu-lated by randomly changing groups of digits by their opposites. Blocks ofcode are moved throughout the computer ’s machine code. Further to mimic nature, third generation AI can have 100s of algorithms running inparallel. Every 1000 iterations (generations) the ‘ﬁttest’are select to ‘mate’following exactly the rules used by life to create new algorithms.The vast amount of these changes will have little success at ful ﬁlling the Fitness Function and will be deleted. However, the AI algorithm willsteadily‘evolve’. Unlike mostﬁrst and second-generation AI themanipulation of machine code can give unpredictable or unwanted re-sults. Although unlikely, here lies the clear and present danger of AI.The dangers of AIThis section are the personal observations and opinions of the author.It is important to reiterate that AI has a goal determined by the Fitness Functionand runs with little user intervention.King Midas and his golden touchKing Midas, in Greek mythology, was granted his wish that every-thing he touched into gold. He didn ’t realise that this included his foodand his children. Similarly, an ill-conceived Fitness Function may giveunexpected results. For instance, an AI asked to design and produce avaccine for the COVID-19 virus which ‘prevents transmission between humans’could solve the problem by killing humans. A poorly statedFitness Function is called a Midas Function because of its potentialdanger.The Sorcerer’s apprenticeThe Sorcerer’s Apprentice, in Johann Wolfgang von Goethe famouspoem, uses magic to get a broom carry water for him. Unfortunately, itruns-away and nearly drowns him. In a similar fashion, if an AI runs awayand becomes unstoppable it could create grave dangers.I now describe an example from petrophysics where a poorly wordedFitness Function could cause the AI to runaway.Example of runaway AIConsider AI being used to history match a reservoir model with theelectrical logs, at the well locations, as shown by Fig. 12. A possible Fitness Function could be ‘get the best possible match as fast as possible’. By trial and error, the computer would be expected toevolve a fast history match. Any endeavour succeeds faster if you increaseits resources. For instance, in a battle it is better to increase the resourcesthat you give to your forces rather than merely asking them to ﬁght harder. Similarly, history matching will be faster if you give the computermore resources, speciﬁcally more computing power. A human pro-grammer or hacker may co-opt the resources of other network computersto achieve a faster speed. There is no reason why AI couldn ’t also do this. If AI achieves this ‘by accident’, there is nothing to stop it doing it againand again via the internet, eventually consuming all the world’s computing power. As it is now on the internet will be impossible toswitch off.Evolution takes millions of years, whereas the computer makes mil-lions of iterations per second. Consequently, the any AI program may‘accidently’start improving exponentially. A supercomputer isn ’t required to do this. Your laptop could do it. An elaborate AI computerprogram isn’t required. Only one that can update its own machine codegoal guided by an ill-judged Fitness Function. This is known as the‘Singularity’where artiﬁcial intelligence becomes uncontrollable andirreversible. The chances of this happening may be as remote as lifespontaneously occurring, but the AI has only to do this once. It is notknown how to switch off or stop computers with runaway evolution.The dangers of AI beyond petrophysicsSeveral commentators, with in depth knowledge of AI, haveexpressed grave concerns about runaway AI. These are listed and refer-enced for those interested in examining these concerns, as detailed dis-cussion of these expert’s views is not necessary for understanding the 5petrophysical case studies.University of Cambridge Professor Stephen Hawking was concernedthat AI could‘take off’on their own, modifying themselves and inde-pendently designing and building ever more capable systems. He forecasthumans, bound by the slow pace of biological evolution, would betragically outwitted and wrote, ‘Efforts to create thinking machines posea threat to our very existence ’.(Hawking 2014). Microsoft co-founder, Bill Gates has said he doesn ’t understand peo- ple who are not troubled by the possibility that AI could grow too strongfor people to control. He notes that AI dangers could include speechsynthesis for impersonation; analysis of human behaviours, moods andbeliefs for manipulation; automated hacking and physical weapons likeswarms of micro-drones. (Gates 2015).University of Oxford Professor and Director of the Future of HumanityInstitute, Nick Bostrom, has said that AI could bring about humanextinction by‘hijacking political processes, subtly manipulating ﬁnancial markets, biasing informationﬂows, or hacking human-made weaponssystems’. He writes‘We’re like children playing with a bomb ’.(Bostrom 2014).SpaceX founder, Elon Musk, has said humanity is merely a ‘biological boot loader for digital super intelligence ’, and unequivocally stated, ‘Mark my words - A.I. is far more dangerous than nukes ’. He is quoted as saying‘AI needs safety measures before something terrible happens ’. (Musk 2017).
Fig. 10.Evolution of DNA code by natural selection.
Fig. 11.Third Generation AI, computer code evolution.S. Cuddy Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Geosciences 2 (2021) 1 –10
8Solution to the dangers of AIAI programs pose considerable dangers far beyond the oil industry.First generation AI (expert systems) shouldn ’t be a problem as the AI is constrained by the hard-wired lines of computer code. Second generationAI (ﬁng systems) can be dangerous if they can access other computers vianetworks or the internet. Third generation (evolutionary systems) AIpose the greatest danger because of their limitless and unpredictablenature.A‘risk assessment’is essential on all AI programs so that all hazardsand risk factors, that could cause harm, are identi ﬁed and mitigated. The possibility of a runaway AI is remote, but the consequences could begreater than pandemics, climate change and nuclear proliferation.A risk assessment need only take a few minutes. This includes con-ﬁrming the Fitness Function is clear and unambiguous, and that the AIcannot runaway by ‘escaping’from the computer where it isprogrammed.AI programs are potentially dangerous and may be the last thinghumans invent.ConclusionsAI brings many beneﬁts to petrophysics and can make petrophysicalanalysis easy. AI doesn’t require prior knowledge of the petrophysicalresponse equations, it is self-calibrating. AI ignores noise and outliers.There is very little user intervention as there are no parameters to pick orcross-plots to make. AI programs work with large datasets and isn ’ta ‘black box’as it provides insights into how it makes predictions.AI can evolve shaly water saturation equations, perform NMR spectraanalysis image analysis, predict shear velocities and permeability. AI isespecially good at the log quality control and repair of electrical logs.AI can be extremely dangerous, especially if it becomes a runawaywithout control. It is strongly recommended that all AI program devel-opment should include a risk assessment.Declaration of competing interestThe authors declare that they have no known competing ﬁnancial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to in ﬂuence the work reported in this paper.AcknowledgementsThe author would like to thank Baker Hughes for the use of their dataand resources.The author would especially like to thank several anonymous expertswho advised the author on the AI ’s historical development. Their nameswill be cited when they give their permission.NomenclatureAbbreviationsAI Artiﬁcial IntelligenceDexp Drilling exponentDNA Deoxyribonucleic AcidDrho Delta RhoDtc Compressional transit timeDts Shear transit timeGR Gamma-RayLFA Live Fluid AnalyserLQC Log Quality ControlLWD Logging Whilst DrillingMDT Modular Formation Dynamics TesterMlith Sonic density lithology factorNMR Nuclear Magnetic ResonanceNphi Neutron porosityPhit Total porosityRhob Bulk DensityROP Rate of penetrationRt Formation ResistivityRw Water ResistivityRxo Invaded zone resistivitySCAL Special Core AnalysisSw Water SaturationT1 NMR T1 relaxation timeT2 NMR T2 relaxation timeTVDss True Vertical Depth subseaVs Shear velocityVsh Shale volumeSymbols
φPorositymCementation exponentnSaturation exponentReferences
Bigoni, Francesco, Pirrone, Marco, Pinelli, Fabio, Trombin, Gianluca, Vinci, Fabio, 2019.A Multi-Scale Path for the Characterization of Heterogeneous Karst Carbonates: HowLog-To-Seismic Machine Learning Can Optimize Hydrocarbon Production, pp. 1 –9. https://doi.org/10.30632/T60als-2019_Ff . Bostrom, N., 2014. Superintelligence-Paths. Oxford University Press, Dangers, Strategies . Brown, D.F., Cuddy, S.J., Garmendia-Doval, A.B., McCall, J.A.W., 2000. The prediction ofpermeability in oil-bearing strata using genetic algorithms. In: Proceedings of theIASTED International Conference on Arti ﬁcial Intelligence and Soft Computing, ISBN 0-88986-292-3, pp. 53–58. July 2000. Coates, G.R., Miller, M., Gillen, M., Henderson, G., 1991. The MRIL in Conoco 33-1- aninvestigation of a new magnetic resonance imaging log. In: 32nd Annual LoggingSymposium Transactions-Society of Professional Well Log Analysts. Paper DD . Crevier, 1993. Who Writes ‘the Conference Is Generally Recognized as the Of ﬁcial Birthdate of the New Science, pp. 47 –49. Cuddy, S., 2013. Litho-facies and permeability prediction from electrical logs using fuzzylogic. SPE Reservoir Eval. Eng. 3, 319 –324.https://doi.org/10.2118/65411-PA . Cuddy, S., Daniels, G., Lindsay, C., Sands, P., 2004. The application of novel formationevaluation techniques to a complex tight gas reservoir. In: SPWLA 45th AnnualLogging Symposium Noordwijk. The Netherlands, June 6 –9, 2004. Darwin, C., 1859. On the Origin of Species by Means of Natural Selection. John Murray – London.Davis, Randall, Shrobe, Howard, Szolovits, Peter, 2002. What is a knowledgerepresentation? AI Mag. 14. Gates, B., 2015. Microsoft ’s Bill Gates Insists AI Is a Threat. BBC New, 29
thJanuary 2015. Hawking, S., 2014. ‘AI Could Be the End of Humanity ’Independent Newspaper, 2
nd
December 2014.Hsu, Feng-Hsiung, Campbell Murray Jr., A., 1995. Deep Blue System Overview,pp. 240–244.https://doi.org/10.1145/224538.224567 . Kay, S., Cuddy, S., 2002. Innovative use of petrophysics in ﬁeld rehabilitation, with examples from the heatherﬁeld. Petrol. Geosci. 8 (4), 317 –325. Dec 2002. Knuth, Donald, Moore, Ronald, 1975. An analysis of alpha-beta pruning. Artif. Intell. 6,293–326.https://doi.org/10.1016/0004-3702(75)90019-3 . Le, Thai, Liang, Lin, Zimmermann, Timon, Zeroug, Smaine, Heliot, Denis, 2019. AMachine-Learning Framework for Automating Well-Log Depth Matching, vol. 60,pp. 585–595.https://doi.org/10.30632/Pjv60n5-2019a3 .
Fig. 12.Using AI for history matching a reservoir model.S. Cuddy Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Geosciences 2 (2021) 1 –10
9Li, Hu, Liu, Gang, Yang, Shansen, Guo, Ying, Huang, He, Dai, Mingzong, Tian, Yuanshi,2019. Automated Resistivity Inversion and Formation Geometry Determination inHigh-Angle and Horizontal Wells Using Deep Learning Techniques, pp. 1 –11.https:// doi.org/10.30632/T60als-2019_Jjjj . Lindsay, Robert, Buchanan, Bruce, Feigenbaum, Edward, Lederberg, Joshua, 1993.DENDRAL: A Case Study of the First Expert System for Scienti ﬁc Hypothesis Formation, vol. 61. Artiﬁcial Intelligence.https://doi.org/10.1016/0004-3702(93) 90068-M.Minsky, Marvin, 1961. Steps toward arti ﬁcial intelligence. Proc. IRE 49, 8 –30.https:// doi.org/10.1109/JRPROC.1961.287775 . Musk, E., 2017. Regulate AI to Combat ’existential Threat’before Its Too Late. Guardian Newspaper, 17
thJuly 2017. Newell, A., Simon, H., 1963. GPS, a program that simulates human thought. Comput.Thought 279–293.Posenato Garcial, Artur, Jagadisan, Archana, Hernandez, Laura, Heidari, Zoya,Casey, Brian, Williams, Richard, 2020. enhanced formation evaluation in the permianbasin using a novelﬁeld-scale workﬂow including wells with missing data. SPE Reservoir Eval. Eng. 23https://doi.org/10.2118/201185-PA . Turing, A., 1950. Computing Machinery and intelligence. Mind LIX (236), 433 –460. https://doi.org/10.1093/mind/LIX.236.433 . ISSN 0026-442.Winston, Patrick, 1976. The Psychology of Computer Vision. https://doi.org/10.1016/ 0031-3203(76)90020-0. Pattern Recognition. 8. 193.Zhang, Hongming, Yul, Tianyang, 2020. AlphaZero. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981- 15-4095-0_15.
Steve Cuddy is a retired Principal Petrophysicist from BakerHughes. He holds a PhD in petrophysics at Aberdeen University.He also holds a BSc in physics and a BSc in astrophysics andphilosophy. He is the inventor of the Fractal FOIL Function thataccurately describes the distribution of ﬂuids in the reservoir model. He writes AI software and has 45 years industry expe-rience in petrophysics. In recognition of outstanding service tothe SPWLA, Steve was awarded the Distinguished ServiceAward in 2018.S. Cuddy Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Geosciences 2 (2021) 1 –10
10