The use of ontologies for effective knowledge modelling and informationretrieval
Kamran Munira,⇑, M. Sheraz Anjumb
aDepartment of Computer Science and Creative Technologies, University of the West of England, BS16 1QY Bristol, United Kingdom
bSchool of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, National University of Sciences and Technology (NUST), H-12 Islamabad, Pakistan
article info
Article history:Received 21 February 2017Revised 30 July 2017Accepted 31 July 2017Available online 7 August 2017Keywords:Information systemsOntologyDomain knowledgeDatabaseInformation retrievalKnowledge managementabstract
The dramatic increase in the use of knowledge discovery applications requires end users to write complexdatabase search requests to retrieve information. Such users are not only expected to grasp the structuralcomplexity of complex databases but also the semantic relationships between data stored in databases.In order to overcome such difﬁculties, researchers have been focusing on knowledge representation andinteractive query generation through ontologies, with particular emphasis on improving the interfacebetween data and search requests in order to bring the result sets closer to users research requirements.This paper discusses ontology-based information retrieval approaches and techniques by taking into con-sideration the aspects of ontology modelling, processing and the translation of ontological knowledgeinto database search requests. It also extensively compares the existing ontology-to-database transfor-mation and mapping approaches in terms of loss of data and semantics, structural mapping and domainknowledge applicability. The research outcomes, recommendations and future challenges presented inthis paper can bridge the gap between ontology and relational models to generate precise search requestsusing ontologies. Moreover, the comparison presented between various ontology-based informationretrieval, database-to-ontology transformations and ontology-to-database mappings approaches pro-vides a reference for enhancing the searching capabilities of massively loaded information managementsystems./C2112017 The Authors. Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of King Saud University. This is anopen access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ ).Contents1. Introduction......................................................................................................... 1 1 72. Ontologies and knowledge representation . . . . . . . . . . . ...................................................................... 1 1 7 3. Ontology-based information retrieval. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ...................................................................... 1 1 8 3.1. Information retrieval from a historical perspective . . . . . . . . ............................................................ 1 1 8 3.2. Ontology-based query formulation approaches. . . . . . . . . . . . ............................................................ 1 1 8 3.3. Ontology-based information linking approaches. . . . . . . . . . . ............................................................ 1 1 9 3.4. Ontology-based query refinement approaches . . . . . . . . . . . . ............................................................ 1 1 9 4. Discussion: ontology-based information retrieval . . . . . ...................................................................... 1 2 0 5. Approaches to perform database-to-ontology transformations and to define ontology-to-database mappings . . . . . . . . . . ................ 1 2 0 5.1. Ontology-to-database mapping approaches . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ............................................................ 1 2 1 5.2. Database-to-ontology transformation approaches . . . . . . . . . ............................................................ 1 2 1
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.aci.2017.07.0032210-8327//C2112017 The Authors. Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of King Saud University.This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ ).⇑Corresponding author.E-mail address:Kamran2.Munir@uwe.ac.uk(K. Munir). Peer review under responsibility of King Saud University.
Production and hosting by ElsevierApplied Computing and Informatics 14 (2018) 116–126
Contents lists available atScienceDirect
Applied Computing and Informatics
journal homepage: www.sciencedirect.com
5.3. Ontology-to-conceptual data model. . . . . . . . ......................................................................... 1 2 2 6. Discussion: database-to-ontology transformation and mappings approaches for relational query formulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .......... 1 2 3 7. Future opportunities and challenges. . . ................................................................................... 1 2 3 References . . . ....................................................................................................... 1 2 4
1. IntroductionIn information management systems, structured query formu-lation languages are one means of retrieving information. Writingstructured queries is a powerful method to access data since itallows end-users to formulate complex database queries by learn-ing specialised query languages. However, query formulation withthe exception of a few visual query generation and reﬁnementapproaches remains appreciatively difﬁcult for the various levelsof systems users. In recent years information retrieval has turnedout to be more complicated with the increased use of data mining,decision support and business analytics applications. Conse-quently, researchers focus has been on approaches that includevisual database interfaces[1]and interactive query generationthrough graphs[2,3], with a particular emphasis on providinginteractive natural languageinterfaces to support query generation.Recently,semantic-basedapproaches using domain ontologies havebeen adapted for data modelling and information retrieval.Ontology-based information retrieval, for example as in[4–6]mainly aim at improving the interface between data and search requestsin order to bring the result sets closer to the users’ researchrequirements. In general, an ontology represents a shared, agreedand detailed model (or set of concepts) of a certain problemdomain[7]. One major advantage of using a domain ontology isits ability to deﬁne a semantic model of the data combined withthe associated domain knowledge. Ontologies can also be used todeﬁne links between different types of semantic knowledge. Thus,ontologies can be used in formulating some data searchingstrategies.This paper discusses ontology-based information retrievalapproaches by taking into consideration the aspects of:(a)ontology generation from database schema(s) ; (b)processing of domain knowledge to represent it as ontologicalknowledge; and(c)the translation of such ontological knowledge into relationaldatabase queries.Moreover, it provides a comparison between ontology-to-databasetransformationandmappingapproaches in terms of:loss of data and semantics;structural mapping; anddomain knowledge applicability.The outcomes presented in this paper can be beneﬁcial in bridg-ing the gap between ontology and relational models whileattempting to generate precise search requests from ontologyexpressions. Moreover, the comparison presented between variousontology-based information retrieval, database-to-ontology trans-formations and ontology-to-database mappings tools/approachesprovides a reference for enhancing the searching capabilities ofmassively loaded information and management systems [8]. After having introduced the motivation and context, theremainder of this paper is divided into the following sections.Section2introduces ontologies and domain knowledge represen-tations. Section3reviews the state of the art in ontology-baseddatabase information retrieval. Section 4discusses our ﬁndingsin relation to ontology-based information retrieval. Section 5 reviews the state of the art database schema to ontology schematransformation and ontology-to-database mapping approaches interms of loss of data and semantics, structural mapping anddomain knowledge applicability. Section 6provides a discussion and highlights a possibility of combining database-to-ontologytransformation and ontology-to-database mappings approachesfor relational query formulation. Finally, Section 7outlines the future challenges and possible research directions towards usingontologies for information retrieval from information and Big data
management systems.2. Ontologies and knowledge representationOver the past few years, many ontology development and querylanguages have been developed and this is still a continuing effort.While building an ontology-based system, it ﬁrst requires decidingwhich ontology language is to be used in a given context. Numer-ous ontology languages were developed in the last few years. Mostof these are based on the eXtensible Markup Language (XML) [9] which enables them to be machine interpretable [10]. Notable examples are the Resource Description Framework (RDF) andRDF Schema[11], the DARPA Agent Markup Language and theOntology Inference Layer (DAML + OIL) [12], and the Ontology Web language (OWL)[13]and OWL2[14]. In order to use ontolo- gies for query formulation it is important to evaluate them in termsof their expressive power, tools and reasoning support in order todecide which ontology language is best suitable for this task. Mostdevelopments in the latest ontology languages are inﬂuenced bythe RDF/RDFS XML based language rules and ranking structure.OWL has three sublanguages: OWL-Lite, OWL-DL and OWL-Full;it was developed on top of RDF and DAML + OIL [15]providing gradually more expressiveness power. The Semantic Web RuleLanguage (SWRL)[16]adds rules to OWL-DL (to increase itsexpressiveness) and is a combination of the OWL-DL and sublan-guages of the Rule Markup Language such as First Order Language.The basic idea of SWRL is to extend OWL-DL. It is simple and hastight integration with the existing OWL language; this can be con-sidered as a key characteristic of SWRL. Recently, OWL2 [14]has been developed on the existing structure to OWL (OWL1) i.e. allthe building blocks of OWL2 are present in OWL1; therefore allOWL1 ontologies remain valid OWL2 ontologies [14]. There are three new proﬁles of OWL 2: (1) OWL 2-EL, (2) OWL 2-QL, and
Table 1Comparison between RDF(s), OWL-1 and OWL-2 showing possible uses of knowledgerepresentation concepts to formulate ontology based relational database queries.
Concepts RDF(s) OWL 1 OWL 2Formal semanticsUUU Equivalence /C2UU Class deﬁnitions /C2UU Constraints /C2UU Enumerations /C2UU Cardinality constraints /C2UU Inference /C2UU Property chains /C2/C2U Disjoint properties /C2/C2U Qualiﬁed cardinality restrictions /C2/C2UK. Munir, M. Sheraz Anjum / Applied Computing and Informatics 14 (2018) 116–126 117(3) OWL 2-RL. These proﬁles are syntactic subsets of OWL 2 con-structs. Selection between these proﬁles depends on the reasoningtasks and ontology structure. A comparison between RDF(s), OWL-1 and OWL-2 showing the possible uses of knowledge representa-tion concepts to formulate ontology based relational databasequeries is presented inTable 1. In summary, both OWL and RDFhave many common features, but OWL is a stronger language withgreater machine interpretability than RDF. Moreover, OWL comeswith a larger vocabulary and a stronger syntax than RDF, whichcan be used to deﬁne complex ontology concept restrictions andsubsequently to formulate ontology based relational databasequeries.3. Ontology-based information retrievalThis section reviews the state of the art in ontology-based data-base information retrieval. Here, a historical overview of informa-tion retrieval approaches is ﬁrst presented, followed by a detailedanalysis of existing ontology-based query systems and data searchstrategies in relation to three different key aspects that guided thereview of such work. These three aspects are: (1) ontology assistedvisual or interactive query formulation; (2) ontology based infor-mation linking approaches (also known as keyword search); and(3) ontology based query reﬁnement (including query enrichment).3.1. Information retrieval from a historical perspectiveDatabase information retrieval is the search for information indatabases. The need for effective methods to automate informationretrieval has grown in importance because of the signiﬁcantincrease in the amount of both structured and unstructured infor-mation embodied in information sources. Over the years, manyvisual information retrieval approaches came into existence whichaim to reduce the end users effort while interacting with data-bases. These approaches intend to extract information from data-bases using visual tools. Such approaches include form-based[17], query by example (QBE)[18]or query by template (QBT) [19]etc. These approaches work for basic relational databasequeries, primarily because tabular structure of the database ﬁtswell with the tabular skeletons used in query interfaces. However,such approaches do not help in semantic data retrieval nor do theyprovide any query formulation support to generate complexqueries.To overcome the shortcomings identiﬁed above, further imple-mentation improvements were advocated. One example is QUICK(Universal Interface with Conceptual Knowledge) [18]that focuses on automating query formulation by exploiting ER conceptualschema design knowledge. Unfortunately, in the real world theER model has been used primarily for database design and theyoften do not store domain knowledge. Therefore, the ER basedquery formulation approaches cannot provide a reliable methodto depend on its comprehensiveness in expressing low-level queryconstraints. More recently, several ontology languages with prop-erly speciﬁed semantics have been developed. Several ontology-based approaches have been reported in the literature that canprovide intelligent query formulation services for relational data-bases. Such approaches are reviewed in the following sections.3.2. Ontology-based query formulation approachesOntology-basedVisualorInteractivequery formulation systems are query systems for databases that use visual representations toexpress related data requests. These systems adapt ontologies fordatabase query generation in order to improve the effectivenessof the human-computer communication. In recent years, manysuch systems have been reported in the literature (e.g., TAMBIS[20], GRQL[21], SEWASIE[22], Ontogator[23], OntoViews[24], OntoQF[25], VISAGE[26], Smartch[27], Semantic-based[28]and many others). In most of these ontology based visual query formu-lation systems, the search queries are performed using an ontologybrowser that visualises the ontology as a tree. The actual search isdone via concept selection through a visual tree or through key-words annotated by the visual ontology concepts.The TAMBIS system[20]supports the specialisation or general-isation of the base or ﬁller ontology concepts to build databasespeciﬁc queries interactively. Here the data in the databases arestored (linked) as instances of ontology concepts. This approach
can be applied to resolve integration problems, where all informa-tion sources have the same schema or provide nearly the sameview of a domain. Another similar approach based on ontologicalgraph pattern queries is presented in GRQL [21]and Knowl- edgeSifter[29]. GRQL relies on the full power of the RDF/S datamodel and provides a GUI for building queries based on ontologynavigation. In this approach, queries are constructed by graphicallynavigating through individual RDF/S classes and propertydeﬁnitions. In SEWASIE (SEmantic Webs and AgentS in IntegratedEconomies)[22], the principles of designing and developing anontology-based query interface are presented. The query interfaceof SEWASIE supports the user in formulating a query through aniterative reﬁnement process supported by ontology navigationwhere in the query formulation process, a user can specify arequest using generic terms, can reﬁne some terms of a query orcan introduce new terms, and can iterate the process if needed.In OntoQF[25]OWL-DL ontologies have been used for informa-tion retrieval by automatically generating relational databasequeries using pre-stored domain knowledge. In comparison toother existing approaches, one of the main features of OntoQFapproach is that it uses a combination of both database-to-ontology transformation and mappings to enable the automaticquery formulation process, which helps in generating precise data-base queries. Overall, OntoQF uses a two-phase approach. In theﬁrst pre-processing phase, domain ontology is generated from rela-tional schema and related mappings are deﬁned which links thedomain ontology concepts to relational entities/columns and viceversa[30]. Moreover, the domain experts can specify studies asontology statements using a visual ontology query editor. OntoQFrules for ontology-based relational query formulation suggest thatfor such query formulation the generated domain ontology doesnot require the deﬁnition of datatype ranges [31]or speciﬁc con- straints that are expressed in the database schema. Moreover,the domain knowledge is to be expressed in terms of OWL-DLassertions as concept restrictions, which need to be consistent withthe respective domain ontology schema. In the second translationphase, the OntoQF engine translates ontology statements into thecorresponding relational query statements. OntoQFs approach issuitable for those systems or data mining applications that aimto keep all data at the original location(s) and use domain ontologyfor knowledge-based information retrieval [25]. The system presented in[32]provides interactive database query generation through non-directed graphs supporting naturallanguages. The ontology language used in this system is based onthe RDF structure. In order to construct queries, query terms aresuggested to a user in a natural language from a predeﬁned vocab-ulary. In a report of the EU Translational Research and PatientSafety in Europe (TRANSFoRm)[33], a query and data extraction workbench has been presented. The TRANSFoRm query formula-tion workbench software tool provides interfaces to author,store anddeployqueries of clinical data in order to identify subjectsfor clinical studies. Moreover, TRANSFoRm query formulationworkbench enables users to deﬁne criteria groups ﬂexibly, whilstcatering for complex queries with combinations of operators.118 K. Munir, M. Sheraz Anjum / Applied Computing and Informatics 14 (2018) 116–126The search method of ontology-based image retrieval systemssuch as Ontogator[23], and OntoViews[24]are examples of a concept-based multi-facetsearch using RDFS ontologies. In amulti-facetsearch, multiple distinct views are augmented to datacreated via ontology projection[24]. OntoViews, supports seman- tic auto-completion of a query[24]. It uses a keyword search mechanism for ontology navigation. The search keywords arelinked directly to ontologyclasses. A user search request is pro-cessed as amulti-facetsearch and results are delivered in a webbrowser. Once a single interesting instance(at least) has been found, additional information can be retrieved via ontologybrowsing.Effective information retrieval is becoming more challengingwith the increase in the use of Multimedia databases, which areusually bigger than traditional databases. In [34]a semantic search engine for multimedia databases namely CROEQS is presented thatworks as both ontology-based query translator and text basedsearch engine. In relation to the use of ontologies for the provisionof intelligent and accurate search engines Kunmei Wen [27]pro- posed Smartch, which is an ontology-based search engine. In thisapproach, a ranking method is proposed while searching for con-cepts, instances and the relationships between them. In Smartch,the end-users’ search is performed by keywords. Once results areretrieved end users’ can use the graphical user interface of Smartchto view all instances of an ontology concept, view relationshipbetween two entities and view all instances of a user deﬁned con-cept.Table 2presents a comparison between some of the majorontology-based query formulation tools and approaches.3.3. Ontology-based information linking approachesThe work carried out in the European TONES project [44]pro- vides relational database access through ontologies. In thisapproach, data access is enabled by deﬁning links between ontol-ogyconceptsandrelational data. This ontology-to-database map-ping mechanism enables a designer to link a data source to anOWL-Lite ontology. While deﬁning mappings, the designer needsto take into account that an ad-hoc identiﬁer should denote eachconceptinstanceso thatinstance valuescannot be confused with data items in the data source. Queries are formulated by consultingontology-to-database mapping rules, but this rule derivation pro-cess is carried out manually by ontology and database experts[44]. Another ontology-based information linking approach withsimilar techniques, but for query reﬁnement purposes, is presentedin[45,46]. This approach stores concepts from a data source as partof the ontology and links actual data with ontology concepts. Thequery answers are improved by using the semantic knowledgeexpressed in an ontology. Database queries are transformed byusingis-a,part-ofandsync-ofrelationships between ontologyconcepts.The work carried out in designing ontology-based interactiveinformation retrieval interfaces[47]provides an ontology-based web information retrieval system. This approach works as an inter-active information retrieval system where end-users are guidedthrough an ontology (OWL-based) driven graphical interface todeﬁne the search criteria. This work mainly addresses the problemof ‘‘where to start in the usage of an ontology-based IR interface”;that is, which elements of the ontology should be provided to theuser to begin the search speciﬁcation [47]. Accordingly, a user ﬁrst
selects a relevant domain in order to start building a query. Theinterface then provides a number of search entry points along withtheir descriptions. Once the user selects the desired ontology ele-ments, web information elements are retrieved by following thestatic ontology-to-web links.In the SemanticLIFE project[48], a front-end approach guides the users in generating data requests. The SemanticLIFE systemintegrates multiple data sources and stores them in an ontologicalrepository. The Virtual Query component of the SemanticLIFE sys-tem allows semantic query writing on the ontological RDF-basedrepository. Users are provided with an overview about the systemdata through aVirtual Datacomponent which stores the extractedmetadata of the data sources in the form of an ontology. Theapproach provides a query engine, which recommends the querypatterns according to the users’ querying context. Since it is basedon a common ontology mapped from the local data source ontolo-gies, this approach can reﬁne users’ queries and create sub-queriesover the local data sources.3.4. Ontology-based query reﬁnement approachesOntology-based query reﬁnement approaches aim at enablingend-users to make an improved formulated query. Theseapproaches attempt to improve information retrieval by replacingor adding extra terms into an initial query. Most of the existingTable 2Comparison of ontology-based query formulation tools/approaches.
Tools/approaches Query support by semantic clauseQuery supportby textReplication of data notrequired in ontologySupportsmultimediadatabaseHeterogeneous data-sources supportNaturallanguage queryCROEQS[34]UU U U GRQL[21]UU Ontogator[23]UU U OntoQF[25]UU U OntoViews[24]UU U Smartch[27]UU SEWASIE[22]UU U U TAMBIS[4,20]UU TRANSFoRm[33]UU U U VISAGE[26]UU U U Ontology and Natural Language [35]UU U OPTIQUE[36]UU U KIRA[37]UU U U U ATHENA[38] UU U Using ontology SPARQL[39]U Pay-As-You-Go Method[40]U U Ontop[41,42]UU U Querying via OWL 2 QL[43]UUK. Munir, M. Sheraz Anjum / Applied Computing and Informatics 14 (2018) 116–126 119query reﬁnement approaches include both query rewriting andexpansion operations. Using these approaches end-users are pro-vided interaction with candidate expansion terms based on con-cept hierarchies which stem naturally from the developeddomain ontologies and associated ontological schema. This sectiondiscusses these ontology-based query reﬁnement techniques thathave been introduced over the past few years such as Thesaurus Ontology Navigation[49,50],Ambiguity-Driven[51,52], Information-Need Driven[53]etc.Query expansion implementations (e.g. [49,50]) usethesaurus ontology navigationfor query expansion. These approaches usetheWordNetontology (http://wordnet.priceton.edu) for query expansion and adapt basic keyword search mechanisms using key-words, which are identiﬁed in the ontology for a matching concept.Another approach based on this thesaurus ontology navigationapproach is the Knowledge Sifter[29]. Knowledge Sifter is a scale- able agent-based system that supports access to heterogeneousinformation sources and relies on the agents technology for queryreﬁnement. In this approach, a user query formulation agent sup-ports user query speciﬁcation to access multiple ontologies usingan integrated conceptual model expressed in the OWL. This userquery formulation agent also consults the ontology agent to reﬁneor to generalise a query based on the semantics provided by theontology.In QuOnto[54]and MASTRO[55], the query answering process is performed through query rewriting. Both of the MASTRO andQuOnto systems adapt a similar ontology based query answeringservice[55]. In these approaches, end-user queries are ﬁrst refor-mulated on the basis of ontological intensional knowledge, andthen they are evaluated by a database engine using a means ofpredeﬁned mappings. Database views are deﬁned for ontologyconcepts and roles using SQL queries are speciﬁed in ontology-to-database mapping declarations. In [56]an ontology-based tool to convert a natural language query into nRQL query has been pro-posed. To achieve the conversion, ﬁrst a pre-populated dictionaryis used to search the synonyms of query terms. If no matchingrecords are found then the ontology search is performed, whichresults in extracting a sequence of entities represented in form oftriples. Finally, nRQL query is generated based on the resultantinformation. The ontology-based query reﬁnement approachessuch as theStep-By-Step Query Reﬁnement[52], examine query ambiguity in relation to both structural and semantic ambiguities.Structural ambiguity deals with the actual structure of a query thatis analysed with respect to the underlying ontological knowledge.In the case where a conﬂict is detected, alternative suggestions areretrieved and presented to the end-user for selection.4. Discussion: ontology-based information retrievalIn Section2, beneﬁts, weaknesses, power and effectiveness ofcurrent mature ontology development languages in relation toquery formulation have been highlighted, and it has been notedthat OWL has greater support for expressing semantics when com-pared to RDF and RDFS. According to the literature review ofontology-based information retrieval in Section 3, it appeared that the focus has been on (1) visual or interactive query formulation;(2) information linking approaches; and (3) query reﬁnementapproaches. Ontology based visual or interactive database queryformulation systems use visual representations to express thesearch criteria. Most of these systems are based on the RDF struc-ture and support the specialisation or generalisation of the base orﬁller ontology concepts in order to build database speciﬁc queriesinteractively. However, it may be concluded that much of this workhas been (e.g.,[57,21,29]etc.) towards interactive query genera-tion throughnondirectedgraphs. Other approaches (e.g.,[44,46,58,48]etc.) store all data from a data-source as part of the
ontology (as ontology instances) or link it directly to ontology con-cepts. But, often it is not practically feasible to store all data as partof a certain domain ontology, especially for systems with largeamounts of data. Data that are stored as part of the ontology oftenneed to be loaded in memory to perform the Selectquery opera- tions. Moreover, this may become both a complex and time con-suming activity to directly link all database instances toassociated ontological concepts. Furthermore, it appears that a lim-ited number of query formulation approaches reviewed in the lit-erature review build on the assertion capabilities of ontologies.Thus, it can clearly be deduced that these approaches need to beextended to include further details, such as what needs to beincluded in the ontology from database along with the domainknowledge needed to initiate the query formulation process, toenable ontology-based query formulation based on the ontologysemantic and assertion capabilities.As discussed before, a domain ontology could be used for repre-senting domain metadata with related semantics extracted fromthe relational database schema. To achieve this, ﬁrst there is theneed:1. to identify the extent to which domain metadata and relation-ships from a relational database can be transformed into adomain ontology schema, and2. to identify a systemic approach to transform this selecteddomain metadata and relationships into the domain ontologyschema.Moreover, a description logic based knowledge representationformalism is well suited for modelling domain knowledge (alsocalled assertional knowledge) in a domain ontology in terms ofconcepts and properties. However it may not be necessary or evenpossible to use all of OWLs description logic constructs for formu-lating queries. Therefore, there is a need to identify OWL constructsthat can be utilised to specify domain speciﬁc knowledge as con-cept restrictions for the purpose of formulating relational databasequeries. In addition, there are signiﬁcant differences between OWLontology statement constructs and relational query statement con-structs. Furthermore, the OWL concept restrictions could be eithersimple or complex potentially involving many conditions. As a con-sequence, ontology-driven relational query formulation is not onlydependent on the underlying relational database schema structure,but also on the translation of individual and different combinationsof ontology statement constructs into relational query statementconstructs.An ontology guided (relational) query formulation process alsoneeds to take into consideration aspects of ontology modelling,processing and integration of domain knowledge based on theunderlying relational database models and mapping to ontologicalqueries to a relational database schema. The following sectionsﬁrst review the state of the art in this ﬁeld and build a case toinform the usability of combining both ontology-to-databasetransformation and mapping approaches for relational databasequery formulation.5. Approaches to perform database-to-ontologytransformations and to deﬁne ontology-to-database mappingsIn order to specify the schema structure of a domain ontologyfor relational query formulation, one requirement is to representthe domain metadata along with the semantic relationships inthe underlying relational database schema into the ontologyschema. Thus, to represent a relational data model in an ontologymodel, the transformation of the relational model into the ontol-120 K. Munir, M. Sheraz Anjum / Applied Computing and Informatics 14 (2018) 116–126ogy model remains an essential requirement in order to achievecorrect transformations. This is because an ontology generally con-tains the deﬁnition of the concepts and their relationships for agiven domain, as well as the domain rules (e.g. cardinality, disjoint-ness etc.) that restrict the semantics of concepts and the concep-tual relationships in a speciﬁc conceptualisation of a particularapplication domain. In contrast a relational data model, on the con-trary, represents the structure and semantic data integrity of agiven database application[59]. To provide detail this sectionreviews the existing database-to-ontology transformation andmapping approaches. These approaches are reviewed in terms ofthe loss of data and semantics, structural mapping, domain appli-cability and correctness.Currently, there are several tools and approaches available thatcan be used to deﬁne mappings between ontology schema anddatabase schema (called ontology-to-database mappings) such asD2R-MAP[60], extended D2R[61], R2O[62], VisAVis[63],i n[64] and many others. These approaches are based on the assumptionthat both the database and the ontology pre-exist, and produce aset of corresponding mappings between the relational databaseschema and the ontology schema. These mapping approaches aredifferent from thetransformationapproaches, which aim at gener-ating an ontology model from a relational model (called database-to-ontology transformations) as described in [65–67]. A majority of these approaches provide trivial transformations, where each data-basetablemaps to an ontologyclass, eachcolumnto adatatype property, eachrowto aninstanceandforeign keycolumns are used to link aninstanceof aclasstoinstancesof anotherclass. In addition to these approaches, several database-to-ontology transformationtools have been developed. For example, DataGenie [68]is a plug-in for Protégé[68]that imports data from a relational data-base to an ontology, D2RQ[69]treats Non-RDF relational data-bases as virtual RDF graphs, D2RMAP [70]is a database to RDF mapping language and processor, RDB2Onto [71]works by creat- ing the semantic metadata from a relational database, RDB2ONTdescribes a formal algorithm to use the relational database meta-data plus structural constraints to construct an OWL ontology,and in[72]an approach to develop ontologies from relational data-bases using reverse engineering is presented. The following sec-tions discuss these approaches in more detail.5.1. Ontology-to-database mapping approachesThe ontology-to-database mapping approaches assume theexistence of both a relational database and an ontology and pro-duce a set of corresponding mappings between them [73]. The related approaches are D2R-MAP [60], extended D2R[61], R2O [62], VisAVis[63]
and in[64]. These mapping approaches relateeach construct in the relational database schema to a constructin the ontology schema and ignore unrelated constructs betweenthem. The R2O (Relational to Ontology) [62]approach, for example, is an extensible and declarative language to describe mappingsbetween relational database schemas and ontologies implementedin RDF(S) or OWL. The most important aspect of this approach isthe use of the database schema and the ontology without adapta-tion. Also, this approach deﬁnes a declarative speciﬁcation of themappings between its modelling components. The ontology-to-database mappings are deﬁned as a set of mapping elements thatrelate a relational DB schema to an ontology schema. This meansthat databasetables,columns,primaryandforeign keys, etc., are related to domain ontologyconcepts,attributes,relationships, etc. R2O is an extension of recent approaches such as D2R-MAP [60] and extended D2R[61], which lack expressiveness in terms of writ-ing complex mapping statements and are not considered fullydeclarative[62]. As a consequence, the R2O mapping languagehas been considered sufﬁciently expressive to cope with complexmapping situations arising from low similarity between ontologyand database models[62]. The mapping deﬁnitions generated byR2O are not intended to be generated manually, and therefore theycannot be read or updated without using its speciﬁc GUI. Such anontology-to-database mapping approach is not sufﬁcient to beused for ontology creation for query formulation.An approach for automatic database to ontology mapping thatsatisﬁes both information and query preservations properties ofsemantic mapping is presented in[74]. Here, information preser- vation is the ability to recreate original database from mappingresults and query preservation is the ability to translate each rela-tional query over a relational database into an equivalent semanticquery over resulting RDF graph. D2RQ [69]extracts the contents of a relational database to an RDF graph as per the mappings speciﬁedin a mapping language which is also expressed in RDF. Another toolthat is heavily inﬂuenced by D2RQ [69]is Automapper[75]. Automapper creates an OWL ontology through SPARQL [76]to describe a relational schema. The feature that separates Automap-per from other ontology mapping approaches is that the generatedOWL ontology is also enhanced with SWRL [16]rules to express the constraints, such as the primary key or attribute datatyperestrictions.In[77]a three phased approach to extract ontology from a rela-tional database is presented. In the ﬁrst phase, ontology TBox iswritten using relational schema by generating classes from bothreferenced and referencing columns. Here, the referencing columnis deﬁned as a subclass of the one related to the referenced column.In the second phase, ABox is written using DB values, and in theﬁnal phase, reasoning is performed to extend the ontology.In[78]an automated ontology construction approach is pre-sented that considers relational schema. In addition to trivial tableto class transformations, the proposed mappings in this approachinclude some additional rules in relation to a table key column(s)and other constraints. These include map foreign key column toontology object property and non-foreign key column to ontologydatatype property. Moreover, it maps primary keyanduniquecon- straint to ontologyInverseFunctionalProperty, and NULL constraint tominCardinalityconstraint withminCardinaltyof 1[78]. Thus, this approach can be useful for the transformation of both relationaldatabase structure and its constraints to ontology. Table 3presents a comparison between some of the major database to ontologymapping tools and approaches discussed in this section.5.2. Database-to-ontology transformation approachesThe database-to-ontology transformation approaches assumethat only a relational database exists while an ontology is producedfrom the relational database by applying certain transformationrules[73]. Such approaches include learning ontologies from rela-tional databases[65], mappings from relational to OWL model[66], relational databases to OWL ontology [67]and rule-based transformation of SQL relational databases to OWL ontologies[84]. Most of these approaches result in specifying an ontology thathas the same ﬂat structure (i.e.classesandinstances) as the original relational database (i.e.relationsandcolumns). These approaches utilise automatic or semi-automatic transformations of relationaldatabases to ontologies. Here the transformation is based on aset of rules specifying how to transform the constructs of a rela-tional model to develop an ontology with the relational model asits domain. The basic transformations adopted in these approachesare very similar, where the constructs of a relational model such astables,columns,datatypesandconstraintsare transformed in an ontology model asclasses,instances,propertiesandconstraints, respectfully. In such a scheme, a tableis represented as aclass unless all itscolumnsareforeign keysto othertables. The reference columnof aforeign keyis represented as anobjectproperty. Acol-K. Munir, M. Sheraz Anjum / Applied Computing and Informatics 14 (2018) 116–126 121umnis represented as adatatypeproperty accompanied by amax- imumcardinality ofone, unless it is aforeign key. The column con- straintUniqueis represented as aninversefunctional property. Similarly,Not Nullis represented as aminimumcardinality of one.Aprimary keyis represented as both aninversefunctional property and aminimumcardinality ofone. Finally, arowis repre- sented as an ontologyinstance.Another database-to-ontology transformation tool, RDB2ONT[85]can be used for generating OWL ontologies from relationaldatabase systems. RDB2ONT describes a formal algorithm that usesrelational database metadata and structural constraints to con-struct an OWL ontology whilst preserving the structural con-straints of the underlying database [85]. The RDB2ONT tool has two major components: the OWL Builder and the OWL Writer.The OWL Builder extracts metadata and structural constraints froma relational database system and builds a model. This model is thenused to generate an OWL ontology describing the underlying data-base. This approach is less complex when compared to D2R-MAP[60], D2R[69]or R2O[22]which are based on creating a new com-plicated mapping language. This is mainly due to its simplicity andeasy of conﬁguration for deﬁning concrete data mappings.Triplify[86]is an RDF extraction tool from relational schemas,which uses SQL queries to select subsets of the database schemaand maps them to ontology classes and properties. The advantagesof the Triplify tool include predeﬁned conﬁgurations for the sche-mas and the use of easily understandable SQL queries for the map-ping representation. Another such tool is SquirrelRDF [87], which uses predeﬁned mappings to extract database contents as RDF tri-ples. Its use is fairly simple, but it does not offer the wide range offeatures when compared to D2RQ[69]as explained earlier. Later, Tether[88]has provided some reﬁnements and solved severalshortcomings of the native translation of a relational database toRDF approach. Most of these reﬁnements; such as to reduce thesize of the RDF graph, were speciﬁc to cultural heritage domain.In OntoQF[25]an ontology is generated from a relational data-base (model) that stores the domain metadata, semantics andrelated domain knowledge. The major differences of this approachwith other approaches is that in OntoQF (1) the transactional dataremains at the original data source(s); (2) in can handle the data-base relations up to third normal form; and (3) the resultant trans-formation describes the original database relationships [25]. Moreover, in OntoQF, the ontological descriptions are based ondomain metadata objects; and consequently, it supports changesand extensions to the underlying database schema. In [89], mod- elling of health service knowledge is done in terms of health ser-vice ontology, where the health service ontology is deﬁned fromthe perspective of concept hierarchy and ontology concepts. More-over, the matchmaking algorithm in this approach is powered byUMLS ontology. In[90]
graph-based knowledge representationmodel has been used in query answering; in particular, a concep-tual graph model is used instead of knowledge representation for-malisms as used in[25].Table 4presents a feature comparison between some of themajor database to ontology transformation tools and approachesdiscussed in this section.5.3. Ontology-to-conceptual data modelOntologies allow an interaction between data held in differentformats and can potentially be used as the basis to guide and val-idate models of particular domains. For example, a considerableamount of work has been reported which aims to transformontologies to conceptual data models (expressed, for example, inUML or in ER) in[98,99,72]. This section reviews the key relevantand mature ontology-to-database mapping approaches.According to El-Ghalayini et. al.[98], a domain ontology can be mapped to a domain conceptual data model (CDM). In thisresearch, several mapping rules have been proposed that guideTable 3Comparison of database to ontology mapping tools/techniques.
DB to ontology mapping tools/approaches Ontology to DB mapping support Mappings deﬁnedusing ontology Mappings deﬁnedusing XML Maps DB instancesto ontologyD2R-MAP[60]UU U R2O[62]UU U VisAVis[63]UU OntoQF[30]UU U Extended D2R[70]UU U D2OMapper[68]UU U Mapping DB to RDF and OWL [74]UU U RDB2OWL[79]UU BOOTOX[80]UU RDF Graph from using SPARQL [81]UU U RBA[82]UU R
2BA[83]UU
Table 4Comparison of database to ontology transformation tools/techniques.
Database to ontology transformation tools and/or approaches DB to ontology transformation support Output ontologyin OWL formatOntology extensionby reasoningPreserve structuralconstraintsRDB2Onto[71] UU RDB2ONT[85] UU U Learning ontology from relational schema [78]UU U Generating OWL ontology from RDB [77]UU U U Learning ontology from RDB [65]UU U U DB2OWL[91] UU U OntoQF[25] UU U U Mapping RDB to OWL structure [92]UU U Transforming of RDB to OWL [93]UU U RDB2RDF[94] U U Mapping RDB into Ontology [95,96]UU U A systematic mapping via reverse engineering [97]UU U122 K. Munir, M. Sheraz Anjum / Applied Computing and Informatics 14 (2018) 116–126the transformation from a given domain ontology to a correspond-ing conceptual schema. Another approach to building ontologiesfrom relational databases using reverse engineering is presentedin[72]. Unlike RDB2ONT[85]and RDB2Onto[71], this approach does not directly transform a relational database into an ontology;rather it uses anentity relationship modelto reverse engineer a domain ontology. In this approach, OWL-DL is used as an ontologyrepresentation language and ER for data modelling. The graphtransformation language, as in[100], is used fornodeandedge addition into an ER model. Thenodeaddition operation is used to introduce newobjectsinto the ER model and theedgeaddition operation to buildrelationshipsbetween ER objects.Recently, an approach to transform a domain ontology into arelational database has been presented [99]based on an algorithm embedded in the OWL2DB[101]. In this approach, OWL documentsare parsed in order to generate the corresponding Data DeﬁnitionLanguage (DDL) scripts. During the parsing and data transforma-tion process, the system ﬁrst transforms ontology classes into data-base table deﬁnitions; the next steps are transformations of object,datatype properties and constraints into complete DDL statements,and ﬁnally, the database is ﬁlled with class instances. In order totransform ontologyclassesinto relational databasetables, the approach uses abreadth-ﬁrstsearch on the hierarchical levels ofthe ontology classes[101]. As a result, onetablein a relational database is created for eachclassin an ontology with aone-to- onerelationship between classes and their subclasses. The OWLobjectproperties are transformed into table relationships, which again usesbreadth-ﬁrstsearch. Depending upon the local cardinal-ity ofclassproperties,one-to-manyormany-to-manyrelationships between tables are created. This approach can transform all OWL-Lite syntax but only part of OWL-DL syntax.6. Discussion: database-to-ontology transformation andmappings approaches for relational query formulationAn ontology generally contains the deﬁnition of the conceptsand their relationships for a given domain, as well as the assertionsand domain rules (e.g.cardinality,disjointnessetc.) that restrict the semantics of concepts and the conceptual relationships in a speci-ﬁc conceptualisation of a particular application domain. A rela-tional data model, on the contrary, represents the structure andintegrity of the data elements of the, in principle, singlespeciﬁc enterprise application(s) by which it is being used. A relationaldatabase is a collection ofrelations(tables
) and a relation consists of a relational schema and a relation instance. The relation schemain a database consists of the schemas for the relations, whereas therelation instances are sets of tuples, also called records. Moreover,each tuple is a row and all rows have the same number of ﬁelds(columns). After reviewing such differences and similaritiesbetween ontological and relational data models it has been notedthat ontologies are semantically richer than database (conceptual)schemas, because conceptual data models only aim at establishinga link between users and domain requirements, and describe a log-ical structure of the data. An ontology can also be used to specifydomain knowledge of a speciﬁc domain of interest. Moreover,ontologies can play a signiﬁcant role in information system devel-opment and have the ability to represent conceptual data modelsusing ontological theories, for example as reported by [98,30]. Therefore, existing relational data models can be used to createontologies, while existing ontologies can be used to generate rela-tional (conceptual) schemas.Ontology-to-database mapping approaches assume the exis-tence of both a relational database and a domain ontology. How-ever, the database-to-ontology transformation approachesassume that only a relational database exists and an ontology isgenerated by applying database-to-ontology transformation rules.According to the database-to-ontology transformation approachesas discussed in this paper, the process of ontology constructionfrom relational databases involves analysing the database schemasto determine the database-to-ontology transformation dependen-cies. This analysis helps in determining the relational entities thatmay be transformed into ontology concepts. It also helps to grouptogether or separate in occasions the information speciﬁed in arelational database table and to determine relationships betweendifferent tables. However, the database-to-ontology transforma-tion rules are solely dependent on application requirements. Mostof the existing database-to-ontology transformation approaches donot provide an exact representation of the domain-metadata in anontology and also do not enable the generation of the respectivedatabase relations. Therefore, such transformation approaches donot particularly aid in the process of specifying concept restric-tions, and also when generating complex database queries. In orderto overcome these shortcomings and to use ontology deﬁnitionsfor database information retrieval, a combination of bothdatabase-to-ontology transformation and ontology-to-databasemappings[25]may be utilised, which could be an interestingfuture challenge for the research community. More areas of futureresearch are outlined in the following section.7. Future opportunities and challengesMost of the existing approaches are based on using singledomain ontology for generating relational database queries. Usingsuch approach, database domain metadata and semantics can betransformed into a domain ontology schema with domain knowl-edge added as concept restrictions. It is possible to adapt the sameapproach for multiple databases that are geographically dis-tributed, but conceptually related with respect to a common sub-ject area; for example,a database that manages patients treatmentrecords and another that manages patients family history, where thedomain-subject is Patients. In such cases, an integrated ontologyneeds to be developed to capture the common as well as the differ-ent domain metadata and related semantics of the underlying dis-tributed databases. Moreover, the existing query formulationframeworks should be extended to develop an approach to inte-grate related domain knowledge in order to obtain a uniﬁed domain ontology that captures all of the domain concepts.Moreover, in the past the focus has been on visual or interactivequery formulation, information linking and query reﬁnementapproaches. Most of these ontology based visual or interactivedatabase query formulation systems either use visual representa-tions to express the search criteria or they are based on the ontol-ogy structure and support the specialisation or generalisation ofontology concepts in order to build database speciﬁc queries inter-actively. Other approaches store all data from a data-source as partof the ontology or link it to ontology concepts. However, itappeared that, with the exception of few approaches, there is stilla lack of knowledge-driven query formulation approaches thatbuild on the assertion capabilities of OWL-DL such as OWL-2.Moreover, there is a need to extend the existence approaches toanswer the questions like:What needs to be included in the ontologyfrom database along with the domain knowledge needed to initiate thequery formulation process, to enable ontology-based query formula-tion based on the OWL-DL semantic and assertion capabilities . Plus how such domain knowledge can be automatically evolved andextended within the existing domain ontology? Furthermore, this work may be extended to further domains; and in particular, forenhancing the searching capabilities of massively loaded informa-tion management systems such as national statistical survey portalsandcontext-aware environmentsthat mobile devices are part of.K. Munir, M. Sheraz Anjum / Applied Computing and Informatics 14 (2018) 116–126 123As per the literature review presented in this paper, it alsoappeared that currently there is very limited tool support availablefor the direct speciﬁcation and manipulation of ontology domainknowledge for query formulation. In most of the presented sys-tems; domain experts, with the help of knowledge engineersexpress domain knowledge in terms of ontology statements thatinclude the deﬁnition of property constraints for concepts andindividuals. In this way, whenever related knowledge about realworld concepts change or when new knowledge is added intothe domain ontology, the related ontology ﬁle is reloaded intothe ontology server. In order to enable domain experts to directlyspecify and manipulate domain knowledge, it would be an inter-esting future work to empower the ontology knowledge compo-nent of such systems with tool support for the direct (on the ﬂy) speciﬁcation and manipulation of related domain knowledge inthe ontology server. However, leaving ontology knowledge speciﬁ-cations completely for domain experts, who usually do not havedescription logic experience, may end-up in deﬁning inconsistentdomain knowledge speciﬁcations from real world knowledge,and hence this needs to be controlled.There are also various challenges associated with the manage-ment of large data sets (so-called Big data) include structuring,search, analysis, visualisation e.g. as detailed in [102,103]. Due to the large and complex data sets it becomes difﬁcult to processstored information using traditional data management tools andprocessing applications. Currently there is little research done oninvestigating efﬁcient ways to process these large data sets to getbeneﬁts such as: search performance, creation of reference dataand enable reasoning. One of the best possible ways to achieve thisis by building ontological knowledge base for Big data; and that isto (a) deﬁne a semantic model of data, (b) specify domain knowl-edge, and (c) deﬁne links between different types of semanticknowledge. Hence, ontologies can be used to discover informationfrom Big Data. Based on these clear prospects, future researchefforts can be towards an investigation of the feasibility to useontological knowledge base for the speciﬁcation of Big datas metadata as a foundation to efﬁciently discover useful information foranalysis. Such research efforts will need to ﬁnd answers forresearch questions such as: (1)To what extent the meta data fromBig data (NoSQL DB) can be extracted and aggregated? and (2)How can the extracted Big datas meta data along with domain knowledgebe represented to be the foundation of knowledge discovery?References
[1]G. Zhang, T. Siegler, P. Saxman, N. Sandberg, R. Mueller, N. Johnson, D.Hunscher, S. Arabandi, Visage: a query interface for clinical research, SummitTransl. Bioinform. 1 (2) (2010) 3
. [2]
D. Damljanovic, M. Agatonovic, H. Cunningham, Freya: an interactive way ofquerying linked data using natural language, in: Extended Semantic WebConference, Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2011, pp. 125–138
. [3]
J. Fan, G. Li, L. Zhou, Interactive sql query suggestion: making databases user-friendly, in: IEEE 27th International Conference on In Data Engineering (ICDE),IEEE, 2011, pp. 351–362
. [4] N. Paton, R. Stevens, P. Baker, C. Goble, S. Bechhofer, A. Brass, Queryprocessing in the tambis bioinformatics source integration system, in:Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Scientiﬁc andStatistical Databases (SSDBM), 1999, pp. 138–147.[5]
A. Meštrovic´, A. Calı `, An ontology-based approach to information retrieval, in:Semanitic Keyword-based Search on Structured Data Sources, Springer, 2016,pp. 150–156
.[6]
F. Ramli, S. Noah, T. Kurniawan, Ontology-based information retrieval forhistorical documents, in: Third International Conference on InformationRetrieval and Knowledge Management (CAMP), IEEE, 2016, pp. 55–59
. [7] T.R. Gruber, A translation approach to portable ontology speciﬁcations,Knowl. Acquis. 5 (1993) 199–220, http://dx.doi.org/10.1006/knac.1993.1008 . [8]
K. Munir, K. Hasham, R. McClatchey, Development of a large-scaleneuroimages and clinical variables data atlas in the neugrid4you (n4u)project, J. Biomed. Inform. 57 (2015) 245–262
. [9]
Harold, E. Rusty, Effective XML, Addison-Wesley, 2004 . [10] K. Munir, M. Waseem Hassan, A. Ali, R. McClatchey, I. Willers, Databaseindependent migration of objects into an object-relational database, in: The2nd IEEE International Workshop on Autonomous Decentralized System,IEEE, 2002, pp. 132–139,http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/IWADS.2002.1194661 . [11] G. Klyne, J. Carroll, Resource description framework (rdf): concepts andabstract syntax, Ph.D. thesis, 2004.[12]A. Gómez-Pérez, O. Corcho, Ontology languages for the semantic web, IEEEIntell. Syst. 17 (1) (2002) 54–60
. [13] P. Hayes, I. Horrocks, F. Harmelen, OWL web ontology language; semanticsand abstract syntax, W3C, 2002.[14] W3C, OWL 2 web ontology language, world wide web consortium (W3C),2017.[15] Y. Gil, V. Ratnakar, A comparison of (semantic) markup languages, in:Proceedings of the Fifteenth International Florida Artiﬁcial IntelligenceResearch Society Conference, 2002, pp. 413–418.[16] I. Horrocks, P. Patel-Schneider, H. Boley, S. Tabet, B. Grosof, M. Dean, SWRL: asemantic web rule language swrl: a semantic web rule language combiningOWL and RuleML, W3C Member Submission, 2004.[17] D. Embley, Nfql: the natural forms query language, in: ACM Transactions onDatabase Systems, vol. 14, 1989, pp. 168–211.[18]
R. Semmel, An integrated system for query formulation and database design,in: Proceedings of 4th International Conference on Software Engineering andKnowledge Engineering, IEEE, 1992, pp. 40–46
. [19] M. Scamell, A human factors experimental comparison of sql and qbe, in: IEEETransactions on Software Engineering, vol. 19, 1993, pp. 390–402.[20] P. Baker, A. Brass, S. Bechhofer, C. Goble, N. Paton, R. Stevens, TAMBIS:transparent access to multiple bioinformatics information sources, in:Proceedings of the 6th International Conference on Intelligent Systems forMolecular Biology, 1998, pp. 25–34.[21] N. Athanasis, V. Christophides, D. Kotzinos, Generating on the ﬂy queries forthe semantic web: the ics-forth graphical RQL interface (GRQL), in:Proceedings of the 3rd International Semantic Web Conference, 2004, pp.486–501.[22]
T. Catarci, T. Di Mascio, E. Franconi, G. Santucci, S. Tessaris, An ontology basedvisual tool for query formulation support, in: On The Move to MeaningfulInternet Systems 2003: OTM 2003 Workshops, Springer, Berlin/ Heidelberg,2003, pp. 32–33
.[23] E. Hyvonen, S. Saarela, K. Viljanen, Ontogator: combining view and ontology-based search with semantic browsing, in: Proceedings of XML Finland, 2003.[24] E. Makela, E. Hyvonen, S. Saarela, K. Viljanen, Ontoviews – a tool for creatingsemantic web portals, in: Semantic Computing Research Group HelsinkiInstitute for Information Technology (HIIT), 2003.[25] K. Munir, M. Odeh, R. McClatchey, Ontology-driven relational queryformulation using the semantic and assertional capabilities of owl-dl,Knowl.-Based Syst. 35 (0) (2012) 144–159, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/ j.knosys.2012.04.020.[26]
G. Zhang, T. Siegler, P. Saxman, N. Sandberg, R. Mueller, N. Johnson, D.Hunscher, S. Arabandi, Visage: a query interface for clinical research, AMIAClin. Res. Inform. Summit, San Francisco (2010) 76–80
. [27] K. Wen, R. Li, B. Li, Searching concepts and association relationships based ondomain ontology, in: 9th International Conference on Grid and CooperativeComputing (GCC), 2010, pp. 432–437.[28] K. Munir, M. Odeh, R. McClatchey, S. Khan, I. Habib, Semantic informationretrieval from distributed heterogeneous data sources, in: The 4thInternational Workshop on Frontiers of Information Technology, SpecialTrack on Bioinformatics for Academia and Industry, 2006.[29] L. Kerschberg, M. Chowdhury, A. Damiano, Knowledge sifter: ontology-drivensearch over heterogeneous databases, in: Proc. 16th Int. Conf. Scientiﬁc andStatistical DB Management, 2004.[30] K. Munir, M. Odeh, R. McClatchey, Managing the mappings between domainontologies and database schemas when formulating relational queries, in:Proceedings of the 2009 International Database Engineering and ApplicationsSymposium, IDEAS ’09, ACM, New York, NY, USA, 2009, pp. 131–141, doi:http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1620432.1620446 .. [31] K. Munir, M. Odeh, P. Bloodsworth, R. McClatchey, Using assertioncapabilities of an owl-based ontology for query formulation, in: IEEE,International Conference on Information and Communication Technologies(ICTTA08): From Theory to Applications, IEEE, 2008, pp. 1–6, http://dx.doi. org/10.1109/ICTTA.2008.4530296 . [32] E. Kapetanios, P. Groenewoud, Query construction through meaningfulsuggestions of terms, in: FQAS, 2002, pp. 226–239.[33] L. Zhao, S. Lim Choi Keung, J. Rossiter, T. Arvanitis, Report for the eutranslational research and patient safety in europe (transform) project: queryformulation workbench, 2012.[34] S. Vandamme, J. Deleu, T. Wauters, B. Vermeulen, F. De Turck, Croeqs:Contemporaneous role ontology-based expanded query search – analysis ofthe result set size, 10th Workshop on Image Analysis for MultimediaInteractive Services, 2009 (WIAMIS ’09), 2009, pp. 169–172.[35]
B. Sujatha, S.V. Raju, Ontology based natural language interface for relationaldatabases, Proc. Comput. Sci. 92 (2016) 487–492
. [36]
E. Kharlamov, S. Brandt, E. Jimenez-Ruiz, Y. Kotidis, S. Lamparter, T. Mailis, C.Neuenstadt, Ö. Öezçep, C. Pinkel, C. Svingos, et al., Ontology-based integrationof streaming and static relational data with optique, in: Proceedings of the2016 International Conference on Management of Data, ACM, 2016, pp.2109–2112
.[37]
F. Amato, V. Moscato, A. Picariello, G. Sperlí, Kira: a system for knowledge-based access to multimedia art collections, in: 2017 IEEE 11th InternationalConference on Semantic Computing (ICSC), IEEE, 2017, pp. 338–343
.124 K. Munir, M. Sheraz Anjum / Applied Computing and Informatics 14 (2018) 116–126[38]D. Saha, A. Floratou, K. Sankaranarayanan, U.F. Minhas, A.R. Mittal, F. Özcan,Athena: an ontology-driven system for natural language querying overrelational data stores, Proc. VLDB Endowment 9 (12) (2016) 1209–1220
. [39]
M.A. Hazber, R. Li, X. Gu, G. Xu, Y. Li, Semantic sparql query in a relationaldatabase based on ontology construction, in: 2015 11th InternationalConference on Semantics, Knowledge and Grids (SKG), IEEE, 2015, pp. 25–32
. [40]
J.F. Sequeda, D.P. Miranker, A pay-as-you-go methodology for ontology-baseddata access, IEEE Internet Comput. 21 (2) (2017) 92–96
. [41]
M. Rodriguez-Muro, R. Kontchakov, M. Zakharyaschev, Ontology-based dataaccess: ontop of databases, in: International Semantic Web Conference,Springer, 2013, pp. 558–573
. [42]
D. Calvanese, B. Cogrel, S. Komla-Ebri, R. Kontchakov, D. Lanti, M. Rezk, M.Rodriguez-Muro, G. Xiao, Ontop: answering sparql queries over relationaldatabases, Semantic Web 8 (3) (2017) 471–487
. [43]
S. Klarman, T. Meyer, Querying temporal databases via owl 2 ql, in:International Conference on Web Reasoning and Rule Systems, Springer,2014, pp. 92–107
.[44] D. Calvanese, G. Giacomo, D. Lembo, M. Lenzerini, A. Poggi, R. Rosati, Linkingdata to ontologies: the description logic DL-LiteA, in: Proc. of the 2ndWorkshop on OWL: Experiences and Directions (OWLED), 2006.[45] C. Necib, J.-C. Freytag, Ontologies for database query reformulation, in:Advances in Databases and Information Systems (ADBIS), 2004.[46] C. Necib, J.-C. Freytag, Query processing using ontologies, in: CAiSE, 2005, pp.167–186.[47]
Garcia, M.-A.E. Sicilia, Designing ontology-based interactive informationretrieval interfaces, Lecture Notes Comput. Sci. 2889 (2003) 152–165
. [48]
H. Hoang, M. Nguyen, A. Tjoa, A. Andjomshoaa, A front-end approach for userquery generation and information retrieval in the semanticlife framework, in:Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Information Integrationand Web-based Applications and Services, Austrian Computer Society, 2006,pp. 107–116
.[49] D. Buscaldi, P. Rosso, E. Arnal, A wordnet-based query expansion method forgeographical information retrieval, in: Working Notes for the CLEF Workshop,2005.[50] M. Rila, The use of wordnet in information retrieval, in: ACL Workshopon the Usage of WordNet In Natural Language Processing Systems, 1998,pp. 31–37.[51] N. Stojanovic, J. Gonzalez, L. Stojanovic, Ontologer – a system for usage-driven management of ontology-based information portals, in: Proc. L-CAP’03 Conference, 2003.[52]
N. Stojanovic, R. Studer, L. Stojanovic, An approach for step-by-step queryreﬁnement in the ontology-based information retrieval, in: Proceedings ofthe 2004 IEEE/WIC/ACM International Conference on Web Intelligence, WI’04, IEEE Computer Society, Washington, DC, USA, 2004, pp. 36–43
. [53] N. Stojanovic, Information-need driven query reﬁnement, in: Proc. IEEE/WICInt. Conf. Web Intelligence, 2003.[54] A. Acciarri, D. Calvanese, G. Giacomo, D. Lembo, M. Lenzerini, M. Palmieri, R.Rosati, QUONTO: querying ontologies, in: Proc. of AAAI, 2005, pp. 1670–1673.[55] A. Poggi, M. Ruzzi, Ontology-based data access with MASTRO, in: Proceedingsof the 15th Italian Conf. on Database Systems (SEBD), 2007.[56] H. Boumechaal, Z. Boufaida, Formalization of natural language queries, in:International Symposium on Innovations in Intelligent Systems andApplications (INISTA), 2011, pp. 495–499.[57] E. Kapetanios, D. Baer, B. Glaus, P. Groenewoud, Data querying and analysisthrough integration of intentional and extensional semantics, in: 16thInternational Conference on Scientiﬁc and Statistical Database Management(SSDBM), 2004, pp. 353–356.[58] A. Borgida, R.J. Brachman, Loading data into description reasoners, in: TheACM SIGMOD, International Conference on Management of Data,Washington, DC, USA, 1993, pp. 217–226.[59] K. Munir, S.L. Kiani, K. Hasham, R. McClatchey, A. Branson, J. Shamdasani,Provision of an integrated data analysis platform for computationalneuroscience experiments, J. Syst. Inform. Technol. 16 (3) (2014) 150–169,http://dx.doi.org/10.1108/JSIT-01-2014-0004 .https://doi.org/10.1108/JSIT- 01-2014-0004.[60] C. Bizer, D2R MAP – a database to RDF mapping language, 2003.[61] J. Barrasa, Ó. Corcho, A. Gómez-Pérez, A case study of database-to-ontologymapping, in: Semantic Integration Workshop (ISWC 2003), 2003.[62] J. Barrasa, O. Corcho, G. Shen, A. Gomez-Perez, R2O, an extensible andsemantically based database-to-ontology mapping language, in: 2ndWorkshop on Semantic Web and Databases (SWDB), 2004.[63] N. Konstantinou, D.-E. Spanos, M. Chalas, E. Solidakis, N. Mitrou, VisAVis: anapproach to an intermediate layer between ontologies and relationaldatabase contents, in: International Workshop on Web InformationSystems Modeling (WISM), 2006.[64]
Y. An, A. Borgida, J. Mylopoulos, Inferring complex semantic mappingsbetween relational tables and ontologies from simple correspondences, in:Proceedings of On The Move to Meaningful Internet Systems (OTM’05):CoopIS, DOA, and ODBASE, Springer Verlag, 2005, pp. 1152–1169
. [65] M. Li, X. Du, S. Wang, Learning ontology from relational database, in:Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on Machine Learning andCybernetics, 2005, pp. 3410–3415.[66] G. Shen, Z. Huang, X. Zhu, X. Zhao, Research on the rules of mapping fromrelational model to OWL, in: Proceedings of the Workshop on OWL:Experiences and Directions, 2006.[67] A. Buccella, M. Penabad, F. Rodriguez, A. Farina, A. Cechich, From relationaldatabases to owl ontologies, in: Proceedings of the 6th National RussianResearch Conference, 2004.[68] Z. Xu, S. Zhang, Y. Dong, Mapping between relational database schema andowl ontology for deep annotation, in: Web Intelligence, 2006 (WI 2006), IEEE/WIC/ACM International Conference on Web Intelligence, 2006, pp. 248–552.[69] C. Bizer, A. Seaborne, D2RQ – treating non-rdf databases as virtual rdf graphs,in: Proceedings of the 3rd International Semantic Web Conference(ISWC2004), 2004.[70] C. Bizer, Database to RDF mapping language and processor, d2rmap, 2016.<http://www4.wiwiss.fu-berlin.de/bizer/d2rmap/d2rmap.htm >. [71]M. Seleng, M. Laclavik, Z. Balogh, L. Hluchy, Rdb2onto: approach for creatingsemantic metadata from relational database data, in: Proceedings of theNinth International Conference on Informatics, Slovak Society for AppliedCybernetics and Informatics, Bratislava, 2007, pp. 113–116
. [72]
J. Trinkunas, O. Vasilecas, Building Ontologies from Relational DatabasesUsing Reverse Engineering Methods, ACM, 2007
. [73] I. Astrova, N. Korda, A. Kalja, Rule-based transformation of sql relationaldatabases to owl ontologies, in: Proceedings of the 2nd InternationalConference on Metadata & Semantics Research, 2007.[74]
J.F. Sequeda, M. Arenas, D.P. Miranker, On directly mapping relationaldatabases to rdf and owl, in: Proceedings of the 21st InternationalConference on World Wide Web, WWW ’12, ACM, New York, NY, USA,2012, pp. 649–658
.[75] D.-M. Fisher, M., G. Joiner, Use of OWL and SWRL for semantic relationaldatabase translation, in: Proceedings of the Fourth OWLED Workshop onOWL: Experiences and Direction, 2008.[76] A. Seaborne, Sparql query language for rdf, W3C Working Draft, 12 October2004.[77] J.W. Choi, M.H. Kim, Generating owl ontology from relational database, in:Third FTRA International Conference on Mobile, Ubiquitous, and IntelligentComputing (MUSIC), 2012, pp. 53–59.[78] L. Yiqing, L. Lu, L. Chen, Automatic learning ontology from relational schema,in: IEEE Symposium on Robotics and Applications (ISRA), 2012, pp. 592–595.[79]
K. Cˇerɗns, G. B ͣmans, Database to ontology mapping patterns in rdb2owl lite,in: International Baltic Conference on Databases and Information Systems,Springer, 2016, pp. 35–49
. [80]
E. Jiménez-Ruiz, E. Kharlamov, D. Zheleznyakov, I. Horrocks, C. Pinkel, M.G.Skj
æveland, E. Thorstensen, J. Mora, Bootox: practical mapping of rdbs to owl2, in: International Semantic Web Conference, Springer, 2015, pp. 113–132
. [81]
A. Oudani, M. Bahaj, I. Cherti, C. Luo, T. He, X. Zhang, Z. Zhou, Y. Ouyang, Y.Ling, Q. Liu, et al., Creating an rdf graph from a relational database usingsparql, JSW 10 (4) (2015) 384–391
. [82]
L.E.T. Neto, V.M.P. Vidal, M.A. Casanova, J.M. Monteiro, R2rml by assertion: asemi-automatic tool for generating customised r2rml mappings, in: ExtendedSemantic Web Conference, Springer, 2013, pp. 248–252
. [83] R. Berardi, V.M.P. Vidal, M.A. Casanova, R2ba-rationalizing r2rml mapping byassertion, in: ICEIS (2), Citeseer, 2015, pp. 5–14.[84] I. Astrova, N. Korda, A. Kalja, Rule-based transformation of SQL relationaldatabases to OWL ontologies, in: 2nd International Conference on MetadataSemantic Research, 2007.[85] Q. Trinh, K. Barker, R. Alhajj, RDB2ONT: A tool for generating owl ontologies fromrelational database systems, in: Proceedings of the Advanced InternationalConference on Telecommunications and International Conference on Internetand Web Applications and Services (AICT/ICIW 2006), 2006.[86]
S. Auer, S. Dietzold, J. Lehmann, S. Hellmann, D. Aumueller, Triplify: light-weight linked data publication from relational databases, in: Proceedings ofthe 18th International Conference on World Wide Web, ACM, 2009, pp. 621–630
.[87] S.D. Seaborne, A., S. Williams, SQL-RDF, in: W3C Workshop on RDF Access toRelational Databases, 2007.[88] K. Byrne, Having triplets – holding cultural data as RDF, in: Proceedings of theECDL 2008 Workshop on Information Access to Cultural Heritage, 2008.[89]
H. Dong, F. Hussain, Semantic service matchmaking for digital healthecosystems, Knowl.-Based Syst. 26 (6) (2011) 761–774
. [90]
R. Thomopoulos, J.-R. Bourguet, B. Cuq, A. Ndiaye, Answering queries thatmay have results in the future: a case study in food science, Knowl.-BasedSyst. 23 (5) (2010) 491–495
. [91] N. Cullot, R. Ghawi, K. Yétongnon, Db2owl: A tool for automatic database-to-ontology mapping, in: Proceedings of 15th Italian Symposium on AdvancedDatabase Systems (SEBD 2007), 2007, pp. 491–494.[92]
N. Gherabi, K. Addakiri, M. Bahaj, Mapping relational database into owlstructure with data semantic preservation, Comput. Sci. Inform. Security 10(1) (2012)
.[93] M. Dadjoo, E. Kheirkhah, An approach for transforming of relational databasesto owl ontology, arXiv:1502.05844, 2015 Feb 20.[94]
P.T.T. Thuy, N.D. Thuan, Y. Han, K. Park, Y.-K. Lee, Rdb2rdf: completedtransformation from relational database into rdf ontology, in: Proceedings ofthe 8th International Conference on Ubiquitous Information Managementand Communication, ACM, 2014, p. 88
. [95]
M.A. Hazber, R. Li, Y. Zhang, G. Xu, An approach for mapping relationaldatabase into ontology, in: 2015 12th Web Information System andApplication Conference (WISA), IEEE, 2015, pp. 120–125
. [96]
M.A. Hazber, R. Li, X. Gu, G. Xu, Integration mapping rules: transformingrelational database to semantic web ontology, Appl. Math. 10 (3) (2016) 1–21
.K. Munir, M. Sheraz Anjum / Applied Computing and Informatics 14 (2018) 116–126 125[97]A.A. Abbasi, N. Kulathuramaiyer, A systematic mapping study of databaseresources to ontology via reverse engineering, Asian J. Inform. Technol. 15 (4)(2016) 730–737
.[98] H. El-Ghalayini, M. Odeh, R. McClatchey, T. Solomonides, Reverse engineeringdomain ontologies to conceptual data models, in: Proceedings of the 23rdIASTED International Conference on Databases and Applications, 2005, pp.222–227.[99]
E. Vysniauskas, L. Nemuraite, Transforming ontology representation fromOWL to relational database, Inform. Technol. Control 35 (3A) (2006)
. [100] P. Mitra, G. Wiederhold, M. Kersten, A graph oriented model for articulationof ontology interdependencies, in: Proc. Extending Database Technologies,Berlin Heidelberg, 2000, pp. 86–100.[101]
A. Gali, C. Chen, K. Claypool, R. Uceda-Sosa, From ontology to relationaldatabases, Conceptual Model. Adv. Appl. Domains 3289 (2005) 278–289
. [102] M. Bilal, L.O. Oyedele, J. Qadir, K. Munir, S.O. Ajayi, O.O. Akinade, H.A.Owolabi, H.A. Alaka, M. Pasha, Big data in the construction industry: a reviewof present status, opportunities, and future trends, Adv. Eng. Inform. 30 (3)(2016) 500–521,http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.aei.2016.07.001 . [103] M. Bilal, L.O. Oyedele, J. Qadir, K. Munir, O.O. Akinade, S.O. Ajayi, H.A. Alaka, H.A. Owolabi, Analysis of critical features and evaluation of bim software:towards a plug-in for construction waste minimization using big data, Int. J.Sustain. Build. Technol. Urban Develop. 6 (4) (2015) 211–228, http://dx.doi. org/10.1080/2093761X.2015.1116415 .Dr. Kamran Munirhas BSc, M.Sc. and Ph.D. in Computer Science from UnitedKingdom. His primary research interests include Information Science, Big data,cloud computing, distributed data processing and knowledge management. He hascontributed to the various European Commission projects: Asia Link STAFF (2004–2006), Health-e-Child (2006–2010), neuGRID (2011–2014) and neuGRID4You(2013–2016) in which he led the Joint Research Area. His role also includes theproduction and leadership of UK and international postgraduate computer sciencedegree courses such as Big Data and Cloud Computing, and frequent collaborationswith students and graduates, including the conduct of collaborative work andsupervision of MPhil and PhD theses.M. Sheraz Anjumhas obtained MS degree from National University of Sciences andTechnology (NUST) and currently doing PhD in Computer Science. His researchinterests are in the areas of knowledge management, relational databases and Bigdata.126 K. Munir, M. Sheraz Anjum / Applied Computing and Informatics 14 (2018) 116–126