 AASRI Procedia   9  ( 2014 )  12 – 18 Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
2212-6716 © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B. V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/3.0/).Peer-review under responsibility of Scientific Committee of American Applied Science Research Institutedoi: 10.1016/j.aasri.2014.09.004 
ScienceDirect
2014 AASRI Conference on Circuit and Signal Processing (CSP 2014) 
The Hierarchical Network Topology Management System based on Managed Object and View Mechanism 
Hui-Qin Jin, Man-Gui Liang* 
Institute of Information Science, Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing 100044, China Beijing Key Laboratory of Advanced Information Science and Network Technology, Beijing 100044, China  
Abstract 
Now how to improve the developing efficiency and enhance the scalability of network management system has become a hot issue in the current research. In this paper, according to the actual demands, understanding the functional requirements and analyzing the process of network topology management, we propose the hierarchical network topology management s
ystem based on managed object and view mechanism. Using an object-based management method, it achieves the expansion of the three-layer model of network topology management; using the view mechanism, it reduces the dependence on the specific needs for the system and achieves a hierarchical network topology management system. 
© 2014 Published by Elsevier B.V. Selection and/or peer review under responsibility of American Applied Science Research Institute 
Keywords: Hierarchical network; topology management; managed object; view mechanism; mapping; network management 
1. Introduction With the expansion and complexity of network scale, management and maintenance of the network has become critical. And network management system s(NMS) have become an important part of network construction and maintenance[1]. Meanwhile, network topology management(NTM) is the basic part of NMS, and most of the functions will be through topological graph to reflect.                                                           
* Corresponding author. Tel.: +86-10-51684780. E-mail address:12120426@bjtu.edu.cn (H-Q. Jin), mgliang58@gmail.com (M.-G. Liang).
© 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B. V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/3.0/).Peer-review under responsibility of Scientific Committee of American Applied Science Research Institute13  Hui-Qin Jin and Man-Gui Liang  /  AASRI Procedia   9  ( 2014 )  12 – 18 
Network topology is the physical or logical layout, corresponding the physical or logical relationship between network nodes. Grasping the topology information accurately is the basis of a series of functions[2]. NTM is a flexible and difficult subsystem. It not only requires to design the interfaces, through graphic symbols display the connection relationship between devices and attribute, but also deals with the real-time interactions with network performance and alarm subsyst em, reflecting the monitoring function[3]. 2. Related Works 2.1. Life cycle NTM has its fixed life cycle. First is the data acquisiti on stage. The second is the data analysis stage. And the thi
 rd is presenting stage, presenting the related topological information according to the user’s demand. And with the change of requirements, it can adjust the presentation of mode and content. The last is using stage. The users can configure and monitor the managed object. 2.2. Key technologies xHierarchical display strategy Here
 we adopt the hierarchical display strategy, the following IP network as an example. The first layer shows the main topology, namely the relationship between router and subnet. The second layer displays interconnection in the subnet; if the subnet also includes router or switch, It can also go deep into the port level for the third layer of topology structure.  xGraphic coordinate allocation strategy It is a techn
ical difficulty to distribute coordinates to network reasonably and make them more attractive on the screen[4]. Based on the hierarchical structure, they can automatically generate the network topology, thus improve the appearance of topology in order to manage the topology intelligently. xData loading strategy Ordina
ry loading model is generally used, because of the small amount of data. Multilevel loading model is the prem
 ise of the hierarchical network. When the system is initialized, it only presents the uppermost data. The multilevel loading model can not only save space, but also improve the speed of loading system. In general, NTM will be developed in the intelligent and hierarchical direction in the future[8]. In the whole life cycle, the most difficult is analyzing topol ogical data, and the large amount of work is database construction, graphic processing and external interfaces. 3. Overall Design The design mainly includes three points: based on the design of managed object, mapping managed object to database, the implementation of functions. Arch itecture design adopts three-layer architecture model. 3.1. Based on the design of managed object The managed objects are abstracted from network resources[5], namely the basic elements of network topology, such as network equipment, network type and network relationship. Various network elements can be abstracted as managed objects, and they can be viewed as an instance of  managed object[6].  14   Hui-Qin Jin and Man-Gui Liang  /  AASRI Procedia   9  ( 2014 )  12 – 18 
3.2. Mapping managed object to database It adopts the view mechanism, including data mapping  and operation mapping. Data mapping refers to the data mapped into memory object, and operation mapping sucks the changed data into database as shown in fig1. 
Fig.1. (a) Data mapping module; (b) Operation mapping module 
Data mapping module includes two parts of capturing object and converting object. Capturing object refers to getting the object from database; Converting obj ect refers to the transformation from the obtained object into the identified memory object. Operation mapping module includes acquisition and transformation. Acquisition refers to the operation of topological interfaces, resource tree, information in the table, such as the operational records of modifying/deleting/adding the managed object. Operation transformation refers that the operating results are saved to the database.  3.3. Architecture design The architecture design is the foundation to realize the software system, and one good architecture design helps implement overall hierarchical structure[7]. The architecture based on hierarchical design can be divided into data processing layer, logic business layer and graphical presentation layer. Data processing layer includes data mapping and operation mapping, which is responsible for obtaining the managed objects; logic business layer includes four parts: processing the to pology, analyzing managed objects, alarm interface, and performance interface, which is responsible for topological operations and analysis; graphical presentation layer includes topological graph, resource tree and information ta ble,which is responsible for presenting the managed objects. Each layer module communicates by means of the managed object and message mechanism to realize the data exchange and sharing. The hierarchical structure of system is shown in fig2. 3.4. Functions From the view of software, the functional modules can  be achieved through the graphics rendering and graphics packaging, so they can be divided into the following modules: topology presentation module, topology management module and the data control module. Topology presentation module includes topology, resource tree and information table, corresponding to the gra phical presentation layer in the software architecture; topology management module includes pr ocessing topology, analyzing managed object and external interfaces, corresponding to the logic business layer; the data control module includes two parts, corresponding to the data processing layer. Get the view information
Create an instance of mana
ged ob ject
Assign the view information to the instance 
Save the instanceGet the operation object 
Get the changed information
Triggers achieve operational  transformation 
Save to database15  Hui-Qin Jin and Man-Gui Liang  /  AASRI Procedia   9  ( 2014 )  12 – 18 
Fig.2. The hierarchical architecture of system Topological Graph Resource Tree Information Table Graphic presentation layer 
Processing topology  business Analyzing managed  objects 
Data mapping Operation mapping 
    DatabaseDatabase view mapping Data processing layer Interface of managed object Logic Business layer Alarm interface  Performance interface 
MessagemechanismInterface of managed object Messagemechanism  16   Hui-Qin Jin and Man-Gui Liang  /  AASRI Procedia   9  ( 2014 )  12 – 18 
Fig.3. The flow chart of topology drawing module 
4. Implementation of Main Functional Modules 4.1. Topology drawing module According to the location of father’s node to determine the location in the hierarchy, scan the database to get the node number and network topology, and compute the position of node icons, then load icon and form the topological layout. Every five minutes, the page will update the view. The flow chart is shown in fig3. 4.2. Information table module Information tables mainly include three types: attribute  information, error rate information and flow information. The specific form relates to the specific format of managed object. Therefore, we only present the basic information, and some specific characteristics need to be implemented in the extended class. 4.3. Resource tree module Resource tree mainly reflects the managed objects in the form of tree. First, display the top level topology of the whole, then gradually show the subnet details. The flow chart of resource tree modu le is shown in fig4. YYNStart
Scan the database, obtain the topological structure, and write into subnetwork(SubNet) 
Obtain topology success
Generate position layout 
Load port icon based on the node's position 
OnDraw(): draw connecting line, 
Is page opened for the first
FinishSetTimer 
N17  Hui-Qin Jin and Man-Gui Liang  /  AASRI Procedia   9  ( 2014 )  12 – 18 
Fig.4. The flow chart of resource tree module 
5. Conclusion The system achieves various functions of network topology using hierarchical structure and modular design. Opening interface implements the extension of system, and multilevel loading data improves the efficiency of the system. In this system, first pull data from the database by the mapping method, and use the functional module to handle the data between database and managed object; then analyze the difference and connection through business analysis module to satisfy th e needs for topological business. Finally, present the data through the graphical interface. The system is flexible, expansible and easy to maintain. And t
he performance management system and warning system are required for further study. 
Acknowledgements The authors are grateful to the anonymous reviewers fo r their valuable comments and suggestions. This work was supported by the Ministry of Science and Technology of China (“863 program”) under Grant No. 2007AA01Z203, the National Basic Research Program of China(‘‘973 program’’) under Grant No. 2007CB307101. N
N
YY
Display subnet topology Start
Scan the database, and obtain the node information
Divide the set according to top-level nodes
Present the tree
Click the nodeObtain information 
Load the data 
Finish18   Hui-Qin Jin and Man-Gui Liang  /  AASRI Procedia   9  ( 2014 )  12 – 18 
References [1] Yang Liu, Li Zhenning, Du Nin, Zhang Dafang. Desi gn and implementation of next generation internet network management system[A]. Computer Engineering 2008;34-7:104-106. [2] Li Tao. The research and implementation of net work topology management system based on SNMP[D]. Institute of software 2003. [3] Zhang Wei, Tang Xuewen, Ma Ying. The design and implementation of graphical campus network monitoring system[A]. Computer and Modernization 2007;05-4:72-75. [4] Liu Yuhua, Xiao Debao, Xu Zhankui. The design and implementation of discovering automatically and displaying campus network topology[A]. Computer Applications 2003;23-11:56-58. [5] Meng Luoming, Qi Feng.Modern network management technology[M]. Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications Press 2001. [6] Liu Huiyong. Telecommunication network resource management model[A]. Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications 2004;1007-5321:01-08. [7] Liu yong. The design and implementation of li ghtweight and scalable network management system[A]. Jichang College 2008;1:101-104. [8] Li Juxi. The implementation of universal distributed network management and IP network topology management[D]. University of Electronic Science and Technology 2005. 