Artiﬁcial  Intelligence  in the Life Sciences  3 (2023) 100077 
Contents  lists available  at ScienceDirect  
Artiﬁcial  Intelligence  in the Life Sciences  
journal  homepage:  www.elsevier.com/locate/ailsci  
Trends  and challenges  in chemoinformatics  research  in Latin  America  
Jazmín  Miranda-Salas  a , Carlos  Peña-Varas  b , c , Ignacio  Valenzuela  Martínez  b , 
Dionisio  A. Olmedo  d , William  J. Zamora  e , f , i , Miguel  Angel  Chávez-Fumagalli  g , 
Daniela  Q. Azevedo  h , Rachel  Oliveira  Castilho  h , Vinicius  G. Maltarollo  h , David  Ramírez  b , 
JoséL.  Medina-Franco  a , ∗ 
a DIFACQUIM  Research Group, Department  of Pharmacy,  School of Chemistry,  Universidad  Nacional Autónoma  de México, Avenida Universidad  3000, México 04510, 
Mexico 
b Departamento  de Farmacología,  Facultad de Ciencias Biológicas,  Universidad  de Concepción,  Concepción  4030000,  Chile 
c Departamento  de Ciencias de la Computación,  Facultad de Ingeniería,  Universidad  de Concepción,  Concepción  4030000,  Chile 
d Centro de Investigaciones  Farmacognósticas  de la Flora Panameña  (CIFLORPAN),  Apartado 0824-00178,  Facultad de Farmacia,  Universidad  de Panamá, Ciudad de 
Panamá, Panamá
e CBio3 Laboratory,  School of Chemistry,  University  of Costa Rica, San Pedro, San José, Costa Rica 
f Laboratory  of Computational  Toxicology  and Biological  Testing Laboratory  (LEBi), University  of Costa Rica, San Pedro, San José, Costa Rica 
g Computational  Biology and Chemistry  Research Group, Vicerrectorado  de Investigación,  Universidad  Católica de Santa María, Arequipa 04000, Perú
h Department  of Pharmaceutical  Products, Faculty of Pharmacy,  Universidade  Federal de Minas Gerais, Av. Antônio Carlos, 6627, Belo Horizonte,  Minas Gerais 
31270-901,  Brazil 
i Advanced  Computing  Lab (CNCA), National High Technology  Center (CeNAT),  Pavas, San José, Costa Rica 
a r t i c l e i n f o 
Keywords:  
Artiﬁcial intelligence  
Chemoinformatics  
Drug discovery  
Education  
Open science a b s t r a c t 
Chemoinformatics  is an independent  inter-discipline  with a broad impact in drug design and discovery,  medicinal  
chemistry,  biochemistry,  analytical  and organic chemistry,  natural products,  and several other areas in chemistry.  
Through  collaborations,  scientiﬁc  exchanges,  and participation  in international  research  networks,  Latin Amer- 
ican scientists  have contributed  to the development  of this subject. The aim of this perspective  is to discuss 
the status and progress  of the chemoinformatic  discipline  in Latin America.  We team up to provide an author´s  
perspective  on the topics that have been investigated  and published  over the past twelve years, collaborations  be- 
tween Latin America  researchers  and others worldwide,  contributions  to open-access  chemoinformatic  tools such 
as web servers, and educational-related  resources  and events, such as scientiﬁc  conferences.  We conclude  that 
linking and fostering  collaboration  within each nation as well as among other Latin American  nations and glob- 
ally is made possible  by open science and the democratization  of science. We also outline strategic  actions that 
can boost the development  and practice  of chemoinformatic  in the region and enhance  the interaction  between  
Latin American  countries  and the rest of the world. 
1. Introduction  
Chemoinformatics  is an independent  discipline  that has a broad 
range of applications  in chemistry  [ 1 , 2 ]. It has several formal def- 
initions,  for example,  “All concepts  and methods  that are designed  to 
interface  theoretical  and experimental  eﬀorts involving  small molecules  ”
[3] or “Chemoinformatics  is a generic term that encompasses  the design, 
creation,  organization,  management,  retrieval,  analysis,  dissemination,  vi- 
sualization,  and use of chemical  information  ”[4] . Other deﬁnitions  are 
collectively  discussed  elsewhere  [1] . It should be noted that several 
terms published  in the literature  refer to the same discipline  and its 
Abbreviations:  AI, artiﬁcial  intelligence;  LaNAPDB,  Latin American  Natural Product Database;  QSAR, quantitative  structure-activity  relationships;  SAMPL, statis- 
tical assessment  of the modeling  of proteins  and ligands; VOS, visualization  of similarity.  
∗ Corresponding  author. 
E-mail address: medinajl@unam.mx  (J.L. Medina-Franco)  . use sometimes  depends  on the geographical  region. To illustrate  this 
fact, Fig. 1 shows a parallel  coordinate  plot with the number  of pa- 
pers in PubMed  in the period 2010–2022  with the keywords  “Chemi-  
cal informatics  ”, “Cheminformatics  ”, “Chemoinformatics  ”, and “Chem 
informatics.  ”T h e ﬁgure shows an overall increase  in the number  of 
publications  since 2010 with a slight decrease  in 2022. Among  the two 
frequently  used terms in conferences  and scientiﬁc  journals,  “chemoin-  
formatics  ”s h o w s  a slightly  larger number  of publications  than those 
containing  the term “cheminformatics  ”. It should be emphasized  that 
the community  has not yet agreed on a single title, unlike the closely 
related discipline  "bioinformatics,"  whose term has mostly been ap- 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ailsci.2023.100077  
Received  6 May 2023; Received  in revised form 10 May 2023; Accepted  10 May 2023 
Available  online 11 May 2023 
2667-3185/©2023  The Authors.  Published  by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/  ) J. Miranda-Salas, C. Peña-Varas, I. Valenzuela Martínez et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in the Life Sciences 3 (2023) 100077 
Fig. 1. Number  of papers in PubMed  in the period 2010–2022  with the keywords  “Chemical  informatics  ”, “Cheminformatics  ”, “Chemoinformatics  ”, and “Chem 
informatics.  ”The ﬁgure shows the trend in usage of the most common  terms that refers to the same discipline.  
Fig. 2. The number of papers in PubMed  with the keywords  “Chemical  informatics  ”, “Cheminformatics  ”, “Chemoinformatics  ”, and “Chem informatics  ”plus another 
relevant  keyword  by year. 
proved [2] . For the remainder  of this manuscript,  we will use the term 
“chemoinformatics.  ”Regardless
 of the speciﬁc  term, since the ﬁrst applications  of 
chemoinformatics  in the ’50s, the discipline  has been evolving  and ex- 
panding  rapidly  with the most recent and large advances  in artiﬁcial  in- 
telligence  (AI) [5] . Chemoinformatics  has a broad range of applications  
across diﬀerent  research  areas, including  drug design, chemogenomics,  
and systems  pharmacology,  as well as medicinal,  analytical,  organic,  
cosmetic,  food, and inorganic  chemistry  [6–8] , and natural  product  re- 
search [ 6 , 9 ], among others. To illustrate  the applications  of chemoin-  
formatics  in other areas, Fig. 2 shows the number  of publications  in 
PubMed  with the keywords  “Chemical  informatics  ”, “Cheminformatics  ”, 
“Chemoinformatics  ”, and “Chem informatics  ”plus another  relevant  key- 
word by year. The analysis  reveals that whereas  molecular  modeling  
was the primary  topic connected  to chemoinformatics  at the beginning  
of the examined  period (2010–2022),  other ﬁelds have been involved  
with time, with education  being one of them. This has allowed  us to 
glimpse  the tremendous  growth  of this discipline  and its signiﬁcant  ap- 
plication  in related areas as the years pass by. In the same period (2010–2022),
 the most frequent  areas published  along with chemoinformatics  
(as measured  by the number  of publications  with concurrent  keywords)  
were mainly molecular  modeling  and drug discovery  with 6935 and 
5459 papers,  respectively.  Other frequent  areas published  along with 
chemoinformatics  were bioinformatics  (6689),  computer-aided  drug de- sign (3764),  and machine  learning  (2402) (see also Fig. S1 in the Sup- 
plementary  material).  
The principle  of open science  has been used to build many of the cur- 
rent chemoinformatics  applications  and developments,  including  teach- 
ing aids and research  tools. Undoubtedly,  the democratization  of science  
would increase  global connections  between  research  teams and students  
of all academic  levels. It would be easier to make connections  between  
various  geographical  zones when you are aware of the study that has 
been done in various  worldwide  places. To this goal, in 2018 we pre- 
sented a viewpoint  on chemical  informatics  from a Latin American  group 
[10] . 
The goal of this manuscript  is to discuss the status of Chemoinformat-  
ics in Latin America  with input from expert research  groups working  on 
the region. We also present  an author’s  perspective  on the future direc- 
tions of chemoinformatics,  emphasizing  the need to strengthen  research  
networks  between  Latin American  scientists  as well as with other in dif- 
ferent countries,  making  it possible  to increase  funding  and the multidis-  
ciplinary  formation  of advanced  human capital.  The paper is organized  
into six main sections.  After this Introduction,  Section  2 discusses  the 
status of the research  in Latin America.  Section  3 presents  exemplary  
research  outcomes  through  representative  chemoinformatics-related  ap- 
plications  and tools recently  developed  in Latin America,  emphasizing  
open-access  resources.  The next Section  discusses  exemplary  contribu-  
tions to education,  training,  and scientiﬁc  dissemination.  Section  5 elab- 
2 J. Miranda-Salas, C. Peña-Varas, I. Valenzuela Martínez et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in the Life Sciences 3 (2023) 100077 
Fig. 3. Number  of papers in PubMed  in the period 2010–2022  with the keywords  “Chemical  informatics  ”, “Cheminformatics  ”, “Chemoinformatics  ”, and “Chem 
informatics  ”A. Analyzed  by continent.  America  is separated  as North and Latin America.  B. Analyzed  by each Latin American  country.  
orates on future directions,  challenges,  and perspectives  to strengthen  
chemoinformatics  in Latin America.  Section  6 presents  summary  con- 
clusions.  
2. Research:  publications,  applications,  and collaborations  
2.1. Publications  and main applications  
In this section,  we discuss contributions  by research  groups in Latin 
America  towards  the development  and application  of chemoinformat-  
ics as analyzed  through  peer-reviewed  publications  between  2010 and 
2022. Fig. 3 depicts the tremendous  expansion  of chemoinformatics  in 
Latin America  during the previous  12 years. Fig. 3 A underlines  that, 
during the previous  ﬁve years, Latin America’s  publication  rate has sig- 
niﬁcantly  increased,  even though Europe,  Asia, and North America  have 
published  many more papers than Latin America  overall.  Fig. 3 B indi- 
cates that, as the years pass by, more Latin American  countries  have been 
joining the development  of this discipline,  contributing  to more pub- 
lished peer-reviewed  papers.  By putting  together  the studies of all Latin American  countries  per year, it is remarkable  the growth  that chemoin-  
formatics  had during the last coronavirus  pandemic  (2020–2022).  In- 
deed, almost all the countries  that belong to this region have at least one 
published  paper related to this discipline,  as it is explicit  in Fig. 3 B. It can 
be highlighting  that Brazil, Mexico,  Argentina,  Colombia,  and Ecuador  
are within the top-5 Latin American  countries  with the largest num- 
ber of papers,  as found in PubMed  during 2010–2022.  This leads to the 
conclusion  that, thus far, these countries  are leading  the development  
of chemoinformatics  in Latin America.  Given its geographical  location  
throughout  the Latin American  territory,  they may be motivating  the 
rest of the countries,  especially  those belonging  to Central  America  and 
the Caribbean,  to develop  this discipline  since it is also relevant  to the 
growing  frequency  that the rest of the Latin American  countries  have 
been generating.  
To elucidate  which are the main applications  that Latin American  
countries  are giving to cheminformatics  and to contrast  the informa-  
tion obtained  until now in PubMed,  we made the same research  in the 
same period but in Web of Science.  The data was obtained  using the 
keywords  “Chemoinformatics  OR Cheminformatics  OR Chem informat-  
3 J. Miranda-Salas, C. Peña-Varas, I. Valenzuela Martínez et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in the Life Sciences 3 (2023) 100077 
Fig. 4. Bibliometric  map based on Web of Science data based on keyword  co-occurrence  during the period 2010–2022.  The data were obtained  using the keywords  
“Chemical  informatics  ”, “Cheminformatics  ”, “Chemoinformatics  ”, and “Chem informatics  ”and each of the Latin American  countries  with published  papers in 2010– 2022.
 A total of 474 publications  were identiﬁed.  The relative size of the nodes is related to the number of publications  containing  the keyword.  
ics OR Chemical  informatics  ”for each of the Latin American  countries.  
Surprisingly,  there was a signiﬁcant  diﬀerence  between  the data ob- 
tained, ﬁnding  more total publications  obtained  in Web of Science  (536) 
in contrast  with PubMed  (451), which also were reﬂected  in fewer peer- 
reviewed  publications  found per country  as it is depicted  in Fig. S5. 
Fig. 4 shows a network  with the key concepts  related to chemoinfor-  
matics in each Latin American  country  as found in the Web of Science.  
The network  was created  with Visualization  of Similarity  (VOS) viewer 
desktop  version  1.6.19 (0) ( https://www.vosviewer.com/  ) [11] based 
on keyword  concurrent  during the period 2010–2022.  This ﬁgure de- 
picts the main concepts  involved  in chemoinformatics.  Each keyword  
and its entanglement  are given by the usage of publications,  and it is 
also notable  the thickness  of the edges in the graph, where chemoinfor-  
matics is strongly  associated  with drug discovery  and chemical  space. 
The network  shows that drug discovery,  quantitative  structure-activity  
relationships  (QSAR),  and chemical  space are amongst  the most frequent  
con-current  words and applications  published  so far by Latin American  
scientists.  
Fig. S2 (Supplementary  data) highlights  the principal  areas of ap- 
plication  in which the publications  of each Latin American  country  
are focused  according  to the Web of Science  categories.  The analy- 
sis indicates  that the main categories  are “Pharmacology  Pharmacy  ”, 
“Chemistry  Medicinal  ”, “Chemistry  Multidisciplinary  ”, “Computer  Sci- 
ence Information  Systems  ”, “Computer  Science  Interdisciplinary  Appli- 
cations ”, Biochemistry  Molecular  Biology  ”, “Computer  Science  Infor- 
mation Systems  ”, “Neurosciences  ”, “Biochemistry  Molecular  Biology  ”, 
and Microbiology  ”. The category  “Chemistry  Multidisciplinary  ”p r e - 
dominates  in Brazil, Mexico,  Colombia,  Ecuador,  and Cuba. For Chile 
and Saint Lucia “Pharmacology  Pharmacy  ”i s the major category.  In 
Argentina,  “Chemistry  Medicinal  ”and “Computer  Science  Information  
Systems  ”are, equally,  the most frequent  categories.  Greater  variability  
of focus areas is evident  with respect to the previously  mentioned  coun- 
tries, and they experience  diﬀerentiation  by the percentages  assigned  
to each focus area. Likewise,  the recent growth  of focus areas such as Microbiology  and Neurosciences  is evident,  where the latter has shown 
greater growth  in Chile, while “Microbiology  ”h a s greater growth  in 
Saint Lucia, combining  percentage  points with “Medicinal  Chemistry.  ”
2.2. Journals:  where research  has been published  
According  to the Web of Science  Core Collection,  the 536 peer- 
reviewed  articles  published  by the Latin American  countries  between  
2010 and 2022 appeared  in 252 journals.  Fig. 5 shows the ten peer- 
reviewed  journals  with major usage by Latin American  countries,  evi- 
dencing  that the journal  with the highest  occurrence  is the Journal  of 
Cheminformatics,  which at least eight Latin American  countries  have 
published  there. Molecular  Informatics  is the journal  with the largest 
number  of publications,  although  only seven countries  published  in it. 
Furthermore,  it is possible  to distinguish  in which of the journals  the 
highest  number  of publications  by country  is found; Brazil, Mexico,  and 
Cuba, have the largest number  of its articles  published  in Molecular  In- 
formatics.  Colombia,  the fourth one according  to the Web of Science,  
has published  the most in the Journal  of Cheminformatics,  which is in 
turn the second most popular  journal.  
2.3. Regional  and global collaboration  networks  between  Latin American  
groups 
As discussed  in Section  2.1 . undoubtedly,  Latin America  has had sig- 
niﬁcant  growth  in the discipline  (i.e., Fig. 3 A), although  there is still a 
comparable  diﬀerence  with other regions  of the world. This growth  is 
largely implicit  thanks to the collaborations  that have been generated  
within Latin America  and other geographical  regions.  These collabora-  
tions are represented  in Fig. S3, where a research  collaboration  network  
is presented.  Fig. S3A, C and D identiﬁes  the top-10 countries  that have 
the greatest  number  of collaborations  with Latin American  countries,  
highlighting  those with a larger number  of joint publications  through  
the edge thickness  and total number  of publications  with the node size. 
4 J. Miranda-Salas, C. Peña-Varas, I. Valenzuela Martínez et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in the Life Sciences 3 (2023) 100077 
Fig. 5. Top ten peer-reviewed  journals  publishing  chemoinformatics  papers by Latin American  countries  during 2010–2022  according  to the Web of Science Core 
Collection.  
We can ﬁnd a greater collaboration  with respect to the number  of ar- 
ticles with North America,  but Europe also generates  a relevant  collab- 
oration  with Latin America  by involving  a larger number  of countries  
implicated  in said collaborations  (six out of ten countries).  Finally,  Asia 
and Oceania,  although  they are only shown with one country  within the 
top ten collaborators  for each of these two continents,  they illustrate  a 
relevant  connection  with Latin American  countries.  
Regional  collaborations  are shown in Fig. S3B, where we visualize  
the important  support  network  that involves  the entire region, and that 
has allowed  Latin America  to grow in the development  of chemoinfor-  
matics. 
Figs. S3C and S3D show the interactions  using an alternative  graphic  
method,  to further highlight  each collaboration  between  Latin American  
countries  and other regions  of the world. Fig. S3C distinguishes  Brazil as 
the Latin American  scientiﬁc  superpower  that has the highest  normal-  
ized collaboration  with the diﬀerent  countries  described,  foregrounding  
among them USA, Germany,  Sweden,  and Japan. Mexico  is the second 
country  with the highest  number  of collaborations  between  the same 
countries  and only compares  Brazil with Spain regarding  the number  of 
collaborations.  
Since data normalization  with respect to the number  of collabora-  
tions from the two Latin American  countries  with the highest  number  
of publications  makes it diﬃcult  to visualize  this last graph for the rest 
of the Latin American  countries,  Fig. S3D was generated.  Fig. S3D al- 
lows us to observe  in greater detail the diﬀerentiation  by each Latin 
American  country  with respect to its collaboration  with the rest of the 
ten countries  with the greatest  collaboration,  visualizing  that Argentina,  
Chile, Colombia,  and Peru in general  have very similar trends, diﬀer- 
ing in that Peru has a very marked  and greater collaboration  with Italy 
while Argentina,  Chile and Colombia  have it with Spain in diﬀerent  
proportions.  
Similar  trends are perceived  with the rest of the Latin American  
countries,  where Ecuador,  like Brazil, has a greater collaboration  with 
the USA. Jamaica,  Uruguay,  Panama,  Cuba, Venezuela,  and Costa Rica 
remain in a limited interval  of collaborations.  Finally,  Nicaragua,  Barba- dos, El Salvador,  and Trinidad  and Tobago  turn out to be the countries  
with the least collaborations  found. 
Although  we have reduced  our analysis  to a speciﬁc  number  of top- 
10 non-Latin  American  countries  with which we collaborate,  there is 
a greater number  of collaborations  with the rest of the world that is 
illustrated  in Fig. S4A (Supplementary  material)  which shows the col- 
laborations  between  Latin America  and the rest of the world, visualizing  
a great interaction  with these countries.  Fig. S4B illustrates  the collab- 
oration  between  non-Latin  American  countries,  and although  a greater 
number  of collaborations  are visualized,  this Fig. S4B allows to infer the 
relevance  of the Latin American  collaborations.  
Based on the collaborations  and analysis,  it is necessary  to under- 
line the vast eﬀort that is being made at the regional  and global level to 
contribute  to the development  of this discipline,  ﬁnding  diverse  collab- 
orations  between  diﬀerent  geographical  areas that must undoubtedly  be 
maintained  or continue  to increase.  
3. Resources  and applications  for research  
Over the past few years academic  groups in Latin America  have 
been developing  open-source  and freely available  resources  for research  
focused  on chemoinformatic  and related disciplines.  These tools form 
part of the increasingly  open chemoinformatic  resources  developed  and 
used worldwide  [12–14]  . Part of such contributions  are the compound  
databases.  This section summarizes  examples  of chemoinformatics-  
related tools developed  by Latin American  groups in the past twelve 
years, with emphasis  on open-access  resources.  
Table 1 summarizes  web servers,  standalone  tools, and other re- 
sources  recently  developed  by Latin American  countries  in the public 
domain.  All the tools listed in the table are characterized  by having in- 
tuitive use with a user-friendly  interface  accompanied  by their respec- 
tive tutorials.  The tools also provide  at least one means of communi-  
cation with the users for questions,  feedback,  or comments  in general,  
which further facilitates  interactions  between  Latin American  scientists.  
Several  of the platforms  listed in the table oﬀer various  types of com- 
5 J. Miranda-Salas,  C. Peña-Varas,  I. Valenzuela  Martínez et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence  in the Life Sciences 3 (2023) 100077 
Table 1 
Exemplary  web servers, standalone  tools, and other resources  developed  in Latin America.  
Country Resource  Application  - use Ref., URL 
Argentina  LIDeB Tools Publicly available  open-source  customizable  
cheminformatics  tools to be used in computer-assisted  drug 
discovery.  [34] , https://lideb.biol.unlp.edu.ar/?p=1237  
Brazil UniCamp  Molecular  Dynamics  Simulations  and custom software 
tools for analyzing  the structure  and thermodynamics  of 
solutions  using simulation  data. http://leandro.iqm.unicamp.br/m3g/main/home.shtml  
Chile Pharmacoinformatics  and drug 
design Computational  polypharmacology  with wet lab analyses to 
strengthen  the drug design and development  processes.  https://ramirezlab.github.io/5.1  _ resources  
Chile CBSM Center of Bioinformatics  
and Molecular  Modeling  More than resources  done and under development  for 
modeling  and analyzing  protein sequences  and structures.  https://cbsm.utalca.cl/?page  _ id=2073  
Colombia  MPTG-CBP  Computer  simulations  at diﬀerent levels of resolution  and 
complexity  to decipher how biological  macromolecules  
interact with each other to accomplish  their function.  https://mptg-cbp.github.io/  
Costa Rica Cbio3 Laboratory  Codes in GitHub repositories  for the calculation  of useful 
descriptors  in chemoinformatics:  i) pH-dependent  
lipophilic  descriptors  for amino acids ii) descriptors  based 
on the count of n conjugated  systems with n = 2 ( n = 𝜋
electrons/2)  relevant for the prediction  of partition 
coeﬃcients  in an aromatic solvent such as toluene. https://cbio3group.netlify.app/  
Mexico DIFACQUIM,  d -Tools Five free web services to analyze chemical  diversity and 
chemical  space, generate in silico libraries of peptides,  and 
predict bioactivity  proﬁles. https://www.difacquim.com/d-tools/  
Uruguay Institut Pasteur de Montevideo  Dedicated  to the development  of methods that allow 
advanced  simulations  to be carried out but with low 
computational  cost, to improve the comparability  of 
theoretical  studies with biochemical,  biophysical,  or 
molecular  biology experiments.  https: 
//pasteur.uy/laboratorios/simulaciones-biomoleculares/  
putational  studies beyond  chemoinformatics  e.g., tools associated  with 
pharmacoinformatics  in general,  molecular  dynamics,  and biophysics.  
Within chemoinformatics,  the web servers and tools are mostly tuned 
for drug discovery  and development  of lead candidates  but also can be 
used for other research  areas, as discussed  in Section  2.1 . 
3.1. Compound  databases  
Concerning  the development  of compound  databases,  perhaps  one of 
the most notable  contributions  in the region is the generation,  curation,  
and update of natural  products  databases  freely accessible.  For more 
than ten years, Brazil has been developing  an extensive  database  of nat- 
ural products,  and several other Latin American  countries  have followed  
the initiative.  Table 2 summarizes  exemplary  natural  product  databases  
in the public domain.  The status of the development  of natural  product  
databases  in Latin America  has been reviewed  recently.  Notably,  there is 
a multi-country  eﬀort to put together  a uniﬁed Latin American  Natural  
Product  Database  –LANaPDB  [ 15 , 16 ]. 
3.2. Blind challenges  for validating  chemoinformatics  methods  
As mentioned  in the previous  section,  the Latin American  region, 
through  its research  groups,  has generated  knowledge  regarding  the de- 
velopment  of databases,  web servers,  and chemoinformatics  tools. In a 
complementary  way, the blind challenges  known as Statistical  Assess- 
ment of the Modeling  of Proteins  and Ligands  (SAMPL  Challenges  [17] ) 
funded by the USA National  Institutes  of Health has provided  an excel- 
lent opportunity  for Latin Americans  to validate  the impact of their tools 
and methodologies  through  the participation  of researchers  in these 
challenges.  The section on the prediction  of physicochemical  proper-  
ties in SAMPL  Challenges  has included  predictions  of solvation  energies  
[ 18 , 19 ], acidity constant  [ 20 , 21 ] and partition  coeﬃcients  [ 21 , 22 ] in 
various  biphasic  systems  (cyclohexane/water  and n -octanol/water)  rel- 
evant for rational  drug design. 
Table 3 shows the participation  of Latin American  research  groups in 
predicting  physicochemical  properties  of drug-like  molecules  in the pe- 
riod analyzed  (2010–2022).  It can be noted that our participation  in the 
SAMPL-3,  SAMPL-4,  and SAMPL-5  blind challenges  was null, however,  from the opening  of the SAMPL-6  blind challenge  (2017–2018)  the in- 
cursion  of Latin American  groups from Argentina,  Chile, and Costa Rica 
took place. 
Despite  the reduced  representation  in the SAMPL  challenges,  it is 
worth noting that valuable  performance  was obtained  in the submis-  
sions where the participation  of groups from Latin America  was in- 
cluded.  Fig. 6 shows that two of four submissions  for predicting  the 
n -octanol/water  log P for eleven fragment-like  small molecules  endowed  
with kinase inhibitory  bioactivity  were in the top 50 submissions,  how- 
ever, considering  the submissions  by categories  based on the computa-  
tional methods  used, the results of the groups belonging  to our region 
were in the top 10. 
In the case of the SAMPL-7  blind challenge,  it was planned  in three 
parts. First, the scientiﬁc  community  was proposed  to predict the acid- 
ity constant  of 22 N-sulfonamides  compounds,  then the n -octanol/water  
partition  coeﬃcient  for the same compounds,  and ﬁnally for the submis-  
sions with the ﬁrst two parts completed,  the distribution  coeﬃcient  at 
pH 7.4 was predicted.  
Fig. 7 represents  the scarce participation  for the p K a prediction  call, 
which was not surprising  considering  that the organizers  did not re- 
quest the macroscopic  p K a of compounds,  but rather the p K a of vari- 
ous microstates  to predict the experimental  observable  and hence the 
predictive  techniques  based on in machine  learning  approaches  did not 
participate  due to the impossibility  of having experimental  values of 
microstates.  In fact, the submissions  received  were all from the physical  
category  based on ﬁrst-principles  methods,  even though some of these 
submissions  did the conformational  analysis  using the open chemoinfor-  
matics tool such as Open Babel [23] . Interestingly,  the participation  of 
Latin American  groups obtained  excellent  performances,  among which 
was obtained  the second best-ranked  submission.  
On the other hand, Fig. 8 depicts 17 submissions  to the SAMPL7  n- 
octanol/water  log P prediction  challenge.  This second part of the chal- 
lenge was encouraging  for the Latin American  region. One of the partici-  
pating groups (University  of Costa Rica) using a classical  machine  learn- 
ing model such as multiple  linear regression  and by calculating  molec- 
ular descriptors  using chemoinformatics  tools accomplished  the highest  
accuracy,  among empirical  methods  and also in all submissions  based on 
the ranked ones. In addition,  the collaboration  between  the University  
6 J. Miranda-Salas, C. Peña-Varas, I. Valenzuela Martínez et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in the Life Sciences 3 (2023) 100077 
Fig. 6. Representation  of the root-mean  square error (RMSE) of A. the 91 submissions  to the SAMPL6  n -octanol/water  log P prediction  challenge  (the participation  
of groups from Latin America  are marked with stars where the red star represent  to the submission  of the University  of Costa Rica in collaboration  with the University  
of Barcelona  and yellow stars the submissions  of the Austral Universidad  of Chile in collaboration  with the University  of Concepción),  B. Twenty ﬁve submissions  
provided  by physical  methods  using quantum  mechanical  approaches,  and C. Thirty one submissions  provided  by physical  methods  using molecular  mechanics  
approaches.  The rank obtained  by each Latin American  submission  both globally  and by category  is represented  at the top of each mark. Details of the methods  and 
participants  can be found in Table S1 (Supplementary  material)  and https://github.com/samplchallenges/SAMPL6/tree/master/physical  _ properties  . 
Fig. 7. Representation  of the root-mean  square error (RMSE) of seven submissions  to the SAMPL7  to the p K a challenge.  The participation  of groups from Latin 
America  are marked with stars where the red star represents  the submission  of the University  of Costa Rica in collaboration  with the University  of Barcelona  and 
the orange star the submissions  of the National  University  of Santiago  del Estero, Argentina  in collaboration  with the Miami University.  The rank obtained  by 
each Latin American  submission  is represented  next to each mark. Details of the methods  and participants  can be found in Table S2 (Supplementary  material)  and 
https://github.com/samplchallenges/SAMPL7/tree/master/physical  _ property/pKa  . 
7 J. Miranda-Salas,  C. Peña-Varas,  I. Valenzuela  Martínez et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence  in the Life Sciences 3 (2023) 100077 
Table 2 
Exemplary  compound  databases  of natural products  generated  in Latin America.  
Database  Country General description  (link) a Refs. 
NaturAr Argentina  Natura products from Argentina.  https://naturar.quimica.unlp.edu.ar/es/  [35] 
NuBBE DB Brazil Natural products of Brazilian  biodiversity.  Developed  by the São Paulo State University  and the University  of São 
Paulo. Includes natural products from plants, microorganisms,  terrestrial  animals, and marine animals. 
http://nubbe.iq.unesp.br/portal/nubbe-search.html  [ 36 , 37 ] 
SistematX  Brazil Database  composed  of secondary  metabolites  from plants, developed  at the Federal University  of Paraiba. 
https://sistematx.ufpb.br/  [ 38 , 39 ] 
UEFS Brazil Natural products from plants that have been published  separately.  Developed  at the State University  of Feira de 
Santana. http://zinc12.docking.org/catalogs/uefsnp  [40] 
BRACOLI  Brazil Brazilian  Compound  Library is a new manually  curated virtual substance  library developed  by Brazilian  research 
groups to support computer-aided  drug design work. The ﬁrst version of BraCoLi has 1176 substances.  Contains 
biological  and chemical  information  on synthetic,  semi-synthetic  and natural substances.  
avMpNp Brazil Antiviral Medicinal  Plants and Natural Products is a DB developed  in Brazil and contains bioactive  substances  
from biodiversity  with antiviral activity. 
NAPRORE-CR  Costa Rica Natural products isolated from plants and microorganisms.  The database is being developed  by the Cbio 3 
Laboratory,  School of Chemistry  at the University  of Costa Rica. [41] 
LAIPNUDELSAV  El Salvador Developed  by the Research  Laboratory  in Natural Products of the University  of El Salvador.  
UNIIQUIM  Mexico Natural products from plants mainly isolated and characterized  at the Institute of Chemistry  of the National 
Autonomous  University  of Mexico. https://uniiquim.iquimica.unam.mx/  [42] 
BIOFACQUIM  Mexico Natural products isolated and characterized  in Mexico at the School of Chemistry  of the National Autonomous  
University  of Mexico and other Mexican institutions.  Includes compounds  from plants, fungi, propolis, and marine 
animals. version 2 https://ﬁgshare.com/articles/dataset/BIOFAQUIM  _ V2 _ sdf/11312702  [ 43 , 44 ] 
CIFPMA Panama Natural products from plants that have been tested in over 25 in vitro and in vivo bioassays  for diﬀerent 
therapeutic  targets. Developed  at the University  of Panama. [45] 
PeruNPDB  Peru Database  created at the Catholic University  of Santa Maria with natural products from animals and plants. 
https://perunpdb.com.pe/  [46] 
PSC-db Chile Free accessible  database containing  the 3D structures  of several plant secondary  compounds  along with their 
physicochemical  and pharmaceutical  properties.  http://pscdb.appsbio.utalca.cl/viewSearch/index.php  [47] 
a When available.  
Table 3 
Participation  of Latin American  research  groups in global challenges  for the Statistical  Assessment  of the Modeling  of Proteins  and Ligands (SAMPL  Challenges  [17] ). 
Challenge  Physicochemical  blind challenge  Participants  Latin American  participants  
in special issue publications  Information  Refs. 
SAMPL3 
(2011–2012)  Prediction  of 36 solvation  free energies 
for three series of chlorinated  compounds  21 submissions  0 https://github.com/samplchallenges/  
SAMPL3/tree/main/solvation  _ energy [18] 
8 diﬀerent 
groups/participants  
SAMPL4 
(2013–2014)  Prediction  of hydration  free energies for a 
series of 47 small molecules.  49 submissions  0 https://github.com/samplchallenges/  
SAMPL4/tree/main/  
hydration  _ free _ energy [19] 
19 diﬀerent 
groups/participants  
SAMPL5 
(2015–2016)  Prediction  of distribution  coeﬃcient  
predictions  were introduced  for the ﬁrst 
time for a set of 53 small molecules  76 submissions  0 https://github.com/samplchallenges/  
SAMPL5/tree/main/  
distribution  _ coeﬃcients  [50] 
18 diﬀerent 
groups/participants  
SAMPL6 
(2017–2018)  Prediction  of microscopic  and 
macroscopic  pKas of 24 small organic 
molecules  protein kinase inhibitors  37 submissions  0 https://github.com/samplchallenges/  
SAMPL6/tree/master/  
physical _ properties/pKa  [20] 
11 diﬀerent 
groups/participants  
SAMPL6 
(2017–2018)  Prediction  of the octanol/water  partition 
coeﬃcients  (log P) of 11 small molecules  
protein kinase inhibitors  91 submissions  4 submissions  https://github.com/samplchallenges/  
SAMPL6/tree/master/  
physical _ properties/logP  [ 22 , 51 , 52 ] 
27 diﬀerent 
groups/participants  2 groups (Chile and Costa 
Rica/Spain)  
SAMPL7 
(2019–2020)  Prediction  of the pKa for 
22 N-sulfonamides  9 submissions  2 ranked submissions  https://github.com/samplchallenges/  
SAMPL7/tree/master/  
physical _ property/pKa  [ 21 , 53 , 54 , 55 ] 
7 diﬀerent 
groups/participants  2 groups (Argentina  and 
Costa Rica/Spain)  
SAMPL7 
(2019–2020)  Prediction  of the octanol-water  partition 
coeﬃcients  for 22 N-sulfonamides  33 submissions  3 groups (Argentina/USA,  
Costa Rica/Spain,  and Costa 
Rica) https://github.com/samplchallenges/  
SAMPL7/tree/master/  
physical _ property/logP  17 diﬀerent 
groups/participants  
SAMPL7 
(2019–2020)  Prediction  of the octanol-water  
distribution  coeﬃcients  for 
22 N-sulfonamides  combining  the pKa 
and logP predictions  6 submissions  2 ranked submissions  https://github.com/samplchallenges/  
SAMPL7/tree/master/  
physical _ property/logD  6 diﬀerent 
groups/participants  2 groups (Argentina/USA  
and Costa Rica/Spain)  
of Costa Rica and the University  of Barcelona  using the IEFPCM-MST  
model presented  very good results with both globally  (rank 8th) and 
physical  (rank 2nd) methods.  Considering  the diﬃculty  of these chal- 
lenges, the collaboration  between  the National  University  of Santiago  
del Estero, Argentina  with the Miami University  had also good results 
(rank 15th). 
Fig. 9 shows the performance  based on the root-mean  square error of 
six submissions  to the SAMPL7  n -octanol/water  log D prediction  chal- 
lenge. Only quantum  chemistry-based  methods  considered  the eﬀect of 
solvent.  The conformational  space of the 22 molecules  was explored  
using cheminformatics  tools. As expected,  due to the outstanding  p K a and log P prediction  results of the collaboration  between  the University  
of Costa Rica and the University  of Barcelona  using the IEFPCM-MST  
model, the best ranked method  was obtained  to replicate  the experi- 
mental results of pH-dependent  distribution  coeﬃcients  for the 22 sul- 
fonamides  that the challenge  proposed.  
In summary,  Latin American  groups have achieved  important  results 
in the blind challenges  mentioned  in this work, positioning  the region as 
a benchmark  for the reliable  prediction  of physicochemical  properties  
of drug-like  compounds.  The experimental  determination  of these prop- 
erties requires  a high investment  of time and resources,  so having expert 
groups in the region on these issues may be attractive  for future collab- 
8 J. Miranda-Salas, C. Peña-Varas, I. Valenzuela Martínez et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in the Life Sciences 3 (2023) 100077 
Fig. 8. Representation  of the root-mean  square error (RMSE) of A. the 17 submissions  to the SAMPL7  n -octanol/water  log P prediction  challenge  (the participation  of 
groups from Latin America  are marked with stars where the red star represent  to the submission  of the University  of Costa Rica (rank 1st), University  of Costa Rica in 
collaboration  with the University  of Barcelona  (rank 8th) and orange stars the submissions  of the National  University  of Santiago  del Estero, Argentina  in collaboration  
with the Miami University  (rank 15th)), B. Eight submissions  provided  by empirical  methods  using chemoinformatics  and machine  learning  approaches,  and C. Six 
submissions  provided  by physical  methods  using quantum  mechanics  approaches.  Details of the methods  and participants  can be found in Table S3 (Supplementary  
material)  and https://github.com/samplchallenges/SAMPL7/tree/master/physical  _ property/logP  . 
orations  between  academic  groups,  not only with the pharmaceutical  
industry,  but also from the food and chemistry  industry,  and in environ-  
mental policies  where these properties  are used to determine  risk factors 
for exposure  to chemicals.  
4. Education,  training,  and dissemination  of science  
In contrast  to bioinformatics  where it is common  to ﬁnd special-  
ized courses,  textbooks,  and educational  resources,  it is still rare to ﬁnd 
courses,  and even more, graduate  programs  focused  on chemoinformat-  
ics. This is not only a particular  case of Latin America  but worldwide.  
Indeed,  as commented  elsewhere  [2] , chemistry  departments  and the 
schools  of pharmacies  in universities  are conservative  in implement-  ing computational  chemical  education  and cheminformatics  education  
in their undergraduate  and graduate  programs.  Indeed,  much of the 
chemoinformatics  discipline,  as we perceive  it today, initiated  at the 
pharmaceutical  industry  instead  of academic  settings,  which also ex- 
plains the strong orientations  of chemoinformatics  toward drug design 
and discovery.  In any case, it is highly relevant  to contribute  to the ed- 
ucation  and training  of highly qualiﬁed  researchers  to enter into the 
increasingly  demanding  job market requesting  professionals  trained  in 
chemoinformatics.  
Historically,  Brazil has researchers  and professors  who have actively  
worked  in the ﬁeld of chemoinformatics  and, therefore,  have consider-  
able scientiﬁc  dissemination  in the area. This fact is observed  by the 
prominence  of this country  related to the number  of publications  asso- 
9 J. Miranda-Salas, C. Peña-Varas, I. Valenzuela Martínez et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in the Life Sciences 3 (2023) 100077 
Fig. 9. Representation  of the root-mean  square error (RMSE) of six submissions  to the SAMPL7  n -octanol/water  log D prediction  challenge.  The participation  of 
groups from Latin America  are marked with stars where the red star represents  the submission  of the University  of Costa Rica in collaboration  with the University  
of Barcelona  and the orange star the submissions  of the National  University  of Santiago  del Estero, Argentina  in collaboration  with the Miami University.  The rank 
obtained  by each Latin American  submission  is represented  next to each mark. Details of the methods  and participants  can be found in Table S4 (Supplementary  
material)  and https://github.com/samplchallenges/SAMPL7/tree/master/physical  _ property/logD  . 
ciated with the theme ( Fig. 3 B and 3 C). In an evaluation  of the last 20 
years, these publications  emphasized  the Brazilian  panorama  regarding  
medicinal  chemistry,  natural  products  chemistry  and molecular  biology,  
addressing  their advances  and challenges,  especially  in the sphere of ed- 
ucation  and research.  Several  relevant  topics and historical  landmarks  
were contextualized  and discussed  throughout  this period, such as the 
role of pharmaceutical  and chemistry  educational  institutions  in the de- 
velopment  of the area, the integration  of multidisciplinary  knowledge  
required  for its expansion,  and the evolution  in the area for application  
of systems  and computational  tools designed  to extract knowledge  from 
a huge set of information  [ 24 , 25 ]. 
In the 1980s, the sector was driven by the Human  Genome  Project,  
with great progress  in the areas of genomics  and molecular  biology,  
whose essential  technology  was bioinformatics  for increasing  analysis  
of data generated  in DNA, RNA and protein  sequences  [26] . Therefore,  
by the late 1990s there were a signiﬁcant  number  of biomolecules  in 
GenBank.  Also, in the 90 ′ s the use of QSAR spread worldwide.  In Brazil 
due to international  collaborations,  especially  with Professor  Hugo Ku- 
binyi, from the University  of Heidelberg,  Germany,  and, consecutively,  
courses  and workshops  given in the country.  One of the political  conse- 
quences  of this event was the creation  of the Chemical  Structure  and Bi- 
ological  Activity  Division  in the Brazilian  Chemical  Society,  forerunner  
of the Medicinal  Chemistry  Division,  the latter formed  in 1998 [ 27 , 28 ]. 
Already  in the 2000s, the discussions  that permeated  chemoinfor-  
matics in the scientiﬁc  and educational  context  were based on the stan- 
dardization  of terms and methods,  such as the elaboration  of a glossary  
of terms used in drug planning  and the improvement  of tools, partic- 
ularly docking  and molecular  dynamics  [ 29–31 ]. The classical  versus 
industrial  paradigm  in the process  of drug discovery  was also a debated  
issue, as well as the availability  of a large virtual database  of small 
molecules  and proteins  (PDB) of natural  and synthetic  origin, drove the 
development  of software  for in silico screening,  applied  to the approach  
known as virtual screening  [32] . 
On this occasion,  the published  books authored  by distinguished  
Brazilian  professors  and researchers,  such as "Medicinal  Chemistry:  the 
molecular  basis of drug action" by Barreiro  & Fraga, "Methods  of Theo- 
retical and Molecular  Chemistry"  by Morgon,  and "Bioinformatics:  from 
biology  to molecular  ﬂexibility"  by Verli, became  indispensable  biblio- 
graphic  references  in disciplines  focused  on medicinal  chemistry  in un- 
dergraduate  and graduate  courses  throughout  Brazil. Furthermore,  the 
development  of new, safer and more eﬀective  drugs for many diseases  
has been demonstrated,  as well as the inﬂuence  of educational  institu- tions in this process,  and an example  of relevance  was the development  
of captopril.  By applying  the "structure-based  drug discovery"  strategy,  
captopril  was the ﬁrst antihypertensive  drug elucidated,  whose mech- 
anism of action is through  the inhibition  of the angiotensin-converting  
enzyme  (ACE). Its discovery  beneﬁted  from pharmacological  studies on 
the eﬀects of the venom of the Brazilian  snake Bothrops  jararaca  , carried 
out by Rocha e Silva’s group, and later by Sérgio H. Ferreira  from the 
University  of São Paulo Medical  School,  demonstrating  its vasodilator  
action, dependent  on its ability to potentiate  the activity  of bradykinin  
[56]. 
In parallel,  the understanding  of the molecular  aspects  directly  in- 
volved in the emergence  of diseases,  led to the expansion  of technologi-  
cal resources  available  for pharmaceutical  research  in the search for new 
drugs of natural  and synthetic  origin, as well as the insertion  of new dis- 
ciplines  in undergraduate  and graduate  courses  related to the molecular  
bases and interactions  between  the metabolism  and drugs. In addition,  
there was an impact on the automation  of processes  and data analysis,  
with automated  screening  on a large scale, Automated  high-throughput  
screening,  coupled  with the development  of new methods  of organic  
synthesis,  such as combinatorial  chemistry  and the analysis  of medicinal  
plants and natural  products  by dereplication  and studies of its action by 
metabolomics  studies.  In general,  education  and research  in the various  
areas of science  that use chemoinformatics  tools has increased  exponen-  
tially in the last two decades,  the research  groups are better distributed  
throughout  Latin America  and their scientiﬁc  contributions  have signif- 
icant impact in the science,  with consequent  publications  in the main 
journals  of the area as shown in Fig. 5 . 
Toward  this end, this section summarizes  representative  educa- 
tional resources  developed  in Latin America  e.g., web-based  applica-  
tions and tools developed  for educational  and research  purposes.  We 
also talk about frequent  regional  and worldwide  conferences,  seminars,  
and schools  that are entirely  or mostly organized  by scientists  from Latin 
America  and where chemoinformatics  (or a directed  discipline)  is the 
main topic or a signiﬁcant  portion  of the scientiﬁc  agenda.  
Table 4 summarizes  the event, main purpose,  and target audience.  In 
several cases, the conferences,  webinars,  and educational/tutorial  ma- 
terial have been made available  on demand  (when applicable,  the URL 
is included  in the table). Throughout  the table, diﬀerent  types of mate- 
rials are displayed  in the area, where many of them have educational  
approaches  with which this discipline  can increase  in use. For example,  
some websites  are included  that contain  tutorials  on the use of chemoin-  
formatics  tools and that allow the introduction  or speciﬁcation  of greater 
10 J. Miranda-Salas,  C. Peña-Varas,  I. Valenzuela  Martínez et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence  in the Life Sciences 3 (2023) 100077 
Table 4 
Examples  of recent conferences,  workshops,  and educational  resources  generated  in Latin America  with a focus on chemoinformatics  or directly associated  disciplines.  
Type Event or resource Description  (target audience)  Access/Refs.  
Meeting 
online Colloquium:  Chemoinformatics  and 
Artiﬁcial Intelligence  Online meeting for the general public with an emphasis  on 
undergraduate  and graduate students.  https://www.difacquim.com/english/events/  
2022-colloquium/  [48] 
Meeting LatinXChem  A virtual forum through which the community  of Latin 
American  chemists located anywhere  in the world can share 
and discuss their research results. It includes a section 
dedicated  to computational  chemistry.  https://www.latinxchem.org/lxchemcomp  
Workshop  CABANA  Workshop:  
Chemoinformatics  in Drug Discovery  The aim was to introduce  researchers  to Chemoinformatics,  
especially  in structure-based  and ligand-based  drug design. 
Topics covered: the use of protein, ligand and drug databases,  
protein modeling,  molecular  docking and virtual screening  for 
drug discovery  applications;  managing  and analyzing  virtual 
chemical  libraries; machine learning algorithms  in drug 
discovery.  https://www.ebi.ac.uk/training/events/  
cabana- workshop-  chemoinformatics-  drug- discovery/  
Workshop  Computational  Chemistry  in Drug 
Discovery  and Development.  From 
Academia  to Industry.  
Computer-Aided  Drug Design The objective  was to introduce  the concepts of 
Chemoinformatics  and its applications  in the academic  
environment.  In addition,  show national researchers  topics 
related to cheminformatics,  data mining, database 
representations  in 2D and 3D. Information  in the oﬃce of Sponsor SENACYT.  
Conference  Integrated  Chemoinformatics  
approaches  to virtual screening  in the 
search of new lead compounds  
against Leishmania  This conference  provided  information  on chemotherapy  against 
Leishmania  where the development  of CYP51 inhibitor drugs is 
sought as a new purpose, so in general terms the conference  
focused on the use of chemoinformatics  as a complement  to 
virtual detection  approaches  (VS) based on ligands and 
structures.  https://www.researchgate.net/publication/  
235412450  _ Integrated  _ chemoinformatics  _ 
approaches  _ to _ virtual _ screening  _ in _ the _ search _ of _ 
new _ lead _ compounds  _ against _ Leishmania  
Conference  Informatics  method to bridge gap 
between experimental  results and 
simulation  for carbon nanotube  
reinforced  composites  It included applications  of computational  chemistry  to 
simulation  for carbon nanotube  reinforced  composites.  https://repositorioslatinoamericanos.uchile.cl/  
handle/2250/926817  
Conference  Latin American  Chemistry  and 
Catalysis.  It included applications  of computational  chemistry  to 
catalysis.  https: 
//www.youtube.com/watch?v=wlRbuIf2Hbw  
Conference  Women in Bioinformatics  & Data 
Science-Latin  America.  Recurrent  meeting bringing together Latin American  
researchers  who work in the areas of systems biology, omics 
technologies,  artiﬁcial intelligence,  machine learning, data 
science, data mining, and high-performance  computing  with 
applications  in biology. https://wbds.la/  [49] 
Conference  School of chemoinformatics  Online event discussing  developments  and applications  and 
chemoinformatics,  including  chemical  space, data analysis, 
natural products,  virtual screening,  toxicity prediction,  and 
drug discovery  for neglected  diseases. It included a hands-on  
session to use the ChEMBL.  Editors of chemoinformatics  
journals discussed  points related to scientiﬁc  publishing.  https: 
//www.youtube.com/@SchoolChemInfLA/videos  
Conference  Digital Technologies,  Innovation  and 
Health in the Covid-19  Pandemic  | 
PROSIC - UCR Online event to publicize  the uses and practical applications  of 
information  and communications  technologies  during the 
pandemic  caused by the Covid-19  virus, which included a talk 
on the role of Chemoinformatics  and Computational  Biology 
during the pandemic.  https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=  
T49FvEk6aCg™t=2196s  
Educational  / 
tutorial RamirezLab  Github Website with tutorials,  script library and FAQ for 
pharmacoinformatics  and drug design. https://github.com/ramirezlab/WIKI  
Educational  / 
Course Practical Aspects of Drug Discovery:  
At the Interface of Biology, Chemistry  
and Pharmacology  - Latin America 
and the Caribbean  Course open to applicants  from institutes  based in Latin 
America and the Caribbean.  The program was aimed at 
researchers  with a background  knowledge  of any discipline  
related to drug discovery,  including  biology, chemistry,  
pharmacology,  computational  chemistry  and informatics.  https://coursesandconferences.  
wellcomeconnectingscience.org/event/  
practical-  aspects- of- drug- discovery-  at- the- 
interface-  of- biology- chemistry-  and- 
pharmacology-  latin- america- and- the- caribbean-  
20221113/  
Educational  Online Manual of Chemoinformatics  
(in Spanish).  This manual contributes  to the academic  formation  of the 
students,  strengthening  in students the understanding  of basic 
concepts of Chemoinformatics  and seeks to allow them to be 
able to handle and interpret computational  techniques  
associated  with this scientiﬁc  discipline,  frequently  used in the 
discovery,  design and development  of bioactive  compounds.  https://difacquim.gitbook.io/  
quimioinformatica/  
Educational  
and Research  NAPROC13  The 13C NMR Database  of Natural Products is a web 
application  that provides diﬀerent search tools to know the 
structure  of a compound.  In addition,  it allows the use of 
chemoinformatics  applications  based in JSME-X-2020  by Peter 
Ertl and Bruno Beinfait, (Novartis),  in the design and 
development  of undergraduate  student theses in Pharmacy.  https://c13.materia-medica.net/  
Meeting 
online 10th School of molecular  modeling  in 
biological  systems Meeting of researchers  and students interested  in acquiring  
knowledge  in the following  topics: protein structure  prediction,  
machine learning methods,  molecular  modeling  applied to 
drug development,  receptor-ligand  docking methodologies,  
molecular  dynamics,  monte carlo, quantum  electronic  structure  
calculations,  hybrid quantum/classical  calculations,  and 
bioinformatics.  http://www.emmsb.lncc.br/  
11 J. Miranda-Salas,  C. Peña-Varas,  I. Valenzuela  Martínez et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence  in the Life Sciences 3 (2023) 100077 
Table 5 
Representative  strategic  actions to strengthen  chemoinformatics  in Latin America.  
Action Time frame a Expected  contribution  or impact 
Research  : enhance research collaborations  within Latin 
America and between Latin America and other countries.  Medium/long  Advance signiﬁcantly  in research projects (basic and applied research),  joining 
eﬀorts with multi-sites;  increase the diversity of points of view. 
Research  : continue working on topics relevant to geographical  
regions and global issues. Foresee upcoming  challenges,  
emerging  needs, areas of opportunity,  and trends. Short/medium  Working on top of regional and global issues and challenges  will contribute  to 
maintaining  Latin American  countries  on top. 
Research  : Partner with industry-driven  foundations  and 
research institutes  (e.g., tres cantos Open Lab foundation  ). Medium/long  Get involved in basic research projects that can be translated  into practical 
applications.  
Research  : Partner with software companies  
(e.g.,Pharmacelera).  Short/medium  Collaborating  in the development  of chemoinformatics  tools such as molecular  
docking programs  
Education  : Promote the university  research seedbeds  in 
undergraduate  programs  at Latin American  universities.  Short/medium  This will enhance the interest in research in undergraduate  students,  allowing 
them to generate skills in the use of computational  tools in the faculties of 
computer  science, biology, chemistry,  and pharmacy.  This would foster their 
interest in furthering  studies in basic chemoinformatics  and its applications  in 
academia,  industry,  and emerging  companies  in AI. 
Education  : Establish  and sustain postgraduate  programs  (e.g., 
Masters’s)  in Latin American  universities.  Long It will help to train highly educated  specialists  in chemoinformatics  that will 
join the industry,  academia,  and start-up companies.  
Education  : continue and increase the number of quality 
conferences,  seminars,  and schools. These could be in-person,  
hybrid, or virtual events. Short/medium  Scientiﬁc  conferences  help increase the interactions  among students and 
research scientists  in the area and the world; will contribute  to being up to date 
with recent developments  and identifying  future needs. 
Funding : attract attention,  collaboration,  and partnerships  with 
industries  (pharmaceutical,  food, materials,  etc.) to fund 
research programs  with translational  applications.  Medium/long  Expand funding sources beyond traditional  government  support will help to 
increase the research funding itself and will promote work on applied projects. 
Students participating  in research projects will gain experience  working on 
industry-driven  projects and help them to work on industry positions.  
Funding : continue and increase the connections  with 
foundations,  not-for-proﬁt  institutions,  publishers,  and 
industries  in the region and worldwide  that help support 
educational  and research programs.  Medium Idem (previous  entry) 
General : Create a Latin American  chemoinformatics  society 
that guides and oversees the development.  Long Help to sustain the collective  eﬀorts in terms of research,  education,  and 
funding. 
Dissemination  and collaborations:  continue to enhance the 
presence and participation  of Latin American  Scientists  in 
international  conferences  organized  in other parts of the world. Short/medium  Active participation  of Latin American  students and scientists  will favor the 
generation  and/or consolidation  of collaborative  networks;  will also help the 
awareness  of the scientiﬁc  community  worldwide  of the research done in Latin 
America.  
Dissemination  and collaborations:  Continue  and enhance the 
participation  of Latin American  scientists  in specialized  
international  committees  and editorial boards of peer-reviewed  
journals. Medium Strengthen  the connection  and networks  between Latin America with other 
countries,  be “ambassadors  ”that share the needs and progress in the Latin 
American  region. 
Chemoinformatics  community-wide  blind challenges.  Long With the progress in the generation  of databases  of natural products,  biological  
activities  and physicochemical  properties  of compounds  in the region, it is 
intended to democratize  reliable data so that the scientiﬁc  community  around 
the world can validate computational  tools, propose new predictive  models that 
can be critically evaluated  through blind challenges.  
a Approximate  timeframe  to start the implementation  and development  of the task. In all cases, it is expected  that the action sustains for several years. 
Short-term:  1 year; medium-term:  1–5 years; long-term:  5–10 years. 
interrelationships.  A manual  of the discipline  is even presented,  with 
which an integration  of a greater number  of scientists  who approach  
this discipline  is generated.  Conferences  and webinars  are very illustra-  
tive of the applicability  that is being given to chemoinformatics,  allow- 
ing interactions  with experts,  who can guide towards  the areas of focus 
and interest  of the viewer.  Since many webinars  were recorded  and are 
freely available,  they are also useful resources  for teaching  and train- 
ing. At the same time, they are excellent  references  to witness  and keep 
track of the evolution  of chemoinformatics  during the next few years. 
Although  a few examples  are listed, the conferences,  workshops  and re- 
sources  in Table 4 point to the eﬀorts of several countries  to develop  
chemoinformatics  in Latin America.  
Due to the recent COVID-19  pandemic,  the online and hybrid for- 
mats could represent  an advantage  to increase  the number  of national,  
regional,  and/or international  conferences.  Of course, such online or hy- 
brid conferences  would be added to the full in-person  meetings  that also 
provide  key advantages  through  the direct interaction  between  scientists  
and students.  
5. Future directions  
In this section,  we summarize  the author’s  perspective  on the ex- 
pected progress  and evolution  of chemoinformatics  in Latin America  
during the next few years. Based on the discussion  of the preceding  Sec- tions and the authors’  perspective,  we outline a concise  action plan to 
strengthen  the development  of chemoinformatics  in this geographical  
region and worldwide.  Table 5 summarizes  the action, the expected  pe- 
riod required  to implement  it, and its anticipated  contribution  or impact.  
The list of tasks is not exhaustive  but aims to stimulate  the analysis  of 
these and other strategic  actions that can take place. It is expected  that 
the action tasks can be sustained  for several years. 
From the action tasks summarized  in Table 5 , we would like to point 
out the need to strengthen  the education  of undergrad  and graduate  stu- 
dents so that highly trained  professionals  in Latin America  join start-ups,  
pharmaceutical  and other companies,  academic  groups in universities  or 
start and develop  their own companies.  Start-up  (AI) companies  based in 
Latin America  could stablish  solid collaborations  with medium-to-large  
industries  following  the example  of successful  partnerships  happening  in 
other countries,  for example,  Exscientia  ( https://www.exscientia.ai/  )- 
Sanoﬁ; Recursion  ( https://www.recursion.com/  )-Roche  and Genentech;  
Benevolent  AI ( https://www.benevolent.com/  )-AstraZeneca  [33] . No- 
tably, there are scientists  who graduated  from Latin American  universi-  
ties currently  employed  by Recursion  and Benevolent  AI. 
Scientiﬁc  meetings  and conferences  favor the exchange  of knowl- 
edge and technology  transfer  based on computational  tools that can be 
incorporated  into universities  and institutes,  allowing  for the following  
in the academic  environment:  the participation  of undergraduate  stu- 
dents in scientiﬁc  initiation  sessions  and their incorporation  into uni- 
12 J. Miranda-Salas, C. Peña-Varas, I. Valenzuela Martínez et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in the Life Sciences 3 (2023) 100077 
versity research  hotbeds  with groups are already  well established.  In 
any case, face-to-face  (or hybrid)  meetings  that are also beneﬁcial  can 
be conducted  and ﬁnanced  through  collaborations  within Latin Amer- 
ica. These interactions  lead us to the generation  of conglomerates  that 
can develop  multi-center  projects  in the Latin American  region. 
This will favor the interests  of ﬁnancing  agencies  (public or private)  
in ﬁnancing  collaborative  projects.  The above, together  with the advan- 
tages of online and live conferences  and webinars,  make it increasingly  
easier to hold meetings  or conferences  that have the advantage  of saving 
time and reducing  the cost of organization  and attendance.  It is also ben- 
eﬁcial to have the continued  convenience  of being involved  in editorial  
boards of peer-reviewed  publications.  Currently,  several Latin Ameri- 
cans are taking an active part in the editorial  boards of journals  such as 
the Journal  of Chemoinformatics,  Journal  of Chemical  Information  and 
Modeling,  eLife, to name a few examples.  Also, a current  trend of some 
scientiﬁc  publishers  is to include  early career researchers  in the review 
board, e.g., Protein  Science,  which opens opportunities  for scientists  in 
Latin America  to take part in editorial  boards where our representation  
is underrepresented.  
In several of the action points proposed  in Table 5 , it is crucial to 
expedite  the paperwork  needed  to formalize  conﬁdential  agreements  
with industry.  The overabundance  of bureaucracy  frequently  saps in- 
dustry and other institutions’  motivation  to collaborate  with academic  
organizations  on scientiﬁc  achievements.  Of course, these points re- 
quire a greater eﬀort that includes  the participation  of high manage-  
ment and governments.  In all, research,  education,  and funding  are 
among the main pillars that will help to sustain and improve  Chemoin-  
formatics  and related disciplines  in Latin America.  The research  in- 
cludes dissemination  through  peer-reviewed  publications,  participation  
in international  scientiﬁc  conferences,  and creation  and strengthen-  
ing of collaboration  networks  within Latin America  and with other 
countries.  
6. Summary  conclusions  
This is a collective  eﬀort to discuss the status, progress,  and chal- 
lenges of chemoinformatics  in Latin America  by experts  working  on this 
geographical  region. Although  there are several other Latin American  
research  groups working  on chemoinformatics  that are not included  in 
this manuscript,  we consider  that this is the ﬁrst eﬀort to team up and 
discuss the subject that is loosely based on the “four W´s ”: w hen the 
publications  and applications  have been disclosed  (for this work we fo- 
cused on the period 2010–2022);  w ho (e.g., Latin American  countries  
working  on chemoinformatics  along with network  collaborations  within 
the continent  and the rest of the world);  w hat applications  of chemoin-  
formatics  are being published;  and w here (we analyzed  the journals,  
online databases,  scientiﬁc  conferences,  and forums where the research  
is being disseminated).  We concluded  that like “bioinformatics,  ”there 
is a need to establish  a unique term for a well-deﬁned  and indepen-  
dent discipline.  It is also concluded  that, overall,  Latin America  is the 
fourth geographical  region that contributes  to chemoinformatics  world- 
wide after Europe,  Asia, and North America.  By far, Brazil is the Latin 
American  country  with the strongest  contributions,  followed  by Mex- 
ico. In the last twelve years, the most common  cheminformatics  ap- 
plications  with other disciplines  have been molecular  modeling  and 
drug discovery  that, in general  are common  applications  of chemoinfor-  
matic in other geographical  regions.  Also, QSAR and chemical  space are 
common  topics published  along with chemoinformatics.  Collectively,  
Molecular  Informatics  and Journal  of Chemoinformatics,  followed  by 
the Journal  of Chemical  Information  and Modeling,  are the most fre- 
quent journals  where Latin American  groups publish  their papers.  The 
same conclusion  can be drawn from the scientiﬁc  journals  where re- 
searchers  from other countries  publish  their chemoinformatic  research  
papers.  
We also conclude  that there is a strong collaboration  network  within 
Latin America,  the strongest  being between  Brazil and Mexico  this far. Also, there are extensive  collaboration  networks  between  Latin Amer- 
ican countries  and other geographical  regions.  Of note, collaborations  
between  Brazil and USA and Brazil and Germany.  Other Latin American  
countries  have frequent  interactions  with the USA, Germany,  Spain, and 
Italy. While Argentina,  Brazil, Chile, Colombia,  Mexico,  and Uruguay  
are among the countries  that have been developing  important  open- 
access resources  for research,  education,  and training  on chemoinfor-  
matics and closely related disciplines.  It is also noticeable  that more 
than ten compound  databases  have been developed  with an emphasis  
on natural  product  collections.  Development  of compound  databases,  
including  natural  products,  is also a common  trend in other countries  
outside  Latin America.  
Continuing  doing research,  consolidating  current  collaborations,  and 
expanding  interaction  networks  within research  groups within Latin 
America  and other countries  is an important  challenge  and will have 
a strong impact on developing  chemoinformatics  in the region. A strong 
challenge  in Latin America  to make academic-industry  partnerships  is 
the paramount  of paperwork  and lengthy  time required  to sign and 
implement  legal cooperation  agreements.  We think that speeding  up 
the process  will beneﬁt both parties.  The vast territory  and richness  
of natural  resources  in Latin America  oﬀer an attractive  opportunity  
to spread start-up  and AI-focused  companies  that can foster the fur- 
ther development  of chemoinformatics  and related computational  dis- 
ciplines  in the area. Democratization  and open science  would foster 
the connection  of research  groups and students  at various  levels within 
Latin America  and across the world. Although  open science  favors sci- 
ence development  worldwide,  this is quite relevant  in Latin America,  
where the funding  level to acquire  and maintain  commercial  software  
and computational  resources  is limited.  Dissemination  through  peer- 
reviewed  papers,  active participation  at scientiﬁc  conferences  (orga- 
nized within Latin America  and elsewhere),  and training  and educa- 
tion will play an important  role to continue  expanding  chemoinformat-  
ics and related disciplines  in Latin America.  Indeed,  formal and com- 
prehensive  courses  on chemoinformatics  and related disciplines  have 
been introduced  in Latin American  universities  in the past 3–5 years. 
This short time sharply  contrasts  with other geographical  regions,  such 
as Europe or the United States, where chemoinformatics  courses  and 
formal programs  have been ongoing  for several decades.  It is antici- 
pated that the continued  and sustained  growth  of research  will attract 
funding  and additional  partnership  between  Latin American  universi-  
ties with industry  and other public or private organizations.  Overall,  
we anticipate  that chemoinformatics  will continue  growing  in Latin 
America.  
Declaration  of Competing  Interest  
The authors  declare  that they have no known competing  ﬁnancial  
interests  or personal  relationships  that could have appeared  to inﬂuence  
the work reported  in this paper. 
Data availability  
The data collected  in the paper is a bibliometric  analysis,  and it is 
described  in the manuscript  in detail. 
Acknowledgments  
Rich discussions  with Diana L. Prado-Romero,  Fernada  I. Saldívar-  
González,  Alejandro  Gómez-García,  and all members  of the DIFACQUIM  
research  group are deeply acknowledged.  Brazilian  authors  would like 
to thank the funding  agencies  CAPES (Coordenação  de Aperfeiçoamento  
de Pessoal  de Nível Superior),  CNPq (Conselho  Nacional  de Desenvolvi-  
mento Cientíﬁco  e Tecnológico),  FAPEMIG  (Fundação  de Amparo  àPesquisa
 do Estado de Minas Gerais),  and UFMG (Universidade  Federal  
de Minas Geais). 
13 J. Miranda-Salas, C. Peña-Varas, I. Valenzuela Martínez et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in the Life Sciences 3 (2023) 100077 
Funding  
We thank the Dirección  General  de Cómputo  y de Tecnologías  de 
Información  y Comunicación  (DGTIC),  UNAM,  for the computational  
resources  to use Miztli supercomputer  at UNAM under project LANCAD-  
UNAM-DGTIC-335;  and the innovation  space UNAM-HUAWEI  the com- 
putational  resources  to use their supercomputer  under project No. 7 “De- 
sarrollo  y aplicación  de algoritmos  de inteligencia  artiﬁcial  para el dis- 
eño de fármacos  aplicables  al tratamiento  de diabetes  mellitus  y cáncer ”. 
We also thank the funding  of DGAPA,  UNAM,  Programa  de Apoyo a 
Proyectos  de Investigación  e Innovación  Tecnológica  (PAPIIT)  , grant 
No. IN201321  . This research  was also funded by: FONDECYT  (Fondo 
Nacional  de Desarrollo  Cientíﬁco  y Tecnológico  —Chile)  , grant num- 
ber 1220656  and ANID (Agencia  Nacional  de Investigación  y Desar- 
rollo —Chile)  grant number  ATE220043  and FOVI210027  ; ANID –MILE-  
NIO – NCN19_038;  Vice-rectory  of Research  and Postgraduate  Studies  
of the University  of Panama  for University  Research  Funds CUFI-VIP-  
01–14–2019–05  and SNI sponsor.  WZ thanks the Vice Chancellor  for 
Research  of the University  of Costa Rica for its support  work via the 
research  projects  115-C2–126  and 908-C3–610  . Brazilian  researchers  
was funded by Conselho  Nacional  de Desenvolvimento  Cientíﬁco  e Tec- 
nológico  ( CNPq - 303757/2019–1  and 311875/2022–0  ), CAPES founda-  
tion , grant numbers  88887.684031/2022–00  ; UFMG intramural  funds 
and its Pró-Reitoria  de Pós - Graduação  (PRPG)  intramural  funds . 
Supplementary  materials  
Supplementary  material  associated  with this article can be found, in 
the online version,  at doi:10.1016/j.ailsci.2023.100077  . 
References  
[1] Varnek A, Baskin II. Chemoinformatics as a theoretical chemistry discipline. Mol Inf 2011;30:20–32. doi: 10.1002/minf.201000100 
. 
[2] López-López E, Bajorath J, Medina-Franco JL. Informatics for chemistry, biology, and biomedical sciences. J Chem Inf Model 2021;61:26–35. doi: 10.1021/acs.jcim. 0c01301 
. 
[3] Bajorath J. Understanding chemoinformatics: a unifying approach. Drug Discov To- day 2004;9:13–14. doi: 10.1016/s1359- 6446(04)02916- 2 
. 
[4] Gasteiger J, Funatsu K. Chemoinformatics –A n important scientiﬁc discipline. J Comput Chem 2006;5(2):53–8. doi: 10.2477/jccj.5.53 
. 
[5] Gasteiger J. Chemistry in times of artiﬁcial intelligence. Chemphyschem 2020;21(20):2233–42. doi: 10.1002/cphc.202000518 
. 
[6] Medina-Franco JL, Saldívar-González FI. Cheminformatics to characterize phar- macologically active natural products. Biomolecules 2020:1566. doi: 10.3390/ biom10111566 
. 
[7] Gasteiger J. Chemoinformatics: achievements and challenges, a personal view. Molecules 2016;21(2):151. doi: 10.3390/molecules21020151 
. 
[8] Medina-Franco JL, et al. Bridging informatics and medicinal inorganic chemistry: toward a database of metallodrugs and metallodrug candidates. Drug Discov Today 2022;27(5):1420–30. doi: 10.1016/j.drudis.2022.02.021 
. 
[9] Kirchmair J. Molecular informatics in natural products research. Mol Inf 2020;39(11):e2000206. doi: 10.1002/minf.202000206 
. 
[10] Naveja JJ, Oviedo-Osornio CI, Trujillo-Minero NN, Medina-Franco JL. Chemoin- formatics: a perspective from an academic setting in Latin America. Mol Diversity 2017;22(1):247–58. doi: 10.1007/s11030- 017- 9802- 3 
. 
[11] Perianes-Rodriguez A, et al. Constructing bibliometric networks: a comparison be- tween full and fractional counting. J Informetr 2016;10(4):1178–95. doi: 10.1016/ j.joi.2016.10.006 
. 
[12] González-Medina M, Jesús Naveja J, Sánchez-Cruz N, Medina-Franco JL. Open chemoinformatic resources to explore the structure, properties and chemical space of molecules. RSC Adv 2017;7(85):54153–63. doi: 10.1039/C7RA11831G 
. 
[13] Cox PB, Gupta R. Contemporary computational applications and tools in drug dis- covery. ACS Med Chem Lett 2022;13(7):1016–29. doi: 10.1021/acsmedchemlett. 1c00662 
. 
[14] Villoutreix BO, et al. One hundred thousand mouse clicks down the road: selected online resources supporting drug discovery collected over a decade. Drug Discov Today 2013;18(21–22):1081–9. doi: 10.1016/j.drudis.2013.06.013 
. 
[15] Gómez-García A, Medina-Franco JL. Progress and impact of Latin American natural product databases. Biomolecules 2022;12(9):1202. doi: 10.3390/biom12091202 
. 
[16] L Medina-Franco J. Towards a uniﬁed Latin American natural products database: lANaPD. Future Sci OA 2020;6(8):FSO468. doi: 10.2144/fsoa- 2020- 0068 
. 
[17] Mobley, D.L. The SAMPL challenges. SAMPL. 2023 https://samplchallenges.github. io/ 
(accessed 2023-04-30). 
[18] Geballe MT, Guthrie JP. The SAMPL3 blind prediction challenge: transfer energy overview. J Comput-Aided Mol Des 2012;26(5):489–96. doi: 10.1007/ s10822- 012- 9568- 8 
. [19] Mobley DL, Wymer KL, Lim NM, Guthrie JP. Blind prediction of solvation free en- ergies from the SAMPL4 challenge. J Comput-Aided Mol Des 2014;28(3):135–50. doi: 10.1007/s10822- 014- 9718- 2 
. 
[20] I şı k M, Rustenburg AS, Rizzi A, Gunner MR, Mobley DL, Chodera JD. Overview of the SAMPL6 pK challenge: evaluating small molecule microscopic and macro- scopic pK predictions. J Comput-Aided Mol Des 2021;35(2):131–66. doi: 10.1007/ s10822- 020- 00362- 6 
. 
[21] Bergazin TD, Tielker N, Zhang Y, Mao J, Gunner MR, Francisco K, Ballatore C, Kast SM, Mobley DL. Evaluation of log P, pK, and log D predictions from the SAMPL7 blind challenge. J Comput-Aided Mol Des 2021;35(7):771–802. doi: 10. 1007/s10822- 021- 00397- 3 
. 
[22] I şı k M, Bergazin TD, Fox T, Rizzi A, Chodera JD, Mobley DL. Assessing the accuracy of octanol-water partition coeﬃcient predictions in the SAMPL6 part II log P Challenge. J Comput-Aided Mol Des 2020;34(4):335–70. doi: 10.1007/ s10822- 020- 00295- 0 
. 
[23] O’Boyle NM, Banck M, James CA, Morley C, Vandermeersch T, Hutchison GR. Open babel: an open chemical toolbox. J Cheminf 2011;3:33. doi: 10.1186/ 1758- 2946- 3- 33 
. 
[24] Barreiro EJ, Rodrigues CR, Albuquerque MG, Sant’Anna CMR, Alencastro RB. modelagem molecular: uma ferramenta para o planejamento racional de fár- macos em química medicinal. Quím Nova 1997;20(3):300–10. doi: 10.1590/ S0100-40421997000300011 
. 
[25] Montanari CA. A química medicinal na próxima década. Quím. Nova 2000;23(1):134–7. doi: 10.1590/S0100-40422000000100024 
. 
[26] Góes ACS, Oliveira BVX. Projeto genoma humano: um retrato da construção do con- hecimento cientíﬁco sob a ótica da revista ciência hoje. Ciênc educ 2014;20(3):561–77 (Bauru). doi: 10.1590/1516-73132014000300004 
. 
[27] Ferreira LG, Dos Santos RN, Oliva G, Andricopulo AD. Molecular docking and structure-based drug design strategies. Molecules 2015;20(7):13384–421. doi: 10. 3390/molecules200713384 
. 
[28] Tavare, A.; Horta, C.; Kümmerlec, A.E.; Guido, R. A evolução da química medicinal no Brasil: avanços nos 40 anos da sociedade brasileira de química. 2017; 40:694–700 doi: 10.21577/0100-4042.20170075 
. 
[29] Amaral AT, Montanari CA. Química medicinal: 25 anos de planejamento racional de fármacos. Quím Nova 2002;25:39–44. doi: 10.1590/S0100-40422002000800008 
. 
[30] Sant’Anna CMR. Glossário de termos usados no planejamento de fármacos (re- comendações da IUPAC para 1997). Quím Nova 2002;25(3):505–12. doi: 10.1590/ S0100-40422002000300027 
. 
[31] Verli H, Barreiro EJ. Um paradigma da química medicinal: a ﬂexibili- dade dos ligantes e receptores. Quím Nova 2005;28(1):95–102. doi: 10.1590/ S0100-40422005000100018 
. 
[32] Lima LM. Química medicinal moderna: desaﬁos e contribuição brasileira. Quím Nova 2007;30(6):1456–68. doi: 10.1590/S0100-40422007000600015 
. 
[33] King, A. Encoding creativity in drug discovery. Chemistry World. 2023 https://www. chemistryworld.com/news/encoding- creativity- in- drug- discovery/4016866.article 
(accessed 2023-04-13). 
[34] Gori DNP, Alberca LN, Rodriguez S, Alice JI, Llanos MA, Bellera CL, Talevi A. LIDeB tools: a Latin American resource of freely available, open-source cheminformatics apps. Artif Intell Life Sci 2022;2:100049. doi: 10.1016/j.ailsci.2022.100049 
. 
[35] Website. 2023 https://naturar.quimica.unlp.edu.ar/es/ . 
[36] Valli M, dos Santos RN, Figueira LD, Nakajima CH, Castro-Gamboa I, Andricop- ulo AD, Bolzani VS. Development of a natural products database from the biodiver- sity of Brazil. J Nat Prod 2013;76(3):439–44. doi: 10.1021/np3006875 
. 
[37] Pilon AC, Valli M, Dametto AC, Pinto MEF, Freire RT, Castro-Gamboa I, Andricop- ulo AD, Bolzani VS. NuBBE: an updated database to uncover chemical and biolog- ical information from Brazilian biodiversity. Sci Rep 2017;7(1):7215. doi: 10.1038/ s41598- 017- 07451- x 
. 
[38] Scotti MT, Herrera-Acevedo C, Oliveira TB, Costa RPO, Santos SYKO, Rodrigues RP, Scotti L, Da-Costa FB. SistematX, an online web-based cheminformatics tool for data management of secondary metabolites. Molecules 2018;23(1). doi: 10.3390/ molecules23010103 
. 
[39] Costa RPO, Lucena LF, Silva LMA, Zocolo GJ, Herrera-Acevedo C, Scotti L, Da- Costa FB, Ionov N, Poroikov V, Muratov EN, Scotti MT. The SistematX web portal of natural products: an update. J Chem Inf Model 2021;61(6):2516–22. doi: 10.1021/ acs.jcim.1c00083 
. 
[40] ZINC catalog UEFS natural products. 2023 http://zinc12.docking.org/catalogs/ uefsnp 
(accessed 2023-03-15. 
[41] Zamora, W.J.; Pinheiro, S.; Acuña, D. NAPRORE-CR (NAtural PROducts REpository - Costa Rica), 2023. doi: 10.5281/zenodo.7858102 
. 
[42] Unidad de informática del Instituto de Química. 2023 https://uniiquim.iquimica. unam.mx/ 
(accessed 2023-03-15). 
[43] Pilón-Jiménez BA, Saldívar-González FI, Díaz-Eufracio BI, Medina-Franco JL. BIO- FACQUIM: a Mexican compound database of natural products. Biomolecules 2019;9(1). doi: 10.3390/biom9010031 
. 
[44] Sánchez-Cruz N, Pilón-Jiménez BA, Medina-Franco JL. Functional group and di- versity analysis of BIOFACQUIM: a Mexican natural product database. F1000Res 2019;8. doi: 10.12688/f1000research.21540.2 
. 
[45] Olmedo DA, González-Medina M, Gupta MP, Medina-Franco JL. Cheminformatic characterization of natural products from Panama. Mol Diversity 2017;21(4):779–89. doi: 10.1007/s11030- 017- 9781- 4 
. 
[46] Barazorda-Ccahuana, H.L., Ranilla, L.G., Candia-Puma, M.A., Cárcamo-Rodriguez, E.G., Centeno-Lopez, A.E., Del-Carpio, G.D., Medina-Franco, J.L., Chávez-Fumagalli, M.A. Peru NPDB: the Peruvian natural products database for in silico drug screening. Sci Rep 2023 13, 7577. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598- 023- 34729- 0 
[47] Swamy MK, Kumar A. Phytochemical genomics: plant metabolomics and medicinal plant genomics. Springer Nature; 2023 
. 
14 J. Miranda-Salas, C. Peña-Varas, I. Valenzuela Martínez et al. Artiﬁcial Intelligence in the Life Sciences 3 (2023) 100077 
[48] Bajorath J, Chávez-Hernández AL, Duran-Frigola M, Fernández-de Gortari E, Gasteiger J, López-López E, Maggiora GM, Medina-Franco JL, Méndez-Lucio O, Mestres J, Miranda-Quintana RA, Oprea TI, Plisson F, Prieto-Martínez FD, Rodríguez-Pérez R, Rondón-Villarreal P, Saldívar-Gonzalez FI, Sánchez-Cruz N, Valli M. Chemoinformatics and artiﬁcial intelligence colloquium: progress and chal- lenges in developing bioactive
 compounds. J Cheminf 2022;14(1):1–12. doi: 10. 1186/s13321- 022- 00661- 0 
. 
[49] Velez Rueda AJ, et al. Women in bioinformatics & data science - Latin America. MethodsX 2022;9:101907. doi: 10.1016/j.mex.2022.101907 
. 
[50] Bannan CC, Burley KH, Chiu M, Shirts MR, Gilson MK, Mobley DL. Blind prediction of cyclohexane-water distribution coeﬃcients from the SAMPL5 Challenge. J Comput- Aided Mol Des 2016;30(11):927–44. doi: 10.1007/s10822- 016- 9954- 8 
. 
[51] Riquelme M, Vöhringer-Martinez E. SAMPL6 octanol-water partition coeﬃcients from alchemical free energy calculations with MBIS Atomic Charges. J Comput- Aided Mol Des 2020;34(4):327–34. doi: 10.1007/s10822- 020- 00281- 6 
. [52] Zamora WJ, Pinheiro S, German K, Ràfols C, Curutchet C, Luque FJ. Prediction of the n-octanol/water partition coeﬃcients in the SAMPL6 blind challenge from MST continuum solvation calculations. J Comput-Aided Mol Des 2020;34(4):443–51. doi: 10.1007/s10822- 019- 00262- 4 
. 
[53] Viayna A, Pinheiro S, Curutchet C, Luque FJ, Zamora WJ. Prediction of n- octanol/water partition coeﬃcients and acidity constants (pK) in the SAMPL7 blind challenge with the IEFPCM-MST model. J Comput-Aided Mol Des 2021;35(7):803–11. doi: 10.1007/s10822- 021- 00394- 6 
. 
[54] Rodriguez SA, Tran JV, Sabatino SJ, Paluch AS. Predicting octanol/water parti- tion coeﬃcients and pKa for the SAMPL7 challenge using the SM12, SM8 and SMD solvation models. J Comput-Aided Mol Des 2022;36(9):687–705. doi: 10.1007/ s10822- 022- 00474- 1 
. 
[55] Lopez K, Pinheiro S, Zamora WJ. Multiple linear regression models for predicting the n ‑octanol/water partition coeﬃcients in the SAMPL7 blind challenge. J Comput- Aided Mol Des 2021;35(8):923–31. doi: 10.1007/s10822- 021- 00409- 2 
. 
15 