Vehicular LTE connectivity analysis in urban and rural environments usingUSRP measurements
Karthik Vasudevaa,b,*, Ozgur Ozdemirb, Sugan R.S. Chandarb, Fatih Erdenb, Ismail Guvencb
aElectrical and Computer Engineering, Florida International University, Miami, FL, USA
bElectrical and Computer Engineering, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC, USA
ARTICLE INFO
Index terms:3GPPLTE connectivityReference signal received power (RSRP)Road-side unit (RSU)USRPABSTRACT
The intelligent transportation system (ITS) offers a wide range of applications related to traf ﬁc management, which often require high data rate and low latency. The ubiquitous coverage and advancements of the Long TermEvolution (LTE) technology have made it possible to achieve these requirements and to enable broadband ap-plications for vehicular users. In this paper, we perform ﬁeld trial measurements in various different commercial LTE networks using software deﬁned radios (SDRs) and report ourﬁndings. First, we provide a detailed tutorial overview on how to post-process SDR measurements for decoding broadcast channels and reference signalmeasurements from LTE networks. We subsequently describe the details of our measurement campaigns in urban,sub-urban, and rural environments. Based on these measurements, we report joint distributions of base stationdensity, cellular coverage, link strength, disconnected vehicle duration, and vehicle velocity in these environ-ments, and compare the LTE coverage in different settings. Our experimental results quantify the strongercoverage, shorter link distances, and shorter duration of disconnectivity in urban environments when compared tosub-urban and rural settings.
1. IntroductionThe rapid advancement in information and communication technol-ogies stimulated a connectivity solution for vehicles to improve traf ﬁc safety and management. Such a solution is a key aspect of the intelligenttransportation system (ITS), which is said to transform the way we traveltoday. The vehicles communicate not only with each other but also withnearby road-side unit (RSU) infrastructures to warn drivers against apotential accident or other unsafe events. In order to improve safety andmobility of the road travelers, there are various ongoing work on theconnected vehicle pilot deployment programs in New York City, Tampa,and Wyoming [1]. The US Department of Transportation (USDOT) claimsthat the connected vehicle technology has the potential to eliminate up to80% of the non-impaired crashes [2].Potential incident warnings should be instantly indicated to drivers inthe rapidly varying vehicular channel. Therefore, reliability and timeli-ness are of utmost importance in vehicle-to-everything (V2X) commu-nication where wireless connective framework plays a crucial role. TheUS Federal Communications Commission (FCC) allocated separate 75MHz bandwidth in the 5.850–5.925 GHz band to implement ITS appli-cations based on dedicated short-range communication (DSRC)framework [3]. The DSRC framework uses IEEE 802.11p, which is amodiﬁed version of the Wi-Fi standard and designed for wireless accessin vehicular environments (WAVE). It ensures interoperability betweendevices from different manufacturers and provides fast network estab-lishment in the rapidly changing mobile environment [ 4]. In DSRC network, the onboard unit (OBU) in a vehicle receives disseminatedsafety messages either from neighboring vehicles or the RSU infrastruc-ture to determine emergency events, and the warning is sent to drivers incase of emergency. However, there are some concerns over itscontention-based scheduling mechanism where it is dif ﬁcult to achieve critical latency requirements in high-density traf ﬁc scenarios. Therefore, congestion controlling schemes need to be implemented in DSRC [ 5]. Alternatively, the cellular-based V2X communication (C-V2X) startedby the third generation partnership project (3GPP) is working onleveraging the long term evolution (LTE) framework for vehicular com-munications [6]. As a result, the present deployed LTE infrastructure canbe conﬁgured to support vehicular connectivity, thereby reducing thenumber of RSU installation. Further, large coverage scope and high ca-pacity of the LTE make it a suitableﬁt to support low-latency safe- ty-critical services for high-speed vehicles. Moreover, its higherpenetration rate facilitates reliable packet delivery at road intersections,
* Corresponding author. Electrical and Computer Engineering, Florida International University, Miami, FL, USA.E-mail address:kvasu001@ﬁu.edu(K. Vasudeva).
Contents lists available atScienceDirect
Array
journal homepage:www.elsevier.com/journals/array/2590-0056/open-access-journal
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.array.2020.100045Received 18 September 2019; Received in revised form 31 July 2020; Accepted 28 August 2020Available online 1 October 20202590-0056/©2020 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. This is an open access article under the CC BY license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ ).Array 8 (2020) 100045unlike DSRC technology, which suffers due to non-line-of-sight (NLOS)conditions and shorter coverage. These advantages have sparked interestrecently among leading automotive and cellular companies, e.g., Qual-comm and Ford, to deploy C-V2X in Colorado [ 7]. The architecture enhancements to enable LTE-based V2X applicationsare given in Ref. [8]. The vehicles may receive V2X messages either viaunicast or broadcast setup called multimedia broadcast/multicast service(MBMS) [9] over LTE-Uu interface for vehicle-to-infrastructure (V2I)communication. In addition, many additional modes have been intro-duced for direct vehicle-to-vehicle (V2V) communication in Ref. [ 10]. In one of the modes, V2V resource allocation is managed by the base station(BS); thus the availability of coverage is crucial to ensure collision-freetransmission which is unlikely in the case of the contention-basedapproach employed in DSRC technology. Therefore, ubiquitouscoverage is desirable for efﬁcient V2X communication.Usually, the propagation losses and interference are the majorlimiting factors for vehicular communication, and their evaluation re-quires BS location information. Recently, BS location data are publiclyavailable, e.g., in OpencellID [11] and CellIDﬁnder [12], through esti- mation techniques. OpenCellID in particular incorporated crowd-sourceddata collection scheme to estimate the location of the BSs and developeda database consisting of GPS coordinates of all the BS. The location es-timates in the OpenCellID database are accessed using the global identity,which is periodically disseminated by the BS, and it is known asE-UTRAN Cell Global Identiﬁer (ECGI) in LTE.In this paper, we study the vehicular connectivity performance of theLTE networks based on the drive test measurements carried out using auniversal software deﬁned radio (USRP). The measurements are post-processed to decode identity information of the BSs and to evaluatetheir coverage strength. Primarily, we aim to decode unique identi ﬁca- tion of BSs speciﬁed by the ECGI and to extract their locations fromOpenCellID. The results from the rural, semi-urban, and urban areas ofthe drive test campaign are obtained to investigate the coverage per-formance and its impact on the temporal connectivity of vehicular users.Our results show that V2I communication is better supported by LTEnetwork deployments in semi-urban and urban compared to rural areas.The paper is organized as follows. Section 2provides the literature review. Section3describes the drive test measurement setup and therecording process. The post-processing steps performed in MATLAB toevaluate the BS information are given in Section 4. In Section5, drive test results assessing the performance of the LTE infrastructure are presented,followed by concluding remarks in the last section.2. Literature reviewThe vehicular connectivity performance of Wi-Fi networks forInternet access is studied in Refs. [13–15] using drive test measurements. In Refs. [13,14], active scanning is analyzed, where moving users sendprobe requests to access points (APs) within their vicinity for theconnection attempt. The distribution of APs discovered during activescan were examined in geographical areas with different populationdistribution in Ref. [13], while temporal connectivity information fordifferent vehicular speeds is investigated in Ref. [ 14]. Alternatively, connection requests can be sent by users in the coverage range of AP aftersuccessfully receiving the beacon. The connection performance of thisapproach of passively scanning the APs is studied in Ref. [ 15]. The intermittent connectivity was observed at several locations during the
motion of the vehicle, and the possibility of poor link period is estimatedusing the knowledge of past connection measurements. As a result, theconnection framework in Wi-Fi networks is suitable to supportdelay-tolerant applications like web browsing, messaging, etc., invehicular scenarios.On the other hand, the DSRC designed to support vehicular safetyapplications employ amended version of IEEE 802.11 (Wi-Fi) standard,called IEEE 802.11p, to address the safety-critical communication re-quirements mentioned in Refs. [16,17]. Theﬁeld test campaigns wereperformed in IEEE 802.11p-based vehicular network to examine theimpact of vehicular speed on latency and throughput of the V2Icommunication, respectively in Refs. [ 18,19]. The reported results conﬁrm that normal range vehicular speeds do not have a direct in ﬂu- ence on the performance of V2I communication. The works in Refs.[20–25] evaluate packet delivery ratio (PDR) to determine the connec-tivity performance of V2I communication, and it is studied in various testenvironment and system settings of IEEE 802.11p standard.Initially, the results in Ref. [20] show that the NLOS conditions characterized by obstacles like trees, heavy traf ﬁc conditions, etc., degrade the connectivity range. The height of the antenna and changes interrain elevation are also known to affect the visibility between vehiclesand RSU. Usually, the vehicular channels are highly time varying and as aresult, increasing either the throughput or packet size settings of the RSUhave a negative inﬂuence on the link connectivity as reported in Refs.[21,22]. Further, the results in Ref. [23] show that high-beam antennas improve the coverage range; however, its precise positioning, which canbe easily inﬂuenced by environmental conditions, becomes more critical.Lastly, the connectivity performance is estimated using the Gilbert modelin Refs. [21,24], while artiﬁcial neural and Bayesian networks areemployed in Ref. [25] to estimate the connectivity range consideringdifferent context information from drive test measurements for trainingthe networks.The DSRC technology is usually suitable for short transmission ad hoctype communication because serving users with V2X applications in alarge coverage area requires a centralized approach of allocating radioresources for handling the channel congestion, which is a problem inDSRC. Therefore, the DSRC is not ideal for use in V2I applications forlong-range communications. Alternatively, the LTE-V2X standard iscapable of catering reliable safety services to many vehicular users due toits wider coverage and high capacity. In Refs. [ 26,27], V2V communi- cation performance is evaluated using packet reception rate (PRR), andthe simulation results show that V2V in coverage perform bettercompared to out of coverage where users autonomously select their radioresources without the assistance from BS. Further, drive test experimentresults in Ref. [28] conﬁrm that the PDR performance of LTEcellular-based vehicular services is better than DSRC in V2I connectivitysituation at the road intersections. The LTE-V2X standard is still in trialstages, and currently, there are no real-world deployments which offervehicular safety services. Therefore, studying vehicular connectivity withthe existing LTE deployments will help to determine the important fac-tors inﬂuencing the vehicular communication performance.An experimental testbed is developed in [ 29,30] to obtain the link statistics of DSRC and LTE frameworks in vehicular safety applications.The results show that the link performance of LTE is better compared toDSRC even in NLOS conditions, at the expense of compromise in latency.The measurement campaigns were performed in [ 31,35–37] to study various performance indicators of LTE networks such as latency,throughput, and coverage in urban and rural areas. In [ 35], the core and the access network delays are evaluated, and the results reveal that thenetwork enhancements are required to obtain latency performance,which can support vehicular safety use cases. The download speed isanalyzed in [31], and results show that its variability with distance ismore signiﬁcant in urban compared to rural areas. The results alsoindicate that parameters like signal quality and bandwidth in ﬂuence the throughput. Further, the maximum coupling loss between the user andthe base station determined in [35] show that LTE provides 99% coverage to outdoor and road users. The signal strength results in [ 36,37] indicate higher penetration loss in sub-urban/rural compared to urbanareas since channel propagation characteristics differ in these radioenvironments.The pathloss characteristics of V2I channel were evaluated in Refs.[32,38,39] (see also [40,41] for millimeter wave vehicular channels). Itis shown that the path loss is affected by the antenna height, and itsbehavior can be described using the two-ray ground re ﬂection model. In rural/suburban areas, multipath components are not prominentK. Vasudeva et al. Array 8 (2020) 100045
2compared to urban areas as depicted by the average power delay pro ﬁle results in Ref. [38]. This is because of the lesser obstacles in the ﬂat terrain of rural/suburban areas, and scattering mostly occurs in the closearea around the mobile user [33]. Further, in the NLOS scenarioobstruction from neighboring vehicles case, measurements in Ref. [ 34] are quite in agreement with the knife-edge model in Ref. [ 42], which accounts for additional attenuation produced by diffraction. Simulationsare performed in Ref. [33] to evaluate bit error rate (BER) performance inNLOS for V2I channel. The results show that the channel estimationperformance of the IEEE 802.11p pilot pattern is degraded, and BER doesnot improve with increasing SNR. The measurement campaign worksspeciﬁed in the literature review and their differences with the proposedstudy have been summarized in theTable 1.3. Drive test measurement setup and data collection processThe drive test measurements are obtained using a USRP N210 with anintegrated GPS disciplined oscillator (GPSDO) module, which offers aﬂexible programmable platform to implement custom functions usingonboard FPGA [43–46]. The GPSDO module is connected to a 3 V activeantenna for faster acquisition of location information. The measurementsetup is shown inFig. 1. The active antenna improves the signal receptionperformance and thereby yielding faster locking on to GPS satellites. Themeasurements are collected using a laptop through a Gigabit Ethernetconnection, and both the USRP and the laptop are powered through anuninterruptible power supply (UPS) during the drive test.The measurement collection is performed in LabVIEW running on thelaptop, and the process is shown in theﬂowchart inFig. 2. The GPS and
IQ data samples from the USRP are continuously recorded in respectiveﬁles in CSV format, while total elapsed time is monitored. If the elapsedduration exceeds a threshold, then newﬁles are created, and recordings are carried over to the newﬁles. This avoids the difﬁculty in handling largeﬁles during post-processing of the measurement data. The GPS in-formation is obtained using the USRP driver, which returns the standardNational Marine Electronics Association (NMEA) sentences from theGPSDO module.Fig. 3shows the generated recommended minimum data(RMC) format type where each data segment is separated by a comma.The segments are described inTable 2. The latitude and longitudeﬁeld values are converted to decimal format, and sign convention is applied as
Table 1Literature review summary.
Author WirelessStandardContextMethodology/ContributionProposed ApproachAmdouni [13],Bychkovsky [14]&Mahajan [15]Wi-Fi Developed differentapplications to obtainmedium accesscontrol (MAC) orhigher layerinformation ofsurrounding APsusing device driver ofa WiFi hardwaremoduleDesigned aLabVIEWapplication toobtain data of thesurrounding BSsfrom the basicphysical layersetting using devicedriver of a USRPhardware module Lin [18], Sukuvaara[19], Gozalvez[20], Shivaldova[21]&Sassi [22]DSRC Studies primarilyfocus on analyzingthe communicationperformance in thepost connectionphase betweenstandard complianttransmitter andreceiver devicesThe study mainlyaims to assess theperformance fromthe point of view ofinitial connectivityestablishmentachieved throughdecoding the BSs’broadcast signal Hu [26], Cecchini[27], Shi [28], Xu[29], Liu [30]&Akselrod [31]LTE/LTE-V2XApplicationperformance metricslike latency,throughput, etc. areconsidered toinvestigate thefeasibility of wirelessstandards invehicular networksThe performanceevaluation of awireless network isstudied from thecontext of coveragereliability invehicular scenarios.Lee [32],Mecklenbrauker[33]&Aygun [34]DSRC The signal strengthmeasurements areused to study V2I linkcharacteristics in LOSand NLOS conditionsThe signal strengthevaluated fromdrive testmeasurements areused to study V2Iconnectivityduration statistics inrural, sub-urban andurban scenarios.
Fig. 1.Drive test measurement setup with USRPs.
Fig. 2.Measurement collection process in SDR experiments.
Fig. 3.NMEA RMC sentence format.K. Vasudeva et al. Array 8 (2020) 100045
3indicated by the N/S, E/W dataﬁelds. The latitude and longitude valuesare considered negative for south and west, respectively, which are thenrecorded along with the speed value.Further, the USRP parameters, like sampling rate, carrier frequency,and number of samples per fetch, are initially con ﬁgured before starting the I/Q signal acquisition. It is crucial to set the ideal parameters toaccomplish successful decoding of primary system information and ECGI,which are speciﬁed in the master information block (MIB) and systeminformation block type 1 (SIB1), respectively. The BS broadcasts thisinformation periodically, and it is important to study their schedulinginformation in time and frequency. First, we study the scheduling patternof MIB and SIB1 in frequency to determine the sampling rate of the USRP.The MIB is carried by the physical broadcast channel (PBCH) transmittedin central six OFDM resource blocks (RBs), and therefore correspondingsampling rate of 1.92 MHz is required, regardless of the system band-width at the BS. The USRP N210 does not support this sampling rate sinceit allows only integer decimation factor Nof the master clock rate given by
100e6
N. Thus, the nearest sampling rate of 2 MHz is set during themeasurement recording in a drive test. In contrast, SIB1 is transmittedusing physical downlink shared channel (PDSCH) over the entire systembandwidth indicated by the MIB. After a few preliminary drive tests, weobserve base station’s bandwidth to be 10 MHz. Therefore, we set thesampling rate to 16.67 MHz.Next, we determine the total capture duration using the standardtransmission time pattern of MIB and SIB1 in LTE for their successfulextraction. The MIB transmission pattern in time is shown in Fig. 4. For instance, let us consider two different MIB-1 and MIB-2, and that each ofthem is transmitted every 40 ms. Within this period, each radio framecarries respective repetitions of MIB-1&2 as depicted inFig. 4. The repetitions allow soft combining for decoding the PBCH in low signalstrength conditions. We perform soft combining by taking four sequentialradio frames and advancing this window until successful decoding isattained [47]. Therefore, the capture duration of the USRP is ﬁxed to 80 ms for successful MIB extraction. Unlike MIB, transmission periodicity ofSIB1 is 80 ms and within this period, each of the respective repetitions ofSIB1-1 and SIB1-2 are transmitted every 20 ms as shown in Fig. 4.I ti s important to note that each of the repetitive copies have differentredundancy version (RV) aiding in soft decoding of PDSCH data.Following the similar approach used for MIB extraction, the USRP isconﬁgured to record 160 ms of I/Q signal data since SIB1 is transmittedwith a periodicity of 80 ms. To sum up, two sets of I/Q signal measure-ments are recorded for extracting MIB and SIB1. The I/Q data for MIBextraction contain 80 ms sampled at 2 MHz, whereas for SIB1 contain160 ms sampled at 16.67 MHz. In the next section, processing steps todecode MIB and SIB1 from the corresponding measurements areprovided.4. Post processing of drive test measurementsThe primary goal of the post processing is to unambiguously identifythe BSs and analyze vehicular communication performance from themeasurement data. The ECGI information enables unambiguous identi-ﬁcation, and it is extracted from the measurements performed fordecoding the SIB1 as mentioned in Section 3. Further, the vehicular communication performance is determined based on the achievablecoverage from the measurement data by decoding the MIB as explainedin the following section.4.1. Decoding the MIBThe primary system information required for the initial access to thecell is speciﬁed in the MIB. Therefore, successful decoding of the MIB ischecked to determine BS coverage from the measurement data. Thestandard LTE procedure is followed for MIB decoding using the MATLABLTE toolbox [48] as shown inFig. 5.Initially, the recorded measurements dedicated to MIB extraction areresampled to 1.92 MHz due to sampling rate restrictions of the USRP, asexplained in Section3. Then the cell search procedure is performed toevaluate the physical cell identity (PCI) and timing offset. The PCI in LTEis determined using a combination of Primary Synchronization Signal(PSS) and Secondary Synchronization Signal (SSS). There are three var-iations of PSS signals, and depending on the variation, there are 168 SSSsignals resulting in 504 unique combinations. The signal data arecorrelated with all the 504 combinations of PSS and SSS, and the onewhich yields the peak in correlation gives the PCI. Unlike PSS, the SSSsignals transmitted in subframe 0 and 5 differ in the cyclic shifts. Thisenables to determine the timing offset of the LTE frame in the receiver.For instance, the correlation peaks for a particular PSS and SSS combi-nation occurring in subframe 0 and 5 of a frame length equal to 19200samples is shown inFig. 6. We can observe that the highest correlationpeak is achieved within subframe 0, and the corresponding peak locationgives the direct estimate of timing offset. Otherwise, the peak locationwould have delayed to the subframe 5 of the next frame for calculatingthe timing offset.Further, the frequency offset is performed to compensate for oscillatorerrors and doppler shift in the vehicular scenarios. It is evaluated basedon correlating the cyclic preﬁxes. SupposexðnÞ
is the resampled signal and the sample atn¼n
1is part of the CP, then ignoring channel andAWGN,xðn
1þ128Þ¼xðn 1Þejφ128(1)whereφis the angle created in one sample due to the frequency offsetbetween the transmitter and the receiver. Note that,Table 2RMC sentence description (seeFig. 3).
Field # Description1 Protocol header type2 UTC time format3 Status (A ¼valid; V¼invalid) 4 Latitude (DD
/C14MM.MMMM0) 5 North/South (N/S) indicator6 Longitude (DD
/C14MM.MMMM0) 7 East/West (E/W) indicator8 Speed in knots9 Course over ground10 Date (ddmmyy)11 Magnetic variation12 Checksum
Fig. 4.Scheduling time pattern of system information in LTE [ 47].K. Vasudeva et al. Array 8 (2020) 100045
4/C0argðxðn 1Þx*ðn1þ128ÞÞ ¼128φ (2)and frequency offset is related toφby,bf
offset¼φ2
πTs(3)whereT
s¼11:92/C2106seconds.For instance,Fig. 7shows the plot ofyðnÞ¼xðnÞx
*ðnþ128Þinte- grated over all CPs in a slot and then averaged over all available slots inthe received data whose length is equal to 960 samples. It clearly depictsthe peaks of all CPs corresponding to seven OFDM symbols in a slot. Thefrequency synchronization is achieved by performing xðnÞe
j2πbfoffsetnTs.I n this approach, frequency synchronization is possible when j128φj/C20
π⇒ jφj/C20
π
128. Therefore maximum frequency offset is expressed asbf
offset/C20π=1282
πTs¼1:92/C2106
2/C2128¼7:5 kHz:(4)Next, OFDM demodulation is carried out by removing CP and per-forming 128 point IFFT. The unused subcarriers are discarded resultingin a grid consisting of 72 subcarrier rows and columns indicating thesignal duration. The channel estimates are then obtained for the resourcegrid to compensate for the imperfections in the channel. Furthermore,the PBCH extraction procedure is carried out, where PBCH REs areextracted from the resource grid and subsequently PBCH decoding isperformed as shown inFig. 5. First, the REs undergo deprecoding, layerdemapping and descrambling procedure to obtain broadcast channel(BCH) codewords. This is equivalent to the inverse of PBCH processingspeciﬁed in Ref. [49]. Then these codewords are decoded by performinginverse of BCH processing mentioned in Ref. [ 50] to obtain MIB bits. A total of 24 bits are obtained, out of which 10 bits are spare, and theremaining 14 bits actually signify three essential system information,namely./C15System bandwidth/C15System Frame Number (SFN)/C15Physical Hybrid Automatic Repeat Request Indicator Channel(PHICH) Conﬁguration.The system bandwidth information is carried in ﬁrst 3 bits and its decimal equivalent, 0 to 5, corresponds to the RB set N
RB¼ f6;15;25;50;75;100g. The forth bit conveys whether the duration ofPHICH is normal or extended, while theﬁfth and sixth bits indicate its multiplexing conﬁguration, and the last eight bits are used to determinethe SFN. Apart from the system information, the transmit antennanumber data are scrambled in CRC using an antenna speci ﬁc mask [50]. In order to obtain its data, CRC check is attempted for the standard valuesequal to 1, 2 and 4, and the corresponding true value is returned whenthe decoding is successful [51]. The pseudo code of the overall MIBdecoding procedure is summarized in the Algorithm 1.Algorithm 1MIB decoding algorithm.
Next, the BS coverage strength given by the reference signal receivedpower (RSRP) is evaluated from the resource elements (REs) in the grid
Fig. 5.MIB decodingﬂowchart and in detail PBCH decoding procedure.
Fig. 6.Correlation results obtained for a particular PSS and SSS in a framelength of 19200 samples.K. Vasudeva et al. Array 8 (2020) 100045
5that carry cell-speciﬁc reference signals [47]. It is relatively measured in dB scale and all the results were obtained by keeping the same USRP gainsetting. The V2I connectivity performance of the LTE is studied from theresults explained in Section5. However, unique identiﬁcation of BSs is necessary to determine the impact of actual network deployments on theV2I connectivity performance. It is achieved by decoding ECGI infor-mation from the measurement data.4.2. Decoding the PDSCH for ECGI extractionThe range of cell identiﬁcation using the PCI is limited to 504, and itmight be reused to identify the small cells in dense deployments scenario.This creates ambiguity and therefore BS broadcast ECGI contained withinthe system information indicated in the SIB1 for unique identi ﬁcation. The SIB1 is transmitted on PDSCH, and the decoding procedure given inRef. [48] is performed for its extraction from the recorded set of mea-surements speciﬁed in Section3.Initially, the measurements are resampled according to the systembandwidth given inTable 3, and the resource grid is obtained byrepeating a sequence of processing steps for OFDM demodulation asspeciﬁed in Section4.1. The overview of PDSCH decoding procedure toacquire SIB1 is shown inFig. 8. First, we extract the Physical ControlFormat Indicator Channel (PCFICH) REs, which are usually mapped intogroups called as Resource Element Groups (REGs) [ 47]. There are four such groups, and each group contains four REs distributed across thefrequency domain and their location indices are pre-de ﬁned with an offset related to PCI. Therefore prior knowledge of PCI is required forPCFICH symbols extraction. Next, inverse of PCFICH processing is per-formed, which includes deprecoding, symbol demodulation, anddescrambling to obtain codeword sequences. Lastly, the codewords aredecoded to determine the CFI value, and it usually has three standardvalues, i.e., 1, 2 or 3, which indicates the number of OFDM symbolstransmitted in the physical downlink control channel (PDCCH) [ 47]. Next, we acquire downlink control information (DCI) which is carriedon the PDCCH to determine the scheduling information of the datatransmitted on PDSCH. The DCI REs in the resource grid is mapped on toControl Channel Elements (CCEs) and their possible locations arechecked in search space which comprises of user speci ﬁc and common as deﬁned in LTE [47]. Typically, the common search space carries DCImessages specifying the resource assignments of broadcast system in-formation on the PDSCH. We perform blind decoding to check for allpossible standard DCI formats using a broadcast identity called as SystemInformation Radio Network Temporary Identi ﬁer (SI-RNTI) [47]. In order to perform blind decoding, we initially extract all the possiblePDCCH REs from the resource grid across the entire subcarrier rows andthe time span speciﬁed by the CFI [52]. Next, the inverse of PDCCH processing is performed consisting of deinterleaving, cyclic shifting,deprecoding, symbol demodulation and descrambling to obtain code-word sequences. Finally, blind decoding is performed to ﬁnd all the possible DCI message format across each PDCCH candidate in commonsearch space. If the CRC of the successful decoded PDCCH bits matcheswith the SI-RNTI identity then the corresponding returned DCI messageindicates the resource assignments along with necessary decoding in-formation for SIB1.Further, in order to decode the SIB1 message weﬁrst extract the PDSCH REs where their locations are provided by the DCI. Then decodingprocedure is carried out by performing PDSCH channel inverse pro-cessing to obtain codeword sequences. It includes inverting the channelprecoding, layer demapping and codeword separation, soft demodula-tion, and descrambling operations [53]. Lastly, the codewords undergo decoding procedure consisting of rate recovery, turbo decoding, blockconcatenation, and CRC calculations [ 54] to obtain SIB1 bits. In addition, decoding status is gathered for each codeword to check for error indi-cated by CRC check. This helps in error correction of incorrect codewordsthrough soft combining with other repeated SIB1 messages captured inthe other radio frames.Finally, we extract ECGI information by parsing SIB1 bits using ASN.1compiler. The compiler is installed on linux platform by following thesteps given in Ref. [55]. Initially, the SIB1 bits are stored in aﬁle with.per format and decoding is performed to obtain BCCH-DL-SCH-Message. Itcontains ECGI information consisting of mobile country code (MCC),mobile network code (MNC), tracking area code (TAC) and cell identity(CID) to identify the cell within the Public Land Mobile Network (PLMN)[47].Using the ECGI information, we obtain BS location from the Open-CellID database and CellIDﬁnder [12] and it is important to note that locations provided by database are approximate. Then we incorporate BSlocation results to analyze the effect of LTE network deployments on theperformance of V2I communication shown in the following section.5. Results and analysisThe drive test results are provided to investigate the impact of pa-rameters such as frequency and mobility on V2I link performance in asmall scale shown in Section5.1. Further, we present results of the largescale drive test measurements to study how LTE network deployments inrural, semi-urban and urban counties inﬂuence the V2I link performance explained in Section5.2. Next, results analyzing the handover for variousTable 3Sampling rates for different bandwidths in LTE.
LTE Bandwidth (MHz) LTE Sampling rate (MS/s) Number of RBs ( N RB)1.4 1.92 63 3.84 155 7.68 2510 15.36 5015 23.04 7520 30.72 100
Fig. 8.Decoding of SIB1 information from SDR measurements.
Fig. 7.Peak locations coincide with the CP location occurring in a half frame of9600 samples.K. Vasudeva et al. Array 8 (2020) 100045
6parameter settings is provided in Section 5.3. Lastly, the impact of RSRP and RSRQ parameters on the performance metrics namely throughputand latency is studied in Section5.4.5.1. Impact of LTE frequencies on V2I link performanceThe drive test measurements are performed around the North Car-olina State University campus, and at each location the USRP carrierfrequency is changed alternatively to have one of the two frequencies f¼ ½739;2132/C138MHz. The user locations shown inFig. 9are plotted using different colors indicating the RSRP value of the strongest decoded BS,while red and blue triangles represent the BS location. First, we inves-tigate the V2I link performance for the frequency measurements at 739MHz, as shown inFig. 9. At the start of the drive test, RSRP for the cellwith PCI¼493 is stronger and gradually decreases until the MIBdecoding is no longer possible indicating out of coverage. Further, theRSRP values from the cells with PCI¼132/134 appear, and we experi- ence stronger coverage from 493 cell majority of the time compared torest of the cells. Next, the RSRP value of the strongest BS for the fre-quencies 739 MHz and 2.132 GHz is shown in Fig. 9to compare the V2I link performance. We can see that RSRP values are lower for the fre-quency 2.132 GHz, and this may be due to increased pathloss for higherfrequency or BS might be transmitting with lower power.Further, the distribution of BSs is examined by obtaining their loca-tions from the measurements performed in the drive test scenario showninFig. 10. The USRP carrier frequency is hopped sequentially betweenfrequenciesf¼½739;751;866:3;874:4;882:2;1967:5;1992:5;1982:5/C138 MHz at each user location, and the obtained BS locations from thesefrequency measurements are shown as black triangles. We observe moreBS deployments near the Raleigh downtown compared to countrysideareas.5.2. V2I connectivity analysis in different LTE deployment scenariosThe drive test measurement campaign is conducted from Miami toRaleigh covering four states, namely Florida, Georgia, South Carolina,and North Carolina as shown inFig. 11.The central frequency of the measurements were ﬁxed at 739 MHz, and the results are acquired on a county level, which are then categorizedin to urban, semi-urban and rural types based on population census.First, cumulative distribution of RSRP results is shown in Fig. 12to investigate the V2I connectivity performance of LTE networks. Weobserve that the RSRP values tend to be greater in urban areas indicatingstronger V2I connectivity compared to semi urban and rural counties.This is because of the shorter distances between a BS and a user which isveri
ﬁed from the cumulative distribution plots shown in Fig. 12. Next, the velocity statistics of all the counties is examined from the cumulativedistribution shown inFig. 12. We observe higher possibility of largervelocities in semi-urban compared to rural and urban counties. This isbecause of lower semi-urban counties in the drive test campaign andtherefore sparse result data are obtained for semi-urban counties.Further, joint distribution of RSRP and BS distance plots for urban,semi-urban and rural counties are shown in Fig. 13. In rural counties, we observe higher possibility of BS distance around 3000 m and over thisdistance, there is a higher chance of RSRP variation between /C040 dB and /C020 dB. On the other hand in urban counties, it is more likely to observesmaller BS distance around 2000 m with higher chance of observingstronger RSRP values ranging from/C020 dB to/C010 dB. Further, impact of the user velocity on V2I link performance is studiedfrom the joint distribution of RSRP, and results are shown in Fig. 14.W e observe greater likelihood of lower velocities in rural and urbancompared to semi-urban counties. In addition, RSRP tends to ﬂuctuate with wider range for user velocities in semi-urban and rural compared tourban counties.Lastly, the joint distribution of velocity and BS distance is shown inFig. 15. We observe a higher likelihood of BS distance close to 5000 m inurban counties while in rural counties the chance of BS distances aregreater than 5000 m.Next, the time duration statistics of RSRP from BSs is extracted tostudy the disconnected duration proﬁle. In the following we explain how disconnected duration is evaluated from the results of measurementcampaign. Let us examine individual time instants of captured mea-surements in the drive test campaign shown as dots in Fig. 16. For instance, let there be two obtained RSRP results at time instant t½n
1/C138 namely,R
1;RSRP ½1/C138andR 2;RSRP ½1/C138indicated from BS 1 and 2 respectively.
Fig. 9.Drive test results around NCSU campus.K. Vasudeva et al. Array 8 (2020) 100045
7In general, letR nrepresent a set containingB nnumber of RSRP results obtained att½n/C138given byR
n¼/C8R i;RSRP½n/C138:i2Γ BS;i¼1;…;B n/C9;(5)whereΓ
BSis the set containing all BSs obtained in the drive testcampaign. Further, let us consider the condition where obtained RSRPresults inR
nfalls below the thresholdγthgiven byD
n¼/C8R j;RSRP½n/C138:R i;RSRP½n/C138<γth;j2Γ D/C9;(6)whereΓ
D⊆ΓBSis the set containing all BSs satisfying the condition in (6). Next, we obtainD
nover all time instants of the measurement campaignexpressed asD¼fD
n:n¼0;…;Tg; (7)whereTis the last time instant of captured measurements in the drive testcampaign. Further, we examine the consecutive intervals in Dfor a BS in Γ
D. Let us supposeR 1;RSRP from BS 1 falls below the threshold γthat each consecutive time instant starting from t½n
p/C138and ending witht½n pþnq/C138as shown inFig. 16. Then, the disconnected duration is computed asτd¼/C26t/C2npþn q/C3/C0t/C2n
p/C3;n
p;npþ1;…;n pþn q
0;n p¼n q:(8)In a similar way, we evaluate for each BS in Γ
Dto obtain overall set of disconnected duration values represented as
τD. The cumulative distri- bution of
τDfor rural, semi-urban and urban counties consideringdifferent RSRP thresholdγ
thare shown inFig. 17. We observe higher
Fig. 10.BS distributions during a drive test route in Raleigh, NC.
Fig. 11.Drive test route between Raleigh, NC and Miami, FL, covering urban,sub-urban, and rural environments.
Fig. 12.Drive test scenario results in different counties.K. Vasudeva et al. Array 8 (2020) 100045
8chance of disconnected duration with increase in RSRP threshold, sincethere are more possibilities of satisfying the condition (6) in result dataset. Additionally, the possibility of disconnected duration in urbancounties is lower compared to rural and semi-urban counties. This isbecause there is a greater chance of observing higher RSRP values asshown inFig. 12.5.3. Handover analysis in different LTE deployment scenariosIn LTE, the handover decisions are usually based on RSRP measure-ments, and are triggered when the user moves out of the coverage areasof its BS. In one of the common handover trigger conditions (referred asthe A3 condition [56]), the RSRP from a neighboring BS becomes greaterthan the serving BS by an offset. Then, time to trigger (TTT) duration isawaited and if the condition is still satisﬁed then handover is initiated [47]. In order to analyze handover, we consider RSRP results from thestrongest and other BS’s as target and serving BS, respectively. Let t½n
a/C138 indicate a time instant where the handover condition is satis ﬁed given as R
t;RSRP >R s;RSRP þν (9)whereR
t;RSRP andR s;RSRP represent the RSRP from target and serving BS,respectively, while the offset is denoted as
ν. Further, let us consider a later instant where duration between t½n
aþnb/C138andt½n a/C138is greater than the TTT durationT
m; at that time instant, if (9) is still satisﬁed then a handover is initiated by the serving BS.We use the measurement results of one county from rural, suburbanand urban settings to study the number of handovers. In particular, the
Fig. 13.Joint distribution of RSRP and BS-distance in different counties.
Fig. 14.Joint RSRP-velocity distribution in different counties.K. Vasudeva et al. Array 8 (2020) 100045
9number of handovers is computed for different offset νwhere TTT isﬁxed to 0.5 s and the results for Colleton, Florence, and Broward counties areshown inFig. 18. The results show that the number of handovers de-creases when offset is increased, since (9) is satis ﬁed for fewer cases. We also observe a larger number of handovers in Broward county comparedto other counties due to larger network deployments in the urban area.5.4. Implication on application performance metrics based on the signalstrength of V2I linksIn the drive test measurements, connection establishment with theBSs was not achieved and therefore performance indicators such asthroughput and latency could not be directly deduced from the capturedmeasurements. However, it is apparent that these performance indicatorsare inﬂuenced by the associated BS’s signal strength indicated by the RSRP. The results in Ref. [57] show the throughput dependence on RSRPbased on theﬁeld measurements. They show that interference, which isone of the important factors driving the throughput, depends on theRSRP. For the sake of completeness, we provide an example that mapsRSRP to throughput for different network load scenarios in Fig. 19, taken from Ref. [57]. Generally, the results show improvement in throughputwith the increase in the RSRP.Theoretically, the relation between interference and RSRP is shownusing the reference signal received quality (RSRQ) parameter given byRef. [58].RSRQ¼NRB/C2RSRPRSSI (10)where reference signal strength indicator (RSSI) is computed as totalaverage received power of all the REs carrying reference signals in ameasurement bandwidth ofN
RBwhich includes interference from all thesources [47]. Further, the RSRQ is expressed in terms of signal to inter-ference ratio (SINR), which is usually an indicative of throughput givenby Ref. [59].RSRQ¼
1N
RB/C1812βþ
1SINR/C19 (11)whereβis the subcarrier activity factor expressed as a total number ofsubcarriers carrying reference signal of all the antenna ports duringPDSCH transmission over number of subcarriers in a RB which is 12. β term is usually used in network load calculations. Then, SINR determinedfrom(11)is used in Shannon’s capacity equation to obtain theoreticalthroughput based on different network load conditions.The errors in packet transmission can be caused due to low signalstrength condition. As a result, packet retransmissions occur, increasingthe round trip latency between the users and the BSs. In Ref. [ 60], the impact of RSRP and RSRQ parameters on packet error rate and jitterbased on real time transport protocol (RTP) is investigated for voicetrafﬁc. The jitter is computed as consecutive differences of packet latencyand the results are based on measurements in a network load /C2550%. Overall, higher jitter and error rate is observed for lower RSRP ranges.
Fig. 15.Velocity distance distribution in different counties.
Fig. 16.Illustration of disconnected duration in the measurement campaign.K. Vasudeva et al. Array 8 (2020) 100045
10The maximum impact is observed with RSRQ where error rate and jitterdegrades signiﬁcantly at lower RSRQ conditions.6. ConclusionIn this paper, we examined the V2I connectivity performance of LTEdeployments in rural, semi-urban and urban scenarios using extensivedrive-test measurement campaign. The joint distributions of the linkquality metrics are obtained, which indicate stronger coverage andhigher BS density in urban and semi-urban compared to rural scenarios.In addition, shorter duration of disconnectivity and more handovers areobserved in urban scenarios when compared to semi-urban and ruralscenarios. Lastly, we noted that higher operating frequencies of LTEnetworks yield lower coverage. We provide our developed SDR codes forother researchers’use in Ref. [61]. In our future work, the drive testcampaign results will be incorporated into an LTE system level simulatorto assess the mobility performance of LTE networks [ 62–64]. We plan to evaluate key mobility performance indicators and investigate the impactof channel congestion on V2I connectivity in road safety applications.Credit author statementKarthik Vasudeva, Ozgur Ozdemir: Conceptualization, Methodology,Software, Validation, Formal Analysis, Investigation, Writing-OriginalDraft, Writing-Review and Editing. Sugan R. S. Chandar: Writing-Original Draft, Validation, Formal Analysis Fatih Erden: Writing-Original Draft, Writing-Review and Editing. Ismail Guvenc: Conceptual-ization, Methodology, Resources, Supervision, Funding acquisition,Writing- Original Draft, Writing-Review and Editing.
Fig. 17.Disconnected duration distributions in different environments.
Fig. 18.Handover analysis in different counties for TTT ﬁxed to 0.5 s.
Fig. 19.Mapping of RSRP ranges to downlink throughput based on differentnetwork load (Q
DL) percentage (from Ref. [57]).K. Vasudeva et al. Array 8 (2020) 100045
11Declaration of competing interestThe authors declare that they have no known competing ﬁnancial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to in ﬂuence the work reported in this paper.AcknowledgmentThe authors would like to thank Nadisanka Rupasinghe for his help indeveloping SDR codes. This work was supported in part by the NationalScience Foundation under the award numbers CNS-1453678 and CNS-1814727.References
[1] Hartman KK. Connected vehicle pilot deployment program. The USDOT; 2019[Online]. Available:https://www.its.dot.gov/pilots/ . [2] Connected vehicles: beneﬁts, roles, outcomes. The USDOT, Tech. Rep.; 2019[Online]. Available:https://www.its.dot.gov/research_areas/pdf/WhitePaper_connected_vehicle.pdf.[3] Dedicated short range communications DSRC service. FCC. [Online]. Available: http s://www.fcc.gov/wireless/bureau-divisions/mobility-division/dedicated-short-range-communications-dsrc-service . [4]Kenney JB. Dedicated short-range communications DSRC standards in the UnitedStates. Proc IEEE July 2011;99(7):1162 –82. [5]Weinﬁeld A, Kenney JB, Bansal G. An adaptive DSRC message transmission ratecontrol algorithm. In: Proc. ITS world congress, Orlando, FL; Oct. 2011. p. 1 –12. [6] Flore D. Initial cellular V2X standard completed. 3GPP. 2019, Sept [Online].Available:http://www.3gpp.org/news-events/3gpp-news/1798-v2x_r14 . [7] Qualcomm. Panasonic, qualcomm and ford join forces on ﬁrst u.s. deployment for C-V2X vehicle communications in Colorado. 2018, June [Online]. Available: https ://www.qualcomm.com/news/releases/2018/06/01/panasonic-qualcomm-and-ford-join-forces-ﬁrst-us-deployment-c-v2x-vehicle . [8]TS 23.285. Architecture enhancements for V2X services. 3GPP TechnicalSpeciﬁcation; June 2018. [9]TS 23.246. Multimedia broadcast/multicast service MBMS; architecture andfunctional description. 3GPP Technical Speci ﬁcation; Dec. 2017. [10]TS 36.213. Evolved universal terrestrial radio access (E-UTRA); physical layerprocedures. 3GPP Technical Speci ﬁcation; July 2018. [11] OpenCellid. Open database of cell towers. 2017 [Online]. Available: https://opence llid.org/.[12] CellID Finder. Basestation location coordinates with MCC, MNC, LAC and CID[Online]. Available:http://cellidﬁnder.com/. [13]Amdouni I, Filali F. On the feasibility of vehicle-to-internet communications usingunplanned wireless networks. In: Proc. int. conf. telecommun., Doha, Qatar; Apr.2010. p. 393–400.[14]Bychkovsky V, Hull B, Miu A, Balakrishnan H, Madden S. A measurement study ofvehicular internet access using in situ WiFi networks. In: Proc. int. conf. mobilecomput. netw. (MobiCom), New York, NY; 2006. p. 50 –61. [15]Mahajan R, Zahorjan J, Zill B. Understanding WiFi-based connectivity from movingvehicles. In: Proc. ACM SIGCOMM conf. internet meas., New York, NY; Oct. 2007.p. 321–6.[16]Araniti G, Campolo C, Condoluci M, Iera A, Molinaro A. LTE for vehicularnetworking: a survey. IEEE Commun Mag May 2013;51(5):148 –57. [17]Zheng K, Zheng Q, Chatzimisios P, Xiang W, Zhou Y. Heterogeneous vehicularnetworking: a survey on architecture, challenges, and solutions. IEEE Commun SurvTutorials June 2015;17(4):2377–
96. [18]Lin C, Chen B, Lin J. Field test and performance improvement in IEEE 802.11p V2R/R2V environments. In: Proc. IEEE int. conf. commun. workshops, Capetown, SouthAfrica; May 2010. p. 1–5. [19]Sukuvaara T. Field measurements of IEEE 802.11p based vehicular networkingentity. In: Proc. int. conf. ubiquitous future netw. (ICUFN); July 2012. p. 135 –9. [20]Gozalvez J, Sepulcre M, Bauza R. IEEE 802.11p vehicle to infrastructurecommunications in urban environments. IEEE Commun Mag May 2012;50(5):176–83.[21]Shivaldova V, Winkelbauer A, Mecklenbr ~A¤uker CF. Vehicular link performance: from real-world experiments to reliability models and performance analysis. IEEEVeh Technol Mag Dec. 2013;8(4):35 –44. [22]Sassi A, CharﬁF, Kamoun L, Elhillali Y, Rivenq A. Experimental measurement forvehicular communication evaluation using OBU ARADA system. In: Proc. int.wireless commun. mobile comput. conf. (IWCMC), Dubrovnik, Croatia; Aug. 2015.p. 1358–64.[23]Shivaldova V, Paier A, Smely D, Mecklenbr ~A¤uker CF. On roadside unit antenna measurements for vehicle-to-infrastructure communications. In: Proc. IEEE int.symp. pers. indoor mobile radio commun. (PIMRC), Sydney, Australia; Sept. 2012.p. 1295–9.[24]Shivaldova V, Sepulcre M, Winkelbauer A, Gozalvez J, Mecklenbr ~A¤uker CF. A model for vehicle-to-infrastructure communications in urban environments. In:Proc. IEEE int. conf. commun. workshop (ICCW), London, UK; June 2015.p. 2387–92.[25]Sepulcre M, Gozalvez J, Altintas O, Kremo H. Exploiting context information forestimating the performance of vehicular communications. In: Proc. IEEE vehic.netw. conf., Boston, MA; Dec. 2013. p. 39 –46. [26]Hu Y, Feng J, Chen W. A LTE-Cellular-based V2X solution to future vehicularnetwork,. In: Proc. IEEE adv. inform. manage. commun. electron. autom. controlconf. (IMCEC), Xi’an, China; May 2018. p. 2658–62. [27]Cecchini G, Bazzi A, Masini BM, Zanella A. Performance comparison between IEEE802.11p and LTE-V2V in-coverage and out-of-coverage for cooperative awareness.In: IEEE vehic. netw. conf. (VNC), Torino, Italy; Nov. 2017. p. 109 –14. [28]Shi M, Lu C, Zhang Y, Yao D. DSRC and LTE-V communication performanceevaluation and improvement based on typical V2X application at intersection. In:Proc. Chinese autom. congr. (CAC), Jinan, China; Oct. 2017. p. 556 –61. [29]Xu Z, Li X, Zhao X, Zhang MH, Wang Z. DSRC versus 4G-LTE for connected vehicleapplications: a study onﬁeld experiments of vehicular communicationperformance. J Adv Transport Aug. 2017;2017:1 –10. [30]Liu Z, Liu Z, Meng Z, Yang X, Pu L, Zhang L. Implementation and performancemeasurement of a V2X communication system for vehicle and pedestrian safety. IntJ Distributed Sens Netw Sept. 2016;12(9):1 –14. [31]Akselrod M, Becker N, Fidler M, Luebben R. 4G LTE on the road - what impactsdownload speeds most?. In: Proc. IEEE vehic. technol. conf. (VTC-Fall), Toronto,ON, Canada; Sept. 2017. p. 1–6. [32]Lee S-H, Kim J-C, Lim K-T, Cho H-R, Seo D-H. WAVE communication-based V2Ichannel modeling. J Korean Soc Marine Eng 2016;40(10):899 –905. [33]Mecklenbrauker CF, Molisch AF, Karedal J, Tufvesson F, Paier A, Bernado L,Zemen T, Klemp O, Czink N. Vehicular channel characterization and its implicationsfor wireless system design and performance. Proc IEEE July 2011;99(7):1189 –212. [34]Aygun B, Boban M, Vilela JP, Wyglinski AM. Geometry-based propagationmodeling and simulation of vehicle-to-infrastructure links. In: Proc. IEEE vehic.technol. conf. (VTC Spring), Nanjing, China; May 2016. p. 1 –5. [35]Lauridsen M, Gimenez LC, Rodriguez I, Sorensen TB, Mogensen P. From LTE to 5Gfor connected mobility. IEEE Commun Mag Mar. 2017;55(3):156 –62. [36]Berisha T, Artner G, Krasniqi B, Duriqi B, Mucaj M, Berisha S, Svoboda P,Mecklenbrauker CF. Measurement and analysis of LTE coverage for vehicular usecases in live networks. In: Proc. IEEE-APS topical conf. antennas propag. wirelesscommun. (APWC), Verona, Italy; Sept. 2017. p. 260 –3. [37]Schaffner JH, Song HJ, Bekaryan A, Talty T, Carper D, Yasan E. Scanner based drivetest LTE capacity measurements with MIMO antennas placed inside the vehicle. In:Proc. IEEE int. conf. microw. commun. antennas electron. syst. (COMCAS), TelAviv, Israel; Nov. 2015. p. 1–4. [38]Yangi M, Ai B, He R, Yao D, Li J, Zhang B, Wang Q, Fei D, Ni M. Path losscharacteristics for vehicle-to-infrastructure channel in urban and suburbanscenarios at 5.9 GHz,. In: Proc. general assembly and scienti ﬁc symp. int. union radio science (URSI GASS), Montreal, QC, Canada; Aug. 2017. p. 1 –4. [39]Rubio L, Fernandez H, Rodrigo-Pe ~A/C6arrocha VM, Reig J. Path loss characterization for vehicular-to-infrastructure communications at 700 MHz and 5.9 GHz in urbanenvironments. In: Proc. IEEE int. symp. antennas propag. USNC/URSI nat. radioscience meeting, Vancouver, BC, Canada; July 2015. p. 93 –4. [40]Anjinappa CK, Guvenc I. Millimeter-wave V2X channels: propagation statistics,beamforming, and blockage. In: Proc. IEEE vehic. technol. conf. (VTC); 2018.p. 1–6.[41]Anjinappa CK, Guvenc I. Angular and temporal correlation of V2X channels acrosssub-6 GHz and mmwave bands. In: Proc. IEEE int. conf. commun. workshops (ICCworkshops); 2018. p. 1–6. [42] ITU-R P.526-14. Propagation by diffraction. Recommendation ITU-R P.526-14. Jan.2018 [Online]. Available:https://www.itu.int/dms_pubrec/itu-r/rec/p/R-REC-P.526-14-201801-I!!PDF-E.pdf.
[43] Ettus research website [Online]. Available: https://www.ettus.com/product/ details/UN210-KIT.[44]Pidanic J, Valenta V, Juryca K. The radio coverage monitoring by low-cost systembased on SDR. In: Proc. int. symp. ELMAR, Zadar, Croatia; Sep. 2017. p. 123 –7. [45]Rupasinghe N, Güvenç _I. Capturing, recording, and analyzing LTE signals usingusrps and LabVIEW. In: Proc. IEEE SoutheastCon, Fort Lauderdale, FL; Apr. 2015.p. 1–7.[46]Kumar S, Hamed E, Katabi D, Erran Li L. LTE radio analytics made easy andaccessible. In: Proc. ACM SIGCOMM computer communication review, vol. 44; Aug.2014. p. 211–22. 4, Chicago, IL. [47]Sesia S, Touﬁk I, Baker M. LTE: from theory to practice. second ed. John Wiley andSons Ltd; 2011.[48] MATLAB. Cell search, MIB and SIB1 recovery [Online]. Available: http://www.mat hworks.com/help/lte/examples/cell-search-mib-and-sib1-recovery.html . [49]TS 36.211. Evolved universal terrestrial radio access (E-UTRA); physical channelsand modulation. 3GPP Technical Speci ﬁcation; April 2020. [50]TS 36.212. Evolved universal terrestrial radio access (E-UTRA); multiplexing andchannel coding speciﬁcation. 3GPP Technical Speciﬁcation; Mar. 2019. [51] MATLAB. ltePBCHDecode [Online]. Available: https://www.mathworks.com/help/ lte/ref/ltepbchdecode.html. [52] MATLAB. PDCCH blind search and DCI decoding [Online]. Available: https ://www.mathworks.com/help/lte/examples/pdcch-blind-search-and-dci-decoding.html.[53] MATLAB. ltePDSCHDecode [Online]. Available: https://www.mathworks.com/hel p/lte/ref/ltepdschdecode.html . [54] MATLAB. lteDLSCHDecode [Online]. Available: https://www.mathworks.com/hel p/lte/ref/ltedlschdecode.html . [55] Peng. ASN.1 compiler to generate the LTE-RRC message decoding program[Online]. Available:http://blog.csdn.net/peng_yw/article/details/22437251 .K. Vasudeva et al. Array 8 (2020) 100045
12[56]Lopez-Perez D, Guvenc I, Chu X. Mobility management challenges in 3GPPheterogeneous networks. IEEE Commun Mag 2012;50(12):70 –8. [57]Tomic IA, Davidovic MS, Bjekovic SM. On the downlink capacity of lte cell. In:Telecommunications Forum Telfor (TELFOR); 2015. p. 181 –5. [58]Afroz F, Subramanian R, Heidary R, Sandrasegaran K, Ahmed S. Sinr, rsrp, rssi andrsrq measurements in long term evolution networks. Int J Wirel Mobile Netw 2015 . [59] Salo J, Reunanen J. Inter-layer mobility optimization. John Wiley &Sons, Ltd; 2015. p. 333–78. ch. 15,https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/9781118912560.ch15[Online]. Available:.[60] Elnashar A, El-Saidny MA, Yehia M. Performance evaluation of volte based on ﬁeld measurement data. U5GIG, Tech. Rep.; 2018 [Online]. Available: http://www.u5g ig.ae/VoLTE_Performance_v23.pdf .[61] MPACT Lab Website. LabVIEW and Matlab code for capturing and decoding theUSRP measurements respectively [Online]. Available: https://research.ece.ncsu.e du/mpact/data-management. [62]Vasudeva K, Simsek M, Perez D, Guvenc I. Analysis of handover failures inheterogeneous networks with fading. IEEE Trans Veh Technol July 2017;66(7):6060–74.[63]Vasudeva K, Dikmese S, Guvenc I, Mehbodniya A, Saad W, Adachi F. Fuzzy-basedgame theoretic mobility management for energy ef ﬁcient operation in HetNets. IEEE Access Mar. 2017;5:7542–52. [64]Lopez-Perez D, Guvenc I, Chu Xiaoli. Mobility enhancements for heterogeneousnetworks through interference coordination. In: Proc. IEEE wireless commun. netw.conf. workshops (WCNCW); Apr. 2012. p. 69 –74.K. Vasudeva et al. Array 8 (2020) 100045
13