 AASRI Procedia   5  ( 2013 )  48 – 53 
2212-6716 © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
Selection and/or peer review under responsibility of American Applied Science Research Institute
doi: 10.1016/j.aasri.2013.10.057 ScienceDirect
 2013 AASRI Conference on Parallel and Distributed Computing Systems 
Video Coding and Routing in Wireless Video Sensor Networks 
Hussein R. Al-Zoubi* 
Computer Engineering Department, Hijjawi Faculty for Engineering Technology 
Yarmouk University, Irbid 21163, Jordan  
 
Abstract 
Video represents a form of data that needs large storage space. In addition, and due to the complexity of video coding 
(encoding/decoding) techniques, they usually involve computatio nally intensive operations. This imposes heavy burdens 
upon sending and receiving entities that are required to have high processing power and abundant storage capacity, as well 
as the network infrastructure transporting video content that is required to have sufficient transmission bandwidth. 
Therefore, it is important to tailor video coding techniques to resource-constrained wireless sensors. Moreover, the 
intensive computations needed by video codecs consume substantial power, which is a scarce resource of wireless sensor 
nodes as they are usually battery powered. Therefore, it is of paramount importance to design power-aware coding, 
streaming, and routing schemes for the emerging wireless video sensor networks (WVSNs), that also achieve high levels 
of QoS and QoE. This paper introduces a brief survey of the recently published research on some important topics about 
WVSNs including video coding and routing and point to possible venues for future research. 
 
© 2013 Published by Elsevier B.V. Selection and/or peer  review under responsib ility of American Applied 
Science Research Institute 
 
Keywords: Wireless Video Sensor Networks; Video Coding; Routing. 
 
 
* Corresponding author. Tel.: +962-2-7211111-4454. 
E-mail address:  halzoubi@yu.edu.jo. 
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
© 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
Selection and/or peer review under responsibility of American Applied Science Research InstituteOpen access under CC BY-NC-ND license .
Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license .49  Hussein R. Al-Zoubi  /  AASRI Procedia   5  ( 2013 )  48 – 53 
 1. Introduction An emerging type of networks called wireless sensor network (WSN), Yick et al. 2008 is comprised of a number of smart sensor nodes working together to sens e and monitor an inside or an outside environment. Each sensor node consists of one or more sensors, a pr ocessor, memory, a power supply (typically a battery), a radio, and an actuator. Depending on the application, sensors could be mechanical, thermal, biological, chemical, optical, or magnetic. The wireless sensor n ode is constrained in terms of energy, communication range, transmission link capacity, and processing an d storage capabilities. To design a WSN effectively, the application and environment in which they will be used should be carefully considered.  An important class of WSNs is the wireless multimed ia sensor network (WMSN), Akyildiz et al. 2007 that allow retrieving different types of multimedia conten t like video, audio, graphics, and scalar data. The development of WMSN has been triggered by the av ailability of inexpensive off-the-shelf cameras and microphones. WMSNs can be employed for multimedia su rveillance in a wide range of applications covering various aspects of human life in both civilian and mil itary aspects. Some of the most popular applications include industrial control, patient monitoring, habitat and environmental monitoring, battlefield and border monitoring, household management, disaster and rescue, and target detection and tracking. In addition to capturing multimedia content, WMSN are also used to perform in-network non-real time processing as well as real time processing, storage, correlation, and fusion of the sensed multimedia content. Mobile multimedia sensor networks (MMSNs) can be used to provide bette r event description, Chen et al. 2011. WVSN is a special type of WMSNs consisting of miniature video cameras for surveillance missions, Wu et al. 2011, Cho et al. 2010, and Durmus et al. 2012.  Coverage percentage in WMSNs is the perception area of  the environment being monitored. Chen et al. (to appear in IEEE Sensors Journal) proposed a cove rage-enhancing algorithm based on overlap-sense ratio (OSRCEA) to increase coverage and prolong WMSN lifetime by to shutting off redundant sensors. The proposed algorithm finds the rotation angle of a sensor  node using the overlap-sense ratio (OSR), while the centroid of overlapping regions is adopted to determine the rotating direction. The issue of finding the optimal camera placement to provide angular coverage in WVSNs has also been addresses by Yildiz et al. (to appear in IEEE transactions on computers). To compare between the different image quality ev aluation techniques in WMSNs, Sarisaray-Boluk 2012 evaluated the impact of packet size, link and node correlation effect, and loss areas on the performance of image quality assessment (IQA) metrics like PSNR, W SNR, SSIM, and VIF. The author found that packet size and link and node correlation do not affect PSNR. He also found that as larger packets are used WSNR decreases, while SSIM and VIF increase. Moreover, th e author proposed and evaluated the block-based weighted peak signal-to-noise ratio (WBBSNR) me thod to evaluate image qualities on the fly and made several suggestions like combining IQA metrics using weights. There are several other issues and challenges facing WVSNs including for example node architectures Seema and Reisslein 2011, the design of low-power distributed video sensors, Chien et al. 2013, security in terms of encrypting video streams in WVSNs, Wang et al. 2010 and watermarking, Harjito et al. 2012, and efficient communication protocols and algorithms that address the unique challenges posed by WMSN requirements in order to realize various WMSN applications, Gisirses and Akan 2005. However, we focus in this paper on two important subjects: video coding and routing in WVSNs. Remaining sections of this paper are as follows: in Sections 2 and 3, we survey recent research papers about video coding and routing in WVSNs, respectively. Then in Section 4, we point to some open issues for future research. The conclusion of this paper can be found in Section 5.  50   Hussein R. Al-Zoubi  /  AASRI Procedia   5  ( 2013 )  48 – 53 
 2. Video Coding in Wireless Video Sensor Networks The H.264/MPEG4 AVC is the most recent coding standard of video streams. This protocol suite has been introduced by both ISO/IEC MPEG and ITU-T VCEG. Compared to previous video coding methods, the H.264/MPEG4 AVC impressively provided efficient vi deo coding, achieved better error robustness, and maximized applicability. Therefore, H.264/MPEG4 AVC has been applied in many video compression applications including mobile video services, videoconfe rencing, IPTV, HDTV, as well as HD video storage. The coding in H.264/MPEG4 AVC has been built on the conventional block-based motion estimation and compensation but with many improved features and services like the enhanced entropy coding and scalable video coding (SVC) techniques. Entropy coding can provide reductions in bit rate while maintaining similar perceptual video quality. SVC methods can reconstruct video at lower quality, Marpe et al. 2006. The conventional MPEG and H.26x video codecs are based on complex encoders and simple decoders. The encoder performs intra-frame coding and exploits statistical dependence between frames in the source video signal to perform inter-frame coding. The decoder is on the contrary much simpler. This configuration seems suitable for many applications like video broadcasti ng, where encoding is needed to be performed just once while decoding is performed multiple times by se veral decoders. In many other applications like in WVSNs, the requirements are typically different, wher e devices have limited energy and computational capabilities. The distributed video coding (DVC) – reader is advised to see Girod et al. 2005 – is built on principles of the information theory of 1970s. Theoreticall y, DVC employs Slepian/Wolf (which is a lossless coding) and Wyner/Ziv (which is a lossy coding) to pr oduce video codecs that exploit statistics gathered by source at the decoder and thus provides a complex de coder and a less-complex encoder. Practically, one can find implementations of DVC in the literatures utilizing several methods like pixel-domain encoding, joint decoding and motion estimation, transform-domain encoding, in addition to rate control. These practical implementations were able to achieve 10X to 100X reduction in the computational complexity of compression performed by the encoder relative to conventional encoders. Moreover, these practical implementations outperform conventional intra-frame coding considerably. However, it is not expected that these schemes will reach the conventional inter-frame codecs in terms of rate-distortion but at least come close to them. Compressed sensing (or compressive sampling) has been  proposed as an alternative to conventional video codecs aiming at building encoders with very low com putational complexity. Pudlewski et al. 2012 proposed the C-DMRC algorithm based on compressed sensing for streaming video over wireless multimedia sensor networks. The proposed system is comprised of a distributed rate controller, video encoder, in addition to a channel encoding scheme with adaptive parity using low-complexity video sensor nodes. To reduce traffic volume on video sensor nodes and to maximize the bandwidth at hand, Politis et al. 2008 proposed packet 
scheduling scheme to selectively drop combin ations of video packets before transmission, where less important video packets.
 Tsai and Lin 2012 proposed an approach for VSNs to increase coding efficiency and decrease coding complexity. The proposed coding exploits the existing redundancy related to foreground and background objects in the image. The macroblock having distinguished context will be classified and then the encoder compresses MBs. 3. Video Routing in WVSNs Multimedia routing in WMSNs demands certain requirements and is faced by several challenges. The successful routing protocol is therefore highly application and circumstances dependent. The most dominant requirements encompass QoS requirements and energy efficiency, Ehsan and Hamdaoui 2012. QoS 51  Hussein R. Al-Zoubi  /  AASRI Procedia   5  ( 2013 )  48 – 53 
 requirements include latency (the maximum allowable de lay of multimedia content to reach the sink node), reliability (an upper bound on the tolerated packet loss ratio), jitter (the maximum allowable variation of delay in between the reception of video packets), and bandwidth (the minimum amount of bandwidth in bits per second that should be supported). The energy efficiency requirement is vital in WMSNs because the high required data rates and the extreme processing needs ca use fast depletion of sensors power. Some of the most challenges that face routing protocols in WMSNs include architectural issues and hole detection and bypassing. The points the routing protocol designers sh ould consider in terms of the network architecture are the network dynamics like mobility issues, data delivery models addressing the periodicity of data delivery and dissemination (continuous, event-driven, or qu ery-driven), architectural configuration addressing homogeneity or heterogeneity  among sensor nodes in terms of purpose and capabilities, and channel capacity.  Most energy-aware routing protocols used for routing in WVSNs employ shortest path routing or multipath routing approaches to address bandwidth, en d-to-end delay, or both requirements, Ehsan and Hamdaoui 2012. Here, we mention some examples of protocols specifically designed for routing video streams over WVSNs. A modified version of LEACH is a hi erarchical protocol to reduce video distortion and address bandwidth constraints. The fully distributed OEDSR is a protocol that addresses end-to-end timing constraint. Directional Geographical Routing (DGR ) protocol streams real-time video over WVSNs. Therefore, it considers both bandwidth and dela y constraints, Ehsan and Hamdaoui 2012. The routing scheme proposed by Kandris et al., 2011 combines an energy efficient routing protocol with a scheduling algorithm of video packets. The proposed hierarchical routing protocol selects routes and manages network load based on residual energy of sensor nodes.  The authors also adopt analytical distortion prediction model in their video packet scheduling algorithm to mi nimize distortion. The authors also extend their work to include scalable video coding, where the base vide o layer streams can be routed over high-transmission- quality routes, while lower-quality routes can be used  to transport enhancement layers video streams. It is possible to achieve lower energy consumption or  lower communication cost if the data being sensed are correlated by applying the information theory using network combinatorics by applying network coding (NC) as well as distributed source coding (DSC). Li et  al. 2011 proposed a coding and routing mechanism by applying an analytic power-rate-distortion (P-R-D) model for distributed video coding (DVC) to reduce distortion of video and prolong the lifetime of network. Dai et al. 2012 proposed CAQR scheme in order to minimize the energy consumed by wireless video sensor nodes under delay and reliability QoS constraints through the utilization of correlation inherent in the perceived scene information. The correlation-aware compression/decompression employed by CAQR uses  differential coding, Dai and Akyildiz 2009 between intra coded frames to reduce the size of the generated traffic. CAQR then performs correlation-aware load balancing. Dai et al. 2012 then integrate these two correlation-aware schemes into a distributed optimization QoS routing framework targeting reduced energy of nodes. Video is typically of large size. The transmission requirements therefore exceed the bandwidth available for video sensor nodes. To achieve better transmissi on performance, the multi-path transmission lends itself as a viable solution. TPGF, Shu et al. 2007 is a hole-bypassing multi-path routing protocol for WMSNs that reduces the end to end transmission delay as well as path length. Another multipath transmission scheme was adopted by Politis et al. 2008 and Zou et al. 2011. It can also be observed that in multimedia applications video and audio streams are of varying importance levels . For instance, one can notice that video has higher importance than audio in the forest fire monitoring application while audio has higher importance than video in the monitoring of deep ocean application. MPMPS, Zhang et al. 2008 routing protocol is built on TPGF and assigns two priority levels to audio and video streams according to their importance in the specific application and selects routing paths that have high priority level for more important video/audio stream. The CAMS, Shu et al. 2010 was proposed to increase th e possibility of gathering valuable (comprehensive) information by video sensor nodes in order to send to the sink node based on brightness level and noise level. 52   Hussein R. Al-Zoubi  /  AASRI Procedia   5  ( 2013 )  48 – 53 
 4. Open Research Issues There are several issues in WVSNs that can be addressed by researchers in the future. In this section, we point to some important future research issues. Researcher s should consider that the routing protocol used in WVSNs must achieve high QoS and saves energy. It is also important to consider joint compression, aggregation, and routing of video under QoS constraint s with an objective to minimize the amount of energy consumed by wireless video sensor nodes. Congestion-awa re routing algorithms is another important subject. To reduce redundancy, wireless sensor cameras must be made awake when they sense something in the sensing range, which leads to a need for optimal placement of sensor cameras for the best coverage and to avoid redundancy. We should also remember that mobility of either sensor nodes or object being tracked can impose additional challenges to video-sensing applications . Moreover, if the WMSN is used to collect various multimedia data, then robust protocols are needed for data aggregation and fusion. 5. Conclusions Wireless video sensor networks represent a promising solution in many human life areas. In this paper, we have surveyed recent research papers in topics addressing various issues of WVSNs with a focus on video coding and routing in WVSNs. We have also outlined future research directions and open research issues in this active area of research. References [1] Yick J., Mukherjee B., and Ghosal D. Wirele ss sensor network survey. Computer Networks 2008:52:2292–2330. [2] Akyildiz I. F., Melodia T., and Chowdhury K. R. A survey on wireless multimedia sensor networks. A survey on wireless multimedia sensor networks. Computer Networks 2007:51:921–960. [3] Chen M., Lai C.-F., and Wang H. Mobile multi media sensor networks: architecture and routing. EURASIP Journal on Wireless Communications and Networking 2011:159. [4] Wu D., Ci S., Luo H., Ye Y., and Wang H. Video Surveillance Over Wireless Sensor and Actuator Networks Using Active Cameras. IEEE Transactions  on Automatic Control 2011:56:10:2467- 2472. [5] Cho Y., Lim S. O., and Yang H. S. Collaborative Occupancy Reasoning in Visual Sensor Network for Scalable Smart Video Surveillance. IEEE Transactions  on Consumer Electronics 2010:56:3:1997- 2003. [6] Durmus Y., Ozgovde A., and Ersoy C. Distributed and Online Fair Resource Management in Video Surveillance Sensor Networks. IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing 2012:11:5:835- 848. [7] Chen J., Zhang L., and Kuo Y. Coverage-Enhancing Algorithm Based on Overlap-Sense Ratio in Wireless Multimedia Sensor Networks. To appear in IEEE Sensors Journal. [8] Yildiz E., Akkaya K., Sisikoglu E., and Sir M. Y. Optimal Camera Placement for Providing Angular Coverage in Wireless Video Sensor Networks. To appear in IEEE transactions on computers. [9] Sarisaray-Boluk P. Performance comparisons of the image quality evaluation techniques in Wireless Multimedia Sensor Networks. Wireless Netw 2012. [10] Seema A. and Reisslein M. Towards Efficient Wireless Video Sensor Networks: A Survey of Existing Node Architectures and Proposal for A Flexi-WVSNP De sign. IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials 2011:13:3:THIRD QUARTER:462- 486. [11] Chien S.-Y.,Cheng T.-Y., Ou S.-H., Chiu C.-C., Lee C.-H.,Somayazulu V. S., and Chen Y.-K. Power Consumption Analysis for Distributed Video Sensors in Machine-to-Machine Networks. IEEE Journal on Emerging and Selected Topics in Circuits and Systems 2013: 3:1:55- 64. [12] Wang W., Hempel M., Peng D., Wang H., Sharif H ., and Chen H.-H. On Energy Efficient Encryption for 53  Hussein R. Al-Zoubi  /  AASRI Procedia   5  ( 2013 )  48 – 53 
 Video Streaming in Wireless Sensor Networks. IEEE Transactions on Multimedia 2010:12:5: 417- 426. [13] Harjito B., Potdar V., and Singh J. Watermarking Technique for Wireless Multimedia Sensor Networks: A State of the Art. CUBE 2012, September 3–5, 2012, Pune, Maharashtra, India:832- 840. [14] Gisirses E. and Akan O. B. Multimedia comm unication in wireless sensor networks. Ann. Telecommun 2005:60:7-8: 872-900. [15] Marpe D., Wiegand T., and Sullivan G. J. The H.264/MPEG4 Advanced Video Coding Standard and its Applications. IEEE Communications Magazine 2006: 134- 143. [16] Girod B., Aaron A. M., Rane S., and Rebollo-Monedero D. Distributed Video Coding, Proceedings of the IEEE 2005: 93:1:71- 83. [17] Pudlewski S., Melodia T., and Prasanna A. Comp ressed-Sensing-Enabled Video Streaming for Wireless Multimedia Sensor Networks. IEEE Transactions  on Mobile Computing 2012:11:6: 1060- 1072. [18] Politis I., Tsagkaropoulos M., Dagiuklas T., Kotsopoulos S.. Power Efficient Video Multipath Transmission over Wireless Multimedia Sensor Networks. Mobile Netw Appl 2008:13:274–284. [19] Tsai T.-H. and Lin C.-Y. Exploring Contextual Redundancy in Improving Object-Based Video Coding for Video Sensor Networks Surveillance. IEEE Tran sactions on Multimedia 2012: 14: 3:669- 682. [20] Ehsan S. and Hamdaoui B. A Survey on Energy -Efficient Routing Techniques with QoS Assurances for Wireless Multimedia Sensor Networks. IEEE Communi cations Surveys & Tutorials 2012:14:2:265- 278. [21] Kandris D., Tsagkaropoulos M., Politis I., Tzes A., and Kotsopoulos S. Energy efficient and perceived QoS aware video routing over Wireless Multimedia Sensor Networks. Ad Hoc Networks 2011: 9: 591–607. [22] Li C., Zou J., Xiong H., and Chen C. W. Jo int Coding/Routing Optimization for Distributed Video Sources in Wireless Visual Sensor Networks. IEEE Transactions on Circuits And Systems for Video Technology 2011: 21: 2: 141- 155. [23] Dai R., Wang P., and Akyildiz I. F.. Correlatio n-Aware QoS Routing With Differential Coding for Wireless Video Sensor Networks. IEEE Transactions on Multimedia 2012:14:5: 1469- 1479. [24] Dai R. and Akyildiz I. F. A spatial correlation model fo r visual information in wireless multimedia sensor networks. IEEE Transactions on Multimedia 2009: 11:6:1148–1159. [25] Shu L., Zhou Z. B., Hauswirth M., Phuoc D. L., Yu P., Zhang L.: Transmitting Streaming Data in Wireless Multimedia Sensor Networks with Holes. Procee dings of the 6th International Conference on Mobile and Ubiquitous Multimedia (MUM 2007), Oulu, Finland, December 2007. [26] Zou J., Xiong H., Li C., Zhang R., and He Z. Lifetime and Distortion Optimization With Joint Source/Channel Rate Adaptation and Network Coding -Based Error Control in Wireless Video Sensor Networks. IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology 2011: 60:3: 1182- 1194. [27] Zhang L., Hauswirth M., Shu1 L., Zhou Z., Reyno lds V., and Han G. Multi-priority Multi-path Selection for Video Streaming in Wireless Multimedia Sensor Networks. Ubiquitous Intelligence and Computing 2008:5061: 439-452. [28] Shu L., Zhang Y., Yu Z., Yang L. T., Hauswirth M., and Xiong N. Context-aware cross-layer optimized video streaming in wireless multimedia sensor ne tworks. Journal of Supercomput 2010:54: 94–121. 