A novel adaptive variable step-size constant module medical CT image blind equalization algorithm was proposed. The proposed algorithm overcomes the shortcoming of conventional constant module blind equalization algorithm with the fixed iteration step-size. The processing of image restoration transformed by a linear operation is equivalent to one dimensional blind equalization. The constant modulus blind equalization cost function applied to medical CT image was founded. The mean square error was utilized as step-size control factor to speed up the convergence and improve the performance of the algorithm. Computer simulations show that new algorithm improves peak signal to noise ratio, restoration effects and efficiency of operations, and decrease state residual error.

Medical CT image reflects the degree that the organs and tissues absorb X-ray. It benefits discovering small lesions of microstructure in vivo. And it is a most important assistant means in the field of medical image diagnosis. However, in the process of imaging and transfer, due to the image affected the two- dimensional channel, namely point spread function, and the image blurring will carry out. The degraded CT

images will have an influence on affecting normal display and diagnostic accuracy. Nevertheless, in nature, the process of the CT image degradation is often unknown. Blind image restoration is that, in the case of unknown degradation information, interference and noise are removed, the lost image will be recovered, and the restored image approaches the original image as much as possible.

In order to utilize blind equalization technology pass to realize medical CT image restoration, firstly, two- dimensional medical CT images should be transformed into one-dimensional row or column sequence. However, a single row or column transform weakened blind equalization algorithm's ability that overcomes point spread function’s affect. This paper proposed an image blind equalization based on simultaneous row and column signal transform. The block diagram is shown in Fig.1.

Digital medical CT images are grayscale, and independent with the distribution [11]. C. Vural firstly proposed a two-dimensional constant modulus cost function to realize image restoration. In this paper, the ideological dimension reduction was adopted. The newly CMA cost function is

The shortcoming of the traditional constant modulus algorithm is slow convergence. From equation (12) can be seen, the algorithm adopted a fixed step size. The larger step size is, the quicker convergence speed is, but the larger step size causes large steady residual error. The small step size can reduce steady residual error and increase the convergence precision, but at one time it depresses convergence speed and tracking capacity, or even results in divergence algorithm. In order to resolve the contradiction, the fixed step size was replaced by a variable step size. Variable step size image blind equalization algorithm was put forward. In the other

In order to validate the algorithm, the experiment adopted 8-bit, the size of 256 × 256, CT images. The degradation of CT image is an approximate Gaussian process[12], the point spread function is taken as 15 × 15 Gaussian matrix, and its variance is 0.1. The original image passed through the point spread system, and the degraded image was added by Gaussian white noise with mean 0 and variance 0.008. And it was shown in

Constant modulus blind equalization algorithm in the communication system was applied to blind image restoration. Firstly, dimension reduction was utilized to transform the image into one-dimensional signal. The cost function of constant modulus applied to image restoration was constructed. In order to overcome the defects of constant modulus algorithm, slow convergence, the mean square error signal was utilized to control step size factors, speed up the convergence rate. Simulation results show the effectiveness of the algorithm, the algorithm not only gets better in the restoration effect and improves the peak signal to noise ratio, and obtains better convergence. The improved algorithm adopts variable step-size and resolves the conflict between convergence speed and state residual error in conventional constant algorithms. Theory analysis and simulation indicate this algorithm has smaller state residual error and faster convergence speed.

