Human vital signs like Heart Rate (HR), Heart Rate Variability (HRV), Respiration Rate (RR), and Oxygen Saturation (SpO2) are im- portant physiological indicators that reflect the physical and men- tal well-being of the human body. The heart pumps oxygenated and nutrient-rich blood all over the body. As the cardiac output is inti- mately associated with HR and stroke volume, HR is central to the cardiovascular process. HR measurement is crucial for a health mon- itoring system [1]. According to WHO Global Health Estimates, heart diseases such as myocardial infarction (MI), sudden cardiac death, heart attack, coronary artery disease, arrhythmia, heart valve disease, and heart infection have been the leading causes of death over the last few decades. In 2020, about 697,000 people died alone from heart disease in the United States; one in every five deaths [2,3]. Clinical biofeedback practice heavily emphasizes the control of cardiac

dynamics. To analyze biofeedback, HR, the number of heartbeats per minute is the most often measured metric. However, a healthy heart does not beat uniformly; it changes its rhythm with each beat. While HR focuses on the average number of beats per minute, HRV measures the specific variations in time between successive heartbeats. The period between heartbeats is measured in milliseconds (ms) and is referred to as the R-R interval or the inter-beat interval (IBI). The sympathetic and parasympathetic branches of the autonomic nervous system (ANS) control HRV. Especially for diabetic and post-infarction patients, it is a crucial parameter in analyzing the behavior of the sympathetic and parasympathetic functions of the ANS [4]. An effective way of estimating HRV is measuring the variation in IBI [5], which can be used to detect probable cardiovascular disorders [6,7].

The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 contains a review of the current state of contact-free vital sign monitoring. MIBINET is proposed in Section 3, along with the description of pre and post-processing techniques. Section 4 includes the numerical results. Finally, a brief discussion of the findings, limitations, and strengths of MIBINET is provided in Section 5. Regarding notation, scalars and vectors are represented in lower and bold lower cases, respectively. The

Unlike previous studies, which often rely on static, pre-defined datasets, our approach allows for greater adaptability and versatility. Our synthetic IBI Generation Augmentation technique, in particular, proves more effective than existing methods for handling irregularities in heart rate and other cardiac conditions. This novelty is especially critical in real-world applications, where heart rate conditions are often far from ideal.

Analyzing the distribution of each fold shows some disparities be- tween the range of IBI values in the training and test sets. In particular, folds 3 and 10 display significant variations, making it quite challeng- ing to train deep learning-based models. This leads us to propose a novel data augmentation approach to training the deep models, which will be elaborated on next.

Typically, most neural networks accept predefined dimensions of the inputs and outputs. However, the available radar data does not adhere to those constraints. Hence, we restrain the dimensions of the inputs and outputs to a predefined value. Getting inspired from [43,44], by using a rolling window of size 8, we are able to restrict the size of the output to a vector of size 7. In our dataset, each input consists of a windowed version of the original data containing 7 IBIs, and the maximum windowed input length is found to be 4885 samples. In order to restrict the dimension of the input data, we zero-pad all the inputs to a size of 4910 samples. These zeroes are inserted randomly at the start and end of each window to remove any prospective bias during training. The starting point of every successive rolling window is randomly selected between two consecutive R-peaks to remove any regional bias.

Our proposed CNN architecture aims to balance computational effi- ciency and high prediction accuracy for estimating IBI values. The ar- chitecture, named MIBINET, incorporates fewer parameters than other contemporary networks while maintaining high accuracy. The rationale behind developing such an architecture is to create a lightweight and efficient real-time heart rate monitoring solution.

In this section, we discuss the experimental data and analysis used to evaluate the performance of our proposed MIBINET. We assess the efficacy of our proposed system using the Pearson correlation coeffi- cient, and root means square error (RMSE). These metrics are chosen due to their suitability for regression tasks. In addition, the established state-of-the-art in [42] is used as the baseline methodology.

in both metrics. To substantiate the robustness and efficacy of our pro- posed approach compared to its counterpart, we test their performance over various datasets of different modalities. These particular ones are chosen because of their availability and authenticity. In the following subsections, we present a brief account of these datasets.

Shi et al. [42] also provide the phonocardiograph (PCG) signals corresponding to the Radar-HS data from the previously considered 11 test subjects. With the similar split, recording number, sampling rate, and ground truth of Radar-HS, it just differs in the signal modality.

into train, validation, and test sets with a ratio of 60:20:20 based on the number of subjects. For the sake of simplicity, only the signal from lead II is considered, as the QRS complex here is more prominent compared to the ones in the other leads. It is to be noted that ECG signals are annotated using BioSPPy [50] as suggested in [49].

Jarchi et al. [51] released a PPG dataset collected using smart- watches from 8 participants. Here, all the recordings are sampled at a 256 Hz sampling rate, and 19 recordings are recorded in four different conditions, i.e., running, walking, fast-easy bike riding, and slow-difficult bike riding. We include this dataset as it has heavy motion artifacts, typical in real-life scenarios. Here, the R-peaks are determined from the given synchronized ECG signal. It also contains high HRV cases due to sudden initiation of motion and abrupt stoppages. Utilizing the 19 recordings, 19-fold cross-validation results are reported where fifteen, three, and one folds are in training, validation, and testing, respectively.

The robustness and versatility of our proposed approach were fur- ther demonstrated by evaluating it on datasets containing ECG, PCG, and PPG signals, where its performance was found to be superior to HSMM in all of them. A custom-weighted regression loss was developed to train MIBINET, and a unique weight-saving approach based on a weighted metric was used. The novel weighted loss function improved the correlation coefficient by more than 1.4% and lowered the RMSE by more than 21 ms in Radar-HS data compared to the commonly used Huber-loss function. Additionally, a novel IBI augmentation technique was also introduced to negate the effects of dataset imbalance, which led to significant performance improvements.

