Abstract The present paper presents one of the efficient approaches toward multilingual text detection for video indexing. In this paper, we propose a method for detecting textlocated in varying and complex background in images/video. The present approach comprises four stages: In the first stage, combination of wavelet transform and Gabor filter is applied. By applying single level 2D wavelet decomposition with Gabor Filter, the intrinsic features comprising sharpen edges and tex- ture features of an input image are obtained. In the second stage, the resultant Gabor image is clas- sified using k-means clustering algorithm. In the third stage, morphological operations are performed on clustered pixels. Then a concept of linked list approach is used to build a true textline sequence of connected components. In the final stage, wavelet entropy of an input image is mea- sured by signifying the complexity of unsteady signals corresponding to the position of textline sequence of connected components in leading to determine the true text region of an input image. The performance of the approach is exhibited by presenting promising experimental results for 101 video images, standard ICDAR 2003 Scene Trial Test dataset, ICDAR 2013 dataset and on our own collected South Indian Language dataset.

With the current multimedia technology, the captured images and understanding these images through its contents have gained lots of attention from the computer vision community. Contents of an images and video help in clear understanding the information present within. A text is one of the images and video content which carries semantic information, and may help to provide the scene description of an image. Hence, the detection and extraction of either scene or graphics text has

The above stated studies revealed that the text detection approaches are either region or texture based methods. Though the concept of k-means clustering algorithm and a connected component analysis have used, the detection accu- racy of the text region can still be improved without missing text data and reducing most of the falsely detected blocks of an image. Detection of texts of south Indian language is still a challenging task. Words of such south Indian languages are framed with modifiers and compound bases. To detect such a texts in an images/video, we propose a method based

The proposed method is a robust multilingual text detection approach based on the sequential adoption of Wavelet trans- form, Gabor filter, k-means clustering and a measure of wave- let entropy. First, by applying single-level discrete 2-D wavelet transform, a single-level 2-D wavelet decomposition is per- formed. As a result approximated and detailed co-efficients are obtained. Then detail co-efficients are merged and aver- aged to extract efficient texture feature information. Gabor fil- ter is further applied in order to obtain edge information of an image. The resulted Gabor output image is grouped into three clusters by applying the k-means algorithm to classify the background, foreground and the true text pixels of an image. In the next stage, morphological operations are performed to obtain connected components, then a concept of linked list approach is in turn used to build a true text line sequence of connected components. In the final stage, wavelet entropy is measured in an each connected component sequence in order to determine the true text region of an input image. A complete text detection procedure of the proposed work is shown in Fig. 1 and explained in the following sub-sections.

The Wavelet Transform is a method convolution of the wave- let function with the signal. The ability of the discrete wavelet transform to decompose a signal at different independent scales and to do it in a very flexible way [12]. The discrete wavelet transform (DWT) is an implementation of the wavelet transform using a discrete set of the wavelet scales and trans- lations. In our research work wavelets are used as analytical tools for signal processing. A study has performed about the development of the discrete wavelet transform (DWT), as a series expansion of signals in terms of wavelets and scaling functions which are associated with low pass and high pass

Gabor filter mainly provides better spatial localization. The main intension of employing Gabor filter is for texture segmentation. In [13], Gabor filters are utilized via multireso- lution structure, consisting of filters tuned to several different frequencies and orientation. The main purpose of using Gabor filter after employing wavelet transform are the following:

its value set to pi/2, ‘f’ is the spatial frequency its value set to 1/sqrt(2), ‘Sx and Sy’ are variances along x and y axes respec- tively. Gabor filter representation is optimal and shows better performance for classifying text region. The resultant image of detail co-efficients obtained by performing single-level 2D decomposition is averaged and is shown in Fig. 2(c). Then, the Gabor filter function is applied on to the obtained average image of detail co-efficients, in order to extract local phenom- ena. The Gabor filter resulted image is shown in Fig. 2(d). The implementation of Gabor filter proves better performance in classifying text region.

Clustering in [14] is a group of methods for finding and describing cohesive groups in data, such as compact clusters of entities in the feature space. To find and describe a cohesive groups in our data, we applied k-means clustering. The main objective of applying k-means is to minimize the total intra- cluster variance as well as to build a classification over empir- ical data. The procedure of k-means clustering begins with initiating k tentative centroids. Further, tasks such as collect- ing clusters around centroids and updating centroids with clus- ter means, until its convergence are repeatedly performed. k- means mainly depends on the initialization of the centroids. In this regard, we initialized k value as 2 and observed the detected true text region. When we initialize k value as 3, the obtained true text region was more accurate than when

Figure 2 (a) Input image of 101 video images dataset. (b) Resulted image of single level 2-D wavelet decomposition. (c) Resultant average image of single level 2-D wavelet decomposition of detail co-efficients. (d) Resulted Gabor image with feature extraction. (e) Resulted image of k-means clustering by setting K = 3. (f) An image of third cluster consisting of true text pixels. (g), (h) and (i) Resultant images of morphological operations. (j) A Resultant image obtained for linked list approach. (k) True text region detected image.

connected component is obtained. ‘mid’ is center point of the connected component and ‘Rmid’ is the center point of the right most part of the connected component. With this approach, the proposed system is able to maintain elements by position and allows for data manipulation of an each connected com- ponent. The result obtained for this stage is shown in Fig. 2(j).

sequence of connected components as in [15] to detect a sequence of true text regions of an input image. A linked list is a concept of linear data structure which accesses the ele- ments sequentially. In a list rowwise elements are arranged from starting to the end of the list. In order to access each ele- ment in the list for data processing, a function has to be cre- ated which traverses the list. In the proposed system, a linked list concept has selected as the choice of data structure and the point to be noticed that an element of the list refers to a connected component obtained by applying morphological operations. A group of nearby elements of a list i.e., nearby connected components together represent a sequence. To build this sequences of connected components, center point of the right most part of a connected component is calculated using Eq. (3). By finding Rmid point, a horizontal line with respect to the zero degree up to the line reaches to the nearest

The wavelet entropy carries information about the degree of order, disorder associated with a multi-frequency signal response. From the obtained sequence of connected compo- nents, we calculated the wavelet entropy using Eq. (4) of the corresponding region of a sequence of connected components in an input image, in order to obtain the true text region as well to eliminate falsy blocks of an image. Then we extracted an energy information from an input image of the regions speci- fied. Average energy of all the regions specified in the input image is fixed as a threshold t. If the specified sequence of a text region is 5 of t, as a result, a region is considered as a text region else it is considered as a non-text region.

The experiment was conducted on 101 video images provided by [8]. The dataset comprises video images with horizontal text lines with a different font color and varying background. The successful text detection images obtained for a dataset of 101 video images are shown in Fig. 3(a) and (b).

Figure 3 (a) and (b) Results of true text region detected images 101 video images dataset. (c) and (d) Results of true text detection of ICDAR 2003 Scene Trial Test dataset. (e) and (f) Results of true text detection of ICDAR 2013 Born-Digital Images dataset. (g) and (h) Results of true text detection of ICDAR 2013 Text in Scene Images dataset.

increased compared to the method [10], but one of the notice- able measure i.e. False Positive Rate (FPR) gets reduced. From this, it is proven that the proposed system executes toward finding most of the text elements of an image. Average Processing Time (APT) is also measured, the proposed system yields result much faster in time compared to [10]. The best execution time is 2.6 s for image size 160 · 45 and the worst execution time is 3.0 s for image size 1024 · 500.

Experiment is conducted on ICDAR 2003 Text Locating data- set and Scene Images dataset and ICDAR 2013 Born-Digital Images (Web and Email) and Scene Images dataset. ICDAR 2003 Scene Trial Test dataset contains 251 camera-based images. During the experiment, for each image in the dataset number of Actual Text Blocks(ATB), Truly detected block (TDB), Falsely Detected Block (FDB) and Text block with Missing Data (MDB) are manually counted. To evaluate the proposed method on ICDAR 2003 Scene Trial Test dataset, we compared the proposed method with three existing meth- ods such as Gradient [3], Laplacian [9] and Bayesian Classifi- cation and Boundary Growing [16] methods that are experimented on ICDAR 2003 Scene Trial Test dataset. In addition to the existing categories, Average Processing Time (APT): Processing time per frame required for detecting text in the images defined in [16] is considered. The performance measures defined in [16] Recall (R) = TDB/ATB, Precision

compared with the few of the competitive methods submitted to the challenge: ICDAR 2013 Reading Text in scene images [17]. Successful text detection images results of ICDAR 2013 Text in Scene Images dataset are shown in Fig. 3(g) and (h). Experimental results are shown in Table 7. For reference purpose, in Table 7 we also provided the text detection results in terms of text line by employing the linked list approach. In this case, the average processing time for the dataset is 3.3 s, the best execution time is 2.6 s for an image size 533 · 263 and the worst execution time is 7.0 s for an image size 3888 · 2582.

We also conducted an experiment on our own collected video sequences consisting of English and Kannada texts. The sys- tem successfully detects text present in the video. The system detects the true text region in a video with the same bit rate of the input video. This approach plays an important role in the recent progress of text detection technique for video. The resultant text detection in video is shown as video frames in Fig. 5.

V.N. Manjunath Aradhya, M.S. Pavithra, C. Naveena, A robust multilingual text detection approach based on transforms and wavelet entropy, The Proceedings of 2nd International Conference on Computer, Communication, Control and Information Technology (C3IT-2012), vol. 4, Procedia Technology (Elsevier), 2012, pp. 232–237.

