It is an architecture for software-defined networks (SDN) that pro- vides security for 5G networks. Which is applied to handle security challenges in 5G core networks; as a consequence, SDN’s logically centralized intelligence, abstraction, and programmability provide ma- jor benefits for tackling mobile network security issues. Due to the programmability of this suggested architecture, it can meet many user’s security requirements and deploy the service as quickly as feasible. Additionally, the design demonstrates its independence by allowing the security controller and network management to operate concurrently without interfering with one another or with the regular operation of the mobile network [67].

It is a secure authentication technique that is utilized in 5G UDN, and it is based on blockchain technology. This method is mostly used to protect networks against Byzantine general attacks [75]. This technique allows for the creation of trustworthy chain access point groups using APs and the transmission of authentication results inside the APG using Blockchain message propagation. It can decrease authentication frequency and increase access efficiency.

Cryptography-based strategies may be used to protect against RBS- based attacks. In [71], the authors presented a lightweight authentica- tion technique based on elliptic-ElGamal. Elliptic curve cryptography is used to choose a key pair, and the ElGamal method is the technique that makes it possible for the station and the user to exchange the secret key. The primary key with less number of messages decreases the risk of guess-based attacks. For devices with limited computational capabilities, the suggested solution is effective.

Artificial intelligence has the potential to introduce new security protocols to the network. The most notable is Reinforcement Learning, in which an (i.e., MEC edge node) monitors the security complexity of a network and then learns from that monitoring by employing a Deep Q-network learning algorithm [76,77].

This section will cover numerous innovative technologies employed in 5G for smart healthcare. These technologies have been categorized into several groups. As a result, we will present a discussion on several subcategories of technical issues and emerging technologies associated with 5G security for smart healthcare.

The word ‘‘blockchain’’ refers to innovative and transformative technologies for 5G security in smart healthcare that enables decen- tralized, secure authentication, validation, recording, and management of information and identity among diverse parties [78]. It is consid- ered a turning point for 5G-based smart healthcare networks. As a peer-to-peer, distributed storage platform for maintaining chains of linked blocks of transaction data, block-chain has several qualities that contribute to the security of the 5G-based smart healthcare net- work, including decentralization, distribution, and others [79]. Because it is a decentralized and dispersing technology, it can be utilized for various applications, including smart finance, intelligent trans- portation, supply chain management, and autonomous vehicles [80]. The economic value of data sharing might be greatly increased by combining 5G with blockchain technology. The strength of 5G cover- age enabled by blockchain technology has lowered latency, increased speed, and capacity, allowing widespread adoption of IoT devices for smart healthcare [81]. Simultaneously, these devices may use security,

users through the directional modulation transmitter. In [89], the au- thors suggested a unique approach for merging using a clone-resistant device identity with the user’s biometric identification. Using keystroke dynamics and an accelerometer, a user’s biometric identification is developed via machine learning. The cloning-immune identity is unaf- fected by the mobile service provider or the device maker. Combining the two identities results in a safe authentication system that protects the user’s private connections from interception by the controlling trusted authority.

Quantum computers are exponentially quicker than conventional computers in solving complicated mathematical problems [93]. Quan- tum computers and quantum-related information technologies are rapidly developing today, posing a challenge to the traditional public- key cryptography required to protect communication in 5G-based networks. For this purpose, before switching to the next network generation, the network must be protected from any potential quantum attacks. To protect the 5G-based networks against quantum attacks, it is necessary to use post-quantum cyphers. One of the conceivable and practical methods is lattice-based cryptography. In [94], the au- thors introduced the first use of Lattice systems in cryptography, in which they employed a random lattice chosen based on a specified distribution as a random key. Numerous applications use lattice-based

encryption because it has been theoretically proven robust to quantum attacks. The lattice-based cryptosystem method, Nth degree truncated polynomial ring units (NTRU), is widely used for signature generation and encryption [95]. Quantum key distribution (QKD) is another viable approach resistant to quantum attacks. It is built on users exchanging cryptographic data [96]. Since 2016, QKD techniques have been used to protect over 350,000 customers of SK Telecom’s LTE backhaul network, which connects Daejeon and Sejong in South Korea. The first quantum cryptography technology for 5G networks was unveiled by SK Telecom in 2018. Since there is no way to exclude the risk of a quantum attack in the future, post-quantum cyphers are an absolute necessity for 5G networks and beyond.

This article discussed vulnerabilities and security methods that may be used to avoid and overcome difficulties in 5G-based smart healthcare networks. AI and Blockchain are used to defend radio access and virtualization technologies such as SDN and NFV. Nonetheless, several security vulnerabilities remain in 5G-based networks. The following security flaws are following:

Maintaining the confidentiality of health information remains chal- lenging due to the weak points in wireless networks and the specialized technology used by sensors [97]. There is no uniform solution that works for all sorts of sensors, and even comprehensive systems, such as those featured in 5G networks, have drawbacks. Ensuring the pri- vacy of healthcare providers and patients is critical, and when that confidentiality is violated, their safety may be affected.

Patients and examiners should always have access to previous and current data. Additionally, servers and sensors must never fail, and data must always be in the right format. These operational standards are likely unachievable with present technology and scientific knowledge. However, advancements in other domains, such as quantum computers or superconductors, can change the nature of this challenge.

While some computing power is required for sensors, there are cir- cumstances when using less energy is advantageous, such as embedded in the body sensor. Additionally, implanted sensors must have sufficient power to function for an extended period, ideally, the usual diagnostic length, since changing them is uncomfortable and costly. It is difficult to balance the energy required to run the sensor with the energy that a patient can tolerate, and this presumably varies by sensor type.

Because smart healthcare sensors are often tiny, their memory size and processing capability are likewise limited. Security algorithms for these sensors must operate with minimal memory while not interfering with the sensor’s operation. Novel computational strategies are nec- essary since most security algorithms today are too complicated to perform consistently with limited resources.

Smart healthcare components should be capable of operating if a system component is down or fail. Backup sensors are one option, but they are not always feasible, and building fault tolerance into life-critical systems may save lives. Although this challenge is more concerned with how sensors work outside than within, a robust internal structure is still crucial.

Smart healthcare sensors must continually provide current data to healthcare practitioners. It is critical to verify the condition of system nodes frequently and to collect data from sensors. Calculating how far apart these intervals should provide difficulty since sending frequent requests for fresh information might make the network overburdened. On the other hand, failure to make frequent calls may endanger patients if sensors fail to convey a problematic state.

Smart healthcare sensors should eventually be able to detect out- ages, connection failures, and hardware issues. Additionally, they should be capable of diagnosing and resolving such issues automat- ically. This is an open topic due to the large diversity of sensor technology and requirements. Because it calls for the development of new software and hardware technologies, it is one of the most challenging research topics in the field of smart healthcare.

Sensors and servers must fast recover from faults to reduce the time patients are not monitored. While testing sensors and servers are feasi- ble, certain gear cannot incorporate backups due to their architecture, while others are unstable. It is a challenge to design durable sensors and servers independent of their physical shape.

Smart healthcare networks must be able to expand or contract in response to patient requirements. New sensors should be able to easily integrate into an existing system without creating any complications, and modifications should not be performed that affect the integrity of the current system. Again, variations in sensor technology might make this challenging, and network traffic restrictions could make things even more difficult.

Since many sensors in smart healthcare networks are designed to be connected to the body in some way, they are frequently quite mobile. This implies that the sensors may frequently enter and exit wireless networks, passing through places where transmissions may be interfered with, and have difficulty sending data if moved in a specific manner or separated from a patient. All of these options must be considered while developing sensor hardware or software.

Developing security algorithms for servers and sensors that are light and robust enough to function on very minimal computational resources is unquestionably the most significant open challenge [98]. Certain security techniques demand a considerable amount of memory, and the addition of encryption to the algorithm, which is necessary for smart healthcare, enhances the amount of memory required even more. Algorithms need new security principles since they are the most often attacked sector.

Sensor data in a 5G-based smart healthcare network is frequently noisy, overlapping, and unstructured. Sensors also gather an enormous amount of data quickly, making it critical to separate the signal from the noise before decoding the data. Machine learning algorithms may be trained to understand sensor data and differentiate between vi- tal information and noise that is delivered by the sensor. They may also reduce both the number of sensors required for data collection as well as the amount of data that medical professionals need to manually sort. However, since healthcare data is sensitive, it must be handled appropriately. In order to make ML models secure and privacy- preserving, one viable option is the merging of federated learning and edge computing. This might entail the creation of ML-based security solutions that can retain patient data privacy while learning from data gathered from various edge devices. Additionally, using explainable AI techniques could result in a more open and reliable security decision method.

The capacity of blockchain technology to connect records using cryptography can potentially change privacy and security in 5G-based smart healthcare allowing for safe and transparent data sharing be- tween patients and healthcare professionals. To automate and stream- line healthcare operations may entail creating blockchain-based iden- tity and access management systems and integrating smart contracts and decentralized applications. However, integrating blockchain in 5G- based smart healthcare requires more computational energy, which may be challenging for resource-constrained devices. Therefore, the implementation of new consensus methods based on blockchain tech- nology may accommodate constrained devices and offer a secure and decentralized method of network management and governance is re- quired. Additionally, standardization initiatives and stakeholder en- gagements will be required to guarantee the scalability and inter- operability of blockchain-based solutions in 5G networks for smart healthcare.

Even though nodes in the network should trust one another, this is not always prudent since attackers might impersonate trustworthy nodes to get access to data. The ability of one node to trust another is referred to as ‘‘trust management’’. Because the network’s nodes depend on one another to successfully process and transfer data, nodes must understand how to identify and respond appropriately if one or more are compromised. This may involve the development of AI-based algorithms for risk assessment and decision-making, as well as the use of ML techniques to detect and respond to security threats in real time.

For 5G- based smart healthcare, cloud computing is beneficial be- cause it enables decentralized networks. However, edge/fog computing may be more suited to smart healthcare requirements. Edge/Fog com- puting solutions offer better control over data privacy and are less expensive than traditional cloud computing. Additionally, they are more robust to errors and reduced latency. In order to safeguard sensi- tive data and processes at the edge may entail integrating hardware- based security features like Trusted Execution Environments (TEEs). Additionally, by treating all devices and connections as untrusted until confirmed, the adoption of Zero Trust architectures may offer a more safe and more scalable solution to edge security.

Because sensors have a limited amount of processing power, there is also a temporal limit placed on how long they can remain powerful to process and compute. Consumption of energy and production in smart healthcare is far from optimized. Therefore, developing algorithms and hardware that are both lightweight and efficient is a very essential and challenging task.

Communication is crucial in smart healthcare networks; it is neces- sary to balance content and speed. This is compounded by the fact that there are several protocols available for the various kinds of sensors. It will be possible for several distinct sensors to work together on the same network by standardizing the protocols necessary for communication among the various types of sensors. Additionally, Conventional proto- cols may also be modified to effectively carry data without overloading the network with unnecessary requests.

Smart gateways provide a secure data entry point, hence improving verification and authorization. These gateways are resistant to routing attacks as well as other kinds of cyberattacks, such as denial-of-service attacks, that rely on data being supplied by users which is not al- lowed. Smart gateways may be able to aggregate data from several devices while also managing different elements of network routing and enhancing security [99].

Significant security threats and concerns faced by 5G-enabled smart healthcare systems. It is necessary to reduce these issues and threats to understand the security needs of such systems. Because smart health- care devices have limited scalability, resource constraints, single-point- of-failure, high cost, and standard security techniques are unable to meet all of the security requirements of 5G-enabled smart healthcare. Many technologies such as Blockchain and Artificial intelligence have recently brought a new healthcare security and privacy era. This paper presents 5G smart healthcare architecture and key enabling technolo- gies. This study looked at various technological features and services related to 5G smart healthcare security, including authentication, confi- dentiality availability, non-repudiation and integrity. We also discussed many security threats in 5G smart healthcare connectivity poses and available solutions. Finally, open issues and future research directions are presented for young researchers.

Chochliouros IP, Kostopoulos A, Giannoulakis I, Spiliopoulou AS, Belesioti M, Sfakianakis E, Kourtis A, Kafetzakis E. Using small cells for enhancing 5G network facilities. In: 2017 IEEE conference on network function virtualization and software defined networks (NFV-SDN). IEEE; 2017, p. 264–9.

