A differential evolutionary algorithm (DE) is proposed to implement the minimum zone evaluation of flatness errors. It is a heuristic evolutionary algorithm based on population optimization. Compared with other methods, it is efficient and robust. Then, the objective function calculation approaches of planar error are developed, which directly originate from the definition of minimum zone solution and conform to the ISO standard. Finally, the experimental results evaluated by different methods confirm the effectiveness of the proposed DE. Compared to conventional evaluation methods, it has the advantages of algorithm simplicity and good flexibility.

Y14.5 [1] specifies that the form tolerances on a component must be evaluated with reference to an ideal geometric feature, ISO Standards [2] recommends the form tolerance being evaluated based on the concept of minimum zone. As for the flatness tolerance, it can be defined as the least possible value of the normal distance between two parallel planes that enclose all measurement points.

One of the most widely used techniques for geometric error evaluation is the least squares method (LSM) and. It is easy for implementation, efficient in computation, and commonly used in coordinate measuring machines (CMMs). However, the LSM does not guarantee the minimum zone solution specified in the ISO standard and can result in overestimation of form tolerances and the rejection of good parts.

In order to obtain the minimum zone solution, Murthy and Abdin [3] proposed a simplex search technique. Fukuda and Shimokohbe [4] suggested a minimax approximation method, by which a subset of the measured points that defines a zone of the feature is sequentially replaced until the minimum zone is achieved. The nonlinear optimization is used by Wang [5], Kanada and Suzuki [6]. Weber et al. [7] proposed a unified linear approximation technique for use in evaluating the forms of straightness, flatness,circularity and cylindricity. Non-linear equation for each form was linearized using Taylor expansion, and then it was solved as a linear program. Zhu and Ding [8] established the equivalence between the width of a point set and the inner radius of the convex hull of the Minkowski difference between the point set and itself. The minimum zone tolerance was formulated as a linear programming problem. Hermann [9] proposed the algorithms based on techniques borrowed from computational geometry.

The minimum zone association of flatness error evaluation is a non-convex problem, and it can be formulated as nonlinear optimal problem with complex constraint. Therefore, this evaluation method is virtually the optimization problem. Intelligent computations, such as the genetic algorithm (GA), improved genetic algorithm (IGA), hybrid optimization algorithm and particle swarm optimization technique, were used to solve the nonlinear problem of flatness evaluation[10-13]. Examples had proved that above methods were effective to compute the minimum zone flatness error, but to most methods above, some parameters need to be decided by experience in advance. This paper suggests the evaluation algorithm of roundness of a novel differential evolution (DE) algorithm to find the value of flatness error according to the minimum zone criterion. DE is another very effective intelligent computation method for solving optimization problems with non-convex and nonlinear characteristics as it does not require derivative information. DE for flatness error is a simple yet powerful optimizer with fewer parameters.

Assuming Pi (xi, yi, zi) (i = 1, 2, . . ., n) is the measured pointextracted by measuring a plane part. A flatness tolerance specifiesa tolerance zone defined by two parallel planes within whichthe surface must lie [14]. If all extracted datapointsPi (xi, yi, zi)are between two parallel planes, the minimum separation betweenthese two parallel planes is called the minimum zone solution(MZS) of flatness error. Assuming one of the two parallel planeequations of MZS is

Obviously, the minimum separation f is a function of (a, b). Consequently,evaluating the minimum zone flatness error is translatedinto searching the values of (a, b), so that the separation f(a, b) isthe minimum and this minimum value is just the flatness error. Itis a non-linear optimization problem.

G ,towards the global optimum. NP does not change during them initialization process. The initial vector populationis chosen randomly and should cover the entire parameter space. As a rule, we will assume the initial population should better cover the entire search space as much as possible by uniformly randomizing

If the values of some parameters of a newly generated trial vector exceed the corresponding upper and lower bounds, we randomly and uniformly reinitialize them within the prespecified range. Then the objective function values of all trial vectors are evaluated. After that, a selection operation is performed. The objective

current population. If the trial vector has less or equal objective function value than the corresponding target vector, the trial vector will replace the target vector and enter the population of the next generation. Otherwise, the target vector will remain in the population for the next generation. The selection operation can be expressed as follows:

In this study, the strategy “DE/best/1 is selected as the best performance from candidate mutation strategies and we use the following parameter values: D=2; the population size NP=10*D, the scale factor F =0.85 and the crossover probability CR=0.9.Using the DE to evaluate flatness error, the termination condition is set the maximum iteration 100.For comparative purpose,twotypical examples available are selected.

Example 1.The sampling data is available in literature [11]. The results are tabulated in Table 1.From Table 1 it is observed that the flatness error of LSC and IGA are 0.0219 and 0.01839, respectively in literature[11], and the flatness error obtained by canonical GA with elitist selection (EGA) are 0.02161,While the flatness error obtained by the DE is 0.01838. It is well in agreement with the literature [11].

Example 2. The measurement data from the plane surface are given in literature [8]. The results are tabulated in Table 2. It is observed that the flatness error of LSC is 0.00303, and the results obtained by the optimization procedure in literature [8] is 0.002627, and the results obtained by the EGA are 0.002739, while the flatness error obtained by the DE is 0.002627. It is well in agreement with the literature [8].

In the EGA, the population was set 40, the possibilities of crossover and mutation was set 0.90 and 0.20, respectively, and the maximum iteration was 200. The presented method for two examples not only provided a more accurate and stable solution, but also it took less time than EGA. Figs.1-2 showed the searching processes of the minimum zone flatness error of two examples.

In this paper, an effective DE is presented to implement the flatness error evaluation of minimum zone method. The objective function mathematical model of minimum zone method is formulated and the initial population generated methods is given. Compared with conventional evaluation methods, the proposed algorithm has the advantages of algorithm simplicity and good flexibility. The typical practical examples are representative in industrial application and their results verified that the proposed method could search the optimal solution efficiently. And it is well suited for form error evaluation in CMMs.

