In this work, an adaptive algorithm with variable tap-length is proposed for diffusion networks, where all nodes exchange information with their connected group without a fusion center and utilize both exchanged information and their local observation to make their individual estimations. Based on a fractional tap-length solution and the fully distributed structure of networks, we propose the algorithm to resolve the estimation problems on both tap-length and tap-weights. The proposed algorithm with adaptive tap-length structure enables the networks to reduce communication energy and network resources. The convergence properties of this algorithm are confirmed by the simulation results.

mean-square-error (MSE) deteriorate; in order to avoid this situation, we can select an adequate long tap- length at the steady-state stage, but it will cause the high calcualtion cost and the high excess mean-square- error (EMSE). Since the research [2] firstly utilized the variable tap-length to improve the performance of an adaptive algorithm, several research articles [3]-[5] on adaptive tap-length algorithms have been presented. Compared with the previous algorithms, the fractional tap-length (FT) algorithm presented in [6] achieved a robust and improved performance with a low- complexity. In addition, the works [7, 8] also provided the analysis for the FT algorithm on the relation between parameter selection and the steady-state performance.

Within the networks, the tap-length of the adaptive filter at each node is assumed as a fixed value in many applications of distributed adaptive algorithms [9, 10]. Nevertheless, when tap-length is unknown or variable it gives rise to the tap-length estimation problem for distributed networks. The incremental adaptive algorithm with the fractional tap-length solution has been proposed before in the literature [11]. This algorithm is based on incremental learning over a distributed network, where a Hamiltonian cycle is built to make all the nodes communicate its neighbor at every iteration. The network topology is therefore determined by this type of connection. In order to resolve the tap-length estimation problem within networks with fully distributed structure, we introduce the fractional tap-length solution. In this type of network, each node not only communicates with its neighbors, but also experiences the effect of the entire network. In this paper, the fractional solution is utilized in the proposed distributed variable tap-length algorithm to resolve the both tap- length and tap weights estimation problems in a distributed diffusion network. We provide performance analysis for the new algorithm and provide simulation results to confirm its convergence properties.

The remainder of this work consists of 4 parts. Section 2 provides the estimation problem which motivates us to formulate the proposed algorithm. And then, the steady-state performance of this algorithm is analyzed in Section 3. Section 4 shows that the simulation is carried out to confirm the analysis. In section 5, we draw the conclusions.

Assume a network consists of N nodes, which are distributed over some area. When two nodes can exchange information with each other in a direct way, we regard them as connected. Each node can connect to itself. All the nodes communicating with node k are included in the its neighborhood, which is defined as k . The total number of neighbors of node k is denoted by nk . At each instant i , every node k receives

by 100 independent Monte Carlo runs to obtain the simulated results. The steady-state results are averaged over the last 1000 instantaneous samples of 10000 iterations. Fig.1 illustrates the converged fractional tap- length throughout the network in the steady-state, with a difference of approximately 0.26 at 12.02. Therefore, as it is expected, in the steady-state the proposed algorithm can obtain a good estimate of the tap-length. Fig.2 shows the steady-state performance of the proposed algorithm. The simulation results provide a good match with the theoretical curves.

We presented a distributed variable tap-length algorithm in a diffusion network. Our algorithm exploits the fractional tap-length solution, estimation theory and diffusion LMS distributed adaptive algorithm. In this work, we provide the analysis on the performance of the distributed algorithm and the simulation results, which agree well with the theoretical results.

