Finger vein authentication plays an important role in the field of vascular certification because of its simplification and high efficiency. In this paper, a finger vein recognition algorithm based on gradient-correlation is presented. Firstly, a method based on histogram statistics is given to recognize whether finger vein images or not. Secondly, matched filter based on maximum curvature model is adopted to extract the gradient image of finger vein. Finally, cross-correlation between two gradient images is figured out to estimate their similarity. The maximal correlation is used to decide whether matching or not with threshold. Experimental results show that FAR and FFR are 0.375% and 1.20% respectively. This algorithm is simple, efficient, insensitive to noise,

With the information era’s coming, people pay much more attention on the Information Security. The development of science and technology presents some drawbacks of the traditional identification methods, such as smart cards and passwords. However, finger vein recognition, as one of the biometric technology, has some kind advantages of non-contact, live identification, high security and inner-feature, etc.

So far, some companies [1, 2] have published products based on finger vein authentication, while some researches [3-8] are still in the lab stage with problems exist as followed: 1) Lack of consideration to tell the available input image. 2) Require high image quality. 3) Image preprocessing.

Processor DM6437DSP clocked @ 600MHz was implemented in the system that consists of image acquisition part and DSP board, is shown in Fig.2 and Fig.3 respectively. The DSP board contains image processing module, storage module and matching module. All the procedures including finger vein registration and authentication are performed on DSP.

Image acquisition part is made up of a CMOS camera and 6 LEDs that emit ~850nm near-infrared light. Optical filter added to capture a distinct image sized 355x288, 8 bit for each pixel. One original image is shown in Fig.4. Before discrimination, as Sun [5], a rotational alignment was done, and the effective area of finger vein was shown as Fig.5.

Convolutional filtering was performed through the image using the operators mentioned. After that, 4 images, sized J*K, were obtained with pixel value f0(x, y), f1(x, y), f2(x, y), f3(x, y). Accordingly, the gray value f(x, y) of the gradient image, as shown in Fig.7, was calculated as follow:

Experiments show that the accuracy is high and this algorithm could tell the true finger vein image from non-finger vein images like pencil images. Images from 40 different fingers were captured and some fingers out of them were captured for 70 times. Totally 588 images were used to make up the vein library.

According to table 1 and table 2, threshold is rational to be 0.4, a good recognition rate obtained. On the grounds of FFR and FAR, a testing index of matching algorithm, the Receive Operating Characteristics Curve shown in Fig.12, demonstrates the relationship between FFR and FAR in different thresholds.

This work presents an algorithm for finger vein authentication. Experimental results show that FFR and FAR are 0.375% and 1.20% respectively. Fewer steps improve the processing speed, especially suitable for the finger vein authentication system based on DSP. In the later product research and development, we will be dedicated to optimize the pre-processing algorithm, especially reduce the noises caused by light source.

