Abstract The mobile network providers have provided the most widely used means of communication. In an attempt to expand on this frontier, we propose and develop a GPS-based Mobile Service Locator System to help individuals in different walks of life, find addresses and locate their services of interest using their mobile devices. Notably, the proposed system is able to determine the prox- imity distances between the user and the locations of the desired service. It is flex- ible and extendible to easily incorporate additional mobile service providers and new services. A main point of departure from existing similar systems is that it is the GPS-based rather than the mobile-based service provider to allow for a more accurate location calculation.

and to increase profits ( Hjelm, 2002; Lindgren et al., 2002; Kalakota and Robinson, 2001). One of the best and most productive ways to accomplish this is through the delivery of highly personalized services. One of the most powerful ways to personalize mobile services is based on location. The purpose of mobile positioning is to provide location-based services (LBS), including wireless emer- gency services (Bisdikian et al., 2001; Chen and Kotz, 2000; Giaglis et al., 2002). Locating the nearest emergency, public, private, and social services as well as the nearest service provider efficiently using mobile devices involves the process of creating applications for mobile devices and maintaining connectivity over slow, inexpensive, and unreliable networks ( Burnham, 2001; May, 2001). This paper describes an attempt to a system which facilitates such a process. Required services may range from emergency locations, such as hospitals, clinics and pharmacies, or public and governmental services locations to private services locations, such as restaurants, shops, malls, etc.

The terms mobile positioning and mobile location are sometimes used inter- changeably in conversation, but they are in fact two different terminologies. Mo- bile positioning refers to determining the position of a mobile device. Mobile location refers to the location estimate derived from the mobile positioning oper- ation. Mobile positioning can be divided into two major categories – network based and handset based positioning.

This category is referred to as ‘‘handset based’’ because the handset itself is the primary means of positioning the user. The network can be used to provide assis- tance to the mobile device in making position estimate determinations based on data measurement and handset based position determination algorithms. The STK allows for communication between the SIM (which may contain additional algorithms for positioning) and a location server application (which may contain additional algorithms to assist in mobile positioning) (Lidgren et al., 2002).

Function (SCF) to launch a message (MAP ATI or PosReq) to the HLR for posi- tion information. The HLR may respond with approximate information such as the content of the cell of origin (COO) or more precise information such as timing advance (TA) or network measurement report (NMR) as in the case with GSM. LBS middleware is used to facilitate location based services; this functional ele- ment acts as a gateway or a hub for a location. One of the most obvious technol- ogies behind LBS is positioning, and the most widely recognized system is the Global Positioning System (GPS) (Hjelm, 2002; Djuknic and Richton, 2001). Geo- graphic data are also an important aspect of any location system. There must be a location management function to process positioning and GIS data on behalf of LBS applications. The location management acts as a gateway between position-

Location Based Services for Network devices, and particularly for WAP-enabled phones, are currently prominent in the market. Research in the area of location- based systems has been going on for over a decade. The pager system is one of the oldest applications to provide the conventional method for personnel location. In order to locate someone, a signal is sent out by a central facility that addresses a particular receiver unit (beeper) and produces an audible signal. In addition, it may display a number to which the recipient could call the sender back. Some sys- tems allow a vocal message to be transmitted back to the call-back number. The recipient could use the conventional telephone system to call back to confirm the signal and to provide appropriate response (Kaasinen, 2003, Bisdikian et al., 2001, Chen and Kotz, 2000).

Earlier work such as the Active Location Badge system (Want et al., 1992) uses infra-red technology to provide products in the realms of outdoor location-track- ing, using GSM and GPS technologies. Such location-based services are limited to mobile phones. There are some other commercially products, such as Webraska, IntelliWhere, Openwave, and Esri (Dey et al., 1999), which are regarded as geo-ref- erenced mobile phone applications.

Some other related products that are focused on special interest like user inter- action can be shown in a game scenario. An example is the context-aware games (Romero et al., 2004). The first commercial location-aware game was launched in 2004 by SingTel in Singapore. Gunslingers is a multi-player network game where players move around, and eventually track and engage other players (‘‘enemies’’) within their physical vicinity.

Most recent research that provides location-based services is increasingly becoming diverse and wide. Examples are the Guide project (Cheverst et al., 2000) and Cyber Guide (Abowd et al., 1997). Most of these applications use the position-aware approach, meaning that application’s actions are based on its knowledge of its own position. Location-tracking services (Marmasse and Schmandt, 2003) such as the safety-based ones, for children or the elderly, are commercially available. Some applications like ‘friend finder’ services are available on some mobile phone service providers’ offers (Hanrahan, 2003).

In general, location is a dynamic attribute of mobile computing. Tracking has large application areas, ranging from the fleet applications to enabling mo- bile commercial services. Fleet application typically entails tracking vehicles for the purpose of the owner company to know the whereabouts of its vehicles and/or operators. Tracking is also used in mobile commercial services. A mo- bile user could track and be provided with predetermined information (such as notification of a sale on men’s suits at a store close to the user’s current loca- tion) that he desires. Mobile positioning technology is also crucial to wireless emergency services. GPS provides a good facility to locate co-ordinates but does not provide a website access, or detailed information about the desired location. In addition, it is not user friendly when it comes to locations’ images in high resolution. Mobility application on the other hand is considered the best user friendly application to provide detailed information or data on the run.

Most applications in the market are not user friendly, do not provide precise data, nor allow multiple ways to access the data, such as SMS, web access and real time feed back to the requester. The proposed system is meant to resolve such deficien- cies. It uses the cell phone service provider to locate the requester for a registered service. It is not necessary to have an Internet connection as the requester can use SMS to request a service location.

It is a location-based service provider. It differs from many other types of mo- bile services because it is not just mobile in the sense that it can be carried with the user but it can actually be used on the move. In addition, it takes into consider- ation the usage situations that may affect the location’s physical environment (e.g., background noise, illumination, weather).

The first scenario merely determines the location based on the nearest tower and not the exact co-ordinates, which results in an inaccurate determination of the right services at the right locations. The second scenario gives a more accurate information and faster determination of the location. It is based on ‘‘Handset Positioning Technology’’ where user’s handset is used to determine the right loca- tion of the user. Thus, the second scenario is adopted.

The HSFC includes two modules, namely, request service, Get a reply. The user connects his mobile to a GPS receiver through the mobile Bluetooth. HSFC dis- plays a list of most demandable common services (based on statistics carried out by marketing specialists). The user chooses (i) a service from the drop down list, and (ii) the desired service information (such as service ID, longitude, lati- tude). The user then submits his request to the server by clicking a submit button in an SMS.

The SSFC includes two modules, namely, the service provider and request manip- ulation. A client connects through an online system to provide his services details, such as locations (latitude and longitude can be provided by tech support) of the offered services, addresses and phone numbers. The provider information (GPS decimal locations, name, service provided, phone and address) is added to data- base. The received SMS is deleted, and a new SMS is sent back to the hand- set along the requested services information.

in a specific form) and is parsed using the parsetolist () method to extract the demandable service ID and the handset latitude and longitude values. (Class Dia- gram: SSMS CLASS – parsetolist ().) This is done by scanning the sms text coming from the handset and parsing it.

Values of measured alpha and beta (longitude, latitude) were obtained by site life measurements where the PDA equipped with GPS (see section for used hard- ware) was placed at each of the services shown in the above table and readings of alpha and beta were recorded and inserted in the database along with provider data including service category, name, address, phone. A cross validation of the measured alpha and beta was performed by comparing our measurements to values obtained from Google earth as shown in Table 1. The comparison shows agreement between the measured and Google values; hence it validates the mea- sured values.

The finder system validation was investigated by using two different types of hard- ware; namely, a PDA equipped with GPS and a notebook equipped with PCMCI GPS card (see Section 3.2). The test cases discussed below in Table 2 were carried out using both the PDA and the notebook. From client application interface, a user selects a service, e.g., Hospitals. The client application retrieves the current handset GPS location latitude and longitudes, calculates the client location, and sends the location of the service to the user via SMS.

providers for the service he is looking for. It should, however, be pointed out that the indicated distance is not a real physical one since it is GPS-based. It does not also take into consideration the real traffic map of the area. Neverthe- less, it certainly offers valuable information to the user.

