This paper proposed a radial basis function neural network optimization algorithm with a hybrid adaptive mutation particle swarm. During the optimization of RBF neural networks, the HAMPSO method is adopted to train the network structure and applied to solve the problems of the target localization. The HAMPSO algorithm is a dynamically adaptive optimization approach using uniform distribution mutation and Gaussian distribution mutation to escape local optima. We propose a HAMPSO method that can expedite convergence toward the global optimum during the iterations. In order to verify that the proposed HAMPSO-RBF approach has effect, comparisons with the RBF, genetic algorithm based RBF and PSO-based RBF approach are made. The computational results proved that the proposed HAMPSO-RBF approach exhibits much better and faster convergence performance in the training process as well as better prediction ability in the validation process than the results of other three approaches.

Target localization based on time difference of arrival is an vital issue in many applications such as radar, sonar and wireless sensor network [1]. In the TDOA localization method, the differences in arrival times of the source signal at multiple pairs of base stations are measured, the target position is achieved by calculating the distance difference between the target and other different reference base stations. When base stations are distributed arbitrarily, the position of target is determined from the intersection of a set of hyperbolic curves by the TDOA estimates, and the problem is hard to solve due to the noise of the environment and the high nonlinearity of localization equations.

The literature demonstrated that the target position can be effectively obtained using RBFNNs [2]. However, optimizing the structure of RBFNNs is still a challenging work. This paper proposed a RBFNNs optimization algorithm by HAMPSO and applied to target localization. The feasibility and efficiency of the algorithm over the PSO-RBFNNs and the GA-RBFNNs is demonstrated in the computational results.

where c1 and c2 are constants named acceleration coefficients. r1 and r2 are two independent random numbers uniformly distributed in the range of 0,1.  is called the inertia weight that controls the impact of previous velocity of particle on its current one [6].

Set the position of stations is (0, 0, 0) m, (-12990, 7500, 200) m, (0, 15000, 150) m, (12900, 7500, 100) m. The flight time of the target is 140 seconds and the interval of the signal transmission is one second. The locations of aerial target are also obtained by using GPS. There are 120 sets of time-differences and target positions collected from the localization measure system, among which 100 sets of data are used for RBF neural network’s training while the rest are for verification of the position prediction. Because the obtained time differences are very tiny and the coordinates of the target are large comparatively, all the data, including time differences and the coordinates, are scaled to [0, 1] by Eq. (10).

Step 1. PSO parameters setting: the population size is 20, the inertia weights max = 0.9 and min = 0.2, the number of generations is 100, the initial velocity range of particles in PSO is [-1, +1]. The mutation probability pmax = 0.1 and pmin= 0.01. The acceleration coefficients c1 and c2 are both 2.0.

A prediction of the RBF neural network for target localization was presented by using the HAMPSO method. In the proposed method, the HAMPSO technique is used to optimize the RBF neural network parameters. The computational results indicate that the proposed method is more efficient than RBF, GA-RBF and PSO-RBF methods. The proposed HAMPSO-RBF method can be further extended to the application in other scientific fields.

