Electromagnetic devices in industrial systems are utilised for problems of positioning and tracking control. A direct adaptive non-linear control framework for a non-linear electromagnetic actuator is presented in this paper. Starting from a Lyapunov approach a continuous control law is calculated for the actuator. After that, an approximated sampled final control law is proposed. The resulting control strategy is an adaptive one in which the main parameter depends on the variable inductance of the actuator itself. This aspect seems to be important to prevent saturation during the control phase.

With the recent rapid progress in permanent-magnet technology, very compact and high-performance electromagnetic linear actuators are already available in a wide range of applications. They open new possibilities for high-force motion control in mechatronic applications. Recent contributions are given in this direction in [1] and in [2] where different electromagnetic actuators are presented together with most of their important control problems. In particular, control and optimal trajectory generation are analyzed. In [3] and in [4] an electromagnetic actuator and its sensorless control using Kalman Filter are presented. In industrial systems, mechanical and/or hydraulic-mechanical components have been often replaced by electromagnetic ones, see [5] and [6]. One of the most utilized kinds of actuator is the linear electromagnetic one. There are, beside linear electromagnetic actuators, other types of electromagnetic actuators with different advantages, corporations, such as BMW [7], GM [8], DaimlerChrysler AG [9], Renault [10] and Siemens [5, 11] have based their prototype developments on the electromagnetic actuator design. A typical set-up for this kind of electromagnetic valve actuator, see the left side of Fig. 1, is equipped with two electromagnets and two springs and a moving armature. The upper coil is responsible for the closing phase and the lower coil is

In Fig. 2 the scheme of the magnetic circuit is drawn. State vector x(t) = [i(t), s(t), v(t)] and input uin(t) are taken under consideration for the representation of the system. Current i(t), armature position s(t), velocity v(t) and input voltage by uin(t) are the state variables. The dynamics of the electrical part of the actuator is the following:

M is the mass of the armature, kf is the constant which characterizes the spring, AF e1 the magnetic pole cross-sectional area, N is the number of the windings of the coils, kv is the friction coefficient, d(t) repre- sents the force acting against the cylinder because of the burning phase of the engine. μ0 is the magnetic air permeability and R is the magnetic reluctance from the air gap point of view. The parameters kf and kv are considered constant here. In the right part of Fig. 2 a polynomial approximation of the inductance as a function of the valve position is shown.

weight of the control. The resulting control law is an adaptive one in which the main parameter depends on the variable inductance of the actuator itself. This aspect seems to be important to prevent saturation during the control phase. Because of the presence of the inductance value in the numerator of this factor, from equation (16), the control law cancels the effect of this nonlinearity.	 

Simulated results are visible in Figs. 3 and 4. This trajectory corresponds to 6000 rounds per minute. The power involved for each exhaust valve does not exceed the mean value of 60 W in the case of 6000 rpm. A sampling time equal to 20 × 10−6sec. is used.

A direct adaptive non-linear control framework for a non-linear electromagnetic actuator is presented in this paper and starting from a Lyapunov approach a continuous control law is calculated for the actuator. After that, an approximated sampled final control law is proposed. The resulting control law is an adaptive one in which the main parameter depends on the variable inductance of the actuator itself. This aspect seems to be important to prevent saturation during the control phase.

