Traditional method to learn Chinese calligraphy needs long hour’s practice and the practice process often makes learners feel boring. And learners cannot get instant evaluation result during training. In this paper we introduce a new mobile Chinese Calligraphic training system based on virtual reality. The system is inspired by the way of tradition way to learn calligraphy which includes three main steps: a) learning stroke order of character; b) copying writing; c) real writing. Firstly the system demonstrates the right stroke order of calligraphic character with 2D and 3D mode. Secondly learner can write on iPad screen to practice copying writing. Meanwhile the leaner’s writing track will be captured and evaluated according the similarity. The result of user studies shows that our system can successfully guide learners to improve their writing skills and motive them to learn calligraphy.

2D writing process recurring is used to demonstrate writing process by 2D animation method. It is helpful for learner to master the right stroke order. In tradition way, showing the writing process is often given by teacher face to face. The shortcoming of traditional way is that the writing process demonstrated by teacher cannot cover all the characters in calligraphic class and if someone wants to see the demonstration more times it will make teacher boring.

Copying writing is a traditional method to learn how to use tip of a writing brush to write different shape at the start point, at the corner or at the end of a stroke. The evaluation rule of copying writing is that more similar with the original image is better. As writing brush is made of soft material and it can easily change shape and stroke thickness with different direction and pressure during the writing process. But in our App it is difficult to achieve as iPad screen is without pressure sensor. To simulate stroke thickness change, we use the writing speed as an import factor which will affect stroke thickness. An assumption is made that the writing speed and stroke width have an inverse relationship. The following formula presents the detail between stroke width and writing speed:

The 3D engine adopted in our project is Unity3D for it’s a powerful engine fully integrated with a set of intuitive tools and rapid workflows to create interactive 3D object. The main reasons of the choice of Unity3D for our system are: 1) 3D object and different kinds of lights can easily be edited; 2) user interaction is well supported by widely used script language such as JavaScript, C# and so on; 3) the 3D scene created in Unity3D can be exported as an iOS project in the code level. We embed the Unity3D scene into our App project in code level. In the 3D scene the movement of brush is along to the stroke order extracted from original calligraphic image by pre-processing module. The main app scene passes stroke order to 3D scene by “PlayerPrefs”.

Based on the above research result, we implement four Apple Apps using three famous classical calligraphic products. These Apps can download from App Store with “CADAL” or “Chinese Calligraphy” as keywords. To evaluate the performance of our system, we totally invited 80 pupils to attend our calligraphic learning test for 5 times. During each test all the students are randomly selected into a tradition learning group and another group using our training system. The objective is to investigate the system performance from the following perspectives:

In each test every student was assigned to learn 10 calligraphic characters in 40 minutes. The five tests used different font types: Normal font, Lishu, Cursive Handwriting, Seal Character and Small Seal Character. After 40 minutes learning each student was required to virtual write on the iPad to check. Table 1. shows the difference of the two groups. With the help of the system students can master stroke order more quickly. We find that for Normal Fonts the difference between traditional method and method using the system is small. The reason for the small difference is that Normal Font calligraphic character is now still used in daily writing thus few mistakes are made. However for the other three fonts the difference between two groups is obvious for these font types are nearly new to most of the students.

Our system is evaluated to check if it can raise learner’s interest by some surveys. The survey has three options such as you have high interests, common interests or poor interest in calligraphy. The comparison result between two groups is shown in Fig. 4. It shows that our system effectively raise the learner interest in learning calligraphy. For further reason of the difference, we find by personal interview that the learner’s using the system can master calligraphy quickly and they are also pleased to use new science technology which make them happy during the training period.

In this paper we discuss some key algorithms of Chinese calligraphic writing process recurring and stroke width simulation. Based on these ideas, we implement a virtual Chinese calligraphy training system based on iOS that can help people enjoy the writing beauty of calligraphy character and set good writing examples for users to follow in 2D and 3D mode. The learners’ real-time writing track can be captured and evaluated according similarity. These Apps can help learner master the right writing method faster than traditional method and motivate learner’s interest of learning calligraphy.

These Apps have been online in App Store for about 9 months. By the end of Feb, 2013, the sales data of global markets are shown in Table 2. The total of download units is more than 15,000. Download is from many countries and most is from China as now more and more people start to learn calligraphy.

