Methods: Our proposed approach first searches and retrieves PubMed abstracts using the desired terms and keywords. The extension corpora are then passed through the NLP pipeline for automatic information extraction. We then identify triples representing cause-and-effect relationships and encode this content using the Biological Expression Language (BEL). Finally, domain experts perform an analysis of the completeness, relevance, accuracy, and novelty of the extracted triples.

Biomedical literature is a valuable source of information; typically expressing high-level knowledge in the form of scientific narratives of- ten in an unstructured format. Presently, publications are growing at an unprecedented rate, therefore, staying up to date on the latest find- ings by manually reading the literature is no longer feasible for a given field of study. Thus, automated extraction of relevant information by applying intelligent natural language processing (NLP) algorithms has become a crucial and non-trivial task [1]. One of the most diﬃcult chal-

lenges in biomedical information extraction and literature mining is the development of effective methods and strategies for transforming scien- tific text into structured knowledge representations such as ontologies and knowledge graphs (KGs) [2]. Biomedical KGs are a powerful means of representing biomedical concepts and relations in the form of nodes and edges within networks. They have been utilized in a range of appli- cations including identifying protein functions [3], prioritizing genes as- sociated with disease [4], as well as drug discovery [5]. Drug discovery is the process of finding new potential medications, and conventionally it is an extremely time-consuming and costly procedure. Biomedical KGs

Fig. 1. Example of a BEL statement encoding a biological causal relationship from the follow- ing sentence: “Leu markedly increased phos- phorylation of Thr residues 36, 47, and 70 on 4E-binding protein (BP)1 in muscle from rats not receiving EtOH” [26]. Different parts of a BEL statement such as function, namespace, or relationship type, are illustrated in different colors.

have been essential for the acceleration of data-driven drug discovery and drug repurposing as they can incorporate a broad range of biolog- ical scales and concepts [6]. For example, Domingo-Fernández et al. developed an algorithm that prioritizes drugs for a given disease by rea- soning over causal paths in a KG [6]. In the context of drug discovery, Knowledge Graph Embedding (KGE) models have also been explored and utilized frequently [5]. KGE models learn vector representation of graph nodes and edges in low dimensional space and embed entities and relations of knowledge graphs while keeping the original structural information (such as the relations between entities) [7]. In their study, Bonner et al. investigated a variety of KGE models to assess how dif- ferent factors such as the training setup or their hyperparameters can result in better prediction in drug discovery tasks [5]. In this regard, N. Sosa et al. [8] implemented a literature-based KGE method with drug repurposing application in rare diseases.

Inherently, knowledge evolves rapidly in many research domains of current interest, and thus an eﬃcient update procedure is in high de- mand for KG maintenance [9]. Generally, biomedical KGs can be gen- erated in multiple ways, ranging from manually aggregating curated databases [2,10,11] to techniques such as NLP [12–14]. To cope with the increased number of scientific papers published every day, NLP techniques are quickly becoming the primary method by which rapid overviews of thousands of publications can be generated in seconds. NLP is often compromised of a combination of other technologies and techniques such as named entity recognition (NER) [15], relation ex- traction (RE) [16], and document or sequence classification [17]. These core methods have also been widely utilized in domains such as can- cer research and clinical decision support [18]. Pre-trained language models such as BERT/BioBERT are currently among the most widely employed language representation models that have proven to be ex- ceptionally powerful in biomedical text mining [19,20]. As an example, in a recent work, a BERT-based model was applied for generation of the high-quality molecular representations in drug discovery issues [21]. BERT models can employ the encoder part of the transformer architec- ture so that the attention mechanism can then be utilized for learning context and relationships in sequential data [20]. BERT is trained on text corpora of general domains, whereas BioBERT, which is an extension of BERT, is further re-trained on domain-specific biomedical corpora in- cluding PubMed database [19].

of a data exchange language should be considered. Extensible Markup Language (XML) [22], Biological Pathways Exchange (BioPAX) [23], Systems Biology Markup Language (SBML) [24], and Biological Expres- sion Language (BEL) [25] are currently among the most widely utilized language models in systems biology. BEL was developed to assemble causal relationships among biological entities with the underlying meta data such as support evidence [23,24]. Furthermore, BEL makes use of the concept of namespaces (e.g., Human Gene Nomenclature (HGNC)) to flexibly normalize entities. Fig. 1 depicts a more detailed example of a BEL statement. More information about BEL language specifics is provided in the Supplementary file.

lized to improve the development and updating of causal KGs in biomed- ical domains [27,28]. In the context of drug discovery, KGs representing causality are becoming essential analytical and inference tools that can help in areas like target identification [29]. One recent example of a cause-and-effect KG is the Human Brain Pharmacome (HBP), a drug- target mechanism-oriented data model that combines knowledge from multiple sources [30,31]. Pharmacomes link drug-target information to specific pathophysiology mechanisms and are ideal for rational ap- proaches toward the modulation of pathophysiology mechanisms [32]. Although the need for constant maintenance of KGs may appear triv- ial, the regular updating of “pathways” and other biological associations remains a challenge for biocurators and biomedical knowledge workers. Though in most cases, changes brought on by evolution and the com- pletion of knowledge occur gradually and smoothly [33], a fully auto- mated KG updating procedure imposes a substantial challenge to the biomedical research community, given the rapid pace of publishing in the field. Hence, our work had a singular, pragmatic focus: How can a tool be developed for semi-automatic updating of the mechanism and disease-specific physiology KGs starting with limited data? In this work, we begin with the HBP and, due to its significance in neurodegenerative diseases like Alzheimer’s disease (AD), we focus on the phosphorylated Tau (pTau) as a starting point. Next, we introduce and employ an NLP- based workflow to extract the BEL relationships from relevant literature contained in the PubMed database and verify the correctness and rel- evance of the extracted triples by engaging experts before adding the newly encoded information to the KG. Finally, we investigate the NLP workflow’s shortcomings by analyzing what is missing during informa-

Retrieval of essential information from text, and therefore mapping, creation, and extension of KGs are gaining more attention in biomedi- cal research. Santos et al. [34], as an example, have presented a clini- cal KG that supports the harmonization of proteomics with other omics data while integrating biomedical databases and scientific publications. In another work, Thomas et al. [35] have recently developed a frame- work for modeling causal activities called Gene Ontology Causal Activity Modeling (GO-CAM) to represent more complex statements about bio- logical functions in a structured and scalable manner. Gene-product in- teractions are modeled qualitatively and causally using GO-CAM, which can in turn help answer complex questions about how gene product ac- tivities interact to carry out biological functions [35]. Their research also reveals a growing trend toward modeling cause-and-effect rela- tionships in the context of gene ontology. Therefore, there are several substantial efforts being made towards the construction of ontologies and causal KGs, most of which can be broadly classified as manual or automatic/semi-automatic and are summarized below [33,36].

[10,11,37–39]. Manual construction of KGs requires that experts contin- uously read publications to annotate and identify relevant relationships or concepts of interest, which does ultimately result in a high degree of accurate information, but at the expense of time. One of the charac- teristics of KGs built in this manner is that they contain precise data, although the recall is low [2,40–43].

In a recent investigation, Lage-Rupprecht et al. [31], developed the Human Brain Pharmacome (HBP), a manually and highly-curated drug- mechanism-oriented model that encompasses a wide range of biological processes relevant to the pathophysiology of AD. The HBP includes a highly granular representation of mechanisms describing tauopathies, a group of neurodegenerative diseases distinguished by the deposition of the abnormal microtubule-associated Tau protein in the brain in the form of neurofibrillary tangles [31]. In their work, they established a comprehensive framework in silico for identifying druggable mecha- nisms in the context of Tau phosphorylation (pTau) and created a work- flow for evaluating likely therapeutics that target AD-specific patho- physiology processes. Briefly, they first created an initial version of AD- specific KG using the eBEL software package [44] which generated a network using a combination of manually curated, AD-focused BEL re- lations as well as established biological pathways derived from pub- lic repositories including KEGG [45] and Reactome [46]. Using this KG, they selected pTau as an entry point and identified upstream reg- ulators (secondary interactors) in the network which modulate that protein [31]. The secondary interactors were then ranked according to defined criteria (including draggability), and the top hits were se- lected for further evaluation. In the case of the Tau drug repurpos- ing example, these biochemical assays led to the discovery of novel target/compound combinations modulating posttranslational modifica- tion of the Tau protein [31]. Since the introduction of HBP, several studies have worked on drug discovery for AD [47–52], which can in turn highlight the necessity for keeping HBP up-to-dated with recent findings.

To train the RE module of the NLP pipeline, we utilized a train- ing dataset generated by combining several published KGs. These KGs were built by expert manual curation on various topics such as AD [28,61–68], Parkinson’s Disease [68], epilepsy [69], amyotrophic lat- eral sclerosis (unpublished), type 2 diabetes [70,71], post-traumatic stress disorder (unpublished), traumatic brain injury (unpublished), schizophrenia, bipolar disorder (unpublished), COVID-19 [62,72,73], and pTau modulation [31]. The BEL statements underlying these KGs are extracted from PubMed abstracts as well as full-text documents. Table 1 summarizes the information regarding the total number of BEL nodes, edges, distinct PMIDs, and unique BEL statements in this training dataset.

The extension corpus was created for updating and expanding the Tau KG. To create this collection, we used the E-utilities API [74] to search and retrieve abstracts from PubMed using “Tau” as the primary keyword, and extracted all abstracts published between May 2020 and May 2022. The distribution of abstracts belonging to the context of Tau phosphorylation and its post-translational modification are shown in Table 2.

Starting with the initial mechanism KG, we query PubMed for rele- vant medical subject headings (MeSH) terms and keywords consis- tent with the context of the KG. Here, we extracted PubMed abstracts dealing with Tau phosphorylation and its post-translational modifi- cation. The abstracts extracted from this step constitute the extension corpus.

Automated extraction of BEL triples from text is a diﬃcult task due to the high level of expressiveness in the biomedical domain. Be- sides, there are some limitations of the BEL syntax, terms, and func- tions [79], moreover, not all information encoded in a BEL document can be directly found in the evidence text. There may also be several different perspectives on how or which specific information should be coded in BEL [79]. Therefore, our goal was to create flexible evalu- ation guidelines and a schema to assess the performance of the BEL extraction module so that a BEL statement can be accurately labelled based on how “correct” it is. As depicted in Fig. 4, this evaluation rubric assigns one of six categories to each triple according to how ac- curately the BEL statement describes the associated support evidence. This schema also helps to determine the level of correctness of each extracted statement and to better understand where the NLP pipeline can be improved when extracting BEL relationships. Based on these guidelines, we selected triples that were of high-quality to be further evaluated. Domain experts then analyzed and filtered the high-quality triples, and this final subset was subsequently added to the Tau KG. Table 3 showcases a few examples of extracted BEL triples and their associated correctness label. These correctness labels are defined as the following:

The performance of the NLP pipeline on the extension corpus is sum- marized in Table 5. More detailed information, such as the distribution of each relationship type or most common namespaces occurrences, is described in the Supplementary file (Figs. S1- S8). To assess the correct-

ness of the extracted triples, a BEL curation team consisting of four anno- tators with both biology and data science backgrounds was formed. We then randomly selected more than 50% of the extracted triples and the team manually evaluated the quality of this dataset based on the above- defined evaluation criteria. The result of this evaluation is represented in Table 6. Additionally, the inter-annotator agreement rate for the en- tire dataset was computed by three BEL-expert annotators with several years of experience in BEL curation. For this calculation, 1,000 anno- tated triples were randomly selected and given to this second BEL ex- pert team who then computed the percentage of annotations that match across all annotators. In this study, the inter-annotator agreement rate, meaning the percentage of BEL triples that were annotated with the same sense by all annotators, stands as 371 out of 1000 triples. Finally, we chose a selection of high-quality triples as decided by subject-matter experts for inclusion in the KG. Table 7 illustrates the result of the second round of manual evaluation as well as the inter-annotator agreement rate.

The visualization of the updated BEL KG centered around pTau is represented in Supplementary File (Fig. S9). Moreover, this KG can also be visualized with the Biomedical Knowledge Miner (BiKMi) web tool, which is accessible at https://bikmi.pharmacome.scaiview.com/. After the high-quality BEL triples were added to the KG, we used BiKMi and identified six additional interactors that are related to the modulation of Tau phosphorylation. Briefly, we first chose the target, which is the Tau protein, and only selected the entities that have phosphorylation as the protein modification. Then, we identified upstream regulators of the modified target by considering the direct causal relations. Next, we se- lected interactors that are druggable, meaning those for which there ex- ist drugs from DrugBank [86] that target them. These upstream interac-

tors are apolipoprotein E (ApoE), Legumain (LGMN), phosphodiesterase 11A (PDE11A), protein kinase cGMP-dependent 1v (PRKG1), Alpha- synuclein (SNCA) and TANK-binding kinase 1 (TBK1). Among them, only ApoE, PDE11A, and TBK1 were shown to be druggable. Finally, we searched several sources and databases, including protein-protein inter- action networks, gene-disease databases, and pathway databases to val- idate and enrich the information about the identified potential targets against neurodegenerative diseases, including AD. We have summarized this information in the following sections.

TBK1 is a protein-coding gene that has been associated with dis- eases such as encephalopathy, acute frontotemporal dementia, and amy- otrophic lateral sclerosis 4 [87]. TBK1 is also shown to be involved in au- tophagy and inflammatory responses, too [88]. More specifically, loss- of-function (LoF) mutations in the TBK1 gene, including frameshift mu- tations and inflame amino acid deletions have been associated to a vari- ety of neurodegenerative diseases [88]. However, the role of TBK1 in the modification of tau phosphorylation linked to AD or other tauopathies, is not yet well-understood [89]. In a recent study, H.Abreha et al. employed immunoaﬃnity enrichment coupled with mass spectrometry (MS) and identified TBK1 in human cortical brain tissue as a regulator of tau hyperphosphorylation [89]. In a related study, Xiang et al. sum- marized the knowledge on inhibitors of TBK1 that may be candidates for therapeutic approaches in many diseases, such as inflammation or metabolic diseases or pancreatic cancer [90]. However, no TBK1 kinase inhibitor is currently authorized by the US Food and Drug Administra- tion (FDA).

Following this, Yu et al. reported in a recent study that ApoE may be protective in neuronal activity, but its toxic fragments are linked to neu- rodegeneration and neurocognitive impairment among those with AD [92]. Their study also highlights that the differences in ApoE fragments expressed in the hippocampus of mice of different ages lead to variability in Tau phosphorylation and neurocognitive functions and mechanisms [92]. Various animal studies have demonstrated that pathological (poly- merized) Tau drives cerebral atrophy, however, the mechanisms that ex- acerbate Tau pathology or Tau hyper-phosphorylation in ApoE4-carriers are not known [93]. R. Saroja et al., claim that the astrocyte-secreted protein glypican-4 is a key driver of ApoE4-mediated Tau abnormal hy- perphosphorylation [93]. A variety of therapeutic approaches on tar- geting ApoE4 for preventing or treating Alzheimer’s disease have been highlighted in a recent review by Williams et al. [94]. However, be- cause the mechanisms underlying ApoE isoform-specific differences in brain homeostasis are complex, it remains unclear which ApoE-related therapeutic approaches are applicable in vivo [95].

PDE11A is a protein-coding gene that is related to primary pig- mented nodular adrenocortical disease and is associated with the GPCR downstream signaling pathway [87]. In a recent study, exome sequenc- ing performed by Qin et al., revealed that the PDE11A variant led to significantly higher Tau phosphorylation levels and therefore PDE11A could be a candidate gene for early-onset AD [96]. Previously, two rare mutations in the phosphodiesterase PDE11A gene were identified in people with early-onset AD [97]. Their study confirmed significantly decreased protein levels of PDE11A in brain samples of AD patients [97]. Furthermore, the expression of PDE11A variants was proven to be associated with the increased Tau hyperphosphorylation in context of AD [97]. In another research, Fawcett et al. used molecular cloning to characterize PDE11A and reported that it is responsive to zapri- nast, dipyridamole, and the nonselective PDE inhibitor 3-isobutyl-1-

methylxanthine (IBMX) [98]. It has also been observed that each of the four PDE11A splice variations (PDE11A1-4) appears to have a differ- ent tissue expression profile as well as a separate N-terminal regulatory area, implying that each isoform could be targeted independently with a small molecule or biologic [99,100]. Though PDE11A inhibitors and ac- tivators have been identified so far, more examinations in patient tissue must yet be performed for the establishment of a therapeutic indication [99].

By utilizing AI-based relationship extraction workflows, we demon- strate that regular updating of highly curated KGs is feasible. The relationship-extraction workflow Sherpa is an open-source and freely accessible platform that combines different machine learning and NLP techniques to enhance biomedical text analysis procedures. Initially, the corpus for KG extension was extracted by searching PubMed for research abstracts involving Tau phosphorylation. Then, the NLP-based module performed NER, NED and RE on this extension corpus to identify all BEL relationships embedded within. As a final step, manual assessment was performed based on defined BEL evaluation guidelines to assess and re- fine the extracted BEL triples for further integration in the initial KG. In our example scenario that is highly relevant for drug repurposing in neurodegenerative diseases, the subsequent analysis of the updated KG revealed previously unreported interactors related to the modulation of Tau phosphorylation. While the results of our overall approach are promising, we acknowledge that substantial work is needed to improve the eﬃcacy of the underlying NLP-based module. Though the develop- ment of complete autonomous systems for extraction of cause-and-effect triples is a complex task for which there is no near-optimal prediction model yet.

At the core of Sherpa NLP workflow stands the Entity-Fishing tool, a machine learning service that aims to automate entity recognition and disambiguation generically while minimizing domain-specific restric- tions. To perform entity disambiguation, a supervised machine learning technique based on Random Forest and Gradient Tree Boosting exploit- ing multiple features was utilized. The Sherpa pipeline includes an open- source and extensible tool named OpeNRE, which provides a framework for the implementation of neural models for RE based on TensorFlow and PyTorch, and is trained with a BERT-based encoder. The perfor- mance and error analysis revealed the success of the BERT-based BEL triple extraction module in the rapid expansion of the Tau KG. By mining the updated KG, our investigations and enrichment analysis yielded six potential target candidates relevant to the regulation of Tau phosphory- lation concerning neurodegenerative diseases. However, additional bio- logical screening systems are undoubtedly required to learn more about the role of these interactors in modulation of Tau phosphorylation in the context of AD.

For identifying the novel upstream regulators of pTau, we applied a graph-based algorithm using BiKMi, an in-house software package which was designed to explore pathways and interactions within a BEL network. Currently, there is an ongoing demand for ML-based ap- proaches to improve not only the hypothesis generation itself, but also the speed at which it is performed. For instance, the path ranking algo- rithm (PRA) is an alternative that can help with knowledge reasoning and knowledge recommendation tasks [101]. PRA computes the feature matrix on a pair of graph nodes and edges and assigns a score to each

triple. As the KG representations are used to predict links that may in- dicate potential relations between entities in the KG, hypothesis gener- ation approaches can be influenced by a variety of factors, such as how well the KG is constructed or how well the KGE algorithm works. In this regard, Zeng et al. [102] provided a review of hypothesis generation ap- proaches for drug discovery using KGs and explain that designing and validating automated workflows which can generate hypotheses, is still a massive challenge in the biomedical domain. Our work aims to meet this challenge and present a viable method to overcome the hurdles of hypothesis generation.

To validate and enrich our understanding of the found interactor can- didates, we searched a variety of gene, protein, and disease databases for additional information. By comparing proteins, protein families, and protein-protein interaction networks, one can generate a wealth of in- formation about the relationship between proteins within a genome or across different species and related to different diseases. Additionally, human disease databases are also an essential component of biological research that aid in understanding the importance and context of these proteins. Among the identified interactors described in the results sec-

this type of phosphorylation via the calpain-CDK5 signaling pathway [103]. Following the fact that modulations of ApoE are related to and promising in AD drug development, Ymazaki et al. [95] summarized the associated therapies in three main categories: 1) regulation of ApoE quantity; 2) modification of ApoE properties; and 3) indirect therapeutic approaches. Despite extensive research conducted regarding the role of ApoE in neurodegeneration, no therapeutic interventions has been suc- cessfully found that targets the ApoE gene directly [95]. This could be due to the complicacy of mechanisms underlying ApoE isoform-specific differences on brain homeostasis [95]. However, though ApoE is not di- rectly targeted, the ApoE genotype is expected to affect the responses in several potential AD therapies [95].

Despite the eﬃciency of the RE module, more thorough evaluations and adaptations of our workflow are still required to further improve performance. One area that can be revised in our proposed methodol- ogy is the strategy for searching for relevant abstracts and publications. As stated previously, we used specific keywords and looked through PubMed database via their API, however, even with a sophisticated search phrase, querying PubMed may not always return pertinent ar- ticles in their entirety [104]. To improve the search strategy, Subra- manian et al. [104] introduced a shallow filtering approach to retrieve relevant literature in the context of drug repurposing. Previously, this matter was also investigated, and a systematic methodology was intro- duced to develop better strategies and enhance biomedical literature searching [105]. Moreover, there are now alternative platforms such as A2A [106] which support searching through biomedical publications. Such tools will also be considered in our future investigations toward more eﬃcient context-specific corpora generation [106].

labeled datasets, though these labels may also contain noise [108]. In- terestingly, active learning approaches have recently been shown to re- duce the labeling effort required for learning a RE model. This is accom- plished by incorporating a human annotator into the learning loop and carefully selecting a small number of samples to be labeled [109]. Ac- tive learning methodologies are especially useful when there are plenty of unlabeled, available, and easy-to-access samples, but labeled data is rare and costly to provide [110]. As instance, in their work, Rosales et al.

Another possible solution for improving RE performance would be to combine the co-occurrence-based strategies in our pipeline. In a recent study, a scoring method was previously proposed that relies on entity co- occurrences to extract relationships from biomedical literature [112]. In their work, they considered how often two entities appear together and aggregated these counts over the whole corpus [112]. Co-occurrence based RE approaches are very advantageous since they do require an- notated training yet maintain a relatively high recall rate. In our future work, we will implement these strategies to enhance our platform and overcome its limitations.

This work demonstrated the feasibility of an NLP-based pipeline for the semi-automated updating of a highly curated KG. Our strategy is based on a pragmatic approach to rapidly generate biomedical corpora enriched with recent publications which are then fed into an NLP work- flow for BEL statement detection. Despite the eﬃciency of our pipeline, clearly there is a demand for accelerated manual BEL annotation as well as an expansion of training datasets for NLP workflow improvement.

We obviously did not solve the problem of full automation of the KG updating process. However, we foresee that soon complete triple indices will be available for entire PubMed (including related full-text literature collections). This will make finding “related” and “recent” triples merely a graph query task. We are currently working on such “triple index” for entire indication areas and it is only a matter of time before we will see the first PubMed-wide cause-and-effect indices.

Harish BS, Udayasri B. Document classification: an approach using feature clus- tering. In: Thampi SM, Abraham A, Pal SK, Rodriguez JMC, editors. Recent ad- vances in intelligent informatics. Advances in intelligent systems and comput- ing. Cham: Springer International Publishing; 2014. p. 163–73. doi:10.1007/ 978-3-319-01778-5_17.

Spooner A, Mohammadi G, Sachdev PS, Brodaty H. A. Sowmya, and for the Syd- ney Memory and Ageing Study and the Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initia- tive, “Ensemble feature selection with data-driven thresholding for Alzheimer’s dis- ease biomarker discovery,”. BMC Bioinformatics Jan 2023;24(1):9. doi:10.1186/ s12859-022-05132-9.

Geißler S. The Kairntech Sherpa – An ML Platform and API for the Enrichment of (not only) Scientific Content. In: Proceedings of the 1st international workshop on language technology platforms. Marseille, France: European Language Resources Association; 2020. p. 54–8. Accessed: Dec. 12, 2022. [Online]. Available. https:

Yang M, Tan H, Zhang K, Lian N, Yu Y, Yu Y. Protective effects of Coenzyme Q10 against sevoflurane-induced cognitive impairment through regulating apolipopro- tein E and phosphorylated Tau expression in young mice. Int J Dev Neurosci Off J Int Soc Dev Neurosci 2020. doi:10.1002/jdn.10041.

Goutte C, Gaussier E. A probabilistic interpretation of precision, recall and F- score, with implication for evaluation. In: Losada DE, Fernández-Luna JM, ed- itors. Advances in information retrieval. Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer; 2005. p. 345–59. doi:10.1007/978-3-540-31865- 1_25.

