The traditional data fitting method based on least square method is not good for vector data fitting whose independent variable is random. So this paper proposes a new criterion of data fitting which is the least quadratic sum of geometrical distance, and brings forward the new fitting scattered data method based on the new criterion. At the same time the paper puts forward the optimization algorithm for the solution of the data fitting parameter. Simulation experiments show that the fitting precision of the new method is higher than the one of least square method for data fitting of vector, whose independent variable is random.

linear or nonlinear fitting modelling frequently to the survey data, seeks to the function (model) which can approximately reflect the change rules of the data. There are a long history and enrich results about data fitting and its application[1-3]. In linear data fitting, we frequently use the least square method in order to get data fitting parameter. The reason is that if the fitting model conforms to the Gauss -Markov hypothesis condition, least square method can obtain the fitting parameter with good statistical nature, like agonic, uniformity, smallest variance and so on. However, the actual test data infinitely varied, moreover the purpose of carrying on the data fitting to the test data are also different, and the precision request are also different, thus the data fitting result which use the least squares method to carry on the data fitting can not achieve the requested purpose. For example, there are some unusual data due to occasionally abnormal error or data probability distribution deviates normal distribution, if we use the regression analysis result of least square method, we will lose its good statistical property, one solution of this situation is to use the criterion function with steady performance[4-5]. Moreover, during linear fitting, compare to the Scatter-point actual distributed tendency, the straight line determined by least squares method in many fields all has a bit small slope phenomenon, especially the fluctuation of the sample Scatter-point is a little bigger, this phenomenon is more obvious. The reason is that, when we use ordinary least square method on parameter estimation, we have the

the dependent variable between the observed value and the estimated value to be smallest, from all the possible linear equation. Its geometry significance is: To find a straight line, which longitudinal distance sum of squares between the scatter-point of the observed value and this straight line to be smallest, from all possible straight lines. Just because the goal is to make the longitudinal distance sum of squares between the scatter-point and this straight line to be smallest, rather than the geometrical distance (vertical distance) sum of squares between the scatter-point and this straight line to be smallest, which result in the estimated straight line has slope small tendency[6].

Lifts the background of least square method theory, we can discover the concealed default premise supposition when we use least square method on data fitting: because the dependent variable of the sample is influenced by the stochastic disturbing term, it is stochastic undulation, while the sample independent variable doesn’t stochastic, that is scatter-point deviates linear equation, completely because scatter-point undulates in the fluctuation direction of dependent variable, rather than the combined effect in the fluctuation direction of all the dependent variable. Therefore, use least square method on data fitting directly without considering the premise supposition condition, and no wonder we will get the fitting equation with deviation. The different results are produced by different methods, however different methods are established on the foundation of different premise supposition. Therefore each method itself can not be said who is right in this question, just whose premise supposition more reasonable.

workers carry on much research work on the least square fitting method and obtain fruitful efforts. For example, Principal Component Regression (PCR), Partial Least Squares (PLS), all kinds of Non-Linear Principal Component Regression (NLPCR), all kinds of Non-Linear Partial Least Squares (NLPLS), Neural Network method and the syntheses of these methods ect., which used in actual quite many in present project[4- 9]. In this article, we do not use the method which is mentioned by the above literature when carry on scatter- point fitting, instead of using the minimum of geometrical distance sum of squares as new fitting standard, we propose a new data fitting method based on the new standard. In the method, including model transform, turns fitting parameter solution into "constrained optimization problem", and provides the fitting parameter solution algorithm. The simulation experiment indicated that, the fitting parameter solution algorithm is feasible and effective; in the data fitting which independent variable is the random variable vector data, we can get a higher fitting precision by using the new data fitting method instead of least square method.

By the figure we can see, the discrete point uniform distributes on the different sides of three straight lines. It is obvious that the fitting effect by the least square criterion and based on the geometrical distance criterion is all good. However, reference to the ideal straight line we can know that the fitting straight line under new criterion obviously better than the least square fitting straight line, the fitting straight line under new criterion located between the ideal straight line and the least square straight line, the fitting precision is higher than the least square straight line.

The authors would like to thank the editors and the anonymous reviewers for their valuable comments and constructive suggestions. This research is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 61272077, 61202319), the Natural Science Foundation of Jiangxi Province(No. 20114BAB201034) and the Scientific and Technological Project of Jiangxi Province(No. 20133BBE50022).

