Trust among entities of a distributed system supports secure environment. In this paper, the authors propose an approach to compute trust values using fuzzy based approach. The main focus of the approach is on the dynamic behaviour of trust values. Mutual authentication is ensured among the communicating entities using trust values. These trust values are transmitted securely using cryptography. The trust values have also been used to generate access control policies.

Security methodologies in grid systems [1, 2, 3] is an important aspect. Security features required in distributed system are identified as: trust, authentication, encryption and access control. ‘Trust’ is used to ensure secure communication. It can be used for implementing security methods in grid environment. A distributed trust model has been developed for ad hoc mobile networks in [4]. A trust and access control based model for distributed system has been developed in [5]. Trust and reputation based access control mechanism have been discussed in [6]. For wireless communications, a rendezvous node based trust based security is

model is proposed in [10] that ensures data security in distributed system. TrustWebRank based security approach is proposed in [11]. Fuzzy logic can be used for calculating trust. Many models have been proposed to compute trust using fuzzy. Alfarez Abdul-Rehman and Stephen Hailers have proposed a trust model [12] where trust is defined in terms of direct trust and recommended trust. In our framework we have direct trust

values based on direct communication and updated trust value based on direct and feedback trust values. Fixed weighted [13] and variable weighted [14] fuzzy based models have been proposed for evaluation of trust. As evaluation parameters have dynamic significance, hence variable weighted method is used here.

This paper is divided into 5 sections; section 2 defines the terminology we have used for defining our grid system also with the data structures used for maintaining the trust values. Section 3defines the fuzzy approach used to calculate the trust value. Then section 4 defines the various security measures used in this framework. Section 5 is conclusion and future scope.

Grid is composed of a number of independent domains. Here, we refer to these domains as Organizations. Each organization is an autonomous domain with its own administrative and security policies. These are denoted as vector O={O1, O2, O3….. On}, where, Oi is the ith organization of the grid environment. These organizations comprises of entities. An entity is represented as if where i represents the organization to which entity e belongs, j represents the grade of an entity within the organization x is used as a name for entity to differentiate from different entities. Grade of an entity refers to the level of trust that an organization has over its own entity. Two entities of the same organization can have the same grade.

Each organization has a manager. Mi denotes the manager of organization Oi. Grades are allotted by the organization manager, which is responsible for maintaining the trust values of an organization and its entities. Initially Mi assigns same grades to all the entities e  Oi. Gradually, with feedbacks from communicating entities, grade is updated.

a) Initial Trust Value: The Trust value assigned for it by any entity with which no communication has occurred in the past. They are based on authentication queries. And its value can be either 0 or t0. The scope of these values is before completion of any transaction. (b) Direct Trust Value: The Trust generated after an entity has carried out a job. It is based on, initial trust, job success rate, error rate, turnaround time. Its value ranges from [t0, 1] and the scope of these values is before completion of job. (c) Reputation: It depends on trust values by other entities. Its value depends on feedbacks after job completion, trust on an organization and grade within organization.

(a)Initial trust value: It is based on the authentication queries from the highest grade entity. In case, all entities are of the same grade, randomly any entity can be selected. (b) Direct Trust Value: With the competition of job, direct trust values of entities of organization are updated.

Feedback matrix: this matrix is sent to the manager of the entity’s organization. For example, lets assume that   Oj communicates with e  Oi then, based on its communications its will generate feedbacks and send it to Mj . Mj will aggregate all the received feedback matrices and send to Mi.

So in the above matrix we can see, that column represents all the entities of organization Oi. With respect to different contexts, trust values are assigned to the entities with which communication took place. Since there was no communication of  with  in terms of C3 hence it takes value as NA.

Now we need to assign weights to these parameters. Importance of a parameter depends on the instant of time, the trust value is computed. For example, if two entities are going to compute for the first time, then whole weightage will be given to initial trust value. Whereas, after few successful job completions, initial trust will have least weightage. Therefore, these weights will be variable. Wi is weight for Evaluation parameter Ei, where E= (E1 E2 E3 E4 ) is the evaluation parameter vector. Value of evaluation is denoted as u1,

Level 1, whenever a new entity wishes to join a grid, it will send request to particular grid entity to which it wants to communicate. This grid entity will check for authentication, by generating certain queries. Only legitimate user will have the correct answers to those queries. In case correct responses are received, grid entity will sent initial trust value (to).Else if wrong response will be there then grid entity will assign trust = 0, and an alarm will be generated for all grid entities informing about this unidentified entity.

Level 2:- When grid entity sends the initial trust, the trust value is sent using public key cryptography. Therefore, an entity can have access to the trust value, only if it has the key to it. Suppose a hacker in any way gets the responses of initial queries, he will be able to cross the first level authentication, but cannot cross level 2 unless presence of key.

The new entity joining the grid must also be sure of the authentication of grid. Therefore, mutual authentication is necessary. New entity will also generate queries to which grid responses are checked and accordingly trust is established. Here also two levels of security are maintained.

Thus, access control policies vary according to the trust values. The manager’s of each entity are responsible for maintaining the access control. Managers maintain the trust value of each entity of other organizations, on the basis of feedback from its own entities.

In this paper, trust values have been used to carry out authentication and access control, ensuring a secure grid environment. Fuzzy logic concept is utilized for evaluating the trust. In future, authors would be working for decreasing the computations required for generating and updating trust values. Also reputation parameter can be added to ensure secure communication.

