Modern security sciences use these differences to control the access to restricted places, which is one of the fundamental problems in security field. The increasing need of the security field has given rise to the development of recent and efficient authentication systems.Old approaches of identification such as key or passwordare not satisfactory in many application areas. These conventional methods can be forgotten, stolen or cracked. For these weaknesses, the recent science is interested in automatic systems of identification which

physiological characteristics such as fingerprints, iris (Fig 1),and behavior characteristics such as voice. The need of reliable and secure systems has involved the emergence of the biometric systems. Fingerprint,face and speaker recognition have been widely studied. Among all the biometric recognition systems, Iris Recognition System (IRS) is the most efficient and reliable system [2] for authenticity check. Iris identification was proposed by Flom and Aran [12]. Recent surveys of iris recognition algorithms can be found in [13]. This is due to the stability of the human iris, its invariant over time and its uniqueness for each person. Even between brothers or twins [4].

The IRS is a high accuracy verification technology [5],and a valid biometrics approach for personal identification. The IRS has been wildly studied [4] and used especially in the security fields. Thus, many countries use IRS in order to improve their security such as in airports and government buildings.Although the iris identification theory was started earlier, most important recent works [6] have been inspired by the works of John Daugman [7].

segmentation process consists to isolate the iris ring from the iris image. The normalization process is applied to produce an invariant iris area.It transforms the circular iris region into a rectangular region with fixed dimensional.In fact, the inner and outer boundary can approximately be taken as circles.But, the two circles are not co-centric. Daugman [7] proposed to apply the Integro-differential operator to detect the inner and the

This method (integro-differential) is used to transform the image from the Cartesian (x,y) to the polar coordinate(r, ș) space [4]. The center of the pupil is illustrated by a green point. The center of the iris is illustrated in red point in Fig 2.We can notice that the two boundaries are not co-centric.Fig 2 illustrates an iris image in the Cartesian coordinates and its rectangular transformation result.The third is the feature

extraction step. The goal is to capture the relevant information from image. Daugman applied the Gabor filter on the rectangular iris. He used a multiscale quadrate method on the obtained image. This method encodes the signs of the real and the imaginary part of the Gabor coefficients. Each pixel is encoded by two binary codes. The generated binary code is called ‘Iris Code’ (Fig 2).

Fig. 2 illustrates an example of an iris image and its iris code. The positive coefficients are represented by a white line and the negatives by a black line. For the Matching step, a distance measure between a generated iris code and stored iris code is calculated. The query iris is considered authentic if the distance measure is below a threshold. Daugman has considered the quality of the iris image, and extracted a matching mask from the iris image. He used the Hamming distance (HD) to calculate the distance between two irises. For the identification, Daugman fixed the threshold of the matching around 0.34 [8]. The iris recognition system proposed by Daugman is often used and is a basis of all current iris recognition systems.

In order to extract the relevant information from an iris image, we propose a novel feature extraction method. The proposed method is inspired by the Local Binary Pattern (LBP) method. Some improvements are made to capture the local information and describe better the iris texture. This paper has been organized as follows: In section 2, our proposed method for iris texture analyses is explained. Section 3illustratessome experimental results.The conclusion of this paper is given in section 4.

summarizes the proposed architecture of the IRS will be also given.The Local Binary Pattern (LBP) operator was proposed by Ojala and Pietikainen in 1996 [9].And used in recent works [3][11].This method uses a 3x3 analysis window. The neighborhood of the central pixel is thresholded by the value of the central pixel. Each neighbor is coded by 1 if its value is above or equal than the central pixel value, and encoded by 0 otherwise. Binary code is obtained from the analysis window and converted into a decimal number LBP number.

The NBP extracts the binary pattern by thresholding each neighbor of the central pixel by the next neighbor (starting from the top-left neighbor and going clockwise). The binary value of one neighbor is equal to 1 if its gray value is greater than the next neighbor, 0 otherwise.Fig 3 illustrates an example of the NBP method. The first neighbor (4) has a gray level value less than its next neighbor (6). Thus, its binary code is equal to 0. After that, the obtained binary code (11010) is converted into a decimal number (26) and considered as the value of the central pixel. Finally, the central pixel in the original image (5) will have the

Indeed, a small rotation of the same analysis window generates a different NBP code. In order to deal with the rotation problem of the NBP method, we proposed an encoding process. This encoding process starts relatively from the higher neighbor of the analysis window.Thus, even if the pattern is rotated, the encoding process gives the same code. This encoding process is illustrated in Fig4.

In order to describe the NBP image, we proposed to use a decomposing architecture.First, the NBP image is decomposed into several blocks. The mean of each block is calculated. After that, the variations of the means are encoded. One block is encoded by 1 if its mean are greater than its rightneighbor’s mean, 0 otherwise. A binary matrix of the variation means are extracted and used as template of the iris(Fig5).

Fig. 5 illustrates the variation encoding process. First, the NBP method is applied on the iris image. The obtained NBP image is decomposed into 2*4 blocks in red. The mean of each block is calculated. After that, the variation of the mean of each block is encoded. For example, the mean of the first block is equal to 26, which is greater than its right neighbor 24. Therefore, the first variation is coded by 1.

Where M1, M2 are the variation binary codes of the two iris images. S is equal to 1 if the ith blocks from M1 and M2 are the same, 0 otherwise. Nb is the number of blocks which depends on the decomposition of the iris image. If the distance Dis is above a threshold, the two irises are considered of the same person.

In order to evaluate our system performance, we have used the public iris database CASIA [10], which is a most used benchmark in the iris recognition research.In the evaluation process, three images from each person have been taken as a reference and four as test. In order to compare the LBP method and the proposed NBP method, twenty persons taken randomly from the database are used in the experimental process. Thus, 60 images are used as references and 80 as a test images. Each test image is considered as query. The LBP histogram is extracted and the mean variation of the NBP image is extracted. After that, the hammingdistance between the query’s feature and the features extracted from all reference images of the database is calculated. The obtained hamming distances are sorted from the most similar to the dissimilar comparing to the query. A majority vote of the top three is considered and the query iris is classified following the majority. An experimental example is illustrated in Fig 6.

58.75% and the NBP method is 76.25%.We can notice, from the results, that the NBP method is better than the classical LBP method.Because in fact, the neighborhood of the central pixel is thresholded by its value using the LBP method.So, LBP get the relationship between each neighbor and the central pixel.However, the NBP method describes each pixel by the relationship of its neighborhoods.Experimental results demonstrate that it is more interesting to capture the relative pertinent information between the neighbors.Thus, the results have shown the robustness and the efficiency of the proposed NBP method.

