tives of the reference diseases (which are called as ‘classical’ cases). Manual diagnosis is often individualized and so as the presentation of an illness. Therefore, the appropriateness of the term classical becomes relative in clinical medicine. Applications of higher data mining technique(s) and concepts of computational intelligence have tremendous research scopes in modeling the process of clinical diagnosis due to its opera- tional resemblance. It also invites an opportunity for the cross-disciplinary research.

Psychiatry is the most complex domain in Medical sciences. Psychiatric diseases are not directly measurable due to vague symptomatic presentations. Results of investigations and treat- ment are manually correlated with the course of morbidity and such correlations could lead to biased decision-making.

The onset of depression is often unrecognizable. It may originate from several non-psychiatric illnesses, for e.g., can- cers [2] or chronic joint pains [3] and so forth. It is often noticed that different diseases present with similar types of symptoms and vice versa. Also behind a set of symptoms there is a possibility of multiple diseases evident in case of depression with mania [4]. Therefore, the process of depression screening (DD) to its formal diagnosis (PD) is quite lengthy and much

Given these issues, the objective of this paper is to mathe- matically model the clinical decision making process in psychi- atry using Soft computing and not to develop a full-fledged expert tool. It is exclusively an application-based research in mental health and cross-disciplinary in nature. Unfortunately, the number of such cross-disciplinary research is small and hence, this is an attempt to add to the existing literature of ‘mental health-informatics’ research. The way existing methods are realized and implemented in a model is from the scratch and hence proposed to be new in the clinical study of depres- sion. However, this is a future scope and may be considered as the next step toward automating the depression diagnosis.

Rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 dis- cusses various applications of fuzzy set, fuzzy logic and neural network approaches in mental health research. Section 3 details the methodology of the study. Experimental results are shown and discussed in Section 4. Finally, Section 5 dis- cusses the key outcomes and concludes the paper.

In psychiatry, applications of soft computing techniques are more suitable as it can handle the issues, such as non- linearity, multidimensionality, and vagueness, compared to hard computing, such as probabilistic approaches. However, due to the lack of availability of the combined domain exper- tise (e.g., expertise in both psychiatry and computer science) the number of research attempts is less. Computer scientists find difficulties in understanding and modeling the disease pro- cesses, its representations, and evaluation. On the other hand, psychiatrists find it difficult to realize the merits of algorithms, its coding and necessary implementations. Despite such hin- drances, however, attempts have been made by the researchers since decades in screening and diagnosing psychiatric diseases using soft computing techniques. Some recent studies have been described in the following section.

In another study [12] a hierarchical decision-tree-based fuzzy model was proposed to screen and grade fifty cases of premenstrual syndrome (PMS), which falls under the cross- domain of gynecology and psychiatry. The authors used firing strength (FS) of fuzzy rules to evaluate the respective PMS grades. Rules with higher FS had been considered significant and had been used in designing the diagnostic rule base of PMS. The study concludes that appropriate rule base could be constructed to diagnose complex cross-domain diseases, which often lack standardized diagnostic rule sets.

Fuzzy set theory was applied in the classification of depres- sion [13]. The authors adopted Beck Depression Inventory (BDI)-II to capture a group of young depressives. On this data, the authors attempted FCM and probabilistic based classifica- tions (Wald’s and K-means) to classify the severity of depres- sion. After comparison, the study observed that FCM was the best technique. The authors concluded that FCM more accu-

ANN had been used to examine the correlation of recurrent suicide attempts and the overall self-harm history of Taiwanese soldiers [14]. They identified totally ten factors which might have influence on suicidal risks. Network training with these factors was conducted using the Radial basis function (RBF). The trained model showed about 82% sensitivity and 86% specificity.

The strength of RBF and a back propagation (BPNN) algorithm had been used to develop a decision support system (DSS) in assisting rural doctors to diagnose psychiatric ill- nesses [15,16]. The heart of the said system is the application of BPNN as the feature extraction algorithm. The authors con- cluded that the proposed DSS was able to diagnose psychiatric problems with 98.75% accuracy.

In a recent study, a group of researchers used a BPNN in classifying a set of real-world adult depression cases based on its severity/grade [17,18]. In order to do so, the authors at first collected fifteen symptoms of depression under four major constructs, such as ‘motivational’, ‘emotional’, ‘cognitive’, and ‘vegetative and physical’. Information about symptoms was then captured by a questionnaire. Answer to each question was then quantified and the corresponding grade was assigned as ‘mild’–‘moderate’–‘severe’ under a three-point scale. The information was then fed to the network for training (incre- mental mode). Finally the study concluded that by the BPNN approach the network was able to classify depression cases with 89% average accuracy.

Performance of a neuro-fuzzy model in predicting weight changes in chronic schizophrenic patients exposed to atypical or typical antipsychotics for more than a couple of years had been examined [19]. The authors used FuzzyTECH 5.54 soft- ware package to generate the rule base. The model was able to predict 93% of weight changes.

To differentiate between epileptic and non-epileptic events various fuzzy arithmetic operations have been investigated [20]. A total of 244 patients were studied using the NEF- CLASS (NEuro Fuzzy CLASSification) architecture with the Artificial Neural Network and Back propagation algorithm (ANNB). Finally they were able to detect the differences with a sensitivity of 85% sensitivity, while 95.65% was achieved by ANNB.

The paper aims to study a fuzzy-neural hybrid model to diag- nose the severity of real-world depression cases. It focuses on the overlapping areas of diagnosis, i.e., the DD and attempts to make more discrete diagnosis, i.e., the PD. The steps of the study are as follows,

Fuzzy-neural hybrid model development using Mamdani’s fuzzy logic controller [22] mapped onto a FFMNN [23], and it’s tuning with a BPNN algorithm [24]. It may be noted that while training and testing the controller, the sample is divided randomly into two parts – 214 (i.e. approximately 70% of the sample) for training and remain- ing 88 (i.e., approximately 30%) for testing the hybrid model using a 10-fold cross validation [25]. Sugeno’s con- troller has not been chosen because of difficulty involved in mapping of the output polynomial function with the clin- ical decision making.

Scores of fourteen symptoms of depression (see Table 1) have been considered in this study according to the DSM-IV-TR guidelines [26]. These symptoms denote independent factors. Corresponding grades of depression denote the dependent fac- tor. A group of specialist doctors (mean experience of 10.4 years) consisted of five senior psychiatrists assign weights [0,1] of each of these factors/symptoms and the grades (mild, moderate, and severe) of depression. The weighted symptoms are nothing but the reflection of the load of the disease. Such ‘symptom-grade’ relations have been established on the basis of the clinical experience and knowledge base of the psychiatrists.

Data of total 302 adult ‘psychotic depression’ cases have been collected from two hospital sources in India over the per- iod of eight months. The grades of these cases are known. For further validation of the model, a control group (no depres- sion) has been considered. Appropriate ethical measures have been taken for preserving data privacies, i.e., the information of subjects, doctors, and hospitals. Atypical symptoms, patients aged below 19 years and above 50 years have been excluded from the study to avoid accidental inclusion of child-

matrix (‘i’ varies from 1 to 302 and ‘j’ varies from 1 to 14), which is fed to the controller as the input. Among 302 total depression cases, 214 cases (i.e., 70%) are used for training the proposed hybrid system and the remaining 30% are kept for testing its performance. It is important to note that a 10- fold cross validation has been performed to partition training and test data.

As data are raw and secondary in nature (constructed by a group of medical doctors), it has been preprocessed by check- ing for noise, such as data redundancy, missing values etc. Finally data have been normalized [0,1] column-wise using the max–min normalization technique. Then, data reliability has been measured by computing Cronbach’s alpha (a) on the whole dataset using 95% confidence interval [27].

The study proposes and develops a fuzzy-neural hybrid approach in diagnosing the severity of depression. In doing so, Mamdani’s fuzzy logic controller (FLC) has been pro- posed. Asymmetric triangular membership function distribu- tions (TMFD) are considered for mapping inputs and the output, i.e., the symptoms and the grade of depression, respec- tively. Inputs and the output are arbitrarily assigned class labels – ‘mild (‘m’)’, ‘moderate (‘M’)’, and ‘severe (‘s’)’ with some numeric range. Its working steps are then mapped onto a FFMNN (see Fig. 2), where the first layer is the ‘input’ (I) layer; second layer represents hidden layer-1 (HL-1), which is

PCA measures eigenvectors and its eigenvalues of the cor- relation matrix. Table 2 shows the eigenvalues of all factors. According to the concept of PCA, factors of higher eigenval- ues are the principal components (PC) and are interesting to study. It may be noted that ‘S’ (Feeling sad), ‘P’ (Loss of plea-

It is important to note that ‘lij’ values and ‘FSjk’ values resemble the connection strengths between ‘I’ and ‘HL-1’and are denoted by ‘wij’ and that between ‘HL-2’ and ‘O’ layer are denoted by ‘vjk’. Throughout the nodal input–output pro- cessing, linear transfer functions have been considered. The developed model is then trained and tested with 214 and 88 real-world depression cases, respectively.

nia), ‘A’ (Loss of appetite), and ‘P1’ (Psychomotor agitation) are the seven latent factors with eigenvalues higher than 1.0 (see Table 2) and hence are taken into consideration as princi- pal components (PC). Therefore, the initial input vector space having 14-dimension initially has now been reduced to 7- dimension. It resembles the way psychiatrists extract the signif- icant symptoms from too many at the backdrop of the illness during DD. Fig. 3 plots the components based on the respec-

(s) (referring to the DD phase of clinical diagnosis, discussed in section I) and are represented into asymmetric TMFD (refer to Fig. 4). Such overlapping regions are the focus of this fuzzy- neural model that aims to differentiate it into ‘mild’, ‘moder- ate’ and ‘severe’ (i.e., the PD phase of the clinical diagnosis). A group of psychiatrists according to their experience assigned the range A Mamdani’s FLC is then developed and modeled into a FFMNN structure. There are a total of seven inputs, each with two possibilities one time. Hence, there are a total

It may be noted that a total of 38 rules (which is only 30% of the total fired rules) have FS P0.5. An ‘OR’ operation has then been performed to obtain the membership of the com- bined control (see Table 4). In the next step, firing areas (FA) of all fuzzy output rules for ‘mM’, ‘Ms’, and ‘s’ have been computed (refer to fig. 5).

been measured by comparing with the target depression grades (see Table 7). In case of 50 control data (i.e. normal popula- tion), none of the cases are misdiagnosed as ‘depression’. Hence, it is not shown as a table. The average accuracy of the hybrid controller is 95.50% (see Table 7), which is compa- rable to the other controllers shown in Table 8.

This paper proposes a neuro-fuzzy model consisting of Mam- dani’s technique mapped onto a feedforward backpropagation neural network. The aim is to model the manual process of clinical diagnosis of depression. On a sample of 302 real- world depression cases, the model has been trained and tested. The observations are as follows.

having firing strength >0.5 may be considered as ‘strong’ rules, which are ultimately required to develop the final rule base of the controller. With this technique, 98.27% rules, which are not so important, are pruned. Such pruning is important to reduce the complexity of the controller. Med- ical doctors also possess their own rule bases depending on their levels of experiences. This technique mimics the way medical doctors actually prune the number of unimportant

Future work: Expert tool development is the next step of any controller design. However, it is a time-taking process to achieve the required amount of standardization and user satis- faction. Keeping all these in mind, we propose that such a hybrid model could be implemented as a full-fledged expert system and given to the psychiatrists for its’ initial use. The authors are currently working in the Graphic User Interface (GUI) development and its standardization.

