Network reliability analysis problem is the center of many scientific productions. It consists of evaluating the all-terminal reliability of networks. Two classes have emerged; exact and approximate methods. The aim of this paper is to present an efficient exact method for enumerating minimal cuts (MCS) of R-networks. The algorithm proceeds by determining minimal paths set (MPS) and from which minimal cuts are generated by managing binary decision diagrams. The manipulation process consists of a series of transformations, reductions and filtering operations. The approach succeeds in the reduction of computation time and memory space and was applied for evaluating the reliability of a national radio communication network.

R-networks are particular graphs and could be either directed or undirected. “0” correspond to the failure mode and 1 to the operating mode, and nodes as links may fail randomly. R-networks are only used for determining the reliability of systems. A large literature relative to networks reliability evaluation have been discussed in many publications and concerns physical systems such as electric power systems, telecommunication networks, and traffic and transportation systems (Rebaiaia and Ait-Kadi, 2010; Hardi et al., 2007).

Generally, reliability engineers model the physical connectivity of system components using a network. Mathematically, a network is a graph G(U , E) in which the edges E represent the components (e.g. devices, computers, routers, etc.) and the nodes U represent the interconnections.

This paper presents an efficient technique for determining all MCS of a given directed or undirected graph network using an approach based on binary decision diagrams (BDD’s) representation. The first interest of BDDs is that they encode disjoints terms. This allows to enormously simplifying the probabilistic calculation as the Poincaré formula as it is reduced to its first term (For more details on the Poincaré formula, please see Rebaiaia, 2011). This is why this approach is so effective to perform exact probabilistic calculations. The algorithm proceeds in two stages. First action consists of determining MPS using a fast depth first search (DFS) algorithm. The second action consists of obtaining MCS by manipulating the reduced ordered BDD (ROBDD) of the MPS. The manipulation process consists of a series of transformations, reductions and filtering actions.

The paper is structured as follows. Section 2 presents some related preliminaries. Section 3 details the principle of BDD manipulations. Section 4 and section 5 give respectively the algorithm for generating MCS from ROBDD and its computational efficiency illustrated using some benchmark networks. In section 6, a

Experimental techniques have been applied to reduce reliability network expression, but they are not adequate for simplifying network Boolean expression. One of the efficient solutions has been introduced by Bryant, 1992 who was the first to encode the theorem of Shannon using a new interpretation formula called ITE for If Then Else, which is used to represent and manipulate logical formula as a binary decision diagrams. The implementation and manipulation of BDD algorithms is composed by three procedures, restrict, apply and ite. The problem with BDD representation despite their effectiveness is that, their exponential growing size due to a wrong order declaration between variables. To overcome partially this problem, Ruddell, 1993 used a dynamic programming algorithm to reduce the size of the BDD demonstrated that; improving the Variable Ordering of a BDD is NP-Complete. BDD principle has been used in many fields for simplifying Boolean expressions. Rauzy, 1993 applied first, BDDs for evaluating networks reliability. Recently several papers have been dedicated to ROBDD for reliability investigation as those of Hardy et al., 2007.

OBDD can be reduced to a ROBDD by repeatedly eliminating, any instances of duplicate and redundant nodes using a bottom-up graph traversing procedure. If two nodes are duplicates, one of them is removed and all of its incoming pointers are redirected to its duplicate. If a node is redundant, it is removed and all incoming pointers are redirected to its just one child.

As described by Locks and Wilson. 1992, an inverse polynomial to the path polynomial can be obtained by complementing the given polynomial and using De Morgen’s laws. If we transpose the idea of generating MCS by inversion as introduced by Locks and Wilson, 1992 and Shier and Whited, 1985, we can use the model generated by the graphical representation of BDD.

Consider the bridge network given in Fig.1.(a) and its corresponding ROBDD constructed from the MPS (Fig.2. (a)). The first step try to find the cutset by traversing the graph tree by tracing the arborescence from button to top in a reverse direction. The second step proceeds by removing from the branches cuts. In the third phase, the algorithm deletes all redundant cuts to build the MCS.

To illustrate the algorithms presented in this paper, we propose a real a case study problem of undirected regional radio communication network showed in Fig.4. Fundamental statements necessary to analyse the system are presented in (Rebaiaia, 2011). All the details on the architecture of the system, the model representation and the model simulation, and the reliability indices and how they have been generated of the individual system components can be found in Rebaiaia and Ait-Kadi, 2010, and Rebaiaia et al., 2012. Reliability indices consisting of failure rate, failure duration, fading duration, mean time between failure (MTBF), availability and other’s system information.

In the radio system, a zone is responsible for managing its own elements (sites, repeaters, subscribers, UHF-VHF and microwave carriers) interconnected using a Local Area Network (LAN). The LANs are interconnected though a high-speed transport network to form a Wide Area Network (WAN). The WAN allows user configuration information, call processing information, and audio to be conveyed throughout the system.

Once all the MCS are known, then the algorithm proceeds to calculate the network reliability using a novel procedure (see. Rebaiaia, 2011), and the determination of each component reliability uses different informations (e.g. the mean time between failures (MTBF)). The results of the calculus are shown in Table 1.

This paper presents an efficient algorithm for generating all minimal cuts of a given network. The algorithm is based essentially on the information taken from the computed table relative to a binary decision diagram representation. These BDDs have been first determined using the composition of minimal pathset. So indirectly, the minimal cutsets are scanned from minimal pathsets which use a particular pseudo-algorithm to be generated. The described method in this paper can be applied for relatively large systems. It is similar to those of Locks technique but its effectiveness is far better. We applied the algorithm’s program to different graphs as shown in Fig. 3, and we can testify that the time required for generating all cutsets proceeds in linear time. Also, a simple procedure has been used to determine the reliability of a large radio- communication and the results of the calculation are presented here in and in Rebaiaia, 2011.

