This study presents a new algorithm for detecting dual-tone multi-frequency (DTMF) signals. The discrete multi- frequency transform (DMFT) method with optimal phase was employed to reduce the DTMF detection computations. With the DMFT approach, the pass-band ripple is employed as a cost function, and the optimal phase can be obtained using the open-loop search method. Compared to the traditional discrete Fourier transform (DFT) approach, not only is a computational saving of 75% to 83% achieved, but spectrum efficiency is also maintained. These experimental results demonstrate the excellent performance of the DMFT method.

In a public switched telecommunications network (PSTN), dual-tone multi-frequency (DTMF) signaling is widely employed for analog telephone dialing, data entry, voicemail systems, and remote control of various consumer electronics. DTMF signaling is used to transfer digital numbers. The PSTN system also defines additional tones to indicate the status of the calling process.

Two cost functions, as shown in Fig 2(c) and defined below, were identified to determine the optimal phase θˆ . θˆ ={ min(gpr) | 0  θ  360 0 }, The gpr is the pass-band ripple, which is the frequency response range between frequency indices k and k + ( L – 1 ). gpr is also shown in Fig 2(c).

The DMFT method was proposed to improve DTMF detection computations. The computational requirements of the DFT method, Goertzel algorithm, and DMFT method are listed in Table 1. The computational savings provided by DMFT are superior to those of the traditional DFT and Goertzel approach. In general cases of DFT-based DTMF detection, the basis frequencies number approximately 4 to 6. Thus, using the DMFT approach, the computational saving is approximately 75% to 83%; this is a reasonably satisfactory result.

The DMFT method with an optimal phase was proposed to reduce DTMF detection computations. A computational saving of 75% to 83% was achieved without declination of spectrum efficiency. The results showed that the performance of the DMFT method was superior to that of the DFT and Goertzel approaches. In the future, the phase and gain of the basis frequency components of the DMFT approach can be controlled more precisely to further improve DTMF detection.

