The existing GO methodology algorithm is theoretical, and hard to solve with computer. In this paper, we research a new method to get the reliability of system based on GO methodology. According to some properties of the operators in GO chart, GO chart can be transformed into series structure, then the minimal path sets are induced based on Enumeration method from first operator to last one. It is very convenient for computer to calculate the system reliability with the new method based on minimal path sets. The case study indicates the method is suitable for practical engineering, which can be used to possess the quantitative analysis of complex GO methodology models.

The GO methodology is an available method of system reliability analysis. Different with some other modeling method, such as static FTA, it is a success-oriented one and mainly be used to solve the problem of systems with multiple states and time-sequential signals. This method was first introduced from Kaman Science Company of USA in the middle of 1960s, and had been used to analyze the safety and reliability of weapon system. In the early 1980s, Go methodology had got the further improvement and development.

In the early 1980s, Institute for Standardization of Nuclear Industry first introduced GO methodology in China. In recent years, GO methodology has developed rapidly in theory and practical method, such as the probability accumulation algorithm and probability quantitative analysis method with common cause failures. By far, GO methodology has been used to analyze or assess the reliability of many practical engineering systems, such as nuclear power plant power system, natural gas pipes system and aviation electronic equipment. Although GO methodology has many advantages, the existing algorithm is theoretical, and hard to solve with computer, which makes it difficult to apply and popularize in complex engineering systems. Therefore, the GO methodology for computer solving becomes the bottle neck to generalize the method [2].

The system reliability may also be determined using minimal path sets. A path is a set of components whose functioning ensures that the system functions. A minimal path is one in which all the components within the set must function for the system to function [6].

GO methodology has defined seventeen kinds of operators, denoted with the type of 1-17. In the GO methodology, every operator represent a specific component, the signal-flows represent connections between the operators. The operators represent specific function and the input and output signals have to obey the operation rules.

From the set of function operator, type 6, 7 and 8 operators have two input signals, when we deduce the minimal path sets by Enumeration method, first, put the second input signal in series with the main input signal. Then, delete the same operators between second input signal and main input signal. Then, getting a new chart where type 6, 7 and 8 operators have only one input signal. From Figure 1, we know type 1, 3, and 5 operators have only one input signal. These  be possessed.

In the set of logical operator, these three kinds of operator only represent the logical relationship among the signals. Generally, each logical operator has at least two or more than two input signals. When deduce the minimal path sets, we need processing the logical operators. If GO chart include the type 2 operator, according to the property of OR gate, add the operator OR gate and the operators after OR gate to N signals before OR gate. If GO chart include the type 10 operator, let N signals before AND gate become one signal, after it delete the same operators in these N signals. If GO chart include the type 11 operator, let the operators which

Water supply system as example has two states: the success and the failure. This system has one water source and two waterways, each way includes an electric pump, a check valve and two control valves which are in parallel and always closed. So every waterway has two water supply export, and the system have four water supply export. Electric pump on each waterway has its own power. Only the power state is success, the pump can work, two control valves in each waterway are controlled by own control signal. Only the control signal is success, the control valve can open. The successful state is that at least two water supply export successful. Figure 1 shows the water supply system principle diagram.

The GO methodology Model is easy established based on water supply system functional diagram. First, according to the function of water supply system components, corresponding type of operators represent specific components. For example, water source is the input of the system, which is represented by type 5 operator. Similarly, powers and drive signals are also represented by type 5 operator. The electric pump needs the control signal to operator normally, which is represented by type 6 operator. Here, the primary input signal is from water source, and the secondary control signal is the output of the power. Similarly, control valves must operate upon receiving the control signals, which are also represented by type 6 operator. The check valves are two states components, which we use operator 1.

of operator 6-7 based on GO chart. According to the figure 2, find that operator 5-5 and 1-4 are all connected with operator 6-7. Similarly, operator 5-5 and 1-4 are the input of operator 6-6, and in Figure 2, operator 6-6 is connected with operator 6-7. Operator 5- Operator 6-3 is connected with operator 6-6 and behind operator 6-6, we find operator 6-3 has two input signal 5-1 and 5-2. Figure 3 is the one of the minimal path of the water supply system.

In this paper, we propose a new method to calculate the reliability of GO methodology. According to logical relationship of the operators in GO chart, we transform GO chart into series model, then get the minimal path sets based on enumeration method from first operator to last one. This new algorithm is suitable for computer aided solving. The application of the case indicates the method can be used in practical engineering, which can efficiently deal with the quantitative analysis of complex GO methodology models.

