Abstract With the wide spread use of e-transactions in enterprises, information security risk management (ISRM) is becoming essential for establishing a safe environment for their activities. This paper is concerned with presenting a com- prehensive ISRM framework that enables the effective establishment of the tar- get safe environment. The framework has two structural dimensions; and two procedural dimensions. The structural dimensions include: ISRM ‘‘scope’’ and ISRM ‘‘assessment criteria’’, while the procedural dimensions include: ISRM ‘‘process’’ and ISRM ‘‘assessment tools’’. The framework uses the comprehen- sive STOPE (strategy, technology, organization, people, and environment) view for the ISRM scope; while its assessment criteria is considered to be open to var- ious standards. For the procedural dimensions, the framework uses the widely known six-sigma DMAIC (define, measure, analyze, improve, and control) cycle for the ISRM process; and it considers the use of various assessment tools. It is hoped that the framework would be widely used in the future as an open refer- ence for ISRM.

One of the essential functions of information technology (IT) governance is risk management, which aims at providing a safe environment for e-business and e- commerce. In support of this function, various IT organizations, concerned with standards have published different risk management methods. These methods have been and are being partially or fully adopted by enterprises using IT, and working in different fields, for identifying, analyzing, and minimizing risks for their IT activities.

This paper is concerned with introducing a comprehensive information security risk management (ISRM) framework for enterprises using IT. The structural scope of the framework is based on the STOPE (strategy, technology, organization, peo- ple, and environment) view which is becoming of increasing importance for struc- turing information security issues over its five distinct domains (Saleh et al., 2006, 2007, 2008; Esteves and Joseph, 2008); and the management process of the frame- work is associated with well known six sigma DMAIC (define, measure, analyze, improve, and control) cyclic phases (Pyzdek, 2003). In addition, the framework adds management criteria to its structural issues; and considers evaluation tools for its procedural phases. The framework also enables the integration and enhance- ment of the various available risk management methods and standards into its structural and procedural components. The paper describes the framework, and emphasizes its importance as a potential open reference for enterprise ISRM.

Microsoft, 2006; Mehari, 2007) and the rest presented by research projects (Kailay and Jarratt, 1995; Smith and Eloff, 2002; Robert and Rolf, 2003; Karabacak and Sogukpinar, 2005; Hoffanvik and Stolen, 2006; Mayer et al., 2007). Each of these methods has been developed to meet a particular need and hence has a different objectives, steps, structure, and level of application. The common goal of these methods is to prioritize and estimate the risk value and to suggest the most suitable mitigation plan to eliminate or minimize that risk to an acceptable level (Vorster and Labuschagne, 2005).

In spite of the increasing number of standard and commercial risk management methods, various reports, surveys, and related literature indicate that the diffusion of the current risk management methods, within organizations has been very lim- ited so far due to lack of awareness, high cost, need for expertise, and long process (NCC, 2000; DTI, 2002). In addition, the trust in these methods is very low due to the poor results, bulky confused reports and the narrow technological scope (Labushehagne and Eloff, 1998; Spears, 2006). Furthermore, the confused huge number of risk management methods (more than 200 now) create a problem to any organization willing to adopt one of these methods and the absent of an agreed reference benchmark or comparative framework for evaluating these meth- ods limit its practical use in assessing the enterprises information security risks (Vorster and Labuschagne, 2005; Bornman and Labuschagne, 2006; Syalim et al., 2009).

Labuschagne and Eloff (1998) argues that most of the available risk manage- ment methods have a scientific core that emerged from the engineering origins of computing. These traditional methods used to manage enterprises risk and gen- erally focused on the technology and this proposes technical solutions. The major- ity of these methods seldom consider human, organizational, strategic, or environmental factors. While technology is a necessary consideration, it is not the only element requiring recognition (Hang et al., 2008; Werlinger et al., 2009). In addition, the IT-centric approach to security risk analysis does not in- volve business users to the extent necessary to identify a comprehensive set of risks or to promote security awareness throughout the organization (Lategan and Solms, 2006). Nosworthy (2000) mentioned that in order to apply business conti- nuity measures in a consistent, manageable and cost effective manner an organi- zation-wide approach to a practical business continuity risk analysis should be adopted and applied to the business as a whole and not just the IT department. Recently, many authors suggest the need for a holistic information security risk management method that minimizes the several shortcomings of the traditional risk management methods (Niekerk and Labuschagne, 2006; Spears, 2006; Zucca- to, 2006; Anderson, 2007; Huang et al., 2008). The suggested method should be based on the standards and considers the special characteristics of information security domain and uses different techniques to combine the standard and profes- sional methods under a comprehensive and practical information security risk

The target ISRM framework has two main parts: one part is concerned with its structural view; while the other is associated with its procedural view. The struc- tural view has two dimensions: scope and criteria; while the procedural view also has two other dimensions: process and tools. The framework is described in the following, in terms of these four dimensions.

regards to ISRM, are considered to be its: assets, security challenges, and security controls. These are addressed in the following according to the STOPE-based scope. ‘‘ Asset management’’ is one of the main clauses of ISO 17799, and has two objectives: ‘‘responsibility of assets’’ and ‘‘information classification’’. ISO defines an asset ‘‘as anything that has value to the organization’’ (ISO/IEC 17799, 2005). This definition brings up the consideration of two types of assets: ‘‘tangible’’ and ‘‘intangible’’. Table 1 maps the tangible assets considered by different refer- ences to the five STOPE domains; this is a high-level mapping that can be refined into sub-levels of further details. The Table also considers intangible assets that

Security challenges can be viewed as negative coins of two faces: threats and vul- nerabilities. ISO defines threat as ‘‘a potential cause of an unwanted incident, which may result in harm to a system or organization’’; and it defines vulnerability as ‘‘a weakness of an asset or group of assets that can be exploited by one or more threats’’ (ISO/IEC 17799, 2005). Table 2 maps ISO threats and vulnerabilities to the five STOPE domains. With regards to threats, the Table marks them as either: delib- erate (D), accidental (A), or both (D&A).

required security controls, on the various STOPE domains, relative to cost-benefit analysis. For the controls considered, it may provide benchmarks to their accept- able levels. In general, the management criteria would be associated with the strat- egy and requirements of the enterprise considered.

Table 4 maps the processes of the key risk management methods, considered above, to the six-sigma cyclic phases of: ‘‘define, measure, analyze, improve, and control’’. This shows how the DMAIC process can accommodate these pro- cesses, providing a potential comprehensive risk management process for the fu- ture. This is enhanced further by giving the functions of each phase, in the process, as summarized in Table 5, and explained in the following.

and open manner. This does not only integrates the issues that have been consid- ered by other methods, but also permits other or emerging issues to be considered. The six-sigma ‘‘DMAIC process’’ of the framework allows it to accommodate the various processes of other ISRM methods in a one unified and widely accepted process. In addition, the framework respond to the need of using a ‘‘management criteria’’, and permits various criterion to be taken into account, including ISO information security controls, and considering pre-determined benchmarks. The framework also considers the use of ‘‘support tools’’ for performing the various phases of the process efficiently as is the case with other ISMR methods. The com- prehensive and flexible nature of the framework makes it a candidate to become an ‘‘open reference’’ for ISRM that can be widely used by enterprises seeking safe environment for their e-based business. The authors hope that the time to be taken toward the wide scale use of the framework will not be very long.

