Contingencies in power system caused oscillation in rotor angle which leads to power swing. In the case of power swing, distance relay is designed to block the operation to avoid wrong operation of relay. However, this blocking scheme proves to vulnerable as it could block the trip signals when a fault occurs during power swing. Hence, it is desired to develop the proper fault detection technique to avoid such circumstances. This paper presents a new fault detection technique during power swing based on S-Transform. To ascertain validity of the proposed scheme, it was verified with the IEEE 14 bus test system and simulations results show that the proposed technique can detect fault occurring during power swing.

Benmouyal et al. [3] and Su et al. [4] have tracked the power swing voltage center (PSCV) to detect a symmetrical fault during power swing. However, these methods require longer time delay thus might cause blocking relay would not reset. Mecharoui and Thomas in [5] developed the technique that can detect fault during fast power swing based on phase angle. However the technique proved to be problematical for high resistance fault. The work carried out in [6] has focused on detecting high resistance fault during power swing, but the symmetrical fault is not being considered in their studies.

[7] to detect fault quickly during power swing and it works for phase earth fault, two-phase earth fault and even three-phase earth fault. Another approach based on Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) is developed by Mahamedi [8]. Unfortunately both techniques required proper selection of threshold value especially for detecting high resistance fault.

Time-frequency analysis using wavelet transform (WT) has been introduced in [9] and [10] for identification of the power swing and symmetrical faults during power swings. However the additional tools need to be developed to find the proper wavelet coefficient. Abidin et al. [2] introduced the use of S- Transform to characterize the features of fault and power swing. This technique found to be problematical for detection of faults with resistance more than 50 Ω.

All of the techniques which have been reported are not able to operate properly during high resistance faults and/or symmetrical fault. In order to overcome such drawbacks, the new fault detection technique during power swing based on S-Transform features of bus voltage has been proposed. In order to ascertain validity of the proposed scheme, evaluation and simulation are conducted under IEEE 14 bus test system.

The system used to simulate all study cases presented in this paper is IEEE 14 bus test system as illustrated in Fig. 1, extracted from [12]. It consists of 5 generators, 3 transformers, 11 loads and 20 transmission lines. The simulation model of the test system is set up by using PSCAD/EMTDC tools.

From equation (6), a row of vector of length n, filled with smallest value of each of column in matrix of δ is obtained. Once the smallest value of each of column in matrix of δ is obtained, the largest value of elements in array can be further obtained. The two key parameters in the proposed fault detection scheme are symbolized by kref and kf, where kref represent the largest value in array of when no fault occurs, and kf represents the largest value in array of  in the event of fault occurs. Then, the criterion for the fault detection is defined as,

In this part, some case results are illustrated to test the effectiveness of the proposed fault detection technique during power swing. Fig. 3 shows the typical voltage waveform generated by the test system when a three phase fault occurred during power swing and the absolute S-Transform output. It is clearly observed there is significant feature between power swing and a three phase fault occurred during power swing.

This paper used criterion of ke to detect fault during power swing. The value of criterion ke is depending on the kf which represent the highest level of S-Transform output. The values of kf around the fault point are shown in Fig. 4. In this case, there is at least one point that ke > 1, which means a fault occurred during power swing.

A new fault detection technique for the distance relay during power swing has been presented in this paper. It make use of the utilization of S-Transform processing tool to process the distance relay input signals based on bus voltage to detect fault occurs during power swing. This technique is proven to detect different type of fault with different value of fault resistance.

