This paper deals with research in the area of a novel imaging approach of web documents based on semantic inclusion of textual and non-textual informations. The main idea was to create a robust method for relevant display results into search engine based on search by keywords or images. Thus, we proposed method called Semantic Inclusion of Images and Textual (SIIT) segments. The output SIIT method is short web document. It contains image and textual segments, which are semantic linked. Creation of short web document to possible three steps was divided. Firstly, the all images and textual segments from main content web document were extracted. Secondly, extraction images were analyzed in order to obtain of semantic description objects into image. Finally, linked images and textual segments using linguistic analysis.

and their textual comments available on the web. Mulendra Parag Joshi and Sam Liu in [2] described a technique for extracting text and images from a web document using the Document Object Model analysis and natural language processing. In the first phase, the article body from a Web document is extracted. Then, the semantic similarity based on NLP (Natural Language Processing) is used to find relevant images corresponding to the article. J. Pasternack and D. Roth [3] introduce maximum subsequence segmentation, method of global optimization over token-level local classifiers, and applied it to the domain of news websites.

L. P. Florence [4] described an image and text mining tool named TNT. This tool is based on Contextual Exploration and work on different points of view. This tool offers a reorganization of the text guided by the images and annotated segments that are associated.

Recently, the university research in the area of processing web pages for creation short web documents focuses on the analysis of text segments around images. Research in image processing is currently at a high level, would have been wrong not to use this fact to creation short web document. Our proposed method is based on existing systems, which are described in previous section. In this system we put the emphasis on the minimization or elimination of potential deficiencies (see Tab. 1). The proposed method allows an automatic processing of various components of web pages. The system architecture called Semantic Inclusion of Image using Textual segments is shown in Fig. 1. Automatic extraction takes place along two axes, one oriented towards the text and the other oriented image.

In practice we identifier element and simple character counter not work. The amount of Web documents in question contained multiple blocks with more than 500 characters. Dynamic sites is a long text strings used to create the drop-down menu or similar interactive blocks, from one point in the chain is presented as part of using JavaScript as moving text or list.

In this case is preferable to use a natural language description to distinguish the relevant text from the auxiliary strings. Instead of a single counter of characters or a word that has the same drawbacks, we chose counter full sentences. In natural language, we assume the characteristics of structure of sentences - each sentence is followed by a terminating punctuation character of the preceding sentence (period, question mark, exclamation mark) and a space.

After reading a text document, test the contents of each element of the number of sentences that rule. The relevant content will be such a text block that contains at least 5 sentences. Elements that hide the appropriate text with relevant content are also tested for the presence of images. We assume that the images associated with text can be found in these blocks. If confirmed their presence, their extraction algorithm ensures together with the text. To identify the main text in the form of a flowchart is shown in Fig. 2.

For comparison, the counter of characters was used. This part of the algorithm was implemented in the JAVA programming language. First, all spaces from the input document using counter were removed. Subsequently, all the characters of text in application were counted.

The proposed algorithm on selected sample of documents has been tested. The overall efficiency for text extraction was 88.99%. Extraction of the images depends on the identification of the main block of the document therefore follows the success of the state of text extraction.

In this section the extracted images were processed. The main goal of this step was obtained automatic semantic description of static images. This description is important for matching objects of web document. The overall procedure of automatic semantic description of image is shown in Fig. 1. The basic steps of automatic semantic description can be divided into the following steps:

Firstly, we loaded of extracted images and SVM model. In the next phase, we defined number of segments for segmentation images using K-means [6]. The extracted images from web pages contains only three segments (e.i. water, tree, sky, ...). For each input image we set three segments using K-Means. Next, we used

In the third phase, features from segments using SIFT descriptors was extracted. These descriptors by threshold 5 or 8 pixels have been modified. This threshold was selected on the basis of previous publications [7]. In the test image, the vector length than eight pixels is not obtained. For this reason, the threshold greater than eight will not be used.

In the following phase, we classify extraction of features using SVM models. Models contain 9 classes. Every extraction feature of segment was evaluated and description was allocated by using SVM model. In the last phase of our experimental part, description of image was assigned (shown in Fig. 3).

Finally, an algorithm for semantic inclusion of web objects was proposed. Semantic inclusion is based on description of extracted images. The textual segments of the web page are searched and extracted. The sentences, which contents identical words description are extracted into short web document. Then, the image with the sentences which have same index as the description were associated. The general block diagram for semantic inclusion is shown in Fig. 4.

In future work, a semantic map will be implemented. This map should help with more accurately description of non-textual information and improve accuracy of the animal’s description in the image. Based on the recognition efficiency of image objects, it could be assumed, that the presented classification is sufficient for evidence of animal presence in the vicinity of a road, and for the corridors build-up.

The work presented in the paper has been supported by the Slovak Science project Grant Agency, Project No.1/0705/13 "Image elements classification for semantic image description" and EUREKA project no. E! 6752 – DETECTGAME: R&D for Integrated Artificial Intelligent System for Detecting the Wildlife Migration.

