For the conventional truncated unscented Kalman filtering (TUKF) algorithm requires the measurement to be a bijective function, a novel improved truncated unscented Kalman filtering is proposed. In the proposed algorithm, we linearize the bijective measurements function based on the statistical linear regression (SLR) in order to obtain the only inverse function of the measurement function. It is a modified algorithm which extends the range of practical application of the filtering problems. Finally, the experiments show that the performance of the proposed algorithm is better than the unscented Kalman filter (UKF) and the quadrature Kalman filter (QKF). This approach can efficiently deal with this problem that measurement functions are not bijective.

UKF approximates the nonlinear distribution through deterministic sampling to capture the Gaussian variables with covariance and mean. The accuracy and stability is superior to EKF. UKF is increasingly concerned and has been widely used. The truncated Kalman filter (TKF) proposes a modified prior PDF in the Kalman filtering process, which improves the performance of Kalman filtering effectively. TUKF approximates the TKF when the measurements are informative. The main limitation of TUKF is that it requires the measurement function of the state be bijective. This paper modifies the limitations of TUKF algorithm using SLR for linearization of measurement functions. The simulations show that the computation of the presented algorithm is equivalent to other Gaussian approximation, but the filtering performance is better than other filtering method.

The outline of this paper is arranged as follows. In Section 2, the nonlinear model of Kalman filtering is presented. In Section 3, a novel improved truncated unscented Kalman filtering is present, including the principle and concrete steps of the algorithm. The experiment and analysis are provided in Section 4.

where wk ~ N (0,1), vk ~ N (0,5) . Data were produced using α  1, β  0,κ  2 .We compare the performance of the improved TUKF with UKF and QKF using Monte Carlo simulation with 100 runs. The estimation of the state using improved TUKF, UKF, QKF and the real state are present in Fig.1.

The proposed algorithm linearizes the measurement function using SLR based on TUKF for the nonlinear filtering. It can deal with the situation when the measurement is not bijective. On this condition the algorithm extends the range of application of the filter. Simulations show that in general, the improved TUKF performs better than UKF and QKF.

