The operating temperature of a commercial PV panel strongly affects the electric power output of the devices. The prediction of the operating temperature therefore plays a central role in the economic and energy assessment of PV systems. The authors propose a new implicit correlation that takes into account the standard weather variables but also the regimen of PV panel in terms of the proximity to the maximum power points. Data coming from an experimental set-up were processed by using the least squares technique. To validate the reliability of the correlation, a comparison between expected values and data from other common correlations were done. The results show that the regimen of the panel is strongly correlated with the operating temperature and the quality of the new correlation is generally very good.

This technology is founded on the photovoltaic (PV) effect, that exploits the properties of some semiconductor materials to convert solar radiation into electric energy. When sun light enters the PV cell, a part of the energy of the photons is absorbed by the semiconductor's atoms, which release electrons from the negative layer of the cell. By flowing through an external circuit, these electrons reach the positive layer and produce electricity. The power efficiency of PV is related to its “peak power”, which is the maximum power that the PV module is able to generate. The peak power of a PV cell is conventionally evaluated in the following “standard conditions”: irradiation of 1000 W/m2 (Gref) and cell temperature of 25°C (Tref). The typical power curve of a commercial PV module has always a single maximum and, in the above defined standard conditions, only about 15% of the incident solar energy is converted into electricity; the remaining part of the solar radiation is transformed into heat.

The operating temperature of the cell Tc is one of the most important parameter to determine the energy conversion efficiency of a PV panel; indeed, the efficiency of a PV device is a decreasing function of the Tc temperature. Obviously the performance of a PV module largely also depends on many other physical parameters such as the site latitude, the typical weather conditions, the panel tilt and azimuth angles, the air temperature, the wind speed, the temperature of the surrounding surfaces, the obstruction and shadow effects, the electrical load, etc. [6, 7].

To better evaluate the energy performance of a PV element it is necessary to know the thermal behaviour of the system to estimate accurately the heat flux across it; the heat transfer between the PV panel and the surrounding environment is driven by a global heat transfer coefficient, which describes the radiative and the convective exchange processes. In literature are available some empirical correlations to obtain the PV panel operating temperature. These correlations have been developed for common geometries and standard weather variables to facilitate the modelling design process of PV devices. From the mathematical point of view, the correlations for the PV operating temperature are either explicit in form, thus giving Tc directly, or in implicit form, i.e. they involve variables which themselves depend on Tc. In this last case, an iteration procedure is necessary for the relevant calculation. Most of the correlations usually include a reference state and the corresponding values of the pertinent variables [8, 9].

Indeed, the load defines the operating point on the I–V characteristic. For given values of irradiance, temperature and electrical load, the operating point can be identified by drawing on the I–V characteristic the lines of the different RL. In the Fig.1 it is possible to observe how the intersection of load line and the PV characteristic corresponds to the working point; with the same graphical method it is possible to identify the working point in terms of electric power (Fig.2).

As can be seen from Fig. 3 and Fig. 4 the points of maximum power of a generic PV panel can be well approximated by a more simple linear relation. If we take account of effects due to temperature, even the voltage pertaining the points of maximum power Vmpp can be derived with a linear relationship.

The experimental system was made up and situated on the top of the Department of Energy of Palermo University (Fig.5). It consists of two different silicon PV panels, a precision resistances set, a multimeter Fluke189/FVF2 and a Delta Ohm pyranometer mod. LP PYRA 02 AV, linked to an Advantech ADAM 6024 data acquisition module. A Davis Vantage PRO2 Plus Weather station was used to collect the measurements of air temperature and relative humidity, wind speed and direction, horizontal global solar irradiance and atmospheric pressure. The different values of RL were obtained by the parallel and/or series compositions of 3, 4 and 10 Ω precision resistances (Vishay RH250) with a tolerance of ±1% and a temperature coefficient of

In detail were installed two different panels: a 175 W poly-crystalline PV panel with a total area of 1.277 m2 (panel A) and a 180 W mono-crystalline PV panel with a total area of 1.16 m2 (panel B). The silicon temperature was measured using three thermocouples (type T, copper-constantan) installed into little holes

made in the PET (Polyethylene terephthalate) rear film of the panels, in order to improve the thermal contact with the cell silicon back face; averaged values of temperatures were used. All data were collected every 10 minutes and stored for the further calculations and comparisons. More details about the acquisition procedure is described in [7]. At different value of RL we recorded the values of:

From the database of data monitoring were extracted individual records characterized by a 0.95<V/Vmpp<1.05 from panel A. The correlation analysis between all data have confirmed the initial hypothesis, highlighting a strong correlation among the temperature reached by the panel during operation and the voltages ratio (Table.1).

In Fig.6 it is possible to see the graph of expected value of Tc versus the value obtained from the above correlation for the panel A. To better assess the reliability of the new proposed correlation, we compared also the monitored Tc values of the panel B, values that were not used to obtain the a, b and c parameters (Fig.7).

The results in Table 2 show that the new proposed correlation is characterized by a better MAE value respect other correlations already published in literature; in detail for the panel A the MAE is 2.11 and for panel B is 1.66. Probably the better results obtained by the proposed correlation are due to the classification of the operating regimens of the solar panel illustrated by the ratio V/Vmpp, which represents a novelty in the field.

Authors presented a novel implicit correlation to obtain the cell temperature from standard weather variables and working point of a PV panel. Assuming a linear relationship between the irradiation, the temperature and the relative voltage at maximum power, has been possible to characterize the operating regimen of the panel by the ratio of V/Vmpp (G, Tc). Following these hypotheses authors used a large database of monitored data coming from a two different PV systems to evaluate the parameters of a new implicit correlation depending of the ratio of V/Vmpp (G, Tc).

The value of the parameters used in the correlation were obtained by applying the technique of least squares. To assess the performance of the new procedure other correlations, widely used and available in the literature, were tested. The comparison of the results on two different panels were assessed by means of the MAE evaluated on several days data, The new correlation presents a significant improvement in terms of Mean Absolute Error respect other common correlations largely used.

