The foliar color pattern under the stress of nitrogen deficiency varies usually in a uniformly distributed way, so it seems reasonable to fabricate a detection index directly using the averaged value or any of the relative form of its color components. However, these color components are linearly correlated with each other, and the mineral contents don't have a precise metric description themselves, which makes the color modeling a very tough task. In this paper, a novel foliar color model of rubber trees is proposed to approach the detection index by combining the relative components with the absolute ones, taking full considerations of vagueness of nutritious description, for which a slope angle as a metric to evaluate the fitness of the color model is proposed. Our experimental results have substantiated this supposition.

In this paradigm, one needs to complete 2 stages of procedural treatment, i.e. the training stage and the detecting stage. At the training stage, we should at first take the sample pictures of the plants' leaves and extract the features of the foliar images, and then we should fabricate a model based on the relationship between the features and results of their agro-chemical analysis. Similarly, at the detecting stage, features of the foliar image should be extracted at first using machine vision techniques, and then the nitrogen content can be located within an acceptable range according to the formerly established index model.

On one hand, the color that we see is made of three basic components R, G, and B, which are not independent to each other. Consequently, an explicit generalized expression of a color using its components is not easy to find out. As we can refer to the results of the literatures already published like [1], [2], and [3], the foliar model fabricated in a way of linear combination can be illustrated in Fig.1.

Since the relationship between the foliar color and the nitrogen content was established with the help SPAD devices as stated in [3], there are a lot of literatures published to tackle with this issue. Unfortunately, these results seem not as accurate as to help make up an adaptive fertilizer recipe for prevention from nitrogen deficiency of rubber trees. Therefore, in this paper, we further our work from our previous results to derive a novel and more sophisticated foliar color model for this nutritious diagnosis.

What expression made of color components can be used as an index to locate the range the nitrogen may be in? There have been lots of endeavors to aim at the purpose. One direct way is to fabricate the color model using color components. Zhang et al [4] studied the linear regressive nitrogen content model of canola leaf color features, G/R-G/B or G/R, and found that the deviation error of the predicted value is less than 9% of the measured ones. Liu et al [5] tested and have shown that in different times, different color features have different correlation significance with cotton nitrogen content, and pointed out that R, G, G/B, R/B, G/(R+B), B/(R+G) may be used to predict the cotton nutrition status. However, the results are not satisfactory.

So, some scientists tried other ways of image processing. Scharpf and Lory [6] studied relations between the corn leaf color and its sidedress N need and demonstrated that corn leaf color can be used to predict sidedress N need, if the soil pixels have been removed from the image. Other researchers argued that color features can't be the only feature used to make up the index, other related features must be added. In [7], Mao et al proposed that the extracted features should include the color and textures of the leaf, and they developed a method to distinguish different nutrient deficiency using a fuzzy K-Nearest Neighbor classifier. This method depends on the choice of a fuzzy member function, by comparing the value of which this classification process can be completed. The merits of this technique are that, the nutrient contents include almost all mineral elements important for tomato growth, and the features to be used are nearly complete, including color, shape and textures; its drawback is only providing qualitative results, therefore requiring other tools to assist for further fertilizer guidance.

In addition, other factors such as shape distortion and color distortion due to imaging systematic errors are considered. Many researchers have proposed the calibration methods. Noh et al in 2005 proposed a calibration method for real-time crop nitrogen deficiency detection on the sprayer during fertilization operations [8]. They use four flat paints with colors of Flagstone, Dover Gray, Knight's Armors and Black Magic to obtain four levels of known reflectance. The calibration is completed with a linear regression model of which the parameters can be computed dynamically.

To deal with this issue, two important factors must be taken into considerations. One factor is that the nitrogen status can't be described with a single index, but actually a reasonable range; the other factor is that, color model may behave similarly. Under this circumstance, the ideal relationship between the color model and the nitrogen status may be illustrated as in Fig.2.

Therefore, in this paper, we don't try to simulate this relation with a single-line mathematical function as we did in [2] and [3]. On the contrary, we present a color model with regional area fitness, and compare the slopes of their boundaries. From Fig.2, we can find out, the best slope angle is approximately 135 , bigger or smaller will only decrease the performance of the modeling. This can be used as our objective evaluation criteria.

In order to test the truth of our analysis or supposition, we selected about 49 samples from our collections of 195 rubber leaves under the conditions that the K and P contents should all be set to “abundance” so that we don't have to care about the interactions among those mineral nutrients. That's to say, we can only consider the changing rules of nitrogen content of rubber trees. All the tests are undertaken with Matlab 6.5.

To compare with the ideal relationship illustrated in Fig.2, it is easy to evaluate the slope angle for each case as shown in Fig.3, and Fig.4. We notice that in Fig.3, G/B or R/B has relatively better features, which is also substantiated in our previous work like [2] and [3]. Furthermore in Fig.4, our newly proposed index has a

Since the nitrogen status itself can't be described accurately with a linear index, it's reasonable to find an index of some kind that can be stated vaguely, which will then be measured with another index to sketch the relationship between the color model and the nitrogen status. Here and now, in this paper, we find out that the slope angle of the distribution regions can be used for this measurement whether the color model is appropriate for the nitrogen content diagnosis. The experimental results have shown that with this measurement some better color model can be recognized very conveniently, so is our newly proposed color model.

