Restructuring of Electricity supply industry in roduced many issues such as transmission pricing, transmission loss allocation and congestion management. Many methodologies and algorithms were proposed for addressing these issues. In this paper a graph theory based method is proposed which involves Matrices methodology for the transmission usage, loss and transmission reliability margin (TRM) allocation for generators and demands. This method provides loss and TRM allocation in a direct way because all the computation is previously done for usage allocation. The proposed method is simple and easy to implement in a large power system. Further it is less compu ational because it requires matrix inversion only a single time. A comparison between proposed method and already exiting methods also presents. Results are shown for the sample 6 bus system and IEEE 14 bus system.

congestion management etc. arises due to this transformation. As transmission sector is the backbone of power sector, the question of transmission pricing is great importance. The main aim of any transmission pricing methodology is to introduce a fair competition in the electricity sector and provide efficient economic signals.

Similarly many different loss allocation schemes have been proposed for transmission loss allocation. The existing transmission loss allocation methods may be classified into prorata method, marginal methods, power flow tracing-based methods, and circuit theory based methods [1]. A usage based transmission loss allocation method is proposed in [7]. In [8] method based on circuit theory and the concept of orthogonal projection for pool based electricity market is proposed.

This paper presents a model of usage, loss and transmission reliability margin allocation based on the concept of the matrices methodology. In the proposed method modified Kirchhoff matrix is developed for usage allocation. After that loss allocation matrix is formed for transmission loss allocation to loads and generators. Further by incorporation (n-1) reliability criteria, maximum flow of transmission lines is calculated. After that the TRM of every transmission line is allocated to generators by using modified Kirchhoff matrix.

This matrix is the basis of the proposed methodology. Authors construct a power flow matrix from the Newton Raphson load flow. This matrix gives a complete overview of power flows in the system. It is formed between nodes of the system. Diagonal elements give net flows at nodes and off diagonal elements give the actual flows and counter flows in the system. The proposed matrix is defined as follows: active power in branch i-j from bus 1 to bus J as Pij(> O) nd total inflow at bus 1 as PTi

The procedure for power flow tracing is same as preaented in [6]. Power flow allocated to generators from the lines flow as shown in Eq. (5). It is assumed that a ag: a1 (23:77) split in the transmission usage occurs between generators and demand. For example the generator share situated as bus s to the line s-t is given by

Hence eq. (5) gives the generators share in lines flows. Similarly, the usage allocated to a load for the use of all lines can be defined by using a1 instead of ag. For calculating the loads shares in line flows and generated power same procedure is followed.

For transmission loss allocations to generator consider Eq. (5). In this equation line flows Pst is replaced by the transmission Loss in lines which is coming from the elements of the Kirchhoff loss matrix. Hence transmission losses of line s-t allocated to generator located at bus i is given by:

The sample 6 bus power system is used to illustrate the proposed methodology. The summation of powers extracted by the load buses from all the generators equals the total load demand similarly the addition of powers contributed by the generator buses to all the demands equals the total generation power. Table 1 gives the generators contributions to losses and line flows.Total system losses occurred in the system is 0.084697 pu from which 23% is allocated to generators and 77% is allocated to demands.

From the equations (10) and (11) TRM are allocated to generators and loads respectively. From the table 2 it is observed that the generators which contribute more power to line flows, have more TRM allocated. Also table 3 provides a comparison between TRM allocated by proposed method and method presented in [11].

The proposed method is also applied on IEEE 14 bus system [12]. Authors assume that cost of the line is proportional to the length of the line. After this the share of each generator (load) in load (generator) and line flows is calculated. Fig 2 gives generators shares to various line flows respectively. Y axis shows the usage allocation in MW and x axis provide no of lines.

Fig 3 presents the transmission loss allocation between generators respectively. Total system losses occur in IEEE 14 Bus system is 15.87016 MW. 23% of total losses i.e. 3.70114478 MW is allocated to generators and 77% i.e. 12.16902 is allocated to loads.

In the proposed work authors presents a combined methodology for the transmission usage, loss and reliability margin allocation which is based on the matrices methodology. This method is simple and easy to implement in large power system. Furthermore transmission loss and reliability margin allocation by this method is direct because all the calculation previously done for usage allocation. This method requires less

calculation as compared to other methods such as Topological generator distribution factors proposed by Bialek [4] because matrix inversion is required only one time. Further TRM allocation by this method is more as compare to method presented in [11]. Results are shown for the sample 6 bus system and IEEE 14 bus system.

