Spam and spam filters are contrarious components of a complex interdependent social ecosystem. Traditional spam filtering techniques or systems are usually designed and deployed individually that neglect the distributed and bulk characteristics of spam. This paper proposes a reputation-based collaborative anti-spam approach. This approach, adopting fingerprinting technique, evaluating reporters’ trust, achieved better performance and robustness than the state-of-the-art in comparison experiments on several known email corpora.

There is frequent and close mutual relationship between people and data on web, and such relationship offers some lawbreakers potential opportunity to send all kinds of spam information including spam email, spam poster, spam invitation, spam advertisement, etc. According to characteristic of spam information, there are many definitions about spam in practice, such as unsolicited and unwanted email, indiscriminate bulk email sent directly or indirectly, unsolicited commercial email, etc. In addition to wasting recipients' time to deal with spam, spam also eats up a lot of network bandwidth. Moreover, spam occupies vast resources of computation and storage and it is profoundly annoying clients and email service providers (ESP).

can be categorized into two types: anti-spam techniques based on EK (expert knowledge) and anti-spam techniques based on ML (machine learning). Anti-spam techniques based on EK contain rule-based filtering, such as whitelists, blacklists, challenge-response, enhanced protocol, etc. There have been many spam filters based on EK, such as Sender Policy Framework (SPF) [1], Sender-ID [2], and Domain Keys Identified Mail (DKIM) [3], etc. Anti-spam techniques based on ML contain probability-based filtering, linear classifiers, Rocchio method, nearest neighbor method, logic-based method, data compression model, etc.

Most of recent spam systems are individual spam filters which are designed and deployed individually according to various clients and ESPs. Considering the distributed and bulk characteristics of spam, the better schema of anti-spam system should be implemented depend on multi-client or multi-ESP collaboration and has individuals sharing their judgments of legitimate email and spam. This paper proposes a reputation-based collaborative anti-spam approach, adopting fingerprinting technique, evaluating reporters’ trust, and it outperformed the state-of-the-art in comparison experiments on several known email corpora.

Fingerprint and fingerprint recognition are concepts originated from the area of biometric authenticate identity. After applying them in the area of information retrieval, fingerprint is defined as short tag for large object. Fingerprinting technique has the advantage that it can identify the same or similar duplicated documents with small partial variations by calculating and matching their hash values.

In spam ecosystem, spam information has produced massive waste to network resource and person’s time, such as mass data transmission on internet and mass storage on servers. On the other hand, spam information has produced serious damage to web information safety and personal information privacy. Fingerprinting schema is derived from traditional research domain of data encryption and digital signature. This schema adopts certain encryption hash arithmetic by which to generate shorter content digests for large original messages in order to take the place of original information storage and transmission. Fingerprint functions may be seen as high-performance hash functions and there are two kinds of known algorithms: Rabin's algorithm and cryptographic hash functions [4].

Collaborative spam filtering is more efficient strategy to content filtering where rather than employing someone or certain computers to attract and analyze spam, and rather than having different user train himself individual filters. The whole collaborative community works together with shared spam knowledge. Therefore a collaborative spam filter needs certain shared and efficient database where storing different user’s judgment about which is spam and which not. At present there has been some collaborative spam filters on web, such as DCC, Vipul's Razor, Pyzor, Cloudmark, etc[5, 6, 7]. These methods have similar strategy of using shared knowledge. The DCC (Distributed Checksum Clearinghouse) system detects spam by computing spam checksums and querying the same checksums in a database of checksums. Vipul's Razor system filters out known spam by maintaining a catalogue server of signatures feedback by spam receivers. Pyzor and Cloudmark have different protocols of spam filtering similar to Vipul's Razor.

Spammers often control some puppet PCs and engaged servers to send mass spam. It is the purpose of spam filters to recognize these machines and senders. Spam filtering is the automatic processing to distinguish spam from non-spam between incoming emails according to specified criteria. After the steps of fingerprinting based on MIME-Division, and indicator score calculation based on reputation evaluation, we can generate a diverter for spam and non-spam as shown in Figure 2.

