It is a powerful and useful means for signal analyzing and processing, which decomposes a 2D image into four independent sub-bands, namely LL (approximate component details), HL (horizontal component de- tails), LH (vertical component details) and HH (diagonal component details) [5]. An image can be transformed repeatedly by DWT to get multi-scale wavelet decomposition, so as to make it have multiplied approximations and details. The highest coefficient in low-resolution band LL of DWT denotes the most information. The DWT has the char- acteristics of multi-resolution and multi-layering, and accords with the human vision system. It has certain advantages in improving the imperceptibility of watermark. The formula of DWT can be expressed as follows:

SVD, as an effective algebraic feature extraction method in linear algebra, has been widely used in the fields of data dimensionality reduction algorithm, recommendation system, natural language pro- cessing and so on. This mainly origin from its good properties, such as good stability. When one image is subject to small disturbance, the singular value of it will not change greatly. In many digital water- marking schemes based on SVD, most watermark information is embedded in a cover image built on a new matrix of singular values.

The main focus of this paper is to propose a robust and secure watermarking scheme based on the new blend of DWT and SVD in FRFT domain. It provides an alternative for more secure watermarking embedding technology. In the field of image watermarking based on FRFT, the transformation order of FRFT can be used as a secret key in the process of embedding and extracting watermark information.

The organizational structure of the rest of our paper is as follows. We introduce the fundamental theories in Section 2. Section 3 gives more details of our proposed watermarking scheme. In Section 4, the exper- imental results and analysis are presented in detail, and the advantages of the proposed scheme compared with other existing schemes are given. Finally, Section 5 summarizes this paper and draws conclusions.

mation can be restored from the transformed image after FRFT with the same transformation order of (p1, p2). If we have no correct trans- formation order, the original image feature information is not obtained correctly. The transformation order of FRFT (p1, p2) can be used as a key for image encryption. Therefore, the proposed scheme based on the

The robustness of the algorithm is the ability of the watermarked image to against various attacks, mainly including image processing and geometric transformation. NC and BER between the original watermark and the extracted watermark are two widely common means to estimate the quality of extraction watermark. They measure the difference be- tween the extracted watermark image and the original watermark image. The larger the NC value, the smaller the BER value will be. It indicates the extracted watermark image is more similar to the original watermark image; otherwise, the extracted watermark image is less similar to the original watermark image. The NC is expressed as follows (17):

0.02) and corresponding to Zhou [46] except the Gaussian noise (m = 0, v = 0.03) and Pepper and salt noise (d = 0.02). More importantly, our proposed scheme has more obvious and outstanding advantages in anti-geometric attacks. We also calculate the values of NC against geo- metric attacks and compare them with the other watermarking schemes.

