purposes with instruction and references. Good decisions on what design to document, invoking season, styles preferred and process surrounding cataloguing are important. Therefore, targeting mar- ket interest involves segmental solutions. It encourages direct mar- keting and provides focus to all design marketing activities. Data mining can be used to improve targeting by selecting which people to contact, figuring out what design, when to offer and to whom it should be offered.

In today’s competitive business environment, a typical fashion catalogue contains exploding dataset as shown in Fig. 1. This con- tains very large image data of designs that requires classifications. For proper guidance, categorization of the designs, fabrics, brand and color combination are needed for better returns in marketing, investments and in order to enhance business management in strategizing and delving into other new designs [16].

A typical fashion business environment is considered. The design consideration requires that a fashion designer should nor- mally have automated catalogue. Customers’ classifications were based on three classes of objects: original, combine and new designs. There are also the ready or initial designs with the design- ers, called original in this case. In combined design, two or more designs from the catalogue can also be coupled to create/obtain new design. A customer may also come up with his own entirely new design.

Different fashion dresses were collected from Jumia Nigeria. The dataset contains 1000 customers’ records. The data comprises of customer ID, name, gender, preferred color, fabric, style, brand, and code. Due to some missing attributes from the 1000 data, 938 were used. The dataset was randomly categorized using six attributes: color, style, brand, fabric type, size and price. The first four are classified as major while size and price were considered

Customers in this category chooses dresses from the fashion designer initial catalogue, negotiate with the fashion designer and choose from his existing database. The dresses are represented with a name called ‘original design’ which symbolizes the fashion designers initial designs. In Fig. 2, a mutual relationship is estab- lished between this user and the designer.

Customers in this category choose from two or more different original designs to make up entirely new design. They either choose original top with different original design of skirt and or combine part of the designs. Any adjustment or addition to the original design is considered as a combined design by the designer because a new design product will emerge from the existing designs.

Fig. 3 shows a fashion design business scenario where three set of customers are identified as customers X, Y, and Z. A Designer- Analyst-Customer relationship is presented where the analyst stands as the middleman between the designer and the customer. In some cases, the analyst could also be the designer. An analyst, in this case, is considered as the vendor who sells dresses and to whom payments are made. The analyst has an automated docu- mentation of his stock by categories of designers, styles, color, brand, size; and as expected, prices are given by these different cadres. A Customer orders for dress, whether original, combined or new. He pays for his dress and receives the dress from the ana-

the number of data is less than the number of clusters then we assign each data as the mean vector of the cluster. Therefore, each mean vector will have a cluster number. However, if the number of data is bigger than the number of clusters, for each data, we cal- culate the distance to all mean vector and obtain the minimum dis- tance. Thus, the data is said to belong to the cluster that has minimum distance from this data [19,2,31].

developed in Java with every chosen design coded with a unique identifier. The coding was done to differentiate between the three designs with x, y, and z for each design of original, combined and new, respectively using ZeroR as the classifier rule. Euclidean dis- tance was used for the determination of centroid on which the clustering was based. Each object was based on minimum Eucli- dean distance. Out of the six attributes of the dataset, four (color, style, size and price) were found to be mainly constraints for cate- gorizing the dataset, while brand and fabric could not be distinc- tively classified. Fig. 4 shows the identified fashion attributes where a compilation of the six attributes are presented in their

together in Eq. (4). Let the dimension of the matrix X be l(c × d) as cluster [19,31]. In order to get the SSE, the error is squared and sum given by Eq. (2), algorithm 1 describes the generation of new xi.

created styles were made to update design catalogue automati- cally. We classify the original designs and assign new designs from different combinations to a set of predefined classes of the com- bined designs on the basis of the available training designs. From Fig. 5, new designs either originated from a combination or modi- fication of predefined designs.

Algorithm 1 classifies a new design x by searching in the train- ing set for the k nearest designs called neighbours to x according to the distance metric in Eq. (1). Then, x is assigned to the most patro- nised designs (common class) determined by calculating the per- centage patronage on designs of the retrieved k nearest neighbours. Ties are settled using single nearest neighbour of the color, style, fabric type, and brand noting, the error rates. We place k points, that is, the initial group centroids, into the space repre- sented by the objects that are being clustered and assign each object to the group that has the closest centroid. When all objects have been assigned, the position of k centroids is re-calculated. This procedure is repeated until the centroids no longer change or move. By this, clusters are constructed until all of them contain items that belong to only a particular class. This resulted in the separation of the objects into groups from which the metric to be minimized is calculated. The result is then combined severally and a dynamic upgrade forming a new dataset of designs is obtained.

Color is always a baseline in fashion attraction, which could fos- ter customer’s interest and fashion design choice making. We therefore compared how color could be a main factor on price, size and style of designs. The goal of these experiments is to study the effects of color and color combinations on customers’ choices of designs and the impact on sales. Fig. 6 shows a classifier result when color and prices effect were examined.

Fig. 6 shows what happens when color was compared to price. Clearly, the increase in price influences the decision of color by customers. In Fig. 6, it is shown that color, especially the scarce ones, is a factor that determines what price a particular dress is sold. To this end, customers choose dresses with lesser prices even though it may not be their color of choice. Hence, more customers chose red, multi-color and black because they are less costly and probably as a result of easy combination with other colors. This is depicted in the bottom left corner of Fig. 6 where the clusters form around lower cost colors.

To validate our classifier, we studied the root mean square error, the Ignore Class Unknown Instance (ICUI) and the Receiver Operator Characteristics (ROC) area curve measures. In Table 1, we illustrate the correlation of colors with price and size; and the results clearly show that the correlations between the variables are not significant. Due to diverse input variations, correlation for style, fabric type and brand could not be examined. But when color and size, color and price were examined, negative relationships were observed between the variables. While we could not establish

distinguish the effect of style, size, and color on designs’ sales. The result in Table 2 describes the effect of the three attributes on sales. The ROC region likewise test for the level of precision among the three attributes, which shows high performance in rela- tion to sales.

Next, we evaluate the accuracy of the clustering decision on fashion design based on new, combine and original design by com- paring the results achieved by the SAk-means, SVM, and Bayes methods. Using the optimal parameter values obtained on the training datasets, the accuracy was examined using independent test datasets. The experimental results on datasets is given in Table 3. From the results in Table 3, it can be observed that SAk- means applied on the dataset improves the accuracy of the cluster- ing decision-making. Except for the combined design where SAk- means and Bayes method have no significance performance mea- sure. Regarding the SVM method, results on combined and original designs showed no significance; whereas, better results on cluster- ing decision are obtained from Bayes and particularly, the pro- posed SAk-means methods.

between the variables are in opposite directions. This reveals that as color and size change, price increases or decreases. Therefore, the relationship between color and price, size and price lie on opposite directions as shown in Fig. 6 and this is clearly seen in Fig. 7b.

Table 1 shows the error values on color, size, and price. The rel- ative absolute error (RAE) and root relative squared error (RRSE) is very high for the three attributes. The root mean squared ratio (RMSR) measures the average magnitude of the errors. The RMSR gives a relatively high weight to expensive errors, which makes the RMSE most useful because of vast errors that are particularly undesirable. The Mean absolute error (MAE) delineates the direct score and this implies that individual differences are weighted similarly on the average. Out of 1000 instances, 62 were ignored, which implies 938 instances were classified in all.

(a) shows the relationship between style and color. It can be clearly seen that 54% of customers preferred combined designs because they have full customization control over the design, while 31% of the customers shows preference for new designs by the fashion designer, because new designs are produced based on the acquired data from the original designs. However, 15% of the customers pre- ferred the original called old designs. This could be attributed to the obsoleteness of the designs. From Fig. 7, it was found that more customers’ preferred combined designs than other two designs.

Fig. 7a also shows that style is a major factor on any color choices. Consequently, design style should be given a major prior- ity during fabric consideration. This would address the challenge of not getting the proper designs invoke by continuous dynamic updating of the dataset of new creative designs as it unfolds from the system. From Fig. 8, a fashion designer could deduce what color and color combinations would attract customers’ interest. Black, multi colors, blue and white are seen in this case to be of highest interest. Fig. 8 shows that black color dominates the fashion world market, hence design should not only be based on the style but commercial success implications.

A mechanism for commercial success in fashion design has been proposed in this paper. Here, economy was considered as a major liberation in the fashion world by analyzing six fashion attributes, which includes style, color, fabric, brand, price and size. The data- set of 1000 customers’ records used were categorized as original, combined and new designs using k-means algorithm to extract common attributes that would foster better business bargains. The dataset of the designs was first ranked for hidden patterns. Then, SAk-means was used to classify the original designs and assign new designs from different combinations to a set of prede- fined classes of the original designs on the basis of the available training designs. This helps in clustering of heterogeneous designs into a number of more homogeneous sub-designs categorized with the six attributes. New designs emanated either from a combina- tion or modification of the highest chosen designs.

The SAk-means is a system of automatic creation of new designs as a result of the combinations of frequently chosen designs. The new designs automatically replaced the old original designs. In addition, this study also builds on the fact that fashion companies need to maintain balance between artistic and economic consider- ations. From the study, it was found that in order to get more cus- tomers patronizing designers, the style and color combinations are considered important as these revealed the level of projective cre- ativity in fashion design. Hence, the study revealed that more cus- tomers would likely patronize fashion designers primarily because of the style and color combinations as creativity is projected through these combinations.

During the study, the computations were a little limited with the number of data analyzed. When the data is increased, the result is expected to be more precise. However, immediate next research steps should be to explore other criteria that would foster fashion business development.

