This paper presents a generalised SVPWM technique –named Nearest Three Vector and Selected Three Vector – (NSTV) to control DC-link imbalances in the three-level NPC-MLI, which is one of the main drawbacks. The proposed scheme is a result of the blend of the techniques Nearest Three Vector (NTV) and Selected Three Vector (STV). This scheme can maintain DC-link voltage within a specified tolerance value with any modulation index or a wide range of load variation. The results of the proposed scheme exhibits DC-link voltage variation within 0.25% which well below the acceptable limit. The scheme guarantees to achieve voltage balancing without any additional control. The benefits of the proposed solution over existing schemes are verified through the MATLAB simulation and tested for the proto type MLI designed with the novel SVPWM implemented in FPGA- SPARTEN III.

The neutral point balance can be achieved by using an algorithm to switch the inverter with proper switching states such that the DC-link balancing is achieved. Josep Pou et .al have used stationary feed forward SVPWM for D.C-link balancing, in which the duty cycle calculations involved are more complex. A new modulation approach for complete control of DC-link balancing in 3-level 3-phase NPC VSI has been proposed based on the virtual vector concept, which guarantees the balancing of DC-link voltage for any load over the full modulation range (Jian-Yong ZHENG et.al, 2010). However this method has only been implemented using carrier based PWM which involves the calculation of angles and trigonometric ratios. A complete control has been obtained in the 3-level 3-phase NPC inverter (Amit Kumar Gupta et.al, 2007). This scheme fully dependants on modulation index and reference vector angle.

In this paper, a novel SVPWM Nearest Three Vector and Selected Three Vector (NSTV) strategy is proposed. The crux of the scheme is ingenious usage of Nearest Three Vector (NTV) and the Selected Three Vector (STV) to bring the DC-link voltage fluctuations below the tolerated value. The presented solution is capable of eliminating the low frequency dc-link capacitor voltage oscillations and guarantees balancing of dc-link voltage in 3-level NPC-MLI over the full range of modulation (Modulation index > 0.5). The improvement in npf through proposed SVPWM is much pronounced for higher modulation range than the lower. The scheme is simulated and conceptual feasibility is thoroughly understood using MATLAB software. Later the strategy is coded, synthesized and downloaded in FPGA- SPARTEN III.

The SVPWM treats sinusoidal voltage as constant amplitude vector rotating at constant frequency with reference voltage vector V*, defined by V*=|V*|*ejwt, rotates around the centre of the space vector (SVM) diagram at an angular frequency ω=2πfsys (e.g.fsys=50 Hz).The 3-phase 3-level space vector diagram illustrated in Fig.2. The rotating reference vector V* lies in any of the sector inside that 4 sub-triangles are available. The three vectors of the corresponding triangle can be used to synthesise the sampled reference voltage vector.

DC-link imbalance is mainly due to medium vectors, because the phase currents are not zero in those vectors. Due to the existing phase currents, capacitor balance cannot be achieved. The capacitor can be balanced by proper utilization of the short, zero and large vectors without medium vectors (du Toit Mouton.H et .al, 2002).

When the reference V* lies in the ∆2, it can be synthesized by using the nearest vectors VM,VSI, and VS2, which is termed as NTV scheme. Similarly the reference V* can lies in any of the triangles ∆2-∆4 and it is synthesized by using the corresponding nearest vectors. The triangle where the reference vector is located can be identified by ∆j by the general implementation of the SVM scheme. Once the triangle identification was done then that particular triangle is treated as sector of a virtual 2-level inverter and the suitable vertex of the triangle can be taken as the zero vector. The tip of the reference vector with respect to shifted vector is represented as (Va, Vβ). The duty ratios are

The equations (4)-(6) can be applicable for any triangle. When the control lies within the ∆2, the vectors VSI VMI and VS2 are switched with redundant states.The states(110),(10-1),(100),(00-1), (10-1),(0-1-1) are used with the duty ratios δS1+, δS2- , δM1 , δS2+ and δS1- . Here, δS1+ + δS1- =δS1 & δS2+ + δS2- = δS2. So, by controlling duty cycles δS1 & δS2, the npf can be controlled (Amit Kumar Gupta et.al, 2007;J.H.seo )

(i) The reference V* makes an angle less than 30o with the a- plane, if the tip of the reference V* lies within the triangles ∆b or ∆c.Then the reference point is divided in the ratio 2:1. The V* is Va+√3Vβ<2 then the point lies in ∆b. On the other hand if the reference point is Va+√3Vβ<2 then V* lies in the ∆c. Case (ii) The reference V* makes an angle greater than 30 o with the a- plane, if the tip of the reference point is within the triangles ∆e or ∆d, then similar to the case.1 the triangle can be identified. For example the reference point lies in the ∆b, if both the inequalities a<300 and Va+√3Vβ<2 are satisfied. Based on the region duty cycle is calculated

Fig.6 Simulation result in Matlab 11.b for 3-level inverter with SVM based NTV scheme with Modulation Index = 0.907, f = 50Hz, C1= C2= 100µF (a) DC link capacitor voltages Vc1 &Vc2 for NVT –SVM Scheme , npf 2 %(b ) DC link capacitor voltages Vc1 &Vc2 for Proposed NSVT –SVM scheme

The SVM modulator duty-ratio information is calculated and pulse is generated through FPGA. The NTV and STV switching sequences are mapped by using the 2D- look up table. The algorithm is tested experimentally on a 3-level NPC laboratory prototype inverter with 200V DC-link, two 100µF capacitor, 5kHZ switching frequency fed 1 HP squirrel cage 3 phase induction motor open loop v/f control drive. The corroborating experimental results are captured using 6 channels YOKOGAWA digital signal oscilloscope (DSO). Fig.7(a)and Fig.7(b) shows the output voltage of the inverter, npf (0.25 %) and THD for the proposed NSTV scheme. Note this Experimental npf value is little differs from simulation platform result for the same system parameters; because of real capacitors will not have the same discharging in nature

Fig. 7(a). Experimental results for i [15 A/div], Vc1 and Vc2 [100 V/div], output voltage v [150 V/div], and V = 200V, m = 0.907, f = 50Hz, C1 = C2 = 100µF 7(b) THD spectrum for proposed NTV-SV PWM, f = 5 kHz

Fig.8 depicts the percentage npf verus modulation index for different schemes.For the modulation index (0<m<0.5),the NTV scheme is medalist in reducing the npf problem. If the modulation index is beyond 0.5, due to the participation of medium vector the npf increases and hence the NTV scheme is not preferable.Therefore for the modulation index (m≥0.5), the STV scheme is used to limit the npf.

A novel SVPWM modulation approach for control the DC-link voltage in the 3-phase 3-level NPC VSI is presented. The proposed NSTV scheme maintains the DC-link imbalance within a specified tolerance value. The balancing of the DC-link voltage is achieved irrespective of load condition and over the full range of inverter output voltage. Thus, the proposed NSTV scheme limits the DC-link imbalance value to 0.25%, which is well below the IEEE standard requirement of 1% (Nomura S et .al, 2005). The scheme significantly reduces the size of the dc-link capacitors.

