Under the visual simulation, some cases often are happened such as an armored vehicle penetrating or penetrating through other entities. However, the various existed bounding box models can’t resolve this trouble well. A bounding box method is introduced, the collision test concerning the box have been performed analysis under translation and rotation for an armored vehicle. In order to resolve the trouble existed, the author provides the method of dynamic collision detection in this paper, and set up the dynamic collision detection models for an armored vehicle accordingly. Utilizing OpenGVS through VC++ to create simulation. At the last, feasibility of those models are tested and verified by the contrast tests from simulation results.

complex geometric object approximately, and then to approximate the object’s geometric model as closely as possible by constructing tree structure until its geometric characteristics are almost fully obtained, and the collision detection process can also be accelerated through the pre-treatment process (bounding box) [2, 3]. This method can handle the collision detection problem of static entities well. However, it often appears such phenomena as armored vehicles penetrating or penetrating through other entities in a virtual scene, especially in high-speed motion in the wild. In order to solve this problem, the authors put forward a method of dynamic collision detection for armored vehicle.

In a virtual scene, the entity is given certain speed, with which the location of the entity at each frame is computed; then the graphics engine is refreshed at a speed no more than 30ms per frame; different locations are set up for the entity at each refreshing so that the entity is in motion visually. Collision detection is conducted through the bounding box; if the motion speed is slow, the ground object can be detected before the entity reaches it, and thus not penetrated (as in Fig. 1a); otherwise if the motion speed is fast, the ground object may be penetrated by the entity when the latter is at the location at time i+1 (as in Fig. 1b), creating such a distortion phenomenon.

In the figure, assume that the studied moving entity is a regular cuboid; against its exterior surface is a bounding box for collision detection. For the purpose of study, overlooking observation is conducted. The solid line represents the entity; the dotted line represents the face of the bounding box, perpendicular to the ground surface.

The motion pattern of a moving object is relatively complex; so the motion process of the entity is simplified for the sake of the study. The following study mainly concerns rigid entities. First, the collision detection is carried out when the entity is in translation on horizontal ground; then the collision detection of the entity in fixed-axis rotation is analyzed. Because complex motion of entities can all be reduced to the combination of these two basic motions [4].

Translation is the most common movement in engineering and life, and is also the simplest movement [4]. Therefore, to study the motion of an entity in a virtual scene should also start from the study of translation. In translation, an entity can move in a straight line or along a curved path. But in a virtual scene, the motion of the entity is embodied by the change in its location at each frame. The location of the entity at the next frame is only associated with its location and speed at the current frame; so the translation between two frames can be regarded as linear motion.

To avoid such a phenomenon, the dynamic collision detection model is thus introduced (see Fig. 2). At time i, the boundary of the entity’s static collision detection model is extended by Li , and the bounding box becomes one with the space encircled by the dotted line. Through this bounding box, the collision with the

Model verification is conducted and completed by contrast test. First, a wheeled vehicle is used as the rigid entity in the visual scene; then the static bounding box and dynamic bounding box are used to carry out collision detection: passing the same location (relative to the same reference) in the visual scene at the same speed, the entity is made stop when each model detects the ground object; the locations of the entity are observed and the results are compared; the result of evaluation is finalized after a number of experiments. Fig. 5 and Fig. 6 show one contrast test.

It can be seen from the above experiment results that the head of armored vehicle in Fig. 5 penetrates the ground object at time ti+1; while the head of armored vehicle in Fig. 6 stops at the outside of the ground object.

In this paper, a dynamic collision detection method is put forward for the distortion phenomenon of armored vehicle penetrating the ground object in visual scenes, and a dynamic collision detection model is constructed. The model is verified to be of good detection effect of collision after simulation and a number of contrast tests, and thus capable of solving the problem mentioned above. The shortcoming of this model is its failure to incorporate the specific shape of armored vehicle in the model, which will be considered in future studies.

