The single wind farm short-term power forecast could be modeled using physical approach (Feng S., et al., 2010). Wind speed of wind farm is forecasted based on numerical weather prediction (NWP), at the same time the energy transferring model is constructed taking into account the influence of surface roughness, topography, and wake effects on wind energy capturing.

Analyze the correlation between each wind farm output and power of the entire grid, then select wind farms with high correlation to the entire grid and high forecast accuracy as representative farms. Calculating the weight coefficient of each representative wind farm using statistical method, and derive the regional wind power forecast using weighted summation of representative wind farms power forecasts. The diagram of the forecast is shown in Fig.1.

There are 41 wind farms integrated into the grid with the capacity of 4187MW, until Jun. 2012. The wind power is mainly concentrated in two regions, which are ZJK and CD region, with the capacity of 2935MW and 1088MW separately. There are 26 wind farms, with the capacity of 2652MW, have implemented the Wind Power Forecast System more than 6 months. In this paper, we have certified the grid scale forecast method based on these data. The time resolution of the NWP data is 5min. The wind power data was acquired from SCADA per second, and then was processed into the 5min data, for the consistency with NWP data.

In order to realize the grid scale forecasting, representative farms and the weight coefficients must be determined firstly. The wind power data and forecast result of the 26 wind farms, which have the wind power forecast system, were analyzed. As shown in Fig.2, the wind farms strongly correlate (RGF>0.75) to the wind power output of the whole grid are mainly concentrated in ZJK region. In this paper, the representative farms was selected from the strongly correlated farms, in addition with good forecasting performance (RMSE<30% and MAE<25%) is also indispensable. The list of representative farms is shown in Tab.1.

Based on the measured and forecasted wind power data, started from Jan. and ended at Mar. 2011, the RGF and RMSE of each representative farm was calculated and shown in Tab.1, and then the weight coefficient can be acquired according to the formula (1).

Based on the data of grid scale and single farms, started from Jan. and ended at Mar. 2011, the weight coefficients were calculated. And the maximum wind output of the whole grid (CapT) was fixed on, that is 2687MW. The forecast result for grid scale can be achieved according to the formula (2).

The experiment result indicates the feasibility and effectiveness of the method presented in this paper. The forecast accuracy of grid scale is always better than single farms, due to the regional smooth effect. And the grid scale forecasting accuracy meets the application demands of projects and far ahead of the demands of industrial standard.

