Deep neural network (DNN) is a framework of deep learning. It is a neural network with at least one hidden layer. Similar to shallow neural networks, deep neural networks can also provide modeling for complex nonlinear systems, but the extra layers provide a higher level of abstraction for the model, thus improving the ability of the model. A deep neural network is a discriminant model that can be trained using a back propagation algorithm.

The whole rock composition data used in this paper to train Deep Neural Network (DNN) models are extracted from basalt data down- loaded from the GEOROC Geochemical Data website http://georoc. mpch-mainz.gwdg.de/georoc/. The training sets and prediction sets of deep neural network model and random forest model are consistent.

In this paper, ROC curves were made based on the prediction results of random forest model and deep neural network model. The AUC area of the random forest model was 0.978 and that of the deep neural network model was 0.838. According to the AUC area, the random forest model had high accuracy(Fig. 7 and Table .1).

In this paper, the above 5043 basalt samples (27 elements for each sample) are trained, and the training accuracy calculation adopts the cross-validation method, that is, the training data is divided into K groups (K-Fold), and each subset data is verified once set, and the rest of K-1 subsets of data are used as training sets, so that K models will be obtained. The K models are evaluated in the validation set respectively, and the final error MSE (Mean Squared Error) is added and averaged to obtain the cross-validation error. In this paper, K is set as 5, and the training accuracy of the random forest model reaches 81%. Model training converges faster, as shown in Fig. 8.

(-), Th (-), U (-). It can be seen that the positive and negative component loading values of the geochemical elements in the rift tectonic setting are similar to those of the island arc tectonic setting, but the degree is different. The training results of these models show that different ele- ments play different roles in the process of judging the tectonic envi- ronment of basalt. For example, Nb is an important element in distinguishing the tectonic settings of island arc and rift valley (Figs. 10 and 11).

The number of decision trees in the random forest classification method used in this paper is set as 200. The final vote of the decision tree is to select the category with the highest average probability. The pre- dicted probability of each sample class represents the probability of each sample classification in the random forest. After establishing the training model based on random forest algorithm, this paper collects the forecast samples from the references and the forecast results are as follows (Table 1): (1) 6 forecast samples in the Dongwuqi area of Inner Mongolia; all the forecast results are island arcs, and most predicted probabilities are distributed between 0.65 and 0.995. (2) 11 prediction samples in Keyouzhongqi area of Inner Mongolia; all the prediction re- sults are island arcs, and the prediction probability is between 0.83 and

1. (3) 14 prediction samples in the Beishan area in the southern section of the Central Asian Orogenic Belt; all the prediction results are island arcs, and the prediction probability is between 0.84 and 1. The total forecast results are shown in Table 1.

In recent years, scholars have made a lot of progress and achieve- ments in the research on the evolution of the Xingmeng orogenic belt. However, the evolution of geological structures has become extremely complex in the Xingmeng orogenic belt, due to the possible influence of the superposition and transformation of the Paleo-Asian Ocean, the Mongolian-Okhotsk Ocean and the Paleo-Pacific tectonic domain. Among them, the most controversial issue is the time limit for the closure of the Paleo-Asian Ocean. There are mainly two different views. The first view is that the Paleo-Asian Ocean developed two branches, the south and the north. The north branch subducted NW from the Early Paleozoic to the Late Carboniferous, and then closed gradually; the southern branch developed bidirectional subduction from the Early Paleozoic to the end of the Late Paleozoic and finally closed. (Liu et al.,

2017). Some scholars believe that the Paleo-Asian Ocean developed continuously from south to north subduction to the end of the early Triassic and finally formed the Sauron - Sylamulun suture belt (Liu et al., 2006; Xiao et al., 2003; Xiao et al., 2009; Xiao et al., 2015). Although there are disputes over the subduction model, both views show that a trench - arc - basin system existed in the Paleo-Asian Ocean during the Carboniferous period.

during this period, and entered the orogenic belt stage; that is, it was in an extensional tectonic environment (He and Shao, 1983; Shao, 1989; Tang, 1990; Shao, 1991; Tang, 1992; Xu et al., 2014; Zhao et al., 2015; Zhao et al., 2016; Zhao et al., 2017). In the newly compiled 1:5000000 International Geological Map of Asia, Ren Jishun et al. Ren Jishun proposed that the Carboniferous Permian volcanic rocks in Central Asia were formed in an extensional rift environment rather than an island arc environment. Therefore, the key to the above debate is whether the ocean was closed, and whether there was still subduction during the

used to train 27 major and trace elements in 5367 basalt samples from island arc tectonic environments and 1187 from continental rift valleys in GEOROC geochemical data. Based on the training model thirty-one basic rock samples from four regions of the Central Asian Orogenic Belt and the Xingmeng Orogenic Belt were used for prediction. Among them, the prediction results in the Dongwuqi area and Keyouzhongqi area of Inner Mongolia show that the island arc probability is relatively high and relatively concentrated, which clearly indicates that these basic rocks have a high probability of forming in the island arc envi- ronment. The Beishan area in southern section of Central Asian orogenic belt also shows a high and uniform island arc probability, indicating that the subduction is probably not over yet, and it is also in the tectonic environment of the island arc. The age of the samples in this paper spans

the early and late Carboniferous period, and the region spans the Xingmeng orogenic belt and the southern section of the Central Asian orogenic belt. This temporal and spatial distribution indicates that there was still extensive subduction in the Paleo-Asian Ocean during the Carboniferous period. Therefore, the results of this paper support the view that oceanic subduction existed in the Paleo-Asian Carboniferous. This is also supported by the following two aspects: 1. More and more research results have confirmed the existence of Carboniferous- Early Permian ophiolite (Xiao et al., 2009), indicating that the Paleo-Asian Ocean still existed in the Carboniferous to Early Permian (Early Mid- dle Permian); 2. The pattern of the late Carboniferous adakite in the Erlian-Hegenshan suture zone indicates that the Paleo-Asian Oceanic Carboniferous-Early Permian was in the process of oceanic subduction and extinction characterized by intra-ocean subduction (Wang et al., 2021).

the eastern segment is relatively late (Xu et al., 2019). The research in this paper has important implications for the subduction age and in- tensity of the eastern and western segments. The predicted area is from west to east, from the Beishan area in the southern part of the Central Asian Orogenic Belt to the Dongwuqi area in Inner Mongolia. and the island arc probability has a downward trend from the early Carbonif- erous to the Late Carboniferous. The island arc probability mainly re- flects the degree of fluid participation in the source area, while the magma source area of continental rift basalt often has less fluid partic- ipation. Therefore, the magmatism in the Beishan area of the southern part of the Central Asian orogenic belt in the Early Carboniferous may have formed in the heyday of subduction, while the Xingmeng orogenic belt in the Late Carboniferous may have been in the late subduction stage to the collision or even the early rifting stage. This temporal and spatial evolution shows that the subduction of the Paleo-Asian Ocean is different from west to east.

settings, and the island arcs probabilities of most of the predicted sam- ples are all between 0.65 and 1. Therefore, it is inferred that the Carboniferous Xingmeng orogenic belt was formed in an active conti- nental margin environment and belongs to the island arc tectonic setting.

Machine learning approaches reduce biases caused by human subjectivity by automatically searching for relationships in large scale Spaces. The results show that the random forest model can obtain tec- tonic setting information, and the random forest model can also demonstrate the potential application value of machine learning methods in processing high-dimensional geochemical data. In addition, the random forest model can capture key characteristic attributes in the classification process, making models interpretable and helping us to understand geological processes.

