A search strategy is applied to keep the search results within the scope of the SLR. In this study, the initial search was performed using a string with four keywords. The search string was (“cattle” AND “iden- tification”) AND (“machine learning” OR “deep learning”). Some articles were extracted from the search results, and the title, abstract, and author-specified keywords were read to find the synonyms for the basic search keywords. For “cattle”, synonyms considered were “cow” and “livestock”. For “identification”, synonyms considered were “recog- nition” and “detection”. The keywords “neural network”, “image pro- cessing” and “vision” were added with “machine learning” and “deep learning” as similar terms. Thus, the general search string was (“cattle” OR “cow*” OR “livestock”) AND (“identification” OR “recognition” OR “detection”) AND (“machine learning” OR “deep learning” OR “neural

This study reduced some keywords from the search string for the Science Direct database as the maximum Boolean connectors (AND/ OR) for this database is eight. Since the Scopus database yielded many articles with the general search string, the search results were reduced by putting two different keywords together. In this SLR, we did not limit the publication year during the search. After performing the above search strings, a total of 731 articles were retrieved.

The selection criteria are used to identify the studies that can answer the research questions. In this study, inclusion and exclusion criteria were defined based on the research questions. The search results from all databases were recorded on a spreadsheet for scrutiny using the in- clusion and exclusion criteria. A study was selected for the SLR when the inclusion criteria were true but the exclusion criteria were false. The ex- clusion criteria were: (1) publication is not related to ML or DL for cattle identification, (2) publication is a survey or review paper, (3) publica- tion is not written in English. The inclusion criteria were that the publi- cation must be applied to either the ML and/or DL approaches for cattle identification.

To address the research questions, each selected article was read in full and the necessary data elements were extracted from it. A spread- sheet was prepared to store all the extracted data for the selected articles. The spreadsheet columns represent the different data elements of the studies, and the rows represent the articles reviewed for the SLR. In the spreadsheet, each article is summarised by research goal, dataset, feature used, featured extraction, model, location, publishing year, performance evaluation metrics and challenges. The extracted data are then classified according to the research questions. The summarised results of this SLR are reported in Section 4.

an important role in allowing cattle farmers to implement individual animal management techniques. Individual identification also under- pins genetic improvement, disease management, biosecurity, and sup- ply chain management. Fig. 2 shows the three major types of cattle identification methods – ear tag-based methods, DNA-based methods, and visual features-based methods.

notches is used to identify individual cattle. Ear notching has potential welfare implications, and other identification methods are more welfare friendly (Noonan et al., 1994). The ear notching method applies only to a limited number of cattle on a farm. Thus, it is not used to identify indi- vidual cattle on large-sized farms.

Ear tagging is a livestock identification method (Awad, 2016) that is widely used to provide individual cattle identification. It is quick to im- plement and features a low-cost identification system. An ear tag can be made of metal or plastic with bar codes, letters or numbers, and the tags can vary in size and colour. But ear tags can fall out, resulting in lost in- dividual identification (Wang et al., 2010). In addition, ear tags risk damage, can be duplicated, and are susceptible to fraudulent manipula- tion. Lost tags do not allow for the long-term recognition of individual animals (Fosgate et al., 2006). These limitations led to the development of electronic identification devices (EIDs).

Passive radio frequency identification devices (RFID) are commonly used for individual identification and tracking in livestock farming (Ruiz- Garcia and Lunadei, 2011). The architecture of the RFID device includes an RFID tag, a communication channel, a tag reader, a server, and an RFID back-end. These devices use radio waves to transmit livestock data as a unique code made up ofa sequence of numbers. However, skilled peo- ple are needed to set up and manage the RFID system. Additionally, it has some limitations in terms of security, including tag-content changes and a high possibility of system spoofing (Roberts, 2006).

production management, and health monitoring. However, these methods are expensive in terms of both time and cost. DNA-based iden- tification methods are used for specific applications, such as determin- ing genetic linkages for genetic improvement programs. Using DNA for routine identification is not cost effective as it is a very time- consuming process to get unique DNA identifiers to identify individual animals (Kumar and Singh, 2020). Gallinat et al. (2013) introduced a DNA-based identification model for bovine casein gene variants. This study used four casein genes that were sequenced in a total of 319 animals.

The body coat pattern and face are unique features for identifying in- dividual cattle (Kumar and Singh, 2020). With the recent advent of ML and DL methods, facial and body coat patterns have been widely used for cattle identification (Arslan et al., 2014; Andrew et al., 2016; Yang et al., 2019). For the ML models, the features are extracted from the face or body images and then fed into the models for identification. DL models have powerful feature extraction abilities for cattle identifica- tion without pre-specifying any features (Kumar et al., 2018a; Andrew et al., 2017).

In recent times, automatic cattle identification has gained popularity among researchers using ML and DL methods. The traditional methods cannot handle large datasets, and the accuracy of these methods is poor relative to ML and DL methods (Kumar and Singh, 2020). In this SLR, ML and DL based approaches for cattle identification are considered for dis- cussion as the other methods are out of scope in this study.

(1) ML based papers and (2) DL based papers. The figure indicates that the number of published papers based on ML was higher than for DL based papers before 2018. This result indicates that the application of ML techniques dominated cattle identification in livestock farm man- agement before DL approaches began gaining in popularity. Based on our survey report, the number of ML based papers for cattle identifica- tion published annually has been greater than the number of DL based papers since 2018. In addition, the figure shows that the researchers have emphasised DL models for cattle identification in recent years. This is mainly because of the higher accuracy of DL models on large datasets (Mahmud et al., 2021)

The distribution of journals and conferences for the selected papers is presented in Fig. 4. The figure indicates that IEEE Conferences, ACM Conference Proceedings, and the Computer and Electronics in Agricul- ture journal are the three top outlets that published the highest number of automatic cattle identification papers. The other three outlets, Biosystems Engineering, Advances in Intelligent Systems and Comput- ing, and Springer Conferences, published more than two papers in this sector.

Fig. 5 shows a Sankey diagram for the country-wise overall summary of the selected papers in terms of dataset types and approaches used in cattle identification. This SLR reports that China published the highest number of papers (14) for cattle identification, followed by Egypt (7), India (6), and Japan (5). Most of the reviewed papers use image-based datasets (40 times) for cattle identification. Most of the video-based datasets are used in DL based papers. As this study only considers ML and DL based papers for the review, we have found 17 papers that use ML models and 38 papers that use DL models for cattle identification. The papers are divided into three groups based on the study goal(s):

(i) only identification (34), (ii) only detection (10), and (iii) both detec- tion and identification (11). The cattle identification is the process of identifying individual cattle using ML and DL approaches. In Fig. 5, it is noticeable that all the ML based papers are only for identification pur- poses, as the classical ML algorithms are only used for classification problems. The cattle detection system allows us to detect the cattle for individual identification, monitoring, and counting. It can implemented only by DL approaches.

Classical ML approaches perform well for cattle identification in live- stock farming. Table 2 presents a summary of the ML based papers. The summary includes the best model, dataset, used feature, feature extrac- tion method, and performance for automatic cattle identification. In this SLR, many ML based papers used more than one ML approach. In those cases, the performance of the best model is reported in Table 2. Based on our review, most of the ML based papers used the image dataset. The images were used to form the training and testing dataset for cattle identification. About 70% of the papers used the cattle muzzle print as a feature because of its unique patterns.

To address research question one (RQ1), ML models were analysed and listed in Table 3. As shown in the table, the top three most used ML models are SVM, KNN, and ANN. They are also the best models found in the most reviewed studies as shown in Table 2. Fig. 6 provides a timeline of the ML models used for the first time for cattle identifica- tion as per the reviewed papers. The figure indicates that SVM and KNN have been used since 2014 for cattle identification. ML models such as ANN and decision tree (DT) started to be used for cattle identi- fication in 2017, whereas random forest (RF) and logistic regression (LR) started in 2018. The most used classical ML algorithms are briefly explained below.

SVM (Joachims, 1998) is a widely used algorithm for cattle identifi- cation. It is a technique that uses a hyperplane to classify different groups that separate the classes by maximising their marginal distance in high dimensional feature space (Joachims, 1998). The marginal dis- tance is the gap between the hyperplane and its nearest data points for the two classes. The dataset follows the condition that each data point belongs to only one of the two classes.

KNN (Cover and Hart, 1967) is a simple and older machine learning classification algorithm. In KNN classification, the nearest neighbours are the data samples with minimum distance between the feature space and the new data sample. The ‘K’ is the number of closest neighbours considered for voting to classify a new sample. A class label provided for most ‘K’ nearest neighbours forms the training data and is defined as a predicted class for the new data sample. The different classification outcomes can generate different ‘K’ values for the same sample example. ANNs (McCulloch and Pitts, 1943; Rumelhart et al., 1986) are machine learning algorithms developed based on the function of

neural parts of the human brain. The neurons of the human brain are connected using multiple axon junctions. Thus, they form a graph-like architecture. The links among neurons help to receive, process, and store information. Similarly, an ANN algorithm can be presented as a network of interconnected nodes. According to the inter-connectivity, one node’s output becomes the input of another node. A group of nodes forms a matrix, which is called a layer. An ANN can be repre- sented by input, output, and hidden layers. The nodes and their connec- tions have a weight that is used to adjust the signal strength which can be increased or decreased through repeated training. ANNs can classify the test data based on the training and subsequent adjustment of weights for nodes and their connections.

et al., 2016; Schilling et al., 2018; Li et al., 2017; Awad and Hassaballah, 2019; Kumar et al., 2017b; Zaoralek et al., 2016); Ahmed et al., 2015; Tharwat et al., 2014a, 2014b; Hu et al., 2020; Kumar et al., 2018a; Achour

related to DL. The papers are divided into three groups: identification and detection, identification only, and detection only. The groups are generated after analysing the extracted information from the reviewed papers according to the study goal. The goal of the papers from the iden- tification and detection category is to first detect the cattle using DL de- tection models and then classify the individual cattle using DL classification models. The only identification-related papers proposed automatic individual cattle identification systems using DL approaches. The only detection category papers developed cattle detection systems using DL detection algorithms. Table 4 includes the dataset attributes, used features, feature extraction method, DL models for detection and identification, and performance of the models. It is observed that many DL based papers use cattle images as a dataset that is divided into training and testing sets. Based on our survey data, the cattle images for the head, muzzle print, and full body in terms of top and side view are widely used for detection and identification systems. Most of the DL based studies use the cattle body coat pattern as a feature because DL approaches have powerful feature extraction and image representation abilities.

top three identification models are the convolutional neural network (CNN), residual network (ResNet) and Inception models. Cattle detection models are listed in Table 6. You Only Look Once (YOLO) and Faster R-CNN are the top two detection models used in the reviewed papers. In Fig. 7, we have created a matrix plot that shows the combination of de- tection and identification models used for cattle identification. The result shows that the YOLO detection model is used the most with the CNN identification model. It is also observed that ResNet and VGG are used as

identification models where they are combined with three different de- tection models (i.e., YOLO, Faster R-CNN and Mask R-CNN). Fig. 8 shows a timeline of the DL identification and detection models that were used for the first time for cattle identification in the reviewed papers. It is ob- served that DL based classification models were first used for cattle iden- tification in 2015, whereas the detection models were used from 2019. Based on our survey, CNN and LeNet are the first DL models used for cattle identification, as they are the oldest models in DL techniques. Short descriptions of the frequently used DL models are given below.

This SLR found that YOLO (Redmon et al., 2016) is the most used de- tection algorithm for cattle detection problems. It is a popular and well- performing object detection model. The YOLO algorithm follows the re- gression model, and it predicts classes and bounding boxes for the full object in one run of the algorithm. It has several versions, including YOLO, YOLO-V2, and YOLO-V3. The localisation accuracy was improved in YOLO-V2 by adding batch normalisation to the convolutional layers. Additionally, it increased the image resolution and used anchor boxes to predict bounding boxes (Redmon and Farhadi, 2017). In YOLO-V3 (Redmon and Farhadi, 2018), the authors increased the convolutional layers to 106 and built residual blocks and applied the skip connections technique to improve the object detection performance.

The region-based CNN (R-CNN) (Girshick et al., 2014) is another powerful object detection model that is part of the family of CNN models. R-CNN has improved versions named Fast R-CNN, Faster R- CNN and Mask R-CNN. Faster R-CNN consists of two modules (Ren et al., 2015). The first module, called a fully convolutional network, pro- poses regions, whereas the second module, named the Fast-RCNN de- tector, uses the proposed regions. These two modules together form a single and unified DL network for object detection. This study found that the Faster-RCNN is one of the most used detection algorithms for cattle detection.

in any study. To address the third research question (RQ3), we have summarised the cattle datasets used in the reviewed articles as shown in Table 7. The datasets are summarised in terms of several factors, in- cluding breed, the number of cattle, data type and size, image resolu- tion, capture location, and acquisition device. The table indicates that many reviewed papers used the dataset for the Holstein cattle breed. This is mainly because of the unique coat patterns and patches on Hol- stein cattle bodies. The cattle coat patterns are unique features in the ML and DL approaches for identification. Our SLR reported that the most used dataset type was the image-based dataset (40 times), which included different data acquisition systems such as RGB (red, green, and blue), grey, and near-infrared (NIR) images. The images

A cattle identification dataset stores the cattle images or frames cap- tured from videos. For individual cattle identification, the features of the cattle images are extracted using feature extraction methods and stored in the feature dataset along with a specific cattle number. The features are then fed into a DL or ML model for training and testing.

SIFT is a popular and widely used algorithm to detect local features. The algorithm seeks features by looking at interesting points in an image as well as descriptors related to scale and orientation. Thus, it achieves good outcomes in matching image feature points (Lowe, 1999).

Breed: NC = Non-classified, An = Angus, H = Holstein, P = Pantaneira, M = Multiple, S = Simmental, C = Canchim. Type: M = Muzzle, B = Body, T = Tailhead, M.G = Mammary glands, F = Face, He = Head.

extraction methods for cattle identification, whereas the KNN and DT classifiers are mainly used with the LBP feature extraction methods. It is also observed that the LBP feature extraction method is used with al- most all the ML models for cattle identification. This is mainly because of its powerful texture feature extraction capability from images in pattern recognition systems.

CNN and Inception have been widely used in cattle precision farm- ing. They are used as both classifiers and feature extractors. The DL ar- chitecture without its last layer (i.e., classifier) is called a feature extractor. The CNN and Inception models excluding all dense layers are performed as feature extractors. Fig. 10 shows the combination of feature extraction methods and DL models used for cattle identification in the reviewed studies. It indicates that DenseNet, ResNet and Incep- tion as DL classifiers have mainly been used with CNN as feature extrac- tion methods for cattle identification.

Different metrics have been used for evaluating the performance of models. To address the fifth research question (RQ5), evaluation metrics are investigated and identified. Nine evaluation metrics were used for cat- tle identification in the reviewed studies – accuracy, recall, F1 score, pre- cision, mAP, specificity, the area under the ROC curve (AUC), equal error rate, and Kappa, as shown in Fig. 11. Accuracy is defined as the percentage of correctly predicted instances and was the most used evaluation metric in ML and DL based studies (17 times for ML and 31 times for DL) for cat- tle identification. The next most used evaluation metrics were recall, F1 score, and precision. Although 85% of the reviewed papers used accuracy as the evaluation metric, the recall, F1 score, precision, mAP, and specific- ity would be best to understand the identification outcomes because these metrics are considered true positive, false positive, true negative, and false negative for evaluating model performance. It is observed that accuracy is the best evaluation metric for individual cattle identification using ML and DL models. It is also noteworthy that mAP and precision are mainly used in DL-based articles as they are appropriate for measuring the DL model accuracy for identification and detection (Zou et al., 2019).

To address the sixth research question (RQ6), the best perfor- mance of each model used in the reviewed papers was identified and summarised. Some models are used in many studies. This SLR re- ported the best one in terms of evaluation metrics. Fig. 12 shows the

the challenges for cattle identification using ML and DL approaches, the same challenges can be found for identifying other animals (e.g., sheep and pigs). To address the seventh research question (RQ7), the identified main challenges are discussed in this section, along with future research opportunities.

et al., 2021; Qiao et al., 2019; de Lima Weber et al., 2020). In these cases, a standard and high-quality cattle dataset is needed to be used for large- scale evaluations of feature extraction methods and cattle detection and identification models.

Benchmark dataset. There is a lack of benchmark datasets that can be used to extract all the relevant features for cattle identification prob- lems. Based on this SLR, we found that a few datasets are publicly avail- able, although the value of these datasets is minimal due to the lack of uniform data standards. As the performance of the existing ML and DL models still depends on the dataset, the standard benchmark dataset needs to be available in the public domain. Thus, the model using a uni- form dataset may apply to real firms for cattle identification. A recom- mendation from the current study is to create a large-scale benchmark cattle dataset that can be used by researchers for cattle identification problems in the field of precision livestock farming.

Data collection duration. A few studies tested the same identifica- tion model with different datasets collected from the same cattle but at different times (days or months). They reported that the model’s ac- curacy was much low when they collected cattle images for training and testing purposes on two different days (Chen et al., 2021). There is an opportunity for researchers to develop ML or DL models that can handle uncorrelated data from different days and environments.

Feature selection. Most of the articles reviewed in this SLR used datasets with a small number of individual cattle, therefore there was a lack of efficient feature selection methods on large datasets. Scholars may develop methods to extract important features from the large dataset for cattle identification. Additionally, like human face land- marks, researchers can consider cattle face landmarks as features for cattle face recognition. In this paper, we give a comprehensive overview of cattle identification. For cattle that have coat patterns, for example Holstein, Belgian blue, Shorthorn, Ayrshire and Irish Moiled, the body or whole head area can be used to differentiate animals. For those that have pure colour skin, like Augua, Dexter, and Sussex, the muzzle pat- tern is the unique biomedical feature to use. Many advanced deep learn- ing models have been developed for object detection. However, only limited models have been applied for cattle identification. There is a large opportunity to continue to develop and promote advanced ma- chine learning technologies for livestock production.

parameters in the model architecture increases the complexity of ML and DL models (Alzubaidi et al., 2021) but may also increase the model accuracy. However, when the model becomes too complex, it tends to overfit the training dataset, and such situations reduce the model performance on the test dataset (Srivastava et al., 2014; Xu

et al., 2019). Overfitting was a commonly reported problem in this SLR. It makes the model dataset dependent, and therefore the model does not perform well when applied to other datasets. The researchers use different methods to prevent overfitting problems, including data aug- mentation, ensembling, and cross-validation. Thus, they can train ML and DL models to generalise well to a new dataset.

Open environment operation challenge. Another challenge iden- tified here was the implementation of the cattle identification models in the real farm environment. Although some researchers tested their models on cattle farms, no models were applied to the livestock farm management systems. A large dataset incorporating many individual cattle would be useful to train ML and DL models for application on real cattle farms for identification. Additionally, due to the computation cost of a vision-based system, it is unlikely to run real-time identification without using a server over the cloud. Dairy cattle are often kept indoors, making it relatively easy to implement a vision-based identification system for better biosecurity management. However, for the beef industry, cattle are scattered in an open environment, and reliable and cheap network connectivity is still under development. It will be very costly if im- ages are transferred back to a server via satellite. So the implementa- tion of cattle identification in these environments wild still needs the maturity of the IoT technology.

tems are still under development. There are some proposed static image-based approaches (Andrew et al., 2021; Qiao et al., 2020) in use. For example, dairy cattle that are living indoors, where it is easy to set up the vision system. But for cattle scattered in the field, it will be very challenging to obtain consistent features for accurate object rec- ognition from the captured images/videos. Therefore, the power of ma- chine learning and computer vision has not been fully integrated into practice.

The main limitation of this study is the database search for the rele- vant articles. This SLR considered four electronic databases. We identi- fied 55 studies using the search strategy described in the methodology section. There may be more articles available that have not been in- cluded in this study due to not considering other electronic databases. Some relevant articles might have been missed because of the search keyword string. To maximise the number of relevant articles, we chose the databases by considering the scope of this study, and we con- ducted a broad search with a search string including main search terms and their synonyms. Another possible limitation is the data extraction from the selected articles, because some data could be missed in this process. To minimise the amount of missing data, we cross-checked the analysed data. These limitations will provide doors for future SLR, but they do not inhibit the main goal of presenting a comprehensive pic- ture of the usage of ML and DL approaches for cattle identification.

challenges need to be addressed for efficient and effective cattle identi- fication systems and further improvements to ML and DL models. It is concluded that automated and real-time cattle identification systems will play an important role in livestock farm management in the future. We believe that this study will facilitate future researchers in develop- ing automatic cattle identification systems.

