Reasoning: Analyze the frameworks and technologies adopted from different domains for designing meta heuris- tics algorithms. Design pattern conquer the crucial factors of adopting the key practices in an abstract form. Different computer scientists and researchers has used pattern based perspectives which includes methodological, structural, behavioral, and component-based patterns for designing the optimization algorithms.

RQ-5: Where the research articles have been published ? Reasoning: Discover and understand the potential of dif- ferent algorithms of meta-heuristics in solving the various problems. For this different publication in journals, con- ference, books, proceedings are taken into account. To reveal the research venue where the research articles has published the research results are shown in figure two.

Over the years, leveraging meta-heuristic algorithms to sustain real- time applications in IoT environments is inevitable. Although the afore- mentioned meta heuristic techniques are efficient, still numerous chal- lenges and future directions must be addressed before scaling to the next level. Following research challenges and future directions are mined from the literature.

financial risk management and its allied sectors smart. How- ever, real time implementation of meta-heuristic with IoT based framework has two significant challenges. Firstly, the lack of professional sensors is the major hurdle to develop smart specially in agriculture sector. Secondly, the lack of networking commu- nication, specially in rural areas affecting the entire system with the unreliable data transfer. Therefore, it is necessary to develop a feasible system for examining the performance of computationally complex problems in different situations.

Functional & interoperability challenges: In the recent times, there is no single organisational structure developed which can handle the dynamic and high dimensional data. Furthermore, during the data transfer several security challenges such as data tampering, wiretapping, and replay attacks may be attempted causing security threat. For getting the best results several factors such as authenticity, data integrity, and confidentiality must be ensured during data acquisition and data transfer. However, some optimization techniques has been developed which can handle some problem up to certain extent. Capital investment in different applications mentioned in the literature may hinder the growth of this industry.

Handling the large dimensional data: As the large amount of data is generated from several IoT devices. Further, the ‘‘curse of dimensionality’’ occurs when the dimensions of size of data increases. Therefore, there is need of smart infrastructure to pro- cess, analyze, and store data for the automation of various tasks. However, during the non-stationary environment i.e when the data is not static, some additional measures are required. These essential measures will help the meta-heuristic techniques to solve some satisfactorily dynamic problems. Moreover, platform as service models are gaining swift popularity due to low cost infrastructure such as sales force IOT platforms, thingWorx, and amazon web services.

