Authors present a power flow tracing based method for usage and loss allocation along with FACTS devices. Graph theory is the basis for usage allocation. Modified Kirchhoff matrix is used for this purpose. FACTS devices are used in the system for various purposes such as reactive power compensation; voltage profile improvement etc. hence in this paper Thyristor controlled series controller (TCSC) with voltage source modeling is used for finding the effect of FACTS device on transmission usage and loss allocation. A sample 5 bus is used for this purpose.

In this paper authors presented a usage and loss allocation method along with TCSC incorporation in power flow model. A tracing algorithm presented in [5] is used and modified for usage and loss allocation. Newton Raphson method of load flow is used for power flow which is modified for incorporation of TCSC. Results with and without TCSC is presented on Sample 5 bus system.

This matrix is the basis of the proposed methodology. Authors construct a power flow matrix from the Newton Raphson load flow. This matrix gives a complete overview of power flows in the system. It is formed between nodes of the system. Diagonal elements give net flows at nodes and off diagonal elements give the actual flows and counter flows in the system. The proposed matrix is defined as follows: active power in branch i-j from bus I to bus J as P ij (>0) and total inflow at bus i as PTi

Steps for tracing are same as presented in [6]. Power flow allocated to generators from the lines flow as shown in Eq. (5). For this allocation 23% share is allocated to generators and 77% is allocated to loads. For example the generator share situated as bus s to the line s-t is given by

For transmission loss allocations to generator consider Eq. (5). In this equation line flows Pst is replaced by the transmission Loss in lines which is coming from the elements of the Kirchhoff loss matrix. Hence transmission losses of line s-t allocated to generator located at bus i is given by:

The proposed matrices methodology is apply to the 5 bus structure to demonstrate feasibility and effectiveness of the methodology. An Executable code is developed under MATLAB. Test is conducted on standard 5 bus system. For analysis bus 1is slack bus, bus 2 is voltage controlled bus and 3, 4, 5 are load buses. TCSC is installed between bus 3 and 4 by introduced an additional bus 6. For TCSC starting value of the inductive reactance is taken 0.015 pu (50% of value of the inductive reactance of the transmission line).

improving the voltage profile. With TCSC power flow of transmission is increased hence transmission usage allocation and transmission loss allocation also increased. Voltage source modelling is used for FACTS incorporation because by this effect of TCSC at each iteration is incorporated in system. Further usage and loss allocation is done in direct way because matrix inversion is required only single time. The methodology is applied on sample 5 bus.

