The use of multi-media in Chinese college English education is becoming more and more popular. Compared with traditional teaching model, there are many advantages in the use of multi-media, and the paper has listed three of them. At the same time, due to the limitation of time, space and money, practical problems exist in the use of multi-media. The paper suggested some ways to solve the problem and mke a objective prediction for the future of multi-media teachinng.

In the 21st century, with the development of higher education and the rapid growth of economic and cultural globalization, the mastery of English has become an increasingly important index to evaluate the level of a college student. To some extent, the mastery of English will determine the survival and competitiveness of every single person and even the survival and the competitiveness of the whole nation .The Chinese civilians have already realized the significance of English, that is why the tests which evaluate the comprehensive language ability like CET4 or CET 6 are so popular nowadays. At the same time, the Chinese government, such as the Ministry of Education, has shown great concern for English studying by promulgating some specific standards for English mastery. All these have posed a formidable challenge for domestic English teaching and domestic English teachers. The traditional English teaching methods, such as grammar-translation method, listening and speaking method, cognitive approach, communicative approach, have been unable to meet the need for English knowledge and English ability in the Chinese society, a new

him in private, hoping to influence his judgement and be the winner of the contest.Hera promised to give Paris wealth and power, Athena promised to give Paris wisdom, and Venus promised to give him the most beautiful woman in the world, who is Queen Helen. And Paris' decision (Venus won the apple)led to the ten-year Trojan war.Then the teacher should ask students the same questions, and this time their answers and thoughts would be deeper and more serious than the previous ones. They also can guess out the meaning of "apple of discord" after hearing the story, which means something that causes conflict and fighting. Sometimes, the teacher can allow students to guess the fate of these three characters (Archilles was killed by Paris), which will introduce another phrase "the heel of Archilles" , which means the weakness of heroes.The way to tell stories and ask questions through multimedia technology can stimulate discussion, force the students to use their own brains and guide the communication between teachers and students, it can also really arouse their enthusiasm for the English language, and a long-term memory of English knowledge points will be obtained.

Thirdly, multi-media technology is an excellent tool for language output. English teaching operated by multi-media technology can provide large amounts of information and plentiful knowledge, which can strikingly enhance teaching efficiency and effect. Compared with traditional teaching way, multimedia teaching delivers messages through images, sound and animation, which is more direct and simpler . It can stimulate students' multiple senses and deepen memory, which is extremely beneficial for language output. Since class time is limited, the knowledge that the traditional teaching methods can provide is also very limited. However, with the help of multimedia technology in the English class, teachers can output knowledge points through various ways such video clips, pictures, English songs,etc. Students can get the auditory and visual stimulation repeatedly in the class, thus turning the knowledge points into long-term memory, and their comprehensive abilities like listening, speaking, reading and writing will be enhanced at the same time. In addition, students are allowed to download teaching materials after class, which can not only get rid of the limitation of class time, but also greatly liberate the minds of students. So they can really focus on the thinking and discussion of teaching content instead of note-taking. Therefore, compared with the traditional teaching model, multimedia teaching is highly effective and efficient.

Second, there is no effective supervision and evaluation mechanism for students' self-study.Since the space and equipments in each university are quite limited, students have to conduct self-study on their own computer after class. As youngsters, they may not have a strong self-control to resist the temptations on the network and accomplish their task according to schedule. Although some students are very diligent, they are not clear about how to make up for knowledge deficiencies or how to effectively improve their English level. Usually they fall into a habit of doing exercises again and again, eventually killing their own enthusiasm for English learning. Even though they may pass some important examinations, English will remain to be a big headache for most of them.We can say that students' self-study needs teachers' supervision, guidance and evaluatiom, but because of the management system of Chinese universities , the contacts and communications after class between teachers and students are quite limited, , thus affecting the effect of English teaching.

Third, at the technical level, multi-media teaching must be conducted on the basis of electronic devices. In the actual teaching process, there may be something wrong with these devices, but maintenance personnel do not come in time, so the multi-media coursewares cannot be demonstrated, greatly damaging the effect of English teaching. In addition, although students can use U disk or other equipment to download teaching materials, the electronic viruses in these equipments may lead to breaking down of teaching equipment and even more serious problems. In the classroom, in order to play the courseware, the windows curtains should be drawn to keep the classroom dark, which will do harm to the eyes of students and make them tired and uncomfortable. Besides, dim lights makes it difficult for teachers to supervise the activities of students.

Second, teachers should improve their abilities to use multi-media devices and make multi-media coursewares.	All colleges and universities should establish systematic and long-term training for teachers according to their own conditions. And teachers should upgrade their knowledge reserve and skills incessantly. There should be periodical evaluation of the coursewares made by teachers, or there should be contest of coursewares based on criteria of function, knowledge and delight.

In the era of globalization, along with the emergence of a variety of educational sites, the rise of social networking sites, a lot of communication tools like microblogging or MSN', the relationship between English education and multimedia will become closer and closer, but as Professor Guonong Nan pointed out in the article "Chinese Educational Technology in the 21st Century", "It is necessary to emphasize the reserach of multi-media application, but if you think multi-media can replace teachers, that is wrong." If we see things from the perspective of pure instrumentalism, multi-media teaching will become a toy that can display sound, light and animation. It will fail to attract students to think and discuss, and it will lead to the distraction of attention and lack of interest or other issues.After all, teaching is a person-to-person communication, only when teachers can use their extensive knowledge, pesonal charm and sincere attitude to influence and touch students, can multimedia tools be made best use of.

