An efficient vehicle detection method is a necessity for the intelligent transportation system under the complicated traffic environment at present. To solve the problems of large computation and the poor real-time in traditional vehicle detecting methods, this article proposes a real-time vehicle detecting algorithm integrated compressive sensing (CS) theories and background subtraction method. In addition, this paper undertakes the reconstruction of foreground image of vehicle based on the orthogonal matching pursuit (OMP) algorithm. Proved by the experimental result, the proposed vehicle detection algorithm could produce higher precision detection, smaller calculation and higher-quality reconstructed image compared to the traditional ones.

Applying the background subtraction method based on CS, in this paper, the measurements of the video is firstly obtained through the compressive sample operated on the input video images. And then, the measurements of the background image will be achieved from the estimation of the former measurements. Besides, the background image needs real-time update considered about the changes in external environment. When conducting the background subtraction, the differential threshold operation should be undertaken on the measurements of background model and measurements of the real-time video frame image to determine whether there existed moving vehicle in the frame image. If there is no existence, drop the image. Otherwise, reconstruct the target vehicle image through the OMP image reconstruction algorithm in Ref. [14].

In traditional background subtraction method, the first step is to build the background model, then to conduct the subtraction between the input image and background image, set the threshold for subtracted image, and finally get the target. Though a great many of researchers’ works on the background modeling method, it is difficult to achieve the perfect result. What’s more, the estimation conducted through background modeling and updating for every pixel will make the calculation very large. The compressive sensing method used in this text overcomes the problem in traditional method which does not need modeling and updating for each pixel and is of no necessity for background image reconstruction. Instead, the proposed method subtracts on the measurement of background image compression sensing and it of the input image, as shown in expression (8).

The proposed algorithm was experimented under the environment of Matlab 2009. Fig.2 was the 50th frame of the traffic video self-recorded. Fig.3 was the result of the steps that compressively sampled from each frame of the image by random observation matrices, got the value of the 50th frame of the background image measured by background modeling and updating according to expression (5), and reconstructed the foreground image of vehicle for observation. The vehicle detecting result was shown in Fig.4, from which the complete and accurate vehicle contour was almost obtained.

As an important part of modern intelligent transportation system, the high-efficient vehicle detecting algorithm has great significance for improving the reliability of intelligent transportation. For the characteristics of small amount of data for compressive sample and high precision for construction, the compressive sensing theory is suitable to apply to the vehicle detecting algorithm. As the few amount of the measurements on each frame of image through background model calculation, it is greatly decreased on computing operation. Proved by the experimental result, the proposed vehicle detection algorithm could produce higher precision detection, smaller calculation and higher-quality reconstructed image compared to the traditional ones.

