Focus on the problem that noise is existing in the input signals and output signals of visual measurement system , if calculate via the classic least mean square algorithm or recursive least square , it would generate the larger errors ; Or calculate directly , the calculation work loading is too complex . So the solution of weight vector could be as the limited best optimization solution of Rayleigh Quotient of augmentation input vector self correlation matrix , take iteration estimation to the augmentation input vector and set up the function relationship between step factor and error ; The simulation analysis experiment results indicate the standard tolerance of proposed adaptive total least squares algorithm is 0.0375mm ; but the one of normal total least squares algorithm is only 0.0598mm . Obviously , the proposed algorithm has more high precision than normal total least squares algorithm , and its structure is simple , the calculation speed is faster .

of squares is minimum , the least squares estimation would be close to the best optimization solution . But the error is existing in vector A and b , the least squares estimation is not the best optimization . In this case , the best way is total least squares (TLS)[1-3]. But in more cases , the TLS algorithm is batch mode based on

calculation is too complex and in the case of N is too large , it's very difficult to do . Focus on this point , the scientific research workers in domestic and oversea make a lot of research analysis , SUYKENS J. et al., 1999 present Least squares support vector machine classifiers [4]; SANCHEZ A. et al., 1995 presents Robustization of a learning method for RBF net-works [5]; KRUGER U. et al., 2008 present Robust partial least squares regression: part I algorithmic developments [6] . Summary the above research analysis results , to propose one kind of method which is to achieve step length recursion formula of TLS algorithm based on the cost function gradient .

CMM, their coordinates could be measured directly by CMM. And define randomly the position of fifty determinands , use separately the normal total least-squares algorithm and adaptive total least-squares algorithm to calculate the attitude of their optical characteristics points. Then compare the results calculated by every algorithm with the actual coordinate measured by CMM .

The experiment results indicate the standard tolerance calculated by normal total least-squares algorithm is 0.0598mm, and the one done by adaptive total least-squares algorithm is 0.0375mm. Compared with normal total least-squares algorithm , the tolerance calculated by adaptive total least-squares algorithm is less .

In order to further validate the calculation speed of the adaptive total least square algorithm , set up the experiment environment : CPU  Intel core i7 3770	RAM  4G	Operation system : Windows xp Matlab7.0 . The experiment used the normal total least square algorithm and adaptive total least square algorithm to continue calculating 106 times , separately records the time of five times experiment for every algorithm , shown as Table 1.

In order to decrease the error tolerance when the noise is existing in both input signals and output signals of visual measurement system , and get the best optimization solution of the relative to the attitude conversion between optical characteristics points and camera , present the method of adaptive total least square algorithm . Firstly , introduce the function expression of normal total least squares algorithm; Then , based on the Rayleigh Quotient property to get the final equation of adaptive total least squares algorithm. Finally , make the simulation comparison experiment , the standard tolerance calculated by normal total least square algorithm is 0.0598mm ; But the one done by adaptive total least square algorithm is 0.0375mm ; The experiment results prove adaptive total least square algorithm has high precision , and calculation speed is better than normal total least square algorithm .

