In this research work, it employed stacked auto-encoding layers to reduce the size of the MobileNetV2 output feature vector while main- taining an abstract representation of all feature mappings. To use ReLU and softmax in a stacked autoencoder, it typically applies the ReLU activation function to the hidden layers of the encoder and decoder, and apply the softmax activation function to the output layer of the decoder when the task is multi-class classification. The weights, which include a bias term and an ReLU activation function (given in equation (8)) are multiplied with the data in the stacked autoencoder encoding module.

The comparison of the effectiveness of proposed algorithm makes use of a confusion matrix. By combining the values of True Negative (TN), True Positive (TP), False Negative (FN), and False Positive (FP), this matrix is used to generate various metrics. The performance metrics used to assess models using the confusion matrix are listed below.

rate against its false positive rate at a variety of threshold values. Because lower values on the x-axis indicate a lesser number of false positives and a higher number of true negatives, the fact that the curve is located in the top-left corner is seen as a sign of excellent performance. On the other hand, a higher significance level on the y-axis indicates a lower number of false negatives and a higher number of real positives. The time complexity of using PCA with DWSC for detecting masks in the face will depend on several factors, including the size of the input images, the number of principal components selected, and the archi- tecture of the DWSC. PCA involves computing the eigenvectors and ei- genvalues of the covariance matrix of the input data. The time

The proposed work is experimented using Windows 10 computer, an Intel Core i5 processor, and Nvidia GTX 1080 GPU for the tests. Pro- gramming was carried out using Python 3.8. The pre-trained model is using 224x3 STIF frames. The proposed approach is tested using this

dataset. Datasets for training and testing have been produced. The scaling factor was first set at 0.001, and after that, it decreases by a factor of 0.9 every 10 epochs. The Adam optimizer uses a momentum value of 0.999. The training process is repeated up till 100 epochs have

evaluates the results of the research in comparison to the original con- volutional filters. According to the findings of the trials, the proposed system performed much better than the existing conventional convolu- tions. In addition, past work on a motivated baseline approach is compared with the strategy that has been offered here. According to the results, which include an accuracy score of 94.1%, a precision score of 97.6%, a recall score of 94.4%, and an F-score of 96.01%. The DWSC- PCA-SAE algorithm generates the greatest overall performance across a range of evaluation criteria. This model needs additional processing to create visualisations, and due to the limitations of the dataset, it is un- able to differentiate between appropriate and inappropriate mask application. In the future, one of our goals is to provide face mask identification datasets that include a variety of various mask wearing

Howard J, Huang A, Li Z, Tufekci Z, Zdimal V, van der Westhuizen H, von Delft A, Price A, Fridman L, Tang L, Tang V, Watson GL, Bax CE, Shaikh R, Questier F, Hernandez D, Chu LF, Ramirez CM, Rimoin AW. Face masks against COVID-19: an evidence review. Preprints 2020:2020040203. https://doi:10.20944/preprints20 2004.0203.v1.

Jimenez JL, Marr LC, Randall K, Ewing ET, Tufekci Z, Greenhalgh T, Tellier R, Tang JW, Li Y, Morawska L, Mesiano-Crookston J, Fisman D, Hegarty O, Dancer SJ, Bluyssen PM, Buonanno G, Loomans MGLC, Bahnfleth WP, Yao M, Sekhar C, Wargocki P, Melikov AK, Prather KA. What were the historical reasons for the resistance to recognizing airborne transmission during the COVID-19 pandemic? Indoor Air 2022 Aug;32(8):e13070. https://doi.org/10.1111/ina.13070. PMID: 36040283; PMCID: PMC9538841.

