This study used data ranging from 1960-2010 in order to test the relationship between U.S. foreign trade and its economic growth. The Granger Causality Tests show that there exists a bi-directional relationship between American exports and its GDP, while exists only a single-directional relationship between American imports and its GDP. It indicates that American imports didn't Granger cause American GDP growth. That is to say, even if taking several measures to protect and reduce its imports, U.S. can not achieve the goal of promoting its economic growth.

Since the financial crisis, the United States launched anti-dumping, anti-subsidy and other special safeguard clauses to limit its imports and reduce trade deficit in order to recover its economy. This kind of practice has seriously harmed its partners' legitimate interests. Moreover, whether American imports have restrained its economic growth still needs a further inspection.

Generally, when explaining the relationship among several variables, one of the traditional methods is to establish a structured simultaneous equation model. The shortcoming of this method is that this model must be established strictly on economics theory. However, because the economic theory has its limitation in explaining the dynamic relationship between variables, a better solution is to establish a Vector Regression Model (VAR). VAR model is a kind of non-structured equation model, whose biggest advantage is that we can establish the model directly regardless of the economic theory. After several tests, it's convenient to judge the dynamic relationship among variables accurately.

The study used data ranging from 1960-2010. The time series variables selected are U.S. gross domestic product (GDP), exports (EX) and imports (IM). All data are collected from U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA).The data processing software for this empirical analysis is Eviews 6.0.

When establishing a time series model, OLS models require the time series to be stationary to avoid spurious regression. A standard method to test the stationarity of the time series variables is to conduct unit root test. We choose the ADF unit root test. Test results see table 1.

The result of ADF unit root test shows that variables LGDP, LEX, and LIM are all non-stationary series, after an order difference, they are single time series of the order. Because the multivariable system has already held the condition of establishing VAR model, we establish the VAR model directly. In order to determine the biggest lag order, we do test on the model's lagging structure. There exist 5 test methods, AIC (Akaike) information criterion inspection, SC (Schwarz) information criterion, LR (Sequential modified LR test statistic) information criterion, FPE (Final prediction error) information criterion and the HQ (Harman-Quinn) information criterion. We specifically examine these five methods. (See table 2)

Test results show that the maximum lag order number is 2 under the 5 information criterion. Therefore, we can build Vector Autoregression Models VAR (2) acco rdingly. From the perspective of the fitting effect of the model, we can see the coefficient R2 is 0.998454, which reflects the model fitting well. From the

Johansen co-integration test is also called JJ inspection, a method of regression coefficients testing based on VAR model, which is suitable for co-integration test towards multivariable systems. It includes two test methods, namely eigenvalue trace test and maximum eigenvalue test. We test the 5 possible co-integration relationship, which conclude that only the last form, namely the sequence and co-integration equation with both trend term and intercept pass the test. The test results show that there exists only one co-integration relationship among variables. Table 3 and 4 reflects the test results for eigenvalue trace test and maximum eigenvalue test.

The tests above can only draw one conclusion that there exists the long-term equilibrium relationship among variables LGDP, LEX and LIM. However, we need to further analyze the Granger causality relationship through the Granger causality test. The precondition of testing the Granger causality relationship on VAR model is that the series must be stationary. The series are proved to be non-stationary, the only way to solve this problem is to establish Vector Error Correction Model (VECM).Table 5 shows the Granger causality results based on VECM.

Firstly, the relationship between America's GDP (LGDP) and its exports (LEX). At 5% level, the test result rejects the null hypothesis that “LGDP does not Granger Cause LEX” with a concomitant probability of 0.0144. That is to say, LGDP is the Granger reason of LEX. At meanwhile, the hypothesis that “LEX does not Granger Cause LGDP” with a concomitant probability of 0.0026 is rejected at 5% level, which indicates that LEX is also LGDP's Granger reason. In all, there exist a bi-directional relationship between American GDP and exports. On the one hand, exports, as one of the three carriages to drive a country's economy, have a positive effect on a country's GDP; on the other hand, exports will expand with a country's growth in GDP.

Secondly, the relationship between America's GDP (LGDP) and its imports (LIM). At 5% level, LGDP is LIM's Granger reason, while LIM is not LGDP's Granger reason. It shows that the increase in GDP will expand a country's national income, which will increase the demand for goods and services including the demand from outside the country.

According to the empirical results, we can see that there exists bi-directional relationship between American exports and its GDP; while there exists only one-way relationship between America's imports and its GDP, America's imports is not its GDP's Granger causality reason; there exists no Granger causality relationship between America's imports and its exports. Therefore, in order to promote its economy, America's foreign trade policy is not valid until now that a new trade policy is needed. A new policy should aim at expanding its export but not restricting its imports.

