Abstract In the Region Growing Algorithm (RGA) results of segmentation are totally dependent on the selection of seed point, as an inappropriate seed point may lead to poor segmentation. How- ever, the majority of MRA (Magnetic Resonance Angiography) datasets do not contain required region (vessels) in starting slices. An Enhanced Region Growing Algorithm (ERGA) is proposed for blood vessel segmentation. The ERGA automatically calculates the threshold value on the basis of maximum intensity values of all the slices and selects an appropriate starting slice of the image which has a appropriate seed point. We applied our proposed technique on different patients of MRA datasets of different resolutions and have got improved segmented images with reduction of noise as compared to tradition RGA.

images causing noise. Although a bundle of segmentation tech- niques have been developed [1–5] still there is no single segmentation technique that is applicable for all imaging appli- cations. The most common region segmentation method is based on threshold value, which is most often used as an initial step in the majority of image processing applications.

A lot of research has been done in this area but region growing technique has got more attention due to its simplicity, noise suppression, automation and whole tree detection of ves- sels. In region growing algorithm results of segmentation are totally dependent on the selection of seed point. An inappro- priate seed point leads toward poor segmentation. The major- ity of MRA datasets do not contain required region (vessels) in start of slices. We have been studying and published papers in MRI enhancement [6,7].

Another region growing based technique for the extraction of liver blood vessels from X-ray images is applied by Passat et al. [10]. Their proposed algorithm maintains hierarchical priority lists based upon ‘‘first in first out’’ where the priority to each list was assigned according to the value of luminosity. For the insertion of new points, lists are accessed randomly. Kim et al. [11] proposed an atlas based automatic approach for region-growing segmentation of brain vessels. They have implemented the concept of two threshold values: a higher and lower value respectively to cover all the vessels in tree. Multiple seed points are chosen with the help of a higher threshold value.

Kim and Park [12] have proposed a local adaptive thresh- olding based technique for the segmentation of carotid artery using MRA slices. This technique automatically computes the threshold value by considering a midpoint of maximum and minimum gray levels of only first slice. In addition, the application of the threshold value filters the first slice. Taking into account the anatomical structure of the left and right car- otid arteries, the filtered slice is divided into two subregions. Seed points of each subregion are calculated and their eight connecting neighbors are labeled in order to get the region of interest.

Almi’ani and Barkana [13] proposed a modified region growing algorithm to extract cerebral vessels of MRA images. The image segmentation, pre-processing step, gamma correc- tion and spatial operations were the components of proposed techniques. The proposed technique shows performance improvement in terms of noise attenuation, vessel enhance- ment and segmentation.

Priyadharshini and Anitha [14] applied region growing algorithm to diagnose glaucoma in eye. The pre-processing imaging technique and morphological operations such as dila- tion and erosion were incorporated and median filter was applied in the proposed technique. The technique shows per- formance improvement in terms of image quality and image edges compared to the thresholding techniques.

Wen et al. proposed [15] cerebrovascular segmentation algorithm to obtain accurate vessel. The finite mixture model, Gaussian distribution function and Rayleigh distribution func- tion were used. The proposed have two limitations that are, (i) proposed algorithm iteration runs sequentially to achieve a stable state and (ii) proposed algorithm does not consider the neighborhood relationships between the voxels.

In this paper, we proposed few enhancements in region growing algorithm. Our main contribution is to determine appropriate threshold value of slice, seed point and starting slice number. We also developed a two pass algorithm for grayscale 8-connected neighbors. We applied all these compo- nents in RGA and evaluate the performance in terms of image enhancement. The region growing algorithm that applies in our proposed system is driven from [16].

In the traditional region growing algorithm, results of segmen- tation are totally dependent on the selection of seed point. An appropriate seed point results in quality segmentation. How- ever, in the majority of MRA datasets, the start of the slices does not contain any required information. As a result of this, we have not applied region growing algorithm directly on the first slice. In order to begin from the required region, we have developed an automatic threshold value. To calculate the threshold, the maximum intensity value of each slice is obtained and stored in an array denoted as max_list. From this max_list, we then find the maximum and minimum intensity values, i.e. m1 and m2 respectively. Finally the difference between m1 and m2 is gained.

The maximum intensity of each slice is compared with threshold T given in Eq. (1). Slices are checked in a sequence in ascending order. Any slice with an intensity value greater or equal to the threshold value is selected as a first slice F1. Region growing algorithm is then applied to F1 and onward slices only. In this way, the starting slice F1 is different for each dataset and is selected automatically according to max- imum intensity values. The steps for ERGA are given as follows:

Details of datasets used in the experiment are given in Table 1, the investigated images are ToF with T1 relaxation and 16 bit. From Table 1, the obtained value of starting slice for the enhancement and maximum intensity value of starting slice will be used for enhancement. The vessels segmentation of head MRA for dataset 1, using a region growing algorithm without any enhancement, is shown in Fig. 1. The maximum intensity value of the first slice is 356, which is very low com- pared to the maximum intensity value of the entire dataset,

Fig. 2a shows the grayscale (slice 27) image that is maxi- mum and minimum intensity values are 644 and 0 respectively. The threshold value for the starting slice is 322. Fig. 2b is the threshold binary image of the starting slice. The segmentation result of the starting slice is described by Fig. 2c. As soon as an appropriate starting point is selected, head vessels are extracted correctly (see Fig. 2d).

Figure 1 Segmentation of head vessels for dataset 1 using region growing before enhancement. (a) First slice image of head dataset. (b) Threshold image of first slice. (c) Result of first slice after region growing. (d) Final result of segmentation after region growing of all (118) slices.

Figure 2 Segmentation of head vessels of dataset 1 using region growing after enhancement, (a) selected starting slice (27) image of head dataset. (b) Thresholded image of starting slice. (c) Result of starting slice after region growing. (d) Final result of segmentation after region growing of 92 slices (27–118).

region of interest (vessels), the whole region will be grown incorrectly. MRA, which is used specifically for images of blood vessels, does not contain the required region in start of slices. Applying a region growing algorithm directly from the first slice will result in an inappropriate seed point, thereby leading to poor segmentation. In order to overcome this prob- lem, an ERGA has been proposed. The vessel images gener- ated by ERGA are improved quality as compared to generic RGA.

