This paper proposes an algorithm to improve image processing for impulse noise by median filter. Isolate noise points in an image are detected by way of indiscernibility on rough sets. The improved algorithm enhances the detection capability of the single element of an image. Impulse noise is removed by a method of improvement of choice of threshold and filtering templates of median filter. Experiment simulation showed that the method of image enhancement proposed is superior to the traditional method in effectively improving image degradation and image clarity.

Denoising of image is realized by way of image filtering which can be divided into spatial domain, frequency domain and wavelet domain [1-3]. The most common spatial domain filtering has two kinds of linear filters and nonlinear filters. Linear filters include linear average filter, inverse gradient weighted filter, etc. Nonlinear filter is mainly used by median filter to remove impulse noise [4-7].

Choice of threshold and filtering templates of median filter to determine impulse noise is key operation. This article is intended to improve image processing for median filter of impulse noise. Isolate noise points in an image are detected by idea of indiscernibility on rough sets. Impulse noise is removed by a method of improvement of choice of threshold and filtering templates of median filter.

It is shown that signal-to-noise ratio of an image is improved by normal median filter than linear filter, but the whole image edge details is lost, image vision is blurred; Adaptive threshold median filter is of obvious enhancement effect, but a part of edge pixel is incorrectly judged to noise. Impulse noise median filter enhances image edge to become clearly. But from the noise image we can see, it is a part of wired pixel edge was judged to noise. The improved median filter proposed here will reduce the effect of the image edge, and increase the signal-to-noise ratio in effectively improving image degradation and image clarity.

The main issue what we are interested is effective improvement of image processing for impulse noise by median filter. The main works completed in this paper are that a way of detection of isolate noise points in an image is proposed by way of indiscernibility on rough sets. A choice of threshold and filtering templates of median filter is suggested to remove impulse noise. An improved algorithm enhances the detection capability of the single element of an image. The feasibility of the proposed approaches of improvement of image processing for impulse noise by median filter is supported by some of examples.

