A Gabor wavelets based technique was investigated as a potential tool for scene classification (into one of bare patch, plant, or weed) for its ultimate utility in site-specific application of agrochemicals in wild blueberry fields. Images were gathered from five sites located in central Nova Scotia, Canada. Gabor wavelet features extracted from these images were used to classify scenes according to visually determined classes using step-wise linear discriminant analysis.

Due to the wild and perennial nature of wild blueberry plants, cul- tural practices of weed control are meagre to nonexistent. This necessi- tates reliance on herbicides for weed control. As a result, millions of dollars are spent by the industry on herbicides (Esau et al., 2016).

These technologies included digital colour image based co- occurrence matrix algorithm to classify wild blueberry plantation scenes into bare patches, weed or plant (Chang et al., 2012); ultrasonic ranging to differentiate between wild blueberry plants, weeds and bare patches (Swain et al., 2009); Gabor wavelets to differentiate between broad leaf and grassy weeds (Tang et al., 2003) and discrete wavelet transforms of digital images for the development of site-specific herbi- cide application (Tian and Reid, 1999).

Among these, those systems utilizing digital image classification are reported to demonstrate the ability to identify weeds and bare patches more effectively irrespective of plant or weed height (Chang et al., 2012; Tang et al., 2003; Tian and Reid, 1999). Particularly, in wild blueberry fields, image based spot application of fertilizer (Chang et al., 2017; Chang et al., 2014), herbicide (Esau et al., 2016; Esau et al., 2014a; Chang et al., 2012) and fungicide (Esau et al., 2014b) were investigated in more recent studies, and promising results obtained.

A Gabor wavelet transform of an image is obtained by its convolu- tion with a Gabor wavelet filter. Wavelet filters, as applied to images, are designed to selectively pass regions containing a certain size and ori- entation of a given shape structure. For instance, a wavelet transform, based on a mother wavelet designed to pass elliptic shapes, would pri- marily allow the passage of similarly shaped and sized objects with close orientation to the particular filter (Castleman, 1996; Daugman, 1988). In Gabor wavelet transforms such mother wavelet is generated by a Gabor function given (Manjunath and Ma, 1996) as:

Field 2 and Field 3 were in their vegetative year, and the lighting con- dition was cloudy in both cases. They generally consisted of sparsely populated wild blueberry plants interspersed with weeds and bare patches. Predominant weeds were lamb's-quarters (Chenopodium album L.), sheep sorrel (Rumex acetosella L., both vegetative and inflores- cence), goldenrod, poplar (Populus spp.) spreading dogbane (Apocynum androsaemifolium), mouse-eared hawkweed (Hieracium pilosella L.) and a few black bulrush (Scirpus atrocinctus).

Field 4 was in its fruit year, with scattered colony of dense wild blue- berry plants. The lighting condition was a mid-afternoon sunlight. Pre- dominant weeds were sheep sorrel, lamb's-quarters, goldenrod and wire grass (Danthonia spicata (L.) Beauv.). Bare patches comprised of bare soil and areas covered with dead plant remains.

The user would choose whether to start a new classification task or to resume an ongoing one. This would allow the user to open an appro- priate file, containing a list of files to begin a new task, or a decision file to resume a previous task, respectively. The user would then choose the image with which to begin the classification. The six parts of the se- lected image would then be displayed in the respective windows. The

With regard to classification accuracy, the highest value was attained by Field 4, at 98.3%, and the least, by the set at 81.4%. Results achieved in this study were comparable with those attained with the colour co-occurrence matrix based texture analysis technique reported by Chang et al. (2012).

Reduction of wavelet transform artifacts could be achieved with increased resolution of scene images. Although this could improve accu- racy of classification, it reduces processing speed, for a given hardware. Therefore, with the selection of more powerful hardware, and a proper balance between the resolution and processing speed, it would be pos- sible to apply this method for a real-time application of agrochemicals. Consistency in classification of scenes, and hence accuracy in auto- matic operation of a sprayer system operating on the basis of the current method depends on the level of coherence of distances between plants and the camera. Greater uniformity between distances from the camera would enable greater accuracy in the selection of scales for the Gabor wavelet filters, which would in turn enable greater accuracy in classifi- cation. Perhaps a future study would be the development of an auto- matic correction for the effects of variation in plant height, whereby leaves are scaled according to their height from the ground, to offset

