In dynamic environments, it is difficult to track a changing optimal solution over time. An improved univariate marginal distribution algorithm (IUMDA) is proposed to deal with dynamic optimization problems. This approach is composed of the diffusion model, which uses the information of current population, and the inertia model, which uses the part history information of the optimal solution. After an environment changed, the strategy is changed by a detecting operator to guide increasing the population diversity. Finally an experimental study on dynamic sphere function was carried out to compare the performance of IUMDA and mutation UMDA. The experimental results show that the IUMDA is effective for the function with moving optimum and can adapt the dynamic environments rapidly.

It has been argued that evolutionary algorithms (EAs) may be a particularly suitable candidate for this type of problems. However EAs need to be adapted for optimal results on dynamic optimization problems. When the changes occur, the solution given by the optimization procedure may be no longer effective and may actually be misguiding the search. In order to overcome the problems mentioned above, many methods have been proposed [1-8]. Considered above mentions, a new univariate marginal distribution algorithm (IUMDA) is proposed to solve dynamic optimization problems in this paper.

About this problem, the designed aim is that the algorithm must track a changing optimal solution over time when environments are changed. So we must use intelligence optimization algorithm to solve this problems. As the tradition evolutionary algorithms, the continue version of univariate marginal distribution algorithm (UMDA) is one sort of Estimation of Distribution Algorithms and has been applied to many optimization problems [6-7].

attractor, which attracts the other individuals move towards the attractor to find the promising region of the optimum. However in the dynamic environments, when the problem changes at the end of generation t , the next optimal solution may move away from x* (t) . In order to find the new optimal solution, the algorithm needs increase the diversity and search new space which is different from the region presented by current population. That is to say the promising region of optimum is away from x* (t) . If the environment changes at the end of generation t corresponding to the k -th change, the optimal solution of the current population is denoted by x* (t)( x* (t) is the optimal solution of generation t ), it is applied with the following formula to generate new individual xnew .

Step5. Apply the formula (2), an individual will be adjusted the new population; Step6. Apply the formula (2) and formula (3) on U and get one set of D ; Step7. Estimate the parameters of the new density functions according to S(t) . Step8. Mutate  t 1 according to mutation probability;

Where N(0,1) is a Gaussian random variable with mean 0 and variance 1. Here the severity parameter determines the variance of the noise added to the previous optimal solution. In this paper, the search space is set to (50.0, 50.0)3 and T is set to 25. In linear type, when the global optimal location moves past the

Experiments were carried out to compare the performance of the IUMDA and MUMDA on the test environments constructed above. MUMDA is hyper mutation based UMDA, in which hyper mutation is selected to increase the diversity when the problem is changed. In order to compare performance of different algorithms, the total population size N is fixed at 40 individuals. The other parameters are set to   0.5 ,

From these figures, it can be seen that, generally, IUMDA outperforms MUMDA in the same environment. One straight forward approach to make EAs more suitable for dynamic environments is to increase the diversity after a change. However the random immigrant and hyper mutation approaches increase the diversity by generating the new individuals in the whole search space. Although these two approaches increase the diversity, the diversity is too dispersive to concentrate the promising region of optimum. Thus the computation time needed to track the optimum will be delayed. So in same environment the average optimum of MUMDA is worse than IUMDA. In such cases the improved algorithms has positive effect on the proposed algorithm to adapt the changed environment.

In dynamic environments, it is important that the optimization algorithm is able to continuously track the moving optimum over time. In this paper, we proposed a new approach algorithm to tackle dynamic environments. The objective of the approach is to increase the diversity in a guide fashion after a change. In a dynamic environment, it will be effective to predict the new optimal position by previous optimal solution.

Tang, M., Raymond Y. K. Lau, A Hybrid Estimation of Distribution Algorithm for the Minimal Switching Graph Problem, Proceedings of the International Conference on computational Intelligence for Modelling, Control and Automation, and International Conference on Intelligent Agents, Web Technologies and Internet Commerce, 2005, Vol.1:708-713

