The key point of robot dynamics is optimal design and control. The efficiency of robot dynamics has been the goal of researchers in recent years. Screws are used to describe dynamic problems in this paper, and an O(N) recursive robot forward dynamic algorithm is given on this. It can be easily extended to tree topology, closed loop and spatial robot systems. And three classic methods of robot dynamics are compared for easy of use. The results show that dynamics described with screws are helpful in high efficient dynamics modelling. The dynamical expressions based on screws are concise and clear. It s efficiency is high of O(N) and is linear to the degree of freedom. With the improvement of computation efficiency, it will make the real-time dynamics control become possible.

For the simulation and control of astronautics robots and complex mechanical systems, computation efficiency is very important. In the many methods of analyzing space machine, screw is an efficient tool. Screw can be expressed by a pair of vectors, such as angular velocity and linear velocity, force and moment. In 3-D space, screw can be described as six scalar quantities. The use of screw theory has been very effective.

The Lie algebras are the algebraic structure of Lie groups SE(3) expressed by screws. The Lie groups and Lie algebras have been very effective in the methods of analyzing space machines. Also, it is important in developing algorithms which have applicability to mechanisms with general geometries and joint structures.

The classical dynamical modelling method is the Lagrange method [1], it leads to O(N4) algorithms. For inverse robot dynamics, the first O(N) algorithm was the Newton-Euler(NE) formula [2]. The inverse dynamical algorithm of Walker and Orin [3] was the basic of forward dynamics which computed the inertial parameters of composite sets of rigid bodies at the outer end of the manipulator chain. The algorithm was O(N3).

Rodriguez [5] recognized the similarities between the forward dynamics problem and the concepts of Kalman filtering, and developed an O(N) algorithm called the spatial operator algebra(SOA) method for the multi-body dynamics. Jain [6] used the spatial operator algebra framework to provide a unified formulation for manipulator dynamics. He compared the various O(N3), O(N2), and O(N) algorithms that had been previously published. J. García de Jalón[7] put forward a dynamical algorithm based on full Cartesian coordinates, it can also obtain O(N) complexity.

In this paper, an O(N) recursive robot forward dynamic algorithm is described on Screws. Then the computation complexity is interpreted in detail and compared with other methods. At last it gives the different notations of three classic O(N) recursive dynamics for ease of understanding.

Table 1 shows the computation complexity of three kinds of different forward dynamics cost. The algorithms in screw and that of Rodriguez are both O(N) methods. But the SOA method presented by Rodriguez lead to a complex process of forward dynamics. The algorithm put forward by Walker and Orin is O(N3). When the DOF of a robot is N  6, the above methods are the same. If the robot is complex of N  17, the O(N) method is more efficient of half cost.

There are three kinds of O(N) recursive dynamics, the spatial operator algebra(SOA), the articulated body algorithms(ABA) and the Lie Algebras. For inverse dynamics, these dynamical algorithms are all based on recursive Newton-Euler algorithm. It can be seen the same from this point of view. For forward dynamics, the authors of SOA recognized the analogy between Kalman filtering and robot dynamics and got the inverse of the mass matrix. The ABA used the articulated body to creatively divide the spatial force into two parts, the force related to acceleration and the force of zero acceleration. The Lie Algebras also applied the articulated body and put forward two dual Adjoint operators.

The mechanism in these three recursive methods is: movement parameters and their changes in accordance with the articulated body inertia are linked the outward and inward force. The end of the movement is the burden of low order body. The implication is the role of the relationship between the force and the reaction force. The body is linked with outside articulated body definitely which determine the basis of recursion. This relationship is an objective reality, different scholars have proposed three awareness means.

Screw is used to describe the robot dynamics in this paper. Similar to Newton-Euler(NE) formula, the inverse dynamics in screw theory is of more simple expression form and applicable to large robot systems. The O(N) recursive forward dynamics in screw can be clearly expressed by equations 15. This algorithm can be easily extended to closed loop robot systems, flexible robot systems and spaceflight robot systems. The O(N) algorithm is efficient especially for large systems. It can be seen that screw is helpful to high efficient dynamics modelling and the formulae of robot dynamics in screw are concise and clear. It also gives the different notations of three O(N) recursive dynamics for ease of understanding.

