[1] [2] [3], remote sensing [4] [5], medical imaging [6] and other fields. Domestic research on laser polarization is also mainly focused on these fields and pays little attention to short-range detection, especially detection model, of ground objects. This paper mainly models and analyzes the laser polarization characteristic on the surface of metal target, and the simulation of polarization characteristics on the surface of several typical metal targets is also implemented.

where Ep=E0pexp(p) and Es=E0sexp(s) are complex amplitudes. The subscripts s and p refer to the components in the s and p directions, which are orthogonal; E0s, E0p are the maximum amplitudes, and s, p are the phases, respectively. The parameter S0 is the total intensity of the light, the parameter S1 represents the amount of linear horizontal or vertical polarization, the parameter S2 represents the amount of linear +45 or –45 polarization, and the parameter S3 represents the mount of right or left. In addition, degree of polarization P, ellipticity D and orientation angle  is defined as [7]

According to the above analysis of reflection characteristics on metal surface, both the reflectivity and the phase of s and p components change in different degrees. In general, incident linear polarized laser beam becomes elliptically polarized on reflection from metal. According to the definition of stokes parameters, the changes of polarization on reflection from metal can be described by Muller matrix which can represent the process of reflection. Assuming that the Stokes vector of the incident light is [S i ; S i ; S i ; S i ] , and the Stokes vector of reflected light is [S r ; S r ; S r ; S r ] . The Muller matrix for reflection on metal surface can be derived by coordinating formulas (1) and (5).

As shown in Figure 2, linearly polarized laser irradiates the surface of metal, and the detector receives the reflected light. The transmission axes of polarizer s and p are orthogonal. Therefore, the detectors s and p receive s and p components of reflected light respectively and output voltage signals. According to the signals,

The formula (5), which represents the reflectivity and the phase changes of reflected polarized light on the surface of metal, only has one variable 1. As the 1 changes, the reflectivity and the phase on s and p direction also change. According to formula (5), the reflectivity and angle changes of reflected light on copper, aluminum, iron, steel and water can be calculated, and the related optical parameters are shown in table 1.

Figure 3 shows plots of reflectivity variations. When 1=0 or 1=90  the reflectivity on s and p directions of each material have the same value. Because of different materials, the initial values of these materials are not the same, and the initial reflectivity of metal is obviously higher than the water s. Meanwhile, initial values of these metals are not the same, and aluminum has the highest while iron has the lowest. All of the values of s component increase until unity with the incident angle increases, and the curve of water is the most violent in the five. As the incident angle increases, the values of p component decrease at first, and subsequently increase after some angle; the curve of water is also the most violent in the five.

When the laser beam irradiates onto the surface of target, the energy is redistributed on the s and p directions. The energy of s and p components is different because of different materials, and the difference between s and p component is also not the same. As shown in figure 4(a), Y-axis is the value of Rs minus Rp, and the differences increase with the incident angle increases, and the order of differences from largest to smallest is iron, steel, cooper, aluminum and water. As shown in figure 4(b), Y-axis is the ration between Rs and Rp, and the ratios of different materials become more obvious with the incident angle increases. The maximum ratio of iron is nearly six times the size of the maximum ratio of aluminum.

Figure 4 (a)Plot of the reflectivity difference between the s and the p component. The materials are cooper, aluminum, iron, steel and water. (b)Plot of the reflectivity ratio between the s and the p component. The materials are cooper, aluminum, iron and steel.

