spread of this disease. Countries like the USA, China, Russia have come forward to produce vaccines. The developed countries are performing mass vaccination. The government of Bangladesh has also taken steps to begin vaccinations from early 2021. By January 2022, more than 160 million doses of vaccines have been administered, and more than 62 million persons have been fully vaccinated [3].

The number of individuals who use social media has increased in tandem with the number of people using the internet. Different social media platforms have emerged as the primary means for internet users to express their emotions and reactions in recent years [4]. More than 2 billion people regularly share their daily activities through social media platforms [5]. According to a study, there are currently 3.50 billion internet users worldwide. One in every three persons in the world uses different social media sites. Some of the most popular platforms are Facebook, Twitter, and YouTube. By 2019, there are around 2.40 billion

Due to the simplicity of these social media sites, users rely heavily on these platforms for sharing news and information. These platforms have become the prime sources of health-related information also. In the current COVID-19 situation, people are vastly sharing and discussing their views on the pandemic, vaccines and the vaccination process. Users post both positive and negative news and opinions. Sometimes negative and fake information about the vaccines and the vaccination process creates vaccine hesitancy, leading individuals to be disinterested in getting vaccinated. In 2019, vaccine hesitancy was enlisted as one of the ten most significant implications to global health [7]. Fake, as well as misleading information regarding the vaccination procedure, has the

With the beginning of the vaccination program for COVID-19 in Bangladesh, Bangladeshi netizens are also using social networking platforms to express their views and reactions. They have shown mixed reactions to the ongoing vaccination program. However, very few studies have been conducted to analyze the opinions and feelings of Bangladeshi netizens about the COVID-19 vaccination program. This work attempts to fill this gap. Based on different demographic attributes, this study looked at how social media users felt about the COVID-19 vaccines and the ongoing vaccination campaigns in Bangladesh. This study also aims to extract the most essential themes expressed by the Bangladeshi netizens regarding these campaigns. Finally, this research has suggested several machine learning and deep learning approaches

The remainder of the paper is arranged as follows: Section 2 portrays the related works of the study. The methodology for analyzing the opinions of the Bangladeshi netizens regarding the COVID-19 vaccine and the ongoing vaccination program is delineated in Section 3. The result of the study is exhibited in Section 4. Finally, Section 5 concludes the paper by outlining some potential future scopes.

Naseem et al. [1] used a large dataset of ninety thousand COVID-19 related tweets to examine public attitudes towards the pandemic. The study was conducted with a view to discovering the most popular issues discussed by Twitter users about the COVID-19 epidemic. The LDA model was used to perform the topic modelling. Different machine and deep learning-based models were employed for predicting the polarity of the public sentiments regarding the pandemic. According to the study, the Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers (BERT) model showed the best performance in classifying the public sentiments.

Chakraborty et al. [8] performed their study to analyze the polarity of public opinions regarding the COVID-19 pandemic also. According to this study, although individuals were tweeting mostly positive state- ments about the epidemic, the majority of the retweets represented negative feelings. The authors proposed a deep learning-based model to identify the polarity of the public sentiments regarding the epidemic and achieved an accuracy of 81%. They also proposed a fuzzy model based on the Gaussian Membership Function to determine the polarity of public opinions. Doing so, they achieved an accuracy of 79%.

Shim et al. [9] collected the public opinion regarding the COVID-19 vaccine in Korea. This study utilized LDA to retrieve the most prevalent topics discussed by the Korean population about the COVID-19 vaccine. For identifying the polarity of the public attitudes towards the vaccine, this study proposed a Bi-Directional LSTM (Bi LSTM) model. This study found that initially, the ratio of positive and negative tweets about the vaccine was almost the same. However, there was a rise in the number of negative tweets about the vaccine with the increase in the number of COVID-19 affected cases. In the negative tweets, the Twitter users expressed their fear and disappointment about the vaccine.

Lyu et al. [12] conducted a study for identifying sentiments and topics in COVID-19 vaccine-related social media discussions. This study also tried to detect the shifts in the topics and the emotions over time about the vaccine. They used LDA for topic modelling as well as senti- ment and emotion analysis on a total of 1,499,421 tweets from 583,499 different persons. Finally, they discovered that topic modelling of vaccine-related tweets produced 16 topics that were arranged into five main themes. However, due to the period of their data set, they did not investigate sentiments against individual vaccine brands.

The attitudes of people towards the vaccines of various kinds were examined in this study using natural language processing (NLP) tech- niques and they visualized the scenario by grouping the polarities of the received feelings into three categories, i.e. positive, negative, and neutral. The performance of the predictive models was evaluated using a Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) including Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) and Bi-Directional LSTM (Bi LSTM). Here, LSTM and Bi LSTM obtained an accuracy of 90.59% and 90.83%, respectively.

Hayawi et al. [15] presented a unique COVID-19 vaccination misinformation detection framework based on machine learning (ML). They used ML techniques to classify vaccination misinformation after collecting and annotating COVID-19 vaccine tweets. They categorized more than 15,000 tweets into two categories using credible sources and taking the help of specialists. This research work used Extreme Gradient Boosting (XGBoost), LSTM, and the BERT transformer model for classi- fication. Among these models, the BERT model showed the best per- formance. They concluded that machine learning-based algorithms are successful at detecting COVID-19 vaccine misinformation.

tensity, according to their results. Additionally, their tweets reflect their attitudes on events and news in their countries, such as the number of new cases of infection, fatalities, and recoveries. Furthermore, throughout the transmission of the infection, a common sentiment pattern is noticed in numerous countries.

words to determine their sentiments. For analyzing the sentiments of the tweets, they utilized a deep learning model based on CNN-LSTM archi- tecture. Finally, they discovered a slight variation in the number of positive opinions towards domestic and imported vaccines. The study stated that the imported vaccines had the majority of positive sentiments.

sentiment and to identify the latent topics of the opinions of the com- munity members, data was aggregated and examined by month. Ac- cording to polarity analysis, these communities indicated more positive sentiments than negative sentiments towards vaccine-related topics. Topic modelling demonstrated that community members were more concerned with adverse effects than bizarre conspiracy theories. Throughout the LDA topic modelling, keywords indicating vaccine hesitancy were discovered.

Yang et al. [19] investigated the misconceptions and misinformation about the Covid-19 pandemic. They categorized the misconceptions regarding Covid-19 into five groups. They found that majority of Covid-19 misconceptions addressed the spreading of the virus. More- over, they also found that the misconceptions regarding the propagation of the virus and preventive methods spread quicker than the other cat- egories. They employed a deep neural network-based model to identify the emotions of the tweets propagating misconceptions. They noticed that fear was the most prevalent emotion in these tweets.

Yin et al. [22] conducted a study to analyze the public attitudes to- ward the Covid-19 vaccine. In addition, they identified the most com- mon and discussed vaccine-related topics. They used LDA for topic modelling and the VADER model to determine the polarity of the feel- ings. According to the findings of this study, the majority of the netizens showed a willingness to be vaccinated. This study also showed that the netizens had unfavourable feelings regarding the news of adverse effects of the vaccines, shortfalls of the vaccines, and fatalities following taking the vaccines.

Yin et al. [23] analyzed the dynamics of topics and sentiments on social networking sites. They found that tweets associated with home quarantine conveyed mostly positive views, and tweets discussing the mortalities due to the pandemic mostly expressed negative sentiments. Based on the preceding discussions, it can be stated that no research work has been conducted yet to analyze the opinions of Bangladeshi netizens regarding the vaccine and the vaccination process using ma- chine learning, deep learning and natural language processing tech- niques. This research has paved the way to fill this void. This study has utilized different deep learning and traditional machine learning tech- niques to identify the polarity of the opinions of the Bangladeshi neti- zens. Furthermore, this study has extracted the latent topics discussed by the Bangladeshis in social media regarding the COVID-19 vaccine and

news portals, health organizations, etc. and, 83.35% of opinions were gathered from personal accounts. The organizational accounts included the pages of UNICEF Bangladesh, UNICEF South Asia, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Bangladesh, and various newspapers like The Daily Star, Dhaka Tribune, etc.

For labelling the polarity of the statements, we employed seven volunteers. The volunteers labelled the sentiment of each statement of the dataset into two categories: positive and negative. The majority rating of the volunteers was used to determine the absolute polarity of a statement.

has been used to extract the most discussed topics among the Bangla- deshi citizens regarding the vaccine and the vaccination process. In 2003, Blei et al. proposed the LDA model [26]. Documents are seen by LDA as a collection of topics. Topics, on the other hand, are treated as a blend of words. The probability of each word appearing in a topic is measured. If a word has a high probability of appearing in a topic, all documents containing that word are tightly linked to that topic.

Topic 4: Netizens were discussing the side effects of the vaccines. Topic 5: When the government failed to acquire vaccines despite making advance payments to other countries for vaccines, netizens expressed their dissatisfaction. Moreover, they demanded that the government should take back the money that was paid in advance.

text data, these emojis and emoticons have been removed from the collected dataset. Netizens also utilize hashtags to symbolize a variety of trends and topics. The hash characters of the hashtags are removed in this step. Often two or more words are concatenated in the hashtag words, which may affect the performance of the machine learning models. So, the hashtag words have been segmented in this step.

The presence of punctuation marks and stop words may cause the models to perform poorly. The stop words are the most prevalent words in a language. They seldom have a significant impact in determining the polarity of a statement. So, the punctuation marks and the unnecessary stop words have been removed after performing tokenization. As

The proposed LSTM model consists of two LSTM layers. The first LSTM layer has 256 LSTM units, whereas the second LSTM layer has 128 LSTM units. Two dense layers with Rectified Linear Unit (RELU) acti- vation function have been placed after the LSTM layers. Each of these LSTM and dense layers is followed by a dropout layer with a dropout rate of 0.2. Finally, Batch Normalization has been applied. After that, the final dense layer has been added. It has used the Softmax activation

For analyzing the performance of the proposed models, 215 state- ments of the netizens have been used. Among the statements of the test dataset, 56.74% statements have a positive polarity and the rest, 43.26% statements have a negative polarity. Different performance metrics such

Bi LSTM with the pre-trained word2vec embedding model has shown the highest accuracy of 87.44% among the deep learning models. In terms of accuracy, the word2vec embedding based deep learning models have shown better performances than the GloVe embedding based deep learning models. The accuracies of LSTM, 1D-CNN and TCN models with word2vec embedding are 86.05%, 85.12%, and 86.51%, respectively. On the other hand, the accuracies of LSTM, Bi LSTM, 1D-CNN and TCN models with GloVe embedding are 85.12%, 85.58%, 84.19%, and

to 0.5, then the model will provide random outcomes. That means the later model is unable to differentiate between different classes. The AUC values of all the proposed deep learning models are more than 0.9. So it can be stated that all of the suggested deep learning models are almost flawless.

deshi netizens have been collected from different social media sites. This study considered the opinions of the netizens between the timeline June 2020 and July 2021. The polarity of the statements of the netizens was labelled with the help of seven volunteers. For validating the reliability of the polarity labelling of the volunteers, inter-rater reliability tests like

deep learning and traditional machine learning algorithms were employed in this study to predict the polarity of the statements of the netizens. Bi LSTM model with the pre-trained word2vec embedding has outscored other models in terms of different performance metrics for anticipating the polarity of the sentiments. The obtained accuracy of this model is 87.44%.

Md. Sabab Zulfiker: Methodology, Software, Formal analysis, Writing - Original Draft. Nasrin Kabir: Data Curation, Visualization, Formal analysis, Writing - Original Draft. Al Amin Biswas: Conceptu- alization, Formal analysis, Investigation, Writing - Original Draft. Sun- jare Zulfiker: Data Curation, Writing - Original Draft. Mohammad Shorif Uddin: Supervision, Writing - Review & Editing.

