Earlier research in the field of routing protocols was extensively based on one constraint like shortest path between source to destination. There are several other parameters (such as dropping header packets in case of congestion in the network or alternate path in case of link failure) which should be considered for making efficient routing decision. In recent years, active research in the field of routing protocols has been done to make routing decision based on more than one constraint. Fuzzy inference system is one such system which offers a natural way of accepting multiple input constraints which are uncertain and imprecise in nature. This paper aims at analyzing the performance of AODV and DSR routing protocols using fuzzy inference system. Further the behavior of these protocols is analyzed in both cases (with and without fuzzy inference system).

Based upon routing information update mechanism (Murthy, 2004; Sharma & Alam, 2012); three categories of routing protocols are (1) Proactive (2) Reactive (3) Hybrid. Proactive protocols periodically exchange their routing information in the form of routing table. Whereas reactive routing protocol obtains necessary path information only when needed. Hybrid routing protocol combines the best of above two. However performance of same protocol varies in different scenarios. These routing algorithms take several aspects into account during route establishment which decide and influence the routing decision. But still there is a need to develop a system that can deal with uncertain and imprecise information. Fuzzy Inference engine is able to fulfill these needs and helps in achieving dependable solution to route finding.

The Ad Hoc On-demand Distance Vector Routing (AODV) protocol (Sharma & Bashir, 2012; Bai & Singhal, 2006) is a reactive routing protocol for mobile ad hoc networks. AODV is based on the DSDV and DSR algorithms. It uses the route discovery and route maintenance process of DSR and step routing, sequence number to ensure loop-free and up-to-date routes in an on-demand way and periodic beaconing mechanism of DSDV. Reactive routing protocols require routing information of current path at nodes, when needed. To know their current destination route, every mobile node preserves routing table of next-hop. The stale entries in routing table expire, to get current routing information.

AODV routing process, uses control messages: route request (RREQ), route reply (RRP), route error (RERR) and Hello messages (Murthy & Manoj, 2004). when a source node desires to establish a communication session, it initiates to send packets to the destination if it has a current route to the destination in its routing table, otherwise; it initiates a path discovery process by broadcast RREQs .Once the intermediate node receives the RREQ, it checks the request and forwarded RREQ packet to the neighboring nodes if it is not the destination. This process repeats until RREQ reaches to the destination address node. On reaching destination address node it will reply with RRP packet. This RRP is unicast along the reverse-routes of the intermediate nodes until it reaches the original requesting node. A bi-directional route is established among source and destination. Link status to the next hope can be preserved by the use of hello messages. If no link is detected by a node then it sends RERR packet to its neighboring nodes which in turn transmit RERR packet to the link-affected nodes. These link-affected nodes can acquire other routes through route discovery mechanism, if required.

Dr. Lofti Zadeh of university of California proposed the concept of fuzzy logic (Ross, 1995; Wang, chen, yang & Gao, 2005) in the year 1965. It provides natural thinking mechanism based on human mind that include imprecision and ambiguity. The steps involved in working of Fuzzy inference system (Ross, 1998; Torshiz, Amintoosi, Movaghar, 2011) are as follows:

Identify relevant input and output variable. Assign linguistic label to each variable. These variables are expressed using fuzzy set. The linguistic variables characterize the key features like minimum bandwidth, hop count, route selection, probability etc. and fuzzy sets labels these linguistic as low, high, small medium etc. Then select proper membership function for input and output variables.

The Set of IF THEN rules are constructed to obtain the desired behavior of the system on the basis of knowledge of human expert. IF x is A THEN y is B, Where A and B are linguistic values of the linguistic variables x and y, respectively. In order to achieve the full functionality of the system, the rules can be kept on changing.

Numbers of routing protocols have been created in last four decades. Each has its own advantages and disadvantages, but no one is found better in all the conditions. To know their behavior by considering different metrics in different circumstances we have analyses AODV and DSR routing protocols based on Fuzzy inference system. We have also analysed their advantages and disadvantages.

based on fuzzy inference system. These protocols are built upon conventional AODV and DSR routing protocol. It has been observed that by adding new metrics and made minor changes in the operation of AODV and DSR, routing protocols using Fuzzy inference system increase the performance in real time applications. For further research Fuzzy logic can be used with other reactive routing protocols also.

