In Genetic Algorithm, the population size is an important parameter which directly influences the ability to search an optimum solution in the search space. Many researchers have revealed that having a large number of population leads to the accuracy of getting an optimal solution. But having a large population size will not be a good idea in case where the search space is small. Hence, optimal size for population pool has been determined, but the size is kept fixed. Despite the pool size is optimal, the fixed size population leads to time complexity and make the search more complex by increasing the number of generation to converge. So, the population pool size needs to be dynamically varying through the entire GA evolution of new solutions. This paper proposes an adaptive population pool based genetic algorithm, termed as APOGA, in which the population pool size either grown or shrunk at every iteration based on the performance status of the algorithm. The proposed algorithm is implemented and the performance is compared with standard genetic algorithm while solving benchmark test function with varying size of solution space. The experimental results show that APOGA outperforms standard GA for all the solution spaces.

[6] [7]. The goodness of each chromosome is calculated using an evaluation function, termed fitness function [11]. The GA operators, crossover and mutation simulate the process of natural reproduction and mutation of species respectively [4]. As these operators hybrid the existing solutions, the resultant solutions may be far better than the existing [5]. In traditional GA, the user fixes a constant population size and it remains the same throughout the entire iterative process. If the initial population size is too small, GA may fail to reach high quality solution. In contrast, large population size makes the GA computationally complex [12]. The effect of selecting good initial population for GA performance has been studied by Pedro et al. [16]. They proposed to maintain diversity in the initial population.

The outline of APOGA is to validate the size of population pool and to decide on whether to increase or decrease the size. With the reference of addressed issues in [20] and [21], APOGA intends to resolve them by hybridizing both the algorithms. The flow chart of APOGA is given in given in fig 1. The initialization of the population pool remains same as been done in standard GA.

initial population is set up, the next step in GA is to evaluate the fitness of each individual, (i.e. chromosome) in the population. Since the genetic algorithm is based on the Darwinian’s principle in which only the fittest can survive, the fitness value of the individuals must be calculated. In our case, we define the fitness function as a minimization function, which can be represented as follows

the number of iterations up to which iteration, the particular chromosome is able to perform [2] [3]. RLT is continuously monitored at the end of every iteration. Once the RLT of a chromosome attains zero, the chromosome is removed from the population pool.

Like standard GA, APOGA firstly performs selection followed by crossover and mutation. In the selection process, N p / 2 is selected based on the best fitness. It is to be noted that at every iteration N p varies. The selected chromosomes are paired as parents and single point crossover is performed. For each pair of parents,

For the new offspring, RLT is calculated using Eq. (4) along with their fitness. Based on the RLT of entire population pool and the fitness values, the resizing takes place. For resizing, we exploit the criteria used in [20]. As like in [20], the population size is grown at a rate as follows

The growth size is considered if the best fitness value of the current population is improved, i.e. higher than the best fitness value of previous population. If improved, then the population size is increased by introducing new G chromosomes into the population. The population pool is also grown, if the best fitness does not improve for T number of iterations. If neither of the above criteria is satisfied, D% of the chromosomes, which has least RLT values, are removed from the population pool. The RLT value of remaining chromosomes in the population pool is decreased by 1, except the best chromosome. Then the RLT of each chromosome is verified. If the RLT value of any chromosome is less than or equal to zero, then that chromosome is considered as not fit to continue in the search and hence it is removed from the population. Now, the new population enters into the next iteration and the similar process continues till the termination criterion is met.

APOGA and GA are executed for finding optimal solutions of Dejong type I function and the convergence graphs are obtained for varying solution spaces. Fig. 2 demonstrates us that the convergence deviation is notably high between APOGA and GA for all the solution spaces. We can also observe that in the initial set of iterations, the best fitness values of both APOGA and GA are almost similar but when it crosses around 50th iteration (approximately) APOGA shows a drastic minimization. This in turn it explains us that the population pool size is becoming adaptive to the fitness function after a defined number of iterations. The results are encouraging as APOGA outperforms standard GA even the size of solution space is widely varied.

This paper presented an adaptive population pool size based GA, which were called as APOGA. APOGA exploited RLT formulation for each chromosome by hybridizing with population pool growth and shrink criteria. APOGA was experimented with standard GA to visualize the convergence performance on Dejong Type I function with widening solution spaces. For five different varying solution spaces, the results were obtained. They showed that APOGA outperforms standard GA for all the test cases. As an interesting finding, APOGA and GA were similar in performance at first little iteration. After certain number of iterations, APOGA showed rapid convergence over the standard GA. Firstly we would state that both GA and APOGA are initialized with common population pool. As a result, they exhibited similar performance but in the later stages, due to increased and shrunk population pool, APOGA produced chromosome with minimum fitness. The results were encouraging and hence, APOGA will be tested with a collection of benchmark test functions and the performance will be studied over other GA variants.

