With the gradual depth exploit of residual oil in offshore oilfield, RPM logging are using widely in reservoirs dynamic monitoring , the process of logging RPM affected by lithology, porosity, borehole fluid and other factors, so we must do some correction for it. But M oilfield has a special well structure of gravel pack, therefore, some correction made in domestic are not suitable for application in the offshore reservoirs of gravel pack, Thus author design parallelogram method to obtain water holdup and water saturation , by comparing the calculated results with the PLT data, it is found that the error in a controllable range, and also design volumetric model to corrected formation capture cross section, by using the corrected capture cross section establish model with lithology; electrical property, then compares it with the model which corrected before, it improves the model accuracy a lot. By comparing the water saturation which calculated by corrected capture cross section with and the water saturation which obtained by the PLT data interpretation , It is found that the accuracy increased more than 6%,it provides a new method to instruct the RPM data interpretation.

etc[1] .Enhancements tool design; characterization and interpretation algorithms have contributed to increases in precision and accuracy of fluid saturation measurements. Different instruments have differences in the design and interpretation [2]. There is no single solution for the complex formation and borehole environment in C/O logging including cement, casing, fluid patterns etc. Some people had only did some simulation to research the influencing factors of carbon/oxygen (C/O) spectral logging, such as porosity; lithology; and so on[3][4].M oilfield has a characteristics with gravel pack, so the above personnel, for water saturation and the water holdup correction is not suitable for M oilfields. This paper consider the situation of gravel pack in offshore, by using PLT data measured distance C/O ratio and use of interpolation theory, it establishes parallelogram plate which obtaining water saturation and water holdup, by comparing the results with the PLT data, it is found that the error in a controllable range, author also make some corrected for capture cross sections, by using the corrected capture cross section to calculate water saturation, by comparing with the saturation which after corrected and before, Accuracy is improved by more than 6%, It provides a new guiding for RPM data interpretation.

The study finds that the measured values of NCOR and FCOR have a relationship with the lithology and porosity of the formation; we can obtain four measured values of NCOR and FCOR which borehole and formation are pure oil and pure water respectively, By ploting the FCOR and NCOR for these conditions to define the quadrilateral in each case. Thus, the width of the quadrilateral is affected by lithology and porosity of the formation. In the general case: all measurement points basically fall on the quadrilateral area. Water holdup in the borehole and formation oil saturation affect the values of NCOR and FCOR ,so the quadrilateral is an indicator to resolve the formation oil saturation and water holdup in the borehole[6] .

Gravel packing is the special well structure in offshore M oilfield, the part of gravel packing mainly in the part of the screen and casing annulus and perforation tunnel. Such as the production string structure in M oilfield, the inner diameter and outer diameter of borehole annulus section are 15.24cm and 21.1cm. But the instrument detection depth is 21cm and the C/O mode logging speed is 0.6m/min, vertical resolution is 61cm [7], so the measured capture cross section of RPM is also affected by the gravel pack. Accordingly, in order to obtain the formation parameters accurately and improve interpretation accuracy, it is necessary to do some quantitative correction for related factors. So the author designed volumetric model corrected formation capture cross sections.

