Shuffled frog leaping algorithm (SFLA) is a population-based novel and effective meta-heuristics computing method, which received increasing focuses from academic and engineering optimization fields in recent years. Since SFLA is a combination of Memetic algorithm (MA) with strong local search (LS) ability and particle swarm optimization (PSO) with good global search (GS) capability, it is of strong optimum-searching power and easy to be implemented. This paper is devoted to investigate the ability of shuffled frog leaping algorithm (SFLA) to solve an uncapacitated single level lot- sizing (SLLS) problem. Through comparing with some heuristic algorithms, the result showed the feasibility and effectiveness of SFLA.

The lot-sizing (LS) problem is the key production planning problem in materials requirements planning (MRP) systems. Its aim is to decide the optimal production lot size and the inventory volume to minimize the production cost, the inventory carrying cost, the back ordering cost etc. People used to adopt heuristics to solve MLLS problems (Silver et al., 1998). Recently, the applications of simulated annealing (SA) algorithm,

genetic algorithm(GA) and PSO algorithm have been adopted to solve multilevel lot-sizing (MLLS) problems (Kennedy and Eberhart, 1995, Clerc, 2000, Dellaert and Jeunet, 2000, Han et al., 2009, Tang, 2004, Eberhart and Kennedy, 1995, Shi and Eberhart, 1998, Shi and Eberhart, 1998, Yelle, 1979, Dong et al., 2005). The single level lot-sizing (SLLS) problem is a special case of MLLS problem. Shuffled frog leaping algorithm (SFLA) is proposed by Eusuff and Lansey in 2003 (Eusuff and Lansey, 2003), which now has been the hotspot in intelligent optimization fields. Since SFLA is a combination of Memetic algorithm (MA) with strong local search (LS) ability and particle swarm optimization (PSO) with good global search (GS) capability, it is of strong optimum-searching power and easy to be implemented. So far, few literatures have introduced the application of SFLA to SLLS problem. Here we solve a single level lot-sizing problem with SFLA coded in C++ language in order to see whether or not SFLA is a feasible and effective tool for this kind of problem.

SFLA is a recently popular meta-heuristic based on the memetic evolution of a group of frogs when seeking for the location that has the maximum amount of available food. Proposed in 2003, SFLA is the combination of the merits of memetic algorithm (MA) and PSO. In SFLA, the population consists of a group of frogs (solutions) that is partitioned into subsets (memeplexes). Different memeplexes, each performs a local search, are considered as different cultures (memes) of frogs.

The SFLA is described as follows: assume that the initial population is formed by P randomly generated frogs. For L-dimensional problems (L variables), a frog i is represented as Xi=(xi1, xi2,., xiL). Afterwards, the frogs are sorted in a descending order according to their fitness. Then, the entire population is divided into m memeplexes, each containing n frogs (i.e.P = mn). In this process, the first frog goes to the first memeplex, the second frog goes to the second memeplex, frog m goes to the mth memeplex, and frog m+1 goes back to the first memeplex, etc.

Within each memeplex, the frogs with the best and the worst fitness are denoted by Xb and Xw. The frog with the global best fitness is identified as Xg. Here, a process similar to PSO is applied to improve Xw (not all frogs) in each small group. The adjusting measure is as follows:

Where rand() is a random number between 0 and 1. Smax is the maximum change in a frog’s position. If a better solution Xnew is produced, it replaces the worst frog Xw. Otherwise, the calculations in Eqs.(6) and Eqs.(7) are repeated by replacing Xb with Xg in Eqs.(6). If no improvement is achieved under this situation, then a new solution is randomly generated to replace Xw. Then the memeplex is reordered and renewed within local search times and thereafter all the memeplexes are shuffled together to exchange information and reallocated for next search process. The flowchart of SFLA can be given out in Fig 1 (Eusuff and Lansey, 2003).

According to the characteristics of SLLS problem, a solution is a one dimensional vector composed of a string of 0 or 1 with the length T, such as {1,0,0,1,0,1,1,0,0,0,1,0}. Since the demand for products in each period is known beforehand like {10,10,10,10,10,10,10,10,10,10,10,10}, the solution can be easily translated into a production decision {30,0,0,20,0,10,40,0,0,0,20,0}. Then the inventory level and inventory carrying cost can be decided accordingly.

solution is revised into a crossover operator resembling the one adopted in genetic algorithm (GA). While producing a new frog (solution) in a memeplex, the best frog and the worst frog are crossed over to produce two new solutions. After comparison of the objective function value, the new solution with a better result is kept and the other one is discarded.

Meal(SM),EOQ, Lot-4-Lot and Least Unit Cost. External demand is randomly chosen with a mean value of 92. The max length of a velocity is set to be 0.02  M  T. Holding cost for inventory is set equal to 200  15i with

In this paper, we applied a SFLA to solve uncapacitated SLLS problem. Our contribution is that we introduced SFLA to solve SLLS problem and gained ideal results. In our future study, we firstly should expend our experiment framework to more complex product structures with larger scale. Then more improvements should be made such as combining some heuristics with SFLA.

