PVP (Plant Variety Protection) has been playing an increasingly important role in social development, and it has attracted great attentions worldwide. The rapid growth in PVP has placed mounting pressure on the selection of similar varieties used in PVP examination, or DUS test. Such situation makes the traditional way of similar variety selection relying on manual work in trouble. Information System of Varieties of Common Knowledge was proposed in this paper with the aim of improving the accuracy and efficiency of PVP examination and sorting out all kinds of information of plant varieties. The framework, management, maintenance and function of this System was introduced, and the application of this System in the selection of similar varieties was also illustrated in this paper. Based on this System, selection of similar varieties can be standardized, simplified, and independent of subjective judgment from PVP examiners. The information of plant varieties can be managed as well.

With the coming of knowledge economics, intellectual property has become an important index of weighing the comprehensive strength and core competitiveness of any country or region. It has been playing an increasingly important role in science & technology progress, economic development and social stability [1, 2]. As one form of intellectual property, plant variety protection (PVP) is not only the key to the development of modern agriculture, but also the guarantee of social development [3].

In 1999, China officially joined the International Union for the Protection of New Varieties of Plants (UPOV), and became its 39th member. Over the past 13 years, our course on PVP has started from scratch and witnessed continuous development. The number of PVP application and granting has been increasing. The annual quantity of application rose from 115 twelve years ago to 1138 in 2011. By the end of 2010, the accumulative total of applications from 30 provinces (as well as autonomous regions and municipalities) in China and 14 other countries had reached 6989, and of which, 2890 applications have been authorized [4].

In a country where PVP is implemented, PVP can only be granted to those varieties which are determined to be distinct from any varieties of common knowledge (“known varieties” hereinafter), and PVP examination is based on DUS test which is conducted with the reference of similar varieties. Similar varieties are generally selected from the known varieties. In one case of DUS test, similar varieties need to be as few as possible to improve the efficiency and save the labor and cost. Therefore, the selection of similar varieties from the known varieties is of great importance to the efficiency and accuracy of DUS test [5].

Known varieties include varieties sold for years, applied for the grant of PVP, or entered in an official register. At the time when a new variety is in conformity with preliminary examination of PVP, the variety could be deemed as known variety. The number of known varieties has thereby been increasing along with the rapid growth of PVP, which has placed mounting pressure on the selection of similar varieties. Such situation makes the traditional way of similar variety selection relying on manual work in trouble. Therefore, PVP examination is in urgent need of an information-based platform, which can sort out various kinds of information of known varieties and ensure the selection of similar varieties accurate and effective.

To ensure the safety of the System, access to its use and maintenance is clearly defined. As shown in Fig.1, access to the maintenance of system framework and variety information is available to administrators, and any revision to the two parts is restricted to administrator. The function of the System in selecting similar varieties is available to examiners and other users.

Each variety can be described by characteristic expression. To illustrate the characteristics and compare certain characteristics among varieties, the expression range of each characteristic can be divided into a number of states, and the whole set of expression states can be assigned as Note “1-9”, or “1-5” et al.. In the framework of characteristic description, the whole set of Notes for each characteristic and corresponding expression states are established, which are included into “Characteristic Dictionary”.

In the “Dictionary”, each characteristic has one standard code. Besides, information related to characteristic’s full name, expression type, expression states and corresponding notes are included in each characteristic. Characteristics with the same or similar name, expression states and notes can be merged into one, and given one standard code.

Photography is another effective way to visually describe varieties besides characteristic description. For the sake of comparing different varieties with the aid of photographs, the parts of single plant which are used as the targets of photographs should be defined. Information related to the plant parts (photograph targets) is thus included in this framework.

Registration information can be generated when a variety enters into the National or Provincial Registration of Varieties. Registration information of a variety refers to the registration code, registration date, registration conclusion, et. al.. Management of this part includes adding, deleting, revising and inquiring the registration information.

Characteristic information is the information related to the characteristic measurements gained in past years and different test stations, including Test No. of each variety, expression states and corresponding notes of characteristics, as well as the initial measurements of characteristics. Management of this part includes adding, deleting, revising and inquiring the characteristic information as above, and besides, data importing in batches. Two or more years’ DUS test data will be combined into one set to facilitate the harmonization of variety description.

In accordance with the photography protocols, the photographed parts of a variety are clearly defined, and each plant genera or species has their confirmed photographed parts. Besides, photographs should be taken by the same type of camera, and each photograph should be named according to certain rules. The name of one photograph composes of “variety name_photographed parts_No.”. Photograph information related to photograph names, locations, dates, photographed parts is included in this part. Management of this part includes adding, deleting, revising and inquiring photograph information.

A variety applying for PVP should be DUS tested with the reference of similar varieties. Similar varieties are selected from the known varieties. Selection of similar varieties is based on two aspects, characteristic description and DNA fingerprint. When a variety has the most similar characteristic description and DNA fingerprint with the given variety, the variety is considered as the similar variety of the given variety.

The range of candidate varieties should be confirmed. Candidate varieties should be in the same plant genera or species as the given variety, or in the same group (i.e. subgroup) of plant genera or species in the case where the given variety belongs to certain subgroup.

After the consideration of plant genera or species and characteristic variation, selection of similar varieties enters the critical phase: comparison of expressions of the same characteristic. According to the expression types of characteristics, characteristics are grouped as qualitative characteristics (QL), quantitative characteristics (PQ) and pseudo-quantitative characteristics (QN). It is important to note that characteristic expressions should be compared in following order: QL->PQ->QN. The specific method is as follows:

Difference of the notes for the expression states of pseudo-qualitative characteristics (PQ) between similar varieties and the given variety is allowed. However, the difference should be as little as possible. If a pseudo-qualitative characteristic is a grouping characteristic, any difference in the characteristic between similar varieties and the given variety should be avoided.

The range of candidate varieties should be confirmed, and candidate varieties should in the same plant genera or species as the given variety, or in the same group (i.e. subgroup) of plant genera or species if the given variety belongs to certain subgroup.

DNA fingerprint is detected by PCR amplification and electrophoresis, and is composed of different DNA bands. DNA fingerprint is described by the loci of DNA bands. Thus, selection of similar variety in this regard is based on comparison of DNA fingerprint, or the loci of amplified DNA bands, and difference should also be as little as possible.

