Communication equipment radio, especially military radios, which wish only the receiver receives communication contents, namely to ensure the communication information is confidential. The traditional approach is by using encryption technique of cryptology to encrypt communication content; as a result, other receivers without secret key cannot understand the contents. As information become mojibake after being encrypted, it is easy to attract interceptors’ attention and arouse their desire of password cracking. Once the content is decrypted there is no longer a protective action; even if the interceptor cannot crack, he also can intercept the confidential information successfully or can interfere with the procedure of communication. Therefore, cryptology can only protect the contents in transferring.

Therefore, it is in urgently need of another kind of alternative technology or technology replenishing cryptology, which should even be able to continue to protect content after it is decrypted. The "digital watermarking" of covert communication technology has the capacity to meet these requirements, because it not only protects the content of the communicating information, but more important it hides the existence of communication facts, and thus confuse interceptors. After confidential information is encrypted, and then conduct covert communication, which adds another layer of protection. Meanwhile in general use digital watermarking will not be eliminated. Even after the process of decryption, encryption, compression, digital - analog conversion and the file format transformation, the clever designed watermark can continue to exist.

In the process of watermarking embedment, the first step is t produce watermarking. The information you want to embed in can be all kinds of nature, such as number, image and text so forth. The use of password is to enhance the security by protecting non-authorized people from reading messages. The output of watermarking embedding process is image works with embedded watermarking.

The input of the watermarking detection process is the image be tested, it may not be watermarking embedded, or it may be images been watermarking embedded and then attacked. Because of different watermarking algorithm, the input of watermarking detection process can also be password, intact face and so on. The Input of the watermarking detection process may be the watermarking been detected, or a confidence value about whether watermarking is involved in the detected signals.

One important application of digital watermarking is data hiding. In the approved watermarking project, it just needs to judge whether the watermarking exist or not, so meaningless watermarking can be embedded. However, in the watermarking project carrying with confidential data, the watermarking is meaningful and the amount of information of watermarking is bigger.

Technology methods of data hidden mainly have spatial domain algorithm and transform domain algorithm. Digital image hiding algorithm based on integration is one kind of spatial domain algorithm. It uses Bzier Curve one time, hiding confidential images in the original images which have the same size. This kind of algorithm has the characteristics of simple calculation, easy to realize and high quality of regained confidential image. It also can embed any form of binary stream files in digital images. In selecting proper parameters, it can exactly recover the binary stream files. The biggest feature of this algorithm is high ability of hiding data. In the case of gray level image the same as original image, its biggest hidden ability can be 3bits/pixel, so the main application of this algorithm is hide of confidential data.

And because L is the length of bit substring, it can only be positive integer. So L is [1,2,3].Chart 1 finds out when L takes different value, the numeric area of t and the biggest hide ability when 8bits/pixel gray level image is the original image.

The development of digital watermarking technology just has ten years, Data hiding by the use of digital media is still a new field of study, but it also is a practical which is closer combined with specific application. The realization of encrypting radio confidential information by using digital watermarking technology is also a new try. The results will be better if it is combined with the existing encryption technology. We believe there will be new radio security equipments made by digital watermarking in the future.

