CPS CPS are a new generation of systems that have integrated compu- tational and physical capabilities and can interact with humans via various procedures. A CPS is generally a networked compu- tation and physical process-integrated system with cooperating computational elements and controlling physical entities. Its roots are frequently seen as embedded systems, objects with spe- cialized sensing and processing capabilities. Because a CPS is a network of interacting embedded devices, it is feasible to process data locally such that valuable information or abstracted data may be transmitted through the network. CPS implementation in industrial contexts is commonly referred to as Cyber–Physical Production Systems (CPPS) or Industrial CPS [19,20].

SCADA/ICS SCADA/ICS play a vital role in managing and controlling critical infrastructure. These are frequently defined as infrastruc- tures that offer essential services and serve as the foundation for a country’s security, economic, and healthcare systems. They can include sectors such as agriculture, healthcare, nuclear re- actors, transportation, the energy industry, civil and chemical engineering, water plants, research, and so on. Technological improvements have resulted in the SCADA/ICS evolution to modern systems such as CPS [21].

IoT Because of the fast expansion of Internet technology, many phys- ical objects may now be linked to the Internet via embedded electronics, software, sensors, and network devices. IoT often refers to scenarios in which network connection is extended to everyday physical things. The fundamental idea behind IoT is to link devices to each other over the Internet, thanks to recent developments in wireless technology. The Internet, in this scenario, symbolizes the worldwide networking of linked devices – or Things – that allow them to communicate with one another by sharing and transforming information. In industry, IoT is commonly referred to as the Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT). By connecting all industrial systems and shop-floor equip- ment to the Internet, a production manager or executive may readily obtain production information from any location with an Internet connection. Furthermore, they may remotely control the events of production equipment [22–24].

Industrial LAN In a traditional industrial context, there are primar- ily two communication levels: process and control. Each has unique network needs, such as round-trip time, determinism, dependability, and the severity of failures, requiring different communication methods. Thus, IP networks are often employed at the process level, whereas field networks are used at the control level. Field networks, namely fieldbus protocols, have been utilized in industrial applications for some time. Industrial Ethernet protocols were developed to bridge the gap between fieldbus systems and IP networks [25,26].

MAS MAS is based on a society of intelligent, cooperative, proactive, and autonomous entities called agents that represent physical or logical things in the system. It is derived from the field of distributed AI. The agents are dispersed across the environ- ment, interacting with one another and with the environment to achieve a specific or common objective, sharing information, making choices, and modifying their behaviour as conditions change [27].

DT To accomplish digitalization, a more significant effort in standard- ization is necessary to develop consistent interfaces. This will foster open communication among a diverse set of entities. This standardization is frequently achieved through the notion of DT, which is often viewed as a wrapper used to connect any device or process into a network where information can be readily ac- cessed, processed, and shared. In the industrial environment, the DT may be viewed as a software wrapper of physical equipment or information systems, offering autonomous decision making, standardized communication, sensorisation as a plug & play approach, and smart control [28–30].

AI Manufacturing processes should employ a computationally pro- cessable model, such as data-based, physical-based, numerical- based, or discrete-based, to realize the full potential of decision support. Data-driven models involve the analysis of sensor data to discover hidden patterns in the data. This is referred to as data mining, and it can employ one or more AI algorithms to extract relevant information from data. These approaches may be based on hard computing, such as Machine Learning methods, or on soft computing, such as Biologic Inspired Computation [6,31, 32].

WSAN Sensors are used to acquire data about physical processes to monitor them. This data is then analysed and used to regulate physical processes via actuators, resulting in the optimization of a manufacturing process. WSAN has recently enabled sensors and actuators using wireless communication. Sensor motes can be utilized if industrial needs require the deployment of a large number of sensors where the primary aim is to gather sensor data at a reasonable cost or if sensor integration has proven chal- lenging because of the lack of accessibility to remote physical places. Motes are tiny devices commonly used to develop WSAN and are equipped with a microcontroller, battery, radio, Analog to Digital Converter (ADC), and some sensors [33–35].

Cloud/Edge Computing Because of advancements in Cloud comput- ing, IoT has become appealing. Wireless devices are distin- guished by their mobility and battery power, which present sev- eral constraints for data process and storage needs for running algorithms. This means that these capabilities can be relocated out of the constrained devices to powerful remote servers as long as a network connection is available (for information ex- change). Cloud computing refers to the ability of hardware and software systems to deliver data services over the Internet. Data collected from the sensorisation layer can be further processed remotely on the Cloud or the Fog. On the other hand, Fog

Industrial Robots An industrial robot is a self-contained, reprogrammable, multifunctional manipulator with three or more axes that can be stationary or mobile, used in industrial au- tomation applications. An industrial robot generally comprises a manipulator that moves an end-effector to accomplish the intended duties, a controller that actuates and regulates the manipulator, and a teach pendant that programmes and super- vises the operations. There are also Automated Guided Vehicles (AGV), which are robots that transport goods in facilities. More recently, collaborative robots emerged. Cobots are designed to work safely alongside human workers in a shared, collaborative workspace [42,43].

Despite this difficulty for many people and companies when it comes to identifying and implementing AMS, which can be seen cur- rently as I4.0 scenarios, right now, the concept is more transparent. All the implemented I4.0 scenarios converge to very similar require- ments and goals to achieve added value in different manufacturing applications, based on ICT technological advances, such as IoT, AI, Cloud/Edge, and CPS. Oztemel and Gursev [1] presents 12 goals to achieve I4.0, namely:

Computer systems have reached a level of complexity where hu- man intervention for operation and control is becoming increasingly difficult. In the IoT paradigm, the visions of ubiquitous and perva- sive computing will become true by surrounding us with embedded technology and transforming every physical object into a CPS. These CPS are connected to sensors and actuators to maintain communication between physical and virtual worlds and are interconnected to other CPS using communication systems. How can such a complex system be managed in this scenario, considering all the actively interacting heterogeneous devices and uncertainty involved? In 2001, the Inter- national Business Machines Corporation (IBM) suggested the concept of Autonomic Computing, referring to the need for new methods to manage and control the behaviour of complex systems, where these systems should be able to adapt themselves, eliminating the need for human intervention [44].

The Autonomic Computing concept, later extended to Organic Com- puting [45], has been inspired by the human autonomic nervous system [46], which removes from the consciousness the tasks of coordinating all our bodily functions (for regular maintenance and optimization) by taking care of most of them. Kephart and Chess [47] warn that system managers cannot anticipate, design and maintain the complexity of the interactions among devices and computer systems, especially in CPS. For this reason, computer systems should constantly adapt themselves to changing environmental conditions in a logic loop that monitors the context of execution. Such dynamics can be realized by a Monitor–Analyse–Plan–Execute (MAPE) loop or a Monitor–Analyse– Plan–Execute–Knowledge (MAPE-K) loop architecture [44,47], which is illustrated in Fig. 1.

The essence of Autonomic Computing is the system capacity of Self- Management, which, according to Ganek and Corbi [48], includes the so-called Self-x, Self-* (Self-star) or Self-CHOP properties. According to Berns and Ghosh [49], Self-Managing systems are systems that maintain, improve and restore their functionality or properties without external actions on the system. Self-Management is the generic property that encompasses the various Self-* properties, which relies on Zadeh’s concept of adaptivity [50]. Essential Self-* properties are:

Biologic Inspired Computation refers to the study of biologically mo- tivated computation, which belongs to the field of Natural Computing and a sub-field of Computational Intelligence. Biologic Inspired Computa- tion main goal is to solve engineering and computation problems by generating solutions inspired by different biological processes from the natural world. Several sub-disciplines focus on adaptive and intelligent systems, such as Evolutionary Computation, Swarm Intelligence, Fuzzy Systems, Artificial Neural Networks (ANN), and AIS.

The BIS is a robust and self-organized system with remarkable abil- ities, such as recognition and discrimination, maintenance, inference from danger/context and memory. To maintain a healthy state, the BIS processes the state of the body and takes action accordingly through healing processes [52,53]. The BIS is a multilayer system wherein different types of defence mechanisms are active in each layer. There are three main lines of defence: the anatomic barrier, innate immunity and adaptive immunity. The anatomic barrier is constituted by physical obstacles, such as skin, mucous membranes and skin secretions, to prevent pathogens such as bacteria and viruses from entering the organ- ism. If a pathogen breaches the first line of defence, innate immunity provides an immediate but non-specific response, such as inflammatory response and antimicrobial proteins. If pathogens successfully evade the innate response, it will activate the adaptive immunity, which adapts its response during an infection to improve its recognition skills and kill the pathogen.

The BIS consists of a set of organs (central and peripheral lymphoid organs), cells (lymphocytes or white blood cells and granulocytes) and molecules (immunoglobulins or antibodies) [54,55]. The central lymphoid organs, such as bone marrow and the thymus, are responsible for producing and assisting lymphocytes. The purpose of peripheral lymphoid organs, such as lymph nodes, spleen and mucosal tissues, is to facilitate the interaction between lymphocytes and antigens.

the recognition process, the epitope bonds to the lymphocytes using the paratope, which is the bonding molecule of the lymphocyte. Antibodies are a particular type of molecule. They are the paratopes of the B cells and are responsible for binding to the antigen. Antigens are mostly known as non-self cells, while the host body cells are known as self-cells. Epitopes are usually non-self if they are part of antigens, or self since some proteins of the host body could be recognized by lymphocytes.

[56] presents a deep review of AIS, focusing on anomaly detection applications in CPS. As described next, four main immune mechanisms have inspired most standard AIS techniques [5]. However, there are ensemble methods, which represent approaches that combine more than one basic technique. Finally, there are immune-inspired methods, which do not follow exactly a specific immune model but use immune principles.

Artificial Immune Network Models (AIN) [58,59] Jerne [60] pro- posed the immune network theory, also known as idiotypic network theory, in 1974, which suggests that the immune sys- tem maintains an idiotypic network of interconnected B cells for antigen recognition and immunological memory. An idiotype is a group of antibodies that share a common characteristic. This algorithm investigates the interconnectivity of different immune cells, i.e., cell populations linked over successive generations, to stimulate or suppress immune responses. The Artificial Immune Network algorithm (aiNet) [61] is a well-known approach in- spired by the AIN. In this technique, antibodies stimulate and suppress each other to stabilize the network and the memory. An idiotype is stimulated when the antibodies from the group bind to idiotopes of other groups of antibodies. This results in the increase of the concentration of antibodies from the idiotype, and the concentration of antibodies from the recognized group decreases, leading to the stimulation or suppression of a given immune response.

the presence of antigens based on the antigen–antibody affinity. This affinity is based on the binding level between a B cell and an antigen. When a B cell is activated by the presence of an antigen, the B cell matures into plasma cells and secretes antibodies. The created antibodies with higher affinities are cloned, and a mutation process differentiates the clones. If the new antibodies react to self cells, then they are eliminated. In these situations, the concentration of B cells with an improved affinity builds up. Some B cells are retained as memory cells to make a more effective immune response to antigens encountered previously. The created antibodies bind to antigens to tag and inactivate them. A well know technique of CSA is the CLONal selection ALGorithm (CLONALG) [62,63]. Other theories were proposed, such as Artificial Immune Recognition System (AIRS)

Danger Theory (DT) [67] Matzinger [68] explains how an immune response is initiated. She states that, contrary to the previous theories, the ‘foreignness’ of a pathogen is not the important feature that triggers a response, and ‘selfness’ is no guarantee of tolerance. The immune response is initiated by a co-stimulatory signal from specific Dendritic Cells (DCs). Injured cells, such as those exposed to pathogens, emit danger/alarm signals that activate DCs. These signals should not be emitted by healthy cells or cells undergoing normal physiological death. Once acti- vated, they provide a co-stimulatory signal to exhibit an immune response in the danger zone around the injured cell. The most notorious DT-based algorithm is the Dendritic Cell Algorithm (DCA) [69], which captures the function of DCs [70], first iden- tified by Steinman and Cohn [71]. In the tissue, when antigens stimulate DCs, they mature and differentiate accordingly to the specific danger context collected. The level of maturation of a DC is facilitated by the detection of signals within the tissue, namely danger signals (caused by damage to tissue cells), pathogenic associated molecular patterns (pre-defines bacterial signatures), safe signals (caused by regulated cell deaths) and

Considering the nature of AIS techniques, they have already proven to be suitable for solving real-world problems in computer science and engineering. They can be found in different fields, such as machine learning, pattern recognition and classification, computer virus detec- tion, anomaly detection, optimization, robotics, etc. Aldhaheri et al.

This SLR focuses on the collection and analysis of AIS applications in AMS scenarios. Some non-industrial scenario applications are described next. Since detecting anomalies in computer systems greatly resembles the BIS’s functionality, most AIS techniques applications are found in computer security, namely virus detection, network security and intrusion/anomaly detection systems. Greensmith et al. [73] used the DT concept, namely the DCA, to develop an Intrusion Detection System (IDS). The authors assessed the IDS in the port scan detection problem. Later, the same DCA technique was applied in the bot detection prob- lem [74], online break-in fraud for an Online Video on Demand System

The second great AIS application field is regarding optimization problems. Cayzer and Aickelin [79] presents an AIS approach applied to the task of film recommendation. Zand et al. [80] demonstrates how the CSA can be used to solve the File Transfer Scheduling optimization problem. A traffic signal control system was developed based on AIS to supervise an isolated intersection and build a regulation strategy as soon as a disturbance (such as congestion or an accident) is de- tected [81]. Also, Chen and Zhang [82] presented an AIS approach for scheduling wireless access networks in a 5G message service system.

Other proposals are more related to machine learning, pattern recognition and classification problems. Takeda et al. [83] proposes a biometric personal authentication method using the CSA as a classifier training method. Xu et al. [84] used AIS for GPS data processing to solve the nonlinear models and avoid the ill-conditions (single- frequency precise point positioning). Finally, in wireless multimedia sensor networks, AIS was used for energy-efficient, distributed and collaborative image pattern recognition on camera sensors [85].

Considering AMS-related SLRs, Peres et al. [6] present a systematic review of current Industrial AI literature, focusing on its application in real-world manufacturing environments. On the other hand, Radanliev et al. [96] provide a literature review of current and future challenges in using AI in CPS, and present a new conceptual framework for analysing the evolution of AI decision-making in these type of systems. Moreover, thus far, several review-type articles deserve attention in the AIS field. To review available immune models and related inspired methods, Timmis [86] survey the current state of the AIS approaches and reflect on the field roadblocks for future development. In this work, Timmis et al. [88] analyse AIS in a broader context of interdisciplinary research, based on an established conceptual framework that encap- sulates mathematical and computational modelling of immunology, abstraction and then the development of engineered systems. Finally, Dasgupta et al. [5] survey the significant works in the AIS field and, in particular, it explores up-to-date advances in applied AIS during the

Other proposals focus specifically on AIS application scenarios. Zheng et al. [89] review immune applications of the AIS approach and propose several suggestions to the AIS community that can be undertaken to help move the area forward. On the other hand, Hak- tanirlar Ulutas et al. [66] presents a literature review of the CSA, its variants (basic and hybrid approaches), and the main applications. More recently, Al-Khatib and Doush [95] extensively summarize re- search of AIS and categorize them based on the application problem to understand the current trend of the usage of this category of algorithms. Related to the security field, there are several AIS review papers.

Systems field, with the primary focus on biologically-inspired adaptive approaches, including AIS, to the Network Intrusion Detection problem. Bayar et al. [91] provide a survey on biological immunity and highlight the main concepts and mechanisms that are particularly relevant to fault detection, diagnosis and recovery (FDDR) problems. More re- cently, Aldhaheri et al. [72] and Alrubayyi et al. [97] present an SLR and a survey with a comprehensive study of empirical research on AIS approaches to secure IoT environments. Moreover, and also related to AMS, Bere and Muyingi [92] presents an analysis of AIS solutions to secure Industrial Control Systems (ICS) from persistent threats. Finally, Muhamad and Deris [90] review the production scheduling problems, focusing on ways AIS can be used to solve job-shop and flexible job- shop scheduling problems. On the other hand, Raza and Fernandez [93] present a detailed review of immuno-inspired robotic applications.

To the best of our knowledge, none of the previously identified re- views formed insights into applying AIS approaches in AMS. Generally, we find studies focusing only on the AMS domain or the AIS domain. Some AMS-domain reviews also address autonomy in industrial systems (Self-*), but do not include directly in the study AIS applications. On the other hand, AIS-domain reviews have the purpose of surveying the main immune models or specific AIS applications. However, these application scenarios are not related to the industry.

Nevertheless, we encountered three reviews similar reviews, which merge both AIS and AMS domains [90,92,93]. However, these reviews are limited to specific application contexts and/or research categories, such as ICT security, job-shop scheduling and robotics. Thus, there is a need for this systematic review. The main contribution is a compre- hensive study of AIS models applied to different application contexts and research categories within AMS. This will provide readers with a complete understanding of the role of AIS in industrial scenarios.

More information regarding the search strategy, i.e., the electronic database search strings used, can be found in Appendix B. The search was conducted between July and October 2021 and then updated in July 2022. In both phases, it included academic research that: (i) contained at least one term from each group (see Appendix A) in either the abstract, title or keywords; (ii) published in peer-reviewed journals, conference proceedings or book chapters; (iii) written in the English language.

In the Screening stage, the records that resulted from the search were aggregated, and the duplicated work was removed. Next, one indepen- dent reviewer carried out a screening process, following the criteria represented in Fig. 2 and Appendix C. First, the screening process was performed based only on the publication metadata, i.e., title, abstract and keywords. Next, in the Eligibility stage, all remaining articles from the initial screening had their full text analysed in further detail, based on the eligibility criteria represented in Fig. 2 and Appendix C. Finally, in the Include stage, each of the articles eligible to be included in the study, considering the screening results, were analysed based on the research questions defined in Section 1.

Following the PRISMA guidelines and the steps described in Sec- tion 3, a total of 1813 items were identified from database searches. Of those, 113 internal & external duplicate items were excluded, resulting in 1700 unique records. Those 1700 items were screened based on the exclusion criteria represented in Fig. 2 and Appendix C. While screening only titles/abstracts, 1609 items were excluded, resulting in 91 full-text records to be reviewed. After the full-text screening, 41 items were excluded, resulting in 50 publications included in this study. Table 2 summarizes the findings from this assessment, extracting from each included publication the critical information required to address the research questions defined previously.

The analysis shows a stable trend of published papers between 2000 and 2010, while there was an increasing number of publications after 2010 throughout recent years, especially in the range from 2015 and 2020. Between 1995 and 2010, there was a mean of 1 publication per year, while from 2010 forward, until 2022, there was a mean of 3 publications per year. The AIS research field emerged in the ’90s, so it is natural to find studies in the area since 1995. The academic community was more active after 2010 because the emergence of the Industry 4.0 happened in 2011 and other national initiatives in the following years. This implies that the topic of AIS applications in AMS is attracting more and more attention from the academic community.

Fig. 4 presents the distribution of contributions from different pub- lishers. The Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) is the most contributing publisher, with a 66% share. This can be explained since IEEE is currently one of the largest associations of tech- nical professionals in electrical and electronic engineering, telecommu- nications, computer engineering and similar disciplines. Next, we can find Elsevier (14%) and Springer (10%) since they publish several arti- cles in multiple journals and conferences in engineering-related fields

To ensure a comprehensive collection and analysis of publications while understanding the article publication trend, both journal and proceedings articles were considered. In this case, 62% of the paper were published in conference proceedings, while 38% were published in scientific journals. Considering the journals, according to SCImago, 73.6% are classified as Q1, 10.5% Q2 and 15.8% Q4. Table 3 presents the journals considered and the SCImago classification. On the other hand, conferences are rated using the H-Index metric, according to SCImago, ranging from 2 to 71.

Fig. 5 presents the top contributing authors. The analysis consider only two or more publications where the author is the corresponding author. In this case, the most contributing author is Pinto, with 4 publications. The other top contributing authors are Lokesh and Lau, with 3 publications each, and Lima, Li and Lee with 2 publications each. On the other hand, considering authors’ contributions by country, the analysis shows that the top five contributing countries are China (40 authors), Brazil (19 authors), Portugal (16 authors) India (14 authors),

As mentioned before, Autonomic Systems refer to the introduction of Self-* properties in industrial systems (as discussed in Section 2.2). The main applications areas found are CPS, Electric Power Industry and Manufacturing. Overall, all the proposals were validated with datasets for proof of concept, or small lab testbeds, achieving a TRL of 3–4. On the other hand, the LOA of most proposals (dataset validated) is 0 since the proposed solution is demonstrated in a simulated dataset (no system autonomy achieved). Considering the work validated on testbeds, it is possible to find LOA of 3, i.e., despite the predominant pre-programmed functionality, the system is capable of self-adjusting its own behaviour (within specific boundaries) considering the perceived environment state.

Regarding the CPS application area, Rammig et al. [111] (P14) proposed an online model checking technique that can be applied to identify needs and adapt the currently running software system proactively. In this case, a DT-based approach is used for continuous system supervision. This way, achieving a lightweight solution for Self-adaptation in Real-Time Operating Systems (RTOS) is possible. The proposed solution is demonstrated in a paravirtualization context (virtual machines) and tested in an abstracted emulation framework. On the other hand, Lokesh et al. [104] (P07) propose a MAS-CPS model- based integrated with an ensemble immune model (combination of DT and AIN). This model introduces resiliency and self-adaptation to the system by enabling state awareness, self-tolerance and self-healing. The proposed solution is demonstrated as a generic framework and applied to a simulated dataset containing data from several CPS layers, such as monitor & actuator, communication and computation & control. The authors propose a similar solution to the same problem [105]

In the Electric Power Industry, Li et al. [121] (P24) address the distribution service restoration problem, in the event of a large-scale blackout in a power distribution network with DGs, by proposing a generic immune-inspired MAS, designated Multi-agent Immune Algo- rithm (MIA). This solution introduces adaptability, resiliency, Self- tolerance and Self-healing properties to the power system. The so- lution is demonstrated using a power flow analysis software of a simulated scenario with real-world conditions. More recently, but in the Manufacturing application area, Rocha et al. [99] (P2) studied industrial approaches to distributed machine diagnosis, using a MAS paradigm combined with AIS. For this work, lightweight NSA, AIN and CSA models are developed based on fuzzy logic, enabling distributed system adaptability, resiliency and Self-tolerance. The models were demonstrated and validated in simulation environments.

Control systems manage the behaviour of other system devices using control loops. In this case, it can be found mainly in Robotics, SCADA/ICS, and the Electric Power Industry. Overall, most work is validated in lab environments (mostly simulations) for proof of concept, achieving a TRL of 3–4. However, two proposals in the robotics field were validated in real industrial relevant environments, achieving a TRL of 5. Regarding LOA, all robotics-related work achieve an LOA

of 4 since the robot system can behave as an adaptive and autonomic system and continuously self-learn within known system boundaries. However, proposals related to SCADA/ICS and Electric Power Industry achieve LOA of 3 since the system can self-adjust its own behaviour. However, a human is responsible for overseeing system decisions.

Robotic immuno-based control systems are very popular. In the early years, Lee and Sim [131], Jun et al. [126] and Sun et al. [140] (P34, P29, P43) were already proposing an ensemble method, combin- ing CSA and AIN and achieving cooperative control in a distributed autonomic robotic system. Based on the MAS paradigm, the proposed solution enables adaptive group control as a swarm strategy, where robots can find and execute tasks that are spread out in the environ- ment. Validation is performed in a simulated environment regarding a collaborative robot search problem. On the other hand, Michelan and Von Zuben [137] (P40) investigates an autonomic control system of a mobile robot based (in this work, non-distributed), using an AIN model. The robot navigates to solve a multi-objective task, namely, garbage collection, while it adapts to environmental conditions to establish a trajectory without colliding with obstacles. The authors used simulation to validate the solution.

Moreover, considering mobile robots, Lau and Wong [129] (P32) present a fully distributed and adaptive control framework, based on generic immune theories, to manage, coordinate and schedule a fleet of agents employed in an AGV system. The framework was validated in a simulation study of an intelligent transport system operated by a fleet of AIS agents in a warehousing environment. Later, the authors presented a mathematical model of the control framework [136] (P39).

On the other hand, Lau and Ng [132] (P35) reports the develop- ment of the MAS-based control paradigm, inspired by the CSA, for the distributive trajectory control of a robot manipulator. Authors tried to enable cobot capabilities, such as adaptive, resiliency and robustness. They validated the solution in a MATLAB simulation of the Whole Arm Manipulator (WAM) system, a four degrees-of-freedom robot installed at the Intelligent Systems Laboratory of the University of Hong Kong. Ko et al. [110] (P13) propose a distributed control system, based on the immuno-suppression theory, for a Modular Self- Reconfigurable (MSR) robot arm. The proposed framework, designated General Suppression Framework, is adaptive, resilient, robust and Self- tolerance since it enables robot modules to generate emergent group behaviours by exhibiting aggressive or tolerant behaviour based on environmental changes. The framework is validated through computer simulation (MATLAB) and in a hardware implementation of a seven- module MSR manipulator. More recently, Huang [128] (P31) proposed an online motion control of four-wheeled redundant Swedish mobile robots by using a fuzzy system incorporated with the Bacterial Foraging Optimization (BFO) metaheuristic technique and AIS, designated FS- PBFOAIS. The solution was validated in an experimental four-wheeled redundant mobile robot, with one FPGA, to self-adjust the polar-space trajectory tracking. Results show Self-tolerance and robustness.

Islanding Detection is a common research category in the Electrical Power Industry, since it tries to detect islanding situations (a condition in which a distributed generator continues to power a location even though external electrical grid power is no longer present). Yin [133] (P36) proposes a robust immune-inspired approach to detect islanding of DG, based on digital signal processing and harmonic signature recognition. The approach was validated in a simulated grid-connected inverter based on a digital signal processor, achieving a TRL of 3–4 and LOA of 1, i.e., the system may suggest goal-oriented improvements, but a human always approves them in order to take effect.

Anomaly Detection is used to identify a system’s bad behaviour compared to a predefined intended behaviour, which is considered normal or baseline. The assumption is that anomalies, or faults, are outliers in the dataset, which always differ from the ordinary behaviour of a standard dataset. Anomaly Detection studies can be found in CPS, Manufacturing, and the Electric Power Industry. Overall, TRLs are relatively high when compared to other research areas since it is possible to find several proposals validated and demonstrated in rele- vant environments. However, some proposals are only validated in lab scenarios (both dataset and simulation). On the other hand, the overall

[142] (P45) tackles industrial prognosis, i.e., the prediction of failures of an industrial asset, by proposing an adaptive learning approach based on an ensemble method (DCA for drift detection and a Deep Neural Network — DNN that dynamically adapts to new operational conditions). The solution is validated in a dataset containing opera- tional data from an experimental benchmark comprising a real-world industrial problem. Finally, Pinto et al. [56] (P47) propose an ensem- ble approach, the Cursory Dendritic Cell Algorithm (CDCA), which merges the DCA with a clustering algorithm for flexible monitoring and anomaly detection in industrial processes. The CDCA tackles some DCA original problems, such as manual characterization of signals (using a K-Means approach), and online data analysis and classification. The approach was validated in two industrial-oriented datasets regarding physical and network-related data.

[116] (P19) proposes an anti-jamming ensemble approach that com- bines DT with AIN for distributed machine energy leakage diagnosis in complex environments such as parallel-machine job shops. In order to evaluate the proposed approach, several experiments were performed on a tyre vulcanization shop floor in China to diagnose the steam leakage of steam traps. Results show that the lightweight immune approach introduces robustness and Self-tolerance. Moreover, Kim et al.

In the Electric Power Industry, Ieao et al. [109] (P12) propose an ensemble methodology based on the unconstrained binary program- ming (UBP) model and the CSA to estimate fault sections in electric power systems. The proposed methodology is tested in a simulated environment, using part of the South-Brazilian electric power system. On the other hand, mainly used in Smart Grid environments, Lima et al. [106] (P09) propose a method of using a voltage and current abnormality detector filter in electrical distribution systems based on the NSA. The solution was validated in two simulated distribution systems.

In manufacturing, Pinto et al. [98] (P01) presents an IDS approach based on the deterministic version of the DCA (dDCA). To evaluate the dDCA effectiveness, a testing dataset was generated by implementing and injecting various attacks on an OPC UA-based CPS testbed. The properties introduced by the immune model are adaptive, robustness and Self-tolerance. Later, Pinto et al. [113] (P16) propose the Incremen- tal Dendritic Cell Algorithm (iDCA) for online incremental detection in an unsupervised manner. The iDCA was also validated using datasets. Moreover, Clotet et al. [114] (P17) propose a MAS real-time IDS, based on the NSA, to detect attacks targeting physical components at the industrial process level. The solution was validated using a dataset from a water treatment plant laboratory.

Regarding CPS applications, Pinto et al. [144] propose a Model- based Engineering (MBE) approach to enable security-by-design during the development of CPS, using the IEC 61499 standard. The security features introduced rely on an IDS based on the iDCA. The authors used a CPS testbed to validate the proposed approach. Results show that the solution is very lightweight and can dramatically reduce design and code complexity while improving application maintainability.

In the robotics field, Degeler et al. [112] (P15) propose a DT-based IDS to protect AGVs against cyber-attacks that can cause severe physical damage to the manufacturing system. The solution is validated in a simulated factory floor with a distributed scenario (three AGVs oper- ating simultaneously). Finally, related to the Electric Power Industry, Igbe et al. [102] (P05) propose an IDS in industrial communication scenarios based on the dDCA. In this case, the authors used the DNP3 protocol and proposed a dataset for a Smart Grid scenario to validate the solution.

Fault Diagnosis, or fault isolation, refers to the system monitoring and identifying faults when they occur, and pinpointing the type of fault and its location, along with one or more root causes of problems, to the point where corrective action can be taken. Typically, Fault Diagnosis includes anomaly detection. One can find Fault Diagnosis in Electric Power Industry applications, SCADA/ICS, Manufacturing and CPS. Overall, the LOA is 2, meaning that the proposals introduce partial autonomy to the system, but humans are responsible for the decision-making. On the other hand, one can find work validated in lab scenarios (mostly simulations in SCADA/ICS and Electric Power Industry applications for proof of concept), achieving a TRL of 3–4, and validation in partially relevant environments (SCADA/ICS and CPS), achieving a TRL of 4–5.

line). On the other hand, Zhao et al. [119] (P22) propose an online fault diagnosis system for safety in chemical processes by combining Artificial Neural Networks (ANN) with an immune-inspired model. The solution was developed for a lab-scale distillation process, achieving adaptive, robust and Self-tolerance properties. Moreover, in CPS ap- plication scenarios, Zhu et al. [118] (P21) also propose an artificial immune system-based fault diagnosis, designated AISFD, combined with Bayesian estimation, for controlling alarm floods during transi- tions of chemical processes. A pilot-scale distillation process was used to validate the solution.

On Manufacturing applications, Outa et al. [146] propose the NSA for failure detection during the maintenance of pressure vessels. De- tection relies on the recognition of vibration signals. The approach was validated in a small lab testbed that represents the behaviour of the flow of a fluid and the respective vibration of the system. Experimental results show that the approach is robust in precision and signal recognition and for classifying the degree of severity and probability of failure. Finally, regarding Fault Diagnosis in Electric Power Industry, Lima et al. [108] (P11) propose a new approach to detecting and classifying voltage disturbances in electrical distribution systems based on a combination of wavelet transform and NSA. Two distribution systems were simulated to evaluate the proposed method’s performance.

Operations Research deals with developing and applying advanced analytical methods to improve decision-making in complex problems, where optimal or near-optimal solutions are typically found. In this SLR context, Operations Research can be found in several applications, mainly for optimization and scheduling problems. The AIS model is used as a meta-heuristic method, such as in the Electric Power Industry, Robotics, Manufacturing and CPS. Regarding TRL achievement, one

On the other hand, one can find very low and also very high LOA. For example, the maximum LOA found in the Electric Power Industry was 2 since systems present only partial autonomy. In both manufacturing and robotics fields, one can find LOA of 3 and 4 since the system already presents several autonomic capabilities, including most of the decision-making on its own.

through real-world industrial deployment in some companies in Swe- den, the U.K. and Spain. More recently, considering now the CPS field, Semwal and Nair [117] (P20) presented a decentralized mechanism, based on the combination of CSA, AIN and DT, applicable to multiple distributed problems in CPS. Although being developed for CPS, the solution is validated in both emulated (CPS) and real (robot) scenarios. In this case, robots must discover the best path to follow in a real mobile multi-robot system.

Finally, considering the robotics topic, Gao and Luo [139] (P42) proposed an AIN model for efficient cooperative task allocation in a multi-robot system with autonomously distributed architecture. The dynamic allocation method for cooperative robots was demonstrated and analysed in the simulation of emergency handling. On the other hand, Xu et al. [101] (P04) proposed an AIS-fuzzy method (fuzzy systems combined with CSA model) for a hybrid optimization technique in order to accomplish distributed formation control. The System-on- a-programmable-chip (SoPC) methodology is adopted for the solution validation, where each robot is realized as an independent CPS in one FPGA chip.

This section tries to answer the RQ 3. What are the main motivations for using AIS in AMS?, by collecting from the selected papers all the Self-* and specific AIS properties (see more in Sections 2.2 and 2.3.3) introduced by the implemented immune-models. This data is analysed and correlated considering the primary AMS requirements (see more in Section 2.1). This way, it is possible to understand if the desired AMS requirements are met and what the introduced properties that make it possible. Table 4 presents a summary of the AIS conceptualization.

environmental changes by changing its internal properties accordingly. This presents a strong synergy with the Adaptability AMS goal. Finally, the other Self-* properties refer, in general, to systems that, when facing a set of external actions, can change their configurations and/or system topology to restore or improve their global state. These behaviours are aligned with both Optimized Management and Process Efficiency & Product Quality AMS goals since the management of complex systems, specially MAS-related, require a high level of adaptation (configuration and settings update) to achieve an optimum global state. The relation- ship between AIS approaches following MAS architectures is common due to their similarities.

* properties achieved, it is clear that there is a direct cause–effect between the immune models and system autonomy. Most of this auton- omy is found in state awareness and adaptability scenarios, which are very aligned with the AMS goals Autonomy and Adaptability. Also, since immune models provide Self-tolerance and robustness, they are a good match with AMS applications. On the one hand, the desired capability of no human intervention and supervision is only possible if the system decision-making process is reliable by tolerating good conditions and reacting to bad ones. Finally, data analysis results are only as good as the data collected in the first place. So, a robust system operating normally with uncertain data is an advantage for a systematic system monitoring process.

This section tries to answer to the RQ 4. What are the research gaps and future areas within AMS based on AIS solutions?, by analysing the correlated data between Self-* and AIS properties, and AMS goals. Considering Table 4 and continuing with the analysis provided in Section 4.3, it is possible to identify research gaps, in terms of less addressed AMS goals. The AMS requirements with less research work, considering the application of AIS approaches, are Safety & Security (6.1%), Resource Efficiency (2.6%), Communication Network Infrastruc- ture (2%), Standardization (1%), Human Management (0.5%), Regulatory Framework and Upskilling (both with 0%).

Safety refers to the absence of threats to human operators, i.e., to the fact that machines, production facilities or products should not pose a danger to people or the environment. On the other hand, Security (IT security or cyber-security) refers to the protection of digital systems, i.e., the system itself needs to be protected against misuse and cyber-attacks.

considering the complexity of AMS architectures and the global con- nectivity of shop-floor systems, exposing these types of systems to much more vulnerabilities than the already existing systems. Also, consider- ing the similarities that the BIS functionalities have with the problem of detecting attacks/intrusion in computer systems, AIS has incredible potential to be used for autonomic IDS. However, this research is still in its infancy. More detail about bio-inspired IDS and AIS-related security in AMS enabler technologies, such as IoT and CPS, can be found in previous work [72,87,92,147].

In the Manufacturing application area, Li and Cai [107] (10) pro- poses the I2S solution to achieve optimized sustainability, i.e., opti- mization of manufacturing lifecycles for global energy consumption reduction. On the other hand, Guo and Yang [116] (P19) proposes an approach for machine energy leakage diagnosis in complex environ- ments. Considering the resource utilization goal, both proposals tackle the global energy consumption reduction (job re-scheduling or energy leakage detection).

Regarding the Electric Power Industry application area, Bhuvaneswari et al. [134] (P37), and Lizondo et al. [123] (P26) propose control solutions. The first work, the control of a microgrid operation, aims to optimize the power production of local DG systems. The second work proposes a control system to tackle the Peak Load problem. Both proposals focused on energy demand management, which dictates correct resource usage in different periods, such as the size of generators, transmission lines, transformers and circuit breakers. On the other hand, and also related, Xiaobo and Guoqing [130] (P33) focused on planning distribution networks by considering the cost minimization of DGs and the power losses.

Despite the previous work, more research is needed since the in- dustrial sector is still among the top contributors to greenhouse gas emissions worldwide. Developing lean/green approaches will allow manufacturing companies to cut energy costs, enhance process effi- ciency, and even provide a safer working environment for employees. Also, by introducing immune approaches, it is possible to enable the adaptation of resource usage considering energy consumption. More detail about lean-green manufacturing can be found in previous work [148–150].

Communication Network Infrastructure refer to the needed infras- tructure that enables a higher volume or quality data exchange pro- vided by communication networks. Overall, challenges associated with this goal are related to (i) scalability, (ii) security and (iii) availability. In the AMS context, all industrial assets are connected via the Internet, according to IoT principles. Thus, wireless communication technologies play a significant role since they allow ubiquitous internet access and increased interaction (availability). Also, as the number of networked connected devices increases, the network infrastructure should be scal- able. Finally, the increased number of connections opens the surface of harmful cyber-attacks to be deployed in the system (security).

In this SLR, four publications tackled network-related issues, namely NIDS [98,102,113,144] (P01, P16, P05 and P48), focusing only on the security aspects of the network infrastructure. This research work is not enough to impact this AMS goal. Also, other approaches may be needed for the other two challenges.

Standardization and open standards for a reference architecture refer to the normalization of cooperation mechanisms and information exchange between system devices. Reference architectures are helpful for the development, integration and operation of the technological innovations introduced to the AMS. A common standardization effort exists in networked devices in a manufacturing system, such as Edge devices, related to the Communication Network Infrastructure AMS goal.

In this SLR, [102] (P16) and [144] (P48) tackle standardization goals. On the one hand, [102] focus on the HIDS on networks using the Distributed Network Protocol 3 (DNP3) communication protocol, which is part of the IEEE Standard for Electric Power Systems Com- munications. On the other hand, [144] uses the IEC 61499 standard to provide security-be-design features during the development of a CPS.

Moreover, Pinto et al. [98],Pinto et al. [113] (P01 and P16) provide detection in field networks using OPC UA. Although having continu- ous specification work, strong user support and implementations, and considerable marketing efforts to support its adoption, OPC UA may be considered a standardization attempt rather than an established standard at this stage.

Human management refers to the work organization and design, considering the role of employees. AMS transformation should not focus only on the innovation and implementation of technology. One should also consider how employees will be part of the AMS transformation and how the presence of technology in the work environment will impact employees’ work processes, especially considering new scenar- ios such as Human–Machine Interaction (HMI). This paradigm is also known as Human-Centred Manufacturing [151] or Operator 4.0 [152].

Workforce and managers of manufacturing companies, such as pro- fessionals and executives, need to develop high-demanding skills in new transforming technologies within the AMS paradigm. These sys- tems are changing the job requirements for several positions within manufacturing companies. So, several manufacturing processes and tasks are being adjusted to include this new paradigm’s demands. This means that the existing workforce and management must face new challenges regarding new skills development. Thus, the implementation of AMS poses new challenges for new skills and academic training for continuing professional development and upskilling, also known as Education 4.0 [153].

Despite the rich research efforts and numerous implementations of existing AIS models, its actual prevalence in AMS is still relatively low. The results of this study suggest that most of the performed research is implemented and validated as a proof of concept, using datasets, simulation environments or, at most, demonstrated in laboratory en- vironments since the average TRL is between 3 and 4. The impact of such technologies on system autonomy is also disappointing since the average LOA is between 2 and 3 (partially/limited autonomy).

On the one hand, over the last few years, some researchers claim that AIS have not experienced the success of other bio-inspired ap- proaches [154]. This explains why there are so many ensemble models compared to basic models. Also, the strong stochastic aspect of immune mechanisms makes them hard to explain and evaluate, which poses a difficulty to the research field since it is hard to use these models outside the field. This is not the case with several classical Machine Learning techniques, especially the ones related to Explainable Arti- ficial Intelligence (XAI) [155]. On the other hand, implementing AIS in AMS scenarios may require a significant digital transformation in the manufacturing industry, which involve time and money to deploy several changes to existing systems. Those changes may be related to the technological implementation of CPS, Edge devices manipulation, embedded systems (SoPC FPGAs) and Big Data analysis for data-driven scenarios, according to AMS vision. This may not even be possible in some systems, such as Electrical Power Systems. That is the reason why simulation and emulation are such essential technologies when it comes to validating implementations.

bio-inspired technologies may have on the AMS paradigm. Industrial companies must understand the enabling technologies of AIS imple- mentation and deployment and the operational and organizational requirements to realize the full autonomy vision in AMS. Thus, Fig. 9 represents a conceptual framework of industrial AIs applications, pro- viding some guidelines for manufacturers to adapt AIS in their own manufacturing applications to solve different problems. The authors propose the conceptual framework by collecting the findings from the study performed in this SLR in terms of the application areas, research categories and immune models that drive AIS in AMS. Moreover, the leading enabling technologies found in the literature review behind the industrial application of AIS are described next:

MAS: A Multi-Agent System is, by nature, a system that presents autonomic behaviours by manifesting one or more Self-* proper- ties. These type of systems consist of multiple interacting intel- ligent software agents, which develop complex behaviours even when each agent have a simple individual strategy (like a swarm). Essential characteristics of such agents are the autonomy level (self-aware), the knowledge of local views only and distributed control. These characteristics greatly resemble the properties of immune models, so the application development usage of both technologies is widespread.

Edge Devices: The Edge computing paradigm brings computation and data processing together to the edge device level, i.e., devices that collect sensor data. This way, achieving real-time processing of real-time data generated by sensors is possible. In Edge com- puting scenarios, data may travel between different distributed nodes connected through the Internet, such as an IoT scenario. These nodes may also be resource-constrained devices, like a typical embedded system. Considering the AIS applications, Edge Devices are found in the lab or relevant environment validation scenarios. They work great together because immune models are lightweight, robust, and distributed. This means they can

Simulation/Emulation: Simulation models are representations of the real physical systems, representing the key characteristics or behaviours of the selected system or process. In the AIS context, simulation was widely used to validate immune applications in AMS (especially in Electric Power systems) since the real system cannot be engaged because it may not be accessible, or it may be dangerous or unacceptable to engage. These models simulate data sources with specific behaviours, while the data is the main input of immune models for analysis. Also, some immune proposals may use their outputs to inject back into the simulation model to determine the eventual real effects of alternative conditions and courses of action. Finally, simulations may also be used to model the immune model itself (as a natural system) and gain insight into its functioning.

Big Data: Big data refers to solutions for collecting and analysing large and complex datasets. As mentioned before, if this collection and analysis are performed at the Edge level, ‘‘instant data’’ is generated by sensors, so real-time processing scenarios are re- quired. Typical solutions that address big data problems may have a multiple-layer and distributed architecture. These properties are shared with some immune models, making them suitable for big data scenarios.

Secure Water Treatment (SWaT) testbed [114,158]: SWaT rep- resents a scaled-down version of a real-world industrial water treatment plant. The dataset contains network and physical (pro- cess) data on the different number of sensors and actuators in all stages of the SWaT testbed for anomaly-IDS purposes. The NSA model was validated using this dataset.

Skoltech Anomaly Benchmark (SKAB) Dataset [56,159]: The devel- opment of SKAB is based on sensor readings deployed in a water circulation system from an IoT testbed, located in the Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology (Skoltech). Anomalies are in- troduced by inserting different physical faults in the system, such as closing valves, increases in temperature, and rotor imbalances. The CDCA model was validated using this dataset.

This study comprises a systematic literature review, restricted to journal and related conference papers in Artificial Immune Systems and Advanced Manufacturing Systems fields. By characterizing previous surveys and reviews in terms of their purpose and topics addressed (AMS, Self-* and AIS), the authors identified the need for this study. The systematic review was conducted following PRISMA guidelines, and the publications considered are indexed in the IEEE Xplore, Sco- pus, ScienceDirect, Springer, ACM, Inspec, Knovel and Web of Science databases.

This study results in a comprehensive characterization of AIS appli- cations in AMS. We start by analysing the research trend considering these topics and then assess the status of such work. With this analysis, it was possible to define the main motivations for using AIS in AMS and identify the research gaps while commenting on possible future research trends in these topics. Finally, based on the systematic review of existing AIS in AMS literature and empirical evidence, a conceptual framework is proposed, providing a holistic view of the core elements of applying AIS in AMS, such as application areas, research categories, and immune models developed.

Wang H, Peng D, Wang W, Sharif H, Wegiel J, Nguyen D, Bowne R, Backhaus C. Artificial immune system based image pattern recognition in energy efficient wireless multimedia sensor networks. In: MILCOM 2008 - 2008 IEEE military communications conference. 2008, p. 1–7. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/MILCOM.

Ieao FB, Pereira RAF, Mantovani JRS, Leão FB, Pereira RAF, Mantovani JRS. Fault section estimation in electric power systems using an artificial immune system algorithm. In: 16th power systems computation conference, PSCC 2008, Strathclyde, UK. 2008, p. 7, URL: https://www.scopus.com/inward/record.uri?eid=2-s2.0-84944097046& partnerID=40&md5=c9465da4ebb5830b12931208567dfa95.

Jun J-H, Lee D-W, Sim K-B. Realization of cooperative strategies and swarm behavior in distributed autonomous robotic systems using artificial immune system. In: IEEE SMC’99 conference proceedings. 1999 IEEE international conference on systems, man, and cybernetics (cat. no.99CH37028), Vol. 6. 1999,

He H, Maple C, Watson T, Tiwari A, Mehnen J, Jin Y, Gabrys B. The security challenges in the IoT enabled cyber-physical systems and opportunities for evolutionary computing & other computational intelligence. In: 2016 IEEE congress on evolutionary computation (CEC). IEEE; 2016, p. 1015–21.

