Radio Frequency Identification RFID is a non-contact automatic identification technology, which signals through radio frequency automatic identification and access to relevant target data, no need for manual intervention to identify job can work in a variety of harsh environment. Because the logistics in the production control flow with information not to match, more and more can not satisfy a realistic and future demand. Internet of Things overcome traditional the blemish of the form code, be subjected to international logistics field and international community business enterprise biggest concern and research.

Internet of Things (The Internet of things) is defined as: The radio frequency identification (RFID), infrared sensors, global positioning systems, laser scanners and other information sensing device, according to the agreed protocol, to any article connected to the Internet up to information exchange and communication, in order to achieve intelligent identify, locate, track, monitor and manage a network. Internet of Things concept is put forward in 1999. Internet of Things is the "material objects connected to the Internet". This has

RFID is a technology with important business value and huge potential. RFID promises to replace the old barcode and contributes to the real time visibility of the goods, regardless of the location of the supply chain. We find RFID applications in various fields, but its main use is in tracking objects (assets).

Radio Frequency Identification (RFID) has a long history and is part of the technological revolution both current and past. RFID enables quick payment of tolls and quick identification of items. In addition, RFID provides benefits, such as tracking assets, monitoring conditions for safety, and helping to prevent counterfeiting. RFID plays an integral part in the technological revolution along with the Internet and mobile devices, which are connecting the world together All RFID systems, contain three basic components. The first is the RFID tag that is attached to an asset or item. The tag contains information about that asset or item and also may incorporate sensors. The second component is the RFID interrogator, which communicates with (also called interrogating) the RFID tags. The third component is the backend system, which links the RFID interrogators to a centralized database. The centralized database contains additional information, such as price, for each RFID tagged item.

RFID technology has been widespread and nowadays, it can be found in many applications. Some of RFID applications are RFID printer, RFID scanner, RFID reader and RFID antenna. Radio frequency identification or better known as RFID describe a system that transmits the identity of an object or person wirelessly using radio waves in the form of a unique serial number.

An RFID system may consist of several components: tags transponders, tag readers, antenna, and interface. In a typical RFID system, individual objects are equipped with a small, inexpensive tag. The tag contains a transponder with a digital memory chip that is given a unique electronic product code. The interrogator, an antenna packaged with a transceiver and decoder, emits a signal activating the RFID tag so it can read and write data to it. When an RFID tag passes through the electromagnetic zone, it detects the reader's activation signal. The reader decodes the data encoded in the tag's integrated circuit and the data is passed to the host computer. The application software on the host processes the data, and may perform various filtering operations to reduce the numerous often redundant reads of the same tag to a smaller and more useful data set.

Although RFID has been around for more than a half century, it is only in recent years that this technology has been gaining significant momentum due to the convergence of lower cost and increased capabilities of RFID tags. Currently, RFID is emerging as an important technology for revolutionizing a wide range of applications, including supply chain management, retail, aircraft maintenance, anti counterfeiting, baggage handling, and healthcare. It also heralds the emergence of inexpensive and highly effective pervasive computers that will have dramatic impacts on individuals, organizations, and societies. Many organizations are planning or have already exploited RFID in their main operations to take advantage of the potential of more automation, efficient business processes, and inventory visibility. For example, recent news shows that Wal-Mart has reduced out-of-stocks by 30 percent on average after launching its RFID program. Many predictions agree that RFID will be worth billions of dollars in new investments.

With IOT enterprises can supervise their every product in real time, and manage their logistics architecture. They not only supervise the circulation in supply chain and share information, but also analyze the information generated from every procedure and forecast. By forecasting the information from the current procedure of their products, the future trend or the probability that accident happens is estimated, remedy measures can be adopted or the warning can be given ahead. This can improve enterprises’ ability of responding to the market.

While RFID has previously been considered a forward looking technology, its adoption across a variety of industries has seen it become a lot more commonplace. As RFID is being more prevalent across a variety of industries, logistics organizations seeking to gain a competitive advantage are already utilizing the technology in a variety of innovative ways the industry has not seen before. The question that many providers are now asking is: where is RFID going? The answer, it seems, is that the technology has a bright future with more value added features appearing at similar costs.

RFID is a prospective automatic identification method, being considered by many as one of the most pervasive computing technologies in history. RFID is based on storing and remotely retrieving data using devices called RFID tags or RFID transporters. An automatic identification technology such as an Auto-ID system based on RFID technology is an important asset for inventory systems for two reasons. First of all, the visibility provided by this technology allows an accurate knowledge of inventory level by eliminating the discrepancy between inventory record and physical inventory. Secondly, RFID technology can prevent or reduce sources of errors. Benefits of using RFID technology include the reduction of labor costs, the simplification of business processes and the reduction of inventory inaccuracies.

