The H∞ filtering and Unscented Transformation(UT) algorithm are introduced to deal with the initial alignment error of missile-borne Strapdown Inertial Navigation System(SINS), which is caused by the nonlinear error model and the uncertainty of the disturbance noise. Firstly, on the basis of additional quaternion error, the error model of SINS is built up. Secondly, the nonlinear H∞ filter based on UT and H∞ filtering is constructed, which is with nonlinear approximation ability and strong robustness. Finally, simulations are made compared with UKF and the nonlinear H∞ filter under the conditions of disturbance model of strong wind. The result shows that nonlinear H∞ filter is more stable and faster than UKF under the disturbance conditions of strong wind and can effectively improve the accuracy of initial alignment and robustness of the algorithm.

Initial alignment is one of the most momentous technologies in a Strapdown Inertial Navigation System(SINS). Under the circumstances of low sensor accuracy and external disturbing motion, one crucial problem in initial alignment of missile-borne SINS is how to verify the initial transformational matrix from the missile body’s coordinate system to the navigation coordinate system efficiently and accurately. Initial alignment of missile-borne SINS can be divided into two categories: autonomous alignment after launch and transfer alignment before launch. In both modes, the SINS is in constant motion with drastic posture changes, thus frequently influenced by uncertain disturbance. Traditional Kalman Filtering requires the accurate priori knowledge of the mathematical model of the studying object and the noise being white noise. However, when in missile-borne situation, the noise tends to be colored type. In combination with the error in system model, there will be filter divergence if traditional Kalman Filtering is applied. Therefore, the properties of being robust and nonlinear are required in the initial alignment of missile-borne SINS.

A good number of researchers are involved in developing robust nonlinear filtering algorithm. Literature [1] deals with the rapid alignment of ship-borne weapon INS with large initial azimuth attitude error under complex environment disturbances. Based on the nonlinear error propagation model, velocity plus angular rate matching method was applied in the implementation of the alignment. Literature [2] suggests a quaternion-based nonlinear error model in rapid transfer alignment. Literatures[3-5] carry out an intensive study in H∞ filtering. It is suggested that due to its significant effect in uncertainty disturbed moving-base rapid alignment, this filtering is appropriate both for linear and nonlinear models. Moreover, when there is colored noise or unmatched models, H∞ filtering still keeps its robustness. Based on the research above, it is found that applying H∞ filtering to the initial alignment in SINS is an effective estimating method in that it is relatively more rapid, accurate and robust, and is more suited to this application.

To deal with the problems of nonlinearity of error model and the disturbance-induced uncertainty in noise in SINS moving-base initial alignment, a quaternion-based nonlinear error model is introduced, and through enhancing the approximation ability of nonlinear model with Unscented Transformation (UT) algorithm and increasing the robustness to uncertain noise in filtering process with H∞ algorithm, a new H∞ filtering algorithm is put forward. Simulations are made compared to conventional Kalman algorithm in the condition of large misalignment angle and strong wind. It is verified that this algorithm is effective in the initial alignment of missile-borne SINS.

The posture error in navigation system refers to the mal-alignment angle (or misalignment angle) between platform coordinate system and navigation coordinate system. In a SINS, quaternion describes the transformational relation between carrier coordinate system (system b) and navigation coordinate system (system n). Thus, the calculation error of quaternion can be used to decide the mal-alignment angle of the carrier.

H∞ filter are applied in the initial alignment of missile-borne SINS. When the missile body is disturbed by airflow, the system noise is colored, and modelling error exists. Severe divergence will arise in traditional Kalman filtering. However, H∞ filtering still keeps its strong robustness. Therefore, H∞ filtering being applied in the initial alignment of missile-borne SINS breaks the restriction of Kalman. H∞ filtering is a much more applicable and effective estimating method.

Using the nonlinear H∞ filtering algorithm, the initial alignment in large misalignment angle under wind disturbance is simulated. In the simulation, suppose that the angle of pitch ranges between 45°±5° and the frequency is 2 Hz, and that the roll angleψranges between 0°±3°, and the frequency is 10Hz. The constant drift of gyro signal is 0.01°/s; the mean square root of white noise drift is 0.01°/s; the time span for first order markov process is 3600s; the square root of white noise is 0.01°/s. The accelerate bias is 10-4g; the mean square root of random white noise is 10−4 g; the time span for first order markov process is 1800s; the square

root of white noise is 10−4 g. The posture updating cycle is 1ms; the filtering cycle is 100ms;   5 . While the wind disturbance is irregular, its scope and frequency range are known. Thus a disturbance model is set

Due to the restriction of sensor accuracy and external interference in missile-borne SINS, conventional linear error equation and Kalman filter algorithm can no longer deal with the problem of initial alignment. This thesis explores the initial alignment if missile-borne SINS. Firstly, addictive-quaternion-error-based nonlinear error equation, unscented transformation algorithm and H∞ filter are introduced. To solve the problem of linearity of the system equation and external interference, a new nonlinear H∞ filter algorithm is then proposed. The digital simulation compares the filter effect of UKF and nonlinear H∞ filter under the circumstance of strong wind interference. Results demonstrates that the nonlinear H∞ filter algorithm is superior than UKF in terms of accuracy and robustness.

