Most known mineral deposits were discovered by accident using expensive, time-consuming, and knowledge- based methods such as stream sediment geochemical data, diamond drilling, reconnaissance geochemical and geophysical surveys, and/or remote sensing. Recent years have seen a decrease in the number of newly discovered mineral deposits and a rise in demand for critical raw materials, prompting exploration geologists to seek more efficient and inventive ways for processing various data types at different phases of mineral explo- ration. Remote sensing is one of the most sought-after tools for early-phase mineral prospecting because of its broad coverage and low cost. Remote sensing images from satellites are publicly available and can be utilised for lithological mapping and mineral exploitation. In this study, we extend an artificial intelligence-based, unsu- pervised anomaly detection method to identify iron deposit occurrence using Landsat-8 Operational Land Imager (OLI) satellite imagery and machine learning. The novelty in our method includes: (1) knowledge-guided and unsupervised anomaly detection that does not assume any specific anomaly signatures; (2) detection of anom- alies occurs only in the variable domain; and (3) a choice of a range of machine learning algorithms to balance between explain-ability and performance. Our new unsupervised method detects anomalies through three suc-

(South Africa). It detected both the known areas of the Assen iron deposit and additional deposit occurrence features around the Assen iron mine that were not known. To summarise the anomalies in the area, principal component analysis was used on the reconstruction errors across all modelled bands. Our method enhanced the Assen deposit as an anomaly and attenuated the background, including anthropogenic structural anomalies, which resulted in substantially improved visual contrast and delineation of the iron deposit relative to the background. The results demonstrate the robustness of the proposed unsupervised anomaly detection method, and it could be useful for the delineation of mineral exploration targets. In particular, the method will be useful in areas where no data labels exist regarding the existence or specific spectral signatures of anomalies, such as mineral deposits under greenfield exploration.

comparatively more common in the spatial domain, the variable domain contains the majority of the encoded information. In the case of non- spatial data or for data that has excessively high dimensionality in the variable domain (relative to the number of spatial dimensions), anomaly detection can proceed either solely or efficaciously in the variable domain (e.g., detection of geochemical anomalies using geochemical data). Existing signal processing (not artificial intelligence-based) methods, such as spectral signature matching and spectral unmixing (Beiranvand Pour and Hashim, 2014) are effective for detecting specific anomalies where the exact signatures of the anomalies of interest are known. In the variable domain, spectral responses of spatially separated anomalies would be similar if the anomalies themselves were physically similar, which is clearly the case of mineral deposits of similar types. In the case of modern multispectral or hyperspectral data, the variable domain is dimensionally rich and typically its dimensionality far ex- ceeds that of the spatial domain. However, detection of generalised anomalies in high-dimensional data space is computationally intensive

faults, with the western fault overlapping the western-most area of the Assen mine. Near the western fault, rocks are heavily brecciated (fault zone up to 100 m across where exposed on the surface). In the mine lease area, a variety of minor folds and faults have been observed. Lithofacies at the Assen mine have been plastically deformed, partially meta- morphosed, metasomatized, and recrystallized in addition to folding and faulting. Metamorphic minerals include amphibole (tremolite), talc, calcite, crystalline quartz, and dolomite, indicating contact meta-

Infrared Sensor (TIRS) instruments. These two instruments capture data across nine visible, near-infrared, shortwave infrared, and longwave thermal bands. They offer a high signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) radiometer performance, allowing for 12-bit data quantization and additional bits for  better  land-cover  characterisation.  Landsat-8  offers

prospecting and geological mapping by remote sensing have both benefited from this pre-processing approach (Cooley et al., 2002; Salem et al., 2016). The tropical atmospheric and rural aerosol models were used to apply the FLAASH algorithm to the data (Manakos et al., 2011). Therefore, the raw imaging spectrometer radiance data were rescaled to reflectance data.

the various pre-processing phases. Affine translation was applied to project the acquired satellite image into the WGS84 datum. One of the most significant processes applied to spectral remote sensing data for mineral exploration and lithological classification is radiometric correction (Rajendran and Nasir, 2014). The acquired image was opti- mised for best radiance, reflectance or brightness temperatures using radiometric calibration, which reduces errors in spectral pixels. The Fast Line-of-Sight Atmospheric Analysis of Spectral Hypercubes (FLAASH) approach was applied in this study, which is a first-principles atmo- spheric correction tool that corrects wavelengths up to 3 m in the visible, near-infrared, and shortwave infrared ranges (ENVI, 2009). Mineral

The scaled bands were used to create false colour composite (FCC) images and were used for band ratio analysis. The FCC assigns to the red, green, and blue channels three different forms of information (e.g., image channels). Due to sheer differences in colours based on the values in the single channels, a colour composite makes it easier for humans to comprehend multichannel image data (Pohl and Van Genderen, 2014). The FCC colour composite image based on specified spectral features improves lithological and mineral discrimination (Salem et al., 2016). Band ratios are simple arithmetic combinations of different bands that allow semi-quantitative investigation of the distribution and strength of

supra-background iron oxide enrichment) using both traditional band-ratio maps and our machine learning-based anomaly enhancement and detection method. For detection of ferrous and ferric oxide minerals, the relevant OLI bands are 4, 5 and 6, and the amplitudes of these bands were mathematically manipulated to create a knowledge-guided com- posite. Band ratios can mitigate illumination changes due to terrain. The ferric band ratio is sensitive to ferric iron even in low concentrations. High values of ferric minerals ratio are useful to detect the crystal-field absorption of ferric iron oxide (Rockwell, 2013). The ferrous and ferric OLI band ratios are, respectively:

The purpose of using machine learning algorithms in this study is to detect generalised anomalies across a set of bands in variable domain that are known to contain some information of interest (i.e., a known iron ore deposit). However, these anomalies are not known a-priori. Therefore, our task of anomaly detection is fully unsupervised. How- ever, rather than trying all combinations of bands (which may yield a large amount of non-geologically relevant anomalies), we use the existing discipline-specific knowledge that the band ratios indicate that bands 4, 5 and 6 contain the most relevant information related to both ferric and ferrous oxides (Rockwell, 2013). This implies that, for the purpose of enhancing iron ore deposit anomalies, bands 4, 5 and 6 should be reconstructed, while the remainder of the bands can be used as features. Spectral information that is specific to bands 4, 5 and 6, which is reconstructed poorly, is therefore referred to as anomalies.

Machine learning-based predictive modelling in this application was used to model the data-driven background, which is a different approach compared to existing spatial methods (Maxwell et al., 2018). The spatial coordinates were used only to create maps but not for predictive modelling. The strength of the anomalies was measured by the

There is a vast amount of remote sensing data available, in that they either are or approach big data. For reconnaissance mineral exploration, the key research question is how to maximize the value of data and the value of insights that are derived from data. We attempted to address this question in a manner that we thought is the most efficacious, which is by adopting data-driven techniques to perform anomaly detection, guided by discipline-specific knowledge. This is one significant

learning workflow. Its applicability is broad and not limited to remote sensing data or for the targeting of mineral deposits; it can also be used with geochemical data or a mixture of datasets. To summarise the anomalies in the study area, we demonstrated the effectiveness of PCA; however, this is a post-processing step to aid targeting and interpreta- tion and is not a key step in our proposed method.

The authors thank Mr. Elekanyani Negwangwatini for providing geological details about the Assen iron ore deposit. We would also like to thank an anonymous reviewer for constructive comments which have greatly improved the quality of this article. Prof. Hua Wang is also thanked for editorial handling.

