In an AI-enabled data pipeline, the data are retrieved from the data- base as CSV, Excel, Images, or any format that can be handled by the an- alyzing program. The data pre-processing involves mainly the data cleaning in terms of removing outliers, normalizing, and so on. For a su- pervised algorithm, the data are divided into a train, validation and test set. Based on the data and the type of operation to be performed, a

SMS and email. During the recent period, farmer-friendly mobile and web applications are also widely used for communicating information to the farmers. The farmer can control the farm activities through mo- bile applications as well. They can send control signals and accordingly, the actuators can perform necessary actions.

The tractor performance monitors measure, record, and help in re- motely visualizing the entire operation. The parameters generally taken into consideration are power, fuel consumption, draught and wheel slip. Optimization of these parameters can greatly improve the tractor performance. The draught was measured by strain-gauge mounted on a ring transducer at the front end of the drawbar. The fuel consumption was measured by a positive displacement flow meter and wheel speed by using toothed gears and magnetic pick-ups

(Grogan et al., 1987). A data acquisition system is also handy for moni- toring the performance wherein the transducers are mounted for mea- suring the various operational parameters. The spatial mapping of the tractor-implement performance can be made possible using the Differ- ential Global Position System (DGPS). Global Positioning System (GPS) acts as a major component of this system that provides spatial values. This enables the system to measure, record, and monitor the perfor- mance of the tractor-implement system relative to the position. Since the performance of a tractor-implement system is influenced by the

Farms in developed countries now have tractors with an in-built navigation system and sensors, monitoring all macro-scopic and micro-scopic elements in the field. Nowadays, as farms have become more and more connected and internet-enabled, the real potential of the internet of things and allied technologies can be effectively utilized in monitoring the performance of tractors. A general system that mon- itors the tractor navigation and performance includes both hardware and software parts. The hardware section encompasses the essential sensors for measuring geo-location, fuel flow, and power consumption and these data are transferred to a processing unit or PCB. With a suit- able communication technology like LPWAN (Low Powered Wide Area Network), the data are transferred to the network. For the software side, web applications developed by connecting with the real-time and scalable database is utilized (Civele, 2019).

The pesticide application is another key focus area of drone applica- tion. The two main components of the system are the spraying system and the controller. The spraying system is normally attached to the lower part of the UAV and is connected to the pesticide tank. The nozzle of the sprayer is activated using the controller. At present, the agricul- tural sector has embraced drone technology with both hands to trans- form modern precision farming (van der Merwe et al., 2020). In India, start-up and research organizations are leveraging the opportunity of drones in agriculture to make data-driven decision-making on the soil as well as crop health monitoring. The opportunities for drone-based so- lutions in India are endless as the landscape makes ground-based sur- veys costly and time-consuming. The major challenge is setting clear regulations for drone usage (Sylvester, 2018).

processing components or system-on-chip such as Raspberry Pi, sen- sors, cameras, and sprayer (for spraying the herbicide on the weed). The vital part of the system is handled by an artificial intelligence- based weed classification model, which identifies and separates the weed from the crop. The convolutional neural networks are used for building image classifiers that can give high accuracy. Based on the out- put of the classifier model, the sprayer gets triggered. The IoT- based weed control system is very promising automation as it can drastically decrease the usage of herbicides and thus a significant reduction in health-related problems (Dankhara et al., 2019).

Livestock plays a vital role in rural development and the livelihood. Studies show that there is a huge yield gap since the farmers are follow- ing old age practices. The biggest concern is how to manage and orga- nize the growth of this livestock sector in such a way that the yield gap can be minimized. Due to this, there is a research opportunity with the help of advanced technologies that can provide a sustainable solution. The Precision Livestock Farming (PLF) system automates the complete process of monitoring, analyzing and decision making thus ensuring the health and wellbeing of the livestock.

The productivity on a dairy farm is heavily dependent on the effi- cient and timely reproductivity of the cattle. The traditional system of artificial insemination is not accurate because of the lack of techniques for timely identification of the estrus and calving events. Automated systems using sensors like accelerometer, pedometer, temperature sen- sor, etc. can collect information about the current state of the cattle. Dur- ing estrus and calving events, their activity duration and patterns vary from a normal state. From the data collected, an artificial intelligence model can analyze this pattern to identify anomalies in the activity

and thereby conclude that the cow is undergoing the calving or estrus event. The most important three parameters that can determine the state of the cattle are hourly ruminating time, feeding time, and resting time. These can be easily obtained from the accelerometer data. The ru- minating time and feeding time are extracted from the accelerometer mounted on the neck and standing time from the accelerometer mounted on the leg of the cattle. While detecting the cattle is in estrus or not, any binary classification models such as logistic regression can be used (Benaissa et al., 2020).

Prior to the actual cultivation of crops inside the greenhouses, it is recommended to go for an evaluation of the micro-climatic conditions inside the greenhouses. This helps in an optimal design of energy- efficient greenhouses with adaptive climate control methods. Data ac- quisition and interpretation help to monitor and plan strategies for min- imizing the cost of cooling systems that are often affordable for growers. Also with the help of the IoT and decision support system, a relationship can be established between the micro-climate variation and the growth of the crops which can help the growers, a better insight about the crop growth rate before the cultivation. A model that is built processes the data from the field which may include temperature, humidity, vapour pressure, solar radiation, etc. and simulates the comfort ratio for differ- ent growth stages of the crops. This can be used to plan better control

The system should be able to handle and process all forms of data. Designing cloud-based architecture for IoT applications can be used to tackle this challenge as the cloud service can provide immense comput- ing power, huge storage capacity, and is highly scalable. Also in the case of AI algorithms, the quality and quantity of data decide the quality of decision making. Getting a huge volume of quality data is a big concern for building AI-based models.

are high chances for a security breach. The communication delay is an- other major area that needs to be focused on. Since IoT solutions are targeted to work in real-time, the messages and information passed to the end user should reach them on time. Any delayed information will be of no use as the user has to act on it spontaneously.

IoT and AI systems are continuing to grow and they enhance the op- portunities for increased value creation and capture. Despite all the challenges, they are expected to contribute in future to make agriculture automated and smart. There are opportunities for these technologies in transforming the agriculture activities. The evolution of 5G technology will be pivotal in enhancing the opportunity of the Internet of things in the upcoming years. 5G is having a hundred times better capacity than 4G networks and this can incredibly contribute to increased inter- net speed. Since the communication delay is a constraint of current IoT systems, this will be solved by the evolution of 5G, wherein the response can be obtained faster than the blink of an eye. The sensors and embed- ded technologies will continue to be cheaper and widely available in the future and will make IoT very promising in the future. The growth of Ar- tificial intelligence and advanced algorithms fuel up the decision mak- ing of smarter applications.

In this work, a comprehensive review of digitization and automation in agriculture using AI and IoT has been presented. When it comes to digitization and automation in agriculture, IoT and AI play a key role in every phase of farming activities during pre and post-harvest opera- tions. Adoption of these technologies from crop monitoring to autono- mous harvesting robots are slowly transforming agriculture and making the life of farmers easier and faster.

