It has been shown experimentally that regular autooscillations may arise in thermo-responsive polymer solutions that are in the temperature gradient fields. The theoretical interpretation of the observed phenomena is given. This paper shows that these phenomena can be used for the development of new sensor panels.

The studies of self-organization processes in stimuli-responsive polymer solutions have long attracted the close attention of researchers Zaslavsky, 1988. (In particular, it is connected with attempts to discover the mechanism of evolution that preceded the biological, i.e. to find out in what way the life began on the Earth exactly Ergozhin at al., 2008.)

In this paper, 2% solution of copolymer N-isopropylacrylamide (NIPAAm) and acrylic acid (AA) in the ratio of molar concentrations 90:10 at pH=7.6 between 26 and 40 o was investigated. Our investigated solution has a phase transition temperature around 32oC at which it reaches sharp turbidity (increase in optical density). It enables to measure the content of macromolecules that partially transformed into a soluble form using turbidimetry (intensity measurement of the light transmitted through the solution). Furthermore, there is a possibility to investigate the variation in the number of macromolecules that change their state by measuring optical density fluctuations.

The results of samples are presented in Figures 1 and 2. It is seen that the optical density of the solution was exposed to periodic fluctuations in Fig. 3, in which as shown the result of the procedure application of numerical filtering to the mean-square deflection of measured values have been presented in Fig. 1.

Qualitatively, the appearance of such fluctuations can be explained as follows. The dependence of the optical density of thermo-responsive polymer solution on the temperature has an expressed nonlinear character. This corresponds to the fact that in the transition region of dynamic equilibrium is established: part of the molecules that have passed to a partially soluble state transforms into swollen macromolecular coil, and some experience the reverse transition.

Thus, there are conditions under which previously unknown type of waves can develop in liquid phase development. It is essential that such environments can be converted into a film by the use of cross-agents (gel formation, i.e. crosslinked polymer network). Moreover, the detection of waves of this type can be carried out by optical as well as electrical devices. This is due to the fact that with the loss of solubility the degree of ionization of macromolecules is reduced rapidly. In turn, this leads to the dramatic increase in local value of the specific resistance of solution.

