Renography is a radionuclide technique introduced in medicine since the early sixties in the daily practice. It allows measuring the function of each kidney separately in case of unilateral or bilateral uro-nephrological disease. A new system for analysis of Renography is presented in this paper. Our system aims to show a fully automated method for drawing the renal regions of interest based on a multi-agent system that incorporates spatio-temporal interest points detection on scintigraphic images by using the HOG3D descriptor to initialize agents. We used both types of agents, namely supervisor agents and explorator agents, they communicate among themselves and they inspire in their behavior from the Fast Marching method. Our system was tested on many real patients’ cases and we have obtained encouraging results. Clinical validation showed a constant agreement between the approach presented and manual segmentation by professionals in the nuclear medicine.

be traced on an image sum based on renal function. The ROI must be larger than the renal contour of one pixel to obtain all the informations existing in the renal region. In our study, we propose to use the points of interest spatial and temporal detection of the initialization of the contour and we also propose to use a multi- agent system to accelerate this approach.

Semi-automatic approach: The methods using this approach permit drawing the renal ROI starting from an initialisation point. In [4] Y.Aribi et al explained the different modules used in their application with an explanation of the algorithm REGION_ GROW that they have used for semi-automatic tracing of ROI. Another method has also been developed to generate renal ROI and evaluate the renal function in a small population [6].

[5] the author presented a system based on an automated method for detecting the renal ROI and tracing the adequate renograms. In the state of the art; many approaches using intelligent techniques were proposed to define the concept of renal ROI. Our objective through this work is to describe an automated system for the definition of renal ROI using HOG3D descriptor and Fast Marching Method (FMM).

The HOG3D is a descriptor based on the spatio-temporal aspects; it is based on 3D gradient orientations histograms. The integral image representation is essential for the calculation of gradients. For a standard quantification of the orientation of the spatiotemporal gradients, we can use the regular polyhedra. The shape and movement descriptors are combined together simultaneously. In our work, we apply the HOG3D descriptor on the video. For this purpose, the video is divided into nx*ny*nt cells [9].

This method computes in each point (x, y) the transit time T (x, y) of the front (each point is examined only once). One can show that T evolves according to |  T |. F = 1 (2), this means that the transit time is inversely related to speed of the front. As information is propagated in one direction, it can be the smallest T, and thus find the propagation of the front. The idea is to move the head in a narrow band, which is advanced by freezing the pixels existing in inserting new pixels in the band.

The approach of our system is as follows, a pixel can be owned by one or many agents. We consider that an agent is just a pixel. Each agent is operating in the image by altering the original pixel. We can treat each pixel of the image on several occasions, but we do not need to cope with all of the pixels in the image. Our evolving model was based on the cooperation involving all the agents’ explorer images that has a limited ability and a partly known environmentally and ensures better communication with their supervisor agents. Any explorer agent is required to consider its nearest neighbors. It changes to achieve the frontiers of the object to be extracted. In fact, any agent controls the destination of its development from the reports reaching from neighboring agents and the next evolution of the algorithm proposed thereafter.

If the pixel that we need to evolve is not owned by a different agent, the position of the original pixel must be modified to the pixel having the nearest value to the initial pixel. Then, the position of the original pixel will be modified with the nearest pixel value to the ancient pixel. In the opposite case, the supervisor agent reaction at this stage will handle the conflict and decide if such pixel is belonging to an agent. The seed

For the evaluation of our system, we have studied real cases of patient images. Figure 4 shows the segmentation results using three different approaches. According to the experimental results, it is very clear that our system is better than other approaches in the accuracy of segmentation and also with regard to the time available for the execution.

Throughout this work, it became possible to make an automated system for detecting the renal ROI to facilitate the analysis of renography. Our system defined visually acceptable ROIs with no operator intervention. Automated ROI definition should enhance the efficiency of a good evaluation of renal function using a method based on the smart combination of three techniques: Multi-agent system, HOG3D descriptor and Fast Marching Method. To sum-up, the result of our system could be considered precise because we have used spatiotemporal descriptor. Finally, our system is a step forward in the field of medical image processing, waiting to receive expert advice.

