In paper the new structure of the automatic voltage regulator (AVR) and the power system stabilizer (PSS) of the synchronous machines is considered. It is known, that the primary goal, that solved AVR are maintenance of a terminal voltage of the synchronous machine according to the reference. For PSS, the goal is mitigation the electromechanical oscillations of the synchronous machine at various disturbances. For these purposes as inputs of the AVR and PSS the set of state variables of the synchronous machine is used: terminal voltage, armature current, frequency, speed, power, etc. The key feature of offered excitation control system is use only the terminal voltage phasor for the decision of all above- stated problems, that considerably reduces influence of noises and disturbances, simplifies its design and operation.

the proportional gain of the AVR ( KP  25 ). However, as has been determined theoretically and observed in practice [1], in some operation modes of the synchronous machines, this leads decreasing in damping component TD of the electric moment TE , that proportional to the deviation of the speed  . This is causing the rotor oscillations of the synchronous machines at disturbances in the grid. Therefore, in addition to the AVR, using feedback to the parameters that reflect the rotor motion – speed, frequency, accelerating power, which used in power system stabilizer (PSS). This greatly complicates the development,subsequent coordination of AVR/PSS and commissioning the excitation control of the synchronous machines. So, promising is the development of the excitation control, which realizes a new type of the feedback, which reflects the states of the terminal voltage and the rotor motion.

Paper includes sections with the following contents. Section II defines the two-dimensional complex argument error function (CAEF) of the terminal voltage phasor and a method of it measuring. Consider the definition of the normal CAEF (NCAEF) for steady state of the plant. Presented the calculation of the differential CAEF at terminal voltage phasor with use the Wirtinger calculus. In section III showed the excitation control of the synchronous machine that used CAEF at terminal voltage phasor. The example for study the small-signal stability with proposed excitation control is given in the section IV. The conclusions are summarized this paper.

If we use the terminal voltage phasor as the input for excitation control, we can react to changes in both the electromagnetic and electromechanical states of a synchronous machine, as take into account the increments of the magnitudes terminal voltage and the rotor angle in case of violation the steady state. Control of the various plants based on the real signals. Therefore, CAEF should be considered as a real function of the complex arguments - the output of the plant. It is known [6], that the nonconstant real-valued function of a complex variable is nonanalytic and therefore does not differentiate in the accepted sense for the complex variables (Cauchy-Riemann conditions). To calculate the stationary points and differential CAEF (3) in the whole domain of the terminal voltage phasor, we used the definition of a real differentiable [6, 7] for CAEF:

high adaptive and robust properties. Excitation control system by terminal voltage phasor of the synchronous machine provides control of it electromagnetic and electromechanical states, and allows us to natural way coordinate the AVR/PSS tasks. The next step should be to determine the method of calculating the required values of the gains K and N.

