This paper expounds the basic concepts and connotations of office automation and OA system design and implementation. Combination of a detailed analysis of the functional requirements of the office automation system, OA system architecture and development platform needs, and OA system construction of a comprehensive university (referred to as LH), as the background, the C/S and B/S architecture implementation of the program, the system uses Lotus Domino/Notes R5, groupware development platform that integrates Lotus distributed document management system (Domino.doc) real-time collaboration systems for distance learning system (earningSpa.ce4.0) (SameTime), gives the system framework based on LotusDomino/N0tes the OA. Workflow automation, document databases and relational databases, system security, in-depth discussion. The paper presents the Notes and relational database integration solutions to effectively protect existing investments. The development the unstructured Notes database access structure of the relational database, the database data access interface, information processing and other business systems are integrated into a collaborative platform, effective solution to the traditional information silos exist OA system, application island, the problem of resource island. The combination of Domino / Notes platform focus on strengthening the system of application-level security.

This research and development of office automation systems, has been successfully applied to the actual good results, the system e-mail, process management, information dissemination, project management, remote office and other functions, greatly improving the level of internal management and office efficiency, has a broad application prospect. The reason it occupies such an important position in the field of commercial office. In addition to the workflow itself has perfect control, a powerful database replication technology and other factors, another important reason is that it provides advanced and reliable security mechanism. Focused on several security technology used in Lotus Domino / Notes.

The OA system is an experimental system developed for the LH basic computer teaching within the Department of the electronic office. The system requires to achieve accurate, safe, reliable, efficient daily office transaction processing. Based on actual usage in the initial development of the system, including user management, internal communications, information dissemination, daily office module, the system by function, as the "Home", "daily office", "query and statistical analysis," "secondary business processes "information services", "internal communication BBS" systems management "seven interrelated sections, each subdivided into more specific functional modules.

Based on Lotus Domino / Notes office management information system "is an application in the College office management information systems, system architecture for the B / A / S three-tier architecture, the main technology: front-end using the browser Browser, (such as IE 6.0); application layer based on the Lotus Domino / Notes R5.0.8, integrated LotusScript, Java, SQL JavaScript technology; database service layer using SQL Server2000. The business logic of the system structure, including data management, application control layer and user interface layer of three parts.

Note: secretary of general administration office is authorized to: modify document, edit document No., confidentiality, degree of urgency, Principal receivers, carbon copy, report, subject terms etc.; staff in print room is authorized to: typeset documents, edit document No., confidentiality, degree of urgency, principal receiver, carbon copy, report, subject terms etc.

Two-way design is employed at four steps. Two-way design means the relevant procedures are reversible and you can repeat your operation between one step and its previous step or next step, which offers a chance for improvement and coping unexpected changes. In the work flow, sectary of general administration office is the central link, because he/she is responsible for document issuing management. Because of this two-way design, sectary of general administration office is able to cope with all rising problems in document issuing flexibly in accordance with work demand.

extending, practice shows that the system is reliable and available, retractable cluster structure. Not just for institutions, government agencies, to in, small businesses and institutions also can adapt to expand. Support clustered database and distributed database structure, security unit interior office more clearly, more smoothly. Along with the development of network OA, Domino security mechanism will be further test and development.

