Remote sensing data is closely related to geochemistry and exhibits big data characteristics (e.g., scalability, automation potential, velocity, coverage and coverage rate). Remote sensing data is already useful for a variety of geoscientific tasks (Booysen et al., 2020; Xiao and Wan, 2021; Ghorbani et al., 2022, 2023). Deriving secondary geochemical data from remote sensing data would imbue the secondary data with big data-characteristics of remote sensing data (Shen et al., 2019; Cheng

practical, because of complications due to overburden, variable terrain, the scale of the application and ambiguity of inversion outcomes. Additionally, remote sensing-data inversion usually occurs to mineral species and not elemental composition (Asokan et al., 2020; Marghany, 2022). Zhang et al. (2023) developed an inferential method that used geostatistical data augmentation and machine learning to invert remote sensing data into geochemical data. Prototyping of the method occurred using geochemical and remote sensing data from a tailing storage fa- cility (TSF). A high-resolution resource model was spatially integrated with a temporally matched remote sensing dataset, to produce an inte- grated dataset that paired features (spectral band data) with data labels (resource grade). Furthermore, Zhang et al. (2023) demonstrated that a variety of machine learning algorithms can generate useable models.

In this study, we carry the method that was developed in Zhang et al. (2023) into deployment and demonstrate model deploy-ability across space, leveraging the knowledge that Witwatersrand tailings are consistent in mineral composition. By choosing a TSF similar to that in Zhang et al. (2023), we can ensure that mineral assemblages and

traditional geochemical data, and that traditional resource modelling and exploration was not designed to handle such data. We compare the temporal predictions of the gold grade with that of a geostatistical model (not used for predictive modelling). We showcase the effectiveness of big geochemical data for online resource assessment, environmental moni- toring and other purposes by observing changes in the distribution of gold in the TSF and relating those changes with existing knowledge.

purposes, but we did not rely on any geochemical data from the studied TSF for training purposes. The erosion of TSFs creates a constant dispersal of fine dust, which implies that there is a contamination of surrounding areas that could give rise to spectral signatures associated with the tailing material (Schonfeld et al., 2014). Hence, we constrain our analysis to the area inside the TSF.

we summarize the key details. The Sentinel-2 satellites each contains a multispectral imager (MSI) that captures four bands at 10 m, six bands at 20 m, and three atmospheric correction bands at 60 m spatial resolution (Vaiopoulos and Karantzalos, 2016; Park et al., 2017). The atmospheric correction bands include: band 1 for aerosol scattering and cloud detection; band 9 mainly for aerosol retrieval; and band 10 for cloud detection (uncalibrated, see Ge et al., 2020). There are ten visible and near-infrared (VNIR) bands and three short-wave infrared (SWIR) bands make up the image (Clerc and Team, 2022; https://sentinel.esa.int/

Data pre-processing is purposely kept maximally identical to that employed in Zhang et al. (2023), which used the Rasterio and GEEMAP Python libraries (Wu et al., 2019; Wu, 2020). The only change from Zhang et al. (2023) in our data pre-processing methodology for machine learning-based predictive modelling is that we employed a clipping process to remove excessively high-intensity pixels. Here, we provide a brief summary of the steps that were executed: (1) affine translation to project the satellite images into the Universal Transverse Mercator (UTM) projection and the World Geodetic System 84 (WGS84) datum;

To understand the feasibility of our predicted resource concentration maps using remote sensing data and machine learning, we opt to perform a qualitative and quantitative comparison between the pre- dicted maps and a geostatistical model built using all data supplied by the mine (borehole data only, no grab samples). Because grab-sample data were unavailable for the construction of the geostatistical model, the surface of the geostatistical model is substantially lower in resolution and in representativeness of the actual TSF condition as compared to the geostatistical model in Zhang et al. (2023). The geostatistical model is tabular with a maximal depth of about 20 m and a physical extent that approximates the boundaries of the TSF. The grid spacing is purposely kept the same as the grid spacing of the remote sensing images (10 m), while the vertical grid size is 5 m. The geochemical survey was con- ducted in 2014 and has not been updated since that time. This implies

et al. (2023). Zhang et al. (2023) explored a variety of supervised learning algorithms and determined that for the task of inferential inversion of remote sensing data, and specific to the training dataset that was used, the best algorithms among the explored ones were the: k-nearest neighbours (kNN); random forest (RF); and adaptive boosting of decision trees (AdaBoost or AB) algorithms. In this deployment study, we adopt the same algorithms and workflow. The kNN algorithm (Cover and Hart, 1967; Fix and Hodges, 1951) is a non-parametric method that averages the data label of a number of training samples (hyperparameter

method that constructs a forest of decision trees in parallel and averages their output. This mitigates the noise sensitivity of decision trees, pro- vided that tree outputs are decorrelated through, e.g., feature boot- strapping (Ho, 1995). The hyperparameters of the RF algorithm includes: maximum number of features per tree; the number of trees; and the minimum number of samples per split, in addition to the tree depth parameter that is inherited from decision trees. Similarly, AB is also an ensemble method of decision trees but uses adaptive boosting, which is conceptually trees constructed in series (Freund and Schapire, 1995). It uses a weighted sum of the output of decision trees as the inference. Weight adjustment occurs through adaptation, whereby the weights of successor trees depend on the error of predecessor trees. The

east trend towards the south-eastern end of the TSF. This depletion pattern is the result of the drainage of the TSF due to its topography. Drainage in TSFs is known to re-distribute various elements internally and leads to chemical stratification (Hansen, 2018; Nwaila et al., 2021a,

to have disappeared entirely. This is consistent with the known time of onset of the second extraction phase, targeting less enriched areas. Another approach that demonstrates the big geochemical data nature of our method is the visualisation of changes in daily snapshots in the form of a movie. For this purpose, we linearly interpolated between all 17 images, using a standard frame interval of 3 days to create a smoothly varying animation of the surficial changes of the TSF in gold grade. The images are then rendered into animated movies for each of the algo- rithms considered (kNN, RF and AB; see Supplementary data). The

an infinite combination of terrains. Hence, the feature space spanned by non-target land cover is infinitely complex in general. If this approach were to be taken, care would also have to be taken such that the spectral response of non-interesting compositions does not significantly overlap with that of the interesting compositions. Open tailings such as the Dump 20 and Lindum TSFs are affected by material dispersal mecha- nisms, such as surficial erosion, wind, rain and transport losses (e.g., Tutu et al., 2008; Ojelede et al., 2014). Unfortunately, this means that remote sensing-image pixels near such TSFs are likely contaminated by spectral signatures of minerals from the TSF. It would seem that some knowledge of the nature of remote sites, where there is uncertainty regarding their composition, is important to the spatial transferability of trained models.

The most important contribution of this study lies in the demon- stration of streams of geochemical data. Certainly, the derived geochemical data that was used to analyze temporal changes in the TSF are produced at a spatial and temporal resolution far surpassing that of traditional geochemical surveys. In the case of monitoring TSFs, our method is capable of both identifying natural processes (e.g., drainage pattern) and monitoring anthropogenic activity (extraction). The response rate, or latency of monitoring depends on the imaging fre-

The authors thank Sibanye-Stillwater for providing geochemical data used to train various machine learning algorithms. We also thank Prof. Kunfeng Qiu (China University of Geosciences, Beijing) for highly constructive comments which have greatly improved this manuscript. We thank Dr. Hua Wang for editorial handling.

