This paper proposes a fast search algorithm for vector quantization (VQ) based on a binary search space (BSS-VQ). The trade-off and learning aspects (TLA) were used to enhance the line spectrum pair (LSP) encoder of the G.729 standard. In the trade-off aspect, a slight loss occurred in the quantization quality; however, substantial computational savings were achieved. In the learning aspect, the binary search space was developed using he learning process, which uses full search VQ (FSVQ) as an inferred function. In the experiment, computational savings of 86.19% and a quantization accuracy of 98.15% were achieved, which confirmed the excellent performance of the BSS-VQ approach.

Vector quantization (VQ) is a lossy and powerful method for multimedia communications because of its excellent rate-distortion performance and simple structure. However, full search algorithms have substantial computation requirements. Thus, numerous studies have focused on the computational savings that can be gained by using the VQ approach.

method powerful; however, the meth-od’s loss of quantization quality is problematic. The TSVQ is a binary search method that uses a single path to traverse the appropriate codewords. Thus, the TSVQ encoder does not ensure that the selected codeword is the closest to the input vector.

A previous study [1] applied triangular inequality elimination (TIE) to VQ-based image coding, achieving computational savings of more than 90%. However, the TIE approach is dependent on the correlation characteristics of input signals. The noise-like (weak correlation characteristic) input vector reduces the performance of the TIE approach.

In [3], the quasi-binary search (QBS) algorithm and trade-off aspect between TSVQ and TIE were proposed to reduce the computational complexity of the VQ algorithm. The performance was superior to that of TIE, particularly regarding the noise-like input signal. The QBS algorithm is not dependent on the correlation characteristics of input signals. Although the quantization accuracy of the QBS algorithm was 99.16%, which was reasonably good, the computational savings of 59.43% for the LSP encoder of the G.729 standard were unsatisfactory.

Another study [4] proposed the fast search method for VQ. However, none of those methods focus on the LSP encoder of the G.729 standard. This paper proposes a binary search space VQ (BSS-VQ) approach, which balances computational savings and quantization quality, and achieves considerable computational savings with only a slight loss in quantization quality. Moreover, the learning aspects of neural networks and VQ were also employed to improve the performance of the BSS-VQ approach. The LSP encoder with the G.729 standard was used to verify the performance of the BSS-VQ. The following section describes the BSS- VQ algorithm. The last two sections present the experimental results and conclusion.

This section presents a fast search BSS-VQ algorithm that employs a fast locating approach to determine a small search space and fully search it to obtain an optimally matched codeword. A learning algorithm was proposed to build a BSS, which uses full search VQ (FSVQ) as an inferred function. The BSS was trained using large amounts of training data, which efficiently obtained codewords for each subspace. However, some trifling regions existed between splitting boundaries and codeword boundaries, which implied that the training data fell in trifling regions with little possi-bility. Therefore, a learning algorithm with insufficient training may lead to missed encoding in the trifling region which no training data fall in when the training process, resulting in a decline in quantization accuracy; conversely, each subspace can be fully trained using a learning algorithm with sufficient training data, but it with highly overlapped codewords; a BSS with highly overlapped codewords results in a decline in computational savings. Based on the aforementioned analysis, Algorithm 1 de-scribes the BSS generated by the learning process in the BSS-VQ algorithm. Algorithm 2, concerning the BSS-VQ encoding process, is also presented in detail.

All codewords within subspace bssq are set as the new codebook, and the FSVQ(.) is subsequently used to obtain optimally matched codeword cwm from bssq. The codeword number of subspace bssq is lower than that of the original codebook. Thus, computational complexity is substantially reduced.

This study used the LSP encoder in the G.729 standard with a 10-D codebook and 128 codewords to verify the performance of BSS-VQ. A speech database, which was recorded at a sampling rate of 8 kHz and a resolution of 16 bits, was used on the inside test; it contained male speech, female speech, background noise, and silence, and its data number M was 601 422 (45.8 MB). The trained binary search space whose average, minimum, and maximum number of codewords were 16.53, 8, and 26, respectively. Moreover, the 15.3 MB

speech data for the outside test data were used to verify the performance of BSS-VQ. As shown in Table 1, computational savings of 86.19% and a quantization accuracy of 98.15% were achieved. The computational savings of BBS-VQ outperform that of the QBS-VQ approach when their quantization accuracies are similar. Moreover, the quantization accuracy of BSS-VQ outperforms that of TSVQ when their computational savings are similar. These experimental results confirmed the excellent performance of the BSS-VQ approach.

This paper presents a BSS-VQ algorithm to enhance the LSP encoder of the G.729 standard. The trade-off and learning aspects were used to achieve optimal performance. The BSS-VQ algorithm is not dependent on the correlation characteristics of input signals and outperforms most existing algorithms in the LSP encoder of the G.729 standard.

