This paper analysis the motion effects on human visual system.By using electroenc ephalogram (EEG) and gammo- amino butyric acid (GABA) we prove middle temporal area (MT) are sensitive on motion perception. It links the bridge between LGN(lateral geniculate nucleus), V1(Primary visual cortex) and MST (medial shlerior temporal area), the feedback between these area are paraelle and circular. Nearly all neurons in MT area show their preference on the specific motion direction and angle. The instantanous firing rate at the specific phase is 10 times higher than other phases at a certain neuron. The neurons that react similar response to a certain kind of features can compose a neuron cluster and work synchronously. The contribution of us is to simulate a computational motion field model, which can refelect the neuron activities in MT. This model can explain the attention selection mechanism and visual perception to some extent. However, further endeavor should be addressed on the interconnection and correlation of neurons.

The current researches acknowledge three criterions on human visual perception. They are sparse criteria, temporal slowness criteria and indepent criteria. This paper research the motion cues based on the sparse standard. The meaning behind the sparse criteria advice that most neurons shows a relatively low response to external stimuli, includes visual, auditory and olfactory signal, etc. Only a few of them yields a distinct activity. The response distribution of one neuron to the stimuli inputs has a property of sparse and discrete. These characters are of paramount importance and lead the dimensional deducation and feature extraction to the visual system research.

In this paper, we mimic a computational model which cans reflect the human visual selection instantaneously. In order to represent the complex and irregular neuron activities, we simplify and quantify the problem then it can be simulated on the PC easily. The framework is illustrated in figure 1..

The paper is organized as the following, the section 2 elaborated on the model and algorithm which gives a detail description of algorithm. The experiments part is given in section 3. Section 4 shows the conclusion and comparsion with other state-of-the art models.

The model designing concept is desciribed as the following. The motion intensity cue reveals the highly moving objects. The spatial cues indicate the different motion objects in spatial, while the temporal cues donates the variability of one object in the temporal dimensional. Also, the motion orientations weight the motion saliency map and affect the results on a critical extent. For example, when we capture a 135 degree

vectors is possible to be located near the edges of objects or in the still condition. Firstly, we calculate a phase histogram in spatial window with the size of m * m pixels at each location of Marco block. The bin size of each is 10 degree, as we segment the 360 degree into 36 intervals, which means from 0 degree to 10 degree we regard it as a same angle. Then, the phase distribution is calculated by the full searching entropy as following:

attended region can be more precise if we elongate the frame number as shown in figure 5. The Laplacian filter is to remove the impulse noise generated by the input frames. Hereby we adopt the median filter can also preserve the edge information and sharpen the image details. We adopt 3*3, 7*7…, 25*25 window slides at the experiment stage, but finally we utilize 3*3 window as the convenience of later computation.

To evaluate the efficiency of the gist perception, we have applied the approaches on several types of benchmark video sequences from the benchmarks. The detail of the testing results is given in table 2.We test our model on a Acer laptop, each consisting of a Quad-Core 2.1 GHz IntelXeon Processor, the benchmark video testing dataset is list as the table 1 and based on different genre.

Our contribution can be listed out as the following. We propose a novel method on the motion effects via bio-inspired human visual system by a computational model. This is a novel and state-of-the-art way. Unlike psychological methods, the technique by using computer vision can describe the human attention selection more vividly. In order to further verify the proposed method, we compared our approach with several state-of- the-art methods. A lot of measure standard have been proposed since the attention models pop out. Generally, there are 2 index widely adopted in the evaluation, the salient information is well displayed, quantify the attention models to sticking out the salient region. We measured the overall performance of the proposed method with respect to precision, recall, and F-measure, and compared them with the performance of existing competitive automatic salient object segmentation methods, such as Itti & Koch’s method [8][9], AIM [10] and Achanta’s method [11].

According to the standard evaluation methods, precision is the percentage that the detected saliency map divided on the non-ground-truth saliency map as been predicted. Recall is a measure of the percentage provided that the detected saliency map divided on the ground-truth saliency map as been predicted. The highest percentage of precision indicates the real attention as the test participants assumes them as the attention region. The recall is similar as the false positive. F-measure is a special method which predicts the overall performance of the model. Precision (P), recall (R), F-measure used in this study is calculated from:

Here S donates the proposed attention regions, A is the ground truth attention regions, S*A indicates the grayscale image by the gray value of pixel wise multiplication.  (....) is the summation of the gray value of each pixel. Obviously, a larger value F means a better effect result.

This paper focus on the motion cues and the effect bring to the human visual system. Generally, the results are satisfactory and we are trying to simulate the motion effects in the top-down and bottom-up pathway. As they will leads to different outputs if we consider individual agents in the real world.

