ments. Afterward, through reading their titles and abstracts, the remaining publications were sorted as per their application areas such as cryptocurrency, IoT, healthcare, smart contract, supply chain manage- ment, banking and finance, industry, and other areas. Next, analytical reading was made to decide on which application areas further review is needed. In this regard, although the majority of the publications deal with cryptocurrency, the scope of this review is on those that are commonly categorized under blockchain 3.0. From this class of publi- cations, the most prominent usages are on healthcare and employing blockchain along with IoT. After sorting the documents and selecting the application areas from blockchain 3.0, the second search was started. This was conducted a year later, in December 2019 with search phrases,

Between the two searches, analytical reading was conducted to have a better grasp of the subject and to establish criteria for document in- clusion or removal [69]. Other supporting literature from the applica- tion fields was obtained and provided to substantiate the review based on the knowledge gained via the analytical reading. When a gap was discovered between prior information and publications dealing with blockchain, further publications were consumed to round out the eval- uation and establish a connection between prior knowledge and the emerging trend in blockchain usage.

The inclusion criteria for the primary publications were as follows. Publications that belong to the application areas and are published on a journal with an impact factor greater than 1.0, as per the source data- base of the publication and books or chapters of books are qualified for further processing. However, conference papers are considered cautiously as noted in Ref. [68], but those that are organized by trust- worthy professional associations such as AIS, ACM, IEEE, ICIS, INFORM, etc. as suggested by Ref. [71] were qualified for the next processing. However, they were also assessed against the Google h-5 index, in which those that obtained 10 or more in the index were included.

Setting such quality requirements has an effect on a number of issues, including the involuntary exclusion of valuable publications from sources with lower rankings. Apart from the impact factor 1.0 criterion indicated in Ref. [70] as an example of exclusion, there is no cutoff level that specifies a journal’s quality, which changes on a periodic basis.

technology readiness stage (TRL) [52]. However, of all the application domains that are typically classified as blockchain 3.0, this is the most prevalent use. Articles in this domain address a broader range of sub- jects, including how blockchain can be integrated with IoT, how IoT data is managed, IoT security, and smart city-related challenges.

The other area in which blockchain technology has the potential to make a big change is healthcare. Blockchain technology is mostly uti- lized in healthcare to manage data. The following table presents a list of publications that discuss the applicability of blockchain technology in these two sectors (Table 4).

In IoT, the most commonly covered topics include providing sub- stantial information about the benefits of blockchain for IoT and designing systems that can help in enhancing the security of IoT data. Additionally, various publications demonstrate the integration of blockchain with IoT. Furthermore, some papers explain smart city- related usages. All these are presented in greater detail.

However, the use of blockchain in healthcare is not without chal- lenges, as discussed in Refs. [6,7,77]. Maintaining confidentiality is a problem, as is increasing the throughput and scalability of blockchain-based systems. Moreover, security concerns and limited storage space make it difficult to store image data that is large enough to be maintained on a blockchain, and cost-effectiveness is another issue.

With this in mind, two articles seek to classify the integration methods of blockchain and IoT into three distinct categories. On the one hand [81], classify integration solutions according to the amount of data that flows through blockchain during data exchange between IoT de- vices. On the other hand [135], compares blockchain with cloud for service provision. The two approaches are not mutually exclusive;

To this effect, in the first way of integration, while the normal communications between IoT devices are intact i.e. in the data exchange between IoT devices, blockchain plays no role rather it serves as a me- dium of storage for some of the data or the metadata of the actual data; and this is usually termed as off-chain usage [81]. Prolonging this relationship to the cloud, in this integration method, blockchain isn’t

termed as Cloud over Blockchain (CoB) as per [135]. The second ar- chitecture allows a significant involvement of blockchain; hence all data created through the interactions between IoT devices pass through it. In comparison to the cloud, in this architecture, blockchain serves as the central channel of service provision but obtains analytical and virtual- ization services from the cloud, which is termed as Blockchain over Cloud (BoC) in Ref. [135]. In the last setting, a fair share of data in- terchanges happens on both the blockchain and the IoT devices, which enables the simultaneous and direct utilization of the qualities of both technologies. From the perspective of cloud against blockchain domi- nance viewpoint, this method is referred to as Mixed Blockchain-Cloud (MBC) in Ref. [135].

The IoT is the topic of security-related literature, with a particular emphasis on data security. However, blockchain technology may be used to address a variety of additional security concerns. This section discusses the benefits of utilizing blockchain to accomplish this goal. However, the following section on data management discusses data security.

In [11] the security challenges associated with IoT and the manner in which blockchain technology can assist overcome them is discussed. Similarly [12], conducted a review of the literature on the application of blockchain for security purposes, with an emphasis on IoT security. Numerous other researches, including [46,47,102,106], emphasize the potential security benefits of blockchain technology in the IoT security arena. As a result, the following benefits accrue in this regard:

currently employed in healthcare and IoT, are susceptible to a single point of failure. Even worse, the current distributed network architec- ture, protocol, and techniques are unsuitable for addressing new diffi- culties and developing service requirements [79]. Fourth, data kept on numerous servers are frequently unencrypted, posing a security concern [39], whereas blockchain-based systems employ data storage mecha- nisms that apply a variety of encryption techniques. Fifth, in IoT-enabled systems, data management operations are performed both online and

Acquiring data from the right source is accomplished by the enhancement of message authentication, transaction authentication, entity authentication, and key authentication through the distributed consensus processes. Various authentication designs and methodologies are used in the reviewed articles. To name a few, in an IoT context, for example, in Ref. [96], special devices called Manager Servers (MS) assign IDs to other devices using the devices’ private key. Secure virtual

ticate users with an Interactive Voice Response System (IVRS). However, the most widely used form of establishing identity is through the use of a public and private key pair, with the public key serving as the digital identity, as described in Ref. [111].

4.4.3.3. Privacy preservation. The other issue that the literatures address is the preservation of privacy. According to Ref. [147], privacy preservation techniques can be categorized into two broad categories: data privacy and context privacy. While data privacy concerns diffi- culties such as maintaining privacy throughout data aggregation and

While data security involves a variety of issues, it is noticed that blockchain-based systems are primarily concerned with resolving three topics: data integrity, access control, and privacy preservation. Essen- tially, security concerns are not distinct from one another; rather, they are inextricably linked. Despite, publications have concentrated on those subjects, which are discussed in detail below.

ensuring the accuracy and consistency of data throughout its lifecycle [116]. Prior publications, such as [141,142] expound on the fact that data integrity strategies are concerned with avoiding, identifying, and correcting data integrity issues. Methods such as journaling and building encrypted file systems are aimed at avoiding data integrity issues. Additionally, check-summing, mirroring, Cyclic Redundancy Check (CRC), and parity are used to detect data integrity risks. On the other side, correcting data integrity concerns are addressed using methods such as majority vote and RAID parity.

[101]	A validator node is assigned in each sidechain that monitors incoming access requests and controls access at the sidechain level. Globally, a consortium made up of validators is responsible for controlling access to outsiders. Furthermore, they employ Interplanetary File System (IPFS) that helps in decentralizing access control.

In situations when blockchain is used as part of a system [148], conducted a literature survey and classified privacy-preserving tech- niques into four categories. These are (a) smart contract or key man- agement derivation through the use of secure multiparty computation (SMPC), and (b) identity anonymization, which focuses on securing the identities of users participating in a transaction through the use of mixing, ring signatures, and zero proof of knowledge. (c) Transaction data anonymization, which focuses on ensuring the privacy of trans- action contents through mixing, differential privacy, zero-knowledge proofs, and homomorphic hiding; and (d) on-chain data protection, which focuses on securing data stored on the blockchain using encryp- tion techniques such as asymmetric encryption and attribute-based encryption.

Dissemination of data can take a variety of forms. Fundamentally, there are two main groups of data dissemination methods depending on who initiates the data transmission, i.e. whether a client requests or a server supplies the data. The first is push-based, while the second is pull- based. While push-based dissemination involves a server pushing data to

the mechanism used to convey the request and response data is snoop- ing. In contrast, polling is used to deliver data in a pull-based periodic point-to-point communication, whereas snooping is used to deliver data in a one-to-many communication. On the other hand, when data is delivered randomly in a push-based one-to-many communication, it is referred to as publish and subscribe; when data is delivered periodically, it is referred to as broadcast. Triggers are used to refer to aperiodic point- to-point data transmission [149].

Combinations of the aforementioned mechanisms, structures, and actions are noted in several of the reviewed literatures. For example, in Ref. [95], the data dissemination mechanism is publish and subscribe, in which a blockchain publisher provides information to an IoT-enabled blockchain, from which nodes can acquire data by subscribing. In Ref. [98] a hybrid of pull- and push-based data transmission techniques with a hierarchical framework is employed. The cluster head takes data from sensors and then distributes it to peers.

information dissemination-based systems. In this regard, publications such as [119,122] use trigger to disseminate data. These publications, on the other hand, propose distinct network structures. In Ref. [126], propagation occurs either from a single vehicle to a large number of vehicles or from a single vehicle to another vehicle or to infrastructure, with the goal of establishing two-tier blockchains (Local Dynamic Blockchain and Main Blockchain). In Ref. [129], messaging between vehicles occurs in a one-to-many or point-to-point fashion.

Despite these, data retrieval is not a primary objective of many of the reviewed papers. The only publication that focuses on it is [30], in which blockchain is situated as a contract service between biomedical data- bases and data consumers. The blockchain data acts as permanent proof of data retrieval activity, which is tracked in part by comparing the hash value of a query to the hash value of a result.

Additionally, there are distinctions in the literatures about the pro- vision of a right to retrieve and learn about data between blockchain participants. In this regard [39], mentions that the results of a query are decrypted by a designated entity called a leader [112], explains that a gateway server performs re-encryption and the requester decrypts it, and [113] states that a user decrypts data on their own but retrieves it through an intermediary called a Private Accessible Unit (PAU). In contrast, a query in Ref. [94] can be made by a variety of entities, including a provider, a user, and a healthcare insurance company.

According to some authors, blockchain is a distributed database. Despite their similarities, distributed databases and blockchains are not identical. To name a few, in blockchain, replicated copies of data are stored at nodes to circumvent the need for a central trust point; yet, distributed databases are maintained to optimize database efficiency by splitting information retrieval and processing. Additionally, the data stored in the nodes of a distributed database is not homogeneous. The other distinction is that, in contrast to distributed databases, blockchain technology incorporates an automatically executable program known as a smart contract [42].

challenges, making it particularly sensitive to privacy concerns. Addi- tionally, the size of the data has an effect on its storage. As a result, huge files, the majority of which are the result of radiology, are treated differently than laboratory tests and other research data.

In terms of regulations, several of the literatures discuss certain statutes. For example [111], focuses on a standard called Fast Health- care Interoperability Resources (FHIR), which is primarily concerned with the exchange of medical data in transit and storage. As required by the standard, the system saves data pointers on the blockchain. Another paper, namely [118], examines the European Union’s General Data

of data storage, among other things. In accordance with this, one of the objections leveled towards blockchain-based systems is that their immutability precludes them from being regulated, however, the au- thors address this concern through the use of ontology. Ontology has the potential to resolve semantic heterogeneity associated with the use of various IoT devices. This is accomplished, for example, by raising awareness of security threats. However, they use it for intelligence policy analysis in their system, which includes consent management for data acquisition, update, and disposal.

The smart city concept is a subset of the smart planet agenda, with a spatial demarcation for its execution [158] that is conceptualized in two distinct ways. The first defines smart city or smartness as the level at which places are connected through IoT, implying that technocracy plays a role in cities management. On the other hand, the second one stresses the establishment and spread of a knowledge-based economy, in which information and communication technologies play a crucial role in the development of the envisioned economic model [159]. Both conceptualizations emphasize the importance of technology in the form of IoT.

To address these and other challenges, blockchain is considered to make a substantial contribution, as seen by the growth of publications addressing its usage. As a result, authors such as [123,125] suggest frameworks for utilizing blockchain technology in smart city applica- tions. In Ref. [123], blockchain serves two purposes. On the one hand, it

is used at the prosumer level to connect smart devices to a smart meter. Additionally, the smart meter is linked to the micro-grid, smart appli- ances, and sensors. The micro-grid acts as a data hub and a tool for energy exchange in the design. On the other side, each community and smart grid are connected through a blockchain at the household level. According to the authors, this type of usage enables a community to self-manage its energy consumption. The architecture described in Ref. [125] places edge computing between a blockchain, which serves as the core network, and an IoT device network. The obvious goal of pro-

The authors of [124,126] focus on the application of blockchain technology to smart transportation. In Ref. [124] an overview of how blockchain can be used in conjunction with smart transportation by describing seven tiers of intelligent transportation systems that utilize blockchain technology is provided. According to the article, the most successful application of blockchain in intelligent transportation sys- tems is the real-time sharing of information. A similar issue is addressed in Ref. [126], which employs a point or token system that begins with the purchase of a car and subsequently accrues points based on traffic-related performance. They refer to their point-based system as Intelligent Vehicle Trust Point (IVTP), in which reward points are used as a prize, similar to how Bitcoin pays miners, but this time based on traffic-related performance. They propose a two-tiered blockchain sys- tem comprised of a local and a central layer. While the local blockchain is branched and stores data for a limited length of time, the main blockchain tracks IVTP transactions in the same way as Bitcoin does.

Smart grids have also garnered attention from authors, including [83,127]. In Ref. [127], a survey of blockchain application cases is presented. As such, in conjunction with the smart grid, blockchain may be utilized primarily as an infrastructure for peer-to-peer energy trading and as a deterrent to data tampering in the power-producing and dis- tribution industries. Consistent with this [83], a layered structure based on blockchain that they believe can enable energy policy enforcement, energy trading, and security enhancement is proposed. To accomplish these goals, the blockchain is deployed through a virtual private network, with each node implemented by software.

Numerous solutions are being used to overcome these challenges, including smartphone verification systems and pill image recognition tools. Additionally, RFID technology is being utilized, including micro- tags attached to individual pill units and data integration with other sources of data. Moreover, technology such as machine learning and online verification was employed. However, blockchain technology, which is comprised entirely of distributed ledgers and is coupled with IoT, is also being investigated as a possible remedy [130]. In comparison to all of these processes [130,131], credit blockchain with resolving the aforementioned issues by making the drug supply chain trustworthy, transparent, traceable, verifiable, and resistant to the intrusion of counterfeit medicines. Nonetheless, there are a number of disadvantages to blockchain implementation, including the lack of regulatory guide- lines and the necessity to preserve pharmaceutical users’ privacy [132].

the medicine is tracked, each entity scans and signs the code as the drug passes through the supply chain, preventing counterfeiting. Similarly [133], develops a method for ensuring the transparency of drug-related transaction data across the supply chain. Their system is comprised of four entities: alliance members who grant licenses to miners (govern- ment and manufacturers), full nodes (wholesalers and hospitals), and normal nodes (pharmacies and consumers). According to their design description, a public key is utilized to generate a Quick Response (QR) code that acts as a unique identifier (ID) for medications. When medi- cine is manufactured, information about it is stored on the blockchain as the hash value of its name, location, and timestamp of the manufacturing date and time. Unspent Transaction Outputs (UTXOs) and private keys, respectively, can be used to detect fraudulent trans- actions such as sales by unlawful distributors and unauthorized persons.

The purpose of this review is to discuss how blockchain is utilized for data management and delves into the application areas of IoT and healthcare. Additionally, it assesses the integration strategies utilized to integrate blockchain with IoT. As a result, selected works from a list of publications are reviewed to demonstrate the approaches used to inte- grate blockchain and IoT. Moreover, data management activities which are data acquiring, processing, security, dissemination, retrieval, and storage strategies used in blockchain-based systems are demonstrated. Furthermore, the use of blockchain in smart cities and the drug supply chain is discussed.

Clearly, blockchain, like IoT, is pervasive [3,67], and its adoption can benefit a wide variety of applications. Healthcare is one sector where HIoT has the potential to make an impact. However, while the integrative use of both technologies is beneficial, the qualitative aspects of both technologies have an effect on the integration efforts. These include the existence of a large number of sensors, the low memory capacity of blockchain and IoT, the low processing capacity and battery life of IoT, and the low latency of various blockchain-based consensus processes. Blockchain is being used in IoT not only for its qualitative benefits but also to resolve some of the shortcomings that IoT currently possesses.

The degree of interaction between IoT devices and the degree to which blockchain is integrated into systems, as well as the level of emphasis placed on the blockchain, serve as the basis for categorizing integration mechanisms. According to these, blockchain plays a minor part in the first method, dubbed IoT-IoT or CoB. The second technique, known as IoT-blockchain or BoC, utilizes blockchain heavily for data storage, while the hybrid model incorporates an edge, fog, or overlay network into the grand system. It should be noted that these strategies do not cover all possible applications; thus, some circumstances require a combination of them. Nonetheless, some typical works are shown in a tabular fashion above, taking into account the primary classification criteria.

that it resolves the bandwidth issue associated with storing a file on the blockchain. Additionally, it enables blockchain-based systems to comply with some regulatory obligations for the secure storage and sharing of data. The intricacies of one regulation in terms of blockchain application are discussed in Ref. [111]. On the other hand, the hybrid integration leverages the benefits of both blockchain and IoT, making it ideal for situations requiring a high level of latency. Additionally, it is suitable for systems with a high number of sensors.

In terms of data security, blockchain is most frequently used to ensure data integrity, access control, and privacy preservation. These will have a number of benefits across a range of application domains, including those that incorporate both blockchain and IoT. As mentioned before, an IoT network is comprised of numerous and heterogeneous devices that generate large amounts of data; also, their network func- tions in both online and offline modes. As a result, systems developed for data management tasks must take these considerations into account. Additionally, the adoption of blockchain for data management purposes is motivated by a desire to compensate for the deficiencies of IoT in the aforementioned data management functions.

In healthcare, blockchain-based data management is designed to provide patients authority over their data. Their empowerment enables individuals to control who has access to their data and to track who has accessed it. Additionally, blockchain technology improves the integrity, availability, access control, and preservation of privacy.

Acquiring data from the appropriate source is crucial to data man- agement success. In this regard, the authors demonstrate that, in addi- tion to the widely used technique of identifying objects and persons through their public key and pseudonym names, alternative means of authentication, such as voice recognition, have been used in blockchain- based systems. Additionally, it is noticed that architecturally assigning entities, such as management servers, are utilized for assigning unique IDs to objects and users.

The reviewed literature indicates that the most frequently used strategy for assuring data integrity is to encrypt data prior to hashing it, or vice versa. Moreover, third-party systems such as IPFS, Argon2, and Chainpoint are used to produce unique identifiers, form a digital signature, and generate data structures. These techniques and applica- tions are unrelated to the area of the application.

There is no single dominating strategy for access control and privacy preservation that has been widely adopted by a significant number of authors. However, due to their certificate authority and multi-signature provisioning capabilities, established blockchain platforms such as Hyperledger and NEM are being used for access control. In some works, on the other hand, access control is believed to be managed structurally, for example, by allocating access control tasks to selected participant nodes. On the other hand, there is a publication that demonstrates how to utilize a decoder to ensure compatibility between multiple access control models.

levels. This kind of clustering minimizes the danger of identification and transaction exposure beyond the cluster bounds. Additional techniques are applied to bolster the architectural solutions. Generally, no discernible pattern has evolved in this direction. The figure below, Fig. 4, illustrates the taxonomy of data security methods in general.

common mechanism in this area is a method called trigger but publi- cations differ in the architecture they follow. On top of disseminating data from a vehicle to a vehicle, some authors include the dissemination of data from infrastructure to vehicles as well. In other publications, hybrids of pull and push data dissemination methods are being employed. In all these dissemination methods blockchain plays a

Regarding data storage, which is heavily influenced by the method of integration chosen, legal requirements, data size, throughput, and la- tency demanded from a system, the application area a system is intended to be employed, and the number of participants of a blockchain system. Therefore, the three integration methods discussed above have a direct bearing on the placement and type of data maintained in the system. It is observed that literatures solve these issues by following appropriate integration methods, and by creatively designing architectures that take those concerns into consideration.

An examination of the literature reveals some unresolved issues that require attention. Additionally, it is clear from the explanations pro- vided in the publications and the analysis conducted on them that in the two application areas, a set of factors dictate the integration methods and data management activities. These include the legal requirements imposed on an application area, the intended use of a system, the number of IoT devices involved, the architecture chosen, the application area itself, the sensitivity of data, and the required throughput and la- tency. The inre-relationships between the usage areas and their deter- minant factors is presented in Fig. 5.

Second, data processing is listed as a data management operation in the preceding sections. In blockchain-based systems, more autonomous processing capacity is provided by smart contracts. However, it has been discovered that the number of smart contracts employed in such systems varies. As such use may have an effect on system performance, research examining the number of smart contracts that are suitable for use on systems can serve as a foundation for future work.

Third, the bulk of articles does not define how data should be retrieved. Due to the intricacy of data retrieval in blockchain-based systems, retrieval may occur on- or off-chain. Additionally, image files are encrypted and stored on-chain in healthcare. Data retrieval from encrypted files, including the usage of searchable encrypted image files, may be essential in such instances. However, research in this field is stagnant. As a result, this field requires additional research.

Fourth, is the disintegrative use of HIT, which is caused, among other things, by the lack of a trustworthy technique for assigning unique IDs. In this sense, one of the characteristics of blockchain is that it can help solve such a problem; yet, it is uncommon to come across literature that uses blockchain to integrate disparate healthcare systems. Thus, inte- grative HIT utilization has a beneficial effect on the domain; these issues can be viewed as a solution to a long-standing problem.

This review examines how the selected publications leverage blockchain technology to streamline data management activities and how they integrate blockchain with IoT. Furthermore, in addition to examining the presence of trends in developing instantiations, the article demonstrates the benefits of adopting blockchain in subsets of the two domains, namely smart cities and drug supply chains. The preceding observations allow us to deduce the following.

Blockchain technology has the potential to significantly improve a variety of application areas within a smart city. This includes enabling self-management of energy consumption and trade in conjunction with smart utilities. Additionally, it facilitates real-time information ex- change and improves traffic-related performance in the context of smart transportation applications through a reward system that is demon- strated with designed instantiations. Similarly, blockchain technology can assist in combating counterfeiting, sub-standardization and diver- sion through increasing transparency throughout the drug supply chain. The primary application of blockchain is for data management. The premise that blockchain can manage heterogeneous big data prevent a single point of failure, and function with encrypted data both online and offline is driving the adoption of blockchain for data management. To determine whether these objectives have been met, several publications focusing on data management activities such as data acquisition, pro- cessing, security, distribution, retrieval, and storage have been assessed. As a result, it is learned that the primary focus of the literatures is data security, which includes three components: data integrity, access control, and privacy preservation. Through the use of blockchain tech- nology, a variety of ways are being used to enhance these areas. The strategies employed for those topics are classified into the following six categories: Equivalence verification, the usage of third-party systems, encryption techniques, architectural methods, a hardware solution, and smart contracts. From them, the most frequently used strategies include the use of various encryption technologies, third-party solutions,

Other data management tasks, such as data acquisition, benefit from the authentication enhancement capabilities of blockchain-based sys- tems. Various authentication methods have been reported to be applied, ranging from biological mechanisms to public-key encryption schemes. This means that independent of the application domain, a variety of decentralized autonomous authentication procedures for blockchain- based systems can be developed. Similarly, one of the benefits of blockchain for data processing is the revival of smart contracts, which were available before the widespread use of blockchain but were not widely used as a data processing tool. However, blockchain-based sys- tems leverage it for a range of activities, including autonomous data processing.

Dissemination and retrieval of data are the least targeted tasks in data management. Nonetheless, numerous authors present the dissem- ination mechanisms employed in their instantiations in an unambiguous manner. It is learned that the majority of dissemination mechanisms are based on publish and subscribe, hierarchical structures, and trigger- based one-to-many and many-to-many procedures. However, despite the fact that blockchain adoption has an effect on data retrieval pro- cesses, the literatures do not discuss or address data retrieval methods to be used in blockchain-based systems.

Alternatively, it is recognized that a large number of variables have a significant impact on data storage. To circumvent these obstacles, de- signers employ solutions such as creating a data lake, preserving only file locations, and registering a list of files. To address legal problems, developers customize their systems to conform to the applicable legal standards.

By and large, data management tasks and integration approaches are inextricably linked. In this regard, the three approaches to integrating blockchain and IoT are diverse in terms of the complexity introduced to data management. This is because metadata management is required in addition to data management. However, when (a) file size increases, (b) regulation is strict, (c) the number of participants is large, (d) data sensitivity is subtle, and (e) throughput and latency requirements are high, designers opt for IoT-IoT (BoC) and hybrid integration approaches. This is a prevalent trend in both healthcare and the Internet of Things.

research outcomes in the form of instantiations with an uncertain future. Second, independent of the reputation of the journals in which they are published or the conferences at which they are presented, this review assigns equal weight to all literature that meets the screening re- quirements. However, the majority of blockchain-related noble publi- cations are presented as white papers, which are disqualified. This has

Al Omar A, Rahman MS, Basu A, Kiyomoto S. MediBchain: a blockchain based privacy preserving platform for healthcare data. In: Wang G, Atiquzzaman M, Yan Z, Choo K-KR, editors. Security, Privacy, and Anonymity in Computation, Communication, and Storage, vol. 10658. Cham: Springer International

