Artificial Intelligence in neuro-ophthalmology is an emerging field and AI algorithms have shown high accuracy in detecting neuro- ophthalmic diseases in papilledema and glaucoma. Algorithms in AI are developed for detecting neuro-ophthalmic diseases through moni- toring retinal nerve fibre layer (RNFL) thickness and optic disc alter- ations using fundus and OCT images [6]. This emerging technology in neuro Ophthalmology further signifies insight to expand its applica- tion in inherited optic neuropathy especially LHON. This review dis- cusses the current application and recent innovations of AI in Oph- thalmology, and the possible role of AI-based models in inherited optic neuropathy.

netic and epigenetic changes affecting people above the age of 50 years [39]. Advances in image recognition and classification had enabled the recognition of retinal pigment changes, choroidal neovascularization, drusen, haemorrhage, exudation, and atrophy [23]. Colour fundus im- ages are used as data for interpretation in DL. Although the results of

Cataract causes opacification of the lens in the eye with a promi- nent cloudy appearance. The early diagnosis of cataracts is crucial for management, which is a challenging task through clinical observation. Hence the DL finds the application in cataracts by the development of CNN algorithms for slit-lamp images for diagnosis of the early stage of cataract. The performance of the DL model in cataracts compared to the traditional clinical grading was achieved only 70% [50]. Another DL

model developed for paediatric cataracts, enabled automatic localiza- tion of the region of interest in the lens for identification using CNN. The pre-processing of images has enhanced the sensitivity and specificity of the DL model up to 97% and enabled the classification and grading of cataracts [51]. Another study has reported risk prediction for posterior capsule opacification (PCO) using AI with 87% accuracy [52].

Optic neuropathy occurs when the optic nerve is damaged causing structural changes in the eye and variations in the blood flow [69]. In most cases, optic neuropathy leads to vision loss starting with fading of vision, loss of colour vision, blurriness, peripheral vision loss, and clouding. It is important to detect optic nerve damage early and treat it. Researchers are trying to study various methods to derive better and quick diagnoses using AI. [70]. Currently, some studies support the use of AI in various diseases related to optic neuropathy. Recent studies on ML system attempts in detecting optic disc abnormalities through reti- nal fundus, focusing on optic disc atrophy and papilledema. The com-

Currently, DL models are widely used only in the diagnosis of DR, AMD, cataract, and glaucoma [86,87]. Its application is not yet inves- tigated in LHON. Although the demand for the data exists to train the DL models, since LHON is a rare disease, a targeted multi-centric study can provide enough information to feed the DL system. Successful ap- plication of DL in LHON will revolutionize the diagnosis and precision in neuro-ophthalmology. In recent years, DL technology is well estab- lished especially in the DR, and enables the classification of them based on the types and severity [88]. In DR, fundus examination shows micro- aneurysms, dot hemorrhages, intraretinal microvascular abnormalities, neovascularization which serves as an essential tool for clinical diag- nosis [89]. The colour fundus images displaying these peculiar changes in DR are taken into consideration by the DL algorithm to form CNN

The size of the optic nerve head can be useful in LHON [92]. The size of the optical disc can be captured in the image using AI/DL system. Var- ious algorithms were designed to work on the pedigree of an individual by exploring the genetic history of their family. This makes it easier for clinicians to understand the background of the patient, their family, and their genetic capabilities to accept and increase the rate of early diag- nosis of inherited genetic disorders like LHON [93]. Not much has been explored using AI in treating and understanding LHON; nevertheless, there is a great potential in quantitative analysis in combination with in

Trials are ongoing to expand AI platforms via digital innovations in the internet of things, 5th generation telecommunication networks, and the creation of an ecosystem that is self-dependant and provides the prospect to advance the latest models related to Ophthalmology ad- dressing various challenges [94]. One of the major advantages of using telemedicine is that it made possible for clinicians to evaluate the pa- tient from any given location. Replicating routine clinical examination, AI and telemedicine are improvising to be better by incorporating vast information about the progression of diseases, longitudinal data usage, and real-time calculation of incidences in the real-world [95,96]. The application of AI can make data collection possible and store big data of patients. Many digital innovations run from diagnostics to helping in the treatment of eye diseases. Screening of eye diseases was majorly carried with the help of AI. Tele-screening through AI has expanded its applica- tion towards ophthalmological issues like DR, ROP, glaucoma, myopia,

There are slight chances that AI commits minor errors which may be a hindrance in the process of operations and disease diagnosis con- siderably [99]. To originate various ways for gathering data as well as analysing them considering the legal formality is one amongst the prin- cipal challenges to be confronted by the upcoming AI system. Artificial Intelligence uses different approaches to assign ground labels which are AI reference standards, and they are subjected to human error. With evidence, it can be easily stated that there is a high risk of AI system producing biased assessment by the methodological index for nonran- domized studies (MINORS), which is yet to be used completely as an application due to testing [100]. Every new system and algorithm must go through a large amount of testing and trials which is time-consuming as it must cross many approvals, as the whole system is dependant on a trial-and-error procedure.

