Prediction of chaotic time series based on the phase space reconstruction theory has been applied in many research fields. Local linear model is widely used in chaos prediction due to its versatility and small computation amount. The embedding dimension and time delay parameters of the local linear prediction model can take different values with those of the phase space reconstruction. The Binary Particle Swarm Optimization (BPSO) is applied to choose the optimal parameters of the new local linear prediction model for its strong search ability. The main objective of this approach is to increase the predictive accuracy of the local linear model. In this paper the local linear one-step and multi-step predictive model predicts the chaotic time series respectively. Simulation results show the feasibility and effectiveness of the proposed method.

This paper is organized as follows: The local linear prediction model, BPSO and adaptive weighted fusion algorithm are described in Section 2. The new local linear prediction model is illustrated in Section 3. Simulation and results are shown in Section 4 and discussion is described in Section 5. The conclusion is given in Section 6.

neighbouring  points.  B is  an  m+1* k  matrix  whose  ith  column  is  made  up  of  Y  and D = x(N1 + step), x(N2 + step),", x(Nk + step). Number of the neighbouring points is usually no smaller than m 1 to make sure that the matrix is non-singular. For local linear one-step prediction the predictive step is

It is used to speed up the convergence. But typical problems are set in a variable space with discrete and qualitative features, such as scheduling and routing problems. Then Kenney and Eberhart proposed BPSO to settle zero-one integer programming problems in 1997-[12]. In BPSO algorithm vij (t) is no longer the velocity of particles but the possibility of xij (t) equaling to 1. Sigmoid function is used to confine the possibilities

Parameters of the traditional local linear are valued the same with that of phase space reconstruction during the traditional predictive methods. Ref [8] points out that parameters of the model can be assigned different to improve the predictive result. For these two parameters, the authors estimate the optimal value of one parameter with the other parameter fixed by minimizing the standard prediction error in Ref [8]. This method improves the predictive error indeed. But the problem is that there always a corresponding value for one parameter with the other parameter settled, so the obtained value could not be optimal in theory. In this paper the BPSO is used to evaluate the both parameters simultaneously.

Initialize the swarm parameters. In this paper swarm size is 30 and number of iteration is 30, length of the binary number is 4. Other parameters are set as: wmax  1.2, wmin  0.4, c1  c2  2 .

Where x is the amplitude of the convection motion, y is the temperature difference between ascending and descending currents and z is distortion of the vertical temperature profile from linearity. α , β and γ are dimensionless parameters. In this paper these parameters are set to be α  10 , β  28 and γ  8/ 3 for a rich dynamical behavior. The standard fourth-order Runge–Kutta method is used to solve the equations. The time step is h  0.01 and the x value are used to simulate and test.

In order to compare the method of Ref [8] and the new model, 3000 data is chosen to build the model of Lorenz time series. The following 600 data is to be predicted. With the method of Ref [8] we set the parameter m  3 and search for the optimal value of τ that minimizes e(m,τ ) . Then we get that the optimal value of τ is 1. Comparison results are shown separately in Fig.1 and Fig.2.Simulation results show that the optimal method is better than the method proposed in Ref [8].

All the figures above demonstrate the short-term predictive of chaotic time series. The predictive validity depends on not only the dynamic characteristics of time series, but the predictive step as well. From error diagrams we can see that the error of prediction is increasing basically with the prediction step in the local linear prediction. The reason is that each prediction value obtained by the model is used to predict the next data. Therefore the shorter the predictive step is, the more accurate the predictive result will be. Furthermore, the local linear multi-step prediction predicts chaotic time series with the training data by changing the step. The neighboring points do not need to be recalculated during the predictive procedure, which reduces the complexity of computation and is more suitable for the long-term chaos prediction.

To get better predictive value, we can also use some other methods such as the adapted weighted fusion algorithm to fusion the obtained data. The adapted weighted fusion algorithm allocates the weighted factors automatically according to the adaptive criteria-[15]. It merges the output obtained by local one-step and multi- step prediction model with weighted factors and improves predictive accuracy and the algorithm can minimize the predictive error theoretically.

A new method of predicting chaotic time series based on BPSO is proposed in this paper. Parameters of prediction model can be set to different value with those of phase space reconstruction. Because the parameters have important impact on the prediction accuracy, optimal values are chosen for the prediction model. BPSO is applied to search the optimal parameters due to its strong global search capability. The local linear one-step prediction updates the training set to search for new neighboring points and increases the complexity of computation. The multi-step prediction can overcome the disadvantage by changing the predictive step. The adaptive weighted fused algorithm also can be employed to improve the predictive accuracy by fusing the models with weighted factors. Simulation results demonstrate that the proposed method is superior to the traditional local linear model and more suitable for high precision short-term prediction.

