Duck virus enteritis(DVE), also known as duck plague(DP), is an serious and contagious disease, and highly lethal in all ages of birds from Anseriformes, such as ducks, geese, and swans. Since the first report of DVE in domestic ducks in 1923, more outbreaks were reported in many countries, and it has become a significant threat to the commercial duck industry in global [1-2]. Duck enteritis virus (DEV) is the causative agent of DVE, and which is one of the members of the subfamily Alphaherpesvirinae, but it has not been grouped into any genus [3].

With the standard genetic codes used in a many ways, all amino acids(except Met and Trp) are coded by more than one codons, and these synonymous codons are not equally used among organisms[4], namely one certain synonymous codons of each amino acid is preferred over other codons, a phenomenon termed codon usage bias. The frequencies of alternative synonymous codons used among all organisms[5]. It has been reported that some factors related to the codon usage in various specieses, such as mutational bias[6-8], translational selection[9-10], the structure of proteins[11–12], tRNA abundance[13-14], and GC compositions[15-17], gene expression level and gene length[18-19]. Study on the codon usage bias can provide some evidences about the molecular evolution of viruses and their individual genes. So far, some detailed comparative analysis of herpesvirus codon usage are reported[20-21], but the study of DEV UL21 gene codon usage bias is still absent.

In this paper codon usage bias in the UL21 gene of DEV was analyzed and also compared with those of 27 other herpesvirus. In addition, the codon usage bias of DEV UL21 gene was compared with those of E. coli, yeast, and humans. All these analyses might provide some reference for future study of the UL21 gene.

The DEV was obtained from Key Laboratory of Animal Disease and Human Health of Sichuan Province. The UL21 gene(GeneBank Accession No. EU195090) of the DEV was isolated and identified by our laboratory. And the 27 nucleotide sequences of the UL21 like genes reference herpesviruses were obtained from the NCBI GenBank nucleotide database .

In order to detect whether different species follow the same codon usage rule, and select the best suitable expression system, we compared the DEV UL21 gene codon usage bias among E. coli, yeast and H. sapiens. The database of the codon usage in E. coli, yeast and humans is obtained from http://www.kazusa.or.jp/codon.

The overall RSCU values of fifty-nine sense codons (with exception of Trp, Met, and the termination codons) and the codon preferences of the DEV UL21 gene were analyzed through the program of CodonW and CUSP program of EMBOSS, respectively (display in Table 1). Analyzing the RSCU values of the codons from the table, we find that most the A-ended or T-ended codons used for coding amino acid are much higher than the C-ended or G-ended codons. Meanwhile, a high level of diversity in codon usage bias is found among the Ala, Cys, Gly, Leu, Pro, Arg, Ser, Thr and Val amino acids, for they own a 6-fold or 4-fold coding degeneracy.

a L represents the length of identified ORF. b CAI represents the codon Adaptation Index. c ENC represents the effective number of codons. d GC represents the frequency of the nucleotide G + C of codons. e GC3s represents the frequency of the nucleotide G + C at the synonymous third position of codons.

The plot of ENC versus GC3S content is another effective way to investigate codon usage variation among genes. If GC3s a unique determined conditions to shape the codon usage pattern, the values of ENC would lie considerably below the continuous curve. ENC values of the 28 UL21 genes were plotted against their corresponding GC3s contents, as was shown from Fig. 1, we can firm that a large number of points do not follow the theoretical curve, which lie near the solid curve of this distribution, indicating that the codon preference of these genes are subject to GC compositional constraints.

The phylogenetic tree was established in order to analyse the gene evolution among herpesviruses UL21 gene, based on the UL21 amino acid sequence of 28 herpesviruses. As it is showed in fig.2, the DEV, DEV- VAC and the DEV UL21 like gene are different from otherherpesviruses as they first cluster together and form a separate branch, then clustered with HSV-7 and 2 kind genus of virus (Mardivirus and Varicellovirus, respectively) in a monophyletic clade. We conclude that the UL21 gene of DEV CHv strain are quite homology to those of DEV VAC strain and DEV UL21-like gene, the shorter distance between DEV and Mardivirus(GaHV-2, GaHV-3 and MeHV-1) suggests the amino acid sequence are similar between DEV and GaHV-2, GaHV-3, MeHV-1, and the UL21 protein of DEV is closely related to GaHV-2, GaHV-3 and MeHV-1.

As a common evolutionary phenomenon, it is well known that synonymous codon usage bias exists in each organism from prokaryotes to eukaryotes [10,29]. Many reports have revealed that codon usage bias are associated with a variety of biological factors, and the codon usage has been considered to be the equilibrium between natural selection and mutation pressure. It is seemed that the main factor for the codon usage in different viraceae and pestivirus is different, for instance, mutation bias may be a more important factor than natural selection in determining codon usage bias of some viruses, such as herpesviruses and Picornaviridae[20, 30]. Meanwhile, some other reports also showed that the G+C content is the main factor

Relative synonymous codon usage (RSCU), which is the observed frequency of codon usage divided by the sum of codons per amino acid and multiplied by the actual number of codons per amino acid [22], used to examine the synonymous codon usage without the confounding influence of different amino acid compositions. RSCU values greater than 1.0 indicate that the corresponding codon is more frequently used than expected, the opposite is true for RSCU values less than 1.0. From Table 1, we found there are 8 A-ended and 11 T-ended codons at the third codon position which showed strong usage bias for coding the Ala, Asp, Glu, Pro, Phe, Gly, Lys, Leu, Val, and Thr amino acids. So we presumed that codons ended with A and T is preferentially used in DEV UL21 gene.

Codon adaptation index (CAI ), it is a simple and effective measure of the overall synonymous codon usage bias of genes. The CAI value, ranging from 0 to 1.0, which is much closer to 1, the codon usage is much stronger.Customarily highly expressed genes correspond to high CAI values[25-26]. The CAI values of DEV UL21 gene and relational herpesvirus vary from 0.613 to 0.768, with a average value of 0.681, and we infer UL21 gene is lowly expressed gene in DEV genome. Moreover, the SD of CAI value is 0.0579, indicating that there is small variation in codon usage pattern among different herpesvirus UL21 genes.

G + C composition and GC3s has been widely reported to be correlated with synonymous codon usage bias. GC3s is a good indicator of the extent of base composition bias, which represents the frequency of the nucleotide G+C at the synonymous third position of codons(excluding Met, Trp and the stop codons). The GC3S contents of each UL21 gene range from 13.00% to 96.58%, with an average value of 60.48% and SD of 24.249.

The plot of ENC against GC3S can be effectively used to analyse the heterogeneity of codon usage among genes.If G+C compositional constraint influences the codon usage, the GC3S and ENC correlated spots would lie on or just below the expected curve[27]. If a gene is subject to selection for translationally optimal codons, it will lie considerably below the expected curve.Fig.1 shows a large number of points lie near the solid curve of this distribution, so we conclude that the UL21 genes of herpesvirus are subject to G+C compositional constraints.

In order to investigate whether existing UL21 gene synonymous codon usage bias difference among different DEV strain, we compared UL21gene of DEV strain with those of DEV strain VAC and DEV UL21- like strain. Interestingly, all of them are same in the value of CAI, there was no difference or little difference in the codon usage bias parameters of the UL21 gene indicated by ENC, coding GC content. we conclude there is little different codon usage pattern of UL21 gene in different strains of DEV. It is reported that

The phylogenetic tree analysis showed that the UL21gene of DEV CHv strain, DEV VAC strain and DEV UL21-like gene are quite homology to each other, and DEV UL21 gene evolutionarily is closely related to GaHV-2, GaHV-3 and MeHV-1, which belong to Mardivirus. Meanwhile, similar gene lenghth and CAI, ENC, GC content value are shared. Similar study have showed that the codon usage pattern of the DPV dUTPase, UL24, gC, UL27, UL28, UL30 and UL35 gene were also similar to herpesviruses Mardivirus, but UL25 gene, UL26 gene, UL26.5 gene, and UL29 gene exhibited a close relationship with the varicellovirus or the simplexvirus [35-39]. More researches are required to define which genus of herpesvirus the DEV belongs to.

Previous studies have revealed that there was a strongly significant correlation between gene expression level and codon usage bias in Escherichia coli, yeast and Humans[40]. The synonymous codon usage patterns are related to the abundance of isoaccepting tRNAs [13,14], highly expressed genes have a strong selective preference for the codons complementary to the most abundant tRNA species, whereas lowly expressed genes display more uniform codon usage patterns largely compatible with the mutational bias in the absence of translational selection [41,42]. Selecting relative abundance of isoaccepting tRNAs between the gene and expression system codon usage bias is more important for gene expression level. Table 3 shows there are 42, 45, 39 codons showing the DEV UL21 to E.coli, Yeast, H.sapiens ratio between 0.5 to 2.0 respectively, and the codon usage bias pattern in the DPV UL21 gene is similar to that of Yeast. We can conclude that the yeast expression system is more effective for expression of the UL21gene.

In summary, we can conclude that the UL21 gene of DEV is lowly pressed and weak codon usage bias. Meanwhile, our work also has provided a basic understanding of the evolution of herpesvirus UL21 gene and predicted effective expression system for DEV UL21 gene. All these analyses might provide some reference of future study of UL21 gene.

