The research of pattern recognition shows: For a complex identification and classification system, only one method is always difficult to identify and separate objects well, while among the different classification methods, the high complementary exist, the integration of multiple classifiers can clearly improve the recognition rate. Therefore, integration methods of multiple classifiers have become a hot spot which the researchers are focusing on. This paper sets up an integrated neural network handwriting recognition system, comprehensively use a variety of pattern recognition, fully reflect various aspects features of handwritten digital characters, this method has improved the accuracy of handwritten numeral recognition system.

Multilayer feed forward networks are an important class of neural networks. This network typically consists of three parts: a set of input nodes, one or more layers of computing nodes in the hidden layer, a layer of compute nodes in the output layer. The input signal on the basis of the progressive layers through the network propagates to the front. Under the way of supervised learning use an error back propagation algorithm to train the network.

Error back propagation algorithm consists of two different layers through the network: A time forward pass and a reverse pass. In the forward pass, an input vector play role in the network input nodes, its influence through the network layer by layer to spread. Finally, produces an output as the actual response of the network. In the forward pass, the network synaptic weights are all fixed. On the other hand, in reverse pass, the synaptic weights all adjust according to the error correction rule. In particular, the response from the target minus the actual response of the network generated error signal. The error signal is back-propagation through network, is the opposite direction with the synaptic connections-  Synaptic weight is adjusted that make the actual response of the network from the statistical significance more close to the response target. Error back propagation algorithm in the literature was called bach-propagation algorithm, BP algorithm, or simply a back-prop.

BP algorithm consists of two parts: information forward transmission and error back propagation. In the process of forward transmission, input information through  transfer to the output layer, the state of neurons in each layer affects only the state of the next layer of neurons. If the output layer didn't get the desired output, calculate the value of the output layer error change, and then back propagation, through the network put the error signal along the original connection to rollback, and modify the weights of neurons in each layer until up to the desired goals.

A good choice for synaptic weights and initial closure of network had a huge help for a successful network design. When the synaptic weight was given to a large initial value, then the network of neurons is likely to become saturated. If this happens, the local gradient of back-propagation algorithm presented a very small value, resulting in that back-propagation learning process is very slow. However, if the synaptic weight is given a small initial value, back-propagation algorithm may be done within a flat area of the error surface original point; especially for symmetric functions (such as the hyperbolic tangent function) Conditions, this is more likely. The origin is a saddle point, the saddle point is a stable point and the saddle point in the orthogonal error surface curvature is positive, and negative along the saddle direction. For these reasons, should avoid using the over big or too small the initialized synaptic weights. Suitable initialization choice is between these two extreme. Specifically, consider to put a hyperbolic tangent function as activation function of multilayer neural networks. Let each neuron network bias to 0, and the value of a neuron is expressed as

Here m is a neuron's synaptic weight connection number. Based on the above results, how to describe synaptic weights as mixed-signal strategy to make the neurons and the standard deviation of the value locate the transition region of its linear part and the saturation part of sigmoid activation function. I.e. As mentioned earlier the parameters a and b the value established by the hyperbolic tangent function, but the above equation

Feature extraction is the key to the character recognition system; recognition algorithm is based on the type of selection feature to be selected. If the selected features are stable, whether on behalf of the characteristics of a class of characters, is the key of high and low system recognition rate. Handwritten character feature extraction method can be divided into two kinds of structural features and statistical features. Below separately states the features of these two extraction methods and general method. From the perspective of

statistical pattern recognition, character recognition is actually a pattern classification problem, people recognize natural object recognition is based on the learning objects, features analysis, and computer and human pattern recognition process share a lot of similarities Actually by learning or other methods, to form a memory knowledge base ,when implement pattern recognition, clearly express an image from the object to the memory knowledge base, resulting in the recognition results. When human carry out object recognition, use memory base which the brain formed through the study, and process an image for the identified objects, to find out the matching category from the memory base. The computer express this image when human recognize the objects, is generally accomplished by two steps: first, to describe the objects in appropriate characteristics, that is, from xi to f (xt) image; the second step, the computer performs some operations to complete the image form the f (xi) min c (x) = X. This process is actually a general method when the traditional statistical pattern recognition carried out object recognition, specifically, feature extraction and the design problem of classification functions. The feature extraction is a difficult and key issue. If the feature is

known, we can use the existing mathematical theory to guide the design of the image function R(xi ) . However, for feature selection and extraction, but no theory guide to follow, difficult to compare the characteristics of an object in what is substantive, are representative of those features, those features may be unimportant or irrelevant and recognition. This requires a lot of experimental and theoretical guidance.

The edge can outline the target object, contains wealth information, and is the important feature to extract the image feature in the image segmentation, identification and analysis. Edge detection use extremism of image first-order derivative or second derivative zero-crossing edge points information to provide the fundamental basis is an important class of image segmentation. The edge of the image is the result that the image local characteristics are not continuous (or mutation), such as the gray value of the mutation, the color mutation, texture mutation. Gradient corresponds to the first derivative, for a continuous image function f (x, power, the gradient is a vector, defined as:

The research in the field of pattern recognition shows: For a complex problem of identification and classification, only one method always is difficult to identify the object well separated, while among the different classification methods, the high complementary exist, the integration of multiple classifiers can clearly improve the recognition rate. Therefore, integration methods of multiple classifiers have become a hot spot which the researchers are focusing on. His paper set up an integrated neural network handwriting recognition system, comprehensively use a variety of pattern recognition, fully reflect various aspects features of handwritten digital characters, this system improve the accuracy of handwritten numeral recognition.

