Abstract This article presents a new speed observer based on fuzzy logic for speed sensorless control applications of permanent magnet synchronous motor ‘‘PMSM”. The switch function in traditional Sliding Mode Observer ‘‘SMO” is replaced by a rule based fuzzy logic system. The pro- posed observer not only improves the system dynamic performance during disturbances or param- eter variations, but also has a high accuracy tracking performance with sufficient chattering reduction. The validity of the new observer corroborated through experimental results using TMS320F28069M Digital Signal Processor ‘‘DSP”.

Permanent Magnet Synchronous Machine ‘‘PMSM” become a good choice in servo drives, and is on the way to step beside induction machines in traction applications. Traditional PMSM drives employ position sensors to measure the speed, and rotor angular position. These sensors present several disadvantages, such as reduced reliability, susceptibility to noise, additional cost and weight and increased complexity of the drive system. Recently, there has been much interest in developing a sensorless algorithms in which the motor was

Several methods have been developed to estimate the rotor speed or position, and among them are Flux Linkage Observer ‘‘FLO”, Extended Kalman Filter ‘‘EKF” based observer, and Sliding Mode Observer ‘‘SMO”. The latter has a fast response, good robustness for external disturbances, and machine parameter variations [3,4]. The SMO uses a sliding mode vari- able structure in the control loop to compensate the parametric uncertainties keeping the observer independent of the unknown signals during the sliding motion with a stable dynamic error [5,6]. The estimated values in an ordinary SMO contain high frequency oscillation components because of the discrete switch control. The switch function is critical to the observer performance and it allows appearing the chat- tering phenomenon that can excite high frequencies which isn’t desirable in high performance speed drives [7,8]. Several solutions are proposed to make a trade-off between chattering phenomenon reduction, and observer robustness. In [9–11] a first order and second order SMO proposed, the chattering phenomenon reduced but low pass filter causes unavoidable

motion states, which will cause chattering [20,21]. To eliminate the chattering phenomenon in classical SMO, the fixed numer- ical values of the switching function are replaced by linguistic variables, and the switching function is calculated through fuzzy logic system. The new Fuzzy SMO ‘‘FSMO” will have the robustness property of SMO with sufficient chattering reduction via Fuzzy Logic System ‘‘FLS”. The FSMO block diagram is depicted in Fig. 1, and built as follows:

and A6) and (B0, B1, B2, B3, B4, B5, and B6) for the input variables, and (NB = negative big, NM = negative medium, NS = negative small, ZE = zero, PS = positive small, PM = positive medium, and PB = positive big) for the output variable. Membership functions are chosen in the form of sym- metrical triangular as in Fig. 2.

obtained using expert engineering knowledge in the navigation field and satisfying the above-mentioned stability and reaching conditions. The FLS output is calculated based on singleton fuzzification strategy, center-average defuzzification and pro- duct inference. At each input values the FLC gives an output signal corresponds to the increase or decrease in sliding func- tion (Fs) to satisfy the dynamic stability of the observer.

To assess the performance and the robustness of the proposed observer, field oriented control strategy was applied to an experimental DSP-based PMSM drive apparatus. The block diagram of the experimental setup is shown in Fig. 3. It consists of power inverter, PMSM with parameters shown in Table 1 and loading arrangement, voltage and current sensing circuits, and floating point TMS320F28069M digital controller.

loop, and the tuning process of controller constants is designed to get a bandwidth of 400 HZ, and 40 HZ respectively. The resultant PI controller constants are KP = 10—4, Ki = 0.97 for current controllers, and KP = 167.32, Ki = 28.58 for the

The actual and estimated rotor speed for traditional SMO is shown in Fig. 4a, while Fig. 4b, and c shows the waveforms of the actual and estimated rotor positions obtained for tradi- tional SMO respectively. The rotor position error is shown in Fig. 4d. The average steady-state speed error is (300/4000 = 7.5%) at 4000 rpm, and (55/400 = 13.7%) at 400 rpm.

The rotor position error is shown in Fig. 5d. The average steady-state speed error is (50/4000 = —1.25%) at 4000 rpm, and (10/400 = 2.5%) at 400 rpm. It can be observed that the FSMO is accurate with sufficient chattering reduction com-

Test 2: The speed response to bipolar command from 400 rpm to —400 rpm with constant load; this test examines the performance of the proposed observer at low speed bipolar command. The bipolar speed command is a square waveform with a half cycle of 2.5 s and bipolar references ±400 rpm. Fig. 5 shows the waveforms of the actual and estimated rotor

the core loss, copper loss and mechanical frictions. As a result, the stator winding resistances increase. The main purpose of this test was to examine the robustness of the proposed obser- ver in case of doubling the motor resistance. This test was done by connecting 1 X resistor in series with the stator winding, and a speed step reference from 400 rpm to 4000 rpm.

Fig. 6 shows the waveforms of the actual and estimated rotor speed, actual and estimated rotor positions, and the rotor position error respectively. Although position estimation error exists, it is very small because of high rotating speed. In this case, about 55 rpm speed estimation errors appear at tran- sient time. But they converge to zero very quickly. Test results prove the good performance of the proposed observer, despite of the variations of stator resistance, in the speed range from 10% of rated speed to full one (see Fig. 7).

The proposed algorithm is successfully implemented on a DSP controller, and the performance is compared to the tradi- tional SMO. Experimental results prove that the proposed FSMO has sufficient chattering reduction along with a good estimation accuracy, and high immunity to the motor parameter’s variations. In future work, a research is suggested to develop a Genetic based sliding mode controller ‘‘GAs-SMC”, which will be used to choose the appropriate SMC discontinuous part’s gain to reduce the problem of chat- tering in SMC.

