Most agents in a system are designed to operate based on the condition-action rule. The agent system act according to the information acquired by the sensors located in the domain. The aim of this research report is to explain technique used in implementation of a condition-action rules in an agent component of an expert healthcare support system (heassy) unit. Steps and techniques of knowledge search and implementation in the heassy unit is presented.

Most knowledge based expert machines are designed in condition-action (C-A) rule. Sets of rules are created for specific task environments. A main task of an expert healthcare system unit is to ensure that the patient physiological changes are monitored closely as it would be if he or she was admitted in the hospital. The condition of the patient determines the action to be taken. Therefore, the system is an (if…then) driven action.

During the process of condition-action rule, the problem is to achieve the optimal decision (Vlassis, 2007). It is not the matter of action but the best action for each domain state. The domain is observed by perceiving its environment through sensors. The availability of measurements determines the state of the domain (condition) which in turns activates the respective response (action). Therefore, the observability of the system is assumed all time. Observability is a vital issue and must be addressed properly.

The collected data contained in the domain at a time provides the knowledge of the domain state st , at that time. The set of all states of the domain will be denoted by S . In our context, the discrete states, with finite number of state are assumed. Depending on the nature of the problem, the continuous states, with infinite number of states may exist in other types of systems. The domain is fully observable if all sensors at a time

In this section, the first part of antecedent or domain status is discussed. Sets of domain status form conditions of the domain. The action can be for a single condition or for a combination of conditions. If two or more conditions of the domain are needed for an action, the two conditions are said to be dependent conditions, otherwise the condition is a dependent condition. In this section a two-fold state is discussed.

Consider a smart home health system, with five different physiological transducers (equipment) that gives bioelectric signals for diagnosis purposes: electrocardiogram (ECG), electromyogram (EMG), Blood Volume Pulse (BVP), thermometer, and phonocardiograph (PCG). These outputs are incorporated in pathology to provide the patients’ state. The state can be displayed, stored, transmitted, or alarming the medical person in- charge. Each physiological transducer determines its own test. For example, ECG checks the electrical waves of the activities of the contractions of heart. The abnomal condition observed i ECG does not depend or affect

In pathology and human anatomy, there is a possibility of a disease to have two or more symptoms at a time. This invites a combination of these symptoms and action is for the combination. A dependent condition is the state of a domain with more than one positive (+) record. In a system with k different physiological transducers, there are k dependent conditions, one (1) normal condition. For a clarification, consider a simple smart home health system with three (3) physiological transducers, there are three (3) dependent conditions, one (1) normal condition, and the rest are dependent conditions. Table 3.2 shows the dependent conditions or states in a patients’ domain when three (3) physiological transducers are used.

the optimum action. A condition, be an independent or dependent has an action. As it was mentioned before, some conclusions depend on facts and principles behind the given condition. These facts come after deduction of arguments. The deductive arguments act as a solution indicator. For example, if the physiological transducer state is high (40o C for instance), it can be concluded that the patient has fever. Note that, high temperature can be a symptom of other diseases. This is the reason for consulting medical experts in a higher level of health services.

Although the smart home health systems communicate with high level health services to consult medical experts, a knowledge database could assist in a well framed system. The system with database, regardless of its location, (within a network reach) can respond to the smart home health system. The communication language between the systems must be clearly stated.

Therefore, in smart home health system, physiological sensors gather data of the patients and obtain the state of the patient. To conclude if the patient has fever will depend on the state of the domain to have high temperature. Similarly, the low pressure is concluded if the pressure reading is low. The conclusion is a probabilistic. The events of high temperature, low-pressure, high, and others may occur together independently or dependently. The probability of patient to have fever given the temperature is high is reasonably high than when the temperature is low. The knowledge in nature of relationship of domain state (sensory observations) and the action of the smart home health system is required.

The concept of formation of rules and facts required in development of an expert system has been articulated. The art of the knowledge searching, manipulation, and action can be discussed in details in the following chapters. In conclusion, the smart home health system is expected to be rational. Two actions that conflict would be make it dull system.

