The Adaptive Genetic Neural Network is used to determine the finger print classification and it is skilled by engaging the features values that are extracted from each and every image. The Adaptive Genetic Neural Network is well skilled by the way of the extracted features. The Adaptive Genetic Neural Network is home-based to three input units, n unseen units and one output unit. The input of the neural network is the feature vector we have abstracted from the images. The network is qualified under a great group of dissimilar fingerprint images to permit them to efficiently catego- rize the exact query image in the testing stage. The neural network works making usage of two stages, one is the training phase and the further is the testing phase.

In the training stage, the input image is subjected to feature extraction and this feature vector is given as the input to the neural system. Primarily, the nodes are specified with random weights. As the output is previously recognized in the training phase, the out- put attained from the neural network is associated with the origi- nal and weights are diverse so as to decrease the error. This procedure is performed for a great number of images so as to pro- vide a stable scheme having weights allocated in the nodes.

Multilayer feed forward neural network is used in our proce- dure. The structure is portrayed in Fig. 2. The input layer has N neurons i.e. number of matrix elements, the unseen layer has Nsl neurons and the output layer has N neurons i.e. the number of typescripts ranging from A to Z and letters 0–9. Back propagation algorithm is utilized to train the neural network that is designated as follows.

In the testing stage, the input image is applied to the trained neural network having specific weights in the hubs and the yield is ascertained to classify the images taking into account the trained dataset. In common neural network the procedure will be halted in the wake of testing. In the proposed modified neural network, for testing process we have consolidated the optimization technique inorder to enhance the weight utilized for testing. In our proposed strategy the weights are improved with the assistance of the Genetic algorithm. By integrating optimization procedure the clas-

The input for AGA is the random weights which are used for training phase in neural network. The generation of chromo- some for the optimization is the initial phase of GA. Here, ‘N’ numbers of chromosomes are generated from the solution space. The initial chromosome are indicated using the below expression,

By changing the mutation point actively the mutation is accom- plished adaptive in the recommended method as professed for- mer. With respect to the fitness of the accomplished chromosome, the mutation point is accomplished to alter dynamically. The mutation rate is designated on the basis of the fitness intended. At this time the fitness is on the basis of the errands and dependencies.

To attain a latest chromosome termed offspring, the crossover operation is accomplished among two parent chromosomes. The genes are selected and a latest child chromosome is fash- ioned on the basis of the crossover rate COR. The fitness function is utilized to the lately fashioned child chromosome after con- structing a new chromosome. The formula for calculating the crossover rate is set as,

At this time T is intended on the basis of the average responsi- bility value. The mutation is performed in the position consid- ered in Eq. (7). It will be adaptively altered on the basis of the fitness value of every chromosome in iterations.

At the time of the selection process, the Q comprehensively pro- duce chromosomes and the Q novel chromosomes are situated in a selection pool based on their fitness values. The chromo- somes that encompass good fitness lodge the top positions of the pool in the selection pool. The primary Q chromosomes that are at the top of the selection pool are designated for the subse- quent generation among the 2Q chromosomes. At this time the selection is grounded on the fitness and implementation time for each task.

such as dilation and opening. The improved images are then clas- sified on the basis of the input query image with the help of Adap- tive genetic neural network. The categorized images are then stowed for empathy. The presentations of proposed technique in organization of exact images are then assessed and are associated with that of available neural network.

metrics for the existing methods are also evaluated and tabulated for comparing with proposed method. In our proposed scheme we have utilized neural network which is one of the existing method for classification. The performance metrics are defined in Table 2.

In [19] the author’s defined non neural network approach for classification of images. Here they defined threshold between the values of the real data and the fake ones for the various non- reference image quality measures (NR-IQM). Afterwards, in the second stage, used the quality scores for a leave-one-out cross val- idation to get an exact assertion about the classification possibility with NR-IQM. To classify data used k-nearest neighbors (kNN) clas- sification. This method allowed testing all possible combinations of

The training time and testing time required for the proposed approach AGNN and other neural network approach along with the non neural network approach NR-IQM with kNN are calculated for various image quantities are given Figs. 17 and 18. Although the time required to preprocess and classify the images correct or fake by neural network takes more time than the proposed approach, but the training and testing approaches in proposed approach takes very minimum time and are efficient than other methods.

In this work, in order to overcome the disadvantage of various fingerprint images an efficient and productive procedure for unique fingerprint image classification method was proposed. The proposed technique uses Wave atom transform for denoising, morphological operation for image upgradation and Adaptive genetic neural system for image classification. The proposed strat- egy helped in classifying the images precisely in view of the image under question since the images are upgraded and classifier is altered utilizing the enhancement systems. The outcomes acquired demonstrates the adequacy of proposed AGNN based fingerprint classification method as it conveys better parameter values like Precision, sensitivity, specificity, accuracy and F-Measure when contrasted with existing system neural network and non neural network method NR-IQM with kNN approaches.

