In this paper, a novel method for object recognition based on hybrid local descriptors is presented. This method utilizes a combination of a few approaches (SIFT - Scale-invariant feature transform, SURF - Speeded Up Robust Features) and consists of second parts. The applicability of the presented hybrid methods are demonstrated on a few images from dataset. Dataset classes represent big animals situated in Slovak country, namely wolf, fox, brown bear, deer and wild boar. The presented method may be also used in other areas of image classification and feature extraction. The experimental results show, that the combination of local descriptors has a positive effect for object recognition.

In many applications, there is a need for real time object recognition, especially in surveillance systems and recognitions systems in cars. Animal recognition and classification can be also used in expert systems for determining of wild animal’s migration corridors. It terms of real-time object recognition, SVM classifier was used for its fast testing speed and sufficient accuracies. Success rate of object recognition depends also on good object representation and characterization. Object characterization can be achieved by visual descriptors, shape descriptors or texture representation. In this paper, visual descriptors were used to object representation. The outline of the paper is as follows. In the second section, an overview of related work is given. In the third section, object recognition process is presented. In fourth section is related to key points detection and descriptions following the classification section. Finally, experimental results are discussed in the sixth

Task of training part is to create a classification model from the training data. Training data contain a collection of images of each class. The extraction of primary images features are extracted at their low-level by different methods. Most common methods are SIFT, SURF, OpponentSURF, OpponentSIFT etc. These methods will be detailed described in section 3. Moreover, a low-level features extracted from images are used to creation a classification model.

To the input of the testing part enters an images and their still picture objects designated to the classification. Moreover, these objects have the same metadata description like data in training part. Based on these data, the classifier is able to regarding to classification model successfully evaluate an unknown objects to the appropriate class [1], [3].

Visual descriptors are used to capture the local appearance of objects. They are calculated from the neighbour pixels. Visual descriptors need to be discriminative enough to distinguish a large number of object classes. Some of them are visually similar and they need to have also invariance to noise, changes of illumination and viewpoints [2]. Each visual descriptor consists of two parts: detector and descriptor.

Task of detector is to find key points in the image. There are many methods to detect key points. In this part will be described SIFT and SURF methods for key points detection and two proposed hybrid methods SUSIFT (SURF-SIFT) and SISURF (SIFT-SURF).

where xKP_SURFi and yKP_SURFi are x and y coordinates of i-th SURF key point, i = 0,1, ... n, where n is number of SURF key points, and xKPS_SIFT and yKPS_SIFT are coordinates of all SIFT key points. Examples of valid SISURF key points are shown in the Fig 2.

The collection of features or parameters characterizing the object by classifications methods to handle classification task are used. There are two phases of creation a classification model. First, training data collections are used to set up the classification model parameters to distinguish different classes. Then, the classifier is able to regarding to classification model parameters successfully evaluate an unknown objects to the appropriate class [4], [5]. In this work, for classification model combination bag of keypoints and Support Vector Machine methods are used.

A SVM is classification method related to the family of supervised learning methods. There are two data types used in SVM classifier. To create a classification model, training data are used. To test and evaluate trained model accuracy, testing data are used. The main SVM classifier task is to separate training data in the higher dimensional space using a kernel function and find an optimal hyperplane with a maximum margin between data of two different classes [10]. In this work, radial basic function (RBF) kernel was used.

two matchers: Brute Force or Flann Based were used too. All combinations of detectors, descriptors and matchers were combined into standalone runs and they were programmed in C++ language with support of OpenCV (Open source Computer Vision) library. In the clustering process, 15.000, 20.000, and all descriptors per class were chosen to construct the vocabulary. Moreover, for training classifier, 15.000, 20.000, and all extracted bags of keypoints were used.

In this paper, two hybrid key points detectors were presented and tested in comparison to other detectors. The combination of BOW and SVM classifier were experimented. Experiments showed, that highest classification success rate 86% was achieved by algorithm based on combination SISURF detector, OpponentSIFT descriptor, BruteForce matcher and 15.000 descriptors per class in clustering process. Moreover, success rate higher than 80 % was achieved in four other runs. Proposed hybrid key points detector SISURF achieved promising results comparable with other key point detectors. Moreover, in same runs SISURF outperformed other standard detectors. On the other hand, SUSIFT detector achieved poor results with success rate of classification around 50% only.

The work presented in the paper has been supported by the Slovak Science project Grant Agency, Project No. 1/0705/13 "Image elements classification for semantic image description" and EUREKA project no. E! 6752 – DETECTGAME: R&D for Integrated Artificial Intelligent System for Detecting the Wildlife Migration.

