Abstract Organizations, including governments, have been attempting to address cyber threats for years by deploying technologies (e.g., security perimeter defences). These technologies are overarching policies and regulations designed to encourage resilient cybersecurity strategies that safeguard not only data, but also properties and human lives. Implementing these technologies is one thing, but ensuring their effectiveness is another. Lack of effectiveness and inability to satisfy existing government requirements and approaches in dealing with cyber threats and attacks are likely to continue until better approaches are employed. These approaches may emanate from effective regulations, intelligence gathering and sharing, and good security practices to workable alliances and interactions with other communities. This work is proposing approaches based on the premise that cybersecurity strategies must adhere to and be guided by the effectiveness criteria: that is, intervention and retaliatory approaches should be employed and utilized on the basis of their empirically demonstrated effectiveness to combat cyber threats.

It is a challenge for policy makers and practitioners to effectively determine potential threats as early as possible. Hence, when cyber strategies (http:// belfercenter.ksg.harvard.edu/events/6230/intelligence_in_the_private_sector.html, 2014; Bernardo and Chua, 2013) are examined, there is an ideal opportunity to observe the means through which organizations, governments in particular, become challenged in adjusting to the expectations of their stakeholders under the conditions of alliances, cooperativeness, socio-demographic values, and other practical influences.

In these conditions, the opportunity must be explored to develop processes and approaches that are survivable long-term. These conditions, however, do not reflect effective governance and, most of all, effective strategies in dealing with cyber threats, because these conditions are: firstly, influenced by practitioners’ lack of effective interventive approach that falls short of compliance with the regula- tions and exercise of better security mechanisms; and secondly, found to be lack- ing comprehensive and effective retaliatory approach to launch mitigation strategies (e.g., counterattacks, etc.).

Attaining viable strategies to address cyber threats and attacks remains a chal- lenge (http://belfercenter.ksg.harvard.edu/events/6230/intelligence_in_the_priva te_sector.html, 2014; Bernardo and Chua, 2013) due to lack of concentration on tailoring approaches to address appropriate actions to cyber threats: (a) key but uninformed practitioners are too conservative in meeting their agenda to carry out their own strategies on dealing with cyber threats; (b) another is the slowness of legitimate governments to move beyond mere identification of cyber threats by introducing enforceable regulation and actions, and viable solutions to curb and address them, and to fully recognize the importance of alliances with industries and other governments to have unified and effective approaches to combat cyber threats.

Methods for developing retaliatory approach, on the other hand, is reviewed and investigated. These include ways to detect and subsequently derail the source of the cyber attacks, and to execute defence mechanisms that can lead to infra- structure shutdown to halt further attacks and minimize damage to properties. These mechanisms can include terminating communication services across regio- nal domains (e.g., DNS-domain name services) that provide the means to channel collaborative cyber attacks.

These approaches form strategies on cybersecurity that can assist and enable practitioners to select and employ consistent determination relevant to their infra- structure, and which have been found to be effective for the desired outcome (Bernardo et al., 2009; Bernardo and Chua, 2013). These approaches should con- tain components that refer to the requirements that can be systematically varied within the intervention process, and which are capable of reliable deployment across organizations. To meet these requirements, concepts and variables must be clearly identified, defined, and linked to empirical referents.

Statements of interventive and actions of retaliatory approaches must contain explicit predictions of the relationship between the inputs (processes), tactical courses of action and the desired outcomes (e.g., minimization of threats and val- idations of enforced mechanisms, and introduction of strike back mechanisms).

The central focus in this work is concerned where existing efforts appropriately address the different needs for effective practice, and the analysis in this work is guided by the goal set in the preceding sections. Existing works and practices par- ticularly in major industries (e.g., telecommunications, transportation and electric- ity), though limited, have been analyzed to assess the relative emphasis on cyber security research, which can contribute to the community of practice on the effec- tiveness of both approaches and the relationship between replicability of these approaches. With some countries or organizations lacking cybersecurity prepared- ness and guidelines, this work focuses on available roadmaps and collected data sets available, instead of government-restricted classified information.

It is important to select industries (e.g., academe, governments, and private finan- cial sectors) and provide an assessment period to reasonably represent the primary current thrusts of cybersecurity research. The practices are focused on organiza- tions across the US, UK, Asia Pacific (especially on those recently targeted by cyber attacks, such as Philippines, South Korea, Vietnam, the US, and Australia). This work builds on initially collected data from 3 identified organizations (Bernardo, 2012, 2013; Bernardo and Chua, 2013) with regional presence in the UK, US and Asia, and focuses on one recently completed survey on risks and threats on cloud computing. The choice of the work specifically on cloud comput- ing in this sample can be considered more opportunistic rather than monolithic. Given the recent popularity of cloud computing across governments and industries and due its identified risks, the choice has been alluded to the benefits of under- standing the current trends and of further underscoring the importance of cyber threats across many infrastructures.

To observe a situation where cyber threats are suspected to be taking place, it is important to define that central to the interaction where these occur is the signif- icant process of identifying and differentiating cyber attacks from the other attacks (i.e., localized) that occur on a certain period; considering the impact of these attacks into account; and responding by acting according to the existing courses of action.

There has been a continuing thrust to identify and quantify attacks, which consid- ered incidents to determine appropriate mitigation strategies to obfuscate them. Organizations developed and improved their courses of action, including identifi- cation and frequencies of incidents to determine if they are localized or if these are considered large-scale cyber attacks. These plans include statistical representa- tions, which are tailored to the organizations and practitioners of attacks, as dis- cussed in 3.1.1 (Bernardo, 2012, 2013; Bernardo et al., 2009; Bernardo and Chua,

Remark. A square matrix with nonnegative entries and row sums all equal to 1 is called stochastic matrix. A therefore is a stochastic matrix. A stochastic process (Berger, 2006; Brooks, 1998) for which the probability of entering a certain state depends only on the last state occupied (and on the matrix governing the process) is called a Markov process (Bernardo and Chua, 2013; Bernardo and Smith, 1994). Note: Markov Process is a prerequisite example in understanding how the approach can be beneficial in identifying threats and generating courses of action.

The above example can assist in achieving reasonable estimations for how val- idations should be performed in future threat identification using basic Markov process. The inputs (Brooks, 1998; Chen et al., 2007; Congdon, 2003; Goldstein, 2006; O’Hagan and Forster, 2004) and assumptions to be accurate, they must be based on data collected on field.

The initial observation of the recent cases is the discovery of lack of effective strategies, technologies, and resources to carry out effective cybersecurity. This observation is made as a result of static, one-way observation on incidents that reportedly occurred. One-way observation means observing circumstances with limited interaction (e.g., lack of active data gathering, of active participation of those involved, and of consistent monitoring and review, to name a few). Dealing with reports of cyber attacks must therefore involve a dynamic multi-way complex process of interactions and intelligence sharing between those who are tasked to take courses of action and those who are directly affected by them and those who defined governance and compliance (e.g., emergency response group, govern- ment funded groups, and industry).

Trends in the development of conceptual framework to detect cyber threats have paralleled those in specific regions (Bernardo et al., 2009; Bernardo and Smith, 1994) where threats have occurred and/or are continuing. In recent years, the problem of cyber threats has become an identifiable issue for many organizations that can be addressed by the appropriate intervention.

These questions are best conducted in longitudinal studies across industries. A periodic analysis of trends may assist in creating methods that raise awareness and address concerns on how cyber threats can be quickly identified, validated, and resolved. Nonetheless, securing cyber-infrastructure remains a challenge to many, especially in an era of cyber threats.

The trends of alliances encourage participation and interaction that provide greater access to many experts and tools. Awareness of the issue, of course, can be achieved and raised through tailored approaches. Some organizations, how- ever, have limited opportunities to forge alliances that encourage participation, but engaging with other communities is an important step to developing interac- tion that can result in feasible approaches.

