excluded during the screening process. Abstract analysis, dataset anal- ysis, and inclusion and exclusion criteria were used to filter the studies. A total of 130 research works became eligible for full-text analysis through the screening process. Later, these 130 research works were reviewed, and 26 of them were eliminated. In the last stage, a total of 104 studies remained to be checked for their methodological qualities. Among those studies, a total of 16 studies were then excluded based on the methodological quality. After completing all these procedures, only

88 studies remained for the systematic review. Among the selected studies, 29 studies are from the Elsevier journals, 16 studies are from the Springer journals, 11 studies are from the MDPI journals, 10 studies are from various journals referred to as "Others Journal", and 6 studies are from the Nature journals. On the other hand, equal numbers of studies have been collected from the Hindawi and the Wiley journals. From each of these two publishers, 3 studies have been considered. The least number of studies have been collected from the IOP science journals. Only 2 studies have been considered from the journals of this publisher. The remaining 8 studies are conference papers.

After selecting the studies, data extraction is very much important to analyze and interpret the studies properly. A general structure is required for the extraction of data from studies to obtain meaningful findings. As a response, tables with some preset attributes were devel- oped, and various data from the studies were added to the tables. The

poses of the studies. The third and the fourth attributes describe the data types used in the studies and the sample size of the studies, respectively. The fifth attribute specifies the major techniques applied in the studies. Finally, the last attribute mentions the best performing model with its performance.

and reviewed the studies related to the uses of AI and ML mechanisms in the context of various COVID-19-related tasks. In that review study, various studies related to COVID-19 transmission prediction, diagnosis, and detection, and drug/vaccine development have been analyzed, and six predefined questions have been explored. However, the entire context of the COVID-19 pandemic and the application of DL techniques have not been explored in the study.

In another study, Islam et al. [13] reviewed various studies that have employed various AI and ML mechanisms in the process of fighting against the COVID-19 pandemic. Based on the objectives, the studies have been categorized into four groups such as disease detection, epidemic forecasting, sustainable development, and disease diagnosis.

The application of various models has been reviewed and summarized. Furthermore, six research opportunities have been identified and sum- marized in the study. However, other objectives (sentiment analysis, vaccine development, etc.) and the application of DL techniques have not been explored.

A comprehensive review of the role of AI, drones, blockchain, and 5G to manage the COVID-19 pandemic has been performed by Chamola et al. [14]. The study explored the use of current technologies to combat the epidemic as well as its effect on the global economy. The role of Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs), blockchain, AI, and 5G, among others, in mitigating the effects of the COVID-19 outbreak has been explored and discussed in the studies.

Alballa et al. [15] reviewed recent reports on ML algorithms used in relation to the COVID-19 pandemic. In the study, the applications of ML for diagnosis and predicting patient mortality risk and severity were analyzed. The review includes studies published between January 2020 and January 2021. By assessing the studies, a small number of real-time E2E systems and a selection bias due to imbalanced data were identified. Despite analyzing the ML models for diagnosis and prediction, other COVID-19-related objectives such as detection, epidemic forecasting, etc. have not been considered.

Alafif et al. [16] review the studies conducted on the uses of ML and DL towards COVID-19 diagnosis and treatment. The review study pro- vides a summary of the AI-based ML and DL procedures, the available datasets, performance, and currently available tools. By performing a comprehensive analysis of the current ML and DL approaches used to diagnose COVID-19, obstacles to conducting the studies have been highlighted. In addition, the study made some directions for future work. Although the study analyzed the uses of ML and DL approaches only for the diagnosis and treatment of COVID-19, other perspectives on the probable combination of ML, DL, and the COVID-19 pandemic were not covered.

Although various studies have been conducted to review the works related to the use of ML, DL, and AI-based techniques for COVID-19 management. Very few studies have explored the uses of the possible combination of ML, DL, and AI mechanisms. Moreover, this study explored diverse perspectives on the COVID-19 pandemic, utilizing a variety of data types and combinations of data types. In addition, most recent studies conducted on ML, DL, and the combination of ML, DL, and AI-based mechanisms have been included, as well as some earlier rele- vant studies.

Among all the considered works, 92% of studies have been collected from different journals, and 8% of studies have been collected from different conferences. From Fig. 4, it can be found that 96% of studies using ML models have been published in different journals, while the rest 4% of studies have been published in different conferences. The percentages of studies employing DL techniques published in journals

The yearly distribution of the studies that were chosen for analysis is shown in Fig. 6. In terms of the publication year, a total of 41 studies were published in 2022. On the other hand, 39 studies were included from 2021. Only 8 studies were included from 2020. In 2022, the studies using the combination of ML, DL, and AI-based models have the highest frequency. The majority of the included studies applying ML techniques were published in 2021. Only a limited numbers of studies employing ML and DL techniques were performed in 2020. Furthermore, no studies applying the combination of ML, DL, and AI-based techniques were included from 2020.

Fig. 7 shows the types of data that were used in various studies. The majority of the studies utilized datasets in image formats. Studies employing datasets in image formats used mainly MRI, CT, CXR, ECG, and X-ray images. The studies that used non-image datasets had mainly worked with different clinical, time-series, textual, and audio data. 54%

Among the non-image data types, clinical data is the most frequently utilized data format, representing 41% of all the non-image data, fol- lowed by laboratory data, which represents 12% of all the non-image data. 11% data of the non-image data are in time series format. On the other hand, 9% data of the non-image data are in text format. Furthermore, the percentages of audio-sound data, blood test data, and RT-PCR data are 8%, 5%, and 3%, respectively. 11% of the non-image data are of other different data formats.

ML is the area of AI that mainly focuses on building systems that are capable of learning without explicit programming to do so. At the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic, ML algorithms were primarily utilized. Initially, these algorithms were utilized exclusively for geographical and area-wise COVID-19 spread analysis. These algorithms are now being used for various purposes in combating COVID-19. Currently, ML approaches not only can predict COVID-19 by using clinical and laboratory data but also can be used to derive much more complicated aspects of COVID-19. ML approaches show significant performance in the diagnostic process of COVID-19 by utilizing diverse data such as blood images, X-rays, ECG, CT scans, etc. Due to the usage of ML methods for extracting features from images, signals, and audio

used in the considered studies. The most frequently used ML model is RF in the considered works. The SVM model has achieved the second- highest position, followed by the LR model with the third-highest po- sition. Models like NB, DT, XGB, KNN, and NN have also been used frequently on the other hand.

Fig. 9 shows the percentage of studies by different countries employing ML models to combat COVID-19. The majority of the studies come from the United States. 20% of the studies were conducted in the United States. Each of the countries such as Bangladesh, Iran, and Italy contributed 8% of the studies. However, the remaining 14 countries provided significantly fewer studies using ML models to work on COVID- 19-related issues.

From Table 2, it is observed that, various types of data have been used to perform the various studies. According to our in-depth analysis and observations, in the majority of studies for classification purposes, the RF and XGB classification models performed most optimally with the clinical data type. Moreover, regardless of data type or study objective, XGB, RF, and NN models consistently outperform other machine learning algorithms.

DL is a branch of ML that utilizes representation learning to tackle complicated problems. DL-based models, such as CNN, proposed Custom CNN, DCNN, and other methods have lately been used for COVID-19 classification, diagnostics, and detection, by researchers to combat the COVID-19 outbreak. This study has reviewed the application of various DL approaches for combating the COVID-19 epidemic as well as per- formed comparisons between them. Table 3 shows the summary of the studies employing DL techniques relating to COVID-19 issues.

Fig. 10 represents the applied DL models. Among different DL models, the custom models have the highest frequency of 14, followed by the RESNET50 with the count of 12. Various versions of EFFI- CIENTNET, which are referred to as EFFICIENTNET(X) algorithms, have achieved the third highest position with a number of 11. Among the next-most used DL models, VGG-16 and VGG-19 have been applied in 10

The country-wise percentage of the studies employing DL models is shown in Fig. 11. In terms of using DL models to combat COVID-19, the majority of the research works were performed in India with a per- centage of 44%. 8% of the research works were conducted in each of the following countries: Indonesia and Saudi Arabia. On the other hand, countries such as Algeria, Australia, Turkey, Switzerland, and all other countries have ranked in third place in terms of the number of research works employing DL methods.

The combinations of ML, DL, and AI-based techniques are crucial in better understanding and dealing with the COVID-19 situation. The combinations of these methods are rapidly being used since these ap- proaches can open up new avenues for various forms of diagnosis, sentiment analysis, public surveillance, and illness prevention. Several COVID-19 diagnostic approaches based on images aided by DL and AI- based techniques have been developed, and their association with RT- PCR has been evaluated. Image and non-image types of data are inte- grated by the combination of ML, DL, and AI-based methods to inves- tigate several new alternatives to combat COVID-19.

Fig. 12 shows that among the ML techniques, SVM has been the most frequently used model in the studies that utilized the combination of ML, DL, and AI-based and it has been used in twenty-three studies. Other ML models like ARIMA, LRG, GB, Total Boost, etc., models have been used in 15 studies. Among the other ML models, RF, DT, KNN, LR, NB, and XGB models have been used in 13, 12, 10, 9, 8 and 7 studies, respectively. The ADB model has been used less frequently among the ML techniques.

Various AI techniques have been used most frequently in the studies. In Fig. 12, for AI technique, we have counted only the numbers of different AI technique instead of showing the number of studies that have employed these techniques. Different DL models such as

From Table 4, it is observed that there are diverse patterns or com- binations of mechanisms that have been used to perform the studies. In studies using ML in combination with other techniques, the SVM (ML model) has been utilized and tends to perform better compared to other ML models. Therefore, to construct mechanisms combining the ML model with other techniques, researchers might consider using the SVM model. Furthermore, to perform the study on the amalgam of the various data types, it is important to combine techniques from various domains and examine the performance.

Fig. 13 Depicts the country-wise percentages of the studies employ- ing the combination of ML, DL, and AI models. In India, 18% of the studies were conducted. Saudi Arabia carried out 13% of the studies. China, Bangladesh, and Turkey each conducted 11% of the studies. 8% of the studies conducted in the United States, whereas 5% were per- formed in Iran. The remaining 3% of the studies were conducted in other regions of the world.

According to Fig. 14, accuracy is the most used evaluation metric, followed by sensitivity/recall and AUC. Other metrics have been employed in a limited number of studies. Accuracy has been applied most frequently in the combination of ML, DL, and AI-based studies, while in ML and DL studies, accuracy metrics have been used equally. The sensitivity/recall metric has been mostly used in the studies employing the combination of ML, DL, and AI-based techniques fol- lowed by DL and ML-models-based studies. AUC metric has been used in all these three types of studies.

From Fig. 14 it is obvious that all three approaches use accuracy as the primary evaluation metric. Despite sensitivity/Recall being the second most utilized metric, ML and DL-based studies have used this metric less frequently compared to accuracy. As misclassification of the COVID-19 disease can threaten the patient and their family’s lives in

In this section, the predefined research questions have been dis- cussed. For each of the research questions, we have discussed the sig- nificance of the question as well as the findings based on the question that has been explored via the analysis of the studies. In addition, we have provided directions and some precautions for the researchers who aspire to conduct COVID-19 pandemic-related studies.

Various models have been applied in the application of the ML model in COVID-19-related tasks. The majority of the studies employed mul- tiple ML models and compared the results. Therefore, the finding of some top-utilized models can be very beneficial. RF, SVM, LR, NB, XGB, and KNN are some of the most frequently used models. In addition to the use of specific ML models, various diversified but not widely used models have also been applied.

potentiality of those mechanisms. Among the mechanisms, various AI techniques, SVM (ML model), custom models, diverse but not widely used DL models, CNN (DL model), and RF (ML model) are some of the widely applied mechanisms in the studies. Analyzing the studies and the best model, it can be found that the majority of the studies employed Al methods with ML or DL models and emphasize increasing the performance.

of studies with a similar type of data that applied a variety of techniques. As a result, it is essential for the researcher to choose standard dataset and select the suitable model according to the data type. To perform a study with the usage of ML models in COVID-19-related work, the researcher might consider XGB, RF, and NN models since they have outperformed other models and are widely used too. For performing a DL-based study, researchers should concentrate on constructing custom CNN models since they outperform transfer-learning-based DL algo- rithms most of the time. However, in the uses of the combination of ML, DL, and AI-based techniques, various studies have been used a diverse amalgam of techniques. Therefore, while conducting a study based on a combination of several techniques, it is essential to select and analyze possible combinations of techniques by reviewing previously conducted related work.

RQ 2: A dataset is one of the main defining parts of any study. Therefore, the dataset used in the studies needs to be trustworthy and standard. As the COVID-19 virus can mutate quickly, collecting virus- specific data is very challenging. To stop the spread and identify any mutated COVID-19, data should be collected in a short span of time. For

As COVID-19 is a global pandemic, many governments and NGOs have released open-access COVID-19 datasets, which mostly involve vaccination-related and spread-related datasets. But to identify the COVID-19 virus in the human body, an image type dataset is needed. Due to various constraints, there is a shortage of publicly available image datasets at the beginning of the period. Now there are some in- dividual studies that have given open access to their dataset. But most of the individual datasets have some limitations, such as being imbalanced,

dataset, which can be used to reevaluate studies applying model per- formance. Furthermore, there is a lack of standard datasets related to sound and audio types of data for the COVID-19 disease. Also, there are very limited open-access sound-related standard datasets.

RQ 3: RT-PCR is the traditional method used to detect COVID-19 disease in the human body. Patients must physically visit a hospital to give samples for testing the suspected COVID-19 present in their bodies while using the traditional testing method. However, between the waves of the COVID-19 pandemic, visiting the hospital is a risky step. Because visiting the hospital in the middle of the COVID-19 wave can affect healthy people, who can further act as hosts and further spread the disease. Therefore, it is important to find some End-to-End solution based on AI, which can remotely and effectively diagnose COVID-19 in a suspected person.

But most of the studies have not emphasized building an End to End solution for diagnosis. Despite that, many studies have been conducted in order to develop an application for an End-to-End diagnosis solution [61,81]. Most studies consider image data types such as X-ray, CT, MRI, etc. to build COVID-19 diagnosis E2ES. As a result, using those appli- cations, the patient’s standard form of X-ray, CT, and MRI data sample is

Therefore, the E2ES hardly solves the problem of remote E2ES systems. Some studies have considered using sound and audio data to build E2ES for the COVID-19 diagnosis system, which can diagnose COVID-19 remotely. However, low sound-quality recording devices and environ- mental noise can downgrade the quality of captured audio and sound data, which may affect the performance of the application. Furthermore, these studies and applications have some certain circumscribed. Therefore, there is still a lack of standard and reliable E2ES for the diagnosis of COVID-19.

removing the issues that users encounter when using the E2E system and improve quality (noise reduction, low-quality images handling). The system should be available and compatible with the maximum possible number of devices and platforms. In addition, researchers must promote campaign of the E2E system so that the wider populace can utilize the resource.

as allocating funds, encouraging researchers, providing data, applaud- ing researchers, and so on. These steps and opportunities have aided in the local and global combat of the COVID-19 pandemic by encouraging researchers to work on the issue of the COVID-19 pandemic. As a result, determining which country contributes the most to combating COVID- 19 by conducting more research is a useful step toward appreciating their contribution. Furthermore, identifying countries with less signifi- cant contributions to research work is important so that those countries can be encouraged and financially aided so that as human civilizations, we can advance equally. Identifying the countries contributing to the COVID-19 pandemic, on the other hand, is a broad perfective work that requires dedicated research work, which may include research type, the technology used, and the discovery of performed studies.

RQ 5: For combating the COVID-19 pandemic, many studies have been conducted for various purposes and using various mechanisms. Various domains of AI have been used with diverse modifications and combinations. Furthermore, various types of data and a mixture of data types have been used to perform studies. Therefore, there is a need to evaluate the studies with a standard form of evaluationmetrics. Addi- tionally, there is a need to identify the criteria that have been used in those studies to evaluate the trustworthiness of the studies. Most of the studies have used some of the evaluation metrics such as accuracy,

As COVID-19 is a pandemic and can transmit from person to person very rapidly, the top priority is to stop the spread. Therefore, it is crucial not to misidentify an infected person rather than misidentify a healthy person. Therefore, the researchers should prioritize the True Positive Rate or recall value rather than accuracy, as recall value focuses on capturing all true positives, even if it increases false positive rate.

RQ 6: Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, there have been instanced number of research works conducted to manage and to combat the pandemic by the use of ML, DL, and combinations of ML, DL, and AI- based techniques. Those research works have been analyzed and iden- tified various factors and purposes associated with COVID-19 using ML, DL, and combinations of ML, DL, and AI-based techniques. However, from those studies, some common challenges and limitations can be outlined. Identifying those challenges can be beneficial for the re- searchers who are planning to do research by applying the ML, DL, and AI methods as they can study those challenges to overcome in their study or can make their study particularly based on finding the solution to those challenges.

Selection of an effective model from the variety of models available from various domains of ML, DL, and AI is a challenging and time- consuming task. Some traditional ML, DL, and AI methods have already been extensively researched. However, there is still scope for improvements, but it will be challenging. Additionally, finding an effective combination of ML, DL, and AI is a challenging task that re- quires a significant amount of time and expertise. The scarcity of stan- dards and enough sample data is one of the fundamental challenges when it comes to working with COVID-19. These are the two most fundamental challenges for researchers who intend to conduct research using ML, DL, or combinations of ML, DL, and AI-based techniques.

Many ML, DL, and other AI approaches depend on massive training data, such as clinical data, medical images, and other types of medical data. Large-scale training data is scarce and unavailable. It should be noted that determining the best models for COVID-19 diagnosis is challenging because of the scarcity of data. Further research is required to solve this issue. Moreover, a benchmark dataset is required for diagnosing COVID-19.

due to mutations. Gathering data for different variants in a short period is complex, and there is always a shortage of COVID-19-related updated datasets. A combined and effective data gathering strategy is required to address this issue. Furthermore, a change in the variant might alter the performance of a model, which has been trained by a different variant previously. Hence, more research works are needed to investigate the performance of the previous studies on the new variants of COVID-19. COVID-19 samples have a low count of CT, MRI, and X-ray images compared to pneumonia infection and healthy human case samples. Data argumentation tries to generate new image sample from the existing samples by flipping, rotating, zooming, adding random noise in

already been exposed to the virus. Therefore, a remote COVID-19 End-to End diagnosis solution must be established in order to resolve the problem. In the future, it will be necessary to examine the problem by overcoming constraints and developing reliable and accurate End-to- End diagnosis solutions.

This study focuses on ML, DL, and combinations of ML, DL, and AI- based studies that may help fighting the COVID-19 pandemic. The pri- mary objective of this study is to outline prior research works and how these works have been used to fight COVID-19. For that purpose, mul- tiple academic search engines have been searched by using various keywords to find relevant studies. Those studies are filtered by using the defined criteria. Based on the abstract analysis, dataset analysis, inclu- sion and exclusion criteria, and methodological quality, a final selection

of 88 studies has been made. Among these studies, 25 studies employed ML techniques, 25 studies employed DL techniques, and the rest 38 studies utilized the combination of ML, DL, and AI-based methods. This study has analyzed the prior research works by summarizing the applied methods in those works, comparing the performance of different models used and identifying the purpose of those works.

92% of these studies are from different journals, and the rest 8% of these studies are conference papers. Most of the studies analyzed in this work are from 2022. USA conducted the maximum number of research works employing ML methods. On the other hand, the maximum num- ber of works utilizing DL methods and the combination of ML, DL, and AI-based methods have been performed in India. RF model has been used most frequently in studies employing ML models, whereas different custom models have the highest frequency in DL-based studies. A variety of AI-based techniques have the highest frequency in the studies utiliz- ing the combination of ML, Dl, and AI-based methods. In the evaluation process, most studies have emphasized accuracy to evaluate the per- formance of the proposed models.

The significant information discovered, investigated, and reported in this study are contemporary and up-to-date regarding COVID-19. For the appropriate content, we utilized precise keywords. These search terms yielded valuable results to achieve the aim of this study, though there is a chance we may have missed significant resources that are not shown by these terms. Some data might have been missed during the extraction of data from the selected studies.

Various ML, DL, and combinations of ML, DL, and AI-based methods have emerged in recent years. In future, more combinations of different methods and complicated approaches can be analyzed for fighting against COVID-19. Future research works can consider combining a variety of data formats to precisely identify COVID-19.

