Development of green energy, especially such types as hydropower and wind power, presents great opportunities for companies' growth. The aim of the paper is to investigate commercial viability of green energy business to make an investment choice for Latvian privately owned small sized hydropower producer and seller LLC “Green Energy Solutions” (“GES”). Firstly the paper investigated theoretical and practical application of such concept of commercial viability of a strategy as a SFA: suitability, feasibility and acceptability. Then the latest trends of Green Energy Business in EU and in Latvia have been explored and strategic suitability has been defined. Secondly, to confirm or disprove investments in a hydropower station or wind turbine, Equivalent annual annuities of each alternative investment project have been calculated and financial feasibility has been discussed. Finally, recommendations for stakeholders regarding further growth of company "GES" and acceptability of given strategic choice have been reviewed in detail.

As it was stated by Craddock, 2008 renewable energy is the fastest growing source of energy on this planet and, therefore, the greatest source for profitable business. Although green energy considered being environmentally friendly and a socially viable type of energy, it at the same time was highly costly to produce and did not have an appropriate infrastructure. The aim of the paper is to investigate Green Energy as a type of business to make an investment choice for company “GES”. In this particular research, on the basis of calculated capital budgeting effectiveness ratio, it will be confirmed or disproved recommendation on investment in a hydropower station or in wind turbine.

grouped under three main independent variables, which influence strategic choice: suitability (environment, resources and direction); feasibility (financial advantages); acceptability (stakeholder). Once the theoretical framework has been established, it is now possible to consider the appropriate research questions that will serve as guidelines on how to achieve the aim of the research. Research Question 1: On the basis of strategic tools, what is the most suitable type of growth strategy for company “GES”? The first research question tackles the first set of independent variables that relate to the strategic position of the company and tries to identify what strategy is the most appropriate for the company to pursue. Research Question 2: What is a more feasible choice in terms of investments' effectiveness: investing in HPS or in WPS? The second research question tries to address the second group of independent variables and intends to identify what strategic choice is financially feasible for the company. Research Question 3: Which strategic choice could satisfy the stakeholders' expectations? Third research question tries to find out if the strategic option and recommendations that may be accepted by stakeholders.

In this particular research, on the basis of calculated financial estimates for company “GES”, it will be confirmed or disproved investment in a hydropower station or in wind turbine. The degree of the researcher is minimal, as the study will be conducted in the natural environment of the company without obstruction of the normal work flow of the company “GES”. It is called non-contrived as it is field study conducted in organization within the natural environment. The unit of analysis in this research is the company “GES”.

The investigation is divided into three interrelated parts according to the research questions of the study. The first step is to mach strategic choices in terms of its suitability, and that will be done by using QSPM matrix. The second part is devoted to the financial analysis, where several strategic choices are measured by means of such financial ratios as NPV, IRR, MIRR, Payback Period and EAA. Finally, while exploring acceptability the Mendelow matrix is used to examine stakeholders' reaction to the most suitable and feasible strategic choice.

To answer first research question, suitability analysis is used since it seems to provide the most detailed and comprehensive analysis for answering the question. Suitability analysis included exploration of company's direction of development, market and environment. As it was discussed before, company “GES” is a young Latvian manufacturing company, producing electricity through Small Scale Hydropower Stations. At the moment shareholders are interested in further sales growth operating in the “Green Energy” industry. According to Siegel et al, 2008 Green Energy or as it is also called renewable energy is energy, which is

basically produced from sustainable resources that are constantly replenished. Schaeffer and Pratt, 2005 stated that “Big three” commonly available sources of renewable energy at a reasonable price are: sunlight, wind, and falling water. A great deal of the world enlarge in renewable electricity supply is stimulated by hydropower and wind power according to US Energy Information administration, 2010. World Bank, 2010 in its latest report stated that hydropower accounts for 16 percent of global power and considered to be the principal renewable source globally. Considering Latvia, according to Latvian Energy Policy, 2009 hydropower in Latvia is already the biggest supplier to electricity production and still has unexploited potential. In relations to wind power, it is power generated by wind turbines, which “consists of a pole of tower, blades, and a special box called a nacelle” and each of this turbines can produce electricity according to Fitzgerald and Voege, 2010. According to Boxwell, 2010 wind turbines are constantly increasing in their popularity for both: generating great amount of power for the value grid and generating small level of energy for a family.

To answer the second research question, feasibility analysis has been used since it will assist in investment decision. Investment in HPS project here has been considered to be investment in both Zilupe and Vecogre HPS, while Mezrozite HPS is disregarded since it has negative NPV and EAA value. Wind turbine project has negative NPV as well as negative EAA, while for investment in HPS both NPV and EAA are positive.

The third research question tries to find out if the strategic option developed before matches the stakeholders' expectations and what recommendations may be developed in case of accepting the strategy. The key stakeholders are shareholders and regulatory bodies who may influence on the strategy acceptance. It has been concluded that as the major players having an impact on the strategy selected are shareholders, who is interested in the greatest EAA, and governmental body, who encourage the growth of this sector of business. Thus, it might be stated that the choice made would be acceptable by both parties.

According to the analysis conducted, the recommended strategy can be carried out through replacing outdated turbines in HPSs to increase capacity and manufacture more of the current product (power). As it was already stated the most suitable, feasible, and acceptable is to invest in two HPSs: Zilupe and Vecogre. The following recommendations may be drown: for both projects Gugler HIROENERGY Company should be considered as supplier of turbine. Zilupe HPS with two existing hydro units: Francis turbine and siphon turbine TM-5 use only part of the Zilupe river hydro energetic potential. Thus, install one new horizontal up to-date hydro unit KT35 with flow regulation option in the chamber before the HPS building. Thus, the quantity of sold electric power will grow average from approximately 312 to 382.5 thousands kWh for

average hydrologic year. The growth will make average 70.5 thousands kWh per year. The project will be profitable under the condition that 40% of the total project costs will be covered from the EU foundation “For especially supported territories” and the owners will invest residual amount with cash. For Vecogre HPS should be installed: SSK-1000 hydro unit with fixed drive unit blades and adjusted turbine rotor wheel blades; SK-1000 hydro unit with Kaplan turbine double regulated; one siphon hydro unit of TM-5 type is considered to be installed in the special new-built chamber near deferential facility on the left bank of the Ogre river with regard to provide the required flow capacity 0.5 m3/s (cubic meters per second) after the deferential facility till the deferential channel connection point.

