In order to keep the communication fast and stable between a variety of control modules, the CAN bus communication system was designed in this paper. CAN bus communication system was designed as follow: the eCAN module of DSP chip TMS320F2407 was applied as CAN controller and the chip SN65HVD230 was applied as CAN transceiver, a variety of control modules was linked by the bus. For illustration, the chassis communication of a security robot is utilized to show how the CAN bus works. Empirical results show that the chassis communication of robot security is fast and stable with CAN bus. The CAN bus communication system designed in this paper can solve the unstable problem in the communication between control modules; it can be promoted to other control system.

The definitions of man-machine interaction are extensive. Simply stated, it is a very important technology All The Controller Area Network (CAN) is a serial communications protocol which efficiently supports distributed realtime control with a very high level of security. Its domain of application ranges from high speed networks to low cost multiplex wiring. In automotive electronics, engine control units, sensors, anti- skid-systems, etc. are connected using CAN with bitrates up to 1Mbit/s. At the same time it is cost effective to

One of the biggest CAN protocol characteristic is the abolishment of traditional stand address coding, instead of to communication data block coding. The advantages of this method can make the number of the nodes in the network in theory unlimited, the identification of the data block code can set by 11 or 29 of a binary number, so can be defined 211 or 229 different data block. In this way, it still can make different nodes to transmit and receive the same data, which is very useful in distributed control system. The data length for a maximum of 8 bytes, can meet usually in the field of industrial control command, working status and test data of general requirement. At the same time, 8 bytes will not take bus time too long, so as to ensure the real-time communication.

bus and F2407 interface layer to realize the CAN bus and F2407 physical interface; The second layer, DSP information processing with peripheral devices, F2407 is a new industrial control chip applied in control field, integrated digital I/O, EV (event manager), A/D(analog-to-digital conversion), SPI (serial peripherals interface), SCI (asynchronous serial communication interface), eCAN controller etc. Following Introduce the CAN bus and F2407 interface circuit. The CAN bus communication system shows in figure3.

SN65HVD230 is a interface driving CAN controller and physical between the bus, it provides the differential send and receive function. Hardware principle is as shown in figure 4 shows. Because SN65HVD230 is supplied with 3.3V power and F2407 is also supplied with 3.3V power, it can be directly connected, which simplifies the circuit [3].

With the rapid development of the robot, robot applied in security is increasing. Security robot applies in some large security meetings and related units, responsible for important occasions security work. A kind of security robots has travel mechanism with wheel structure, the movement of the drive wheels was driven by two sets of servo motor, while Communication Design of the drive wheels control system is CAN bus. There are two nodes in CAN bus, Connected to a motor drive respectively. Motor drive connected servo motor

while Servos motor and wheels were linked. Control signals from the control unit (TMS320F2407) through the CAN bus, will go to motor drive, at the same time and the related state signal of motor drive is sent to control unit through the CAN bus. The block diagram of control system of is shown in figure5.

Whenever the bus is free, any unit may start to transmit a message. If 2 or more units start transmitting messages at the same time, the bus access conflict is resolved by bitwise arbitration using the IDENTIFIER; while a minimum of a binary number identifier has the highest priority. The mechanism of arbitration guarantees that neither information nor time is lost. When a ’recessive’ level is sent and a ’dominant’ level is monitored (see Bus Values), the unit has lost arbitration and must withdraw without sending one more bit.

