Shafer et al. (2003) introduced the theory of evidence, later known as the Dempster-Shefer theory. The basis of this approach is to integrate data into evidence or beliefs that can manage information deficiencies. This was a reinterpretation of Arthur Dempster's research in the 1960s, which, according to Dempster, has been largely modified by Shafer (Shafer et al., 2003). Denoeux et al. (2017) provided two new

division methods, along with simulation of some applications in the D.S method. Liu et al. (2017), in their research, proposed a new weighting method in Dempster-Shafer theory by a fuzzy algorithm that can use the evidence obtained from different methods to classify the target.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows: The kinematic model- ing of the agricultural robot, the simulation of the robot in the MATLAB SimMechanic, localization by Dempster- Shafer and Kalman filter are given in Materials and Method section. Comparing of these two methods and the results is presented in Result and Discussions. The experimental tests were designed to investigate the validity of sim- ulation results. And finally, last section, where some conclusions are highlighted.

As can be imagined, the radius of the robot's circular path increases with increasing length of the robot. On the other hand, the steering angle has a mechanical limit and its maximum value specifies the min- imum R1 value. So if the steering angle is constant, the robot runs a cir- cular arc.

In order to have a dynamic environment and visual representation of the robot's motion, the robot model is interconnected individually in the SimMechanics of Matlab software to allow the robot's behavior in deal- ing with various control algorithms be observed by combining it with Simulink environment. By placing a sensor on a robot, in order to report its position and angles (such as the gyroscope sensor), these robot fea- tures are available throughout the path. The robot moves with constant velocity and the steering angle is the only control variable.

to integrate any numerical, signal, and multi-dimensional data. One of the areas that this tool and its features are underused is the localization. In this paper, firstly will be shown how D.S. Theory of Evidence can be used in precise positioning of moving objects, and then the performance

are the real robot motions in the simulation environment, which is ex- pected to show by the ideal sensors. Purple and pale green colors are shown simulated sensor data after the noise respectively for the first and second sensor sources. Also the blue color shows the fusion of two noisy sensor data by D.S. method and the dark green color shows the fusion by the K.F. method. It is clear that the Kalman method shows better performance in Gaussian noise.

In this section, an unmanned ground vehicle is implemented practi- cally to perform real-time navigation. This vehicle has been constructed in Biosystem Mechanical Engineering Department of Tehran University. The vehicle used as mobile robot has a servo mechanism as its steering mechanism. Then the aforementioned controller have been imple- mented and the platform is examined in two case study to verify the re-

Which n is the number of values and m(x) is the mean. MAD has been proposed to be used in place of standard deviation since it corre- sponds better to real life. Because the MAD is a simpler measure of var- iability than the standard deviation. This method's forecast accuracy is very closely related to the MSE method which is just the average squared error of the forecasts. Although these methods are very closely related, MAD is more commonly used because it is both easier to com- pute (avoiding the need for squaring) and easier to understand.

in vehicle localization. Mean deviation from desire path in path tracking by Dempster-Shafer method is about 15.5 cm in linear path and about 17 cm in circular path. This method shows an error about 17.7 degree in orientation during circular path tracking. Localization using Kalman Filter makes up a higher error about 4.7% in linear path and about 5%

In this paper, tried to simulate controlling of an agricultural tractor robot and it's localization in real condition using Dempster-Shafer and Kalman filter algorithms, as data fusion tools. The results showed a bet- ter performance of the Dempster-Shafer method when applying non- Gaussian noise which is the reliability validation of the Dempster- Shafer method in conditions close to real conditions. To verify the valid- ity of this statement and also to compare these two methods of data fu- sion for localization in real-world conditions, two paths were designed on the crop soil. The mobile robot prepared for autonomous navigation tracked the aforementioned paths by the controller described in the paper. Results show the better performance of Dempster-Shafer method in comparison with Kalman Filter.

