The modern sports techniques (cars, motorcycles, bicycles) is drove in motion with use of transmissions with the controlled variable transfer ratio. The transmission provides variable speed of movement depending on external loading. The modern transmission has the step transfer ratio (4 - 5 steps). At each step the transfer ratio constant, and speed of movement is regulated by change of engine power. Achievement of the maximum speed of movement demands optimum control of switching of steps and the engine power.

Control of steps switching (both manual, and automatic) almost always is not the best. The moment of switching either lags, or advances optimum time of switching which depends on controlled power of the engine. Therefore achievement of the maximum speed of movement substantially depends on individual abilities of the driver. But even the big practical experience of the driver does not allow receiving the greatest possible result.

The tooth gearing is reliable and durable but it is not stepless transfer. The automatic gear box provides only automatic switching of steps which is not optimum. Besides, the automatic gear box is heavy and bulky. Such transmission cannot be established on a motorcycle or a bicycle.

The gear adaptive transfer developed on the basis of the discovery has the elementary design and does not require any control. This transfer independently and continuously adapts to variable loading. Absence of management excludes subjective factors and provides ideal conformity to a variable mode of movement. Simplicity of a design allows establishing transfer on any sports vehicle (car, motorcycle, bicycle etc).

Here introduce the paper, and put a nomenclature if necessary, in a box with the same font size as the rest of the paper. The paragraphs continue from here and are only separated by headings, subheadings, images and formulae. The section headings are arranged by numbers, bold and 10 pt. Here follows further instructions for authors.

Recently there were patents on not switched gear continuously variable transmission (CVT) without hydro transformer [6, 7]. In transmission wheelwork with two degrees of freedom and one entrance is used. Adaptive mechanism of CVT provides possibility of output link movement with a speed inversely to resistance moment at constant input power. Researches of wheelworks with two degrees of freedom executed before define possibility of their self-regulation or adaptation to variable technological loading. However the theoretical description of such transmissions is not convincing enough. This transfer has one entrance and does not satisfy the requirements of mechanism theory about the equality of degrees of freedom number to input links number [8]. The inventors of the patented projects [4, 5] used the intuitive assumptions based on the existing ideas of the theory of mechanisms. The essentially new regularity of mechanics takes place at the basis of mechanical adaptive transmission acting [1, 2 and 3]. Purpose of present work is to formulate regularities of the mechanics allowing creating the adaptive-mechanical continuously variable transmission for the sport techniques.

The gear adaptive drive implementing the force adaptation effect represents the closed differential mechanism (Fig. 1). It contains the frame 0, one input carrier H1, a closed four-link contour with toothed wheels 1-2-3-6-5-4 and the output carrier H2. Solar wheels 1, 4 are united in the block of wheels 1-4. Ring wheels 3, 6 are united in the block of wheels 3-6.

At any external moments the moments on blocks of wheels 1-4 and 3-6 will appear unbalanced ( M 21  M 54 , M 23  M 56 ). However these moments are gained on the basis of use of balance conditions of satellites 2 and 5 interacting with links 1-4 and 3-6. Absence of balance on links 1-4 and 3-6 contradicts balance observance on satellites 2 and 5.

The Eq. (8) represents the equation of works (powers) on intermediate links 1-4 and 3-6. The Eq. (8) means balance presence on intermediate links 1-4 and 3-6 simultaneously. In the mobile closed contour basic new situation occurs: balance in statics separately on each intermediate link is absent but balance of intermediate links simultaneously on the movement all contour takes place. Hence if the condition of balance for external links of a moving kinematic chain is fulfillment then for all links of a contour simultaneously

Action of the animation model: Press key W - you will see motion of cogwheels if external loading is increasing. Press key Q - you will see motion of cogwheels if external loading is decreasing. Speed of rotation of the engine shaft is constant. Speed of rotation of the output shaft depends on loading.

Check of effect of force adaptation in the mechanism made under the chart design presented on fig. 1 has been executed on the test-bed (fig. 3). At the stand the electric motor is placed at the left, the electric oscillator simulating useful output loading is placed on the right, adaptive-mechanical transmission is placed in the centre between the electric motor and the electric oscillator. Theoretical results are coinciding with results of check at the stand.

Adaptive gear transmission in the form of gear differential mechanism with closed contour provides the best variant of control with the transfer ratio of sports transport. The adaptive tooth gearing independently and continuously brings vehicle speed into accord to movement resistance without any control system. It leads automatically to achievement of the maximum speed of movement. Absence of control excludes subjective factors and provides ideal conformity to a variable mode of movement.

Ivanov K.S. The theory of continuously variable transfer (CVT) with Two degrees of freedom. Paradox of mechanics. Hearings of the American Society of Mechanics of Engineers (ASME) the International Congress of Engineering industry and the Exhibition (IMECE 2012). Houston, Texas, USA. 2012. P. 543.

Ivanov K.S., Jaroslavceva E.K. Way of automatic and continuous change of a twisting moment and speed of twirl of the output shaft depending on a tractive resistance and the device for its realization. Patent of Russia RU ʋ 2398989. (2010), p. 16.

Ivanov Konstantin S., Almaty, KAZ - Owner of the registered sample. The name - Device of automatic and continuous change of a twisting moment – and changes of a corrected speed of output shaft depending on a tractive resistance. The deed on registration of the registered sample ʋ 20 2012 101

