As technologies of renewable energy production evolve, its sustainability aspects have become topical at the moment. Dynamic modeling allows designing the whole production system as well as testing the technological and economic aspects of this system for its efficiency and sustainability in a defined period of time. The dynamic model described in the article was set up for a farm that produces biogas from agriculture biomass. The dynamic model includes a full cycle of agricultural production and consists of several mutually connected blocks: production (grain, biomass, milk, meat, biogas, heat, electricity), finances (investments, income, outcome, subsidies, loans), resources (arable land, farms, bioreactor, technical equipment, workforce), and risks. The model was created within the Powersim Studio 7 software and was tested using the data obtained at the Latvia University of Agriculture (LLU) Study and Research farm ,,Vecauce'' biogas production plant. Risks in the model are divided into 5 groups: personnel, production, environment, property and legislative (changes in the energy purchase tariffs) risks. They are assumed as probable variables with a normal distribution that is determined by an average value and a standard deviation. They are connected to the processes that they affect to calculate the impact of risks to the farm actions.

Following the world tendencies, the topicality of renewable energy production in Latvia is increasing. Currently, most of the electricity from renewable resources in Latvia is made from hydropower plants, but 1% of electricity is produced by cogeneration of biomass (Energy strategy 2030, 2011), which is seen as a perspective source for increasing renewable energy production under the conditions of Latvia. The development of cogeneration plants is largely encouraged by funding from the EU structural funds, Cohesion fund, and European Agriculture fund for rural development available from the government of Latvia and the EU in the past few years as well as for the coming year (2013).

At the moment there are 23 biogas production plants working in the territory of Latvia with the total power capacity of 29.92 MW. Till the year 2030 it is planned to increase the total production capacity up to 90 MW (by producing biogas from various biomasses) (Energy strategy 2030, 2011). With the expansion of biogas production from agriculture biomass, sustainability aspects, risk assessment and risk management become topical in farms that produce this kind of energy.

A farm that produces biogas is viewed from the systems theory perspective (Blumberga, et.al., 2010). In the study described in this article, firstly, the outside environment and its impact on a farm was determined: laws, regulations, subsidies, quotas, etc. The research was based on the data of a farm that is engaged both in crop production and dairy-farming; biogas production is an auxiliary sector. The crop production sector firstly serves to provide fodder for dairy cows – biomass for silage and heylage. Likewise crop production provides the biogas reactor with maize or grass biomass (Kalnins, 2009). The additional free arable land is fully used for grain production and growing of rape. The optimization of arable land is made by the following linear optimization task:

The dynamic model of a farm consists of several mutually connected modules: resources, production, finances, and risks. Resources include 5 blocks (see Fig. 1): arable land, production premises, technical equipment and vehicles, personnel, and optimization of crop production sector. The module ,,Resources'' is located in the MS Excel software, including the optimization block. Information exchange between MS Excel and Powersim Studio is done by using Studio Dataset. The second module – Production – includes the following blocks: grain production, rape production, biomass production, reproduction of milking cows, milk production, biogas production, and heat and electricity production. All these blocks have Powersim Studio dynamic flow modules that, of course, are mutually connected. For example, biogas production block includes biogas production flow module that accordingly is connected with the milking cow module, biomass production module as well as with heat and electricity production module (see Fig. 2).

The last of the modules Risk module is linked with the variables of the Production module which allows calculating the impact from risks to the production process. Literature review on risk management in renewable energy production shows, that risks are mainly classified by the cause of the risk. Dominant and specific risk groups can be noticed. Technological, environment, legislative, financial and investment risks (Olivier, s.a., Financial Risk Management, 2004; Froggatt, Lhan, 2010; Ferraris, s.a.,) are frequently seen in the risk management studies of this certain field. Based on this summarization, the risks in this research are divided into 5 groups or clusters: personnel, production, property, environment, and legislative (changes in the energy purchase tariffs) risks.

Risks are assumed as probable variables with a normal distribution that is determined by an average value and a standard deviation, estimated by experts. The authors of this article have considered the following definition of the term ,,risk'': Risk is the multiplication of the probability of an event occurrence and its significance level of potentially unfavourable consequences (based on: Hardaker, Huirne, 2004; Renn, 2008). Therefore, in this case, the risks included in the dynamic simulation give only a negative effect and do not reflect any positive consequences.

The biogas plant of the study and research farm ,,Vecauce'' of LLU served as the basis for the biogas production module. It was built using WEL tec BioPower GmbH technology (Agricultural Biogas.., s.a.). This technology is characterized by biogas production in a mezofil fermentation process; the brutto capacity of the fermenter is 2 006 m³. As a substrate in the fermenter, cattle manure, maize silage, grain and other substrates

In the flow diagram, the variables that determine biogas production are shown. These variables are modulated in other blocks of Production module, for example, biomass from maize and biomass from grass are modulated in the block ,,Biomass''. Biogas outcome is assumed as a probable variable with a normal distribution, that is determined by an average value and a standard deviation. Likewise the risk variables are determined by the experts and connected to the Production block variables that are affected by these risks.

Each of the blocks of the Production module gives an outcome in the process of simulation: grain yield, biomass yield, number of dairy cows, amount of milk produced, etc., as well as income and costs of the production in the farm. All production costs and income of the farm are summarized in the Finance module, which gives a possibility to estimate the profit of the farm. For example, production of electricity from biogas

The dynamic module allows covering the whole cycle of biogas production and procession as well as distribution of the produced energy, by including agricultural and dairy production, biogas production itself and the subsequent cogeneration of heat and energy. Thus it allows improving the whole production cycle of the farm and testing the sustainability and economic efficiency of the renewable energy production in a defined period of time. After creating the conceptual model it needs to be calibrated carefully according to the parameters of the specific farm with the aim to increase the reliability and applicability of the simulation results.

