Distributed generation (DG) systems are considered an integral part in future distribution power system. The reactive power injections from DG units, are seen as a cost-effective solution for distribution system voltage support, energy saving, and reliability improvement. This paper proposes a coordinating control method of reactive power optimization in distribution power system with distributed wind energy. The reactive capability limits of doubly fed induction generator (DFIG) are included in the optimization model. The problem of reactive power output/absorb of adjustable compensating capacitor and wind turbine (WT) is formulated as constrained conditions; differential evolution algorithm (DE) integrating depth-first search is developed to effectively obtain optimal solutions. The proposed algorithm is applied to a practical test system and results are compared and presented.

Distributed generation is the direction of future power industry. Wind energy is the most widely used clean renewable energy. Distributed wind turbines(WT) are connected to the grid as distributed power sources and have brought significant impact on the system power flow distribution, voltage level and transmission loss.

The author in [3] has proposed a wind turbine control strategy in which the converters of grid side and rotor side are reserves of each other. In [4], a method to calculate the reactive power limit of system with DFIG considering grid-side converter reactive power limit is proposed, and the DFIG wind farm are used for reactive power compensation. [5] focused on including the reactive power capability of the DFIG turbines directly in the optimization formulation, and proposed a multiobjective reactive power planning strategy for WF and transmission system devices.

The DFIG has two set of windings including rotor winding and stator winding. The stator winding is connected directly to the grid through grid-side converter, GSC. The DC side voltage is controlled by GSC, and the power factor is adjusted according to the demand of grid.

procedure is given in Fig.1. The threshold of reactive power loss employ the average reactive power loss of network without WT, and considering the termination condition can not be satisfied, set the maximum number of iterations to avoid endless loop, maximum number is 500.

The node of 1 to 244 belongs to line 1, 225-343 belongs to line 2, 344-424 belongs to line 3, Fig.2(a) shows the total network voltage level without distributed wind energy and Fig.2(b) shows the nodal voltage state after reactive power optimization.

The figures above show that nodal voltage of line 1 are in low state, line 2 and 3 are higher simultaneously when there is no reactive power compensation and wind energy access. The reactive power optimization efficiency considering the reactive power limit of WT shows in Fig.(3)-(5) , the left is the access point voltage state before optimization, and the right is after optimization.

In line 1, node voltage level increased significantly, all of nodes with low voltage rise within the allowable range. Fig.(3)-(5) show the voltage variation in 24 hours between WT accessed and the day before access. After WT accessed, voltage of total access points improved, where node 109 is the most significant. The switch time optimization result of adjustable compensating capacitor shows in Table 2, and the total reactive power loss decreased from 1.951MWh to 1.678MWh.

