In the present digital world, digital images and videos are the main carrier of information. However, these sources of information can be easily tampered by using readily available software thus making authenticity and integrity of the digital images an important issue of concern. And in most of the cases copy- move image forgery is used to tamper the digital images. Therefore, as a solution to the aforementioned problem we are going to propose a unique method for copy-move forgery detection which can sustained various pre-processing attacks using a combination of Dyadic Wavelet Transform (DyWT) and Scale Invariant Feature Transform (SIFT). In this process first DyWT is applied on a given image to decompose it into four parts LL, LH, HL, and HH. Since LL part contains most of the information, we intended to apply SIFT on LL part only to extract the key features and find a descriptor vector of these key features and then find similarities between various descriptors vector to conclude that there has been some copy-move tampering done to the given image. And by using DyWT with SIFT we are able to extract more numbers of key points that are matched and thus able to detect copy-move forgery more efficiently.

In this digital savvy world “seeing is no more believing”. Most of the information is carried in a digital form especially in the form of either digital images or digital videos. Thus, they form the main stream of the information carrier. These sources can be manipulated very easily. In this paper, we will focus on image forgery, which has become a topic of serious concern. The image editing software such as Adobe Photoshop is readily available using which any given image can be easily doctored, which can lead to serious consequences, as these tampered images can be presented as a part of evidence in the court room leading to a wrong decision and creating the false belief in many real-world applications. Therefore the issue of authentication of the images has to be taken very seriously. Most of the forgery detection techniques are categorized into two major domains: intrusive/non-blind and non-intrusive/blind [1] as shown in the Fig.1

Intrusive method which is also known as a non-blind method requires some digital information to be embedded in the original image when it is generated, and thus it has a limited scope. Some of the examples of these methods are watermarking and using digital signature of the camera and not all the digital devices can provide this feature. On the other hand, non-intrusive method which is also known as a blind method does not require any embedded information. A digital image is said to be forged when its original version is tampered by applying various transformations like that of rotation, scaling, resizing, etc. It may also happen that an image is tampered by adding noise or by removing or adding some objects to hide the real information [1]. Most commonly used image tampering method is copy-move image forgery in this a part of the original image is first copied and then pasted on other parts once or may be multiple times to hide some information.

The remaining contents of the paper are presented in following manner. Next section deals with all previous work related to image forgery detection. Section 3 completely explains the proposed method, section 4 deals with simulation results and evaluation of performance parameter and in the end, we have conclusion and references.

and also provide further recommendation for future research. Mahalakshmi et al [14] provided detection of digital image forgery by exploring basic image manipulations done on the images. Here they have presented techniques to detect image is manipulated using basic method like copy-move, region duplication, splicing etc. Anand et al. [16] proposed an algorithm to detect the digital image copy move forgery to overcome the sustained attacks using SIFT and DyWT methods.

Through this paper, we are going to propose a new technique for copy-move forgery detection. First image is transformed into wavelet domain and SIFT is applied on the transformed image to obtain the features. As wavelet produces multispectral components, features are more predominant [7]. Thus after obtaining interest point feature descriptor we go for finding matching between these feature descriptors to conclude whether tampering is done to the given image or not. Our works confirm that SIFT features are an optimal solution because of their high computational efficiency and robust performance.

[8] introduced the DyWT to overcome the drawback of DWT. DyWT is shift invariant and is different from DWT because in DyWT there is no down-sampling like that of DWT. The DyWT of an image is computed using the algorithm [1].

In order to determine copy-move forgery; first of all we apply dyadic wavelet transform on the given image which will decompose the given image in four parts LL, LH, HL, and HH. Since most of the information is contained in LL part thus we apply SIFT feature extraction on LL part as a result we have the feature descriptor vectors of the interest points, and finally, we go for finding the match between these feature descriptor vectors to mark the forged regions. The proposed algorithm block diagram is shown in Fig. 3.

In result analysis, we applied the proposed algorithm over a standard dataset MICC-F220 [6]. This simulation has been performed on MATLAB 2012a software with 32GB Ram and core i7 processor. DyWT of the test image is first calculated and on the low-frequency component of DyWT we apply SIFT to extract the features which are nothing but descriptor vectors of the object of interest in the test image and the final step is to go matching these features to detect copy- move forgery.

Images shown in Fig. 5 describe various processes involved in proposed method, Fig. 5(a) is the tampered test image on which our algorithm is applied, and finally, we got 2395 key-points and 66 matches, thus concluding that the given test image is forged.

We thoroughly assessed different types of forgery techniques and decided to develop an algorithm which encompasses better performance and robustness for detecting the most common copy-move forgery. We proposed a method which combines DyWT with SIFT. Our efficiency of detection ranked much higher than the previously available methods. DyWT does not incorporate down sampling so the image size is intact and low frequency component contains most of the information on which SIFT is applied to extract the features and then matching is obtained between the feature descriptors to conclude that a given image is forged or not. Our algorithm has higher matching rate, and it is robust to most of the attack and pre-processing techniques and also we have better performance parameter’s values on which we can conclude that it’s a feasible one.

We would like to thank our guide and Coordinator of Centre of Excellence Dr. Avinash G. Keskar for his constant encouragement and guidance toward this project. This project is funded from Centre of Excellence (CoE), Department of Electronics Engineering, VNIT Nagpur. Special thanks to Director VNIT Nagpur for providing institutional facilities and needed administrative and authoritative support during the work at VNIT.

Li, Leida, Shushang Li, Hancheng Zhu, Shu-Chuan Chu, John F. Roddick, and Jeng-Shyang Pan. “An Efficient Scheme for Detecting Copy-move Forged Images by Local Binary Patterns”, Journal of Information Hiding and Multimedia Signal Processing, vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 46-56, January 2013.

Anand, Vijay, Mohammad Farukh Hashmi, and Avinash G. Keskar. "A Copy Move Forgery Detection to Overcome Sustained Attacks Using Dyadic Wavelet Transform and SIFT Methods." In Proceedings of the 6th Asian Conference on Intelligent Information and Database Systems (ACIIDS 2014), Springer International Publishing, pp. 530-542, April 2014.

