each virtual scan and the scan captured from the physical sensor are then established by using a spectral technique [47]. The latter finds pairwise geometric relationships between its two input scans. These correspondences are then used to generate 2D geometric histograms that encode a sense of similarity between the true scan and all virtual scans. The nodes from which the latter were captured are then ranked according to this similarity measure and a threshold based on the correlation coefficient of all combinations of scans is used to extract a subset of candidate poses. This process is used to quickly sift between all candidate poses. The final pose is that which achieves the maximum number of correspondence pairs.

The method introduced in [49] jointly considers odometry, scan- matching and scan-to-map-scan matching of 2D LIDAR scans with cadastral maps for localisation of autonomous vehicles in outdoor scenarios. These are used as constraints in the solution of a graph optimisation problem that computes the most likely vehicle pose given measurements from the 2D range sensor. With regard to the cadas- tral plans, non-building objects are filtered-out from the real laser observation using a split and merge approach, which is combined with weighted line fitting. The input range scan and the one derived from the map are then aligned via Generalised ICP, and the resulting pose transform is then added to the graph if and only if ICP has converged. At the same time, a method for detecting the ambiguity regarding the longitudinal position of the vehicle arising in corridor- like environments is introduced. In [42] scan-to-map-scan matching is employed in tandem with a particle filter. From the pose estimate of the latter, a map-scan is computed and then matched against the range scan captured from the physical sensor using PLICP. Feeding back the resulting pose estimate to the population of the particle filter in the form of a multitude of particles is shown to exhibit lower pose errors compared to [44], where the resulting pose estimate is fed back in the form of only one particle. Furthermore it is shown that this method of feedback exhibits increased robustness compared to [14], where the particle filter is initialised anew around the resulting estimate.

In contrast to NDT however, which establishes correspondences by considering the distance of point positions to voxel distributions, VGICP [23] aggregates the distribution of each point in the voxel and establishes correspondences between these distributions and target distributions, thus making VGICP a voxel-based distribution-to-multi- distribution approach. This approach yields valid voxel distributions even when there are few points in a voxel, resulting in an algorithm that is robust to changes in voxel resolution. VGICP extends GICP [37] in order to avoid costly nearest neighbour search, while reducing its execution time.

m. The values of tested standard deviations were calculated from commercially available panoramic LIDAR scanners by identifying the magnitude of their reported maximum range errors and dividing it by a factor of three. The rationale is that 99.73% of errors are located within

Kumagai I, Ueda R, Sugai F, Nozawa S, Kakiuchi Y, Okada K, et al. Achievement of localization system for humanoid robots with virtual horizontal scan relative to improved odometry fusing internal sensors and visual information. In: 2016 IEEE/RSJ international conference on intelligent robots and systems. IROS, http:

