less likely to do so. Using this newfound knowledge, garnered during the in silico testing process, researchers can then focus their in vitro test- ing efforts onto the promising peptide candidates with high potential of having antimicrobial activity. When successful, this combined testing methodology leads to less in vitro testing, and more AMP discoveries. Moreover, this approach can be used to identify general antimicrobial activity, but also to further specify the exact type of activity for an AMP [40]. Lastly, the usage of evolutionary algorithms in this drug discovery process enables the in silico generation, and eventually in vitro synthesis of previously non-existent peptides with antimicrobial activities [42].

We propose an approach for reducing the number of non- antimicrobial peptides that make it into the in vitro testing phase. The rationale for our aim is that the expert will benefit more from a ma- chine learning model that is able to accurately produce a few promising solutions than a model with higher overall accuracy that yields false pos- itives with high confidence. The operation of logical conjunction is con- ducted between the predictions of the phys_chem model and encoding- based models in an effort to minimize the fall-out metric, also known as the false positive rate (FPR). Our results indicate that this approach of combining the prediction of divergent models can indeed be used for the reduction of the false positive rate and act as a strong candidate for future applications in peptide discovery.

field of chemoinformatics [2,13,36]. To construct the optimal hyper- plane that separates the two classes, the SVM model relies on distances between the data instances. Taking this into account, it is important to scale the features down to similar scales. The one-hot encoded features and the binary encoded features already exist on similar scales because they can assume one of three values: -1, 0, or 1. On the other hand, the physico-chemical features have varying ranges. In the context of this re-

The prediction model that was used in this research is the Support Vector Machine (SVM) with the RBF kernel. The SVM models are capa- ble of solving binary classification tasks, and do so by fitting a hyper- plane that separates the two classes. The main advantage of the SVM model is that it implicitly maps the data into higher dimensions us- ing the kernel trick, which enables the separation of classes in higher dimensions when the separation cannot be done in lower dimensions. The motivation for the use of SVM lies in the fact that it has been used numerous times for AMP prediction purposes [16,21], and is widely re- garded as an advanced and well-performing model, even outside the

also known as the false positive rate (FPR). Unlike the other metrics used in this research, lower values of the FPR are indicative of a better model performance. In the context of this research, a low FPR means that a model produces less in vitro testing candidates which do not ac- tually have antimicrobial properties.

The usage of these approaches introduces a precision-recall trade-off. The multi_comb_1 approach is the most rigorous one. Less peptides are classified as antimicrobial, but those that are classified as antimicrobial are more likely to be true positives. This has the effect of increasing the precision, but lowering the recall. Conversely, the add_comb_1 is a more liberal approach. More peptides are classified as antimicrobial, however at the cost of producing more false positives. This approach will decrease the precision, while increasing the recall metric. Analogously, the phys- chem model is also combined with the binary_encoding model to construct the multi_comb_2 and the add_comb_2 methods.

