In order to accurately describe the equipment’ severity caused by voltage sag, the credibility measure which meets the conditions of non-additive is proposed based on their physical properties of responses. This assessment measure can avoid the deficiencies that classical probability measure needs a large number of samples and the non-duality of fuzzy measure. The membership functions of sensitive equipment voltage tolerance capability that corresponding to the characteristic quantities in the status uncertain area was determined by fuzzy statistical method and polynomial fitting method. Then the joint credibility distribution function was deduced based on uncertainty theory. Hence, the assessment model of severity of equipment failure is constructed. Based on practical samples, the PCs were simulated using the proposed method. Comparing the simulation results with methods using classical probability measure and possibility measure prove that the proposed method is proper and credible and can reflect practical condition more objectively.

deficiencies exist in the present assessment measures. Under the different operation states, the sensitive equipment of different types or the same one have various voltage sag severity. Consequently, the scientific evaluation measure and methods should research from measure theory and its' existence condition.

Uncertainty refers to the property of connection and development between events, including randomness, possibility, fuzziness and roughness. The credibility measure [11] is developed by Liu in 2002, and it is the most appropriate measure to quantify the fuzzy event. The credibility measure has the equal status in fuzzy field as the probability measure in probability theory.

In order to ensure the accuracy and credibility of assessment, a reasonable measure should be selected. The defect of past assessment based on classic measure contain that a mass of sample, subjectivity, harsh condition. Therefore, the more appropriate assessment should start from the physical attribute.

Under the influence of voltage sag, the physical attribute of the device response performances as: the border of equipment's state between normal and fault is undefined, which is called intermediate state, such as system halted. The sum of equipment's normal possibility and failure possibility is not 1 due to this fuzziness, which is against the additivity. This superimposed phenomenon can be described by the subadditivity of credibility measure. For any event A and B: Cr( A1 ∪ A2 )  Cr( A1 )  Cr( A2 )

According to the size of information, uncertainty can be divided into probability and non- probability. There is a recognized probable value for the event can be test repeatedly, which is named probability. While the equipment voltage sag severity has many influence factors, which lead it difficult to repeat. So the severity assessment belongs to non- probability. For this question, membership function of fuzzy variables has the superiority that relaxed requirements of information and the same result under different membership functions. Above all, credibility measure is appropriate choice for that.

The possibility measure has been widely used in equipment reliability assessment. However, it has no self- duality property in theory. It means that, the event with the possibility of 1 will not absolutely occur, while the event with the possibility of 0 may occur. This phenomenon isn't allowed to happened in the engineering field. Based on possibility measure, credibility measure has self-duality same to probability measure, as:

Classical probability assessment method assumes that the equipment's response to the magnitude U and duration T are independent random events. The criterion is the severity(s(U T)) exceed immunity(x(U T)). In practice, equipment may fail when each event happened. Therefore, the failure probability union model of sensitive equipment is:

Voltage tolerance of equipment can be depicted by voltage tolerance curve (VTC). Due to experimental evidence, the VTC of various equipments is rectangle on the magnitude-duration plane. Umin, Umax and Tmin ,Tmax are maximum and minimum of magnitude and duration respectively. External area of curve one express normal state; inner region of curve one express faulted state; the middle shows the uncertain state, containing sub-region of A,B,C.

The boundary between safety and fault is fuzzy. This multivalued state can be depicted by the membership function. The intermediate state corresponds to the uncertain region of VTC. According to fuzzy statistical and polynomial fitting method, membership function of equipment (x) can be constructed with measured samples.

Voltage sag source is made up of a Fluke 6100A disturbance generator and a linear power amplifier. One PC is tested 5000 times with 5% step of magnitude and 20ms step of duration under the range of 0-1p.u. Under hundreds of independent tests for PC with various states, Uncertainty range of PC voltage tolerance capability is obtained in Table 1.

To verify the correctness of the proposed method, the classic probability measure, possibility measure and credibility measure are used for evaluate. And the union model is used in the classic probability measure. The results of comparison are shown in Table 2. The relative errors are calculated as follows:

From the assessment result as shown in Table 2, it can be found that the probability of failure is greater with increased voltage sag intensity. This phenomenon indicates that the proposed can correctly reflect the trend of severity. Because of the axiomatic assumptions of the classical probability measure is too harsh, the different measures have significant influence on results. The maximum errors of assessment method with credibility measure, possibility measure and probabilistic measure are 9.85%, 30.34% and 52.92%, respectively. The results have proved that the assessment method with credibility measure is more accurate and dependable.

Form the physical properties, this paper proposes a credibility measure assessment method which can solve various issues with the lack of samples, non-additive and non-duality condition. The assessment results and comparison the credibility measure is more accurate, effective than the past methods. And the proposed method can be easily used for the assessment of the PLC, ASD, ACC and other equipment.

