Recently, as importance of history is being emerged, IT-grafted cultural contents industry has been extensively grown. In particular, a study on development of cultural heritage sites, architectural cultural property and digital contents for historical remains restoration by using augmented reality technology has been performed. However, most of the existing restoration system of digital contents is being mainly performed indoors in reality. In this paper, 3D model visualization system of cultural heritage sites by using outdoor augmented reality, not indoor augmented reality, is intended to be presented. Presented visualized system augments 3D model of cultural heritage sites in video image inputted from outdoor by using object panorama, SURF and GPS. And the users may be provided with information for cultural heritage sites without difficulty through this visualized system.

Recently, as importance of history is being emerged at home and abroad, cultural contents industry has been developed. IT-grafted restoration contents field among those industries is drawing attention from the relevant industry. As smart phone was emerged, a lot of applications have been developed. In particular, as application based on augmented reality technology has been developed, such application is being utilized in architectural cultural property, cultural heritage sites and restoration contents of historical remains of cultural contents industry. Only traces of most of cultural heritage sites, architectural cultural property and historical remains are left or negligent management for such heritages continues. In order to ensure efficient management of cultural heritage sites being left in traces only or managed negligently, contents restoration by using augmented reality would be effective. But as most of existing contents restoration is being taken place indoors, such efforts faces with locational limitation.

In this paper, 3D model visualization system of cultural heritage sites by using outdoor augmented reality, not indoor augmented reality, is intended to be presented. Presented visualized system augments 3D model of cultural heritage sites in video image inputted from outdoor by using object panorama, SURF algorithm [1] and GPS. The objective of this study is to have students, teachers and general public watch cultural heritage sites with immersion and realistic sense through 3D model visualization system of cultural heritage sites.

Outdoor augmented reality is a technology of implementing augmented reality by using outdoor (not indoor) GPS, compass, gyroscope sensor based on augmented reality technology. Contrary to indoor augmented reality, outdoor augmented reality is not subject to spatial limitation. While indoor augmented reality uses a marker for ensuring convenient synthesis of virtual object as it is taken place in relative narrow space, outdoor augmented reality uses location information as well, not a marker being used in indoor system as it is taken place in relatively wide area [3-4].

3D stone tomb was created by utilizing 3ds Max, a program of creating 3D model, as shown on Fig. 2. As utilization to other contents form is not easy when data of 3D model is enlarged, this model was created by minimum capacity by using triangular polygon.

In order to match image inputted from smart phone with object panorama image, exact feature point matching is required by using feature point algorithm. Typical feature point algorithm includes SIFT (Scale Invariant Feature Transform) [5] and SURF (Speeded up Robust Features) [6]. And these two algorithms have something in common in that feature point invariant to scale and rotation transform is searched from black and white image and its descriptor is configurated. Time of extracting feature point by SURF is faster than that of SIFT by app. 4 times and so, in mobile devices such as smart phone or tablet PC of which processing speed is restricted, feature point is matched by application of SURF algorithm rather than SIFT.

Through above visualization system process as shown on Fig. 10, 3D model visualization system of cultural sites based on outdoor augmented reality was implemented. As shown on Fig. 10, 3D model was augmented in cultural sites by using smart phone camera. In diversified angles of camera, free augmentation of 3D model is allowed.

In this paper, 3D model visualization system based on augmented reality in which overall 3D cultural sites model image is visualized in smart phone by using video image of actual cultural sites was proposed.. Existing method was to show restored contents of cultural sites being progressed based on marker that is usable under indoor environment only to the users. However, as watching cultural sites was allowed in a limited space, it was hard for the users to use such method. If 3D model visualization system of cultural sites of this thesis should be utilized, the users may utilize information for cultural sites without difficulty at any outdoor place as well as indoor.

