This paper is based on interval data of power customer satisfaction degree. The evaluation method of voltage sag or dip is an analytical one which is used to consider the satisfaction of not only the utility but also the user side. Determining function is from the length of fault line and the voltage magnitude in the modern transmission and distribution network. The critical failure positions method is getting through analytical algorithm combined with iterative features. The range characteristics of satisfaction degree of customer side and the distribution regularities of the uncertainty region are considered in the paper. Then, the quantitative frequency of voltage sag is determined using the interval sag frequency. A small size network and IEEE 30-bus RTS are chosen to comparing with existing and traditional methods. And this novel method is proved to have much more academic value and practical foreground.

fundamental change. The complaint from power quality problems caused by voltage sag is increasingly prominent. Expressly with the widely application of sensitive equipments [3-4], including PC, PLC, ASD and ACC, the complaints caused by voltage sag present a rising trend year by year. According to international association of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE), the voltage sag is defined as a sudden dip or decrease of its RMS value during 0.5 cycles of the whole period to 1 min called duration. And the dip magnitude is in the extent from 0.1 to 0.9p.u. From the above, the promotion of the satisfaction degree relies heavily on the assessment of voltage dip frequency.

Traditional voltage sag evaluation methods are based on the voltage magnitude of its RMS. The measurement statistic [7] and analytical modeling [8-9] are the principal methods. The former requires long surveying time and high installation and maintain cost even though it is simple and reliable. The later one has promotion and predictability due to its complex stochastic model but lacking of consideration for customer. The critical distance method, classical fault locations and analytical approach are the conventional methods.

Customer satisfaction in a power system can be defined as the satisfaction indicators synthesized the power supply capacity, power, electricity, and power efficiency, utility and so on. Because of that prices are influenced by the impact on various aspects of capacity, electricity consumption and power sales contracts related, the customer satisfaction is decide by the operating conditions of weather it is normal. Therefore, the comprehensive concept of customer satisfaction is shown by the probability of the normal operation time divide by total operation time. The S % called power customer satisfaction is shown by the following expression:

Except the sag severity, the voltage tolerance is the principal element of electricity customer satisfaction degree. The VTC of equipment is constituted by the upper and lower thresholds shown in Fig. 1. The maximum and minimum thresholds of VTC about voltage amplitude and dip duration are expressed by

which is called satisfaction area, the sensitivity device operates normally as usually. Furthermore, the sensitivity device will take place the opposite situation if the real sag happens inside the curve 2. Even more critical is that the operation state of sensitivity device is uncertain when dip occurs in L- area mixed with the two curves, which are shown in Table 1 [3-4].

The existing methods are based on sensitivity characteristics of equipment VTC. Because of the classic stochastic principle or fuzzy judgement rules, they are not easy to understand. While the randomness merely reflect a single uncertain property for the part of deficiency of cause and effect rule, similarly, the fuzziness can only presents the indeterminacy for the deficiency excluding rule. Actually, the randomness and fuzziness always appear concurrently. Hence, the interval number can describe the uncertain ranges characteristic of magnitude and dip duration of faulted voltage.

Combining with Fig. 1, the value of S% is an uncertain variable between zero and hundred. The satisfaction degree S% equals to one hundred when voltages sag in the power customer satisfaction area and is zero when dropping-into the un-satisfaction area. In this paper, voltage magnitude is the single factor used to evaluate for its convenience by an interval data.

In the power supply system shown in Fig. 2, we choose one bus named I as the connecting site of sensitivity device. When one fault called f happens on the line from m to n, the features between position f b and bus I can presented by the sequence transfer impedances seen in the following expressions.

It is assumed that threshold voltage of the power customer satisfaction is 0.3 p.u of voltage RMS. When a fault of three-phase type occurs in the system, the assessment results of frequency with the proposed method and the traditional method are compared in Table 2.

Obviously, as shown in Table 2, the assessment results from the novel method are closely related to the number of fault position to the traditional fault position method. There will be a bigger error if position number is not reasonable. And the proposed method is proved to be more validate with all most the same results by the method in [9]. The results of comparison of the novel method and the secant iteration method are presented in Table 3. Under the condition of the same system architecture, the proposed method can identify power customer un-satisfaction range much more efficiently and precisely.

As a testing network, IEEE 30-bus test system is used in this paper. Form the Fig.5, it consists of 6 generator units, 37 lines and 4 transformers to interconnect 30 buses, the connection type of different transformers is Y0/-11. And there are four types of fault are taken into account.

According to customer acceptability, the interval data of ASD is [0.59, 0.71]. The customer connecting site with ASD equipment is at Bus 21. When a three-phrase short circuit fault happens in the test power system, the customer satisfaction area is shown in Fig. 5. The surrounded region in the real line is the un-satisfaction region and the area outside the dotted line is customer satisfaction region. Furthermore, the region between the two lines is the user satisfaction uncertainty area. Then the voltage sag frequency interval data is calculated as previously described. After that, the potential cost of customer in this system can be estimated.

The result of Monte Carlo method for the assessment of voltage dip interval frequency is taken for the true value. Its essence is to get the random number within the interval range. Then voltage sag frequency in different circumstances is calculated. Then, the maximum and minimum voltage sag frequency is picked from all the others considered these various conditions. For the reasons of the diversity of the network topology, the Monte Carlo method is reasonable and persuasive for the large system with many interactional factors.

ASD, PLC and PC are assumed to connect to the customer connecting sites which including bus 7, 15, 21, 26, and 30 in the test power system. The assessment results of the novel method and Monte Carlo method are both presented in Table 4. We can clearly see that the proposed method is correct with less amount of calculation.

In practical applications, the customers risk tolerance is combined with the distribution rule of equipments' VTC to estimate the quantitative value. Based on the research of [11], it is assumed that the distribution of sensitive equipments respectively obey normal, exponential, and negative exponential distribution rule. The final consequences are presented in Table.5. It is clear that distributions have significant influence on the results. The interval characteristics of power customer satisfaction degree and the distribution rule of equipments' VTC are the primary consideration in selecting customer connecting site.

It consists of the following advantages: First of all, the analysis method can avoid the insufficient of the traditional method to evaluate the voltage sag frequency in user un-satisfaction area. Secondly, the assessment results considered interval data which can reflect the true influence extent of voltage sag. It has certain guiding significance for rational selection of customer and transformation of system. Finally, the simulation results have shown that this proposed method can meet the reality much better.

