et al., 2020; Graham et al., 2020; Park et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2020a). They designed deep learning models that automatically extract the waveform characteristics distinguishing the P phase, S phase and noise to make decisions about P and S arrivals on the seismic waveform. After training with large amounts of seismic data, the two models generalize well with new input data. Linville et al. (2019) explored using convolu- tional and recurrent neural networks to discriminate explosive and tec- tonic sources at local distances, they showed that developed models can successfully determine the source type of the events at an accuracy above 99%.

An autoencoder is a machine learning model that can be used to learn efficient representations (encoding) from a set of data, and then recover the data from these encoded representations. Deep autoencoders have been used in many different applications, such as compression, denoising, dimensionality reduction, and feature extraction (Baldi, 2012; Liu et al., 2017). Particularly, using autoencoders to extract features for different tasks show great promise (Ditthapron et al., 2019; Gogna and Majumdar, 2019; Kunang et al., 2018; Xing et al., 2015). In seismology, applications use autoencoders to extract compressed feature representations for

essentially compresses the data to about one third of the input di- mensions. This type of autoencoder is called an undercomplete autoen- coder, since the bottleneck layer is smaller than the input dimension. Squeezing the dimensions in this way forces the autoencoder to capture the most useful features of the training data. Another path is to use the overcomplete autoencoders, which extending the bottleneck layer of the encoder to have more dimensions than the input, in our case, 1620 input

The data for training the autoencoder comes from the STEAD dataset (Mousavi et al., 2019a), which contains about ~1.2 million local earth- quake waveforms (with P and S arrival labels). We only used the earth- quake waveforms to train the autoencoders. The earthquake waveforms were resampled to 20 samples per second for a total length of 540 (27s)

