Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) via transfer learning were implemented for multi-crop leaf disease image classification. This pro- posed research has achieved accuracy for grape and tomato leaf disease classification by 98.40% and 95.71%, respectively (Paymode and Malode, 2022). Data augmentation and extension of deep learning VGG-16 pre- trained network model were applied for the multi-pest classification of Indonesian mango leaves image. The overall accuracy achieved from those training is 73% on the validation dataset and 76% for the testing data (Kusrini et al., 2020). Improved CNN was built for the real-time de- tection of apple leaf diseases. Using a dataset of 26,377 images of dis- eased apple leaves, the implementation of INAR-SSD (SSD with Inception module and Rainbow concatenation) gave a detection

performance of 78.80% mAP on the dataset (Jiang et al., 2019). The cor- relation effect of several optimization techniques on CNN performance for olive disease classification was also observed. It was found that the highest rate in the experiment without data augmentation was 92.59% (Raouhi et al., 2022).

Previous research does not include many other nematodes species commonly found in Indonesia. This research provides data that contains these species and assesses the performance of a state-of-the-art deep learning model for use in Indonesia. This paper compares four state-of-the-art deep learning models (ResNet101v2, CoAtNet-0, EfficientNetV2B0, and EfficientNetV2M) trained on nematodes dataset species commonly found in Indonesian soil. Data augmentation was employed to determine if image transformation can further increase the accuracy of the tested models. The effect of several optimizer func- tions was also observed on the performance result. The contributions of the paper are listed as follows:

The structure of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents Materials and Method, starting with the datasets and then describing the implemented deep learning architecture. Section 3 presents the de- tailed Result and Discussion on the comparison of 4 state-of-the-art deep learning models for multi-class classification of plant-parasitic nematodes. Finally, in Section 4, the paper concludes with a remark on the model comparison and some perspective for future work.

The datasets and their augmented variations are then used to train the models. In evaluating the model performance, the dataset is split into a training set, validation set, and test set with a ratio of 80:10:10. To summarize, the dataset consists of 957 nematodes sample with 11 classifications, split into 766, 96, and 95 for training, validation, and test respectively. Note that augmentation processes are performed only on the training set of the dataset.

Nematodes classifications are performed using several state-of-the- art models in terms of image classification problems, namely ResNetV2, CoAtNet, and EfficientNetV2. Model families are chosen based on their performance on Image Classification on ImageNet Benchmark (Keras, 2021; Stojnic et al., 2022). Based on hardware limitations and the size of datasets used in the experiments, a specific variant of models applied are ResNet101V2, CoAtNet-0, EfficientNetV2B0, and EfficientNetV2M.

The original Residual Networks (ResNet) architecture is a CNN based on VGG architecture that employs residual learning in its building blocks by adding shortcut connections that skips one or more layers. This alleviates the degradation problem that VGG architecture has when a deeper model is used (He et al., 2016a). The ResNetV2 is the im- proved version of ResNet architecture that improves the speed of data propagation on each residual block by utilizing identity mapping as the skip connections and after-addition activation. This eases

The baseline EfficientNet architecture is based on a new scaling method for increasing model capacity by scaling the dimensions of width, depth, and resolution of the model using a simple compound co- efficient (Tan and Le, 2019). Neural Architecture Search (NAS) is then used to design a new baseline model using MBConv blocks and scale it using the compound coefficient to create EfficientNet (Elsken et al., 2019). This new family of models achieve state-of-the-art performance on ImageNet dataset while having a far smaller model and faster con- verging speed (Tan and Le, 2019). This family of models are then

Code implementation of each model is achieved using Keras (Chollet, 2015) and TensorFlow library that provides fully built models with pretrained weights on ImageNet dataset. Model training and infer- ence will be performed on the Google Colab Notebook (Pro Version), which has a minimum specification of NVIDIA P100 or T4 as GPU, mem- ory up to 25GB, and CPU Xeon Processor @ 2.3GHz based on availability.

augmentation dataset resulted in varying performance changes. The highest accuracy of 93.81% is obtained when trained without any aug- mentation, using SGD optimizer, whereas using RMSprop optimizer re- sulted in the lowest accuracy out of all model combinations, with an accuracy of 18.56%.

The best test accuracy is achieved by the EfficientNetV2B0 and EfficientNetV2M model with RMSprop optimizer, trained on the dataset with brightness augmentation. This combination achieved 97.94% accu- racy. The CoAtNet family scored on average lower test accuracy differ- ence than other models, indicating higher generalization capability towards augmented data than other family models.

Using contrast augmentation on the dataset resulted in decreased model accuracy. Only 2 out of 12 observed data have higher accuracy than their normal data counterpart, namely ResNet101v2 with RMSprop and CoAtNet-0 with Adam optimizer. Based on observations, increasing contrast too much will result in contextually incorrect Nem- atodes images, i.e., Nematodes images that cannot be obtained from real-world photos. The increasing in contrast will also increase the clar- ity of some features of specimens that are not discriminatory between Genus. This could cause the model to learn irrelevant features of a Genus.

Image blurring with gaussian blur is expected to help models learn about the general morphological characteristics of each Genus of Nem- atodes. Augmentation of gaussian blur caused some model-optimizer combinations to have increased accuracy. Based on observations, the process of image blurring in the dataset produces the variations needed by the model to study the features of the target class nematodes. This may be due to the selection of parameter values in the dataset

Model performances using SGD optimizer result in varying accuracy. In the CoAtNet model results, the SGD optimizer produces the highest accuracy compared to other optimizers on the dataset without augmen- tation. However, models with the SGD optimizer significantly decrease accuracy when using augmented datasets, for example, in the ResNet101v2 and EfficientNetv2M models. This is presumably because the parameters used do not match the augmented data. The decrease in performance when using augmentation data shows that SGD opti- mizer is more sensitive to changes in the dataset. SGD optimizer demands more fine-tuning on its parameters to achieve high perfor- mance based on the model and dataset used.

Based on research by (Choi et al., 2019), general optimizers like Adam should not produce worse results than specialized optimizers like SGD and other optimizer variations. Adam optimizer and other adaptive gradient methods have performance comparable to SGD or momentum with proper parameter settings (Choi et al., 2019). The

All model performance data are then sorted to determine the best combination of the model, optimizer, and augmentation. Remember that the model's performance obtained from the test may differ in real-world applications. Because the amount of data for each class in the dataset is not balanced, the model with the highest test accuracy does not always have the highest mean class accuracy. A higher mean class accuracy value can be interpreted as a better model's capability to learn all class features than other models.

It can be concluded that the simultaneous use of various types of augmentation does not always increase the model's performance. Some models achieve high accuracy using augmentation or without augmentation. In this case, augmentation is used more to vary data col- lection conditions, i.e., microscope illumination level, specimen orienta- tion, or blurry photo. However, in the aspect of Nematodes morphology, the augmentation used did not significantly increase the variation in the morphological characteristics of each class. These augmentations can- not improve the model's ability to generalize classification problems based on the morphology of each class.

Using this proposed approach, plant-parasitic nematodes can be identified faster and more reliable. As explained in the previous para- graph, the system only needs five seconds to give the result of identifi- cations with an accuracy reach of up to 97.94%. The system's limitation is that it can only recognize the nematodes in perfect and undamaged conditions, as the dataset only represents those conditions. However, future research will be conducted to meet others' circumstances.

ResNet101V2, CoAtNet-0, EfficientNetV2B0 and EfficientNetV2M were explored. Deep learning techniques in image-based classification are promising and advance the automation of the nematode identification process. This work demonstrated the capability of using deep learning models to identify plant-parasitic nematodes commonly found in Indonesian soil. The performance of each of the tested models obtained satisfactory results. The exemplary performance for each model results from combining several optimizer functions (Adam, SGD, and RSMProp) and the augmentation process (Flip, Brightness, Contrast, Gaussian Blur, and Gaussian Noise). Based on the selected model vari- ants (ResNet101v2, CoAtNet0, EfficientNetV2B0, and EfficientNetV2M), the EfficientNetV2B0 and EfficientNetV2M models achieved the best performance on the dataset used, with the highest accuracy of 97.94%. Both of the best models were implemented using RMSProp optimizer and brightness augmentation. The final contribution provides an inte- grated deep learning model as a web-based application that Indonesia's prospective agriculturists can use directly. Further work is still needed to improve model accuracy and reliability. Future work will focus on the following:

