On-time recognition and early control of the stresses in the paddy crops at the booting growth stage is the key to prevent qualitative and quantitative loss of agricultural yield. The conventional paddy crop stress recognition and classification activities invariably rely on human experts identifying visual symptoms as a means of categoriza- tion. This process is admittedly subjective and error-prone, which in turn can lead to incorrect actions being taken in stress management decisions. The work presented in this paper aims to design a deep convolutional neural network (DCNN) framework for automatic recognition and classification of various biotic and abiotic paddy crop stresses using the field images. The work has adopted the pre-trained VGG-16 CNN model for the au- tomatic classification of stressed paddy crop images captured during the booting growth stage. The trained models achieve an average accuracy of 92.89% on the held-out dataset, demonstrating the technical feasibility of using the deep learning approach utilizing 30,000 field images of 5 different paddy crop varieties with 12 dif- ferent stress categories (including healthy/normal). The proposed work finds applications in developing the de- cision support systems and mobile applications for automating the field crop and resource management practices.

The paddy crop cultivation is an integral part of Indian agricultural economy ranking first in the area of cultivation with 43.92 million hect- ares with the production of 111.50 million tons (Anonymous, 2018). Al- though the overall numbers are impressive, the rice production has come under increased pressure in Asia due to population growth and changing socio-economic factors. The major paddy producing belts in Asia regions achieves only 40% of total production efficiency due to damage caused by drought, diseases, and pests. A more integrated ap- proach involving optimum crop improvement and resource manage- ment practices such as nutrient management, irrigation regime, and other agronomic management factors for paddy crop with the existing farmers' practices is a potential option for minimizing the crop yield gap (Nutan et al., 2020; Alam et al., 2013).

The leaf injury and leaf color variation are the two visual scoring symptoms used in the classification and determination of the stress cat- egories. The trained personnel visually observe these symptoms as a qualitative assessment to determine the stress types. This visual inspec- tion of an individual leaf is subjective, time-consuming, destructive sometimes, and tedious by nature. For identification of plant Nitrogen

images and the classifier dependency on the handcrafted features causes lack of automation. In recent years, the deep convolutional neu- ral networks (DCNN) have shown the impressive results in many image classification tasks without using an expert designed or handcrafted features (Singh et al., 2018; Mohanty et al., 2016). This brings the desire of adopting deep learning in computer vision to develop a comprehen- sive paddy plant stress recognition system which could be used as an ef- fective tool in constructing crop management strategies. To know the state-of-the-art in automation of paddy and allied crop stress recogni- tion and classification using a deep learning approach, a survey is made and the gist of a survey is given as under.

Sambuddha et al. (2018) have proposed a deep machine vision- based approach for identification, classification, and quantification of eight soybean plant stresses, including both biotic and abiotic using 25,000 images of stressed and healthy leaflets in the fields. The overall classification accuracy of 94.13% is achieved by the developed deep CNN model. Konstantinos (2018) has developed five different deep CNN models which include AlexNet, AlexNetOWTBn, GoogLeNet, Overfeat and VGG for the identification of plant disease combinations using the simple leaves images of healthy and diseased plants. The image dataset comprises 87,848 individual leaf images from 58 different

The literature survey has revealed that the researchers have exten- sively used the deep learning techniques for plant or crop disease recog- nition and classification. In all the works, individual plant leaf images have been used for the disease or stress recognition and classification. But, the diseases or stresses can occur in all parts of the plants apart from the leaves. Moreover, there has not been any comprehensive study and referable results on recognition and classification of paddy crop biotic and abiotic stresses using field images yet. It is also under- stood from the field experts and the survey that the paddy crops are more susceptible to different stresses during the booting growth stage and the severe stress at this growth stage can cause irrecoverable dam- age to the plants resulting in reduced yield. This brings the desire of de- veloping a sophisticated deep learning framework for paddy plant stress recognition and classification system which could be used as an effective tool in implementing crop management strategies.

The experimental paddy fields are situated at All India Co-ordinate Rice Improvement Project (AICRIP), Mugad, University of Agricultural Sciences, Dharwad, India. The study area is categorized as the dry zone with the annual rainfall ranges between 464.5 and 785.7 mm. The soil is medium to deep black clay in larger areas and sandy loam in a small portion with high organic matter content. Sixty experimental farmlands were considered for the individual paddy crop stress analysis.

In consultation with the University of Agricultural Sciences, Dharwad, Karnataka State, India, five certified and popular paddy varie- ties, namely, Jaya, Abhilasha, Mugad Suganda, Mugad 101 and Mugad Siri are selected as experimental grain samples. The grain samples are having 100% physical and genetic purity. The collected paddy grains were sown separately in a raised bed nursery (direct seeding) as per the standard guidelines. All the necessary precautions were taken to maintain a uniform plant population of each variety and the plants were grown under controlled nutrient conditions. These paddy crop va- rieties were challenged by all the considered 11 stress types and the ob- servations were carried out under conditions favoring normal growth and expression of all the crop stress symptoms to fulfill the objectives

average stress classification accuracies of 95.08% and 90.75% are ob- tained for the paddy crop varieties Mugad 101 and Jaya, respectively. The trained models achieve an average stress classification accuracy of 92.89% on the held-out dataset, demonstrating the technical feasibility of using the deep learning approach utilizing 30,000 field images of five different paddy crop varieties with twelve different stress catego- ries (including healthy/normal).

In the present work, an attempt has been made to automate the rec- ognition and classification of paddy crop stresses using the on field im- ages and it has been successfully demonstrated by employing the deep learning techniques. The approach presented is applicable to 11 classes of biotic and abiotic stresses from 5 different paddy crop varieties. The best performing pre-trained deep learning model VGG-16 has been used in the classification task. The maximum average stress classifica- tion accuracy of 95.08% has been achieved using the VGG-16 by learning over 6000 images of Mugad 101 paddy crop variety. The results

obtained are encouraging as the work considers more number of paddy crop stress classes and the varieties than in the reported works. But still, there is a scope for improvement. The stress classification per- formance of the VGG-16 model will be compared with the similar state- of-the-art models such as ResNet, GoogLeNet, Inception-v3, and LeNet as a future scope. The work carried out is challenging in terms of high ir- regularity in an outdoor environment. The generality of the proposed approach can make it applicable to a wide range of field crops, such as wheat, maize, barley, soybean etc. The effects of environmental condi- tions such as extreme temperatures and soil factors, the presence of combinatorial stresses, the quantification of stresses, and the prediction

