Remote sensing provides some of the cheapest and sometimes open exploration data. A diversity of remote sensing platforms includes satellite-based remote sensing and are being leveraged for many pur- poses (Rajesh, 2004; Song et al., 2020; Ge et al., 2020; Shirmard et al., 2022). From a trans-disciplinary perspective (a data-centric manner that

is unspecific to any particular discipline), these types of data are modern (machine-readable and of high quality) and abundant (combined with sufficient velocity to be near or at the level of big data). Such types of data are a critical input into data-centric laboratories, which can rapidly consume data and depend on the availability of timely geoscientific data (e.g., dry labs; Ghorbani et al., 2022, 2023). Other benefits of remote sensing data include their broad (spatial and temporal) coverage and

which created a large spatial discrepancy between the Sentinel data and the geochemical data, thus preventing spatial data fusion (integration) (Abdalla, 2016) using the Sentinel data. Instead, Landsat data were used to optimize the spatial alignment. After optimizing the spatial alignment of the geochemical and remote sensing datasets, the higher-resolution Sentinel data were used for predictive modelling. Although hyper- spectral data are also available, we employed multispectral data for two reasons: (1) multispectral data have a higher spatial resolution, which is important in our case to maximize the amount of training data; and (2)

the feature space. If we had employed hyperspectral data from similar sources as compared with the multispectral data, the reduction of spatial resolution from 10 m to 30 m implies that training data would be approximately 1/9th of the original volume. This would be greatly exacerbated by the increase in the number of bands in hyperspectral data relative to multispectral data due to the curse of dimensionality, if each band was treated as a machine learning feature (Trunk, 1979; Chandrasekaran and Jain, 1974; McLachlan, 2004). In other applica- tions where these factors are not problematic, then hyperspectral data may be used instead of multispectral data.

7. The panchromatic band (band 8), cirrus cloud band (band 9) and the TIRS bands were excluded as their resolutions are substantially lower than those of bands 1 to 7. Similarly, bands 1 to 12, except for 1, 9 and 10, were used for the Sentinel data.

The remote sensing data were pre-processed using the Rasterio and GEEMAP Python libraries (Wu et al., 2019; Wu, 2020) and consisted of radiometric calibration, atmospheric correction, geometric correction through an affine translation and noise removal. For mineral exploration and lithological classification, radiometric correction is important to minimize pixel error in spectral data (Rajendran and Nasir, 2014; ex- amples in Cooley et al., 2002; Salem et al., 2016). Radiometric

calibration optimized remote sensing images for best radiance, reflec- tance or brightness temperatures. For this purpose, the remote sensing data were processed using the first-principles-based Fast Line-of-Sight Atmospheric Analysis of Spectral Hypercubes (FLAASH) method, which can correct wavelengths up to 3 m in the visible, near-infrared and short-wave infrared ranges (ENVI, 2009). For our data, the trop- ical atmospheric and rural aerosol models were used for the FLAASH algorithm (Manakos et al., 2011). Therefore, spectrometer radiance data was converted to reflectance data. Band rescaling is a common pro- cedure for remote sensing data, if the data would be used for band ratio analysis (e.g., Pohl and Van Genderen, 2014; Salem et al., 2016).

Geochemical data containing concentrations of the target (gold [Au]) need to be integrated with remote sensing data, such that the fused data are in the form of paired features-and-label format (He et al., 2010; e.g., Aiazzi et al., 1999; Bannari et al., 2016), in preparation for predictive modelling. Data fusion has been used for other similar tasks,

such as lithological mapping (Wang et al., 2021). Before data fusion (Abdalla, 2016), remote sensing and geochemical data exist in different datasets with different projections and a spatial offset. Silbanye-Stillwater supplied the geochemical data in two forms: (1) drill core data of Au assays; and (2) a geostatistical resource model derived from (1) and additional grab sampling. The data characterize the resource contained within selected areas of the TSF. The geostatistical model augmented the primary drill core (and grab sample, which were unavailable for this study) data by providing a high-resolution 3D point cloud that is resolution-biased towards the shallower depths. The augmented geochemical data are a variable density 3D resource model composed of a scatter cloud of 276,622 gridded points at a resolution of

there would be non-trivial spatial relationships between the band am- plitudes and Au grades. In particular, while we expected Au grades to correlate with local band amplitudes in general, the more detailed variations would be nonlinear and potentially counterintuitive (e.g., higher band amplitudes do not always lead to higher Au grades).

these areas with low Au grades. Although we could have presented only results pertaining to the interior of the TSF, we wanted to understand algorithmic behaviour over terrain that was vastly dissimilar to those in the training data. This is important because manual verification of the nature of physical locations (whether they are comparable to terrain in the training data) cannot always occur, especially in a remote setting. Thus, removing all terrain unseen in any training is not always practical or even desirable, given the use of remote sensing over inaccessible locations.

significantly so where the numerical ranges exceed that covered by the training data (and hence extrapolation is expected to occur). This is more important for algorithms that extrapolate poorly, such as the random forest algorithm. Although in the case of remote sensing data, it is not apparent in general that unsampled terrain would exhibit re- sponses that are numerically outside of the training data. An implication of this observation combined with the prediction results is that where the physical location is inaccessible (and coincidentally where remote sensing is more useful), verification of the representativeness of the training data to the deployment area would be a challenge.

