This paper presents a Thermomagnetic Motor. The design of the motor is based on a thermal-magnetic coupled dynamic model, which is obtained by assuming the use of a ferromagnetic material working at temperatures near the curie point. The motor is modeled in terms of both its magnetic as well thermal properties (magnetic permeability and thermal conductivity) and the thermal processes are supposed to be influenced by the thermal conductivity, the convection and the advection. An analytical expression of the generated torque, which links this quantity to the magnetic, thermal and geometrical parameters of the generated torque is given. A design of a machine, based on this theory is proposed and the related performances are numerically simulated. The motor has been built and its rotor has been manufactured by using Gadolinium. An experimental verification of the performances is reported.

The use of new forms of energy can strongly help to satisfy the constantly increasing demand of energy [1- 4].The purpose of this paper is to show that a Thermomagnetic Motor which can rotate continously and has useful mechanical characteristics is feasible. Such a motor could be coupled to an electric generator to produce electrical energy. A thermomagnetic motor is a motor that directly converts thermal energy into kinetic energy. This kind of motor is also named Curie motor [5- 6].

In this type of motor the driving force is generated by a thermally induced permeability difference in two areas of the rotor. More precisely, the heating of one side of the rotor modifies locally the permeability of the soft magnetic material in comparison with the cool area of the rotor and this permeability difference can generate a force if the rotor is placed in a magnetic field. This force can be enhanced if the hot side temperature of the rotor is above the Curie's temperature of the magnetic material and the cold side under this temperature. If the geometry and the cooling/heating system of the motor allows to continuously keep the temperature, a continuous driving force is generated.

Unfortunately. the traditional ferromagnetic materials have very high Curie's temperature and therefore their ferromagnetic phase transition cannot be used. As a result Curie motors built by using traditional materials have very poor performances.Experimental realization of the motor has been shown several times [6-7], most of the applications presents a reciprocating motion and in all the experimental applications a relatively low speed and a very low torque have been obtained. The objective of this paper is to show that a rotating Curie motor which presents useful mechanical characteristics is feasible.

The main characteristics of this design is that the thermal coupling between the rotor and the heat sources has been maximized, by maximizing the coupling surfaces. As a result, the structure of the rotor is obtained by using several tubes installed along a circumference. The tubes perform to task: they contain the ferromagnetic material which undergoes to the ferromagnetic transition and they allow to maximize the heat exchange.

The tube consists of two regions separated by two layers: in the inner region is contained the cooling fluid, in the external region the ferromagnetic material, the inner layer is made of aluminum and the external layer of plastic material. The function of the aluminum is to shield the fluid from infrared rays and to let the ferromagnetic material follow the optimum temperature cycle by maximizing the heat exchange and therefore the torque production. In fig. 4 the section of the of the tube is shown.

In fig. 5 motor rotates clock wise.In fig. 6 it is shown the temperature field when a temperature difference of 10[K] is continuosly kept between the hot and cold side. The field temperature has been calculated by using a multiphysics simulation tool.

The machine designed has been built. The rotor of the machine has been built by inserting inside the tube GD powder. The hot and cold spots have been obtained by using the heating system described in the previous sectons. Two tests have been performed: the measurement of the stand still torque versus the heat flow and an acceleration curve.

Eq.1 shows that advection causes a reduction of the generated temperature difference (the last term in eq.1) and consequently of Iq and of the generated torque. Formally speaking advection plays the role of the back electromotive force term. By assuming that  is equal to one, equation of motion of rotor is in this case read:

where I is the inertia of the rotor. Eq. (2) can be analytically. Fig.7 compares the experimental acceleration curve with the solution of eq.2, one can see that the behaviour of the angular speed is correctly described from the theory here presented. However, it must be stressed that the parameters present in eq. 2 has not been calculated from first principles or deducted from numerical tools but have been adapted by a best fit technique on the experimental data.

In this paper a Curie motor has been presented. The mathematical model used to design the motor has been presented and the dq theory of the Curie motor has been explained . It is shown, how the temperature difference plays a fundamental role for torque generation and that the temperature difference is governed by both thermal conduction as well as advection in the rotor. It has been shown that the motor can rotate continuously and that a torque Finally, an experimental validation of the theory has been presented.

