With the introduction of sophisticated algorithms, the field of signal processing has experienced enormous diversification of late. In addition to this, design of hardware efficient digital systems has grown sufficient interest amongst the researchers in recent past. In this article, an attempt has been made to realize hardware friendly powers-of-two FIR filter by using an evolutionary computation, called Self-organizing Random Immigrants Genetic Algorithm (SORIGA). In connection to this, this work makes one comparative study amongst various multiplier-less FIR filters in terms of hardware complexity when implemented on an FPGA chip. Finally, supremacy of the proposed design has firmly been established by comparing its hardware cost with many of the state-of-the-art powers-of-two FIR filters.

problem may be solved by considering multiplication operation as repeated addition and hence substituting the filter coefficients as sequence of shifts and additions. These multiplier-less filters are less power hungry and require less hardware blocks for its implementation [1-2]. In connection to this, SPT representation of filter coefficients is very much popular where the effect of multiplier is substituted by means of adders and delay elements only [3-8].

In this communication, we have employed Self-organizing Random Immigrants Genetic Algorithm (SORIGA) for the design of multiplier-less low-pass FIR filters. Designed filter has been implemented on real time hardware and the requirement of resulting hardware blocks like digital gates, latches, buffers and so on has been calculated using XILINX Design Suite 12.3 software.

The parameter ܾ௠௞ does not put any overheads as far as the computational or hardware complexity is concerned since, for every ݇ and ݉, it keeps the term ʹି௠Ǥ ݔሺ݊ െ ݇ሻ intact or make it zero depending upon its assignment over the binary space. The term ʹି௠, when multiplied with ݔሺ݊ െ ݇ሻ, causes the multiplier to get shifted right by ݉ bits. For an input word length of ܹ, allowable maximum word length of the product ʹି௠Ǥ ݔሺ݊ െ ݇ሻ thus becomes ሺܹ ൅ οሻ. As a matter of fact, resulting complexity from the architecture of full- adder is proportionately related to ሺܹ ൅ οሻ in accordance with equation (5).

In order to synthesize linear phase low-pass FIR filter, tap coefficients are chosen to be symmetric around its central coefficient. Proposed scheme has accumulated all such ܮہΤʹۂ different binary vectors into a single row vector of length ࣦ ൌ ܮہΤʹۂǤο which has been regarded as a single chromosome ࣜ in the process of evolutionary computation. Being a population-based algorithm, our design strategy generates Զ such chromosomes randomly of length ࣦ which form the pool of potential solution. Based upon the fitness of individual chromosome, subsequent genetic operations like selection, cross-over and mutation are carried out subsequently in accordance with the steps of SORIGA. This has been symbolically outlined as follows:

Selection of competent chromosomes from the pool of Զ such members is executed on the basis of their individual fitness which is considered to be the degree of proximity with the ideal response. Proposed algorithm calculates this fitness as an inverse of the maximum difference between the designed and ideal frequency response of the low-pass filter and makes an attempt to minimize this difference to a significant extent. In this connection, maximum difference over the entire frequency band of interest has been regarded as the cost function of the individual chromosome.

This section demonstrates the outcome of the proposed algorithm analytically. Since the design incorporates evolutionary algorithm, convergence characteristics of our proposition has been depicted in Fig. 1 below which exhibits the variation of averaged cost function with the number of iterations for three different values of cross-over probability. Size of population has been considered as 100 in the entire analysis.

It can be well apprehended from the above comparison that the proposed filter yields more attenuation in transition and stop-band region of frequency characteristics. As for example, at a frequency of 0.65 rad/pi, SORIGA-optimized filter produces an attenuation of about 193.9 dB while the filters designed in [6], [7], [8] and [15] yields approximately 151.6 dB, 180.3 dB, 157.1 dB and 120.6 dB attenuation respectively.

It can be unambiguously observed from Table 1 that the proposed architecture outperforms most of the state-of-the-art multiplier-less FIR filters by a large margin in terms of the hardware blocks. However, performance of the proposed SORIGA-optimized filter is slightly inferior to that of [7] in terms of 2-input AND, flip-flop and I/O buffer counts. Architecture of the proposed filter as obtained using XILINX Design Suite 12.3 has been depicted in Fig. 3 below.

This article deals with design of a multiplier-less low-pass FIR filter has been carried out by means of a recently proposed evolutionary optimization algorithm, called Self-organizing Random Immigrants Genetic Algorithm (SORIGA). Effectiveness of the optimization technique has been evaluated in terms of its convergence speed. Moreover, the supremacy of the proposed design has been established in terms of frequency response of the filter. Furthermore, tap coefficients of the designed filter have been encoded as sums of powers-of-two and implemented on a real time hardware chip using XILINX Design Suite 12.3. It

