The traditional land area measurement technology, in the past, has been on simple of arrows or tapes as measurement tools, and the area is general rules, but if meeting irregular shape or large plot, these tools are not so precise as other advanced ones. On the other hand, in modern society, many aspects are closely related to area measurement, for instance, farm machinery homework charges, farmland contracting measurement, enterprise land tax, etc. So it is difficult to meet the requirements if still using the traditional measuring methods, and the digital measurement method is effective to resolve that problem.

Any point’s three-dimensional coordinates caculated in the front can be regarded as x, y, z, take the x, y as the projection in the XOY plane. Due to little latitude variation, all latitudes can be regarded varying around the average latitude. then the only working needed to do is to calculate the area of projection, according to a series of two-dimensional coordinates for Sreality  Sprojection / sin(longitude) , during which we must utilize the Green’s Calculus Formula. As shown in figure 4, regional D is a close area surrounded by polygons A1,A2…… , and set its area as A.

The GPS data is mainly received by the hardware Gstar-89m-J satellite receiving engine, which gets current GPS data around the location every short interval. Then it can read the information of latitude, longtitude and height by the data. GPS data conversion formulas as the ®Ľľhave shown. As to data storage, dynamic data storage is used in the scheme combined with area calculation formula .To display, call the program after the finish of calculation of area, assume the attachment between the last survey point and starting point which composes a simulative polygons to display before a not complete measurement, which can provide access to view the area during the measurement.

From the above table of data, it is known that the measurement area differs from the actual area in some errors, but this error is not very big, the minimum error is 0.2635%, the maximum error is 3.086%. At the same time we can calculate the average error is 1.172496%.

To improve the accuracy, the author thinks that the following aspects can be lucubrated: 1.Take the average number of latitude as the projection latitude to reduce the errors in the conversion formulas. 2. Take the average height as the set height, do not fix on a certain height value.3.Use more sophisticated GPS reciever.4.Use the optimal algorithm, so as to improve the accuracy of conversion value and area value, which, however, is difficult to achieve for it is not so easy to come up with.

Methods based on the GPS land area measurement have developed for irregular measurement instruments. The experimental results show that the instrument is able to quickly and efficiently achieve the function of the land area of irregular measurement. And for some projects related to area, the instrument, whose prospect is inestimable, has special application value.

