huge economical loses. Among different processes of the cascade, will be released CO2 and H2S, which will be used for food products (conservation) and medical purposes. The hybrid system, combing of the middle enthalpy geothermal waters, with the solar panels, based on the fact that the Albanian climate allow such a thing (there are more than 280 sunny days on the area), will improve the economic efficiency of the project.

It was thought by the group of authors, that the best and more efficient way to use the geothermal waters of Kozani-8 well is the constructions of a multicenter. The center will include the SPA, massage and fitness center, open and closed pools (with different sizes and temperatures), greenhouse, aquaculture cultivation pools, conference rooms etc. The center will be heated through the geothermal direct use (through the installation of the heat exchangers) Ingersoll et al., 1950, while for the cooling will be installed a geothermal heat pump, Harlow & Klapper, 1952. The roof will be covered will solar panels, whose will provide the

sanitary water and also a part of them, will circulate the geothermal water, increase its temperature, allowing so the electricity production (the hybrid system). This electricity will serve for the lighting system of the center (green energy). In the Fig. 2, is showed the frontal and lateral view of the center, while in the Fig. 3, the principal sketch of the cascade and the hybrid system.

The proposed centre will have several pools: 1 geothermal pool (designed as a natural pond, sized 10*8*0.5 m, water temperature 38°C-degasified); 1 open Olympic pool (sized 50*23*3 m, water temperature 30°C); 1 sweet water pool (sized 10*5*1.5 m-escalate, water temperature 38°C-degasified, lightly closed); 1 kids sweet water pool (sized 5*3*0.5 m-escalate, water temperature 30°C). The criteria for pool designing are: psychological and physiological comfort, roads width 1-3 m, height of the closed pools 4 m, temperature & humidity level, easy maintenance and the noise level below 60 dB. The thermal loads, based on their nature and effect on the thermal balance, can be calculated as loses or thermal increment. The heat loses of the system are influenced by a number of factors including the number of the guests, their physical activity, the

super dimensioning. In the Fig. 4 is showed the water circulation scheme for the pools. On the first cascade the water will be used for house-heating and also for pools. The water discharged by the geothermal and hot water pool (38°C) will be used for the spirulina cultivation. On the first heat exchanger the water supply should be 22.69 t/h of water, for an installed capacity of 512 kW, Kodhelaj 2012. This amount of energy will be transmitted through the sweet water, heated at the level of 45-50°C. On the second heat exchanger are needed 15 [t/h of water] for an installed capacity of 480 kW. The water temperature in this heat exchanger should be in the range of 40-50°C, Kodhelaj 2012.

