A novel precursory wave detector by using liquid-suspension principle and super-low-frequency(SLF) sound signal detection technology in submarine is presented, then the device of earthquake precursory wave detection and the corresponding software are developed. The detection devices were placed respectively in Ziwu, Qianling and Louguan in Shaanxi Province, in more that a year, all the SLF-acceleration signals were recorded continuously in real-time; A contrast analysis was made between the abnormal precursory waves and the following earthquake events. The results show that the accuracy, sensitivity and specificity of this method in earthquake prediction are 72.08%, 39.06% and 81.73%, respectively.

A novel liquid-suspension precursor wave detector was realized based on a sound wave test technology based on the movement of the submarine and was deployed respectively at Ziwu, Qianling, Louguan of Shaanxi Province for more than a year to collect the ultralow-frequency acceleration precursor wave consecutively. Then the collected data were preprocessed according to certain rules. The abnormal signals and the occurrence of the earthquake were compared and the relationship between them was analyzed.

A novel liquid-suspension principle was applied to develop a long-period three-axis signal sensor with high sensitivity, ultra low-frequency, and wide frequency band. The operating principle is that when the long- period precursor wave is detected, the subtle and slow fluctuation state will be captured by a conductive liquid and the mechanical signals will be transformed into electrical signals in three directions as the output of the sensor(see Fig. 1). The sensor is not affected by ground-to-air electromagnetic signals, which increased the bandwidth and signal-to-noise ratio of the recorded signals and provided reliable technique support for the live detection of precursor wave.

Based on liquid-suspension ultra low-frequency signal recording sensor mentioned above, EXI-3000 dynamic precursor wave recorder and MTROL-1.0 signal analyzing software were further developed, providing credible device and technique foundation for the following research. The appearance of the recorder is shown in Fig. 2.

In order to locate the source of the precursor wave, two collection sites are needed at least. The signal recorders were deployed at three sites, namely Ziwu, Qianling(in Qian County), Louguan(in Zhouzhi County), to record precursor waves by Earthquake Monitoring Center of Shaanxi Earthquake Bureau. The geographic distribution of the recorders is shown in Fig. 3.

The recording was from May 25, 2010 to May 31, 2011, during which 372 days’ data were collected. Due to malfunctions of the devices, some data were missed for a part of time. In order to locate the epicenter by the time difference of the same precursor wave arriving at different stations, data from two stations are needed at least. Therefore, after eliminating the data collected at only one location, 283 days’ data are available for analysis; each day’s data are from two or three stations in two or three channels.

Normally, no abnormal wave appears in the recorded waveform and no earthquake happens several days later, which is shown in Fig. 4(a); if any precursor wave is recorded, the wave amplitude will significantly increase, as shown in Fig. 4(b). The recording channels are shown at top left in Fig. 4, at top right are the waveforms from all channels, at bottom left is the frequency spectrum of the signal from a single channel and at bottom right is its time frequency distribution.

To find the universal earthquake catalogue. The catalogue comes from the China Earthquake Networks[4-6]. Appearing moment of the precursor wave is defined as the initial time; all the earthquakes above 4.5 magnitude in China and 5 magnitude in China’s bordering countries within 72 hours after the initial time are summarized.

True positive(TP) stands for the first category, fake positive(FP) stands for the second category, true negative(TN) stands for the third category, and fake negative(FN) stands for the fourth category. Obviously, in our study, TP = 25, TN = 179, FP = 40, FN = 39. Therefore, the values of the three indexes are: accuracy 72.08%, sensitivity 39.06%, and specificity 81.73%.

Previous research has shown that plenty of tiny dislocation or rupture emerges in the epicenter and the neighboring medium shell before a great earthquake happens. Connection of a large number of tiny rupture and further development of the dislocation will lead to bigger rupture and greater dislocation. Before the main rupture, there will be a longtime creep and grind of the fault, the crack becomes unstable and expand, which eventually cause an earthquake. Before an earthquake, there will be a slow and steady expansion and unceasing secondary rupture or tiny rupture of the fault. The creep and grind of the rupture and fault may be the origin of the precursor waves, which have close relationships with the main rupture of the earthquake.

Under the support of earthquake monitoring center of Shaanxi Earthquake Bureau, earthquake precursor wave recording devices based on liquid-suspension principle were placed at Ziwu, Qianling, Louguan respectively and continuous signal recording had been implemented for over a year. Comparing with the propagation speed of the precursor waves, the three data collection stations are too close to each other, which has a certain impact on locating the epicenter. Accordingly, recording devices were relocated in Gansu, Henan, Sichuan and Shaanxi, which are relatively far away from each other. The new data recording process has started from July 21, 2011.

