dissemination. It helps to transact information timely, rapidly and easily. Identity theft and identity fraud are referred as two sides of cybercrime in which hackers and malicious users obtain the personal data of existing legitimate users to attempt fraud or deception motivation for financial gain. E-Mails are used as phishing tools in which legitimate looking emails are sent making the genuine users identity with legitimate content with malicious URLs. It helps to steal consumers' personal data such as user names, account numbers, passwords and other financial account credentials. Spam E-Mails emerges or transforms as Phishing mails. Spoofed Mails plays a vital role in which the hackers pretends to be a legitimate sender posing to be from a legitimate organization which divulges the user to give his personal credentials. The content may escape from Content based filters or the email may be without any body of the message except malicious URL in it. This paper identifies malicious URLs in email through reduced feature set method.

Age of the domain is used to identify when malicious websites are hosted such that they have less age or relatively new to obtain the user credentials. They will be recently registered sending more mails and some domains may not be available even at the time of checking. It obtains the data in the number of months and some may be in years more recently. The WHOIS lookups on the WHOIS server is used to retrieve the domain registration date, and if the domain registration entry is not found on the WHOIS server, this feature will simply return-1, deeming it suspicious.

Page rank provides the rank for the webpage and proves higher the page rank, the more important is the page. Obviously phishing web pages have less age of domain and short lived. Hence they obtain a very low page rank or page rank does not exist. Page rank is a link analysis algorithm first used by Google, in which each document on the web is assigned a numerical weight from 0 to 10, with 0 indicating least popular and 10

meaning most popular. A score value of 1 is assigned when the page rank value for a particular webpage is not available. After examining the dataset, 1000 phishing mails and 1000 legitimate mails the percentage of emails matching the Lexical and Host based features are listed in Table 2.

Abu-Nimeh et al (2007) used the “bag-of-words” approach with a list of 43 most frequent words as features in a machine learning approach. Garera et al (2007) used a set of eight sensitive words such as secure, account, update, login, sign-in, banking, confirm and Verify that frequently appear in phishing URLs. The system is trained with 1000 phishing emails to give weights to the suspicious words found in the phishing e- mails. The count of most occurring words includes Secure, Account, Update, Login, Verify ,Signin, Banking, Notify, Click, Inconvenient, password etcand their Co-Occurencesin the phishing mail.

The classifier has a training dataset of malicious phishing URLs and legitimate URLs. The probability occurrence of each feature in the dataset are calculated and their respective scores are obtained (i.e) Count up occurrence of features in the dataset and calculate the cumulative score. If Cumulative score > Threshold, consider as phishing URL else legitimate URL as illustrated in Fig2 .

Hackers bypass anti-spam filtering techniques by embedding malicious URL in the content of the messages. Hence the URL analyzer method with the help of minimized phishing feature set identifies the malicious URL in the emails. The datasets are obtained from two sourcesviz DMOZ Open Directory Project and Phishtank(2012). Phishtank is a source of blacklisted phishing URLs which admits user inputs and they are also verified by users. An E-Mail server has been configured with hMail namedas SSE Mail Server for the testing purposes. The false positive rate refers to the number of legitimate emails classified as phishing emails, and false negative rate refers to the number of phishing emails classified as legitimate. The Table 3 shows that out of 1000 Phishing mails with malicious URLs, the above results were obtained for identifying various lexical and host based features.

