This paper presents a Computer Aided Diagnosis (CAD) system that automatically classifies microcalcifications detected on digital mammograms into one of the five types proposed by Michèle Le Gal, a classification scheme that allows radiologists to determine whether a breast tumor is malignant or not without the need for surgeries. The developed system uses a combination of wavelets and Artificial Neural Networks (ANN) and is executed on an Altera DE2-115 Development Kit, a kit containing a Field-Programmable Gate Array (FPGA) that allows the system to be smaller, cheaper and more energy efficient. Results have shown that the system was able to correctly classify 96.67% of test samples, which can be used as a second opinion by radiologists in breast cancer early diagnosis.

Computer-Aided Diagnosis systems have been built to aid medical doctors in diagnosing diseases and increase patients’ quality of life. Breast cancer is a disease that is the death cause of many women around the world [1], and the development of CAD systems can help doctors in early detecting it, this being the best way to reduce the number of people that die because of this disease [2]. CAD systems for breast cancer early detection can be developed to detect and classify microcalcifications, small calcium accumulations that can be present in breast tissue and be the first sign of a tumor not perceivable in palpable examinations [3].

In order to aid radiologists in deciding whether a tumor is malignant or not, Michèle Le Gal developed a classification scheme [4] widely used in Europe [5] that differentiate microcalcifications into five types, and depending on the number and type of these elements it is possible for a radiologist to decide whether a tumor is malignant or not without the need for surgeries, avoiding their complications and reducing the need for recurrent treatment [2]. This classification scheme is based on the morphology of microcalcifications, and samples of microcalcifications from each of the five types are displayed in Fig. 1 [6].

Several papers have been published in the area of breast cancer detection, and several tools have been used to provide CAD systems a way to aid doctors in early detection of this disease, like the wavelet transform [7], ANN [8-9], the pyramid steerable transform [10] and support vector machines [11-13]. The main drawback of those CAD systems is that none of them classify microcalcifications into the five types proposed by Michèle Le Gal. Pereira proposed a method [6] that uses the Hough transform to classify them according to this classification scheme, but its classification of microcalcifications from types II and IV is not ideal.

The developed CAD system described on this paper is an embedded system whose software was developed in the C++ programming language and hardware designed with the Altera SOPC Builder. The hardware was compiled using the Altera Quartus 12.1 software and an Altera DE2-115 development board was programmed with it. Fig. 2 shows the components of the designed hardware.

The CPU component of the hardware is an Altera Nios II software processor that uses as its reset vector and exception vector the SDRAM on the board, containing 128MB of memory. There is a parallel port that communicates the board with four push buttons for user interaction. There is also a Secure Disk (SD) card reader on the board, and a Liquid Crystal Display (LCD) for displaying messages to the user. In order to user the system, the user inserts a SD card containing images to be processed on the SD card reader and chooses the one he wants to be processed using the push buttons on the board. Once the user chooses an image, it is processed by the software part of our CAD system, whose diagram is displayed on Fig. 3. The LCD shows the progress of the processing, and warns the user when it is done.

noise to these images, resulting in 210 images to test our system. We saved all test images on a SD card, connected it to the board, processed each image and collected the data. Table 2 shows the percentage of microcalcifications successfully and unsuccessfully classified as one of the five types of Le Gal classification scheme.

Results showed that the system was able to successfully classify microcalcifications from all types. During our tests no false positives were detected by the system. Also, in every test image all microcalcifications were detected, despite the addition of noise on these images. Each image took on average approximately 2.7 s to be processed and no drawbacks were found in executing the system on the Altera DE2-115 board, thus providing an option to create a CAD system that is cheaper, smaller [16] and more energy efficient [16-17] than if it was developed to be executed on regular computers.

