Shamshiri et al. (2018a) described the achievements of the latest ro- botics technology in agriculture such as the importance of incorporating advanced sensing systems, machine vision system (Joseph et al., 2019, Syed et al., 2019a, 2019b) multi-robot collaboration and the latest soft- ware tools. These advanced techniques could help in the efficient

Electronic circuit for the control of feeding conveyor. A DC motor was used to power the slat type feeding conveyor. The electronic circuit used for actuating the DC motor by continuously monitoring the output of the LED-LDR sensing unit of the feeding conveyor. The LED was con- nected to a DC power source (+12 V) through a current limiting resistor (100 K) whichproducedapointedlightsource. The LDRwaspositionedin suchawaythatthepointedlightsourcefrom LEDfellonthe LDR'ssensing surface. Thestraight-linelightbeambetweenthe LEDand LDRformedthe LOA of the robotic arm. The resistance of LDR decreased when the light beam fell on the LDR's sensing surface. A comparator (LM741) IC contin- uously compared the voltage across the LDR and a reference voltage be- tween two resistors (R3 and R4). The output voltage of the comparator produced a driving current whenever the voltage difference was high.

Forward kinematic analysis. The forward kinematic analysis was carried out using the trigonometric concept to obtain both the position and orientation of the end-effector for the given set of input joint angles and link lengths. Px, Py and Pz are the coordinates (x, y, z) of the end effector C.

mm, 220 mm, 210 mm, 220 mm and 180 mm, respectively. Positions P1 and P5 belonged to the first row. P2, P3 and P4 belonged to the sec- ond row of the feeding conveyor. The three columns in the middle of the first row were kept empty as these positions were not covered in the workspace of the robotic arm as it had to move in an arc.

Four servo motors were selected for the robotic arm out of which three servo motors for the shoulder joint, elbow joint and gripper (Hi- Tec HS-422, 6 V) and one for the base joint (Dynamixel ax-12, 12 V). A microcontroller (Arduino Uno) was used to compute the algorithm and generate a (PWM) pulse width modulation signal. A buffer IC 74LS24 was incorporated for a unit gain amplifier in an integrated cir- cuit for controlling dynamixel motor to provide pass signals or data packets. The voltage converter circuit was designed using LM317T and various components for getting output voltage in the range of 3 V to

12 V. This circuit was used for supplying current with 6 V to the three servo motors and microcontroller. Two current sensors (ACS712) were used as an overload protection device for the robotic arm. When- ever a high current was detected, a relay switch was activated to discon- nect the circuit from the main power supply.

Simulation of the robot arm for pick and place of pot seedlings. The roboticarmpathplanningandtrajectorywerevalidatedbythekinematic simulation carried out using ADAMS multibody simulation software. In order to determine the position and velocity of the robot joints during the pick and drop cycle, a kinematic diagram was constructed by provid- ingtheactuallinkparametersoftheroboticarmandtheperformancewas simulated for the input joint motion for one pick and drop cycle.

Rahul K is persuing Master of Science at Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur in Farm Machinery specialization under Agricultural and Food Engineering Department. His re- search focuses on implementation of robotics and automation in agricultural machinery. He is also interested in artificial intelligence, machine vision and mechatronic system de- sign.

