The software for innovative tool using Taguchi-methods is developed and evaluated. There are two trials in the innovative tool using Taguchi-methods; First trial is accomplished for selecting important control factors and its optimum region, and Second trial decides the optimum combination of the control factors by more detail trial using only important control factors. The optimum condition regarding cooling system for cutting was investigated for evaluating this innovation tool in the experiment. It is concluded from the result that (1) Innovative tool using the Taguchi-methods was useful for development with short-term and lower cost, and (2) This tool could quickly and exactly decide the optimum cooling condition.

Recently developments with short-term and lower cost are strongly required for shorten products life cycle. Therefore Taguchi-methods [1],[2] are used for deciding optimum process conditions. However these methods are not enough to develop a new product with short time, lower cost, high quality and high accuracy. In this research, the software for innovative tool using Taguchi-methods is developed and evaluated. There are two trials in the innovative tool using Taguchi-methods. First trial investigates rough fuctions regarding all

levers of all control factors, then important control factors and meaningless control factors were sorted with the several comments for the second trial. At that time, maximum, intermediate and minimum values for each lever of the each control factor should used for pursuit of all possibilities. Second trial decides the optimum combination of the control factors by more detail trial using only important control factors. The second trial is tried for getting the best combination using the optimum level of each control factor. The optimum condition regarding cooling system for cutting was investigated for evaluating this innovation tool in the experiment.

Control factors are equal to the design factors (See the control factors in Table 1). Noise factors are occurred for the error of function on the product (See the noise factors in Table1). Most designer can understand that the final functions of the developed product are strongly influenced for the each lever of each control factor under several noise factors. All combinations using all control factors are compressed by an orthogonal table (See the orthogonal array in Table 2).Then the experiment or the CAE analysis with influence of noise factors is performed by the orthogonal array. At last, the average and the standard deviation regarding all combinations using all control factors are calculated for the SN ratio and Sensitivity. Then most of users write the effective figure (Fig. 1) of the control factors and zealously search the combination of the control factors for large SN ratio. A product using the combination isn’t nearly influenced by noise factors.

Now, innovative development with short-term, low cost, labor saving and energy-saving is also required in the world. Therefore, in this research, the software for innovative tool using Taguchi-methods is developed and evaluated. At first, first trial investigates rough fuctions regarding all levers of all control factors, then important control factors and meaningless control factors were sorted with the several comments for the second trial. At that time, maximum, intermediate and minimum values for each lever of the each control factor should used for pursuit of all possibilities. Then second trial decides the optimum combination using the levels of the control factors by more detail trial using only important control factors. The second trial is tried for getting the best combination using the optimum level of each control factor.

The optimum levels of the control factors for the second trial were decided by using the results of the first trial. The method for selection of the optimum levels of the control factors is shown in Fig. 4. In the explanation, it suppose that the larger function is desired by everyone. The curve of Fig. 4(a) has a mountain shape, there is the optimun lever of the control factor in the region of first trial. Therefore new level 2’ is decided to the top of the mountain, new level 1’ is middle between the old level 1 and the new level 2’ , and new level 3’ is middle between the new level 2’and the old level 2. Level 1’, lavel 2’ and level 3’ are the optimum levels for the second tiral. The curve of Fig. 4(b) has a shape of graph rising to the right, there is the optimun lever of the control factor in the right region of first trial. Therefore new level 3’ is decided to the practicable large value, new level 1’ and new level 2’ devide into three regions between the new level 3’and

At last, wet cutting using strong alkaline water with air of optimum quantity was used for evaluation of the innovative tool. Experimental set-up is shown in Fig. 5. Micro bubble is always supplied for high heat transfer coefficient in strong alkaline water. The strong alkaline water with micro bubble is dew from the vessel and is supplied to the blender for air. Air is also supplied to the blender for air by the compressor. Strong alkaline water and air are mixed in the blender for air and are supplied to the nozzle for outlet.

In the manufacturing field, everyone is desired high heat transfer coefficient. Therefore heat transfer coefficient is used for the function in the proposed innovative tool. The control and noise factors for first trial are shown in Table 3. Then, the optimum quantities of strong alkaline water and air were investigated for high cooling efficiency in the experiment with Table 3. At that time, the proposed innovative tool was used for plan of the second trial.

Results of the first trial are shown in Fig. 6. There are the results of the first trial (Blue line) and the results of the recommendation area (Light green area) of the levels for 2nd trial in Fig.6. Shapes of graphs in (b) and

Hear transfer coefficient with several conditions with length L mm of hose between the blender for air and the nozzle for outlet, air pressure P MPa, quantity of flow for strong alkaline water Q l/min and distance D mm between the nozzle for outlet and the sensor were measured and were shown for comparison in Fig.7. Heat transfer coefficient 8490 W/m2K which was searched by the proposed innovative tool was the largest value in the all experiments. Therefore the proposed innovative tool is effective for innovative development in the industrial world.

