To provide a comprehensive understanding of the privacy issues and challenges in smart city applications for edge computing, we have classified them into several typical categories. Fig. 8 presents the clas- sification, and each category is described in detail in subsection 4.2.

Gaussian, Laplace mechanism, and Exponential mechanism. In subse- quent work, many mechanisms have occurred successively. The stair- case mechanism and the stage Laplace mechanism have been proposed to reduce the noise power introduced by DP. These two mechanisms can reduce the influence of data query and function computation [70]. The improved matrix Gaussian mechanism (IMGM) for matrix-valued DP has been proposed to solve the influence of data correlation [71]. The DP bounds and the corresponding central limit theorem have been proposed to solve multiple queries and iterative calculations [72]. Some re- searchers proposed the privacy amplification approach of different scenarios to reduce the loss of the DP mechanism to performance, such as the privacy amplification based on sampling, iteration, reorganisa- tion, etc.

In this section, we identify several privacy challenges in smart city applications in an edge computing environment. We begin by providing examples of privacy and security cases that have arisen in this context. We then offer a concise overview of the typical privacy challenges that smart cities face. This section focuses on addressing the following issue

30 suspects. The attackers used overseas chat tools and virtual currency to collect and sell more than 600 million pieces of personal information and illegally earned more than 8 million RMB [80]. Furthermore, the Elasticsearch server used by the British data analysis company, Polecat, leaked nearly 30 terabytes of data to the public network [81]. Privacy attacks are divided into two categories: black box attacks and white box attacks, which mainly contain membership inference attacks, recon- struction attacks, property inference attacks, and model extraction at- tacks. The main reason for this is that the server itself is not protected by any authentication or other forms of encryption. In consequence, it is of great importance to develop data privacy protection techniques for smart cities.

In the smart city application scenario, Duan et al. [82] classified data privacy issues into three categories: data privacy, information privacy, and knowledge privacy. However, the broader issue of data security has become a significant concern, encompassing data privacy, data avail- ability, and data integrity [83]. In recent years, there has been extensive research on data privacy protection to address this concern.

Anonymity technologies such as k-anonymity, t-closeness, and l-di- versity have been developed for early privacy protection. In 2002, Latanya Sweeney [84] proposed a k-anonymity model along with pol- icies for deployment to address the issue of data owners releasing private data. However, k-anonymity has been found to be insufficient in pre- venting attribute leakage. To address this, Li et al. [85] proposed the t-closeness concept, which requires the distance between two distribu- tions (the distribution for sensitive attributes in any equivalence cate- gory and the distribution of the attribute in the overall data) to not exceed a threshold t. Machanavajjhala et al. [86] introduced the l-di- versity concept, which aims to publish data without revealing sensitive information. Although these technologies provide privacy to some extent, they only offer anonymity and therefore have limitations.

Encryption technology has emerged as a primary means of protecting privacy in recent years. For instance, Xia et al. [87] developed an encryption method to safeguard sensitive data and prevent unautho- rized access. Liu [88] proposed methods for constructing a secure public-key encryption scheme, while Li et al. [89] presented a time-domain multi-authority outsourcing attribute encryption method to address data collection and sharing in edge computing. However, encryption technology has a significant disadvantage in that key man- agement and distribution can be costly and complex, limiting its prac- ticality in some contexts.

Here we analyse issues and challenges of the privacy in the edge computing environment. Privacy concerns in edge computing can be categorized into five stages of data handling in smart city applications: collection, storage, and transmission, processing, and publishing/ sharing, as depicted in Fig. 8.

vulnerable to attack [100]. The edge server provides access control for users, and the data collected by the end devices can be offloaded to other untrusted servers. The privacy challenges for data collecting in edge computing-based smart city application scenarios are summarised as follows.

In edge computing environments, the wireless transmission of data poses a significant risk of data breaches as it is susceptible to eaves- dropping and data theft by hackers. Furthermore, the distribution of devices in the network increases the potential of data breaches. As a result, ensuring the privacy of transmitted data is a major challenge in edge computing environments.

In the edge computing environment, the proliferation of devices and distributed computing has led to an increase in data interaction between devices. Furthermore, the development of data mining and analysis technologies has also increased the risk of privacy breaches. As a result, the issue of privacy protection in data release has become a significant challenge for edge computing [103]. The challenges to privacy in data publishing in this environment can be summarised as follows.

The use of edge computing in smart cities requires a higher level of privacy protection due to the increased interconnection of devices and data flow. As a result, there is a greater demand for data integrity, confidentiality, and availability. This distinguishes the privacy chal- lenges faced in smart cities from those in other scenarios, which can be attributed to the following factors.

data. Secondly, if an attacker gains control of an edge data center, all services in the area can be compromised, and useful information can be obtained through untrusted edge servers. In addition, some edge servers are not properly managed and can be easily compromised by hackers. Unlike traditional privacy protection methods such as encryption tech- nology, end devices in the edge computing environment may not meet system requirements, and excessive computing energy consumption is also a factor that needs to be considered. Therefore, privacy protection for both edge servers and end devices needs to be carefully considered. The challenges of privacy protection in the edge computing envi- ronment can be summarised as follows. Firstly, the limited resources of edge servers may affect the effective implementation of some privacy protection strategies. Additionally, the computing and transmission limitations of edge servers can result in simplified services with reduced capability. Finally, there is an increasing demand for lightweight pri- vacy protection strategies in a distributed environment, which may weaken the extent of privacy protection. Therefore, addressing these challenges is critical to ensuring the privacy and security of edge

According to the study, existing privacy-preserving techniques in the edge computing environment are displayed in Table 7, and discussions are included in sub section 5.1. The advantages of DP are summarised according to the technique characteristics and the requirements of the smart city application scenarios based on edge computing in subsection 5.2.

The first group of privacy protection methods include data distur- bance [104], data anonymity [105], and data encryption [106,107]. Data disturbance mainly adds noise and random disturbance to the original data to distort sensitive data. However, this technology cannot guarantee that the data statistics are disturbed, as well. Therefore, the data release with DP technology [44] using data disrupting technology has also appeared one after another, but the computational cost is relatively high. Data anonymization changes or publishes the data to be used in some way to prevent key information from being identified. Data anonymization is used for the published trajectories [108] and health data [109]. Nonetheless, data anonymization is unable to handle the huge size of data processing [110]. Data encryption technology trans- forms a message into meaningless cipher text through an encryption key and encryption function. Then, the plaintext was restored into the cipher text by receiver through the function and key to decryption.

In recent years, numerous researchers have proposed advanced pri- vacy protection technologies such as secure multiparty computation technology [112], private information retrieval (PIR) [113], data desensitization [114], and data cleaning technology. Secure multiparty computation is a universal cryptographic primitive that enables distributed parties to jointly compute an arbitrary functionality without revealing their private inputs and outputs [115]. Private information retrieval facilitates the retrieval of one of K pieces of information from N facsimile databases without unveiling the identity of the queried infor- mation to any single database [116]. Data desensitization reduces the sensitivity of sensitive data through substitution, distortion, and other transformations while retaining certain usability and statistical charac- teristics [117]. Data cleaning technology inspects and verifies the collected data, and the analyser can obtain accurate data by deleting duplicate information and correcting existing errors [118]. Table 7 presents a comparison of the existing privacy protection technologies.

such as a mobility support system (MSS) [119], a higher-level security transmission with multichannel communications [120], a dynamic customisable privacy-preserving model basis of Markov decision process [121], and a privacy-aware task offloading method (POM) [122]. However, traditional protection methods need to rely on stronger background relationships and reduce the data utility. Therefore, some privacy preservation methods with DP provide various advantages in the edge computing environment. For example, Meng et al. [19] designed a data collection method of location that imports a DP mechanism with random disturbance in the Voronoi diagram. The privacy-preserving mechanism can not only better meet users’ privacy needs but also

[56] proposed a DP method for preserving location privacy that reduces the computational complexity and resource consumption at the edge node. Gai et al. [124] developed a privacy-preserving mechanism for IoT and blockchain in the edge computing environment to enhance trust- worthiness and achieve optimal task allocation through DP. Addition- ally, Liu et al. [57] designed a DP framework for data release in the edge computing environment, which enhances the accuracy of queries. In summary, the main advantages of DP in edge computing are as follows.

This section focuses on the applications and implementation of DP in smart city scenarios based on edge computing [8]. We begin by intro- ducing the detailed classification of DP research for these scenarios. Then, we explore the application of DP in various stages of data man- agement in the edge computing environment, highlighting its benefits in protecting data privacy. Specifically, we focus on four stages, including data privacy in transmitting, processing, model training, and publishing. In addition, typical data privacy issues, such as location/trajectory pri- vacy protection, are also discussed. Some typical applications of smart city, such as smart manufacturing service, smart logistics, and data

management, are shown in Fig. 9. In this study, the complete course of data management from data collection to data publishing in smart city applications for edge computing is considered. The course of data management is shown in Fig. 9, which can be mainly divided into transmitting, processing, training, and publishing.

DP research in the edge computing environment has various appli- cations, including protection mechanisms, algorithm design, data management, and federated learning. In this article, we focus on privacy preservation in the context of data management, which includes various stages as shown in Fig. 9.

data. In addition, malicious attackers predict user behaviours according to the data. For example, the China Railway Service 12,306 data transmission security incident caused the leakage of 600,000 accounted and 4.1 million pieces of contact information in December 2018 [130]. Data transmission that is not properly handled can cause a great infringement on user privacy. Therefore, the privacy preservation of

edge computing environment. For secure computing methods, Shafagh et al. [134] designed a platform named Pilatus to protect the security of data transmission. Aujla et al. [135] designed a framework named SDN-aided to provide privacy-preserving with the secure grid-based cryptograph system for edge-cloud interplay data transmitting and SDN-assisted management. Shen et al. [136] showed a scheme with bilinear mapping and homomorphic encryption to judge the positional link of multi-query keywords on the transmitted data.

On the DP method, Nie et al. [59] put forward a DP tensor computing model (DPTCM) to protect the data privacy for transmitted to the cloud. They implemented the privacy of transmitting data through the flexible computing function of edge computing. At the same time, the DP method does not generate excess overhead. Hassan et al. [35] reviewed the security of data transmission with transportation systems. They

divided DP implementation into three types in the transportation sys- tem: the networks of railway freight and vehicular, the data of auto- motive manufacturer. Wang et al. [137] considered the privacy of the connected vehicles, which mainly contains the process of the vehicles transmitting data to the roadside unit and base station, such as the speed and location. They proposed a system architecture named privacy-preserving vehicular edge computing (PP-VEC) by disturbing the context information of connected vehicles to address the privacy protect issues of the transmitting process.

Data processing usually involves data mining and retrieval. Data mining is the process of extracting the potential information for data that is hidden and unknown but potentially useful from a large amount of data. The goal of data mining is to build a decision model that predicts future behaviour based on data from past actions.

In the research field of edge computing environment, some re- searchers have focused on DP to protect the privacy of data mining for the smart city application scenarios in recent years. To economise computing costs and increase efficiency, Sun et al. [30] considered that data mining applications complete the data mining task when the data are not shared by owners aspiration. They focused on the tree-based distributed data mining scheme with DP in the edge computing envi- ronment. The participants built a decision model with their data; then, they shared the model after being injected with noise. Sharma et al.

[142] proposed DP using an algorithm named fuzzy convolution neural network (DP-FCNN) to address the problem of data accessed by an un- authorized user. The data providers were responsible for injecting noise into the datasets that the data owners uploaded. The scalability, model accuracy, and processing time of DP-FCNN are showed good efficiency.

nology can solve delay problems; users retrieve the required data from the nearest edge node and reduce the delay [10]. However, when retrieving the popularity of multimedia content from a massive amount of data, network administrators need a suitable retrieval system [143]. The edge nodes bypass the central trusted system and exchange data with each other, which leads to a leakage of user privacy information. Therefore, a perfect retrieval system alone is not enough, and the data privacy protection problem in the retrieval system needs to be solved. There are many privacy protection schemes, such as anonymization, DP, and desensitization. In large-scale data, DP has little influence on pre- diction accuracy and the algorithm does not need to be considered [144]. In the foundation of the DP, Zhou et al. [61], they proposed a multimedia content retrieval based on tree privacy-preserving and trustworthy distributed. They made personalised predictions on the edge network and deployed DP and trust mechanisms combined with edge nodes. Zhou et al. [61] found that the time of the model converges to the optimal policy when the privacy level is increased to certain

[145] proposed an attack method for the training data is adjusted by conspired malicious participants in strategically. The attack made a certain dimension weight of the aggregation model is rose or fallen by the pattern. He et al. [146] designed a new attack method to compro- mise the inference data privacy in a collaborative deep learning system. They verified the effectiveness and generalisation by evaluating the attack method under different settings, models, and datasets. Ji et al.

The model training contains some privacy data for different smart city application scenarios based on edge computing environment. Therefore, the challenges of the privacy protection field with edge computing in smart city scenarios are to insure that private information are not leaked in the model training. Some researchers focus on DP technology to solve data privacy with a training model for edge computing-based smart city application scenarios. In 2010, Michael et al. [149] proposed a method with adding Laplace noise to enhance the privacy of training data. They improved the accuracy of a general class for histogram queries while guaranteeing DP. Du et al. [18] considered

OPP (output perturbation) and OJP (objective perturbation), to protect the model training data privacy, and the algorithm satisfies DP. In order to abate the computing cost of the local device, Mao et al. [150] enabled training of deep convolutional neural networks to face recognition models with the DP mechanism. They indicated that the training accu-

privacy budget ε is confirmed by fine-tuning. Both Du et al. [18] and Mao et al. [150] believed that the model effect of privacy budget ε in a certain range is the best. The former considered the privacy budget ε in

Data publication for edge computing in smart city scenarios has been a hot research topic for data analysis, which has the characteristics of dynamic, multiple sources, and large amounts. However, there are many security issues with data publishing. The attackers acquire sensitivity information using some attack models, as illustrated in Table 10.

DP applies to data publishing scenarios in various fields, such as histograms and matrix mechanisms. Dwork et al. [68] designed the Laplace mechanism with a histogram, and Laplace distribution (Lap 1 ) noise was added to the data. Su et al. [159] proposed a method named PrivPfC, which involves publishing data for classification based on DP. They use the exponential mechanism with a novel quality function. They indicate that using fewer steps to avoid spreading the privacy budget is too thin. Yan et al. [160] focused on the data published in V2G networks, and proposed DP algorithm to protect the privacy of the data release in V2G networks. They defined a variable sliding window to improve the utility of data.

anism of the Haar wavelet transform, and they added noise to the Haar coefficient. Jia et al. [162] showed an approach called StructureFirst, which uses square error and an exponential mechanism to compress the original histogram. Acs et al. [163] combined the adaptive hierarchical

clustering technique and the greedy bisection strategy to propose the method named P-HPartation. Jia et al. [162] designed a method named NoiseFirst, which obtained the optimal partitioning of data grids by adding noise and then splitting and merging. However, NoiseFirst is only applicable in the one-dimensional histogram. Therefore, Xiao et al.

[164] presented a DPCube that can obtain multidimensional V-optimi- sation histograms by combining the KD-tree and the unit division to solve the one-dimensional histogram. These five methods have common advantages that support longer-range count queries, and the query ac- curacy is high. Miao et al. [56] proposed a new noise quadtree data-basedapproach to statistical data release for moving objects. The approach satisfies the DP-preserving model. Liu et al. [102] proposed a location data and distributed data release method in the edge computing environment to preserve user privacy with the release of location data. They constructed a DP complete quadtree and adjusted the quadtree by the threshold to balance the error.

Malicious attackers can infer the address, lifestyle, social relation- ship, etc. By obtaining location data [165]. Location-based service is one of the dominating forms of edge service, and location privacy is a concern of users [166]. Tian et al. [166] proposed an eight-category classification of location-based service for edge computing-based smart city application scenarios from three dimensions, as shown in Figs. 10 and 11.

vacy. However, in the K-anonymous model, the usability of data will reduce for the sparse data, and the attackers’ background knowledge is explicit [58]. Then, the location’s privacy is protected by obfuscation. Nevertheless, the method reduces the precision and the privacy level of

In this section, edge node privacy and edge layer privacy are dis- cussed. There is a mass of individual and business edge nodes in the smart city scenarios based on edge computing [18]. Those nodes contain the ability to compute and process data. The edge node is a business

Miao et al. [56] proposed a privacy-aware framework named MEPA for edge computing, the location privacy of the edge node as an anon- ymous central server is protected. Du et al. [18] considered the privacy issue of any edge node dealing with the data. They strengthen the per- formance of privacy preservation by injecting noise to the blocked data beforehand and then computing and processing it though each edge node. Zhang et al. [175] and Zhang et al. [176] prevented the node from re-identifying the sensitive information revealed by the attackers.

In the smart city scenarios based on edge computing environment, edge layer privacy is the data privacy of edge layer servers. The data streams from the cloud and infrastructure layer are received, processed, and forwarded in the edge layer [177]. Therefore, in the operation of data processing exists some malicious attacks. For example, the data will be transmitted to malicious nodes in the edge layer [83].

layer. They proposed the Markov decision process-based a dynamic customisable model to protect privacy. Sharma et al. [142] proposed a method that implements DP using a fuzzy convolution neural network (FCNN) with a Laplace mechanism for injecting noise to the privacy leakage at the edge layer.

In summary, for edge node privacy, most research work considered the tree structure of the node in the edge computing environment. The existing method for DP demonstrates that the smaller the privacy budget is, the higher the privacy level. However, the noise increases as the privacy budget decreases. Therefore, some researchers proposed the privacy threshold to control the mean absolute error (MAS). For edge layer privacy, first, the scalability measures the system/framework to support a building number of input data. Second, the processing time measures the individual datasets in the system/framework to evaluate the performances. Finally, the accuracy evaluates the efficiency of DP with the privacy budget value. A smaller privacy budget will normally lead to lower accuracy.

Table 9 presents a comparison of existing DP methods applied to edge computing based on application scenario, privacy mechanism/al- gorithm, type of noise, type of privacy, and method of adding noise. In addition, we introduce the concept of noise distribution function, which is a probability distribution function used to add noise while minimizing data distortion and protecting privacy. Differential privacy noise dis- tribution functions, such as Laplacian and Gaussian distributions, can regulate the size and distribution of noise, achieving a balance between privacy protection and data accuracy. The choice of noise distribution function should consider the data type and application scenario.

The protection of edge computing-based smart city application sce- narios with DP has been implemented by many researchers. Neverthe- less, a great number of applications for the edge computing environment still need considerable attention. For example, edge intelligence is a new trend in the edge computing environment. Analogously, DP is combined with artificial intelligence algorithms or applications to ensure the pri- vacy of the smart city. In addition, lightweight and less complex DP algorithms require fitting into the edge computing environment. In summary, DP is an effective solution for the edge computing environ- ment, but researchers need more efforts to address all applications in smart city scenarios based on edge computing.

This paper regarding the application of DP for edge computing en- vironments in smart city scenarios contains experiments to evaluate the performance of the mechanism or algorithm. Then, the platforms/tools, common datasets, and evaluation metrics for the articles are summar- ised in Table 8, where * represents undefined or unknown. The common datasets contain the name, type, and number. As illustrated in Table 8, the evaluation metrics generally contain accuracy, efficiency, utility,

Through the summary of existing studies, we can see that DP is one of the best solutions to privacy problems in smart city applications. How- ever, there are still many deficiencies in the environment of edge computing, which are discussed in Section 7. For example, the param- eters are adjusted to improve the data utility according the datasets size. The DP algorithm cannot provide effective privacy preservation because the privacy budget cannot be adjusted. In addition, untrusted edge de- vices with intentionally or unintentionally leaking privacy are considered.

Despite the advantages of differential privacy (DP) in edge computing, there are still several challenges that need to be addressed. One of the reasons for these challenges is the frequent operations involved in edge computing, such as data transmission, sharing, and collaborative analysis [181]. In the context of smart cities, it is partic- ularly important to address challenges related to data anomaly detection and defense against data attacks in edge computing environments. These challenges remain an active area of research in DP for edge computing, and new solutions are needed to ensure effective data privacy and se- curity in this context. For example, in January 2019, the server used to store data from the Oklahoma Department of Securities data without sufficient protection faced a serious data breach by the cybersecurity company, UpGuard [182]. The leaked data included up to 3 TB of data, containing millions of sensitive government documents and FBI inves- tigation reports. In the same year, the American Banking System (ABS) was attacked by Avaddon’s extortion request [183]. Although its cus-

behaviours in real-time. The application applies in many scenarios, such as time-series data monitoring, fraud in the financial context, data anomaly in feature engineering, data anomaly in the ELT process, etc. Nonetheless, data anomaly detection mainly contains multi-sensor data anomaly detection and network anomaly detection in the edge computing environment.

In smart city scenarios, a massive amount of data is being generated and used every day, such as trajectory data, healthcare data, business data, financial records, etc. To better develop smart cities, data anomaly detection is necessary. We believe that to solve the issue of data anomalies in the environment of edge computing, DP is a suitable so- lution. The reason for this is that DP contains rigorous mathematical modelling, and the method can provide a desirable level of privacy for edge computing environments in smart city scenarios.

In recent years, Ma et al. [189] considered the data poisoning attacks can be defended by DP method. They showed that private learners are resistant to that attack when the attackers are only able to poison a small number of datasets. Shadi Rahimian et al. [190] protected the machine learning model by adding noise to the gradients and as an alternative method. They evaluated the effect of two DP techniques against mem- bership inference attacks.

In smart cities, the research direction of data attack defence has great potential and needs to be further explored. For example, the gap be- tween the theoretical limit and the empirical performance remains an issue. We believe that the DP method can enhance the development of smart cities and can produce optimal services in smart cities.

Blockchain technology is an alternative for constructing transparent security to store or govern data. However, blockchain is a type of decentralised ledger storage system that contains tamper-proofing. It is ambiguous to develop a solution method for edge computing and blockchain for smart city applications. Gai et al. [191] proposed an implemented method for DP in blockchain systems to prevent

ensure authenticity and high income in auction mechanisms, privacy and security are crucial factors to consider. Guo et al. [193] designed a differential private portfolio dual auction mechanism for edge computing platforms, where IoT devices request resource packs and edge nodes compete to provide them, maximizing revenue while ensuring privacy. Lv et al. [194] mapped the complex physical space of CPS in smart cities into virtual space and implemented differential pri- vacy frequent subgraph-mostly regraph to secure data privacy. How- ever, despite these efforts, DP research in edge computing still faces challenges due to frequent operations like data transmission, sharing, and task collaborative analysis, especially in scenarios where data anomaly detection and attack defense for edge computing environments are critical.

In smart city applications, the edge nodes need to share data effec- tively, although the communication between each edge node is unreli- able. However, there is a series of sensitive information that leads to data owners being unwilling to share. Furthermore, users are increas- ingly concerned about sensitive personal information in smart city applications.

Federated learning is a collaborative method for achieving global model training without sharing any raw client data. It involves training a local machine learning model by the data owner and updating the model to an aggregator for collection and averaging. One of the advantages of federated learning is that it can handle heterogeneous local datasets that may be non-independent, identically distributed, and unbalanced among various participants [4,181,195]. Lu et al. [196] designed a data sharing scheme to preserve the devices privacy in the industrial Internet of Things. For their viewpoint, the data-sharing issue is identified as machine-learning issue by incorporating DP and federated learning. The model-sharing is parameter-sharing of the machine model instead of revealing the raw data of participant. Zhang et al. [197] proposed a

medical data privacy protection framework to protect privacy by adding DP noise into federated learning. They considered the data privacy of patients in the smart health application. Wang et al. [198] designed a control algorithm to solve the issues of low resources for the federated learning model in IoT devices.

In the edge computing environment, the core infrastructure provides network access and centralised cloud computing services functions for devices at the edge. However, the core infrastructures are not fully trusting in many cases, and thus, there is a high possibility of security- threatening attacks, including privacy disclosure, tampering with data, DoS (denial of service) attacks, and service manipulation. Therefore, the privacy of the core infrastructure is a research direction with DP methods for smart city application scenarios based on edge computing. The edge data centre is one of the main components in edge computing and takes charge of virtualisation services and multiple management services. Nevertheless, edge data centres on some security issues, for instance the attacks of physical, privacy breaches, service manipulation, and data tampering. Therefore, the research of data se- curity and privacy protection technology for the smart city application

The efficient allocation of resources is a critical research direction for edge computing systems as it not only improves user experience but also optimizes bandwidth resources. However, the process of resource dis- tribution presents a significant challenge. Resource distribution falls under the umbrella of resource management for edge computing sys- tems, as illustrated in Fig. 12. To address this challenge, Wang et al.

[137] proposed a K-neighbour joint optimisation algorithm for task offloading and resource distribution using a histogram with local dif- ferential privacy [199]. The method can protect the privacy of con- nected vehicle and reduce the effect of the task offloading algorithm. In future work, research direction should focus on managing privacy for resource distribution and proposing optimal privacy algorithms for the different tasks of resource management.

With the advancement of edge computing, smart city applications have become an essential part of our daily life, ranging from manual operation to automatic operation and first generation wireless cellular technology to 5th generation mobile communication technology (5G). The advantages of edge computing technology, such as the sinking of resources, ultralow latency, high bandwidth, and high real-time computing power, make it a wide framework in smart city scenarios. Nevertheless, massive data are involved in data transmission, data processing, model training, and data publishing to provide better ser- vices in smart city scenarios. However, important privacy and security issues are raising great concerns at the same time.

In this paper, we present a comprehensive summarisation and thorough comparisons of the existing DP methods for edge computing- based smart city applications. Our coverage of DP in edge computing is extensive, encompassing a wide range of application areas including data transmission, data processing, model training, data publishing, and location privacy. Compared with other data privacy protection solu- tions, the DP mechanism can achieve better performance in the energy cost, data types, latency, computing cost, accuracy, processing time, data utility, and model performance.

Yao X, Zhou X, Ma J. Differential privacy of big data: an overview. In: Presented at the 2016 IEEE 2nd international conference on big data security on cloud (BigDataSecurity), IEEE international conference on high performance and smart computing (HPSC), and IEEE international conference on intelligent data and security. New York, NY, USA: IDS); 2016.

Ezabadi SG, Jolfaei A, Kulik L, Kotagiri R. Differentially private streaming to untrusted edge servers in intelligent transportation system. In: Presented at the 2019 18th IEEE international conference on trust, security and privacy in computing and communications/13th IEEE international conference on big data science and engineering. Rotorua, New Zealand: TrustCom/BigDataSE); 2019.

Sun Y, He Q, Qi L, Rafique W, Dou W. DPODA: differential privacy-based online double auction for pervasive edge computing resource allocation. In: Presented at the proceedings of the 2nd ACM international symposium on blockchain and secure critical infrastructure; 2020. New York, NY, USA.

Yao A, Jiang F, Li X, Dong C, Xu J, Xu Y, et al. A novel security framework for edge computing based UAV delivery system. In: Presented at the the 20th IEEE international conference on trust, security and privacy in computing and communications. TrustCom; 2021. p. 2021.

