Bi-rotary Milling Head in the machining process take direct cutting force, its thermal properties change on the accuracy of machine tool have an important influence. In this paper a wide range of load change processing conditions direct drive type double pendulum Angle milling head thermal properties condition to carry on the analysis, based on solidworks platform set up Bi-rotary Milling Head of the CAD model, the model into ANSYS platform. Determine the Bi-rotary Milling Head structure heat source, convection boundary conditions and constraints, the motor power changes the Bi- rotary Milling Head temperature field model and digital simulation, the varying load processing conditions, A, C thermal characteristic analysis, get the A, C axis load - temperature - time distribution, for the Bi-rotary Milling Head and structure design of high-grade CNC machine straight drive processing technology led to the development of theory and the technology base.

The Bi-rotary Milling Head is the core component of the axis CNC milling machine, its structure and performance largely determine the performance of the whole machine, and thus become one of the axis CNC machine tools focus of market competition [1].According to transmission double pendulum angle milling head can be divided into mainly mechanical milling head of the worm gear, worm drive and direct drive torque motor direct drive milling head. Mechanical milling head in the country earlier research, the technology is more mature, but the large volume of such milling head positioning accuracy. Direct drive milling head with high-power direct-drive torque motor, eliminating the need for intermediate transmission gear, worm link, the structure has the following advantages [2-4]: 1 Parts small parts, simple structure, compact, small size, light weight; 2 Avoid transmission error of the gap between the transmission member, thereby improving the machining accuracy; 3 Greatly reduce vibration, friction, fatigue, mechanical failure, caused by the high- speed transmission and improve the accuracy of the system of the milling head holding. With the torque motor technology continues to evolve, the mechanical milling head gradually replaced by Direct-drive milling head.

Direct-drive Bi-rotary Milling Head with high precision characteristics, so Bi-rotary Milling Head temperature field distribution of the overall structure of a great influence on machining accuracy, the parts of the surface quality and production efficiency[5]. In recent years, scholars have varying degrees of Bi-rotary Milling Head. In 2009, Liu Lei [6] and other several focus on the worm double swing milling head structure comparison and research, bevel gears and torque motor direct drive double swing milling head institutions, summarizes several double pendulum the advantages and disadvantages of the milling head. In 2010, Lin Jianfeng, [7-8] direct-drive double swing milling head structural units finite element analysis and modal analysis to calculate the radial deformation of the casing and turn round deformation, to find the turn round stiffness of the weakest link - spacer, and then calculate the milling head of the 4-order modes, the axis swing angle milling head structure inherent frequency analysis, and to provide technical support for the design and improvement of class milling head. In 2011, Huo Jun Zhou [9-10] etc. Based on UG platform, the A-axis direct- drive double swing milling head thermal deformation and thermal stress analysis, access to the A-axis maximum thermal deformation and thermal stress position for direct-drive double pendulum mill the structural design of the head and around the motor coolant circulation system designed to provide a design basis.

The gimbals and electric spindle torque motor direct drive. Gimbals driven by the first torque motor, achieve C-axis rotation. The second pair of torque motor through a pair of prongs connected to the gimbals around the C-axis rotation with gimbals, the rotor electric spindle sleeve is connected to the electric spindle, direct drive electric spindle axis A swing. Two pairs torque motors are used in parallel installed.

Analysis on the direct-drive Bi-rotary Milling Head to obtain a temperature field in Figure 5 and Figure 6. By the analysis results, the highest temperature appears in the motor coil, out of the A\C-axis moment, 36.5 ° turntable bearing and the electro-spindle lower temperature, which is a lower speed in the work project, so less heat generated, and thus bearing the temperature atlower electric spindle with self-cooling system so the temperature is lower.

