livestock feed and 12% to meet the human food demand. Further, 12% of the maize yield is used for industrial purposes. Maize is helpful in im- proving the digestive health and reducing the risk of chronic diseases such as cardiovascular disease, diabetes and obesity (Sheng et al., 2018). Thus, its' demand is increasing among the populace.

Segmentation is the first step for disease detection. It is important to segment the Region of Interest (ROI) from the input images. The authors (Ma et al., 2009) reviewed various segmentation techniques based on threshold, pattern recognition and on deformable models. In these techniques, threshold is either decided manually or auto- matically based on edge, region, and hybrid one. The authors claimed that the Laplacian and canny edge detection techniques are most widely used for image segmentation (Al-amri, et al, 2010). The Laplacian technique is used to find the dark and light side of an edge, whereas canny is used to isolate noise before edges, and deter- mine critical values for threshold.

To address the issue of complex background, the authors (Lv et al., 2020) proposed a DL based novel network for maize feature enhance- ment under complex environment. Its feature enhancement capacity removes the noise from the images using Retinex and wavelet-based method. They developed a DMS-Robust AlexNet model (Krizhevsky,

It is evident from the above discussion that several researchers fo- cused on segmentation and crop disease identification using deep CNN. But a few of them worked on maize crop for automatic severity measurement and crop loss estimation. Moreover, none of the above- mentioned approaches provide a complete system for data collection, data pre-processing, disease identification, severity prediction, diseased area visualization, and crop loss estimation in maize crop. Also, the models proposed in literature have low accuracy, large number of train- able parameters, high computation cost, and long training time. More- over, there is a lack of visualization of features involved in disease prediction. These challenges refrain the use of these models for real- life predictions. Thus, none of the existing models have been evaluated on real-life datasets. To fill the above identified gaps, the authors in this manuscript propose a novel framework integrated with a web applica- tion for collecting the dataset, labelling and validation of dataset by the plant pathology experts, segmentation of diseased area, classification of dataset into healthy, TLB, Rust, and multiple disease classes. The frame- work includes a mechanism for severity prediction, and crop loss esti- mation. Further, it employs GradCam for visualizing the infected regions involved in decision making.

Next, the collected dataset has been split into training and testing datasets on the basis of trial and error mechanism as discussed in (Xu and Goodacre, 2018). To prevent the problem of data leakage, the im- ages of different classes namely Healthy, TLB, Rust, and Multidisease were distributed in such a way that one image is a part of either training, or test dataset. Also, it is ensured that multiple copies of the same im- ages are not a part of training, and test datasets. The training dataset is used only to train the model while the test dataset is used to evaluate and compare the performance of different model architectures.

Black pixels represent the background region whereas non-black pixels represent the leaf area. Simultaneously, the pixels encountered in region of infection are also transformed to white pixels. This avoids the inclusion of ROI in the background region. Then, we applied K- means (Usha Kumari et al., 2019) algorithm for segmentation of leaf image into two clusters namely ROI and background region. In case the sample images have Larger Leaf Area (LLA) than their background

section. Also, the pre-training of the proposed model is performed using the ImageNet dataset (Lab, 2017) and the impact of transfer learn- ing on its performance is illustrated in the result section. The same dataset was used for training the pre-trained MaizeNet model, non- pre-trained MaizeNet model and state-of-the-art models viz. VGG-16, VGG-19 (Simonyan and Zisserman, 2015), Inception-v3 (Szegedy, et al., 2019). Then, the performance of the proposed model was com- pared with the above-mentioned state-of-the-art models.

In this section, the authors present the inferences deduced from the experimental results obtained by employing the MaizeNet, VGG-16, VGG-19, ResNet-50, Inception-v3, and Inception ResNet-v2 models. The number of layers in MaizeNet is decided by conducting the experi- ments and analyzing the performance of the models with different net- work depths. It was observed that the model with nine convolution layers outperformed the models with five through eleven convolutions.

Our study uses a dataset of 2996 images captured from the farmland of ICAR -AICRP, Mysore. The diseased crops were grown intentionally for carrying out the research work and labelled by plant pathologists. The images are labelled as Healthy, TLB, rust, or multidisease.

The authors pre-processed the collected dataset by applying K- Means algorithm. Further, they applied both supervised and unsuper- vised algorithms on pre-processed, and non-pre-processed dataset for classifying images to all the four classes mentioned above. The authors trained K-means (Khairnar and Goje, 2020), VGG-19 (Simonyan and Zisserman, 2015), ResNet-50 (He et al., 2016), Inception-v3 (Szegedy et al., 2016), finetuned VGG-16 models (Wang et al., 2017), and the pro- posed DL model MaizeNet, on a dataset comprising 2460 images. These images include four classes namely healthy, TLB, rust and multidisease. Among all the above-stated models, MaizeNet reported the highest ac- curacy of 98.50% on the testing dataset comprising 536 images.

Furthermore, the proposed model has lowest number of parameters as 1,55,956. Therefore, its training time is minimum of all the above- stated models. This model completes 20 epochs of training in merely 140 s. Moreover, its efficacy in calculating the diseased leaf area, severity prediction, and crop loss estimation prove its supremacy over the re- search works proposed in the literature. Further, the model is integrated with a web-application for its real-life use as a disease prediction assisting tool. Although, the proposed framework is efficient in classify- ing maize crop into TLB, rust, multidisease, and healthy classes, predicting the disease severity, and estimating the crop loss, there is a scope of making the predictions based on soil parameters, atmospheric conditions, and genomics of plants, and disease-causing agents. Also, the framework can be generalized for crop loss estimation of any crop.

Ramamurthy, K., 2019. Electronic Monitoring and Disease Diagnosis of oryza Sativa Crops through an IoT Enabled Embedded System Feature Ranking of Spatial Domain Features for Efficient Characterization of Stroke Lesions View Project Low Power Real Time GPS Tracking Enabled with RTOS and Serverless Architecture View Project. Rani, G., Agarwal, M., 2020. Contrast enhancement using optimum threshold selection.

