Plants of genus Haloxylon Bunge are psammophytic shrubs or small trees, belonging to Amaranthaceae (formerly Chenopodiaceae) of flowering plants [1-3]. About 13 species have been reported in Haloxylon in the world. In China, there are two Haloxylon species with a distribution in the deserts of Northwest China, namely H. persicum (white saxoul) and H. ammodendron (saxoul) [2, 3]. They are designated the King of psammophytic plants and play an important role in sand fixation, wind control and water conservation in the deserts. Distribution of these two species is sympatric in China. H. persicum grows mostly at the top of sand dunes, while H. ammodendron is widely distributed on sand dunes, clayed deserts, saline or alkaline deserts and Gobi deserts.

Because of the severe environmental conditions in the deserts, such as sand storms, extreme heats and drought stresses, the habit of Haloxylon trees are commonly irregular. The tiny gray-whitish scaly “leaves” on the green assimilating shoots of H. persicum are in fact aculeate. The true leaves are quite reduced and the cortex of young annual cylindrical shoots is the major photosynthetic tissue. The assimilating shoots of H. ammodendron even lack such scaly “leaves” [2].

RAPD and ISSR analyses revealed that a high level of genetic diversity existed within/among natural populations of H. ammodendron in Xinjiang, China [5-7]. Other studies based on DNA ISSR markers demonstrated that there existed genetic diversity and gene flow within/among populations of either H. ammodendron or H. persicum in Xinjiang, China [8, 9]. Using ITS1 region of nrDNA, pollen of H. ammodendron was detected in surface soil in the centre of Junggar Desert Basin, Xinjiang, China, and the ecological relationship between vegetation characteristics and pollen in the surface soil was discussed [10]. Analysis with 14 ISSR primers did not find genetic difference between individual plants of H. ammodendron parasitized and non-parasitized by desertl Cistanche (Cistanche deserticola) in the Alxa desert, Inner

DNA level occurred in the seeds of H. ammodendron exposed to the outer space by “Shenzhou No.4” spaceflight [12]. However, limited success was achieved in detecting genetic diversity of the Haloxylon germplasm resources. Lack of morphological and molecular markers has inhibited the advance of the related researches.Among DNA markers, SSR markers have a high level of polymorphism, better stability and reproducibility compared to other DNA markers (such as RAPD and ISSR markers). SSR markers have been widely used in studies on population genetics, cultivar classification, genetic mapping, gene localization and marker-associated breeding programs [13, 14]. However, few SSR markers have been reported for Haloxylon species and their genetic background is still poorly understood.

under the following parameters: 2, 7, 7=weights for match, mismatch and indels used in the Smith- Waterman local alignment (i.e., Match, Mismatch, Delta); 80, 10 = matching and indel probability (i.e., PM, PI); 50= minimum alignment score (Minscore); 500= maximum size of the repeat unit (Max period).

H. ammodendron, all of the investigated sequences (n=6) only contained mutated repeat motif without type 1 repeats observed in the longer band. Fig. 2 shows the typical mutated repeat motif (repeat type 2) in H. ammodendron. No repeat was detected in the cloned sequences of the shorter band (ca. 564bp in length) of H. ammodendron (Fig. 1). The result of this study was also confirmed using samples collected from the fields.

Cross-genus transferability of primer QCA58 suggested that the binding regions of primer QCA58 may be associated with certain important function in the Amaranthaceae, because of the conservatism. Functional correlations of repeat sequences are frequently reported [19]. Many examples could be given. For example, a (GT)n repeat could enhance gene activity from a distance independent of its orientation, but more effective transcriptional enhancement resulted from the GT repeat being closer to the promoter sequences [19, 20]. In rice, variation in the number of GA or CT repeats in the 5' UTR of the waxy gene was correlated with amylase content [21, 22]. Microsatellite markers (CCG)n in 5' UTRs of some ribosomal protein genes of maize were involved in the regulation of fertilization [23].

Tall fescue (Festuca arundinacea Schreb.) to seven grass species was found to be nearly 92% [27]. The transferability (1.8%) of the SSR markers from the other related genera to genus Haloxylon was considerably low, suggesting a larger genetic divergence between them.

The two genera (Haloxylon and Chenopodium) of the Amaranthaceae could be characterized with the length and repeat motif type of the PCR products using primer QCA58. Microsatellites or simple sequence repeats (SSRs) commonly refer to tandem repeats of short (2–6 bp) DNA sequences with a PCR product size ranging from 100—700 bp [13, 14, 19, 23]. Our results indicated that the longer or compound repeat and its relationship with SSRs are noteworthy because of the potential value for use in basic evolutionary applications, such as identification at genus and species levels.

The study was financially supported by “948 Program” (No. 2008-4-47), State Forestry Administration “Public Welfare Research Foundation” (No. 201004010), the Scientific and Technological Support Project from the Chinese Ministry of Science and Technology (2006BAD26B0101) and the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 30972412). The authors thank Linke Yin, Ming Zhao, Yongzheng Tian, Zhiming Zhang, Fufei Chen, Dezhong Chen, Fuhui Chen, Junyan Zhang, Delu Li for their help in material collections.

Wang XM, Yang DY, Tian YZ, Zhang BW, Tu PF, Sun QS, Li XB. 2009b. Inter-simple sequence repeats analysis of Haloxylon ammodendron from seeds carried back by “Shenzhou No.4” spaceship. Journal of Northwest University 39: 259—263 (in Chinese with English Abstract).

Changé D, Chaumeil P, Ramboer A, Collada C, Guevara A, Cervera MT, Vendramin GG, Garcia V, Frigerio JM, Echt C, Richardson T, Plomion C. 2004. Cross-species transferability and mapping of genomic and cDNA SSRs in pines. Theor. Appl. Genet. 109: 1204—1214.

Maughan PJ, Bonifacio A, Jellen EN, Stevens MR, Coleman CE, Ricks M, Mason SL, Jarvis DE, Gardunia BW, Fairbanks DJ. 2004. A genetic linkage map of quinoa (Chenopodium quinoa) based on AFLP, RAPD, and SSR markers. Theoretical and Applied Genetics 109:1188—1195.

