In the last twenty years, the self-driving cars have obtained a huge importance in the research domain, they are expected to take places of humans in different fields by performing several missions. The autono- mous vehicles development has been one of the most important subjects in the field of automotive research due to the growth of the traffic problems in most of the world. Therefore, the expectance for increasing safety of the road and comfort of driving are high by relieving the drivers of driving tasks in partial or complete way. Because the automation of the driver responsibilities may significantly reduce the collisions and in- crease the road safety.

However, the passive methods, measure the distance by receiving information about the position of the object. These systems are based generally on cameras and computer vision techniques. In principal, two type of systems exist for the passive method, Mono Vision systems and Stereo Vision systems.

stereoscopic ranging techniques to calculate the distance. This system use two cameras as one camera, trying to give the impression of depth and use the disparity of the objects between the cameras to compute the distance with high accuracy. Salman et al. [9], presented a distance estimation method based on stereoscopic measurement using trigono-

selected object in the left camera is the same one in the right camera, when there are multiple objects. Therefore, before measuring the objects distances, we need to define the location of the same object in the two images. In such systems, objects detection methods are applied to images captured by both cameras. Then, they apply some stereo matching al- gorithms to match the detected objects in both cameras, which consume time. However, the main idea in this paper is to detect vehicles by applying the vehicle detection method [1] to the images captured by single camera. Then, match them with the same vehicles in the images captured by the other camera. This matching is done by performing the

A Real-time distance measurement method for self-driven system is introduced in this paper. The utilized method is based on using stereo camera, which is two cameras mounted in the same horizontal position and displaced vertically by a predefined distance (the base). To measure the distance to vehicles, a vehicle detection method is performed first following two steps: hypothesis generation and hypothesis verification. In the first step, the hypotheses are generated using cross-correlation after performing an edge detection method. In the second step, the generated hypotheses are verified by extracting the desired features using the third level of 2D-DWT and then classify them using AdaBoost classifier. Several methods apply the detection task on both images, which is time consuming. However, in this paper the vehicles are detected first in only one camera then the similar vehicles are detected on the other camera using a stereo matching method. After detecting and matching the same vehicles in both cameras, the distance measurement

method based on the distance between the two cameras, the position of vehicles in both cameras and certain geometric angles, is performed. Although the method is based on relatively simple algorithm, the dis- tance is measured accurately. Furthermore, a comparison between the proposed method and some other methods from literature was performed to evaluate the proposed method, where it showed that despite the simplicity of the proposed method, it measures the distance with high accuracy. The proposed method may be used to perform several tasks in several systems such as computing safety distance between vehicles and vehicles speed and it may also be used to measure objects distances regardless of their types by simply changing the detection algorithm.

Abdelmoghit Zaarane: Conceptualization, Methodology, Resources, Software, Formal analysis, Writing - original draft, Writing - review & editing. Ibtissam Slimani: Methodology, Software, Formal analysis, Writing - original draft, Writing - review & editing. Wahban Al Okaishi: Investigation, Resources, Writing - review & editing. Issam Atouf: Validation, Visualization, Supervision. Abdellatif Hamdoun: Valida- tion, Visualization, Supervision.

