According to the configuration of distribution network, this paper put forward the corresponding cyclic decimal coding solution and corresponding mutation, crossover and selection strategy according to problems that during the distribution network reconfiguration, large number of infeasible solutions are produced. Furthermore, we gave the definition of radial decision problem, and solve the reverse problem of the first and the end nodes after reconstruction. The experimental results of the methods of IEEE33 and PG&E69 node simulation show that this method can effectively solve the problem.

Distribution network can change opening / closing status of large section switches and contact switches to adjust the structure of network in normal operation condition. In practical applications, distribution network needs to do the optimization reconstruction with the various requirements. But during the reconstruction process, the early branch algorithm brings a great deal of power flow calculation, which increases the computational burden. In order to solve this problem, various artificial intelligence algorithms are more and more applied in distribution network reconfiguration.

We adopted the following strategies to meet the demand: Firstly, close all switches so a closed loop formed. Thus the loops number must be the same as the number of contact switches. Then encode each network switch according to natural number, and each numbered switch classification in their respective loops. The results are shown in Figure 1. Table 1shows the coding of switches in each loop with the above method.

Only the state 8 among them does not meet the requirements that distribution network must be radial because it formed a ring. Thus the rule proposed by author of [4] that determines infeasible solutions based on cyclic coding strategy is: If there are two or more than two public switches are opened, this individual is considered infeasible solution and should be removed. The author proposes the rule also applies to class 3.

However, the author of [5] doubted this representation is not exactly correct. As shown in Figure.3 of the third ring network. If the public switches are , then open switches , the network still forms the radial structure. So the judgment proposed by [5] is inaccurate.

Each operator of DE population individuals comes from different natural number coding loop in the loop encoding strategy, and has no intrinsic connection between each other. So for DE algorithm, the mutation operation can be continued to do the selection operation accord with the distribution network radiating requirements. As Table.2 shown, each switch number are sequentially encoding with their corresponding loop number below which the number starting from 1, in addition to its own switch number in the loop.

As a result of the reconstruction method in this paper to generate all feasible solutions, run the breadth-first search over the network before load flow calculation. On the one hand, the method solved recoding problem, on the other hand, the method will be layered network in the search process, generate Branch-Level matrix B and Node-Level matrix N. Combined with the above information, it should be easy to calculate the load flow by using forward and backward substitution method.

Firstly, determine the root node and then search the branches one by one follow the Branch Number. If the number of the starting node or the terminating node is equal to the root node, then define the same one as new starting node and the other one as new root node. Maintain running until all the branches have been searched.

The distribution system with 32 branches and 5 contact switch branches as shown in Figure.5. The system load Sbase is set to 12.65KV. Select the maximum generation iterMax= 100, the initial population size NP=50, CR= 0.3and F= 0.5.The simulation result is shown in Table.4.

Based on the optimal flow method, this paper adopts a loop gene coding method which applies in Differential Evolution algorithm .And redefined the criteria for determining the radial structure based on this coding method. Put forward a decimal loop encoding strategies, with this method, the Differential Evolution mutation operator has the independent variation bitwise. Finally, this paper gives an adjustment of the order of nodes. The simulation results show that this method solved the problem of node numbering confusion after network reconfiguration, and are fast and efficient.

