Abstract The advent of the Internet in the twenty-first century has led to remarkable changes in several aspects of our lives. This advanced technology has become an essential tool of communication and information, thus offering unique advantages to both educators and students. Despite a recent educational revolution in Saudi Arabian educational systems, the issue of access to higher education still remains one of the more enduring challenges. The need for more delivery modes that take education to learners wherever they are, and not within the boundaries of the campus, is thus a necessity. e-Learning could dramatically increase access to tertiary education and training, especially for those learners who were once denied learning opportunities for any reason, such as health, dis- tance or the like. Yet, successful implementation of e-learning requires an under- standing of the issues that promote the effective use of the technologies. This article discusses the factors that influence e-learning in Saudi higher education through analysing the perceptions and attitudes of Saudi university students (n = 531). It reports the results of a survey conducted to investigate the accep- tance of e-learning in a Saudi higher education institution as perceived by univer- sity students. The findings demonstrated that attitudes toward e-learning, subjective norms, perceived behavioural control as well as e-learning systems attributes were critical determinants of students’ behavioural intention to use

The new advancement in communication and information technologies has made an impact on some aspects of today’s societies. Largely, commerce, politics and education have been undeniably influenced (Garrison and Anderson, 2003; Khan, 2005). Terms like the global village, information society and knowledge society symbolize the new realties and change in modern societies. Education facilitated by the new ICT or e-learning is transforming learning and instruction forms (Garrison and Anderson, 2003) in ways ‘‘that extend beyond the efficient delivery or entertainment value of traditional approaches’’ (Garrison and Anderson, 2003, p. 2). For this reason, more and more educational institutions around the world are embracing e-learning systems and investing heavily in this sector. In Saudi Arabia, the government has launched a national plan for the utilizsation of infor- mation technology (IT). The plan urges, ‘‘the implementation of e-learning and distance learning and all their prospective applications in higher education’’ (National Centre for e-Learning and Distance Learning, 2008). Furthermore, a national centre for promoting e-learning was established to fulfil the following goals:

However, effective use of e-learning only occurs ‘‘when users choose to migrate or move from less efficient systems to relatively more advanced and more beneficial innovations’’ (Ndubisi, 2006). Investments in the infrastructure, staff IT training and content development may not be sufficient to ensure a successful adoption and use of e-learning (Ndubisi, 2004). Several studies have highlighted that under- standing the factors that influence users’ acceptance and use of e-learning is impor- tant for a better implementation and use of e-learning. The purpose of this study, therefore, is to investigate the factors that influence e-learning acceptance by Saudi

university students. This paper is constructed as follows: first, it will give a brief ac- count of e-learning. Second, it will describe the theoretical framework of this study. Third, it will present the research model and hypotheses. Then a subsequent section on the research methodology will follow. Next, the findings will be presented and dis- cussed in the light of research hypotheses. Finally, some implications are offered.

e-Learning refers to ‘‘the use of new multimedia technologies and the Internet to improve the quality of learning by facilitating access to resources and services as well as remote exchanges and collaboration’’ (Holmes and Gardner, 2006). e-Learning can take place totally online in virtual environments or in a mix of vir- tual and face-to-face environments; a mode entitled ‘blended learning’. e-Learning has the potential to impact positively on education. It provides great opportunities for both educators and learners to enrich their educational experiences (Holmes and Gardner, 2006). Individuals who were disadvantaged for geographic, physical or social circumstances have increasingly better educational chances via e-learning. Furthermore, e-learning supports synchronous and asynchronous communications in various formats ranging from text, voice and audio. In addition, supported by the openness and flexibility of the Internet, e-learning provides the teaching and learning transactions with unfathomable amounts of information independent of the pressure of time and the constraints of distance (Holmes and Gardner, 2006).

Explaining human behaviours have been a topic of vast research. The research conducted by Ajzen (1985) and Fishbein and Ajzen (1975) to understand human behaviour has been of paramount impact in psychology and other social sciences disciplines. The theories of Reasoned Action (TRA) (Fishbein and Ajzen, 1975) and Planned Behaviour (TPB) (Ajzen, 1985) have been used extensively to explain numerous behaviours. Among the most prominent extensions of these theories is Davis’ (1989) the Technology Acceptance Model (TAM) that addresses technol- ogy acceptance and use behaviours. The Technology Acceptance Model (TAM) has attracted substantial attention and found to be robust in explaining the accep- tance and use of various technological innovations [e.g. Internet-based courses (Arbaugh, 2000), websites (Koufaris, 2002) and the Internet (Shih, 2004)]. The the- oretical framework of this study is based on these prominent theories. The follow- ing section gives a brief account of them.

Davis (1989) proposed the Technology Acceptance Model (TAM) specifically to explain technology acceptance and usage behaviours. TAM postulates that an individual’s acceptance and use of a technology is determined by the attitudes to- ward the technology. In addition, TAM posits that two basic perceptions of the technology also have influence on the acceptance and usage behaviours, namely, perceived usefulness and perceived ease of use. These two constructs are anteced- ents to one’s attitude. Perceived usefulness refers to ‘‘the degree to which a person believes that using a particular system would enhance his or her job performance’’ (Davis, 1989, p. 320)). Perceived ease of use refers to ‘‘the degree to which a person believes that using a particular system would be free from effort’’ (Davis, 1989, p. 320)). TAM has been applied to diverse technologies and has been found to be a robust model (Ndubisi, 2004, 2006; Venkatesh, 2000).

The questionnaire consisted of three sections. The first section collected informa- tion about the students’ Internet experience and self-efficacy. The second section elicited information on their perceptions and attitude toward e-learning. The third section gathered some demographic information. The items of the questionnaire were adopted from previously validated instruments (Ajzen, 1985; Davis, 1989; Moore and Benbasat, 1991; Stoehl and Lee, 2003). Respondents were asked to rate their perceptions and attitude using a 7-point Likert scales ranging from 1 = strongly disagree to 7 = strongly agree. Statements measuring self-efficacy used a 5-point Likert scale ranging from 1 = no confidence to 5 = Very high confidence. Experience was captured using three items measuring duration and frequency of using the Internet.

Descriptive statistics were used to describe and understand the data. Multiple regression analysis was used to test the research model. In addition, t-test and ANOVA were employed to examine the differences between the students based on their demographics. Regression analysis assumptions including normality,

The reliability of the instrument was measured by using Cronbach’s alpha (see Table 1). The instrument had a very high reliability, a = .97. The alpha coeffi- cients for the sub-scales were also very good, exceeding the minimum threshold recommended in the literature of 0.70, thus indicating good internal consistency

self-efficacy and perceived accessibility constitute the perceived behavioural con- trol (PBC) construct proposed in TPB. As theorized, the research model explained a significant proportion of the variance in BI (Table 4). The model accounted for 43% of BI’s variance and this is considered a large effect (Cohen, 1988). Looking

at the individual determinants of BI, attitude (b = .32), subjective norm (b = .22) and university support (b = .18) had all significant influence on BI at the .001% level. Perceived e-learning accessibility (b = .12) had a significant influence on BI at the .01% level, whereas Internet self-efficacy (b = .083) was significant at the

cant percentage of variance in attitude, R2 = .46% (Table 5). According to Cohen (1988) this is a large effect. PU had a strong significant effect on ATT (b = .33). PEOU had even a stronger influence on ATT (b = .40). Both results of this anal- ysis gave support to hypotheses 6 and 7.

Hypotheses 8 and 10 were supported as perceived interactivity (PI) (b = .40) and perceived flexibility (PF) (b = .43) were found to have strong significant influence on the perceptions of e-learning usefulness at the .001% level as shown in Table 6.

These constructs accounted for 56% of the variance in PU. The effect size of this index is much larger than typical (Cohen, 1988). On the other hand, Internet expe- rience (IE) (b = .06) was not found to have a significant relationship with PU, thus hypothesis 9 was rejected.

To examine the differences between the students in their intention to use e-learning based on their demographics, a series of t-tests and ANOVA were utilised. To see if there is difference between male and female students regarding their intention to use e-learning, an independent samples t-test was conducted. Table 8 shows that male students were significantly different from female students on their intention to use e-learning (p = .002). Male students demonstrated greater intentions to use

e-learning than female students. However, the magnitude of the difference in the means was very small (g2 = 0.02). Further, to see if the students are different in their intention to use e-learning based on their place of residence, another t-test was carried out. No statistically significant difference was found between the

This study proposed a model to explain and understand Saudi university students’ intention to accept and use e-learning. It adopted Ajzen’s (1985) theory of planned behaviour as well as Davis’ (1989) TAM as its theoretical framework. Students’ intention (BI) was found to be very well explained by the determinants of behav- ioural intention as proposed by Ajzen (1985). Attitude is an important factor that influences BI to use e-learning. This result is similar to previous findings (Stoehl and Lee, 2003), which have shown that attitude toward performing behaviour has an influence on the intention to carry out this behaviour. In other words, stu- dents who hold favourable attitude about using e-learning are more inclined to ac- cept and use this innovation. The results also showed that the influence of important groups such as instructors or peers was significant. This result is in line with the results reported in a previous research (Taylor and Todd, 1995) that

was found to have an impact on perceptions of on-line learning. Similarly, the cur- rent study found a significant difference between external and regular students in their intention to use e-learning. External students showed greater intention to use e-learning than regular students. The attractiveness of e-learning for external students is maybe due to the benefits of e-learning systems, such as their flexibility and interactivity (Taylor and Todd, 1995; Ndubisi, 2006). Furthermore, the students were found different in their intention to use e-learning based on their faculty.

As attitude toward e-learning was found to have a strong impact on the intention to use e-learning among the students, policy-makers should attempt to build po- sitive attitudes among the potential e-learners such as male and external students. One way of achieving this goal is by highlighting the usefulness of this mode of learning to potential users. One of the greatest advantages of e-learning as per- ceived by the students is that it gives university students greater flexibility in time and place (Ndubisi, 2006). Moreover, e-learning enhances interactivity, i.e. com- munication between the students among themselves and with their tutors. As a re- sult, designers of e-learning systems should pay attention to these benefits and design e-learning programmes that offer flexibility and interactivity. In addition, attitude toward e-learning is influenced by the perceptions of e-learning ease of

use. In other words, potential users are more likely to adopt and use e-learning if they deem it easy to use (Ndubisi, 2006). This suggests that designing easy to use systems can lead to a better adoption of e-learning among the students. Equally important to the acceptance of e-learning is the influence of the society. As e-learn- ing is still new, the students have limited knowledge of this service. The society, thus, may provide the students with an alternative source for judging e-learning. Educating the society (e.g. family and instructors) with the benefits of e-learning can thus facilitate its acceptance.

Perceived e-learning accessibility emerged in this research as an important factor of e-learning acceptance. The students are more likely to accept and use e-learning if they think they have easy access to the system. Thus, e-learning suppliers (e.g. the university) should ensure trouble-free access to e-learning. The university can increase students acceptance of e-learning by providing training for the students on using the Internet as well as by making available Internet access points across the university and also by offering technical support. Finally, since some groups of students (e.g. males and external) showed more demand to use e-learning, attention should be given to these groups and make every effort to meet their requirements and high need for e-learning. Equally important, is to direct attention to the other groups of students who showed less interest in e-learning.

This study had some limitations. First, e-learning in Saudi Arabia is still in its in- fancy with a paucity of information on its use at the time of the study. Thus, the greatest part of pertinent literature comes from other nations and may not truth- fully explain the situation in Saudi Arabia. Second, the current study relied on one sample that had its unique features and may not be totally representative of the broader population. This may affect generalising the findings. Furthermore, this study utilised only self-reported measures. Although this method has been repeat- edly employed in the past as a way of measuring attitude and perceptions, it is nec- essary to be aware of the weaknesses and issues associated with this method.

