Downey Mildew (induced by Plasmoparaviticola), and Grape Pow- dery Mildew (induced by Uncinulanecator (Schw.) Burr.), are two sig- nificant diseases of grape in numerous parts of the world (GuanlinLi and Wang, 2011). These diseases affect both leaves and grapefruits. Downey is particularly severe under severe precipitation, high relative

moistness, and significant stretches of dampness on leaves and fruits (Indu et al., 2010); whereas high humidity and moist weather favours the development of Powdery disease (Mundankar et al., 2008). Crop protection products (fungicides) are applied to minimize these diseases. Fungicides are expensive for farmers and can cause ecological contami- nation (Weissteiner et al., 2014), (Zhang et al., 2011) (Zhao and Pei, 2012). Thus, only applied when there are vibrant signals about the exis- tence of the disease.

U.S. and Australia have various systems in place that use both hourly and daily meteorological conditions to anticipate the onset of a variety of different crop diseases but not for grapes. The disease model developed by (Thomas et al., 1994) computes the day-to-day average temperature

along with the hours of moisture and propose treatment solutions for as- cospore infections. They discuss the model testing in California climatic conditions. There is a need for devices to quantify the climate conditions in real-time such that onset of grape disease can be predicted. In recent years, modern mechanisms from the Internet of Things (IoT) have been utilized to acquire real-time onsite observations (Pesonen et al., 2014) and it is crucial to build disease models referenced to these IoT devices.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 presents the background. Section 3 details methodology used to detect Downey and Powdery Mildew grape disease, in vineyards. Section 4 shows experi- mental results of this system followed by insights on performance. Section 5 concludes the work and proposes commendation of future work.

Sensor mechanization for grape yield malady has been comprehen- sively analyzed by (Sankaran et al., 2010), who describe current tech- nologies for developing a ground-based sensor framework which aid in supervising disease in plants under field conditions. The authors also reviewed that the spectroscopic and imaging innovation could be incorporated with a self-governing agricultural automobile for reliable and real time disease detection recognition to accomplish predominant plant disease monitoring and control. Various researchers have projected solutions for identifying the condition of a vineyard by utiliz- ing sensors. Sensors permit us to recognize the particular necessities of every territory, which improves the supervision of the grape plantation and addresses the potential issues precisely. The majority of recent liter- ature centers on remote monitoring of vineyards grapevines by utilizing

Temperature Sensor and Rain Sensor measure essential environ- mental parameters viz. temperature, humidity and rainfall. Each sensor is managed by a NodeMCU (a low cost firmware and development board particularly designed for Internet of Things (IoT) based applica- tions (NodeMCU ESP8266, 2020)). NodeMCU is programmed by the

This section discusses about the experimental setup deployed in the field and actual results captured from the field at real time. Captured data from IoT sensors were analyzed using the algorithm stated to test for the occurrences of Downey and Powdery Mildew. After analysis the proposed system is compared with the existing system which re- veals that the proposed system is worth detecting the occurrence of both diseases.

Depending upon the proposed system, the grape diseases can be ef- fectively identified at a much early stage. The novelty of the proposed system lies in using the Rain sensor along with temperature and humid- ity sensor. The accuracy of disease notification is therefore considerably increased then if a rain gauge was omitted. Thus, the projected device demonstrates higher performance in recognizing grape diseases.

From the above results we can observe that 94.4% of recordings were correctly identified in case of Downey Mildew disease occurrence and 96% for Powdery Mildew. Thus, the accuracy achieved has helped the farmers to reduce the use of fungicides on grape plants. This increases the quality of grapes.

