To investigate the economic performance of applying the ground source heat pump system in swine farms in Beijing China, initial investment and operating cost of ground source heat pump (GSHP) heating and cooling system, coal fired heating system (CFH), wet curtain fan cooling system (WCFC), air conditioner heating and cooling system (AC) were analyzed and compared. The results showed that the initial investment of GSHP heating and cooling system was higher than that of the CFH system integrated with WCFC system, the relative operating cost of the heating systems of GSHP, CFH and AC was 0.94, 1.00 and 0.98 , respectively. The relative operating cost of the cooling system of the GSHP, WCFC and AC system was 4.50, 1.00 and 6.38, respectively.

In 2009, Beijing has had 18 million m2 of buildings utilizing ground source pump system. It is expected that by 2015, the area of ground source pump system utilization will increase to 50 million m2. The capacity and performance of shallow groundwater heat pumps in Beijing Plain area were evaluated by researchers[4- 5],and the city government of Beijing has made a layout of feasibility of ground source heat pump in Beijing Plain, , swine farms in Beijing hereby can decide whether it is feasible in technique and policy to apply ground source heat pump[6].

Since July 1,2006, the buildings in Beijing utilizing ground source pump system for heating and cooling can be given an allowance of 5.55 to 7.93 US$ per square meter. Most swine farms in Beijing now use coal fired heating system (CFH), and few use air conditioner heating system(AC). In addition, most swine farms were not equipped with cooling system. Only a few of them have cooled swine houses with wet curtain fan cooling system (WCFC). However, swine houses in Beijing not only need to be heated in winter but also needed to be cooled in summer. GSHP technique had been applied in the Chinese solar greenhouse[7] and it has also been used in the only two swine farms in Hebei province, northern China[8]. However, GSHP application in swine farms has not been reported in Beijing and other countries.

To compare the economic performance of GSHP system with other conventional methods in Beijing, a swine house with an area of 920 m2 in Beijing was used as an example. The indoor temperature was designed to be 20ćin heating period and no more than 28ć in cooling periods. Heating capacity and cooling capacity were designed to be 94 kW and 91 kW, respectively. GSHP, CFH, AC and WCFC system were designed and analyzed. Technical parameters and initial investment of each heating and cooling method were shown in Table 1.

Table 1 shows that the GSHP system and AC system can both heat and cool swine houses. CFH system only can heat swine houses and WCFC system only can cool swine houses. As mentioned before, swine houses need to be heated in Winter and be cooled in Summer in Beijing. Thus, swine houses heated by CFH system need to be equipped with a cooling system.

As to initial investment for the cooling and heating systems, GSHP is higher than AC system, CFH system with a WCFC system. The initial investment of CFH system together with WCFC system was the lowest. Therefore, though GSHP system can save energy and reduce emission compared to CFH system[8], fund subsidies are necessary for applying GSHP system to swine farms due to its high investment.

The annual heating cost of different heating mode is a function of the energy calorific value(CVk), conversion efficiency(Ck) , and the price per unit energy(Pk). Assuming a GSHP was used for the swine house designed for this study, an annual heating days of 120 with heating duration of 14 hours per day, and a heating capacity of 94kw, the heat consumption of the swine houses was estimated to be 157920 kWh which is equal to 568512MJ. The price of coal and electricity was assumed to be 160 US$ per ton and 0.10 US$ per kWh respectively in the district designed for this study, thus, the price ratio of coal (US$ per ton) to electricity (US$ per kWh) was 1600.

Except for initial investment of each heating and cooling method, operating cost of heating must be taken into consideration by the swine farmers. Table 2 shows the energy consumption and economic performance comparison results of heating between GSHP, CFH and AC during one heating year. The GSHP would need 48591 kWh to heat the swine houses as described above, the CFH would require an equivalent of 32.3 tons of standard coal, the AC would consume 50454 kWh. Taking the heating cost of CFH as a reference, then the relative heating cost of GSHP and AC to CFH was 0.94 and 0.98 respectively. The heating cost of GSHP was lower than CFH and AC.

The price of coal and electricity was not the same in different districts and times in Beijing. The price ratio of coal to electricity decides relative operating cost of the different heating systems comparison. In order to know which operating cost is lower between GSHP and CFH, total heating cost of GSHP and CFH was assumed to be equal, annual primary energy consumption of heating (Ech) from GSHP, CFH and air conditioner were shown in Table 2, then the price ratio of CFH system to GSHP system was calculated. The GSHP system

Each mode of cooling needs to consume electricity energy. The annual cooling cost of different cooling modes is significantly affected by the input power of cooling (IPC). Using the above example swine house with a cooling capacity of 91kw, the input power of each mode of cooling was shown in Table 1.

Whereas, WCFC system causes air-cooling in the swine houses but at the same time, it causes an increase in humidity[11] .This is usually acceptable in regions with hot-dry climates, but in wet regions or in hot-wet days, due to the adverse effects on indoor humidity, WCFC system cannot cool the swine houses effectively in fact. GSHP system and AC systems can avoid an increase in humidity in swine houses. In addition, GSHP system does not produce PM2.5 while CFH system can produce PM2.5 in heating periods. At present, Beijing government is endeavouring to control PM2.5 via different methods.

Assuming the energy conversion efficiency Ck of GSHP system was equal to 3.25 and the price of coal and electricity was 160 US$ per ton and 0.10 US$ per kWh respectively, the relative operating cost of the heating system of the GSHP system, coal fired heating and air conditioner heating was 0.94, 1.00 and 0.98, respectively.

On condition that the technical parameters of each cooling system were described as in this paper, the relative operating cost of the cooling system of the GSHP system, wet curtain fan cooling system and air conditioner cooling was 4.50, 1.00 and 6.38 respectively. The GSHP system heating cost was higher than wet curtain fan cooling system.

Swine farmers will not apply GSHP system without fund subsidies from the government at present in Beijing. Considering cooling effect of and energy saving in heating period and air pollution from PM2.5, the GSHP system will to be accepted in the future.

