Goal of the contribution is to present results of the economical analysis of the photovoltaic systems that fulfill present limits, stated by the legislative of the Slovak Republic. Comparative method is realized on one of the buildings from the state sector in the city from eastern Slovakia with goal to find out optimal using of installed photovoltaic system with performance 100kWp. Comparison is realized and searched from the view of the client and its main task is to determine solution with biggest contribution for the client. Comparison of the systems ON GRID with supplement of leftovers and ON GRID with total supplement to the distribution net is made from the view of state support by the way of repurchase prices for the correspondent installed power plants.

In present time there are existing two tools at the European level that serve for RES support, mainly European Direction for support of electric power, produced from RES and Direction about bio fuels. Increase of electric power rate, produce from RES – 14% in 1997 to 21% in 2010 in the frame of EU-25 was key element of the previous direction that came into effect in 2001. Direction about bio fuels determined goal of fuel consumption – 5, 75% till 2010. Both mentioned tools that expired in 2011 had been replaced by new direction of parliament 2009/28/EC [1] about support for using of electric energy from RES that is connected with area of electricity, transport, heat and coldness, which determines goals for electric power rate, produced from RES at the final gross energetic consumption. European Counsel decided to increase rate of the total energy consumption in EU countries and by this way it specified also different national goals. Direction 2009/28/ES determines minimal energy rate from RES to 14% [2].

Office for regulation of net branches (ORNB) decreases repurchase prices of electric energy, produced through solar power plants. Result of it means that due to the generously stated repurchase prices of electric energy, obtained by solar power plants for 2010 that were approximately 425€/MWh (for equipments with installed performance over 100kW) there was increased number of smaller photovoltaic power plants till 2009 yet over 500MW of photovoltaic [3]. Consequence of the mentioned means that regulation Office suggests in its amendment to decrease maximal repurchase price of electricity, produced with 100kW system, placed on the building approximately about 33,1%.

No 558/2010 that changes and amends law No 309/2009 about RES support and high effective combined production, and state support is determined only for equipment with installed performance to 100kWp that is placed on the roof construction or circuit of one building, connected with earth by fix base, filed in land registry [6]. Therefore comparison is orientated only to the photovoltaic power plants, installed in accord with higher mentioned novelization of the law and its goal is determination of their optimal using according comparative method for ON GRID system with leftover supplement and ON GRID with total supplement to DN in model situation, where building of public sector is object of installed equipment. System OFF GRID is insular system that is used mainly in places with limited access to the DN connection with only one goal to produce own energy. Since its investment costs are too high against ON GRID system, it will not be added to the analysis.

Comparison is made and searched from the view of client and its main task is to determine solution with biggest contribution for client. Comparison of ON GRID system with leftovers supplement and ON GRID with total supplement to DN is made from the view of state support by the way of repurchase prices for correspondent installed power plants, according which there area developed economical indexes, as for example cost, revenue, payback period, cash flow and discounted cash flow. Due to the analysis there is necessary to determine constant and variable indexes for compared connections. As constant indexes there are considered following: building of public sector, consumption of electric power of the searched object, installed performance, luminance, price of photovoltaic system, project and engineering activity, depreciation time, and insurance. Variable indexes are type of system connection and state support by the way of different repurchases prices of electric power.

Annual income for sold energy, produced from given 100kWp from ON GRID system, determined for total supplement of energy to DN, installed on the roof construction on the building from state sector presents during ideal conditions and solar radiance at first year of using approximately 18 000 Eur. Income in year N is achieved according produced electric energy that had been sold to the distribution society at the repurchase price of electric power, which was determined by ORNB in newest amending during ON GRID system with total supplement of produced energy to DN with value 0,19454 €/kWh. But such income is gradually decreasing year by year due to inter annual decrease of installed panels effectiveness about 0, 6%. Expended investment was regarded also with every expense, connected with maintenance, financial expenses and last but not least with expenses, connected with overhead of state sector object, on which photovoltaic system had been installed. Consumption of electric energy with value 30 000 kWh annually, withdrawing from the distribution company at stated price for business subject with value 0, 12 €/kWh, had been assumption of overhead costs.

But such income is year by year decreasing in proportion to inter annual 0, 6% decrease of installed modules effectiveness. During application of surcharge for consumed own produced electric energy we need to add to the total annual incomes in year N also income that is relevant according conditions about surcharges for own consumed energy with value 0,13433 €/kWh, which presents annually in our model situation and during consumption 30 000 kWh value 4 030 Eur. Building of state sector with determined assumption of 30000 kWh consumption per year, reaches every year savings in volume 3 600 € that needs to be regarded also in cash flow. Cash flow development for ON GRID system for leftover supplement means also in this case cash flow with assumption of proper system acting and even running of the power plant existence and it defines payback period of expended investment in 12th year.

From the table there is resulting that ON GRID system with leftovers supplement achieves higher incomes against total incomes of installed ON GRID system, determined for total supplement of produced energy to DN. Considerable savings had been recorded again in the system ON GRID with leftovers supplement that had finally positive impact also to the total cash flow and payback period. Payback period of expended investment of equipment that is determined for sale of whole production to DN in our searched conditions and during ideal conditions of power plant is shorter about 6 years against equipment, determined for own consumption of energy and sale of leftovers to DN. Main reason of rising differences on the side of expenses and incomes and total cash flow was the fact that during ON GRID system for leftovers supplement consumers need not to buy electric energy from DN, but he is using produced energy of photovoltaic for his own consumption, which would bring him considerate savings. Such savings could be even more visible, if determined consumption of electric energy in searching object would be higher and object with such installed power plant would be using higher volume of own produced energy and he need not to buy electric energy from DN. Similarly as cash flow in common year, also in the case of not predictable influences, time influence, deprecation of panels and any other risks, discounted cash flow had been expressively recorded as equipment for leftover supplement to DN and its payback period has positive difference yet 18 years.

