analyzing crack’s growth in the context of linear elastic fracture mechanics (LEFM). This technique uses extrapolation of displacements from results compared with those obtained by the integral interaction. On the other hand, crack’sgrowth is analyzed as a model by combining the maximum circumferential stress criteria with the critical plane for predicting the direction of crack growth. In this research, a constant crack growth increment is determined using the classical Paris’s model, or the so-called modified Paris’s model. It is also shown herein that stress intensity factors needed for these models are calculated using the domain form of the J-integral interactions.

Stress Intensity Factor (SIF) is an important parameter in Linear Elastic Fracture Mechanics (LEFM) for the structural integrity assessment of structures containing cracks and singular stress fields [1]. SIF gives a measure of the intensity of the stress field in the crack tip region. It gives also the possibility to analyze a crack growth or a catastrophic failure if a load is applied to the structure [2]. The stress intensity factors can be calculated using stress and strain analysis or parameters that measure the energy released by crack growth. SIF can be estimated analytically or using numerical techniques [3, 4].Analytical methods are more complex to calculate SIF, however, they have some advantage; an analytical solution can be applied for a range of crack lengths and on the other hand, numerical techniques require the calculation of stress or strain field for each crack length corresponding to each value of SIF.

Stress and strain fields for a given structure can be calculated using several techniques [5]. The most common and available ones can be found in several commercial packages employing the Finite Element Method (FEM) [6] or the Boundary Element Method (BEM) [7]. Nowadays, new techniques based on mesh less methods such as the Extended Finite Element Model (XFEM), are emerging and have several advantages compared to the traditional methods, particularly in problems of fracture mechanics [8].

Where Js represents the density of the current sources. Equation (14) refers to the magneto-dynamic equation. All the above expressions are written in a form such that they can be used in the finite element formulation using electromagnetic equations. This weak form is considered as being a boundary integral, which makes it possible to define natural boundary conditions. Then, discretization of the latest uses polynomial of order two, which can lead to the following system;

Consider the test of a non-magnetic tube without a crack, characterized by a permeability equal to unity, a high conductivity 36.7ms, excited by a sinusoidal current of density J = 2.67 106 A/m, and a frequency of 1 kHz. The results of simulation are shown in figures 2, 3, and 4. The control by Eddy currents requires the use of very high frequencies.

Figure3 shows the variation of the impedance Z and KI with respect to the propagation of crack’s depth. It is obvious that the difference in impedance ǻZ is dependent on the crack’s depth. The latter is proportional to the increase of ǻZ. Moreover, SIF KI is evaluated when the depth decreases with ǻZ leading to a decrease of KI. Then, the depth of defection influences the impedance. Figure 4 shows the variation of the impedance Z

The position of defect (internal, middle or external) has a large effect on the impedance. Obtained results show the great sensitivity of the differential sensor with respect to the detection of the surface defects. However, the major disadvantage of this type of sensor lies in the fact that it is unable to detect a defect located between two reels.

