MANET (Mobile Ad hoc Network) consists the nodes that are self-energized and shall be able to accom- modate limited energy levels, and usually the nodes transmit the data using the intermediate nodes to the ones that are not in hop levels. In such conditions, the lifetime of the intermediary nodes turn out to be a critical factor, and hence only when the routes are having maximum residual energy and the ones that have high, spend minimal energy for transmitting the data is very important. In terms of route selec- tion, the emphasis is much on multicast routing and the route discovery, and the efficient nodes selection has to take place with emphasis on QoS. Hence, the energy efficient multicast route discovery process has gained significant importance, and there are many potential solutions depicted in the process. Energy Efficient Lifetime Aware Multicast (EELAM) Route Selection strategy for MANETs is the proposed multi- cast route discovery approach that is developed using the adaptive genetic algorithm. EELAM works based on tree topology that differentiates to other tree based on multicast routing topologies by adapting evolutionary computation strategy defined as genetic algorithm, which shall play a critical role in terms of selecting optimal intermediate nodes with maximal residual energy and minimal energy usage. The fitness function that devised for the adaptive genetic algorithm targeted for improving the energy con- sumption ratio, improving the residual batter life and towards improving the multicasting scope. The process and the methods that are adapted are contemporary and is different to the traditional genetic algorithms, and still the outcome as depicted in the experimental results reflect the fact that the EELAM is the best of in its class that can support in addressing the limitations in the current solutions and towards managing improved route discovery.

Compared to the wired networks, the complexity of multicast- ing in the wireless networks are much higher because of the inter- ferences and mobility related issues. Multicast is an active communication and the concerted correspondence process between various nodes. Flooding based multicasting is one pre- dominant strategy that evinces control packet overhead as high, and emphasized to generate minimal levels of data traffic in the network. However, the challenge is that the issue of scalability is a major constraint in the case of both the solutions. In the case of multicast protocols, there are varied factors that influence the solutions for MANETs, and categorically the issue of node mobility, is a key issue. The crux in the process is about the need for more bandwidth in terms of updates, by taking more of control message packets and high consumption of power.

In the proposed paper, the focus is on developing an energy effi- cient multicast algorithm for MANETs. In the proposed solution, the factor is that the data packets transmitted from source to the group destinations using a node, and such nodes relies on the path with higher efficiency of residual battery powers and relay- capacities. The other objective of the proposal is to minimize the process overhead to select possible multicast routes between source and destination. In regard to this, the depicted model is con- cluding the routes from destination to source, which is novel that compared to other contemporary models.

In regard to overcome this, and to achieve route discovery deterministic process, this manuscript is preparing initial chromo- somes using the route discovery process called EACNS [14]. Later the process of the genetic algorithm is using these chromosomes in crossover process. Moreover, among the parent chromosomes and newly formed chromosomes, the best fit will be survive and rest will be pruned from the chromosome list, which is progressive evolution strategy. Due to this the number of evolutions are deter- ministic and limits the evolutions process complexity.

Profoundly the algorithms that are designed with intension of power efficiency was based on cluster-based or by adapting the tree-based models. In the later model, emphasis is on developing tree-based solutions that are highly efficient in power manage- ment, and depending on source, they further classified as multicast-source or single-source algorithms. Some of the power efficient single-source multicast models defined are MIP, S-REMIT and RBIP [15].

In [16] G-REMIT was proposed as an alternative tree-based mul- ticast to enable routing between multiple sources and sinks. The critical objective of the model is to achieve multicasting with min- imal energy consumption. REMiT is another model with emphasis towards reducing the consumption levels of energies and improv- ing network lifetime. L-REMit model proposed with objective of refining the lifetime of the network for the source-based trees. G- REMiT model is more about reducing the energy consumption amidst the group-shared trees.

In [17,18], the study has discussed contemporary solutions those enables multicasting. The emphasis of these models is to enhance the network life time. The MLMH [18] depicted a metric called EEM (Energy Efficiency Metric), which is the result of aggre- gate hop-count values and relative levels of increment of lifetime. Lifetime-Aware-Multicast-Tree (LAM) works on maximizing the lifetime by identifying a route with minimal levels of energy con- sumption and exploits the multicast lifetime [19]. The other method of Prioritized-overlay-multicast algorithm shall work towards improving the effectiveness and efficacy of the superim- pose multicast in MANET, by ensuring that there is effective role

The other method MAODV proposed in [21] is an extended ver- sion of AODV that targets improvisation of the process, where all multicast group constituted as a tree that leads by the root node that broadcasts the data packets to the nodes involved in corre- sponding tree. Any corrections, rectifications and repairing of the tree carried out using the MAODV protocol core. MP-MAODV dis- cussed in [22] is an extended model of MAODV and works on mul- tipath selection and establishment, and handling the process of multipath route maintenance along with other functions like load distribution. The MP-MAODV is capable to build multicast tree with multiple sources and multiple sinks that enables bidirectional sharing. In addition, the MAODV is one of the shortest routing with least levels of hops routing, however, the MP-MAODV is much rig- orous in terms of establishing the maximum possible number of multicast routes between so node and multiple sinks that is adapted in the backup route.

EGMP (Efficient geographic multicast protocol) [28] petitions the network into set of virtual zones to achieve effective manage- ment of group membership. In order to this, a network wide zone oriented bidirectional tree is formed in each virtual zone. The experimental study that compared the ERGMP with ODMRP and SPBM evincing that the ratio of packets delivered through EGMP is considerably high that compared to OBMRP and SPBM. The min- imal control packet overhead is observed in multicasting process of the EGMP than the other two protocols. However, there is gener- ally less efficiency with regards to the usage of energy.

The fuzzy oriented demand on multicast routing protocol (FBODMRP) [29] has been proposed as a highly efficient means of delivering information from the node at the source to different nodes, which are the receivers. The main objective of FBODMRP mainly entails establishing small, high quality as well as highly efficient forwarding group. When FBODMRP is compared to ODMRP, it is worth pointing out that fuzzy based approach results into higher packet delivery ratio, very low control information uti- lization as well as delays in the environment, which is highly dense. In addition, power saving option is greater if there is need for low control overhead. As future work, the fuzzy rules may use over the cognitive networks. This depicted model plays a role in increasing the rates of packet delivery by 40 percent, and the ratio of delay and energy dissipation reduced relatively to 35 and 45 percent. However, the loss rate is proportionating to network density.

In the case that multicast transmission from multiple sources to multiple sinks, the main challenge, which is faced generally, entails the development of MEM tree to enable the conveyance of multi- cast data. This results into the minimization of the whole con- sumption of power for packet conveyance within the tree. There is the building of least energy multicast tree. However, it is only appropriate to the ad hoc networks that build by symmetric place- ment of the nodes.

Hence, the contribution of this manuscript aimed to establish a best-fit multicast route that consumes minimal energy to transmit and retains maximum lifetime of the route. In order to this, the proposal relied on adaptive genetic algorithm that uses multicast scope, energy consumption ration and reserve battery ratio in fitness assessment. The adaptive genetic algo- rithm adapted for optimal multicast route selects the sub-trees with dynamic number of nodes and optimal fitness as crossover points to perform mutations, which is significant to reduce the computational overhead that usually found in traditional Genetic Algorithm strategies.

Adaptive Generic Algorithms (AGAs) is one of the affluent algo- rithms, and pc (probabilities of crossover) and the mutation (pm), certainly determines the level of accuracy and the quantum of speed that the genetic algorithms can attain. Rather than taking any fixed values in to account, in the case of the adaptive algo- rithms, the emphasis is on gathering inputs from the population diversity as well as in terms of sustaining the convergence capac- ity. In the AGA model [36], the fitness values of the solutions are vital in terms of determining pc and pm values for the solutions, whereas, in the case of CAGA [37], the decision of pc and pm depends more on the optimization states of the population. The scope of combining GA with the other set of optimization methods shall be more proficient as the GA is very effective in finding good global solutions, but the challenge is about its limitations in terms of finding the absolute optimum using the last few mutations. Some of the other techniques like the hill climbing method and other such solutions are certainly effective and efficient in finding the most favorable in a confined region, but in the case of

In the placement of each node, with 25%, 50%, 75% and broad- cast range with four distinct multicast groups are spawned, which can lead to process that is more emphatic. Also, the power sum is normalized in order to reduce the minimum heuristic solution to 1. The results that discussed about average numbers over 100 sets and routes formed with the range of nodes between 10 and 45.

Energy Efficient and Lifetime aware Multicast (EELAM) route discovery for mobile ad hoc networks is the model that designed to address the issues pertaining to curtailing the consumption of energy and maximizing the route lifetime. The proposed topology EELAM is effective in terms of assessing the optimality of the mul- ticast tree by ensuring that three crucial metrics Reserve Battery Life, Energy Consumption Ratio and multicast scope evaluated. The adaptive genetic algorithm is used to identify energy efficient lifetime aware multicast tree, which is balancing the process over- head by selecting sub-trees having dynamic number of nodes with optimal fitness as crossover points and further refining input chro- mosomes by comparing the fitness with child chromosomes formed. The significance of the EELAM assessed through the simu- lations build by network simulator called NS2. In order to this, the routing performance metrics, such as packet delivery ratio, end-to- end delay, throughput versus mobility, and energy consumption

ratio used. The results obtained for these metrics from the multi- cast route discovered by EELAM compared to the other bench marking models such as EACNS, EDCMRA, HSPMA, and MC- TRACE. These metrics were also compared between the multicast routes formed with divergent count of nodes those discovered by EELAM, which is in order to evince the scalability and efficacy of the proposed model. Insights learnt from this model motivating us to redefine the Adaptive Genetic Algorithm, such that the fitness function can use fuzzy reasoning to estimate the fitness of the given multicast route.

