Spray cooling technology relying on phase-change mechanism has a notable ability to remove high heat fluxes. Spray cooling can be used to transfer large amounts of energy through the latent heat of evaporation. Heat transfer rates much higher than can be attained in pool boiling are possible with spray cooling since the vapor can be removed from the surface more easily. Therefore, spray cooling has a number of applications in the various fields such as continuous casting process, electronics thermal control and metal quenching process which require a high flux cooling technique [1-3]. One important area which would benefit from spray cooling to improve heat removal is press quenching of extruded aluminum alloy plate.

Heat transfer in spray cooling has been studied extensively throughout the world. Shaojun Zhang et al [4] studied the effects of spray distance and high-temperature steel plate’s surface temperature on heat transfer coefficient in spray cooling. Eric A. Silk et al [5] investigated the effects of surface roughness and spray inclination angle on spray cooling.

In the past few years, studies [6-8] on the spray angle are focused on the spray angle itself and the coefficients of discharge and the spray cone angle, fruitful results were obtained by both experimental and numerical research. However, progress in the research of effects of spray angle on spray cooling has been very slow, especially in the field of metal press quenching. The analysis of the effects of spray angle on heat transfer is much more difficult and the direct numerical simulation is the best choice for theoretical study.

This paper attempts to make some numerical investigations on the effects of spray angle on spray cooling of extruded aluminum alloy plate to look for an optimal range of spray angle value that can improve the cooling performance. A commercial FVM code, Fluent, will be employed to calculate the temperature distribution within the cooled aluminum plate. The corresponding stress distribution is obtained with the help of MSC.Marc software.

The cooling target is 300 mm × 10 mm section aluminum alloy plate, Fig 1 shows the simplified spray cooling model for analysis with nozzle arrangement. The pressure boundary condition at inlet and outlet is P = 101325 Pa. For the surface, no slip boundary condition is considered. SIMPLE algorithm is adopted as the pressure-velocity coupling solver. It is clear from the 2-D mesh model shown in Fig 2 that the mesh around the outlet of nozzle along the spray axis is locally fined to improve the computation resolution.

The aluminum plate is assumed of uniform temperature distribution when it is extruded from the extruding machine. Therefore, the initial temperature distribution of the plate is set uniform, the temperature value is set 793 K. The material property is 6061 aluminum alloy.

The distribution of heat transfer coefficient on top surface at different spray angle is described in Fig 3, which indicates that the highest heat transfer coefficient is at the spray stagnation point (located at the central point of top surface) in all cases. With the distance from the stagnation point increasing, the heat transfer coefficient is on a decrease on the whole. From the Fig 4, it can be observed that the increase of cooling efficiency and cooling uniformity can be improved under an optimal range of spray angle, in this paper, the optimal range of spray angle is from 70º to 90º.

A numerical study of spray cooling of extruded aluminum alloy plate with an emphasis on spray angle effects on cooling performance has been presented. The analysis for the cooling process is a combination of FEM and FVM. The results show that increasing spray angle contributes to improving uniformity of surface temperature distribution, surface equivalent stress distribution and reduction of maximum surface equivalent stress obviously, and the spray cooling will be performed with higher thermal efficiency in a certain range of spray angle, the optimal range of spray angle is from 70ºto 90º in this paper.

