In this paper, experiment platform for cavity flow is built in low-turbulence wind tunnel. based on the measurement of wall static pressure and sound pressure with microphones, the basic flow oscillation characteristics of different type cavity in low speed are studied. The effect of geometry parameters of length to depth ratio and width to depth ratio on cavity flow pattern and noise characteristics is obtained. The results show that in the incompressible flow state, the basic flow pattern of cavities is not affected by flow velocity; length-to-depth ratio of 1 to 12 covers the flow pattern from open to close, and with the length-to-depth ratio increase, the cavity radiation SPL increases; with aspect ratio increase, the sound pressure energy of cavity also increase.

Cavity flow is a problem often encountered in practical engineering, and is currently a hot aerodynamics research field internationally. there are a variety of complex unsteady cavity flow such as aircraft landing gear, weapons bay, car sunroof and so on. When the flow passes over the cavity, flow oscillation will be produced and radiate noise. The research of cavity flow typically involving complex flow-sound-vortex interference, unsteady character and shear layer instability problems, which has great research significance.

The maximum depth of the cavity 116mm, maximum length 700mm, and the maximum width 120mm.. Figure 1 shows the parameter definition of cavity geometry. The contact surface of cavity with wind tunnel is filled with soft foam padding to avoid local airflow crossing up and down and reduce the effects of wind tunnel vibration on the flow structure of cavity.

The wind tunnel test is carried out in low turbulence wind tunnel (LTWT) of Northwestern Polytechnical University. The test section of LTWT has two different layouts: three dimensional-only and three dimensional connected with two dimensional. In this paper, the cavity is tested in two dimensional test section which has the cross-sectional dimension of 1.0m × 0.4m. The wind speed operation range in wind tunnel is 5m/s~75m/s.

Figure 3 shows that when the flow stream conditions is consistent, with length to depth ratio L/D varies from 1 to 12 , the pressure on cavity bottoms goes gently through the development from flat to step, covering four basic flow pattern from open to close, and the corresponding length to depth ratio L/D is2, 4, 8 and 12 respectively. For cavity of L/D=2, the pressure distribution is changed gently with the low pressure in middle, for L/D=4, the spoon-shaped distribution is formed, i.e., the front part pressure is high and flattening, and the rear part pressure decreases. As the ratio of length to depth continues to increase, the front pressure decreases, the rear end of the bottom pressure rise, till to L/D=12, the middle pressure forms a platform.

Figure 4 shows that the noise in the cavity exhibits broadband characteristics, mainly due to low frequency radiation caused by the flow oscillations. When the flow velocity is 30m/s, with decreasing of length to depth ratio, sound pressure level radiated from cavity is reduced. For L/D=2, the maximum sound pressure level is 90dB, which is lower than L/D=12 by 15dB. Open cavity flow can generate oscillations which appear that certain frequencies amplified and sound pressure level forms peaks at some frequency.

Figure 5 shows the static pressure distribution comparison within wind speed range of 10m/s~50m/s for cavity L/D=4,12. The results denoted that in the low speed (M <0.2) incompressible flow, the wind speed has less affect the averaged pressure distribution in a small magnitude, i.e., with the flow velocity increased, the cavity internal flow increase, but does not change the basic flow type of cavity.

increases. For L/D=12, the maximum SPL reach to 109dB at 50m/s, 26dB more than that at 10m/s. This indicates that with the flow velocity increasing, the cavity pressure and density largely oscillate, which greatly increase the amplitude of noise, but the affect little on the oscillation frequency.

Figure 7 shows that with the aspect ratio W/D increases, the spanwise flow enhanced which can effectively alleviate adverse pressure gradient on bottoms, so that the pressure distribution tends to be flat. For L/D=4, there are changes trends to the open flow type. Noise spectrum in Figure 8 shows that the changes of width to depth ratio greatly affect the cavity radiated noise, namely, with the aspect ratio increasing, the sound pressure peak is eliminated, but the maximum sound pressure level increases by at least 10dB.

