study. Lei Zhang et al.[8] analyzed hardness layer depth of alloy steel by grinding process. Fu X.L. et al.[9] investigated surface hardening for aluminum alloy in high speed milling. Therefore, turning of stainless steel:JIS SUS 303 was interesting. The study of factors that affected to the quality of turning was important. Thus, the propose of this research was to investigate the factors that affected to roundness and hardness of turning a stainless steel :JIS SUS 303

Material used for this experiment was stainless steel grade JIS: SUS 303. The thirty-six specimens were prepared in diameter of 26 mm and 120 mm long as shown in Fig.1 and 2. The chemical composition of specimen was showed in Table 1. The experiment was run on CNC turning machine ‘MAZAK model Quick Turn Smart 100S ’. Insert carbide cutting tool was used with TiCN+Al2O3+TiN with polycrystalline vapor deposited (PVD) coated carbide cutting tool, as shown in Fig.3. The data of roundness was measured by the roundness tester ‘Rondcom model 40A’ and data on hardness was tested by Rockwell hardness tester ‘Future-Tech model FR-3e’ in Rockwell scale B (HRB).

The experiment was designed by using two factors with three levels (32 designs). Factors used for this study were cutting speed and feed rate. Cutting speed was identified at 100, 150, and 200 meter per minute and feed rate was set at 0.08, 0.12, and 0.16 millimetre per revolution. In addition, the experiment was done by comparing between cooling and non-cooling as shown in Table 2. The experimental factors were tested with eight trials before running the actual experiment.

The actual experiment was randomly run with two replicates. The machined specimens were measured for roundness that using average value and for hardness with Rockwell scale B as responses. The measuring was done by three positions on machined surface. Data were analysed by statistical methods to finding the effect of factor on roundness and hardness.

The appropriate levels of experiment, initial setting factors, were determined. The results were tested by the normality test. The result of normality test was showed that significantly normal. It means that the experimental factors have been appropriate levels. The mainly outcome of this experiment was main factors and factor interactions that affected to roundness and hardness, as following below.

The results of roundness was analysed by analysis of variance (ANOVA) as showed in Table 3. It indicated that factor affecting to roundness was only cooling condition that showed significantly different at the level of .01. Non-cooling turning or dry-cutting would cause on worse roundness as showed in Fig. 4-5. The turning with cooling was showed that roundness value was lower than dry-cutting. It means that the turning with cooling was the better process for quality of stainless steel SUS 303. Moreover, increasing cutting speed in dry cutting would be increasing roundness quality of workpieces. On the other hand, on cooling cutting with high cutting speed was not increasing roundness quality of stainless steel SUS 303. Furthermore, increasing feed rate in cooling turning would be decreasing roundness quality but in dry-cutting was not different.

In addition, the hardness of specimens was tested between before and after turning. The mean hardness before experiment (raw surface) was 96.47 HRB and mean hardness after turning (machined surface) was 93.23 HRB as shown in Fig 6. The effects of cutting speed and feed rate on surface hardness were showed in Fig 7-8. There were showed that the hardness of raw and machined surface were not different. Similarly, the effect of the cooling condition was presented in Fig 9. It shows that means hardness was closely. It was confirmed by the paired T-test which was done for analysis on hardness results as showed in Table 4. The T-test was showed not significantly different between hardness of raw and machined surface. It means that the all of turning parameters

This research was to study the turning parameters that affected to roundness and hardness of turning stainless steel SUS 303. As the result of the experiment, it could be conclude that cooling was mainly affected to the roundness. Non-cooling cutting or dry-cutting would cause of worse quality for roundness. It means that cooling on turning was the better process for quality of roundness.

Moreover, hardness of surface after turning was studied. It was found that hardness was not influenced by cutting speed, feed rate and cooling or non-cooling. The hardness of stainless steel SUS 303 specimen between raw surface and machined surface was not significantly difference.

