In the condition of equivalence ratio α=1 and different spark advance angle (SAA), non-linear dynamic characteristics of combustion process in spark ignition (SI) natural gas engine was studied. The results show that the attractors always have a non-periodic structure within a limited region .When SAA increases indicated mean effective pressure (IMEP) and the scale of attractors increase whereas the coefficients of cyclic variation and the correlation dimension of system decrease. It is observed that the correlation dimension of system is fractal and the largest Lyapunov exponent (LLE) of the system is always greater than zero. Therefore in condition of α = 1, combustion system is of obvious non-linear deterministic nature and the complexity of the system is reduced with the increase of SAA.

Issues relating to environmental pollution and fuel reservoirs are becoming more and more important. Compressed natural gas (CNG) is a good alternative fuel because of its plentiful resources and clean burning characteristics. Advantages including knock tolerance, less CO2 emission, greater ability to homogenate and reduction of the Non-Methane hydrocarbon emissions have attracted a huge public interest in CNG engines.

Cyclic combustion variability is also one of the main characteristics of the SI natural gas engines [1]. There will be a 10% increase in the power output of the engine if the cyclic combustion variability is eliminated [2]. The problem of reducing cyclic variability has not been solved up to now. Generation mechanism, source identification and elimination of cyclic combustion variability have therefore become important issues in SI engine technology engineering. J.B. Heywood [3] identified three main factors influencing cyclic combustion variability which include aerodynamics in the cylinder during combustion, a mixture composition near the spark plug and the amount of fuel, air and recycled exhaust gases supplied to the cylinder.

Larger ignition timing is required in CNG engines as compared to gasoline engines because of its higher ignition temperatures and slow flame propagation speed. Cylinder pressure was recorded and analyzed at different spark timings (SAA = 30ºCA, 35º CA, 40 ºCA and 45ºCA before top dead center) keeping engine speed, air/fuel ratio and throttle setting constant. Measured pressure data against crank angle is shown in Fig.

2. Graphs show that the cyclic variation decreases and the peak pressure and IMEP increase with the increase of SAA. IMEP increases from 0.798 to 0.854MPa and the coefficient of cyclic variation reduces from 4.4% to 1.2% when SAA increases from 30˚CA to 45 ºCA as shown in Fig.3.

Dynamic characteristics of natural gas engine combustion system can not be mathematically represented and it can only be extracted from the pressure time series. Pressure time series contain all traces of the variables therefore we have used the method of phase space reconstruction to illustrate combustion dynamics of CNG engine. On the basis of Takens’ embedding theorem the phase space is constructed from the pressure time series [12]. The time-delayed coordinates used for the construction of the phase space are expressed as

Where N’ is sampling number, m is embedding dimension and τ is delay time. If delay time is too small the elements of the phase space vectors are strongly correlated. However if delay time is too large the correlation is lost completely. We applied autocorrelation function to determine the suitable delay time. Phase space reconstruction plots obtained from the pressure time series for different SAA are shown in Fig.4. At 30˚CA ignition timing the scale of attractor is smaller and its trajectory is looser. The dynamic behaviour of pressure fluctuations does not exhibit a deterministic nature. With the increase of SAA the scale of attractor increases gradually, the periodicity of the dominant periodic fluctuations becomes prominent, the IMEP increases and the cyclic combustion variability becomes smaller. It only lasts a few milliseconds for a single cycle and combustion will finish in a large combustion chamber volume if the combustion starts too late, thus it leads to partly combustion and chaotic behaviour is observed [5].

Fig. 5 presents the typical plots of lnC(r) versus lnr calculated for various embedding dimension at different SAA. The scaling region is set in the middle third of the horizontal range of the plot of lnC(r) versus lnr. The scaling region covers the linear portion of curves in Fig. 5. Slope of the scaling region of each curve

