802.16 standards. Its advantage of sending high-data rates over long distances, while using a single base station to cover a large area, has made this technique a flexible and reliable solution for public wireless networks. In this paper, a current- bleeding Gilbert Cell down-converter mixer is proposed for WiMax direct-conversion receivers. With 5.1 dB of conversion gain, 1.5 dBm of IIP3, 36 dBm of IIP2 as well as 11.6dB and 8.4dB of single sideband and double sideband noise figure, respectively, the proposed 0.15mm InGaAspHEMT mixer largely meets the WiMax standards as demonstrated though successful comparison with published designs.

The ever-increasing demand for secured high-speed high-data rates communication links, preferably accessible through laptops and smartphones via wireless connections, is making the Worldwide Interoperability for Microwave Access, or WiMax, one of the most promising technologies to explore. Furthermore, WiMax systems can cover long distance areas with fewer base stations compared to other wireless technologies, thus involving lower costs in maintenance, operation, and management (J. Malleket al.,

In a WiMax receiver, the down converter mixer is one of the most important devices to consider. Depending on the desired performance, various parameter objectives should be targeted while designing a mixer, such as high conversion gain, 1dB compression point (P-1dB), port-to-port isolation, input second- order intercept point (IIP2) and input third-order intercept point (IIP3) as well as low noise figure (NF) and voltage supply. In practice, these parameters cannot be achieved simultaneously. So, based on design constraints and standard specifications, different mixer types and topologies can be considered.

However, the Gilbert-cell down converter mixer is one of the most suitable for WiMax applications (Wei et al., 2010;Hsiao et al., 2010; Wu et al., 2010). In fact, The Gilbert-cell mixer exhibits major advantages over single and single-balanced mixers due to inherent port isolation, relatively high gain, moderate linearity, and efficient cancellation of even-order harmonic distortion.

In the last few years, significant work has been done to improve the Gilbert cell mixer performance, leading to folded mixers, current reuse mixers, and current bleeding mixers. In this paper, a current-bleeding Gilbert Cell down-converter mixer is proposed for WiMax direct-conversion receivers. The design was achieved using the 0.15mm InGaAspHEMT technology processfrom Win Semiconductor Crop.0. With 5.1 dB of conversion gain, 1.5 dBm of IIP3, 36 dBm of IIP2 as well as 11.6dB and 8.4dB of single sideband and double sideband noise figure, respectively, the proposed mixer largely meets the WiMax standards as demonstrated though successful comparison with published designs.

Gilbert cell mixers are widespread utilized due to their high port isolation, excellent gain, and cancellation of all even harmonics. However, they require staking more transistors leading to more bias supply and power dissipation as well as poorer noise figure and linearity (Krcmaret al., 2007;Su et al., 2008). Therefore, some techniques have been proposed to enhance the conventional Gilbert cell mixer performance, leading to folded mixers, current reuse mixers, and current bleeding mixers (Krcmaret al., 2007;Su et al., 2008; Karanicolas, 1996; Lin et al., 2006).

In this work, the current bleeding technique has been retained as a suitable tool to improve the mixer response. In the proposed design (Fig. 1), the RF signal is applied to the gate of the differential transistors (M1 and M2). Such configuration produces relatively constant gain, cancels the even harmonics, and converts the M1 and M2 RF input signal voltage to output current. The LO signal is applied to M3-M6. These transistors operate near pinch-off region in order to accomplish the multiplication of the RF amplified signal with the LO signal.

Therefore, a current bleeding block (R1 and R2) was added to M1 and M2 to enhance the conversion gain by increasing the current in the RF stage. This current should be enough to operate M1 and M2 in the saturation region while reducing the current in the LO stage; therefore, the voltage is dropped in the load resistors R6 and R7.(Tsai et al., 2007;Khyet al., 2010; Wuet al., 2010).

However, as displayed in Fig. 2 (b), the above LO power gives a relatively high single sideband noise figure of around 10 dB. Therefore, as compromise, we selected a LO power of 0 dBm, corresponding to a conversion gain of about 6 dB and a noise figure of 9.3 dB for single side band and 6 dB for double sideband, respectively. Figure 3 shows an IIP3 of 1 dBm while the IIP2 was found to be 39 dBm.

As for the co-simulation (Fig. 4 and Fig. 5), the obtained conversion gain is displayed in Fig. 4 (a) while the noise figure for both single side and double side bands is shown in Fig. 4 (b). The corresponding IIP2 and IIP3 are found to be 36 dBm and 1.5 dBm, respectively (Fig. 5). The co-simulation layout is illustrated in

In this paper, the design of down converter Gilbert cell mixer for WiMax application was proposed. Implemented in the 0.15μm GaAs pHEMT technology, he exhibits a 5.1 dB of conversion gain, 1.5 dBm of IIP3, 36 dBm of IIP2 as well as 11.6dB and 8.4dB of single sideband and double sideband noise figure, respectively, thus largely meets the WiMax standards as demonstrated though successful comparison with published designs.

