This paper addresses the problems, connected with calculation of the electric field and analysis of surface flashover of node tank SF6 circuit breaker. Namely, the gap between the grounded tank unit, a filter system and a conductive system is receiving input power. The paper also provides the recommendations for change SF6 circuit breaker design.

SF6 circuit breaker insulation system design can be of two kinds with gas gap or along the surfaces of solid dielectrics. The discharge conditions of along the surfaces of solid dielectrics differ significantly from the discharge conditions in the gas gap and it can be the main factor in determining the circuit breaker geometric dimensions. In operation, the insulation system must withstand the normalized AC voltage and normalized overvoltages.

Nowadays SF6 insulation has gained wide-spread acceptance in high-voltage units as internal insulation due to high physical-chemical and electrical characteristics. Therefore the demand arose for reliable and accurate calculation techniques for analysis of structures’ electric strength by main gaps. However, presently available criteria are frequently empirical or semi-empirical and application – specific, consequently their application is limited [1]. Therefore performance evaluation of construction under high-voltage is complicated.

Based on presently-available calculation techniques, electric strength analysis of switching unit node under high voltage with internal insulation was performed in the present study. General view of switching unit node is given in Fig. 1 [6]. Nodes are numerated as follows: 1 - grounded casing; 2 - epoxy insulator; 3 - SF6 cleanup system (filter); 4- clamping element for current conductor 7 and insulator 2; 5 - screen in current- conducting system-filter gap; 6 - screen in current-conducting system-grounded casing gap; 7 - current conductor. Gas flow is indicated by arrows.

Distribution pattern of electrical field in the node under investigation (Fig. 2) was obtained for analytical calculation in software package Elcut 5.5 (corresponding region is denoted in Fig. 1 by rectangular frame). Herewith axially-symmetrical problem of electrostatics was solved. Field distribution is denoted by equipotential lines, intensity distribution is denoted by arrows. Elements designations are given in accordance with Fig. 1. Contours (a-b) and (c-d-e-f) indicate possible directions of discharge formation.

Axially-symmetrical problem setting slightly impairs calculation accuracy (in comparison with three- dimensional model), but it allows to carry out an estimative analysis. The most probable directions of discharge formation, subject to calculation, are given in Fig. 2. Basic parameters of gaps, under investigation, are given in Table 1. Two main gaps types can be distinguished in construction under investigation: purely gas-insulated gap (a-b, c-d, e-f) and a gap along insulator surface (d-e).

Obtained results show that there is an adequate electrical strength of construction in case of “pure” conditions in a gap, for which given expressions are correct. We can also make conclusion that approximated dependence of more simple form for intensity distribution in a gap in case of excessively inhomogeneous fields can be applied. Difference in calculated values is approximately 3%.

The results obtained indicate insufficient dielectric strength design, even for a gap in the unpolluted particles and decomposition products in SF6. The gas gap dielectric strength a-b is slightly greater than the withstand test voltage. Discharge voltage along the surface of the solid dielectric d-e is 0.77 of the withstand test voltage. Possible discharge path c-d-e-f is represented of electric line of force in the investigated gap, however, as shown in [5] the discharge gap along the surface of the dielectric may have another way.

In this paper, based on the discharge streamer inception criterion of tank circuit breaker electric strength is calculated. The results obtained indicate insufficient dielectric strength of this design. The theoretical results obtained during the lightning impulse test of breaker insulation are confirmed experimentally. At the moment, dielectric strength by varying the gap from 82 to 100 mm is increased.

