Abstract E-learning has become progressively more vital for academia and corporate training and has potentially become one of the most significant developments and applications in Information Technologies (ITs). This study used a quantitative approach seeking a causative explanation of the decision behavior of individuals toward the acceptance and assimilation of e-learning in academic settings. A survey of 286 participants (students) was conducted to col- lect the research data. Our study framework was based on the third version of the Technology Acceptance Model (i.e., TAM3) and the data were analyzed using structural equation modeling in order to determine the factors that influence the learners’ intention to use e-learning. Results show the predicting (promot- ing/inhibiting) factors of e-learning technology acceptance, while also examining some related post-implementation interventions expected to contribute to the acceptance and assimilation of e-learning systems. Our results also indicate that TAM3 holds well in the Arabian culture and also outline valuable outcomes such as: managerial interventions and controls for better organizational e-learning management that can lead to greater acceptance and effective utilization. Hope- fully, this study provides a roadmap to more understanding of the success factors

Technology-assisted learning via ICT (or e-learning) has become progressively more vital for academia and corporate training. Furthermore, e-learning has potentially become one of the most significant developments in ICTs [46]. Motivated by such compelling advantages as: geographical reach, learner control (in terms of flexibility and convenience), and cost effectiveness in course delivery and management, educational institutions and professional organizations are embracing e-learning by implementing an expanding array of technology- enabled platforms [27].

Recently, Saudi Arabia has called for a national plan to adopt IT spanning the country. The plan strongly recommends the implementation of e-learning and distance learning, and their prospective applications, in higher education. In a major transformation of conventional education, the Saudi Ministry of Higher Education has recently launched the National Centre of E-learning & Distance Learning, set up a repository to organize the change, and prepare e-learning mate- rials to help universities adopt the system and transform to a scheme of e-learning quickly [39].

of greater acceptance and effective utilization of ITs. This study draws heavily on the seminal work of Venkatesh and Bala [44] and Baker et al. [9] due to their interrelated nature dealing with IT acceptance and adoption testing as a common thematic issue. More specifically, Venkatesh and Bala [44] provide TAM3 as a theoretical base model while Baker et al. [9] provide the quasi replication and testing approach of a theoretical model in a different culture.

This study sets out an empirical research for investigating e-learning acceptance and assimilation in Saudi Arabia as having a unique culture that is different from the Western culture where TAM originated. The fundamental contribution of this study is to exploit TAM3 to predict technology acceptance of e-learning in Saudi Arabia as a developing country, in addition to inquiring for some related post- implementation interventions that might contribute to the acceptance and assim- ilation of e-learning systems in developing countries. The specific objectives of this study are: (i) to develop a customized Technology Acceptance Model using TAM3 for the determinants of the acceptance and assimilation of e-learning; (ii) to employ survey research to test the customized e-learning model per se; and (iii) to outline outcomes of the study, such as, the antecedents of e-learning technology acceptance and managerial interventions and control for better organizational e-learning management. It is hoped that this project provides a roadmap to a bet- ter understanding of the success factors and post-implementation interventions contributing to the acceptance and assimilation of e-learning systems in develop- ing countries in general.

Mirza and Al-Abdulkareem [30] reviewed the current situation of e-learning in the Middle East (ME). They presented drivers and barriers to e-learning, the different types of e-learning initiatives, steps being taken toward overcoming the challenges, and a possible future of e-learning through a case study of ongoing developments of e-learning in Saudi Arabia. Educational organizations in the ME are varying in their engagement in e-learning as some are pioneering while the majority are pro- gressing visa-vis those that are still laggards.

To provide more insight into how to promote e-learning acceptance among students in Saudi Arabia, Al-Harbi [7] investigated the factors that influence e-learning by analyzing the perceptions and attitudes of Saudi university students using a survey conducted to investigate the acceptance of e-learning as perceived by students. Al-Harbi used a combined factor model of the original TAM and the Theory of Planned Behavior (TPB) [3] to explain significant perceptional and attitudinal factors related to the acceptance of e-learning. The findings demonstrated that attitudes toward e-learning, subjective norms, perceived behavioral control as well as e-learning system attributes were critical determinants of students’ behavioral intention to use e-learning.

Advanced technologies facilitating a new environment of higher education e-learning have been investigated in Saudi Arabia such as the adoption of smart phones and tablets which is known as mobile learning or m-learning [13,32,37]. These studies report prevailing of these technologies to some extent indicating that the acceptance and adoption level of m-learning is on rise as the majority of stu- dents express positive attitudes toward m-learning due to the flexibility of learning methods and timings, and improved communication among learners. However, Chanchary and Islam [13] pointed out that there are many more challenges still to overcome like giving proper training to students (a type of intervention as per TAM3) so they can have a sense of security in the new environment in an attempt to take full advantage of e-learning.

Jordan is a good example of developing countries in the ME, exemplifying an IT hub for the region, first introduced e-learning in the Arab Open University in 2002 [1]. Abbad et al. [1] and Al-Adwan et al. [4] explored students’ acceptance of e-learning in Jordanian universities using the original TAM. Their findings, respectively, indicated that students’ beliefs about usefulness and ease of use partially mediate the relationships between external factors (subjective norms, internet experience, system characteristics, self-efficacy, and technical support) and intention to use and actual use of e-learning systems; and that intention to use e-learning systems is only predicted by perceived usefulness as students’ attitude did not significantly affect intention to use e-learning, while perceived ease of use was found to significantly predict both usefulness and attitude toward e-learning.

The original TAM [19,20] proposed that two belief constructs, perceived useful- ness (PU) and perceived ease of use (PEOU), are primary determinants of an individual’s behavioral intention (BI) to use an IT. BI was theorized as the pri- mary predictor of actual usage behavior. There were successive developments of TAM: TAM2, UTAUT, and finally TAM3. Fortunately, the original TAM, TAM2 and UTAUT were tested in the Arabian context and showed to hold very well [5,9,6], respectively).

In this study, following Baker et al. [9], TAM3 is tested in the context of Saudi Arabia, a technologically-developing Arab nation. Since the Technology Acceptance Model is built on the foundation of an individual’s beliefs, it is rational to expect that the application of any given Technology Acceptance Model in the two different cultural contexts could produce different results [9]. It is hoped that the findings of this study shall help to improve our understanding about the antecedents of e-learning technology acceptance and assimilation in Saudi Arabia, thereby providing us an opportunity to refine the model to suit this country’s unique cultural context and offering a path to investigate technology adoption characteristics in other developing countries [5,9]. This paper was part of a scien- tific project which evolved over more than 3 years since 2010. The agenda for this project was summarized and published in the second international conference of e-learning and distance education by the ministry of higher education in Saudi Arabia [22].

The most recent and comprehensive developments of TAM are manifested in TAM3. Venkatesh and Bala [44] synthesized prior research on TAM and devel- oped a theoretical framework that represents the cumulative body of knowledge from TAM research that accumulated over the years, that results in four different types of determinants of PU and PEOU – individual differences, system characteristics, social influence, and facilitating conditions. According to Venkatesh and Bala [44], ‘‘individual difference variables include personality and/or demo- graphics (e.g., traits or states of individuals, gender, and age) that can influence individuals’ perceptions of PU and PEOU’’, while, ‘‘system characteristics are those salient features of a system that can help individuals develop favorable (or unfavorable) perceptions regarding the usefulness or ease of use of a system’’, whereas, ‘‘social influence captures various social processes and mechanisms that guide individuals to formulate perceptions of various aspects of an IT’’, finally, ‘‘facilitating conditions represent organizational support that facilitates the use of an IT’’ (p. 276). In summary, Venkatesh and Bala [44] combined TAM2 [42] and the model of the determinants of PEOU [41], and developed an integrated model of technology acceptance which they called: TAM3. TAM3 presents a com- prehensive nomological network of the determinants of individuals’ IT adoption and use, as shown in Fig. 1.

In the context of IT adoption and use, social influence processes (i.e., compli- ance, identification, and internalization) represent how important referents believe about the instrumental benefits of using a system [42]. Prior individual informa- tion and perceptions – about how easy a system is to use from important referents – are unlikely to be stable as individuals need to form these stable perceptions based on their own general computer beliefs and hands-on experience with the sys- tem [21]. In TAM3, three constructs – subjective norms (SN), image (IMG), and

Figure 1 Research model – A modified Technology Acceptance Model 3 (TAM3)a – and structural model. aDotted variables (Usage behavior and objective usability) are omitted. Note: All b for path coefficients are significant at p < 0.05 or better except coefficients of b < ±0.04.

job relevance, output quality, result demonstrability, and perceived ease of use. ‘‘The core theoretical argument underlying the role of cognitive instrumental pro- cesses is that individuals form perceived usefulness judgment in part by cognitively comparing what a system is capable of doing with what they need to get done in their job’’ [42, p. 190]. TAM3 theorizes that job relevance and result demonstra- bility directly affect perceived usefulness while output quality operates as a moderator of the relationship of job relevance with perceived usefulness. Table 1 presents the constructs definitions of social influence processes followed by the cognitive instrumental processes.

Four anchors were suggested by TAM3: ‘‘computer self-efficacy, computer anxiety, computer playfulness, and perceptions of external control (or facilitating conditions). The first three of these anchors represent individual differences (are) general beliefs associated with computers and computer use. Computer self- efficacy refers to individuals’ control beliefs regarding his or her personal ability to use a system. Perceptions of external control are related to individuals’ control beliefs regarding the availability of organizational resources and support structure to facilitate the use of a system. Computer playfulness represents the intrinsic motivation associated with using any new system’’ [44, p. 278]. Notably, Venkatesh and Bala [44] also suggested that ‘‘while anchors drive initial judgments of per- ceived ease of use, individuals will adjust these judgments after they gain direct hands-on experience with the new system’’ (p. 278).

strong despite user’s gaining more experience with the system, in contrary, with the effects of the other two anchors – computer playfulness and computer anxiety – which were theorized to diminish over time. Moreover, TAM3 theorized that with more hands-on experience with the system, the effects of adjustments – perceived enjoyment and objective usability – on perceived ease of use were escalating. The constructs definitions of anchors and adjustments are shown in Table 2.

TAM3 is the most recent reformulation of TAM as reflected in the seminal work published by Venkatesh and Bala [44]. The nomological network of TAM3 as per Fig. 1 reveals that both social influence processes (subjective norm (SN), volun- tariness (VOL) and image (IMG)) and cognitive instrumental processes (job rele- vance (REL), output quality (OQ), result demonstrability (RES), and perceived ease of use (PEOU)), establish the determinants of perceived usefulness (PU). The anchors (computer self-efficacy (CSE), perceptions of external control (PEC), computer anxiety (CANX), and computer playfulness (CPLY)), and the adjustments (perceived enjoyment (ENJ) and objective usability (OU)) establish the determinants of perceived ease of use (PEOU). PU, PEOU, and subjective norm (SN) determine behavioral intentions (BI) to use an IT. Ultimately, BI deter- mines IT usage behavior. Venkatesh and Bala [44] reported that TAM3 accounted for 52–67% of the variance in usefulness perceptions, 43–52% of the variance in ease of use perceptions and 40–53% of the variance in usage intentions.

However, this study research model differs from TAM3 in three basic aspects. Firstly, in this study, our survey data on the model constructs were collected at a single point in time, as opposed to a longitudinal methodology (i.e., collecting several measurements over time). Our focus is on how well the social influence processes, the cognitive instrumental processes, the anchors and the adjustments predict e-learning technology acceptance, in particular the implicit cultural effects on these processes and factors which affect technology acceptance and assimila- tion. Secondly, the usage construct of TAM3 model was excluded, because we intend to collect cross-sectional data at a single time point, instead of longitudi- nally, the choice to measure technology acceptance with intention is appropriate, since measuring usage would require assessments of people’s beliefs and attitudes in a preceding period. Thus, the use of intention is appropriate for our study and allows us to measure acceptance and beliefs contemporaneously [2].

Objective Usability (OU) used to be operationalized consistent with the key- stroke model from human–computer interaction (HCI) research and prior user acceptance research [41]. The suggested guideline for operationalizing this con- struct is to compute a novice-to-expert ratio of effort. Specifically, the time taken by an expert to perform a set of tasks using the system in an error-free situation is compared with the time taken by a novice (subject) [41]. Accordingly, a set of e-learning tasks should be assigned and completed by the respondents (students). The time taken by each individual student to complete the tasks should be recorded by the Learning Management System (LMS), which will be compared later to the time taken by an expert to arrive at a ratio that would serve as the mea- sure of OU for the particular subject (student). The higher the OU estimate (student-to-expert ratio), the harder the system is to use from an objective standpoint [41]. Unfortunately, the LMS technology used in our university (Blackboard) does not support the keystroke model to measure OU. Therefore,

A ‘‘convenience sample’’ amalgamated with ‘‘quota sample’’ was thought to be the most appropriate sampling procedure for this study. Convenience sampling was deemed appropriate by the virtue of the researcher’s accessibility to the respon- dents while quota sampling was considered appropriate in terms of achieving rel- ative proportions of respondents in different categories such as gender, course major, and study level [12]. Six sites, (three male colleges: Science, Business, and Engineering, and three female colleges: Science, Arts and Literature, and Girls’ Study Center), as subsidiaries of a large Saudi Arabian university in the southern region, were chosen according to this sampling procedure for data collection. These sites were mature in e-learning experience and provided with high speed internet connectivity. To achieve this goal, the data collection method thought to be most appropriate was a survey questionnaire. Newsted et al. [33] argue that

All the survey items used to operationalize the constructs investigated in our research model were adapted for this study from Venkatesh and Bala [44]. However, these scales were originally developed and tested in the English lan- guage, and therefore developed in a different environment and culture. To adapt them for the current research in Arabic, the Brislin [11] back translation method was used. The items were translated back and forth between English and Arabic by two teams of bilingual professors. The process was repeated until both versions converged. The Arabic version instruments that emerged were subject to two Arabic judges to make sure that the instruments are suitable for application for the present research project.

Six hundred copies of a five page questionnaire were distributed among the tar- geted six colleges. The returned and usable responses were 286, thus achieving a response rate of 47.67%. Table 3 shows the sample distribution by gender and study major.

Following Baker et al. [9], the research model shown in Fig. 1 was analyzed using SmartPLS 2.0, a Partial Least Squares (PLS) structural equation modeling (SEM) software tool Ringle et al. [35]. One of the essential features of SmartPLS is the simultaneous assessment of the psychometric properties of the measurement model (i.e., the reliability and validity of the scales used to measure the model variables), as well as the estimation of the parameters of the structural model (i.e., the strength

The measurement model testing results revealed a strong evidence of the robust- ness of the constructs’ measures denoted by their internal consistency reliabilities as manifested by their composite reliabilities presented in Table 4. The range of the composite reliabilities of the measures was 0.70–0.91. Almost all of these reliability indices properly exceed the threshold of 0.70 recommended by Nunnally [34]. Additionally, the average variance extracted (AVE) for each measure far exceeds the lower bound threshold value of 0.50 recommended by Fornell and Larcker [24], as the AVEs for the measurement constructs ranged from 0.763 to 0.919.

Smart PLS generates the convergent validity tests of the scales by extracting the factor loadings and cross loadings of all items (indicators) to their own respective constructs. Table 5 presents these results indicating that all items (after dropping two items: CSE1 and ENJ3): (1) loaded on their own particular constructs from a lower bound of 0.700 to an upper bound of 0.909 (the bolded factor loadings), and

(2) loaded more highly on their own particular construct than on any other construct (the non-bolded factor loadings). According to Yoo and Alavi [40], a common rule of thumb to indicate convergent validity is that all items should load greater than 0.7 on their own construct, and should load more highly on their own respective construct than on the other constructs. Moreover, our measurement analysis shows that each item’s factor loading on its respective construct was highly significant (p < 0.001). Table 4 presents the loadings confirming the con- vergent validity of the measures for the research model latent constructs.

All social influence process variables and all cognitive instrumental process variables (except result demonstrability) exhibited significant relationships as determinants of perceived usefulness. Also, all anchor variables (except CPLY) and computer enjoyment as the single adjustment variable exhibited significant relationships as determinants of perceived ease of use. Besides that, experience exhibited five out of seven significant moderating relationships specified in TAM3. Furthermore, by comparing the variance explained (R2) in this study vs. TAM3: BI (0.420/0.400), PU (0.424/0.520), and PEOU (0.450/0.440), respectively,

The main dependent variable in this study is behavioral intentions (BI) of stu- dents to accept and use an e-learning system which solely predict and determine actual system usage and, consequently, the success of new ITs, as per TAM3. However, rather than PU which exhibits the strongest influence on BI in Western culture, this study reports that subjective norm (SN) exhibits the strongest influ- ence on BI (beta = 0.349, p < 0.001 compared to the insignificant SN → BI rela- tionship in (TAM3: Venkatesh and Bala [44]). Indeed our finding confirms a pronounced effect of SN on BI in Saudi Arabia, a finding which is not usually observed in Western contexts. This adds further evidence and supports the impor- tant role of SN reported by Al-Harbi [7]. Therefore, H2 is supported.

We believe that underpinning the notion of IT acceptance and assimilation onto these three social influence mechanisms in the bounds of Saudi Arabia’s cultural context with the pervasiveness of the Saudi hierarchical conforming society in the workplace [10] would open a new outlook in this issue. Accordingly, we con- tend that Saudi individuals would show a high regard for authority and would conform to the expectations of those elites/managers who occupy senior roles in the organizational hierarchy while embracing IT take-up tendency, would lead to IT acceptance and assimilation. This perspective is ‘‘especially true in light of the heavy promotion of technology adoption through governmental policy and where there are typically more rigid cultural and organizational structures of authority between managers and subordinates’’ [9, p. 49].

In TAM3, four constructs – job relevance, output quality, result demonstrabil- ity, and perceived ease of use – capture the influence of cognitive instrumental pro- cesses on perceived usefulness. This study proved that two cognitive instrumental processes (REL and PEOU) significantly affect perceived usefulness as per TAM3 (REL → PU = 0.380, p < 0.001; PEOU → PU = 0.206, p < 0.001) while OQ

significantly moderate REL → PU relationship (explained below). Result demon- strability (RES) was the only exception, as RES did not significantly affect PU which might indicate that participants do not believe that the results of using the LMS are tangible, observable, and communicable [31]. Hence, H4(a) is par- tially supported.

The anchors suggested by TAM3 are computer self-efficacy, computer anxiety, perceptions of external control (or facilitating conditions), and computer playfulness. The first three of these anchors proved to significantly affect PEOU in this study (CSE → PEOU = 0.176, p < 0.001; CANX → PEOU = —0.105,

p < 0.05; PEC → PEOU = 0.454, p < 0.001). However, computer playfulness did not significantly affect PEOU indicating the absence of intrinsic motivation associated with using the LMS. Perceptions of external control exhibited the strongest effect among anchors indicating how individuals’ control beliefs regard- ing the availability of organizational resources and support structure facilitate the use of the system. This finding supports the important role of perceptions of exter- nal control reported by Al-Harbi [7]. Hence, H5 is partially supported.

As indicated earlier, only one system characteristic-related to adjustments – that is, perceived enjoyment – was investigated in this study which proved to play a con- siderable role in determining perceived ease of use after individuals gain experience with the system. This study proved that enjoyment significantly affects PEOU (ENJ → PEOU = 0.201, p < 0.001). Therefore, H6 is supported.

TAM3 posits that subjective norm (SN) has a positive significant effect on behavioral intention (BI) and to continue in voluntary usage contexts. Our find- ings indicate that SN has positive direct effect on BI and that voluntariness (VOL) positively moderates the effect of SN on BI (VOL · SN → BI = 0.14) indi- cating that the positive direct effect of SN on BI will not attenuate in voluntary usage contexts. The positive interaction of voluntariness on the effect of SN on BI could be interpreted such that, users in more voluntary usage contexts are inclined to be positively affected by significant others’ opinions regarding their intention to use LMS. In this milieu, it is likely that the effect of subjective norm on intention to use LMS will not diminish with increasing voluntariness, as reported in Venkatesh and Davis [42]. Specifically, they found that SN influenced BI only in mandatory usage contexts, and that in voluntary usage contexts, SN had no direct effect on BI. We contend that the significant effect of SN on BI, in both mandatory and voluntary usage contexts, can be explained within Saudi Arabia’s cultural context. In light of these Saudi cultural impacts, even if the con- text of usage was voluntary, SN would continue to be a significant predictor of BI. Indeed, our findings do confirm a pronounced effect of SN on BI in Saudi Arabia, a finding which is not usually observed in Western contexts. Hence, H3(d) is supported.

Venkatesh and Davis [42] defined job relevance as the degree to which an indi- vidual believes that the target system is applicable to his or her job. This study reports on a strong positive direct effect of job relevance (REL) on perceived use- fulness (PU) that will increase with higher output quality. OQ positively moder- ated the effect of REL on PU (OQ x REL → PU = 0.152). Job relevance and output quality will have a moderating effect on perceived usefulness such that the higher the output quality, the stronger the effect job relevance will have on per- ceived usefulness as reported in Venkatesh and Davis [42]. Thus, H4(b) is supported.

The positive direct effect of subjective norm on both behavioral intention and perceived usefulness will attenuate with increased experience. EXP negatively moderated the effect of SN on BI (EXP · SN → BI = —0.10) and PU (EXP · SN → PU = -0.05). These relationships are supported. These negative coefficients could be interpreted to indicate that more experienced individuals are possessing stable perceptions about LMS usefulness besides their affirmed intention to use LMS regardless of referent opinion in this issue. In other words, more experienced users’ tendencies are less likely to be affected by significant others’ opinions regarding their perceptions of LMS usefulness and their intention to use LMS. In this context, contrary to the findings of [42], our findings indicate that it is likely that the effect of subjective norm on perceived LMS usefulness and on intention to use LMS will diminish as users gain more experience with the sys- tem. Hence, management should concentrate on users to acquire more experience

The positive direct effect of ease of use on both behavioral intention and per- ceived usefulness will not attenuate with increased experience. EXP positively moderated the effect of EOU on BI (EXP · PEOU → BI = 0.101) and PU (EXP · PEOU → PU = 0.083). These relationships are supported. We interpret these positive coefficients as an indication that more experienced individuals are still inclined to be affected by significant system ease of use regarding the perceived usefulness of, and intention to use, LMS. In this context, it is likely that the effect of ease of use on perceived usefulness and intention to use a system will not dimin- ish with increased experience. In fact our findings confirm a pronounced effect of PEOU on both PU and BI in Saudi Arabia, which should not be overlooked dur- ing system design.

EXP did not significantly moderate the negative influence of computer anxiety (CANX) on PEOU (EXP · CANX → PEOU = -0.035). In this context, it is less likely that the effect of computer anxiety on system ease of use will diminish with increasing experience, as reported in Venkatesh and Davis [42]. This is a sign of the impediment effect of anxiety with LMS users which persists even with increasing experience. However, EXP did positively moderate the positive influence of enjoy- ment (ENJ) on PEOU (EXP · ENJ → PEOU = 0.076). Hence, it is likely that the effect of system enjoyment on ease of use will increase with increased experience, as reported in Venkatesh and Davis [42].

Computer playfulness (CPLY) is theorized to significantly affect perceived ease of use (PEOU) as per TAM3. However, our findings indicate that computer play- fulness fails to impact LMS ease of use which indicates that participants couldnot achieve an acceptable level of intrinsic motivation while using the LMS in order to foster their perceptions regarding LMS ease of use. Thus, users feel that the system has no playfulness merit which otherwise would let users to perceive the system as easy to use rather than being awkward and complex. This situation did not change when the CPLY → PEOU relationship was moderated by experience (EXP · CPLY → PEOU = 0.007). The insignificant interaction of experience on the effect of CPLY on PEOU could be interpreted such that, gaining more experience has an unconstructive role with regard to how computer playfulness impetus LMS’ ease of use. In other words, even experienced users still perceive LMS with no playfulness merit because they couldnot achieve an acceptable level of intrinsic motivation which in turn fails to influence their perceptions regarding LMS ease of use.

Venkatesh [41] posited that the effects of adjustments on perceived ease of use (PEOU) were stronger with more hands-on experience with the system. Our study confirmed that the positive effect of enjoyment (ENJ) on PEOU (ENJ → PEOU) relationship was significant when moderated by EXP (EXP · ENJ → PEOU = 0.076, p < 0.05). Although this study lacks a longitudinal merit, our findings indicate that more experienced users will enjoy using the system which will

enable them to perceive the system as more easy to use. In summation, experience (EXP) as a moderator variable was significantly moderating five paths of the seven relationships identified in TAM3 as shown in Fig. 1. Therefore, H7 is partially supported.

It has been advised by academics and practitioners that managers need to develop and implement effective interventions in order to maximize end-users’ IT adoption and use [28]. Therefore, identifying interventions that could influence adoption and use of new ITs can aid managerial decision making on successful IT imple- mentation strategies [28]. TAM3 paved the way to comprehend the role of inter- ventions in IT acceptance and assimilation contexts, based on delineating the predictors of PU and PEOU. In TAM3, Venkatesh and Bala [44] classified inter- ventions into two categories: pre-implementation and post-implementation interven- tions motivated by the stage models of IT implementation and type of intervention (e.g., design characteristics, user participation, incentive alignment, training, orga- nizational and peer support). TAM3 also contributes to management with respect to interventions by supporting managerial decision making with two complement- ing alternatives [44]: Firstly, managers are provided with a framework to decide what interventions to apply during pre- and post-implementation stages and for what types of systems. Secondly, managers can decide on resource allocation for each specific intervention anchored by the impact of such intervention on dif- ferent determinants of IT acceptance and assimilation, and system type.

Post-implementation interventions represent a set of organizational, managerial, and support activities that take place after the deployment of a system to enhance the level of system acceptance by users [44]. Post-implementation interventions can be vital so that users are able to go through the initial shock and react favorably to changes associated with the new system. The core theme of post-implementation interventions should be to make users feel that the new system is an opportunity to enhance their job performance, and give them the ability and necessary resources to use the new system smoothly [44]. TAM3 suggests a group of post-implementation interventions: training, organizational support, and peer

Our study has its own limitations. This study was set to utilize TAM3 to empiri- cally investigate the acceptance and assimilation of e-learning in a developing country. However, our study is not an exact replication of the study conducted by Venkatesh and Bala [44] to develop TAM3. Our study applied cross- sectional design and used a sample from a single organization compared to the Venkatesh and Bala study which used a longitudinal design with a sample of sub- jects included from four different organizations. Venkatesh and Bala [44] used conventional regression analysis (MRA), as the statistical technique to analyze their data. In contrast, our study employed PLS-based structural equation model- ing (PLS-SEM), a more powerful technique to conduct the data analysis. We hope this analytical technique is a credit providing additional support for the validity of the results of our model.

Additionally, future studies could be conducted to examine TAM3 using sam- ples of students and instructors from different geo-locations and a wider range of e-learning systems. This could involve testing TAM3 by including the technology usage behavior construct omitted from our research model, which would increase the predictable levels of e-learning acceptance. Furthermore, the full TAM3 model could be tested in future studies by including the objective usability construct which needs special research design to enable the key stroke model which we referred to in the research method above.

Contemporary organizations spend vast amounts of resources in ITs which are becoming progressively complex, and implementation costs are tremendously escalating with time. Implementation failures of many of today’s ITs cost millions of dollars to organizations. In addition, low acceptance and adoption manifested in high underutilization of ITs have been a major problem for organizations.

All hypotheses of direct effect relationships, as per TAM3 in Fig. 1, were sup- ported except two relationships: computer playfulness (CPLY) → perceived ease of use (PEOU) and result demonstrability (RES) → perceived usefulness (PU). Seven out of nine hypotheses of moderating effects relationships, as per TAM3 in Fig. 1, were supported. We hope that this adds further confidence in our research design and we also hope that future studies can refer to these findings for comparison and discussions.

W.W. Chin, B.L. Marcolin, P.R. Newsted, A partial least squares latent variables modelling approach for measuring interaction effects: results from a Monte-Carlo simulation study and voice mail emotion/adoption study, in: Paper Presented at the International Conference on Information Systems, Cleveland, OH, 1996.

