Aimed at the problem that system energy consumption of the traditional cooperative multicast is large with increase of the number of users, four energy-efficient relay selection schemes are proposed to reduce system energy consumption. By using exhaustive search method, the optimal relay selection algorithm selects relays from all the possible combinations of relays, the scheme could reduce energy consumption and improve energy efficiency effectively at high computational complexity. According to the thought of iteration, greedy algorithm chooses relays using the selected relays, though the scheme doesn’t achieve the energy efficiency of the optimal relay selection algorithm, it reduces computational complexity. Besides, relay selection based on multicast rate of users selects relays using the multicast rate of each user by which the rest users with bad channel condition could decode data correctly, and relay selection based on channel state information (CSI) among users chooses relays according to the whole CSI between each user decoded data correctly and all users failed to decode data, these two schemes further reduce complexity compared to greedy algorithm. Results show that all the proposed energy-efficient relay selection approaches could improve energy efficiency while meeting the requirement of fairness.

Considering a wireless multicast network in [5] with a circular cell of radius R, the BS is located at the center of the cell and multicasts to N users who are uniformly and randomly located within the cell. Using the idea of two-stage cooperative multicast, Firstly, BS multicasts data to all users at a rate r1 in the time interval T1, and then the chosen relays multicast data to those users failed to receive data with a rate r2 in the time interval T2. To ensure all the users receiving the same data, the data transmitted in the two stages should satisfy r1T1=r2T2=ST, where ST is the length of data packet. All users in the network work are in the half- duplex mode, that is, they can’t transmit and receive in the same frequency band at the same time. At the first

where PR is the receiving power of each user. At the second stage, Nx users in G are selected as relays, the corresponding relay set is Re, and then these relays forward data to the users in B. In order to make all users decode data correctly in the two stages, relays multicast data at a rate that user with worst CSI could decode correctly. Therefore multicasting rate of relays at the second stage is

In this section, we set R=100m, =3, B=10 kHz, ST=1000 bits, PBS=1w, PRE=0.1w and PR=0.05w, and define the energy efficiency as the number of bits transmitted when one joule energy is consumed. For clarity of presentation, we simplify traditional cooperation, optimal relay selection algorithm, and greedy algorithm,

In Fig.1, we compare the system energy efficiency of different cooperative multicast schemes verse different coverage rate C on condition that transmission SNR of BS is 40 db. It can be seen that energy efficiency of proposed four schemes is much greater than TC, and the coverage rate is different when all kinds of relay selection methods achieve maximum energy efficiency, because these relay selection methods choose relay according to different principles. And we should note that OPT can select the most suitable relay set and achieve the optimal performance at the cost of high complexity using exhaustive search method; besides, Greedy chooses relays according to the relays that have been selected using iteration, its energy efficiency is inferior to OPT but superior to RS-Rate and RS-CSI; what’ more, energy efficiency of RS-CSI is slightly higher than the energy efficiency of RS-Rate, though their energy efficiency is less than OPT and Greedy, these two methods reduce the computational complexity effectively, especially when the number of users is large.

