available due to the low frame-rates and resolutions of many surveillance cameras. Appearance-based, non-collaborative scenarios are challenging because the system must measure the similarity between two person-centered bounding boxes and correctly identify the same person despite changes in illumination, pose, background, occlusions, and the variability in camera resolutions and viewpoints. New advances, however, such as using 3D sensors [16], are making it possible to extract some soft-biometric features such as a person’s 3D shape, height, and the lengths of limbs.

In this paper we improve the performance of state-of-the- art person re-identification systems using an ensemble of methods combined by weighted sum rule. The different systems utilize different color spaces and several texture and color features for describing the images. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work in which several different state-of-the-art person re-identification systems, and their variants, are combined to obtain a more robust approach.

To demonstrate the generality of our system, we validate our approach on the following well-known datasets: CAVIAR4REID, IAS, and VIPeR. Moreover, we test our sys- tem on a dataset derived from VIPeR, which we call VIPeR45 because it contains 45 image pairs from VIPeR that focus on some of the most difficult samples to re-identify images of per- sons containing strong pose changes, for instance, or wearing very similar clothing. VIPeR45 was created because person re-identification performance was tested in [7] using a dataset that was built in a similar fashion (i.e., using 45 difficult image pairs extracted from VIPeR); the human subjects obtained a Rank(1) of 75% and a Rank(10) of ~100% [7]. Thus, it is possible for other researchers in person re-identification to use VIPeR45 for approximately comparing the performance of their computer vision systems with the performance of

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we describe the base approaches used in our system and provide details of our weighted ensemble. In Section 3, we describe the datasets used in our experiments, and in Section 4 we provide the experimental results. Finally, in Section 5 we summarize the significance of our work and highlight some future directions of exploration.

In this work we compare and combine different recent state-of- the-art person re-identification systems, viz. a representation that combines biologically inspired features and covariance descriptors, called gBiCov [15], Symmetry-Driven Accumula- tion of Local Features (SDALF) [8], Custom Pictorial Structures (CPS) [7] based on chromatic content and color displacement (CCD), Color Invariants (CI) [12], and the Skeleton-based Person Signature (SPS) technique [17]. More- over, we propose variants of such approaches, obtained by varying the features used for describing the images and by using different distance measures. Each of these state-of-the- art systems, our variants, and the different color spaces, distance measures (specifically, the Jeffery Divergence measure, which obtains the best performance), and the color and texture descriptors used in our approaches are described in this section.

It is important to note the methods composing the ensem- ble schematized in Fig. 1 all work in parallel, i.e., each method is performed independently of the others. The scores of each method are simply summed (after normalization to mean 0 and std = 1). Moreover, the proposed ensemble uses no optimization algorithm: we simply combine the best methods for optimizing the average performance on the tested datasets.

To improve the performance of each system, we utilize not only the RGB color space but also several other color spaces. A color space is an abstract mathematical model describing the way colors can be represented [4]. The input images in the tested databases are given in the RGB color space. To explore other spaces, the original images are transformed into the following codings: YUV, HSV, HSL, and XYZ.

YUV defines color in terms of one luma/brightness (Y) component and two chrominance (UV) components, taking into account human perception by reducing bandwidth for the two chrominance components. HSV (hue-saturation- value) and HSL (hue-saturation-lightness) are common cylindrical-coordinate representations of points in the RGB color space. The XYZ color space defines three primaries that are not tied to any particular physical device but rather are points that lie outside the visible gamut, thereby completely encoding all color perceptions possible in the real world.

features (BIF) [20] and covariance descriptors [22], specifically by encoding the difference between BIF features at different scales. This image representation efficiently measures the sim- ilarity between two persons without needing a preprocessing step (e.g., to extract the background) since it is robust to illumination, scale, and background changes.

In Step 1 BIF features are extracted using Gabor filters and the max operator. Color images are split into the three HSV color channels and convolved with Gabor filters at 24 different scales, with neighboring scales grouped into 12 different bands. The BIF magnitude images (Bii e [1, .. ., 12]) are obtained using the max operator within the same band of Gabor features.

In Step 2 similarity of BIF features is computed at neighboring scales using a covariance descriptor. The BIF magnitude images are divided into small overlapping regions to retain the spatial information, and the difference between the corresponding regions of the different bands and the covariance descriptors is computed, i.e., for each region the difference of covariance descriptors between two consecutive bands is computed as

Proposed in [8] SDALF is a method that models three aspects of human appearance: (i) the overall chromatic content, (ii) the spatial arrangement of colors in specific regions, and (iii) the presence of recurrent local motifs with high entropy. This information is derived from different body parts and weighted by exploiting symmetry and asymmetry perceptual principles. This combination makes SDALF robust against very low res- olution, occlusions, pose, viewpoint, and illumination. SDALF exploits both single-shot and multiple-shot approaches; in other words, the larger the number of images of a given person, the greater the expressivity of SDALF. In the descrip- tion of SDALF that follows, the harder case of a single-shot approach will be described.

In RHSP texture characteristics that are highly recurrent are highlighted. First, patches p of size [I/6 × J/6] are randomly extracted on each FG part, many around jLRk to focus on sym- metries, again taking into consideration the Gaussian Kernel used in WH. Entropy of the patches is used to select those patches with the most information and is computed as the sum Hp of each RGB channel. Only those patches whose Hp values are higher than a fixed threshold are selected. A set of transforms Ti, i = 1, 2,.. ., NT are then applied on p.

CH and S are combined to give the axes of symmetry and asymmetry. The main x-axis of asymmetry AxTL is located at height iTL and is obtained as iTL = argmini(1 — CH(i, d)) + S(i, d), with values of CH normalized. AxTL usually separates the two biggest body portions defined by different colors (e.g., shirt and pants). The other x-axis of asymmetry AxHT is located at height iHT and is obtained as iHT = argmini(—S(i, d)). AxHT separates regions that greatly differ in area (e.g., between

orientation, and scale of part p in image I, respectively. Given image evidence D, the posterior of L is modeled as p(L|D) a p(D|L)p(L), where p(D|L) is the image likelihood and p(L) is a prior modeling of the part’s connectivity. The kinematic dependencies between body parts are mapped onto a directed acyclic graph with edges E. Image evidence D is obtained with discriminatively trained part models, each providing an evidence map bp. PS factorizes the likelihood in

legs, respectively. R0 (the head) is discarded because its size is small and contains little information. Given R1 and R2, the y-axis of symmetry is located in jLRk = argminj CH(j, d)+ S(j, d), where k = (1, 2) and d is fixed to J/4.

In Phase 2 features are extracted from each part and accumulated into a single signature. The following methods for extracting features are used: Weighted Color Histograms (WH), Maximally Stable Color Regions (MSCR) [10], and Recurrent High-Structured Patches (RHSP). For all features, their distance from the jLRk is considered to minimize effects of pose.

After fitting PS the chromatic content and color displace- ment (CCD) in each of the six parts is considered. Chromatic content is computed using HSV color histograms, where hue and saturation are jointly taken by a two-dimensional histogram, along with a distinct count of full black to take into account areas of low brightness. Since different parts have different sizes (e.g., the torso is roughly three times larger than the head), part histograms are multiplied by a set of N weights.

Proposed in [12], CI uses shape context descriptors to represent the intra-distribution of structure and is based on the intuition that colors composing a person (say wearing a red shirt and blue jeans) form invariant color clusters, i.e., ‘‘color cloud’’ shapes, that refer to specific parts of a person (torso/upper and limbs/lower). The claim of color invariance is based on a number of intuitive arguments: e.g., that the different colors observed in an object are strongly invariant. Another argument is that relative positions of colors remain invariant (if one part has a stronger red component than another, that difference will hold for a wide range of illuminants and imaging devices). Color uniformity is also taken into account.

CI adds an invariant signature that exploits the distribution of color in different parts of an object. This signature is com- posed of three descriptors: (i) Cov, a variant of the covariance descriptor defined in (2), (ii) a color histogram over a log color space using histogram intersection [21] as the similarity measure, and (iii) what is called in [12] PartsSC, which uses spatial information regarding the observed colors. The color histogram is straightforward; Cov and PartsSC, however, require further discussion.

PartsSC uses the Shape Context (SC) descriptor introduced in [2]. SC is a 2D log-polar histogram counting the number of points falling in radius log(r) and orientation h from the reference point. Two cases are possible given a set of N color observations O = {x1, .. ., xN} within some color space: in the first case observations are given without spatial informa-

tion. In the second case, observations are labeled li = 1, if they come from the upper part of the object, or li = 0 if they refer to the lower part. Two different signatures are extracted that correspond to these two cases.

The Skeleton-based Person Signature (SPS) technique evaluates a signature vector for a given target based on the body pose. It takes as input the result of a skeletal tracker, namely a set of body joints, and evaluates a set of local descriptors on the image patches around each joint. It should be noted that the best- performing skeletal tracker algorithms work on 3D data, while when it comes to features the 2D approach performs better than the 3D counterpart. To improve the overall performance, the SPS is evaluated exploiting not only the 3D point cloud provided by the 3D sensor, but also the 2D image of the scene, which is usu- ally also provided by 3D sensors. The skeleton joints are found in the 3D domain by the tracker; they are then projected onto the image plane (thanks to the calibration between 3D sensor and 2D camera). Once the joints are available in the image domain, they are exploited as keypoints for evaluating the local features. Each feature evaluated around a keypoint provides a feature vec- tor (also called descriptor): the complete signature, describing the whole target, is obtained by concatenating all the feature vectors of the different body joints, following a pre-determined order.

WLD [5], based on Weber’s law which states that a change of stimulus that is just noticeable for human beings is a constant ratio of the original stimulus; if the change is less than this constant ratio then it is considered background noise. For each pixel of the input image, the differential excitation component is computed based on the ratio between: (i) the relative intensity differences of a current pixel against its neighbors, and (ii) the intensity of the current pixel. From the differential excitation component both the local salient patterns in the input image and the gradient orientation of the current pixel are computed. By combining the WLD feature per pixel, an image (or image region) is represented with a histogram.

LPQT, or LPQ-TOP [18], is the application of Local Phase Quantization from Three Orthogonal Planes [25]. LPQ uses local phase information extracted using the two-dimensional short-term Fourier transform (STFT) computed over a rect- angular M × M neighborhood centered at each pixel posi- tion x of an image. LPQT calculates LPQ histograms from three orthogonal planes (i.e., the xy, xt, and yt planes).

SIFT is also tested for SPS since it is the best descriptor among those that were tested in [17], where SPS was first pro- posed. SIFT [14] is widely used in robotics. It is a keypoint detector and a descriptor invariant to image scale and rotation; it is also robust to changes in illumination, noise, and minor affine transformations. SIFT is computed as an 8-binned histogram of gradient distribution within the region around each keypoint. The descriptor is normalized to unit length to obtain illumination invariance.

VIPeR (Viewpoint Invariant Pedestrian Recognition) is a dataset composed of a large number of people (632) that are seen at different viewpoints and is available at http:// vision.soe.ucsc.edu/node/178. Only one image pair for each person is available, and people are framed at a distance. This dataset is a widely used benchmark. As reported in the literature, results on VIPeR are produced by ten runs, each consisting of a partition of 316 randomly selected image pairs. Since this dataset is composed of 2D images, the skeletal tracker is unable to provide body joints; however, for a small subset of images (45 image pairs), keypoints were manually added by a human operator (we call this subset of images VIPeR45).

CAVIAR is a dataset where 72 different people were col- lected for the EC funded CAVIAR project/IST 2001 37540 and is available at http://groups.inf.ed.ac.uk/vision/ CAVIAR/CAVIARDATA1/. Caviar is a dataset in which multiple test cases are considered; the CAVIAR4REID (Caviar for Re-identification) test case was used in our exper- iments. CAVIAR4REID is characterized by high level of occlusions, pose changes, and low-resolution images. As in the case of VIPeR, this dataset is composed by 2D images; keypoints were manually added by a human operator. We performed the same single-frame test described in [7], the frame selection is performed five times and the average results are reported.

In the first experiment the aim was to test the different color spaces applied to the different person re-identification systems. Results are presented in Tables 1–8. Each cell contains the Rank(1) and Rank(10) values, except in IAS where only Rank(1) is reported since IAS has only 11 individuals. In the approaches where different distances are applied, all results are reported, with the first row inside a cell reporting the Jeffrey distance, the second row the angle distance, the third row the Euclidean distance. Due to the computational issue of choosing the best methods to combine for fusion explo- ration, we ran experiments only on the VIPeR, VIPeR45, and CAVIAR4REID datasets. For IAS only the performance of the approaches used to build the ensembles and the baseline methods is reported. In the last column, the best average ensemble  of  the  different  color  spaces  is  reported (a × X + b × Y is the fusion by weighted sum rule between the color space X, with weight a, and Y, with weight b). In the last row, we report the computation time (CT) in seconds for extracting the descriptors from an image of size 128 × 64 using MATLAB R2013a (without the parallel toolbox) on an i5-3470 3.2 GHz processor with 8 GB of Ram.

It is interesting to note that the performance of gBiCov (see Table 1) is clearly related to the color space; in the original paper [15], gBiCov is calculated on the HSV space only. The fusion between HSV and YUV leads to a good performance in all the tested datasets. The performance obtained by the three distances is very similar. SDALF (see Table 2) obtains the best performance using the RGB color space, but its fusions are not useful.

different auto-exposure levels of the Kinect sensor. Moreover, CI has a low computational time. Our recommendation is to use the CI ensemble with RGB and YUV only when low com- putational power is available and in cases where there are no pronounced illumination changes.

that unlike the results reported in the original paper [7] we did not change the parameters of this approach for the different datasets. Moreover, examining the results of CPS, it is clear that the proposed approach for extracting features from the mask obtained by CPS works quite well. The differ- ent distances, however, are quite similar in performance, except that the Jeffrey distance outperforms the Euclidean and angle distance measures.

For a deeper evaluation of the performance, Area Under ROC curve [9] is reported in Table 15. The Area Under the Curve (AUC) can be interpreted as the probability that a lower similarity is assigned to a randomly chosen positive match (i.e., for the same person) rather than to a randomly chosen nega- tive match (i.e., for different persons). We have adopted the extension of AUC for multi-class datasets what is called a ‘‘one versus all’’ approach, where, if you have three classes, you would calculate three AUCs. In the first, you would choose the first class as the positive class, and group the other two classes together as the negative class, and so on. The aver- age result is reported.

To obtain a more realistic validation of our approach, we used the same parameters in all the tested datasets. In other words, we did not optimize the performance of our systems for each dataset (to avoid overfitting). Nonetheless, our fusion method outperforms the average performance of all the stand- alone approaches. It should be noted that the results reported for SPS on the IAS dataset in [17] are not comparable with those reported in this paper. In [17] the extracted skeletons of low quality were removed; in the experiments reported here, the entire IAS dataset is used (i.e., no frames are pruned).

Finally, in Table 17 we compared our best approach with several state-of-the-art methods proposed in the literature. The methods named OR_X mean the performance as reported in the papers where method X is proposed. In several papers the parameters of the methods evaluated are fixed separately for each dataset; in contrast, our method, as mentioned above, always uses the same parameters across the datasets to avoid overfitting. With OR_CI we report the best approach reported in [12], whereas OR_CI is obtained using semi-automatically extracted masks; in our tests, we use automatically extracted silhouettes. EBICOV is an ensemble obtained combining SDALF and gBiCov (using the performance reported in [15]). We have also reported the performance of approaches based on the learnt metric (KBICOV, KISSME, and PCA-RBF), assuming a training set is available. Thus, the performance comparison with our approach is not fair. Yet it is interesting to note that our method obtains a performance that is very similar to methods based on learnt metrics also performed without skeleton detection.

An interesting example of the difference in performance when a method is optimized for a dataset can be observed in the performance of CPS. If CPS is optimized for VIPER, it obtains a Rank(10) of ~57%, while CPS optimized for CAVIAREID obtains a Rank(10) of ~53% (using our set of images1). In contrast, if we use a set of parameters that remain the same for both datasets, we obtain a rank(10) of 43.8% and 50.3%, respectively, clearly lower than those obtained when separately optimizing the parameters for each dataset.

The new methods proposed in this paper were tested across several benchmark databases: CAVIAR4REID; VIPeR; VIPeR45; IAS. The experimental results demonstrate that the proposed approach provides significant improvements over baseline algorithms. The VIPER45 is a new dataset of 45 image pairs taken from VIPeR that focus on difficult samples with strong pose changes and with subjects wearing similar clothing. It was created because human beings were tested in

[7] in a dataset that was built in a similar fashion (i.e., using 45 difficult image pairs extracted from VIPeR). It is thus possible for other researchers in person re-identification to use VIPeR45 for approximately comparing the performance of their computer vision systems with the performance of human beings.

A drawback of our approach is computational time, which is not real-time, i.e., using MATLAB code. However, several methods used in our approach are internally highly paralleliz- able. The main focus of this paper was not on computational speed; our goal was to produce an approach that could match human performance. Unfortunately our results show that this goal has not been achieved (our ensemble obtains a Rank(10) of ~65%, while a human being obtains ~100%). Nonetheless, we have succeeded in producing a stable general-purpose

