With the rapid process technologies development, high voltage control circuits or high power driver devices/circuits are widely used in automotive ICs, high-frequency communication modules, power switches, power management circuits, LED illuminations and LCD drivers [1-4]. The power devices can sustain a high voltage and current, and can be integrated with low voltage logic circuits that not only minimized the chip area but also lowdown the production costs and power consumptions. In order to provide better reliability quality on an HV BCD process for the customer [5-9], the wafer foundries enhance the device electricity and reliability on the layout and design due to the extreme operating environment. There are many kinds of solutions to increase the reliability on source, drain, N-well and NBL [5-6] in the HV device, such as a source- side embedded with the bulk zone [7], and the stripe source-side and bulk electrode are far separated by an FOD. Then, is there any other solutions?

In this paper, the FOD structures will be applied to the source- and bulk-sides of the HV devices whose experimental structure and schematic layout are shown in Figs 1~ 3. This experiment, we aim to increase the Rbulk value of an nLDMOS from source-to-bulk side, hoping not only to reduce the trigger voltage (Vt1) and increase ESD robustness, but also to have no impact on the device area. Therefore, under the minimum design rules in this paper, some FODs which are extended into the contact region of the bulk-side, from only one contact replaced shown in Fig. 2(a), gradually increasing the extending contact numbers shown in Figs 2(b)~ 3(a), and finally the contact numbers of an end-to-end in the bulk region have only two contacts shown in Fig.

In the design of an HV nLDMOS device, a layout symmetrical idea is considered, therefore, for this case whose contact number is set to be 164 in the bulk side. Then, the FODs extend into the bulk region, the upside and lower part of the entire bulk-side can have a contact at least. Therefore, after calculating, while the contacts number is equal to 2, 8, 12, 30, 52, 162 in the bulk side can be replaced by the FODs. However, the total contacts number of the bulk region is equal to 164 on planning, which was due to it not only needs to conform with the distance rule of a contact to the oxide definition (OD) boundary and the distance rule of a contact to the y-direction, but also the contacts number can not be too few. Therefore, the experimental planning groups with adding FODs structure in the bulk region are listed in Table 1. Here, the devices under testing were fabricated by a TSMC 0.25-ȝm 60-V BCD process. The channel length (L) is kept to be 2-ȝm, channel width of each finger (Wf) is 100-ȝm, finger numbers M= 6, and the total channel width (Wtot) is kept a constancy, 600-ȝm.

A transmission-line-pulse (TLP) system for experimental testing is controlled by the LabVIEW software. It managed the subsystem electrical machine such as the ESD pulse generator, the high-frequency digital oscilloscope and the digital power electric meter instruments to achieve the automatic measurement. This machine can provide a continuous step-high square wave to device, and short raise time of the continuous square wave can also simulate transient noise of ESD. This HBM-like system has used the short square wave with 100 ns pulse widths and 10 ns rising/falling times to evaluate the voltage and current response of device.

As the FOD structures are applied to bulk region, the TLP data can be obtained and shown in Fig. 4(a) and Table 2. From these data, it can be clearly seen that when the component is added FODs in the bulk side, the It2 value will increase rapidly as the total area of FODs in the bulk side is larger. Due to the power limitation of TLP equipment, the It2 value of component reaches 7-A (the equivalent HBM immunity greater than 10- kV), we labeled it as > 7-A on Table 2. Meanwhile, it can find that when the contacts number of bulk side was replaced by FODs and was greater than 30, that is, the total area ratio of FODs in the bulk side was greater than 93/100, it will appear a secondary-breakdown phenomenon shown in Fig. 4(b). As the area ratio of FODs in the bulk side is enhanced more, the bulk-to-source resistance (Rbulk) will be greater, which will result in the trigger voltage (Vt1) smaller, and the trigger voltage decreased as the area ratio of FODs increased. When the area ratio of FODs is reached 93/100, the trigger voltage has down to about 60-V, thus making the other fingers easier to turn on, and then that will cause many snapback conduction phenomena, and the It2 value became higher.

This paper proposed an HV nLDMOS device with FODs structures in the bulk side to observe ESD reliability. With the FOD structure in the bulk region can effectively enhance the anti-ESD ability of these 60- V nLDMOS devices. The It2 average value can be improved about 1.12% ~ >111.74% as compared with the reference group value. Moreover, we should also pay attention to the trigger voltage of a DUT might not be too small and less than the operation voltage 60-V as with increasing FOD structure occupied area. Therefore, with these FODs adding in the bulk region can extremely effective enhance the ESD ability; however, we should take care about the maximum FODs area limitation.

Wen-Yi Chen, Ming-Dou Ker, Yeh-Ning Jou, Yeh-Jen Huan, Geeng-Lih Lin. Source-side engineering to increase holding voltage of LDMOS in a 0.5um 16-V BCD technology to avoid latch-up failure. IEEE International Symposium on the Physical and Failure Analysis of Integrated Circuits 2009: 41-44.

