Traceability system has been an import means in food quality and safetymanagement. Governments in many countries are putting increasing emphasis onestablishment of food traceability systems. According to production, processing, storage and distribution of the featureagricultural products----navel orange in the central mountain area of China,this article proposes the technology line and the main result of the research of traceability forqualitysafetyof navel orange.

Navel orange is a kind of feature agricultural products in the central mountain area of China. It mainly distributes in the Gannan area of Jiangxiprovince. Gannan navel orange is the most special product in Jiangxi citrus production and has been an import means in increasing income of peasants. But, the quality safety incidents of navel orange in recent years have dealt a blow to navel orange's reputation and cause great

economic loss. For example, the “dyedorange “incident made the navel orange of the 70% of Hong Kong market share reduce to zero in 2004;the “Bactrocera” incident in Sichuan Gung Yuan area was a great blow to the south citrus production in 2008.Market rate was below production cost. The bid of a part production was only 20% of production cost. The peasants suffered heavily loss.Typical of agricultural products of Central Mountain Gannan navel orange as the research object, we explore the monitor points of full traceability of quality and safety of the typical ofagricultural products in our country, and the retrospective business processes, relative standards and key technologies applied to safety and quality of typical of agricultural products in our country.

Because of efficient risk control, food traceability systems receive muchattention by many countries. Food traceability systems mainly apply in animal husbandry in developed countries at present, and gradually cover into vegetablesǃfruit and so on.The United States issued the regulation for food safety, demanded all the companies which involve in food transportationǃfood distribution and food import establish and save the whole records about the food distribution indecember,2003(2). In 2008, the Canadian federal government reached an ambitious goal.The country has achieved tracing back 80 percent of agricultural products to its source, supporting the "Brand Canada strategy"(7).The Japanese Government has passed new legislations required meat processors to collect and save time in the slaughter of livestock per head DNA samples (9).

Quality and safety of Orange tracking and tracing technology decompose the overall architecture from three levels of the information collection, information processingand information services. In the information collection layer, through sorting out process from planting to harvesting and the process of production of the navel orange product, we investigate their business processes, analysis hazards, explore and determine factors which affects the quality and safety of navel orange, and get product processing, quality inspection, logistics and marketing and other aspects of quality and safety information which basedon processing and production of enterprises, build traceability data center of navel orange, and provide data support to achieve the ultimate traceability. In the information processing layer, using HACCP(1)and other quality management methods and tools toanalyze and determine key factors of the quality and safety indicators of navel orange. Using the encoding information technology, information exchange, management and hardware R & D of digital

Using HACCP techniques, combined with China GAP, cananalysis quality and safety of the navel orange chain trace. Itcan also raise the quality and safety of major hazard sources and analysis to determine the quality and safety indicators and critical control points in the various aspects oforange source trace chain. It can not only establish the traceability for quality and safety of navel orangeindicator system, but also determine the key indicators of quality and safety orange.Navel orange elements of HACCP Hazard are shown in Table 1.

Based on place of origin code, EAN / UCC standards, a quality tracking and tracing of Orange coding system, combined with internal production processes, has beenstudied and designed. This includes raw materials, origin code, the batch production at the core of all aspects of code orange, and final product quality and safety traceability code.Itprovides the basis support with forming a complete retrospective navel oranges.

