self-sustain (Pramanik, 2016). Population pressure on agricultural land and strong demand (Cowie et al., 2018) for foods necessitate speedy production or high-yield agriculture. Due to the excessive use of chemical fertilizers and pesticides, insufficient irrigation infrastructure, insufficient transportation systems, depleted soil fertility, soil erosion, and other factors, agricultural production has fallen quickly (De la Rosa and Sobral, 2008).

There has been a significant amount of research on site suitability studies utilising MCDM and ML techniques, including Site Suitability Assessment for Rice Cultivation (Nyeko, 2012; Kihoro et al., 2013), Site suitability for agriculture (Zaredar and Jafari, 2010), for land manage- ment purposes (Rojas and Loubier, 2017) for land-use suitability (Joerin et al., 2001; Romeijn et al., 2016) for Land suitability analysis for various crops (Jamil et al., 2018), for avulsion potential Zone con- struction (Pal and Sarkar, 2018), for the recognition of touristic poten- tial Zones (Ebrahimi et al., 2019), site suitability for conservation of water (Srdjevic and Medeiros, 2007) and water management (Badhe et al., 2019), Predicting the Soil Suitability (Jayaraman et al., 2021); Prediction of Cardiac Disease (Princy et al., 2020); Mapping the risk terrain for crime (Wheeler and Steenbeek, 2021) and executing surface and pressurized irrigation system (Azad et al., 2019), etc.

In this study, the FCOPRAS (Fuzzy Complex Proportional Assess- ment), AHP, and machine learning approaches, namely Random Forest and Multilayer Perceptron have been used to discover the potentiality of the soil for agriculture, and ROC and Accuracy techniques have been also applied to estimate the proficiency of the applied models and al- gorithms. Before arriving at the outcome, the weight of the alternatives for each variable was calculated (Malczewski and Boroushaki, 2008; Murayam and Bunruamkaew, 2011) using AHP. The opinions of three experts were considered in the whole process of the FCOPRAS. To aggregate the performing variables, the WLCM (Weighted Linear Com- bination Method) was used.

vantageous uses of the Geographic Information System (GIS) is the study of site suitability and preparation of land use maps. GIS and Multi- Criteria Decision Analysis (MCDA) can be used well enough for plan- ning and managing how agricultural land is used (Adeniyi, 1993; Shearer and Xiang, 2009). GIS makes it easy to store, process, and analyse complex raw data at plenty of different levels. Combining MCDM and Machine Learning (ML) with Geographic Information Sys-

physical soil parameter related to soil porosity, soil moisture, and hy- draulic conductivity, which is essential for soil quality evaluation and land use management (Li et al., 2019). Crop health is dependent on a sufficient supply of rainfall and soil nutrients, among other things.

Multilayer perceptron algorithms. One of the most basic feed- forward neural networks is the Multilayer Perceptron. Multilayer per- ceptrons are bidirectional neural networks in which the inputs are propagated forward and the weights are propagated backward (Brei- man, 2001). A multilayer perceptron has an input layer and an output layer with one or more hidden layers. All MLPs connect all neurons in one layer to all neurons in the next layer. The input layer receives the input signals, and the output layer performs the intended task. All of the calculations are done by the hidden layers (Wang et al., 2021).

In the current research, 70 (70%) locations are employed for soil potentiality mapping, and 30 (30%) of the entire data set is used to justify the potentiality analysis. The AUC for the AHP model is 0.923, whereas the FCOPRAS model has an AUC of 0.938. On the other hand, the AUC for the Random Forest is 0.947, and for the Multilayer Per- ceptron, it is 0.932. The models used for the predicted maps are very

Deficiency in Nitrogen, Copper (Chaudhry and Loneragan., 1970), low Soil Moisture (Nagy et al., 2007), Deficiency in Manganese (Schmidt et al., 2016), Zinc, Sulphur, Boron, Phosphate, Potassium (Seth et al., 2018), High Bulk Density (Blake, 1965), Older Alluvial Soil, High pH, and least soil depth, etc are the main reason behind low to very low

Several distinct variables were chosen to assess land potential as- sessments, with scales ranging from nominal to ratio. The soil appro- priateness of the research region was evaluated using a GIS-based multi- criteria decision-making technique and machine learning algorithms (Random Forest, Multilayer Perceptron) in this study. In this accept- ability analysis, the AHP approach was utilised to assign relative weight to the fifteen different criteria, and thereafter the FCOPRAS model was applied using a normalised pairwise comparison matrix from AHP. The machine learning algorithms were applied using field data in the Weka

