The joint inversion of dual laterolog and dual-induction log was evaluated from the linear inversion theory. The generalized inversion method was used for the inverse calculation. A couple of parameters in the inversion algorithm were treated using logarithmic method. The abnormal states resulting from the logarithmic treatment on equations were analyzed. The effects of both the data-resolution matrix and model-resolution matrix on convergence of inversion process were discussed. It indicated that the logarithm treatment can not only weaken the abnormal state obviously, but also can reduce the spread of the data-resolution matrix. The improved inversion algorithm is efficient to enhance the stability and to improve the behaviors of convergence during the inversion process.

It is an important way to use of borehole electrical-logging techniques to determine true-formation resistivity and to estimate original hydrocarbon saturation in petroleum exploration. Joint inversion algorithm is efficient to improve log interpretation and reservoir evaluation [1]. Since the limited measurement data is nonlinear for the electrical-logging inversion, there is no unique solution for the logging inversion problem. The inversion results are really the approximate solution or estimated results for the true values. Hence, it is

In a logging inversion problem, the true reservoir parameters are usually unknown. Hence, except from the constraint of priori information, it is important to evaluate the inversion solution, i.e. to evaluate the inversion algorithm. Usually, a common way is to evaluate the reliability and efficiency of an inversion method for an artificial formation [2,3]. In addition, the electric logging inversion is an intrinsically nonlinear inversion problem. It can be transformed into a linear inverse problem using appropriate treatment methods, so that the evaluation criterion of linear inversion theory can be used [4,5]. The present works evaluated the stability and convergence for joint inversion algorithm of dual-induction log and dual laterolog device using data-resolution matrix, model-resolution matrix, and condition number according to the linear inversion theory.

The formation was composed of borehole, invasion zone and undisturbed formation. It can be described by three parameters: true-formation resistivity Rt, resistivity of invaded zone Rxo and invasion depth ri. A dual induction logging instrument, such as conventional dual-induction devices [6] or high-resolution dual induction array [2], can provide two logging curves: deep- and medium-induction log value. A dual laterolog tool, such as conventional dual laterolog tools [6] or high-resolution dual laterolog array [3], yields deep and shallow lateral logging value. If a well was logged using both the dual laterolog device and dual-induction tool, there were four log values were obtained simultaneously. Thus, the four logging data can be used to inverse the three unknown formation parameters: Rt, Rxo and ri simultaneously.

After the increment X was solved, the new values of model parameters can be yielded. Then these new data were input into the forward model to calculate the logging responses and errors. The iterative process will termination until the convergence condition was satisfied.

2, 3, 4). The superscript m and s denote the results of measurement and simulation respectively. R1 means deep-induction logging data RID. R2 denotes medium-induction logging data RIM . R3 and R4 were deep and shallow laterolog responses RLD and RLS, respectively.

The totally four logging data, from shallow- and deep-laterolog device and deep- and medium-induction logging array respectively, were used in the basic algorithm and the improved algorithm to inverse the three unknown parameters: Rt, Rxo, and ri. The relative errors between the inversion computation and the true values were calculated from the basic algorithm and the improved algorithm respectively. The results were illustrated in Fig.1 and Fig.2 for basic algorithm and improved algorithm respectively. The horizontal axis denoted the formation thickness the vertical axis was the related error of inversed results with true model values.

The main task of inversion for logging data is to determine the true-formation resistivity, furthermore, to evaluate the initial water saturation and oil/gas saturation. Therefore, the inversion of true-formation resistivity Rt is much important. The error of inversed Rt from the improved algorithm is less than 5% when invasion depth is less than 0.7m and the formation thickness H>1m, as shown in Fig. 2a. Yet the basic algorithm yielded great errors such as 30% as shown in Fig.1a.

The data-resolution matrix is a criterion to fit the observed data quality. The closer to the unit matrix is the data-resolution matrix, the less is the correlation for the logging data, and the higher is the resolution. In addition, the data-resolution matrix is independent with the logging data. Matrix F is a function as the formation model, the geometry structure of logging devices, and the solving process. The model-resolution matrix is a criterion to discriminate the inversion model parameters and real formation parameter. When it is a unit matrix, the inversion results can completely discriminate the formation parameters. The matrix is independent with the logging data as well and depends mainly on the responding equation.

During the joint inversion of dual laterolog data and dual-induction log responses, the data-resolution matrix F, model-resolution matrix R and the condition number of a matrix were calculated for both the basic algorithm and the improved algorithm while the invasion depth ri=0.4m. F was a symmetric 4×4 matrix.

In the present improved algorithm, the main diagonal elements of F11 and F22 were closer to 1 and the off-diagonal elements F21 and F12 were closer to zero, as shown in Fig.3(b). The values of F31 , F13 , F32 , F23 , F41 , F14 , F42 , and F24 were approximately 0.1 or -0.1. Though the values of F43 , F34 , F33 and F44 are around at 0.5, the resolution of measurement data were still modified obviously comparing with the basic algorithm, as shown in Fig.3(a). Hence, the higher resolution was obtained from the present improved algorithm.

Fig.4 illustrated the variations of the spread of data-resolution F with formation thickness for the basic algorithm (dash line) and the present improved algorithm (solid line) respectively. Either a thin layer or a thick formation, the spread from the present improved algorithm is less than that from the basic algorithm. It means that the high resolution of measurement data was obtained from the present modified algorithm.

For the joint inversion of dual laterolog and dual-induction log, either the basic algorithm or the present improved algorithm, the model-resolution matrix R was a 33 unit matrix that corresponded to the three inversed parameters: true-formation resistivity Rt, resistivity of invaded zone Rxo and invasion depth ri. It means the inversion can yield the formation parameters, but it does not indicate that these parameters are the same as the real models exactly. It only reflects that there is not correlation among these model parameters.

