Due to the continuous change in the topology of ad hoc networks and the lack of a central directory for publishing web services, makes the process of finding web services a very difficult challenge, several approaches have been proposed, all these solutions are based on either a keyword or ID representing the service to be searched, or using a specific scenario of discovery, all this with trying to respect the constraints of ad-hoc networks such as energy, bandwidth ... etc. In this work we proposed a model for measuring the cost of the overall energy consumption in ad hoc networks depending on the mechanisms proposed by the approaches and protocols for discovering web services.

as Web services. Web services speaks XML, they are described in a WSDL (Web Services Description Language) [1] format specifying the methods that can be invoked, their signature and service’s access points (URL, Port, Etc.). These methods are accessible via SOAP (Simple Object Access Protocol) [2]. Web services are centralized (their publications) in a common repository UDDI (Universal Description Discovery and Integration) [3] in order to facilitate their research.

In KONARK [4], which is a protocol for discovering web services for ad hoc networks, which aims mobile e-commerce applications, each node in the network acts as a directory of services available in the network, the authors use a tree in each node to classify the available services in the network, the classification is generic in top-level (root) and becomes increasingly accurate down the tree. The authors proposed a mechanism for web services discovery and publication. In publication, each provider broadcasts its new services in the network, so that each node incorporates this service in its tree (Replication of information about services available in the network). In Discovery Phase, if a client looks for a service, he broadcasts a request based on a Name or Type of service, the relevant servers returns responses containing the desired services and the URL of their WSDL descriptions, the client records this information in his local tree of services. The major disadvantage of KONARK protocol is the significant waste of resources due to the recording of the same information in each node of the network, even if the information will not be used by the node.

We noticed that each of the approaches discussed violated one or more constraints posed in ad hoc networks such as bandwidth and storage resources ... etc. This will result in a significant consumption of energy. We also noted that the proposed discovery approaches are based on the IDs of the services, their names and types with a client intervention for the selection of service that satisfied their needs.

In this paper we have presented our proposed formula to calculate the cost of the energy consumed in an ad hoc environment depending on the approaches or protocols of Web services discovery. This formula is based on Ci parameters that we have taken in our comparative studies between different existing discovery approaches. This formula will allow us to evaluate any web services discovery protocol depending on the total of energy consumed.

