Biometric systems have been widely used in secure and financial organizations such as military, banks, airports, security agencies and famous companies. Biometric systems verify their queries according to their unique physiological data such as fingerprint [1, 2]], palm print [3], face, ear shape, iris textures, vocal tract system (speech signal) [1], fiducial points of electrocardiogram (ECG) [4], distribution of electro- encephalogram (EEG) energy in different bands [5, 6]] and DNA struc- ture [7]. The mentioned biometric systems suffer from various limitations and can be deceived by impostors. For instance, speech recognition system can be deceived by a recorded tape; iris biometric systems can be deceived by wearing a lens; an image or video tape is the bottleneck of face and ear-shape biometric systems. DNA verification system is the most secure biometric system but its verification process is a bit time consuming and expensive.

It is noteworthy to say that the verification results over the occipital, temporal and parietal lobes are much higher than the other scalp parts in the eye-close condition [16], while the verification results are proper over the anterior part under the eye-open state [16]. Therefore, a few studies are conducted to verify the subjects by employing less number of EEG channels (e.g., only one on the occipital lobe). Riera et al. [28] propose an EEG-based authentication system by using just two dry electrodes (Fp1 and Fp2). They recorded EEG signals from the subjects within the interval of 34 74 days. AR coefficients, power spectral density (PSD) and three statistical measures are extracted from their EEG signals. They have achieved the verification rate of 98.10% over 51 registered subjects and 36 intruders.

Das et al. [31] extract spatio-temporal patterns from visual evoke potential (VEP). They show that the subject-dependent information of ERP component, over the occipital region, occurs from 120 to 200 ms after the visual stimulus. Palaniappan [32] have recorded EEG signals through a specific mental task from several subjects in order to verify them. In this regard, they have extracted AR coefficients, PSD differences over the inter-hemispheric channels, linear complexity and approximate entropy from the EEG signals. They propose a modified four fold cross validation procedure to demonstrate the robustness of this authentica- tion system against impostors.

features in this study are local binary pattern (LBP) [33, 34]], AR co- efficients, wavelet coefficients, eigen-vectors of principal component analysis (PCA), correlation value, spectral coherence and phase differ- ence. The reminder of this paper is structured as follows. The description of the collected dataset is brought in Section 2 and the explanation of the extracting features are brought is Section 3. Classifiers are discussed in Section 4. Experimental results and discussions are illustrated in Section

method is employed to estimate the AR coefficients based on the sum- mation of both forward and backward prediction errors. In addition, the finite sample criterion [42] is used to select the best order of the AR model, considering the residual variance and the prediction error. In this study, the best order of AR model is set to 8; therefore, the number of elicited features for 20 channels becomes 160.

In this part, we introduce the k-nearest neighbor (kNN), support vector machine (SVM) and random forest. Although kNN [43] is not a new method, it is still used in wide range of applications, especially for those multi-class problem that the distribution of their classes is multi- modal. kNN is famous due to its simplicity, interpretability and good performance. kNN is a lazy classifier in the recall phase while it is the only classifier that does not need any training phase. kNN is a local classifier and for each test sample x0, its k nearest neighbors should be

fatigue is highly reduced. Moreover, our results show the existence of exclusive information in the resting-EEG of each subject, which is emerged from the exclusive connections in the brain system of each subject [24]. EEG signals in the time domain obey not grammatical behavior and they behave like a white/color noise, nonetheless it seems that the subject-dependent information is captured through this signal. It is shown the power spectrum of EEG signal, especially in

