Agri-food businesses must eliminate supply chain inefficiencies and develop a more sustainable ecosystem (Rejeb et al., 2021a). One way to revolutionise the agri-food sector and increase sustainability is to lever- age artificial intelligence (AI) applications. According to Holt (1978), AI is the science of programming computers to mimic the tasks of human behaviour that necessitate intelligence, judgement, and experience. Coupled with high-performance computing and big data technologies, AI techniques like deep learning, machine learning, and artificial neural networks present significant potential for data-intensive science in agri- culture (Kamilaris and Prenafeta-Boldú, 2018; Liakos et al., 2018a; Rohit Sharma et al., 2020). For example, Patrício and Rieder (2018) investigate the combination of computer vision solutions and AI algorithms in pre- cision agriculture and highlight several benefits of these technologies, including task automation, profitability, and increased food quality and safety.

4.0 technologies, including AI, the IoT, big data analytics, and blockchain. Chen and Yu (2021) summarise the recent developments in reliable, precise, and cost-effective remote tools in the food industry, such as AI-based techniques, image processing systems, and sensors for quality evaluation. According to the authors, image processing systems and AI can be utilized for different objectives such as product classification based on shape and size, detection of product defects and microbes, and food quality grading. Qazi et al. (2022) review the literature pertaining to the applications, challenges, and future trends of IoT tech- nologies and AI techniques in smart agriculture. Finally, Tripodi et al. (2022) study the contributions of AI and machine learning to data anal- ysis and their use in next-generation breeding.

generating memorable, rich, and interpretable visuals. Consequently, applying bibliometrics provides timely, unbiased, and visual techniques to trace the growth of scholarly activities and evaluate the intellectual structure of a particular research field (Rejeb et al., 2022e). It enables understanding of the historical development of a discipline and allows identifying research trends and hotspots from micro and macro per- spectives (Rejeb et al., 2021b).

research procedure employed. Next, we analyse the main results, in- cluding the yearly distribution of publications, the most productive journals and nations, the most influential publications, and the research hotspots. In Section 4, we discuss the findings and highlight research contributions, research agenda, and shortcomings. In Section 5, the study finishes with short reflections and conclusions.

Our analysis did not restrict the time period and noted that the first two extracted publications appeared in 1992 (see Table 1). 589 of the 4750 papers retrieved contain insufficient data for bibliometric analysis. Consequently, we evaluated 4161 papers written by 14,779 authors. A single author wrote only 4.49% (187 out of 4161 total papers). Moreover, the authors employed a large number (12375) of keywords.

Fig. 2 depicts the evolution of AI research in the context of the agri- food industry based on the annual distribution of a sample of papers. There are three distinct growth stages visible. In the first phase, from 1992 to 2000, the maximum number of papers published per year was fifteen (in 1997); in the second phase, from 2001 to 2010, the

maximum was thirty. We can observe slow and inconsistent growth, surpassing thirty published documents in 2010. The last three years have witnessed unprecedented growth in the third phase (2011 to 2020). During this period, AI applications in the agri-food industry re- ceived great attention, as evidenced by the sharp increase in publica- tions. In 2020, scholarly output more than doubled from 2019, surpassing 1700 documents, suggesting that the proliferation and prev- alence of various AI approaches and applications in the agri-food indus- try can explain this dramatic increase.

Regarding the most relevant journals based on the number of arti- cles published, Table 2 lists the top 20 and reveals that Computers and Electronics in Agriculture is the only outlet to surpass 300 publications. In addition, we can see that information technology and environmental science journals dominate the list. Surprisingly, no business, manage- ment, or operations research journals were ranked among the top 20.

We extracted both the authors and keywords plus from WoS to ex- amine keywords dynamics (see Table 5). The former set of keywords is provided by the authors themselves, while the second is generated re- gardless of the title or author keywords, reflecting the paper's contents with profound depth and variety (Garfield, 1990; Rejeb et al., 2022d). The analysis of author keywords and keywords plus could overcome lim- itations like the uncomplete meaning and the small number of author keywords. Since the keywords used in the search query were “artificial intelligence”, “machine learning”, “deep learning”, “food”, and “agricul- ture*”, it is evident that they appeared in the first ranks on the authors' keywords' side. Nevertheless, it should be mentioned that the keyword “machine learning” exceeded four times the occurrences of “artificial in- telligence”. Moreover, we can see the high frequency of other AI tech- niques such as deep learning, convolutional neural networks, and artificial neural networks. Other keywords also held a high position, such as “remote sensing”, “computer vision”, “image processing”, “big data”, and “internet of things”. These technologies constitute enablers for precision agriculture strategies. They can optimise crop production,

reduce the environmental impacts of agricultural activities, and ensure reliable sensing of different variables (e.g., soil properties, water manage- ment, weather, topography) for large crop fields. As per the keywords plus, terms such as “classification”, “system”, “model”, “prediction”, and “identification” appeared in the top 10, thus informing the keywords sup- plied by the authors. In addition, some other essential topics emerge from the keywords plus list, including “regression”, “optimisation”, and “seg- mentation”. In this vein, this collection of keywords has an important as- sociation with AI approaches since they reflect some AI capabilities in agri-food management, among other things, prediction and optimisation of crop yield, plant segmentation, and forecasting of environmental vari- ables. Therefore, keywords plus advocate the potential of AI for the real- isation of increased value within the agri-food sector.

To supplement the analysis of the keyword's dynamics, we ex- tracted the most frequent terms from abstracts. In Fig. 3, the rectangle size reflects the occurrence of the term. On the left side, we can see that the popular terms are “data”, “learning”, “machine”, “model”, “system”, "food“, and “accuracy“. Besides, there is a clear appearance of main AI tasks such as “classification”, “analysis”, “prediction”, and “detection”. As a result, this bolsters the argument that AI is a game- changing technology that can contribute to the sustainability of the agri-food sector by enhancing current agricultural systems and food value chains.

automation, and expert systems were popularised and revitalised in the early years of the field (2002–2006). The dominant themes between 2007 and 2016 were the integration of AI-powered robots and agricul- tural mechanisation. Emerging topics such as “mobile robot,” “autono- mous vehicle,” “agriculture vehicles,” and “parallel robot” could be supported by AI capabilities to automate human tasks, optimise opera- tional efficiency, and increase output. Commonly, these robots employ AI to enhance their situational awareness and sensing capabilities dur- ing agricultural tasks. Since 2017, the focus has been on various technol- ogies and AI techniques, including big data, the IoT, convolutional neural networks, deep learning, machine learning, and fuzzy logic. Combining these innovations is essential for the transition to precision agriculture, which provides agri-food companies with options to optimise their pro- duction, reduce resource consumption, and improve the quality of agri- cultural products. In conclusion, the results indicate that, at the time this analysis was conducted, precision agriculture and AI techniques were key concepts and current trends.

To better understand the research hotspots, we conducted a keyword co-occurrence network to identify topics with common features (Kapoor et al., 2018; Rejeb et al., 2020). As a result, we set the parameters mentioned in Table 6. According to Fig. 5, four clusters were generated for the keywords supplied during the study period (1992–2020). The first cluster (red) is the most significant, consisting of terms like “Machine Learning”, “Random Forest”, “Support Vector Machine”, “Remote Sensing”, and “Classification”. Besides, the keyword “Food Security” belongs to this cluster, and it represents a critical driver for AI implementation and further technological innovations. As a

due to its ability in spraying, crop monitoring, field surveying, identi- fication of drought spots and harmful weeds, and surveillance. The next cluster (blue) was predominated by keywords like “Agriculture”, “Agricultural Robot”, “Internet of Things”, and “Robotics”. Combined with AI, these technologies can inform more intelligent agri-food decisions by controlling crop behaviour, monitoring livestock, crop growth, and supporting the efficient use of manpower. Therefore, these technological advancements play a critical role in developing a more data-driven and knowledge-intensive agri-food sector. In the last cluster (yellow), we see the predominance of “Artificial intelli- gence”, “Artificial Neural Networks”, “Modelling”, “Genetic Algorithm”, and “Optimisation”- all are innovative and reliable solutions for current agri-food challenges.

In general, the findings from the keyword co-occurrence clustering suggest that AI techniques such as machine learning, deep learning, and artificial neural networks were the most common approaches in agri-food systems and thus, accelerated the sector's digitalisation. Addi- tionally, robots, the IoT, wireless sensor networks, and UAVs are popular technologies integrated with AI to modernise farming practices. Never- theless, other adjacent technologies like blockchain, 3D printing, aug- mented reality, and virtual reality did not appear in the visualisation.

In this paper, we analysed the relationship between AI and the agri- food industry and AI's role in accelerating the shift to precision and cog- nitive agriculture. In contrast to previous reviews on AI and agri-food systems (e.g., Jha et al., 2019; Patrício and Rieder, 2018), our findings are novel and insightful because this is one of the few investigations to use a comprehensive sample of research papers that were published over nearly three decades. Consequently, the following sections provide an in-depth examination of AI and agri-food industry developments (Liakos et al., 2018b; Sharma et al., 2020).

By addressing the first research question, our bibliometric review analyses the key productivity measures of the field. According to the sam- ple we analysed, the earliest publications were published in 1992. In ad- dition, the analysis depicted the dynamics of scholarly production throughout three major stages. The initial period of publication ran from 1992 to 2000, and during this period, only a few publications were pro- duced annually. In the second stage, between 2001 and 2010, the field grew steadily, reaching 40 publications for the first time in 2010. This was due to the unprecedented advances in computer science during this period. In the third stage, between 2011 and 2020, AI techniques

In addition, our research identified the most pertinent sources. Com- puters and Electronics in Agriculture, a leading journal, dominate the AI literature in the agri-food industry in this regard. On the one hand, com- puter science and engineering journals were the most prolific and ranked highly. In contrast, this ranking did not include business, man- agement, operations research, and decision science-focused publica- tions. According to the number of citations received, the United States dominated the list, while European and Asian countries occupied signif- icant positions. In the top 20 most influential nations, no contributions from Latin America and Africa were relevant. This suggests that the sci- entific outcome on a global scale was more concentrated and predomi- nantly represented by developed nations.

The current academic literature describes the role of AI in the mod- ernisation of agriculture and the transition from unsustainable farming practices to more data-driven precision agriculture. Several thought- provoking issues arise in this vein. For instance, almost all the literature on integrating AI techniques in the agri-food industry was published within the last five years (2015–2020). This expansion coincides with the transition to agriculture 4.0, in which precision agriculture is sup- ported by AI techniques, the IoT, robots, and smart food systems. In in- formation technology-related journals, applications of AI in the agri- food industry dominated the discussion. It is expected that the flagship journals of AI research will accommodate the evolving nature of the AI field by incorporating this crucial topic into their editorial strategies. Finally, it is suggested that academic institutions from underdeveloped regions of the world engage in AI research by forming partnerships with research labs, universities, and governments in developed nations..

Moreover, by analysing the keyword dynamics, our study revealed that “machine learning” and “deep learning” are among the most inves- tigated AI techniques in agriculture. Artificial and convolutional neural networks are crucial enablers for precision agriculture due to their ca- pacity to analyse produce images and determine its condition (damaged or healthy), support decision making, and predict climate (Deo and Şahin, 2015). Big data, robots, and the IoT are key drivers of developing smarter and more autonomous agri-food value chain practices, which are advantageous to farmers and consumers. In addition to “remote sensing,” “classification,” “image processing,” and “transfer learning,” there are several other noteworthy topics. According to the keywords provided in the abstracts, the most popular research topics are “data”, “learning”, “models”, “classification”, “robot”, “prediction”, “detection”, and “neural”. In addition to reflecting the breadth and velocity of digital

transformations, these topics demonstrate that the agri-food industry is increasingly seeking AI implementations. Despite the abundance of re- search on AI, it is essential to emphasise the paucity of research examin- ing the combination of AI and other emerging technologies, such as 5G telecommunications, 3D printing, blockchain, and bioinformatics, in the development of sustainable agri-food supply chains. Integrating these technologies enables farmers to work more creatively and effectively; however, the real question lies in comprehending the adverse side ef- fects of AI-assisted agriculture. Consequently, our findings emphasise the urgent need for more research on how responsible AI can redefine farming practices and achieve holistic sustainability in the agri-food sector (Abdella et al., 2020; Camaréna, 2020).

the agri-food sector, it is necessary to overcome several obstacles. For example, the literature acknowledges social issues of AI, such as robots replacing humans in the workforce and unemployment (Ampatzidis et al., 2017; Rose and Chilvers, 2018). AI is hampered by lack of connec- tivity, security attacks, limited computation resources, and low network bandwidth (Liu et al., 2018). Therefore, effective AI algorithms and systems must be designed and developed to improve their task perfor- mance (Liu et al., 2018). Other concerns include data privacy and ethics; as a result, agri-food businesses are required to implement and enforce stringent measures and policies to safeguard their data and comply with the applicable regulations. In addition, organisational barriers, such as resistance to change, the need for new skills and capabilities, and prohibitive investment costs, create uncertainty about the value of AI in the agri-food industry.

Considering the proposed categorisation framework, a set of re- search propositions are derived using the Resource-Based View (RBV) to provide a foundation for future research on AI applications in the agri-food industry. RBV is based on the idea that a company's competi- tive position is determined by its unique resources and capabilities and their interrelationships (Barney, 1991; Farooq and O’Brien, 2015). In this context, the interaction between AI and the agri-food industry must be rooted in resources, including raw materials, water, soil, energy, human resources, technology, and relationships (see Fig. 7). For each resource, we provide several insightful and recommended research propositions.

Raw materials. In the agri-food sector, raw materials are vital for product quality and safety. They include seeds, nutrients, fertilisers, and chemicals. By deploying AI techniques, farmers could understand several agricultural-related issues such as seed identification, herbicide use, classification, and identification of raw materials quality (Kamilaris and Prenafeta-Boldú, 2018). Furthermore, AI technologies enable farmers to understand their crops at a micro-scale, enabling the early detection of diseases in seeds (Patrício and Rieder, 2018) and maintain- ing precise fertigation (Bechar and Vigneault, 2016). Therefore, the fol- lowing research propositions emerge:

Water. Since water represents the vital resource consumed by agri-food businesses, there is a need to reduce the pressure on this resource and reinforce water stewardship in the agri-food sector. AI can save the excess use of water and support the development of adequate water and agricultural policies (Sánchez et al., 2020). The big data generated by smart farming sensors can be processed using machine learning to improve the management of smart farm- ing, gain crop insights, elevate productivity, and optimise water re- sources (Freeman et al., 2019; Navarro et al., 2020). Based on this, we suggest that:

Soil. Soil is an essential non-renewable resource in the agri-food industry, and its preservation is crucial. Because destruction and erosion pose a threat to soil, there is an opportunity to unlock the value of AI and ensure the preservation of this precious resource. For example, machine learning can help predict and identify soil properties such as drying, temperature, and moisture content (Liakos et al., 2018b). AI tools auto- mate the acquisition of knowledge and the analysis of large data sets concerning soil health, condition, and hydrology (Benke et al., 2020; Kuzmanovski et al., 2015). Consequently, we derive the following re- search propositions:

Energy. Arguably, an enormous amount of energy is imperative for the production, storage, and distribution of food products (Paulikienė et al., 2020). To ensure more efficient energy use, farmers could leverage AI to reduce energy consumption and cost through pre- dictive process parameter optimisation (Smetana et al., 2021). Further- more, machine learning could develop models for the effective management of energy systems in the agri-food sector (Cubric, 2020). Therefore, AI supports energy conservation and ultimately reduces en- ergy waste thanks to its ability to forecast energy demand based on op- erational usage, historical demands, or current weather (Bokade et al., 2021). In light of this, we propose that:

Technology. Technological progress contributes to the automa- tion of agri-food activities, agricultural productivity, efficiency, reliabil- ity, and precision (Bechar and Vigneault, 2016). The smart reform of agri-food systems necessitates the implementation of innovative prac- tices and technology-driven processes. This calls for agri-food organisa- tions to adopt AI to fortify their technological infrastructure. As such, the combination of AI and other technologies like the IoT, edge computing, blockchain, and augmented reality is considered a promising solution for pest identification, safety traceability of agricultural products, and environmental pollution caused by the use of fertilisers and pesticides (Zhang et al., 2020). Furthermore, AI augments the utility of data analyt- ics to improve crop production and assist farmers in selecting the best breed according to their location and climate (Lova Raju and Vijayaraghavan, 2020), monitoring livestock in real-time (Taneja et al., 2020), and predicting frost events (Diedrichs et al., 2018). Therefore, the following research propositions can be investigated:

RP6–1: The fusion of AI techniques and other technologies (e.g., the IoT, computing technologies, blockchain, big data analytics, robotics, virtual/augmented reality) ushers in an interconnected digital ecosys- tem that turns existing farming practices into knowledge-based agriculture and maximises production levels and product quality.

The agri-food industry represents the major consumer of water on a worldwide scale since crops largely depend on water availability. Con- sidering the significant depletion rate of water resources, there is a need for effective water management to conserve this resource and es- tablish sustainable agricultural production. The effective use of water can be conducive to significant improvements in water quality and a de- crease in health issues and pollution (Neupane and Guo, 2019). In this vein, recent research on AI demonstrates the technology's ability to

improve water management by monitoring water levels, scheduling water runs, and regulating water amounts needed by individual crops. Even though AI offers several tangible advantages to water manage- ment, Kamarudin et al. (2021) state that AI applications in plant water assessments are still under-studied. Future research should examine how AI techniques can increase water productivity and enhance water management practices in low water productivity areas (Virnodkar et al., 2020). Other opportunities for future studies include exploring AI's role in water erosion assessment (Kamilaris and Prenafeta-Boldú, 2018) and supporting precision agriculture systems to ensure water re- sources' stability (Ganeshkumar et al., 2021).

interest is an exploration of the role of AI in identifying crop yield objec- tives to be reached according to resources available and climate condi- tions (Le Bars and Attonaty, 2001). The development of AI-powered spray systems to analyse plants' colour, shape, and size and deliver ac- curate amounts of herbicides is recommended to facilitate precision targeting, prevent collateral damage to plants, and support precision ag- riculture. To advance the understanding of AI applications in livestock management, future studies are required to examine how AI can con- tribute to reducing greenhouse emissions caused by livestock farming. Research may also provide further insights into AI's role in genomics and how this can support farmers' understanding of animals' metabo- lisms and facilitate selective breeding (Eastwood et al., 2021). Finally, AI applications like facial recognition for animals and image classifica- tion should be investigated in detail to allow the individual monitoring of animals and their behaviour (Jung et al., 2021; Xu et al., 2021).

With the support of AI, farmers can reduce manual labour and in- crease task accuracy and performance. Bechar and Vigneault (2016) state that the problems associated with workforce shortage can be mit- igated with the incorporation of AI since the technology helps increase agricultural productivity and compensate for the higher investment cost due to the significant decline in the required workforce. Moreover, AI-powered robots can perform risky tasks and farming operations under harsh conditions (Bechar and Vigneault, 2016), thus contributing to workers' safety and job satisfaction. This can also allow farmworkers to save time and energy for more strategic farming activities requiring

The bibliometric analysis in this study resulted in several conclu- sions. We identified the most prevalent AI techniques and related tech- nologies (e.g., robots, the IoT, big data, UAVs) and their applications in the agri-food industry. This may assist practitioners in determining which AI-supporting methodologies to employ. Second, utilising RBV theory, we developed a framework to assist practitioners in deter- mining which AI deployments may impact agri-food resources. When applying AI to agri-food activities, the seven resource categories (raw materials, water, soil, energy, human resources, technology, and relationships) must be evaluated. In addition, practitioners should care- fully consider the economic and technical viability of incorporating AI while emphasising the technology's ethical and socially responsible dimensions.

Our study has limitations. This review began by performing a key- word search against a single database, Web of Science-WoS. Conse- quently, relevant publications may be omitted, especially those not indexed in the WoS database. The authors' keywords may also intro- duce bias into the analysis. To circumvent these issues, future studies may utilise multiple databases (e.g., Scopus, Google Scholar), include additional keywords, and employ additional analysis methods (e.g., meta-analysis, main path analysis).

the relationship between AI and agri-food systems, how farmers use AI techniques to modernise agriculture, the major trends in AI integra- tion in agri-food businesses, and the challenges and concerns associated with leveraging AI in the digitalisation of agriculture and farming activ- ities. AI has the potential to be an indispensable tool at every level of the intricate agri-food supply ecosystem. In addition to physical product ecosystems, its role can extend from primary production to processing, distribution, and retail, encompassing agricultural assurance and logistics service ecosystems.

In terms of scholarly output, we identified three distinct phases of AI in the agriculture and food industry. We observed that exponential growth began in 2015 due to advances in computational sciences and the emergence of innovative technologies. Unsurprisingly, AI research is published in computer science journals. The United States, China, and Spain were the top three most influential nations in terms of citations per country. Latin American and African nations contribute negligibly to AI research in the agri-food industry. In addition, robotics, the IoT, and unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) were identified as signif- icant technologies that could benefit from AI techniques such as ma- chine learning, deep learning, artificial neural networks, convolutional neural networks, and fuzzy logic. In addition, we identified machine learning and deep learning as recent trending topics. On the other hand, integrating AI with blockchain technology, virtual and augmented reality, 3D printing, and bioinformatics have received little attention. Therefore, future research should concentrate on how AI can enhance these technologies' capacity to manage soil, water, energy, crops, and livestock. In addition, the barriers to AI adoption were analysed and categorised into four broad groups: social concerns, technical concerns, privacy and ethical concerns, and organisational concerns.

