Two methods for identifying nutrient deficiencies in plants are de- structive and non-destructive. One of the destructive methods is labora- tory testing, but the risk of error is more significant due to human error (Harjoko et al., 2019). Digital image processing with machine learning is a non-destructive method that gives more objective results (Kamelia

This study aims to classify six chili plant health conditions using the combination of shape, texture, and color features. Chili in Indonesia is usually grown in an uncontrolled lighting conditions. The use of one fea- ture such as color has a great risk of identification errors because of the lighting condition. So, the proposed study varies several features for nutri- ent deficiency identification. A careful feature selection was carried out to produce an accurate model that robust in the uncontrolled lighting condi- tion. Some features considered are the leaves' color, shape, and texture. Several other machine learning and deep learning methods, such as MLP, SVM, Naive Bayes, RFT, and CNN were tested to compare the perfor- mance models in our data. The contributions of this paper are as follows.

c 7 selected plants were sampled in a hydroponic environment by providing macronutrients based on certain levels. The level used in this study consists of 5 levels. Each level is a dose reduction of mac- ronutrient types by 10%, 30%, 50%, 70%, and 90%. The content of these macronutrients is maintained for seven days to observe visible visual characteristics properly.

Data augmentation is a process to multiply data (Guerrero et al., 2021). In several studies, data augmentation has proven to improve the model performance (Guerrero et al., 2021; Kuznichov et al., 2019). The data is reproduced through specific modification processes. In this study, the data augmentation for the training set is executed by several behaviors, namely rotation, shear, zoom, and brightness. Rotation was

The feature extraction helps retrieve information such as color, tex- ture, shape, geometry, and others from the chili leave image. Some stud- ies only analyze one feature, but other studies combine them. This study compares two-color feature extraction methods using statistical value of the RGB and HSV color models. The RGB and HSV leaf color features are helpful features that have been widely used. Color model conversion from RGB to HSV aims to limit the size and type of color space. Then, the texture feature extraction methods compared are LBP and GLCM. The shape feature extraction used is the value of Hu moments and statistical

The texture is a feature that can be used to identify macronutrient deficiencies. In this study, the class that clearly shows the visual charac- teristics of the textural features is Calcium. If the research only uses color, then the class labelled Calcium will be challenging to identify be- cause it has color characteristics that are very similar to healthy. In this study, the texture feature extraction method uses two different methods, namely GLCM and LBP. GLCM has been used for texture fea- ture extraction in cases (Sabri et al., 2020; Tan et al., 2021) and give good results. Meanwhile, LBP was tested in case (Kumar et al., 2020).

GLCM is obtained by calculating the probability of the adjacency re- lationship between two pixels at a certain distance and angle orienta- tion (Widodo et al., 2018). After obtaining the co-occurrence matrix, the observed image's statistical characteristics can be calculated. GLCM

LBP is a feature extraction method of binary images. In (Kumar et al., 2020) proves that LBP can solve the problem of rotation on objects ac- cording to the data used in this study. For the LBP, we selected the uni- form pattern and set the value of bins to 10. Thus, this study extracted

The distance between the centroid and each edge pixel is obtained by calculating the Euclidean distance. Then, the distance is visual- ized, and the statistical value is sought from the data for each dis- tance to the centroid. The features obtained from this stage are statistical features such as mean, min, max, median, and average.

This study also compares the best MLP architecture based on the experiment with other previous work, such as Naive Bayes, RFT, and SVM. Naive Bayes is used on (Vassallo-Barco et al., 2017) with cer- tain parameters, and RFT is used (Sonobe et al., 2020). SVM effec- tively solves local minima and high dimension problems (Sonobe et al., 2020). SVM has several kernels, and (Xu et al., 2020) uses the Gaussian Radial Basis Function (RBF) kernel. In this method, two hyperparameters, the C regularization parameter and gamma value

are set to generate a classification model. For C, a high score may re- sult in over-fitting due to a high penalty for non-separable points, whereas a low value may result in under-fitting. The value definition of the range of a single training instance of Kernel RBF fits our data with hyperparameter values of gamma of 0.0001, C of 100, and the decision function shape using One vs One classifier (OvO). OvO is used as a multi-class strategy to train models. In addition, this study also tries other SVM kernel such as the Linear kernel (Myo Han and Watchareeruetai, 2020).

recall. The measurement of model performance accuracy is chosen to determine the model's ability to detect all objects correctly. Precision is chosen because several macronutrients exhibit very similar character- istics that the system must distinguish between them. If the system cannot tell the difference, the wrong solution can occur, causing the plant to die. The recall refers to the ratio of correctly predicted positive

There are four experimental in this study. The first experiment com- pares each feature's performance against six chili health condition data classes. The second is the comparison of the feature combination perfor- mance. The third experiment compares several MLP hyperparameters against the combination of the three best features obtained from the previous experiment. While the fourth experiment is a comparison of the results of the third experiment with several previous studies.

There are three types of features analyzed: color, texture, and shape features. This study compares the statistical characteristics of RGB and HSV images for color, LBP and GLCM features for textures, and statistical characteristics of the edge pixel distance to centroid and Hu moments for shape characteristics. For color characteristics, the results are in ac- cordance with (Qur'ania et al., 2020) that RGB data in this study produce

higher accuracy, precision, and recall values than HSV with an accuracy of 66.28% compared to HSV, which is 49.56%. GLCM produces higher performance than LBP for texture characteristics, which is 50.74%. It is because of LBP describes the texture locally. As for the shape character- istics, statistical characteristics from the edge pixel distance to the cen- troid resulted in a higher performance of 41.43%.

augmentation with a combination of color+texture, color + shape, and texture + shape. The combination of RGB color and GLCM texture pro- duces the highest accuracy, which is 76.13%, compared to the combina- tion of the other two characteristics. In the combination of three features experiment, RGB, GLCM, and Hu moments produces the higher

accuracy than combination of RGB, GLCM, and distance of centroid. This is not in line with the results of previous combinations where the dis- tance of centroid results a higher accuracy than Hu moments feature. In addition, this study also did a combination of 3 features by combining the distance of centroid feature and Hu moments feature. The result was beyond our expectations where the combination accuracy is greater, which is 84.77%.

cording to the previous experiments. The results of the augmentation of the three-feature combination data produce accuracy that is not much different. The combination of RGB, GLCM, and Hu moments pro- duces an accuracy of 86.35%, while RGB, GLCM, and distance of centroid produces an accuracy of 86.21%. But, the combination of RGB, GLCM, Hu, and distance of centroid produced the highest accuracy, which is 87.47%. Because of this, we decided to use this combination in the next experiment.

The third experiment was carried out by varying the learning rate value from 2 to 0.0001 with a fixed epoch value of 200. The value of 0.0001 was chosen because the resulting performance trend decreased at that value. Based on the experimental results, the highest perfor- mance was produced by a learning rate of 0.002, with each accuracy, precision, and recall value of 89.70%, 90.62%, and 89.17%. In comparison, the lowest performance is generated by the learning rate with a value of

2. In training using the Adam optimizer, the learning rate value regu- lates the number of updates made to the weight value of w. If the learn- ing rate value is decrease, the error function will decrease. However, a learning rate that is too small can cause the performance of training model decreases, as shown by the experiment. After obtaining the ap- propriate learning rate, this study also looks for the appropriate epoch value based on the previous MLP architecture. The epoch value varied from 100 to 400. The epochs value stopped varying at 400 because the performance trend had declined at that number. Based on the

experimental results, the highest model performance is produced by the MLP architecture with an epoch value of 300. The resulting accuracy, precision, and recall values are 89.70%, 90.62%, and 89.17%, respectively. The greater the iteration value, the more learning is generated. How- ever, an epoch value that is too large can result in an overfitting model. Therefore, the correct learning rate and epoch values must be obtained so that the resulting model performs well.

only gave a black color change at the base of the leaves. Therefore, even though a combination of 3 characteristics has been carried out, the de- veloped model can still give incorrect identification results. In addition, there are conditions of overlapping characteristics such as Mg, S, and Mg\\S. So, the identification model cannot recognize them correctly in certain cases, especially if the Mg\\S is still at a low level.

augmented data has been shown to improve accuracy by more than 3%. In addition, this study also compares machine learning with deep learning, such as CNN. CNN is proven to produce higher performance compared to machine learning. However, CNN has a high complexity compared to ordinary machine learning. The model for identifying plant health conditions can be applied to the agricultural environment. One example is the intelligent hydroponic farming system. In addition to monitoring and controlling agricultural environmental conditions, farmers can also embed our model to monitor plant health regularly and provide nutrient solutions based on plant conditions. To support precision agriculture, we will focus on a model that can identify the type of macronutrient deficiency and estimate the percentage of defi- ciency in the future.

This research was funded by the Directorate of Research and Com- munity Service, Deputy for Strengthening Research and Development, Ministry of Research, Technology/National Research and Innovation Agency of the Republic of Indonesia in the PMDSU program with grant ID 018/E5/PG.02.00. PT/2022 and 1773/UN1/DITLIT/Dit -Lit/PT.01.03/ 2022.

