Cable is the bridge connecting electrical equipment, such as transformers , circuit breakers and switchgear, etc, but also a power equipment. The long-running of cable will probably cause insulation material aging, leakage sparking and local overheating occur, which eventually lead to a cable fire and accident, the temperature of cable surface usually reflected the situation of the cable. In the paper, fiber bragg grating temperature sensor, insensitive to external stress was applied in monitoring cable temperature. The temperature of cable surface ranges in the similar curve with ambient temperature.

Cable is an important part of electricity system. In the substation, cable is the connection of various electricity device, and links to the control room. It usually lays in cable bridge, cable tunnel, cable interlayer, cable ditch and cable shaft. The plenty of cables, long route, complicated trend and compact arrange.

Especially in cable trench and cable pit, a relatively closed, dark and damp environment, cooling condition is poor, the long-term withstand high voltage, large current and heating, lead to the insulation material aging. In addition, as the electric circuit is used for a long time, lacks of regular maintenance and timely update, leakage ignition or local overheating would occur frequently, once the fire area is wide, the repair time is long, there will be a large loss [1-2]. Temperature of high voltage cable surface reflects inside condition of the cable, whether overload operation or changes of cable operating environment or cable line fault (such as the various fault resulting from partial discharge of main insulation or the destruction of protecting layer) will cause the change of cable surface temperature therefore monitoring of cable surface temperature will timely detect the cable abnormal condition, then we take timely measures to avoid accidents [3-4].

Mounted on the cable, fiber Bragg grating temperature sensor inevitably will be squeezed, bending, drawing and stress strain. The temperature measuring of cable fiber Bragg grating temperature sensor should resist traction during the rally and damage from bite of anti rodent animal. Insulating medium covers cable outer part, therefore, to make the sensor sensitive to temperature only and ensure the measuring accuracy, using a metal armored fiber Bragg grating temperature sensor which is not sensitive to external stress, its structure is shown in Fig. 1.

In the double layer tube structure, the main function of the outer tube is conducting temperature and eliminating the external stress strain impact on Bragg wavelength offset. As a result of the external stress strain impact, the outer tube longitudinal strain induced grating wavelength value offset is within, we can assume that the grating offset value is very small, and is within the allowable error range, it has little impact on the temperature induced Bragg wavelength offset. The temperature is uniformly transferred to the inner tube. Due to the temperature effect of grating in the inner tube, Bragg wavelength offset value changes, we can get the wavelength offset value by optical fiber AFC port to the spectrum analyzer.

The system is used in 220/110/35kV substation cable trench and cable pits of Yunnan power network of Zhaotong Power Supply Bureau. When the power cable is installed on the cable trench and cable pits, it is difficult to measure the temperature by manual inspection, so temperature detection system based on the traditional telecommunication transmission can not meet the needs of application. Fiber Bragg grating real- time temperature monitoring is a distributed monitoring system, the position and quantity of measuring point can be laid at needs, it holds high precision, fast response, far transmission distance, convenient installation, free of maintenance, harsh environment resistance, electromagnetic interference resistance, intrinsically safe and explosion-proof, has an obvious technical superiority.

The cable temperature rise test has been done in the laboratory, to determine the initial temperature change and temperature distribution of the cable heat fault. Make site design site visits of transformer substation cable trench, cable pits According to a temperature measurement of a 4 core and 30 meters cable, the positioning accuracy is 1m, temperature resolution is 0.1  , the effective measurement distance is up to 4 km. Following the 0.5 M per branch principles, we need 60 metal armored fiber optic Bragg grating temperature sensors in all.

As shown in Fig. 3, the connecting box is placed in the 5 cable well, the 4 core cable communication cable ports, reached to the main control room then leads to No.5 well; 60 metal armored fiber optic Bragg grating temperature sensors are divided into 4 groups, respectively, occupy the 1~4 trench of fiber grating analyzer.

As shown in Fig. 4, it is the data change curve of cable trench and cable pit sensors with Zhaotong environment temperature in 24 hours, at August 8, 2011. Curves are respectively got in cable trench, high voltage interior cable trench, Cable pit and the real-time temperature monitoring Zhaotong environment data.

30.5  at 16:00 in the afternoon; The cable trench sensors, reached its lowest 26.54  at 7:00, reached its highest 31.78  at 16:00; Cable trench sensors of high voltage chamber reached its lowest of 28.01  at 08:00 , and reached its highest 29.25  at 00:00; The cable pit sensors reached its lowest 28.72  at 07:00 , and reached its highest 35.01  at 17:00; The trend of cable surface temperature change and environmental temperature change is consistent, the data consequence is relatively stable.

The temperature of cable pit sensor is 4  higher than that of cable trench on average, The temperature of cable trench sensors of high voltage chamber tend to be flat and is 2  higher than that of cable trench on average at 00:00 to 11:00 , 3  lower than that of cable trench on average at 12~23. This is because the three teams of sensors laid on different locations, the ventilation performance, closure property of cable pit poorer than that in the trench, the temperature of pit is higher than the trench temperature; High voltage chamber of cable trench is indoor, plenty of equipments, and high quantity of heat production, little effect from external environment temperature, and little temperature change. The temperature sensor effectively monitors the temperature of a day.

As shown in Fig. 5, it is the temperature change curve of sensors in cable trench and cable pit in 479 days. As shown in Fig. 6, it is the temperature change curve of Zhaotong environment in 479 days, the time is from June 6, 2010 to September 28, 2011.

As shown in Fig. 5, the summarizing of 60 metal armored optical fiber Bragg grating temperature sensor monitoring data, shows that the change trends of the basic temperature curve are consistent, the temperature curves of so many points is similar, there is no special point to deal with. In the long-term monitoring of 479 days, the minimum of the average daily temperature range of 60 sensors is 21.24  , detected at number 9 trench 1, The maximum is 37.43  , detected at number 4 trench 2, which reached its maximum temperature

This article is about the armored optical fiber Bragg grating metal temperature sensor used in Zhaotong substation in cable trench, able Cable pit, real-time online monitoring the operation situation of high voltage cables. Through the comparative analysis and monitoring of Zhaotong environment within 24 hours and 479 days of temperature data change curves: cable surface temperature and environmental temperature change trend are consistent; the minimum of the average daily temperature range of 60 sensors is 21.24  ,detected at number 9 trench 1, The maximum is 37.43  ,detected at number 4 trench 2, which reached its maximum temperature 43.41  on July 3, 2010, and the minimum temperature is 4.37  on January 17, 2011,number 13 trench 1. Metal armored fiber Bragg grating temperature sensor temperature changes influenced by seasons; The temperature change has no abnormalities, mutation, the change extent of the maximum and minimum value of temperature of cable trench and cable pit shows they are in normal working condition.

