The main goal of this work was to use rice straw (RS) in the production of environmentally sound composites using corn based adhesives (CA). Treatments of RS with NaOH and hot-water were undertaken to evaluate the effect of such treatments on the performance of produced composites. The influence of composite density, starch content and varieties of starch (cornstarch, cassava starch, potato starch) on flexural properties of composites was investigated. The microstructure of fractured surfaces was further observed. Results showed that cornstarch based composites had higher flexural properties. Composites made from hot-water treated straw and cornstarch had better interface and higher flexural properties, and flexural strength and flexural elastic modulus reached peak values at starch content of 10% and composite density of 0.7 g/cm3. The composites developed from this work may have potential application for ceiling panels and bulletin boards.

Using straw and other agricultural residues for preparation of composite materials has become the focus of world. But the crushed materials (e.g. straw powder, rice husk powder, husk powder or extracted straw fiber) of agricultural residues are the main materials of the composites [9-11], and using discarded tires, formaldehyde resins, polymers as matrix for preparation of composite [12-13]. Such composite materials have better water resistance and acoustic insulation properties, higher internal bond strength and flexibility and flexural strength, bigger fracture coefficient. But smashing agricultural residues and extracting fiber from straw waste lots of energy, and the matrix of the composites is difficult to degrade. This research used rice straw and cassava starch, corn starch, potato starch to prepare composite materials, and focused on the influence of composite density, starch content and varieties of starch on flexural strength and flexural elastic modulus. The microstructure of fractured surfaces was further observed.

Cassava starch, corn starch, potato starch were food grade starch, Shandong Jincheng Food Co., Ltd. products. Rice straw was from Liuhe, Nanjing, previous year products. NaOH, AR (Analytical reagent); Na2S2O3, AR; borax, AR; 30%H2O2, AR; FeSO4·7H2O, AR, the reagents above mentioned were Nanjing Chemistry reagent Ltd. products.

Pressing equipment was XLB-DC magnetic plate vulcanizing machine, Rubber Machinery Co., Ltd. Huzhou Shunli products. Performance testing machine was TMS-Pro, FTC products, US. Moisture absorption testing instrument was HPX-16085 constant temperature and moisture case, Shanghai Xinmiao Medical Treatment Ltd. products. Stereomicroscope was SMZ1000, Nikon Japan products.

RS was extensively washed with distilled water in order to remove impurities (mainly dust). This operation was performed several times at room temperature and under vigorous stirring. After successive washings, RS was dried in an air-circulated oven at 103  . This material was stored in hermetic plastic containers in order to prevent microbial attack (i.e. fungi) before using it in followed treatments. Washed RS without any further treatments was used as control and was labeled CRS.

Some components of cellulose fibres represent a hydrophobic blockage for fibre wetting and they must be efficiently removed. RS is rich in silica and waxes, deteriorating the properties and making RS unsuitable for textile applications. In order to improve the RS wettability and performance, different treatments were applied. CRS was soaked in 2% NaOH solution, for 2 h at room temperature with occasional shaking followed by washing with distilled water for several times to leach out the absorbed NaOH until neutral was reached subsequently oven dried. The NaOH-treated CRS was labeled as NRS.

Cornstarch adhesives was prepared by the dispersion of the cornstarch (CS) powder in distilled water at a CS-to-water ratio 1:10 under stirring at room temperature for 2 h with 1.2wt% sodium thiosulfate (Na2S2O3.5H2O) on dry basis of CS for preventing deterioration. The resultant adhesives were then ready to be mixed with RS.

Fig. 1 showed the flexural properties of varieties of starch based composites. From fig. 1, cornstarch based composites had higher flexural strength and flexural elastic modulus. Potato starch based composites had lower flexural strength and flexural elastic modulus. The flexural elastic modulus of potato starch based composite was 18.5% lower than flexural elastic modulus of cornstarch based composites. This could be accounted for the better stickiness, better dispersion and worse agglomeration of cornstarch. However, cassava starch and potato starch had worse stickiness and better agglomeration, and their composites had lower flexural properties.

Fig. 2 showed the relationship between starch content and flexural properties of cornstarch based composites. From fig. 2, flexural strength and flexural elastic modulus increased and then decreased with increasing of starch content, and reached the peak value at starch mass fraction of 10%. The flexural properties decreased with increasing of starch mass fraction above 10%. This could be accounted for that the relative starch dosage was less, adhesive had weakened solidification and could not glue the rice straw completely, so the flexural properties were lower at starch mass fraction below 10%. Interfacial area of straw was definite, and maximum utilized quantity of starch mantled straw existed. Excrescent starch adhesive made the composite internal structure looser at starch mass fraction above 10%, and the flexural properties decreased.

Fig. 3 showed the relationship between density and flexural properties of cornstarch based composites. From fig. 3, flexural strength and flexural elastic modulus increased with increasing of composite density, increased significantly with increasing of density at 0.6~0.7 g/cm3, decreased slightly with increasing of density above 0.7 g/cm3. This could be accounted for looser internal structure, more moisture content of composites and weakened adhesive solidification, and the flexural properties were lower at density below 0.7

g/cm3. When density was 0.7 g/cm3, moisture content was appropriate, starch adhesive diffuses uniformly and could glue the rice straw completely, flexural strength and flexural elastic modulus reached the peak value. The flexural properties decreased with increasing of density above 0.7 g/cm3, this was due to more compact internal structure and more difficult starch adhesive diffusion.

From fig. 2 and 3, flexural properties of cornstarch based composites from hot-water treated straw were higher, and flexural properties of cornstarch based composites of NaOH treated straw were worst. This may be due to higher SiO2 content of straw themselves, and SiO2 forms a non-polar surface structure in fiber, weakening adhesive adsorption. Meanwhile, there was a wax layer on straw surface, making less friction between straw and more difficult for starch adhesive to permeate through straw, it was difficult to form "gel nails" in bonding process. All above mentioned had negative impact on composites manufacture, and decreased flexural properties of composites. Hot-water treatments could reduce SiO2 and wax content of straw effectively, making better cementation of straw and starch adhesive, and also preserving straw fibers, so composites from hot-water treated had higher flexural properties. However, NaOH treatments could hydrolyze straw cellulose, making straw looser and softer, lower polymerization of straw cellulose and lower flexural properties of composites from NaOH treated straw.

Fig. 4(a, b, c) showed fractured surfaces microstructure of varieties of starch based composites. From the figure, cornstarch adhesive could wrap the straw surface more uniformly than cassava starch and potato starch adhesive, and cassava starch and potato starch adhesive had agglomeration phenomenon, this was due to better mobility of cornstarch adhesive in straw surface and it could stick straw better. Three kinds of starch based composites had different levels of stratification, and cassava starch and potato starch based composites stratify obviously, indicating better interface, better soakage and better compatibility between cornstarch adhesive and straw. Cornstarch based composites had higher flexural properties.

Fig. 4(d, e, f) showed fractured surfaces microstructure of composites from straw with different treatments. From the figure, hot water and NaOH treatments could reduce SiO2 and wax content of straw effectively, improving the interphase boundary of matrix and reinforcement, and composites from hot water and NaOH treated straw had less stratification and crack. NaOH treatments could hydrolyze straw cellulose, making straw looser and softer and composite from NaOH treated had lower flexural properties.

Cornstarch based composites had higher flexural properties. Composites from hot-water treated straw and cornstarch had better interface and higher flexural properties, and flexural strength and flexural elastic modulus reached peak values at starch mass fraction of 10% and density of 0.7 g/cm3.

