An investigation on friction and wear behaviors of carbon strip and contact wire used in the pantograph-cantenary system is presented. The tests are conducted under laboratory conditions and on a pin-on-disc tester under electric current. The results indicate that electric current have a distinct effect on friction properties of carbon strip rubbing against copper. The wear rate of carbon strip increases with increasing of electric intensity due to the heat and arc discharge generated in the current. Worn surfaces of carbon strip are analyzed by scanning electron microscopy equipped with an energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy. It is found that the thermal wear, arc erosion and abrasive wear are the dominant wear mechanism occurring in the electrical sliding frictional process, accompanying with material transferring.

In pantograph-catenary system, the electric locomotive obtains electricity power by a carbon strip rubbing against copper contact wire. Therefore the anti-wear of the contact pairs has a direct influence on the service life of pantograph strip and copper contact line materials [1-4]. In order to study the anti-wear of contact couple material, a series of experimental tests were carried on the friction and wear tester under electric current. A large number of investigations were performed to study the tribology performance of carbon strip/copper contact wire under different sliding speed and electric current. In this paper, the friction and wear performance of electrical contact material is investigated. The surface morphology was analyzed by SEM and EDS. The wear mechanism of contact couple is proposed in the electrical sliding process.

The testing machine has been introduced in detail in previous studies [2, 4, 6]. In the test, the normal force Fn is set to 80, 160 N. The electric current intensity I of 0, 10, 30, 50, 70 A are chosen. The sliding speed v is set to 50 km/h and the duration T of each test is set to 1 hour.

Fig. 1a shows the variation of friction coefficient with and without arc discharge. It can be obviously found that each coefficient of friction varies from a small value to a peak at the beginning stage of sliding, then decreases to an approximate constant value. It is also found that the coefficient of friction with electric current is lower than that without electric current. The sharp rises of friction coefficient may be attributed to uneven contact conditions and the different properties of contact surface at the beginning stage. That suggests that the electric current plays a lubricating role in a sliding process at the steady stage [2, 5, 7-9]. Fig. 1b shows the relation with variation of electric current and friction coefficient with time. It can be found that the variations of friction coefficient and the electric current with time have the same trend, but the time delay existed in the friction process. That may suggest that the coefficient of friction has a close relationship with electric current.

Fig. 4 displays the scanning electron microscope micrographs of a worn surface of carbon strip in different magnifications. Fig.4a shows that there are many furrow, debris and arc ablation pits on the worn surface. Fig. 4b and c are gradually amplified in the zone A in the Fig. 4a. That suggests that thermal wear, arc erosion and abrasive wear occur in the process of electrical sliding friction.

The coefficient of friction with electric current is smaller than that without electric current. And the variations of the friction coefficient and the electric current with time have the same trend in the process of carbon strip rubbing against copper. The wear rate of carbon strip increases with increasing electric current. The thermal wear, arc erosion and abrasive wear are the dominant wear mechanism occurring in electrical sliding frictional process, and accompanying with material transferring.

