For the lack of the traditional particle filter and particle filter based on the colour histogram in the background illumination and the deformation and transformation of target, fuzzy particle filter combined with the classical Monte Carlo algorithm employs fuzzy technique to extract the target features. Colour image sequence converts from RGB to L*a*b Colour space of the International Illumination Commission. Fuzzy particle filter and re-sampling weight superimposed is more effective in reducing the number of particles and enhances traditional particle filter capacity to the recognition positioning and real-time tracking. Experimental results displayed that the method in the target shape, attitude or background illumination in intraday variation tracked target in real time. The algorithm enhances the traditional particle filter robustness and real-time in the light of dramatic changes, background constant variation and the target deformation self-adaptive. And the partially obscured target is not lost.

© 2012 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license. Selection and/or peer review under responsibility of American Applied Science Research Institute Key Words: Monte Carlo ; Fuzzy techniques ; particle filter ; illumination ; target tracking

The tracking target in the video sequence effectively has been a challenging issue in the computer vision[1- 2]. In recent years, particle filter as an efficient target state estimation method, which belongs to the non- parametric estimation with not exhaustive search and has the advantage of high tracking accuracy, has been successfully applied in the field of target tracking and some across-domain[3-4]. It is high computational cost that each particle state is estimated at any frame image in the tracking process[2]. In the case of partial occlusion, illumination variation, changing posture and shape of targets, the real-time and robustness of the traditional particle filter becomes the problems, i.e HPF( Histogram-based particle filter). Vinu[5] put forward to combine with the technology of the fuzzy feature measurement and the stability theory to improve

the timeliness and robustness of tracking on the basis of Ning [6]. The fuzzy particle measurement methods as well as superimposed weight sampling algorithm is employed in the paper to reduce the number of particles and improve the real-time quality. Y. Satoh applied the color characteristics to implement tracking[7].

The constant is based on the similar function of measurement model zt  ht (xt ,nt ), the function h t non-linear associated with n t , where n t is a measure noise sequence. In the particle filter, the probability distribution is approximate to weighted distribution collection, for example s {(x(n) ,w(n) ) | n 1,2,...N }, N is the number of particles,

Where ui,j is the degree of membership of the i-th pixel and the j the pixel. p is the i-th pixel probability of being selected, and N is the total number of pixel. In order to reduce the non-uniformity of the RGB color space, the color of each pixel is converted from RGB color space to the CIE (Commission International de L'Eclairage French abbreviation) L*a * b color space. When c is much smaller than n, c kinds of color local rough set theory and fuzzy histogram calculated from fuzzy C-means (FCM) histogram. c rough color fuzzy clustering core unified color space, defined as follows:

Tversky et al consider that particles is a set of feature points rather than the simple metric[10] , We consider Generalized Tversky Index (GTI) measure for image region extraction has been proposed as the formula (9) .GTI provides directional similarity assessment that is based on human perception. Values a, β determine the relative importance of the distinctive features of the adjacent two images.

In 1st Experiment , the size of images which from http://www.dabi.temple.edu is 256*192 px and the number is 120 frames in the Experiment . Red rectangle manually select the area in the diagram, the tracking area of based on the color histogram particles and fuzzy particle filter with a=0.500 ,β=0.750 are yellow and white rectangle area, respectively . The part of the track result in 1st Experimental  as follows:

There is a target of various attitude change in the sequence. 116th showed that the algorithm based on the color histogram m of particle filter (HPF) has obvious deviation , the partially obscured target is not lost in the new algorithm . The part of tracking the effect in the first experiment is displayed in Fig 1 ,2 the deviation Statistics in the tracking target is as shown in Fig 5 . As is shown in Fig 5, in the 20th, 80th, 100th frames respectively, due to the target deformation, similar with the background, similar goals shows interference, target error change increased , so the color histogram-based particle effects get worse.

Particle filter algorithm can estimate the a posteriori distribution of the target state ,so it can be maintained with a variety of assumptions of the target state through a large number of particles, and therefore has strong handling capacity with a rapid light changes, the longer time occlusion .Thesis method, however, there are many insufficient or not involved in some research areas, which combined with the special traffic weather (for example, rain, fog, etc.), multi-target tracking will be our next research item.

