The downhole inflow control device (ICD) could control the production profile of every section in horizontal well and the edge and bottom water coning, so it is important in enhancing oil and gas recovery. To quantitatively depict ICD’s suitability in horizontal wells requires analyzing reservoir parameters like permeability variation coefficient, average permeability, the ratio of vertical permeability to horizontal permeability and the technology parameters like tube string size, horizontal section length, segment number and the pressure loss ratio between ICD and reservoir. With fuzzy mathematical method, this work has analyzed these factors through relative subordinate function and established the fuzzy comprehensive evaluation model to study the suitability of ICD in sandstone reservoirs by the weight of each factor and fuzzy relationship matrix. The fuzzy evaluation and simulation results prove this method could well evaluate the suitability of ICD in sandstone reservoirs and it is significant for the application of ICD in horizontal well development.

wells can effectively slow down the water cone and gas cone, increase the sweep area of gas drive or water drive, promote single well productivity and then enhance oil recovery. The choke flow of ICD can control the flow in the downhole production layer and adjust the production profile to get the balancing development and optimized production of oil and gas. But many elements would affect the horizontal well productivity with ICD and to describe, analyze and evaluate them is hard because of their vagueness and uncertainty. Therefore this work introduces the fuzzy mathematical method, an evaluating method with theory of fuzzy set which integrates evaluating matrix and the objective fuzzy matrix. It could tell the quality of many factors objectively and make quantitative evaluation correctly. The key point in establishing optimized evaluation model with fuzzy mathematics is in determining the evaluating index factor, index weight, and subordinate function matrix affecting the suitability of ICD and then establishing the fuzzy comprehensive evaluation model.

 The reservoir factors influencing ICD completion meet the following order, variation coefficient > average permeability > reservoir thickness > Kv/Kh . Also the first two factors can greatly influence the experiment and the latter two’s influences are small. Given the poor water control effect in thin layer bottom water reservoir, the thickness is not included in comprehensive evaluation.

The relative fitness rij varies from 0 to 1 when comprehensively evaluating ICD suitability with different cases. The larger value of rij means the higher suitability of ICD completion. The matrix of all rij values is the fuzzy comprehensive suitability matrix of ICD completion R(x).

Technology parameters in ICD completion are usually artificially set according to reservoir parameters and production requirements. Since it is controlled by people, its impact on ICD suitability is relatively small. The weight of reservoir parameters and technology parameters is obtained through expert experience and it is W2=(0.65, 0.35)T.

The result suggests that case 2 is the best while case 3 is the worst just from the aspect of reservoir factors. The main reason is that case 2 has the largest variation coefficient, so the inflow profile is most unbalanced and the probability of water coning is the highest. In this case, ICD completion could display its best water control effect and is most suitable. From the aspect of technology, case 3 is the best while case 1 is the worst, because case 3 has the largest segment number. Combining the 2 factors together, we find case 2 is the best while case 5 is the worst.

 However, the limitation of this work might lie in the inadequate consideration of the interaction among those factors since the analyses here are based on the site conditions. The subordinate functions for each factor are determined when only considering the single factor. Therefore, the method might need further improvement in real applications.

