Abstract In this paper, we shall integrate some ideas in terms of concepts in topology. First, we introduce some new concepts of rough membership relations and functions in the generalized covering approximation space. Second, we introduce some topological applications namely ‘‘near concepts’’ in the general- ized covering approximation space. Accordingly, several types of fuzzy sets are constructed. The basic notions of near approximations are introduced and suffi- ciently illustrated. Near concepts are provided to be easy tools to classify the sets and to help for measuring exactness and roughness of sets. Many proved results, examples and counter examples are provided. Finally, we give two practical examples to illustrate our approaches.

Rough set theory, a mathematical tool to deal with inexact or uncertain knowledge in information systems, has originally described the indiscernibility of elements by equivalence relations. Covering rough sets [1–9,11,12] is a natural extension of clas- sical rough sets by relaxing the partitions arising from equivalence relations to cov- erings. In our work [6], we have introduced a framework to generalize covering approximation space that was introduced by Zhu [11]. In fact, we have introduced the generalized covering approximation space 5n – CAS as a generalization to rough set theory and covering approximation space. The 5n – CAS is defined by the triple

work, we introduce some new generalized definitions to rough membership rela- tions (resp. functions) and new types of fuzzy sets in 5n – CAS. Second part aims to introduce one of an important topological concepts which are called ‘‘near con- cepts’’ in rough context (specially, in 5n – CAS ). In fact, we apply near concepts in 5n – CAS to define different tools for modifying the original operations. The sug- gested methods in this paper represent easy mathematical tools to approximate the rough sets and removing the uncertainty (vagueness) of sets. In addition, compar- isons between the suggested methods are obtained and many examples (resp. counter examples) to illustrate these connections are provided. Hence, we can say that our approaches are very useful in rough context namely, in information analysis and in decision making. Finally, in the end of paper, simple practical examples are provided to illustrate the suggested methods and to show the impor- tance of these methods in rough context namely in information system and in multi-valued information system. In addition, we give some comparisons between our approaches and others approaches such as Pawlak and Lin approaches.

The present section is devoted to introduce new definitions for rough membership relations and functions as easy tools to classify the sets and help for measuring exactness and roughness of sets. These rough membership functions allow us to define four different fuzzy sets in 5n – CAS. Moreover, the suggested rough mem- bership relations (resp. functions) are more accurate than classical rough member- ship function that was given by Lin [10] and the other types.

Example  2.1. Let  ⟨U; 1; Cn⟩  be  a  5n – CAS,  where  U = {a; b; c; d}  and 1= {(a; a); (b; b); (c; c); (c; b); (c; d); (d; a)}. We will show the above remark in case of j = r and the other cases similarly: Suppose that A = {a; b; d}, then we get 1r(A) = {a; b} and 1r(A)= U. Clearly d ∈ A but d Rr A and c ∈¯r A but c R A.

Example 2.2. Let ⟨U; 1; Cn⟩ be a 5n – CAS, where U = {a; b; c; d} and 1= {(a; a); (a; b); (b; c); (b; d); (c; a); (d; a)}. Suppose that A = {b; c; d}. Then 1u(A) = Ø, 1r(A) = {c; d}, 1l(A) = {b} and 1i(A) = {b; c; d}. Accordingly, c ∈r A and b ∈l A but b Ru A and c Ru A. Also b ∈i A and c ∈i A but b Rr A and c Rl A. By similar way, we can illustrate the others cases.

The main goal of this section is to introduce one of the important topological applications which are named ‘‘near concepts’’ in 5n – CAS. Moreover, we intro- duce the new concepts ‘‘j-near approximations’’ (resp. j-near boundary regions and j-near accuracy measures) to generalize the j-approximations (resp. j- boundary regions and j-accuracy measures). In addition, we introduce near exact- ness and near roughness by applying near concepts to make more accuracy for definability of sets in 5n – CAS.

Definition 3.4. Let ⟨U; 1; Cn⟩ be a 5n – CAS, and A C U. Then, for each j ∈ {r; l; i; u}; k ∈ {p; s; c}, the j-near accuracy of the j-near approximations of A C U is defined by

By considering j-near concepts, the new concepts ‘‘j-near rough membership rela- tions’’ (resp. ‘‘j-near rough membership functions’’) are provided to modify and generalize the j-membership relations (resp. j-membership functions) in 5n – CAS. The near rough membership functions are considered as easy tools to classify the sets and help for measuring near exactness and near roughness of sets. The existence of near rough membership functions made us introduce the concept of near fuzzy sets.

Definition 4.2. Let ⟨U, 1, Cn⟩ be a 5n – CAS, and A C U. Thus we can define the j- near  rough  membership  functions  for  5n – CAS  as  follows:  For  each j ∈ {r, l, i, u}, k ∈ {p, s, c} and x ∈ U, the j-near rough membership functions on U for subset A are lkj : U → [0, 1], where

Lemma  4.2. Let  ⟨U, 1, Cn⟩ be  a  5n – CAS,  and  A, B C U.  Then,  for  each j ∈ {r, l, i, u} and k ∈ {p, s, c}, the following is true in general:

The main goal of this section is to introduce two practical examples in order to illustrate the importance of applying near concept in rough context. In the first example we use an equivalence relation that induced from an information system and hence we compare between our approaches and Pawlak approach. In the sec- ond example, we apply our approaches in a multi-valued information system (MVIS) [14]. This type of information system is generalization to information sys- tem which uses an arbitrary binary relation and thus Pawlak approach does not fit in this type. Lin [10] introduced general rough membership function depending on an arbitrary binary relation, these rough membership function coincide with our j- rough membership function in the case of j = r only. But, the other types j of our j- rough membership functions are more accurate than j = r, so we can see that our approaches are the appropriate tools for these types and very useful in information analysis. Finally, in the second example we introduce a comparison between our approaches and Lin method.

It is clear that Lin rough membership function is the same as r-rough member- ship function. Moreover, our approaches l-rough (resp. i-rough) membership function is more accurate than r-rough membership function and Lin rough mem- bership function. Finally, we can also apply j-near rough membership function as in Example 5.1.

In this work, we introduced one of an important topological application that named ‘‘near concepts’’ in rough context. Accordingly, different types of approx- imations (resp. rough membership relations and functions) were provided to be easy mathematical tools to classify the sets and help for measuring exactness and roughness of sets. These tools are more accurate than other types that were defined by others authors. Consequently, our approaches are very interesting in decision making. We believe that these structures are useful in the applications and thus these techniques open the way for more topological applications in rough context and help in formalizing many applications from real-life data. In our future works, we will apply the suggested methods in this paper in real life appli- cations and problems.

