Juglans sect. Rhysocaryon with 16 black walnut species is unusual in the angiosperms for its intercontinental and insular distribution endemic to and spanning the Americas [6]. This indicates a great potential in association with crop improvement of the Persian walnut (J. regia of sect. Juglans, commonly used for nut-producing) and high quality wood for cabinetry as well as agroforestry potential for rehabilitating degraded areas such as cloud forest areas [6]. Therefore, an in-depth study on the Paradox would be valuable for walnut breeding and the commercial industry.

Species background of Paradox affects the performance of seedlings as rootstocks. Because the nuts from which Paradox seedlings are grown are collected from wild trees, their genetic backgrounds are not generally known [5]. Based on nut morphology and nuclear sequences, some of the Paradox source trees appear to have greater genetic contributions from species other than the ones that their cpDNA sequence profiles matched [5]. Thus, development of more effective markers from the genome to infer the parentage of individual Paradox seedlings is highly desirable [5]. In the previous study, only five black walnut species were sampled to trace the source of Paradox [5]. Therefore, it is necessary to increase sampling size from Juglans sect. Rhysocaryon to analyze the genetic components of Paradox hybrids.

Eighty-two sequences of the 14 accessions were deposited in GenBank. Part of the sequences used in this study were downloaded from GenBank. GenBank accession numbers are shown in Table 1. The source of each sample is indicated using symbol(s) in Table 1 as follows:  Arboretum, Forestry Academy of Yunnan Province, Kunming City, Yunnan Province, China;  Resources Nursery, Forestry Bureau of Luoning County, Henan Province, China;  Beijing Botanical Garden;  see Stone et al. (2009) [6].

from the gel using a sterilized scalpel for purification and sent to BGI for cloned sequencing. The fragments were cloned into the pMD18-T Vector (D101A) (TaKaRa Biotechnology (Dalian) Co., Ltd.). Seven to twenty-eight independent clones for each sample were randomly taken and sequenced in both directions using a 3730xl DNA analyzer (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, California, USA) with the M13F(−47) and M13R(−48) primers.

Since sequences of some related species downloaded from GenBank were not long enough, it was decided that the final dataset included 103 sequences/35 accessions in an alignment of 1148bp in length (ranging from position 131 to 1258 from the 5’ end of the nrDNA IGS8-ETS1 region) for formal computation. Totally, 191 parsimony-informative sites were obtained. The NJ tree (Fig. 2) was created using PAUP 4.0b10 [19].

Notes: 1 Number of the isolate sequence haplotype with the number of cloned sequence in brackets; 2 Total number of sites excluding sites with gaps/missing data; 3 Number of polymorphic sites within individual (Sites with alignment gaps were not considered); 4 , 5 and 6 Paradox hybrids; 7 , 8 and 9 Parental materials of Paradox in sect. Rhysocaryon; 10 and 11 Parental materials of Paradox in J. regia of sect. Juglans.

Fig. 2 The NJ strict consensus tree created by PAUP 4.0b10 showing reconstructed phylogeny of the Paradox hybrids in genus Juglans, Juglandaceae based on Juckes-Cantor model. The numbers above the branch are bootstrap values (%)/jackknife values (%) of 1 × 103 replicates [Tree length=529, Consistency index (CI)=0.6106, Homoplasy index (HI)=0.3894, Retention index (RI)=0.8601].

The nrDNA IGS8-ETS1 sequences are typically bi-parentally inherited [5, 6, 9]. As shown in Fig.2, six novel isolates in the Paradox hybrid genomes (i.e., ZhongningQi_isolate_ HT24w141c2, ZhongningQi_ isolate_HT24w8f3, ZhongningQiang_isolate_H32e8, ZhongningQiang_isolate_ H32c7, ZhongningYi_ isolate_H1b1 and ZhongningYi_isolate_H1b7) were isolated, occupying 11.11% of the total number of isolates in ‘ZhongningQi’, 12.5% in ‘Zhongning Qiang’ and 11.76% in ‘Zhongning Yi’.

As a gene family, the sequence of the nrDNA IGS region has a large copy number [9, 16]. Two aspects were found in the bi-parental inheritance process of the nrDNA IGS8-ETS1 region of Paradox hybrids. The first was the addition of genetic components from both parents, which was characterized significantly as one- parent-dominated in each hybridization event. The second was the nucleotide mutations (occurrence of novel isolates) in the nrDNA IGS8-ETS1 region which can be regarded as indicators of heterosis. Paradox hybrids formed a highly heterozygous plant group with a broader genetic basis, suggesting a great value in breeding of excellent rootstocks and high quality wood-producing trees. A quantitative study on gene flow and heterozygosity of black walnut species would improve breeding and utilization of Paradox hybrids [20, 21].

This study was financially supported by Chinese Special Fund Project for the Scientific Research of the Forest Public Welfare Industry (Project No.201004048) from the State Forestry Administration of China and by the National Natural Science Foundation of China grant 30972412. The authors thank Runquan Dong, Huzhi Xu and Jianxun Qi for their advice and help in material collections.

