This article points out the importance of the using of green building materials in China. The selection of green building materials has deep relationship of the regional endowments differences. It requires a combination consider of regional to build the index system. This paper introduces the data envelope method to solve the evaluation of green building materials. The proposed evaluation process also been given.

U    Area Non-equilibrium Development S    ial development has made brilliant achievements after 30 years of reform and opening up. However, the consequent widening gaps between the levels of regional economic drawback the wealth polarization of serious inefficient allocation of resources. They also make many other social problems [1]. Especially in the field of construction, the large number using of high energy consumption and high pollution building materials caused tremendous damage to the social environment.

The process of selection of building materials must correctly handle the relationship between costs and profits. It gives full play to the complementary role of the market mechanism and government intervention in the allocation of resources. It also reduces or even eliminates the waste of resources. The selection should achieve the sustainable development of the regional architecture. New building materials, green building materials, environmentally friendly materials all are important material to achieve green building goals [8]. The effective use of the regional is a necessary condition for the coordinated development of regional construction. Building materials is the important products of the building enterprises. They have great significance to the continued development. The ecological economists long-term focus attention of the problems, which include inadequate use of new materials and space are unevenly distributed, the degradation of architectural function, excessive use of non-environmentally friendly materials [9].

The DEA method takes an economic system or a production process as an activity. It puts a certain number of factors of production and the output of the "product" as entities (units). Each entity (unit) is known as a decision-making unit (DMU). Many DMUs constitute to be respective evaluation groups. The DMU's input or output indicators and ratio for the variable should been evaluated operation. It determine the effective production frontier, and according to the distance of each DMU efficient production frontier situation [10]. It also determines whether each DMU effective projection method can also be used at the same time and pointed out the direction. In this method, the extension of non-DEA effective or weak DEA effective DMU and should be improved. [11]

Comprehensive evaluation of green building materials is applied by the analysis of DEA method. The model used in the evaluation of green building materials called the efficiency of input evaluation model. It is primarily used to determine the DMU whether to achieve the scale efficient and effective technology at the same time. It will get final results in accordance with the process shown in Figure 3.

Our world resources are increasingly depleted. We are changing from relying solely on resources to achieving sustainable development. Promotion of green building materials is important to our society. It can achieve energy-saving, water-saving, materials and environmental protection. We can understand the efficiency of green building materials in the use of green building materials evaluation. This result also has a significant role in the subsequent improvements.

