This work aims to decompose and construct guided wave NDT signal by orthogonal matching pursuit employ modified evolutionary programming algorithm based on the t distribution (MtEP), which can reduce the computation complexity. A pipe sample with holes is inspected by guided wave and the test signal is processed by the OMP with MtEP. The processed result is compared with the OMP with evolutionary programming algorithm based on the t distribution (tEP). The result shows that this improved method can reconstruct the signal with better quality, less calculation time, and the echoes signal can be recognized clearly. Therefore, this proposed approach is useful to the guided wave NDT signal recognition.

Ultrasonic guided wave can propagate a long distance and detect the whole wall defect under the non- contact condition [1], so it has been used to non-destructive testing (NDT) in pipes. For the reason of the disperse and multi-modes features of guided waves, it is important to develop efficient approaches to recognize the guided wave NDT signals. Matching pursuit (MP) [2] has been used in signal processing such as ultrasonic, radar and guided wave, and fuzzy clustering and classification of signals. It is difficult to numerical

implementation MP because it need larger number of iterations about inner product of the signal and the match atoms. The evolutionary programming (EP) is a global optimization algorithm developed by L. Fogel L J [3]and Fogel D B [4]. EP searches in parallel from more than one point to optimize the objective functions. It explores simultaneously many paths for searching the global minimum or maximum, this method is better than a GA-based approaches [5]. The EP need many generations iterations to convergence because its step is a fixed value.

In this work, modified evolutionary programming algorithm[6,7] which choose mutations using t probability distributionand chirplet function [8] as the match atoms is used to orthogonal matching pursuit. The guided wave test signals of a pipe sample with holes is processed and reconstructed by OMP. The echoes signal can be recognized and the match parameters can reflect the features of the guided waves.

OMP use the same method as MP to choose match atoms but it need to do orthogonal operation on the chosen atoms based on the Gram-Schmidt rules. Then make projection to the space spanned by the chosen atoms, the weight of the signal and its residual can be got. The same operation is done to the residual until the halt criterion is satisfied. The detailed OMP are as followings,

Here n represents the degree, t(n) will close to normal distribution as n increase. Depending on the nature of the  function, degree n can be extended from positive real integers into positive real numbers[9]. It is needed to modify the step adaptively to the global optimum with less iterations and less time. Herein, the

We set up the detection device based on magnetostrictive effect and put the excitation sensors and receiving sensors at end of the pipe sample. Trough the device we excited several periodic tone bursts which center frequency is 20kHz, thus the wave signal propagate along the axial direction. If there are defect in the pipe, the wave will reflect when reach the defect and the reflect signal will be received by the receiving sensors. The length of pipe sample is 6.72m, the outer diameter is 38mm and the thickness is 3mm. The diameters of the three holes are 10mm,12mm,8mm, location at 2.24m,3.36m,4.48m from the left pipe end.

The original inspected signal was shown in Figure 1, which contains defect reflect signal. We separately process the signal by OMP with MtEP and tEP, and the results are gave in Figure 2.a and Figure 2.b, respectively. From the Figure 2.a, we can see that most of the noises are filtered and it is more easy to recognize the defect echo signal.

A kind of modified evolutionary programming algorithm using mutations based on the t distribution is proposed and used to the orthogonal matching pursuit. A pipe sample with holes is inspected and the guided wave signal is processed by the OMP with MtEP. The processed result compared with the OMP with tEP shows that the improved method can reconstruct the signal with better quality and less calculation time and the defect echoes signal can be recognized clearly. Therefore, this proposed approach is useful to the guided wave NDT signal recognition.

