The smart home is moving in the direction with the wireless remote control, multimedia control, high- speed data transmission, and its key technologies for the home network compatibility of family controllers and meet information transfer needs. At present, the transmission network use of the integrated wiring technology, limit the application of the system place a higher cost. Wireless way to build a flexible and convenient smart home security monitoring system and become the hotspot of current research.

Based on ZigBee technology smart home system design using ZigBee star configuration. That ZigBee coordinator (including full-featured ZigBee devices) is the core of the entire communications program. To a number of ZigBee end devices, as the surrounding nodes. Form a star network. Combined with remote control,

*the program may be composed of several parts: ZigBee coordinator, ZigBee end devices (controlled object, such as: gas water table, smoke, temperature, gas, fire, theft alarm and other electrical appliances), the Internet, the remote computer. ZigBee coordinator is responsible for ZigBee end and external network communication between the cores of the system as a whole. ZigBee end device is responsible for data collection and a variety of data transmission. The program based on the composition of the program can be divided into two modules: The first family ZigBee coordinator module; two ZigBee end module. The former is further divided into core control module to coordinate the server side wireless transceiver module, the network receive module and GPRS module: the latter is divided into the terminal transceiver module and data acquisition and control modules. The model in Figure 1. Smart Home ZigBee coordinator module ARM microprocessor core. Communications Coordinator end wireless transceiver modules and terminal modules. GPRS mobile communications through the Internet communicate with remote computers.

ZigBee coordinator development platform is based on the ARM920T core S3C2410X microprocessor. The core of the entire communication program. Coordinator of the wireless transceiver module with the CC2430. Short distance of one-to-many communication. The CC2430 has solidified the bottom of the ZigBee protocol stack (The PHY layer and MAC layer). Just with simple peripheral devices can constitute a coordinator of the transceiver module. GPRS used to achieve the long-distance data transmission. This is an optional GPRS microprocessor MC35i and peripheral circuits.

The power supply circuit in which the structural model, the system clock circuit, the system reset circuit, the Flash / SDRAM memory interface circuit is the basic circuit of the S3C2410X microprocessor running. JTAG interface, Ethernet interface, serial port and the wireless transceiver module (CC2430 and its peripheral circuits constitute). Is the coordination function of the interface circuit. The JTAG standard is mainly used for chip internal testing and system simulation, debugging. Standard JTAG interface has four lines. And the connection is simple. MAX232 and RS232 serial port functions. Used to coordinate and GPRS devices to transfer data between. GPRS uses the existing products on the market, the application comes with some small modifications, and so GPRS automatically send and receive data. The wireless transceiver module is mainly used for the establishment and initialization of ZigBee star network, and data between multiple ZigBee end devices to send and receive. the system hardware design

SMS module built-in SMS protocol, set the SMS, MMS, in one of the GSM / GPRS module. It uses the AT command module control, control commands and data transfer via RS232 interface. Its internal integrated 600 KB of Flash memory space available for more than one upload the picture sending MMS messages.

The system uses the CC2430 chip ZigBee wireless communication module, the CC2430 integrated ZigBee radio frequency (RF) front-end, memory, and microcontrollers, CC2430 integrated in line with the IEEE802 15 4 standard. 4GHz RF transceiver supports digital RSSI / The LQ I, CSMA / CA and powerful DMA capability, battery monitoring and temperature sensing capabilities, while powerful and flexible development tools. The basic circuit shown in Figure 3. The capacitor C 1, C2, connected 32-MHz crystal oscillator circuit in Figure 3, this quartz crystal used in normal working hours. Capacitor C3, C4, connect the 32.768 kHz crystal oscillator circuit, dormant work using this quartz crystal, thereby reducing power consumption. C5 is

used to remove clutter, prevent errors microcontroller reset. C6 ~ C8 used as a filter, to remove the clutter to make the voltage more stable. Circuit non-balanced transformer capacitance and inductance L1, L2, L3, and C9 as well as a PCB microwave transmission line, the entire structure to meet the RF input ), C10, C11, C l2, C 13, C14/ output matching resistor (50 decoupling capacitors for power supply filtering to improve the stability of the chip work. Of R1, R 2 is the bias resistor, the R 1 for the 32 MHz crystal oscillator to set the precision bias current. CC2430 chip with low power dissipation characteristics, the choice of two 800 mAh batteries power supply of the node machine. Antenna selection of an external antenna.

The system can image the way outsiders invasions, fires and other indoor anomalies automatically determine. Its intelligence is mainly reflected: the system software on the state of the environment, self-study, so that it can adapt to background changes in the environment, critical state, which can automatically start the state tracking and monitoring to accurately determine the results of multiple images. Background subtraction and interframe difference method, based on the movement threshold binding assay. The target detection process including: image preprocessing, quantization function, motion detection (or a small target motion tracking and detection), the abnormal situation of discrimination and processing.

When the system receives a new image to the camera sent the first pre-processing and noise removal, to get a binary image that can quantify the movement of objects or abnormal areas, and then proceed to the analysis and judgment of the abnormal state. The system uses two kinds of abnormal quantify function: Based on the global bitmap handle and random testing, processing, and then, according to the exception to quantify the function pointer to a specific follow-up operation, For to enter the alarm exception handler, then send an alarm signal to send MMS messages, and store the current video, For to enter the critical exception tracking, start the critical exception tracking program, otherwise the background to replace the judgment and wait to get under a monitoring image. Transmission distance without obstacles within 80 m, the transmission of data packet loss rate of less than 1% are adequate to meet the communication needs of the normal home environment, and the received power is very low, very suitable for family use ZigBee modules for communication between rate of 0% packet loss when the transmission distance is 30 m, through the loss of two water shutoff walls only 1% through a water shutoff walls, fully able to meet the requirements of the system design.

smoke, the parameters of the gas, fire, theft alarm, home appliances Appliances in the home environment, by combining traditional sensor alarm system and image monitoring system, the formation of a new type of smart home system. Users can receive MMS messages via cell phone or PC, according to the need for remote phone set, in order to achieve a flexible, convenient home security monitoring. To achieve multiple wireless networking of monitoring devices, remote control of home appliances, smart home remote monitoring to provide a practical method for intelligent home environment.

