Compared with above methods, we emphasize the coordination of motion and contrast vision in parallel ON/OFF channels mimicking the generally four neuropil-layers of insect physiology shown in Fig. 1. We propose the contrast neural computation as shown in Fig. 3. The advantages over previous studies are abstracted as the following:

Biological visual systems can perform key survival tasks in complex, dynamic environments, whereas artificial vision systems are far from such capability. Visual contrast issue is critical to be addressed [50,51]. Some mechanisms can adapt to natural signals such as the processing of environmental statistics [52,53]. However, the issue of spatial contrast has not been well resolved which always results in response fluctuation against highly variable input. Accordingly, new methods are requested to address such a problem.

For computationally implementing contrast neural computation in motion sensitive visual systems, Fu et al. introduced fly contrast mech- anisms and pathways for estimation of natural background motion; the model demonstrated improved response compared to neural model processing only motion signals [59]. Li et al. incorporated in a single- channel LGMD model the contrast neural computation, initially in- dicated its effectiveness in looming detection [60]. Wang et al. also showed effectiveness of contrast computation in a small target motion detector preventing fake detection [61]. Differently to those works, and combining the latest physiological research, this paper presents an ap- proach to harmonizing motion and contrast vision within four parallel ON/OFF channels for looming detection. The method is validated by a large data set of natural signals.

Based on anatomical knowledge and modelling experience of in- sects’ preliminary visual systems, the proposed neural model mimics multi-layered insect physiology shown in Fig. 1. We herein highlight the coordination of motion and contrast neural computation in four par- allel ON/OFF channels. The proposed model is systematically described by diagrams and mathematical formulas, and it can respond robustly to looming objects in highly variable natural scenes. In general, it is an organizational neural network composed of different types of nerve cells placed in four computational neuropil layers.

Parallel ON/OFF contrast channels The second is the calculation of local spatial contrast delivered by ON/OFF contrast pathways parallel to ON/OFF motion pathways. According to the fundamental research in [29], in the nerve centre of Drosophila, the calculation of contrast information and motion information are carried out in different paths. That is to say, it will not be affected by the motion information when calculating the contrast. Therefore, the normalized signal flow will enter a parallel channel specially used to calculate the contrast through implementing neural competition between centre and surrounding unit response. The calculation can be expressed as the following:

Lamina layer locates in the early stage of insect’s visual information processing. Notably, the photoreceptors of Retina synapse onto the Lamina form the starting nerve cells of ON/OFF channels through oper- ations by polarity inter-neurons. In the process of transmission, visual signals are divided into two parts to enter ON/OFF channels connecting different nerve cells in next Medulla layer. This shunt mechanism can be calculated by half-wave rectification as follows:

Medulla layer, located in the middle region of optic lobe, plays a central role to coordinate motion and contrast vision in the proposed neural model. The stained micro-graph of the Medulla layer shows that there is an obvious hierarchical structure in this layer, and various synapses extend into different fibre layers for signal transmission and interaction (see Fig. 1). For imitating this, the computational Medulla layer consists of three parts of neural computation.

Parallel ON/OFF motion pathways The third part is the calculation of motion information in ON/OFF channels. To extract looming mo- tion features, the model responds to continuously expansion of ON– ON/OFF–OFF edges via spatial–temporal interaction between excita- tion and inhibition cells. The normalized information (Eq. (4)) directly forms visual excitement without delay.

/ig. 3. (a) Diagram of instantaneous feedback normalization in ON/OFF channels. Contrast normalization is the feedback of the combination of partial medulla neurons. (b) Illustration of parallel motion and contrast calculation and convergence. Abbreviations ‘C’, ‘E’, ‘I’, ‘TD’ and ‘HP’ are shorthand for contrast, excitation, inhibition, time delay and high-pass filtering.

is mixed with a large amount of contrast information of natural scenes, the motion channel needs to converge with the contrast channel (see Fig. 3(b)). At the time of convergence, the motion information is sub- tracted from the contrast information to weaken the influence of high- contrast optical flow on looming detection. At the same time, through half-wave rectification, the negative-sign signals will be filtered out.

Lobula layer is the last nerve layer of insect optic lobe (Fig. 1). It has a large number of motion sensitive neurons, which can quickly capture the edge information of moving objects in the field of vision and respond to the target accordingly. After harmonizing motion and contrast features in the Medulla layer, the Lobula layer integrates polarity signals from ON/OFF channels at two levels. First at the local level, excitations are integrated obeying the supra-linear rule.

As most parameters of motion pathways are adapted from previous modelling works [21,62], the only adaptable parameters are depending on the resolution of input visual streams. Learning method is avoided in this research as it is out of the scope of this study. The comparison between linear, static, and dynamic contrast normalization has been taken in our preliminary research recently [60], whereby the result coincides with the physiological study well. That is to say, the dynamic

Concretely, a passing coefficient matrix 𝐶𝑒 is obtained by a convolution process with an equally weighted kernel 𝐾𝑔 . 𝜔 is a scale parameter updated at every time. 𝐶𝑤 is a constant, and 𝛥𝐶 stands for a small real number. 𝑇𝑔 indicates the threshold in grouping mechanism.

are synthesized by computer, which represents simple scenes free of noise in order to demonstrate the basic characteristics of our proposed neural model. The backgrounds and the foreground looming-squares of such kind of video sequences are solid colour pictures with different grey values, whereby the foreground objects expand with respect to time. The background grey value varies between minimum of 0 and maximum of 255, and the sampling interval is taken every 25 between 0 and 255. The same is true for the foreground looming-square. Some samples of the video sequence used in the experiment are shown in Fig. 4. Specifically, in the first video, the background grey value is 0, and the foreground grey value is 255; at this time, the background and foreground form the maximum contrast. The background grey value of the second video is 100, and the foreground grey value is 150; at this time, the contrast becomes smaller. Notably, we also set the scenario with extremely low contrast, tiny difference between foreground and background, that is, the grey value of the background is 125, and the foreground is 130. In this kind of visual stimuli testing, the squares loom between frame-17 and frame-38, otherwise remain stationary. All

The second part is the test of complex scenarios. In this test, our data set includes 1100 original videos. These videos are made based on different realistic, wide-field scenes adapted with respect from a previous research [63]. More specifically, the indoor scenes include libraries, shopping malls, etc. The outdoor scenes include forests, grass- lands, villages, etc. Based on these panoramic scenes, we generate a looming square with different grey values, similarly to the test in the aforementioned simple scenarios. In addition, in order to simulate the visual stimulation of insects during flight, we also set the background to move to the right at a constant angular speed of 20 degrees per

characteristics of the proposed neural model with emphasis laid on performance in extremely low-contrast scenarios, and against various natural signals. After that, we show improvement based upon the incorporation of ON/OFF channels in looming detection. Lastly, as the contrast neural computation is the main novelty of this modelling research upon previous works, we look into the effects of dynamic normalization mechanism, and ON/OFF parallel contrast pathways on looming detection against high input variability.

degree of the coefficient of variation is measured by the inter-quartile range (IQR) of the violin diagram. More precisely, the denser the dis- tribution of the coefficient of variation, the better the statistical result is. The smaller the coefficient of variation, the better the statistical result is. Therefore, we would prefer the distribution of the coefficient of variation concentrated at the bottom of the violin plot. In addition, in the violin plot, the coloured dots represent the calculated coefficients of variation. The border of violin (grey line) shows the corresponding distribution of the coefficient of variation. The green line in each violin represents a box-plot, used to characterize the dispersion degree of the coefficient of variation.

/ig. 6. The experimental results of the proposed model, the model of Li et al. [60], and the model of Hu et al. [36] in pure scenes. ‘F’ and ‘B’ in the legend represent the grey values of foreground and background respectively. The red and blue dashed lines indicate the ground-truth time window of looming process. Compared to the two previous methods, the proposed model (left panel) performs more consistently, and can recognize looming motion with extremely low contrast. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

/ig. 7. The statistical responses of the proposed model and the comparative models against a variety of natural signals. The red and blue dashed lines indicate the ground-truth time window of looming process. The green solid line represents the average output of the model with respect to time, and the purple shadow represents the corresponding standard deviation. The proposed model (left panel) performs more robustly against high input variability. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

/ig. 8. The violin diagram of the statistical results: in each violin, the coloured dots indicate the coefficient of variation. The contour of violin (grey solid line) indicates the distribution of coefficient of variation. The denser the distribution is, the more prominent the contour is. The green in the middle of the violin represents the box plot of the coefficient of variation. The proposed model outperforms the two comparative models against looming motion in thousands of dynamic scenes. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

of the model will be greatly affected by the contrast representing the largest variance to the tested data. Both of our proposed model and the model of Li et al. [60] are able to detect looming motion in low-contrast environments. In contrast to the model of Li et al. [60], the output of our proposed model is more consistent across different contrasts.

/ig. 9. The statistical results of the proposed model and the comparative model [60] in different background illuminations: (a) the mean and standard deviation of the model output after the background grey value increased by 20%. (b) the violin plots formed by the coefficient of variation corresponding to (a). (c) the results of background grey value reduced by 20%. (d) the corresponding violin figure to (c). The proposed model performs more robustly against increase and decrease of background illumination which peaks more smoothly to looming motion.

significantly by incorporating the ON/OFF channels, in comparison with the model of Li et al. [60] that processes motion and contrast vi- sion regardless of polarity changes, i.e., ON-contrast and OFF-contrast. Precisely, the proposed model peaks more smoothly to looming motions in a large number of different natural scenes. The statistical results show the proposed model has more densely distributed coefficients of variation and smaller inner distances. This suggests that our proposed model is invulnerable to environmental illumination.

OFF contrast pathway is firstly closed. In this case, the foreground grey scale values between 0–100 are lower than the average grey scale value of the background. These looming-square motions are mainly han- dled by the OFF-rather than the ON-channels of the proposed model. Therefore, the effect of OFF contrast pathway can be demonstrated via the comparative experiments of switching OFF contrast channels. The results in Fig. 11 reveal that when the OFF contrast pathway is turned off, the distribution of the coefficient of variation of the model response for videos with a foreground between 0–100 has greater dispersion (larger inner spacing of box-plots) than the cases with OFF contrast pathway turned on. In addition, the larger the grey value of the foreground looming-square is (closer to the average background grey value of 122), the greater the dispersion of the coefficient of variation is (showing an upward trend) (see the left panel in Fig. 11). That is to say, when the contrast between the foreground and background is smaller, the effect of OFF contrast pathway is more obvious, consistent to our previous results on dealing with low-contrast looming motion.

On the other hand, the ON contrast pathway is closed. The fore- ground grey value between 150–255 is greater than the background average grey value of 122, so the ON contrast pathway matters in this case. When the ON contrast pathway is turned on, the dispersion of the coefficient of variation of each foreground grey value does not change much (hardly affected by contrast changes). Nevertheless, when the ON contrast pathways is turned off, the dispersion of the coefficient of variation begins to change more greatly. The larger the grey value of the foreground looming-square is, i.e., the greater the contrast between the background and the foreground is, the smaller the dispersion of the coefficient of variation is (there is an overall downward trend) (see the right panel in Fig. 11). Accordingly, similarly to the results of closing merely the OFF contrast pathway, the smaller the contrast is, the effect of ON contrast pathway is more obvious.

/ig. 11. The violin plots of examination on closing either ON or OFF contrast pathway in looming detection against natural signals: the 𝑋-axis indicates different grey values of foreground looming-squares and the 𝑌 -axis indicates coefficient of variation. The ON/O// contrast pathways work effectively to maintain the robustness of the proposed

This paper has presented a novel way of coordinating contrast and motion vision to improve effectively the performance of looming de- tection in extremely low-contrast scenarios, and against a large variety of natural signals. The proposed neural model features feed-forward visual processing in a stratified neural network with four bio-plausible parallel ON/OFF channels encoding polarity motion and contrast in- formation separately. The contrast neural computation is the main novelty of this modelling research as it first works as an instant, dy- namic normalization mechanism to open the gates for ON/OFF motion signals. There are also ON/OFF contrast pathways to neutralize high- contrast local ON/OFF motion induced excitations, in order to stabilize model response against high input variability of natural scenes. Accord- ingly, the proposed model performs consistently in highly variable, and various-contrasted scenes.

To corroborate the proposed method, we have crafted a new data set consisting of thousands of looming-square motions in cluttered and dynamic backgrounds. To highlight our achievements, the comparative experiments have been carried out. The results verify our proposed method is more robust for looming detection in natural scenes, espe- cially at extremely low contrast. Separating motion and contrast into ON/OFF channels works effectively to alleviate the response fluctuation against natural signals, and make the visual system peak more smoothly to looming motion.

For resolving real-world, complicated detection problems, recent years have witnessed much progress based upon image processing and deep learning methods [64,65], as well as advanced sensor strate- gies [66]. We insist another promising way is drawing lessons from neuroscience on how animals deal with similar situations. Insect in- telligence is featured by efficiency and parsimony that can offer a number of excellent paradigms to build artificial vision systems and neuromorphic sensors. In this regard, the proposed approach is also of great potential to be utilized in hardware applications like bio-inspired robotic systems [67,68], and micro/aerial robotic systems [19,20].

