Cloud computing provides information resources for users in "Cloud" through the Internet. These information resources with a variety of different languages are distributed in Web pages and the databases. The scheduling of multilingual information resources becomes complex, as multilingual information resources are heterogeneous and uneven in cloud computing. The need arises in scheduling of multilingual information resources in cloud computing for new mechanisms. This paper presents a four-tier architecture for multilingual information resources scheduling in cloud computing. It includes user accessing tier, technology supporting tier, resource scheduling tier and resources tier. We propose a three- layer scheduling model for multilingual information resources in cloud computing. The model includes some home managers, some local scheduling agents and a global scheduling agent. The model not only shows the autonomy of private cloud resources and is convenient for user to submit and supervise tasks, but also lightens the pressure of the global scheduling agent. The example shows that the proposed scheduling model could improve the performance of the scheduling of multilingual information resources in cloud computing.

With the development of the Internet and Web technology and frequent cross-cultural communication, it is necessary for people to be able to access and manage information in many different languages. These information resources with a variety of different languages are distributed in Web pages and the databases. Cloud computing[1] provides information resources for users in "Cloud" through the Internet. Cloud computing utilizes large-scale virtualized data centers to manage such large volume of resources.

Now, multilingual information retrieval and management issues are increasingly attracting research attention[9,10]. But, the scheduling of multilingual information resource in cloud computing has not given more attention. The scheduling of multilingual information resource in cloud computing becomes complex, as resources with a variety of different languages distributed in different Web pages and the databases are heterogeneous and uneven. In this paper, we present a four-tier architecture and a two-layer model for multilingual information resources scheduling in cloud computing.

The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In section 2, we give a four-tier architecture for multilingual information resources scheduling in cloud computing. A three-layer model for multilingual information resources scheduling in cloud computing is presented in section 3. In section 4, we give an example, which proves the effectiveness of the scheduling model given in this paper. The conclusions of the paper are given in section 5.

Effective information resource scheduling architecture is important to optimize the use of resource. In this section, we give a four-tier architecture (shown in Fig. 1) for multilingual information resources scheduling in cloud computing based on hierarchical method. The architecture includes user accessing tier, technology supporting tier, resource scheduling tier and resources tier.

User accessing tier is a front-end component, which is responsible for providing a way for users to access information. The users can retrieve the information from cloud datacenter in "Cloud" through the Internet. The ways for users accessing the Internet are PC terminal via wired network as well as mobile terminal such as mobile phone and PDA via wireless network.

Resources tier is a bottom component, which is responsible for providing resources for overall system operation. The resources include physical resources such as computing resources, store resources, network resources, etc. and information resources such as corpus, knowledge base, original information base, etc.

Suppose that there is a digital library cloud computing system. The system is consists of a private cloud and a public cloud. There is one datacenter named as DL1 belonging to a university in the private cloud. There are two datacenters named as DL2 and DL3 in the public cloud. The DL1 stores information of language L1 such as Chinese and language L2 such as English. The DL2 stores information of languages L1, L2 and L3 such as Frence. The node DL3 stores information of languages L3 and L4 such as Spanish. The transmission times of the requirement are 2s and 4s from the home manager of submission node to the local scheduling agent and global scheduling agent respectively. The transmission times of the requirement are 3s from the local scheduling agent to the global scheduling agent. The download times of different languages information at different datacenters are listed in table 1.

If the scheduling model is only one layer that is only one global scheduling agent, the requirement is submitted to the global scheduling agent. The sum of the transmission time of the requirement information of L2, L3 and L4 are 12s(4+4+4) from the submission node to the global scheduling agent. Then, the requirement information of L2 is assigned to DL2, L3 to DL2 and L4 to DL3 by the global scheduling agent. The sum of the transmission time is 9s(3+3+3). The information download time is 22s, 16s and 22s from DL2, DL2 and DL3 respectively. The sum of the download time is the maximum of download time from DL2 and DL3. Because the information download from DL2 and DL3 is parallel, The sum of the download time is 38s(max{22+16, 22}). The total scheduling time is 59s (12+9+38).

technology supporting tier, information integration in resource scheduling tier, and corpus, knowledge base in resource tier. We give a three-layer scheduling model for multilingual information resources in cloud computing. The model including home manager, local scheduling agent and a global scheduling agent, which not only shows the autonomy of private cloud resources, convenience for user to submit and supervise tasks, but also lightens the pressure of the global scheduling agent. The example shows that the proposed scheduling model could improve the performance of the scheduling of multilingual information resources in cloud computing. The effective scheduling algorithm for multilingual information resources in cloud computing is our further research.

