The conventional ballasted railway superstructure normally involves the use of reinforced concrete mono- or bi-block sleepers. In Italy, for instance, in case of lines running at a speed less than 200 km/h, RFI S.p.A. (Rete Ferroviaria Italiana, Italian Railway Network) generally employs a sleeper which is 2.30 m long, with a trapezoidal section and variable dimensions both in height and in width [1], [2]. Whereas a bi-block sleeper consists of two lightly reinforced concrete elements, held together by a steel tie rod whose function is to guarantee the correct track gauge and to keep the adequate spacing among the aggregates in the casting. Compared to mono-block sleepers, bi-block sleepers have greater resistance to lateral actions and lighter weight [2], [3].

On field experiences, which were carried out in Italy on traditional lines and employed the diagnostic trains “Archimedes” and “Taletes”, allowed to point out that 92.6% of the track alignment faults and 82.6% of superelevation faults occur in line sections with a non-void curvature (circular curves, clothoids and cubic parabolas) [4]. This can be due to the high lateral stresses in the track as trains pass by owing to the centrifugal force, which in the long run cause sleepers to be weakly clamped to the ballast with consequent variations in the original geometry of the track. In order to face these problems, whose solution can be reached only through frequent ordinary and/or extraordinary maintenance activities with high financial costs and deterioration in service levels for users (due to the necessity, for instance, to reduce the speed on faulty lines or to interrupt lines for maintenance work), a new railway sleeper was designed, planned and patented, called “HP-BB” (High Performance Bi-Block sleeper) [5], [6]. It is a reinforced concrete bi-block sleeper equipped with two lateral stoppers with a “clamping action”. The sleeper, whose dimensions are illustrated in Figures 1 and 2, provides the lateral actions with high resistance values under conditions of well-compacted and degraded ballast, as emerged by the analyses performed and better described later.

As shown in Fig. 3, in case of ballast in good condition (condition A), a bi-block sleeper provides an average resistance increase by about 23% compared to a mono-block sleeper. On the other hand, a HP-BB sleeper provides an average resistance increase by 32% and 63% in comparison with bi-block and mono-block sleepers respectively. On the contrary, if the ballast is degraded or old (condition B), the performances of a HP-BB sleeper appear to be even more remarkable although there is a decrease in the sliding resistance in all the sleepers under study as a consequence of a decrease in the friction angles ’ and ’w. As a matter of fact, in this condition its resistance is on average greater by 71% than a bi-block sleeper and by 202% (about twice) than a mono-block sleeper.

(P). In all the sleepers under study lateral resistance has been observed to decrease whenever the internal friction angle of the ballast was reduced, mainly after aging processes of the railway superstructure.The HP- BB sleeper guarantees the average resistance increase by 32% with regard to a bi-block sleeper and by 63% with regard to a mono-block sleeper in a ballast in good condition (’ = 45°). Moreover, in case of degraded ballast (’ = 35°), the performances of HP-BB sleepers appear to be even more remarkable: in fact, its resistance is on average greater by about 71% than a bi-block sleeper a d by 202% than a mono-block sleeper.

Guerrieri M., Ticali D. (2012). Ballasted track superstructures: performances of innovative railway sleepers (EGA and HP-BB). in J. Pombo, (Editor), “Proceedings of the First International Conference on Railway Technology: Research, Development and Maintenance”, Civil-Comp Press, Stirlingshire, UK, Paper 39, 2012. doi:10.4203/ccp.98.39 (Civil-Comp Proceedings ISSN 1759-3433).

