In the reporting stage, each of the articles retrieved was analyzed according to the AI component such as DL, ML, neutral network and robotics and agriculture activities namely harvesting, plant eco- phenotyping, grading system, weed and crop classification, disease detection and monitoring and soil management. The searched articles were then listed on excel spreadsheet. The data sheet contained the de- tails of article namely name of author/s, year of published, study title, key AI technology used, main agriculture area, benefits obtained and limitations. Once the database was completed, a content analysis was performed to examine the review summary in-depth and summarise the empirical experiences on currently applied AI technologies in agri- culture sector and variety of AI technology initiatives to achieve sustain- ability growth objectives in agriculture sector. Fig. 1 illustrates the methodological chart applied in the SLR.

AI is one of the emerging areas of research in recent generation. Today AI is used to solve the problems particularly to reduce the use of the labor force, to enhance efficient utilization of resources and to facilitate the development of sustainable business. With the rapid tech- nological advancement,people are more intend to developed these ap- plications (Bannerjee et al., 2018). With that, different AI approaches have been suggested to solve the existing problems in the agriculture to improve the productivity.

Robotics are used in agriculture to assist farmers. These robots are developed with many operations such as weeding application, visual detection and harvesting where they can be used to match the needs of various tasks (Zhang et al., 2020; Benos et al., 2020; Yorozu et al., 2021). Ghafar et al. (Ghafar et al., 2021) design a robot to spray pesti- cides and fertilizers in harvesting field at low operating cost and general crop monitoring. This model is used two-wheeled robot that included a a mobile base which is used a spewing mechanism with a controlling of wireless tool that is used to manage the movements of the robot. There- after, crop growth conditions and health factors are monitored using

Moreover, the study aligns the main agriculture functions with sustainability growth objective (Fig. 4) in order to provide contextual link with present view of the agricultural functions and sustainability. In here, the study focused on several functional areas highlighted in the selected studies. As such, the research hots-pots of AI and agriculture in the past decades comprise mainly prediction, harvesting, advanced care crops, weed control, resource management and supply chain.

This section elaborates the inclusive review of the literature that applied automate functions in agriculture (e.g., prediction, harvesting, advanced care crops, weed control, resource management and supply chain) using AI techniques. Within the reviewed papers it was identified that the most common applications of AI are predicting, harvesting, advanced care of crop and so on Fig. 5.

As shown in Fig. 5, of the total 115 studies, 36 (40%) articles reported that the most common applications of AI for agriculture is prediction model for total agricultural output value (Tian et al., 2021; Kim et al., 2021; Han et al., 2018; Khan et al., 2020; Crane-Droesch, 2018; Kumar and Joshi, 2015; Isachsen et al., 2021), waste minimization (Almomani, 2020), irrigation control (Mohapatra and Lenka, 2016), weather index (Buyrukoğlu et al., 2021; Liu et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2021), energy

optimization (Senocak and Goren, 2021; Guillén et al., 2021) and de- mand and consumer preference (Sharma and Bisen, 2013; Giannakis et al., 2019; Dargan et al., 2020; Monteiro et al., 2021). To cover these sce- narios, ANN and DL techniques are used by 95% of the reviewed papers. The ANN and DP are used to collect real-time data about multiple agricul- tural parameters, such as production quantity, waste, climate data,

parameters. Interestedly, few papers (4) focused on predicting customer demand and preference and market integration for few agricultural products (e.g.: wine, yogurt). The studies focused on the the elements in sensory functions and reveal the associations among evaluators scor- ing and latent features. These preference predictions provide wider chances to develop food product designs in future. What we can con- clude from these literature base is that agriculture sustainability is en- sure production of an adequate food supply.

certain advantages such as minimum wastage, picking efficiency, high picking rate and flexible work force and nighttime operation. Develop- ment of timely, efficient, and careful robotic harvesting solutions lead to complete the harvesting process while generating high quality yields at minimum time consuming and at minimum unrecuperative damages in the harvesting process. Particularly, there have been significant developments of AI towards the sustainability agriculture objective of ensuring production of an adequate food supply. Besides research projects have been performed, very few have developed into the com- mercial world (Kiwi fruit; Tomato; Cotton; Apple; Rice).

Currently, labour intensive crop caring practices use vast amount of agricultural chemical inputs (fertilizers, herbicides, fungicides, and in- secticides) cause to have high production cost and lead pollution mat- ters as well. In general, it is estimated that more than 100 kg are applied per hectare in farm land. Unfortunately, majority of the nitrate applied were either washout or loss in the air. The robotic disease- detection systems were commonly designed in whole inclusive pattern to identify the results in infection and these results could be utilised to detect precise diseases and and apply fertilizes appropriately (Schor and Attwood-Charles, 2017; Grimstad and From, 2017). In addition, ML technique was used to measure plants with sensors (Sharma et al., 2020) to estimate plant growth direction (Booth et al., 2020) and plant classification (Libertn et al., 2018), ANN to design performance-oriented riparian buffer strips for the filtering of nitrogen

(Santin et al., 2016) and measure plant growth status (Li et al. 2021b), DL to detect underdeveloped plants (Aguiar et al., 2021) and to recog- nize the plant using image-based (Kiourt et al., 2020). Therefore, it is important to recognize the AI applications that favor both disease man- agement and to provide sufficient, safe, and nutritious food to the global population. Particularly, there have been significant developments of AI towards the sustainability agriculture objective of achieving better health and nutrition for a growing population.

reach final product the end consumers. In the process of SC also includes multiple stakeholders such as farmers, producers, processors, certifica- tion agencies, traders, government, retailers, distributors, and final consumers. Compared with other supply chains, agriculture SC is complex due to the nature of perishability and high supply-demand fluctuations of the products and high consumer awareness towards pro- duce provenance, quality, and safety. All these notes, the review insists that AI applications, especially ML, in agriculture SC enable farmers and other relevant organizations to draw valuable insights on agriculture process, leading to increase agricultural productivity while taking decisions via data-driven platform (Sharma et al., 2020; Camaréna, 2020). Data pays a crucial role in supply chains thus improvisation in storage, collection, visualization, privacy, security, accuracy, and access of agriculture data can impact application of AI in agriculture supply chain. The common believe in agriculture is that farmer is classified under low income group and many firms/farms in the agricultural are worried with low-profitability. AI is widely used in SC to identify hidden patterns in the data, in this line, SC stakeholders consider to accelerating AI in SC, leads to achieve the expectations of farmers as well as cus- tomers. Contextual factors that have been identified as important influencers of AI in agriculture sustainability objective: alleviate poverty of farmers through formalize products sales to certified markets and global commodity price trends, visualize the farm income prior to the intervention and the formalize the existence market structure. As re- view highlights although SC using AI platforms leads to sustainable ag- riculture objective, questions related to the mechanism of reaction and selectivity of matrices for AIs in consumer aspect are still unanswered.

Development of timely, efficient, and careful robotic harvesting solutions lead to obtain desired quality harvest at short-time period and more interestedly at minimum unrecoverable loss. Particularly, there have been significant developments of AI towards the sustainabil- ity agriculture objective of ensuring production of an adequate food supply. Besides research projects have been performed, very few have developed into the commercial world (Kiwi fruit; Tomato; Cotton; Apple; Rice). Moreover, the review revealed that disease detection sys- tems are mostly concerned on leaves and the lower area of leaves is not properly sensed by the camera sensor. As said, besides leaves, AI tech- niques need to be expanded for a variety of plant parts. In line with that (Li et al. 2021b) insisted that AI technologies have been counted on a dif- ferent sensors and imaging technologies to gather a variety of plant data, whereas analyzing different sensor data also relies on different hardware devices, software systems, and different platforms and different monitor- ing scales used to analyse date. Such complex operation process might slow down data acquisition and integration, leading to an information lag. This implies the need for international harmonization and standardi- zation in phenotyping data. The phenotyping data collecting and analyz- ing then could lead to manage cultivating practices, plant breeding and overall management in agricultural functions.

Weeds destructively affect agricultural crop productions by contending with crop plants for resources, including soil moisture and nutrients. Providing sufficient and healthy foods for ever growing population heavily depends on the ways we control weeds and apply fertilizers in efficient manner. For future work, the review opines (Kounalakis et al., 2019) that more robust weed recognition approaches could be extended with additional data capturing conditions (like illu- mination, grass density) and sampling techniques could be synthetized with techniques like Synthetic Minority Over-sampling Technique (SMOTE) and Adaptive Synthetic Sampling (ADASYN).

natural resources using AI technologies lead to increased global crop yields. Meeting the fourth objective - conserving natural resources, is a daunting challenge. As we identified, it includes protection of soil health and water quality and maintain biodiversity of flora, fauna, and natural landscapes. The review sheds a light that AI technological developments taking consideration on these challenges while improving agri-food productivity with minimum effects to the environment. Particularly, there have been significant developments of AI towards the sustainabil- ity agriculture objective of conserving natural resources. However, to improve overall crop water productivity, AI technology has to be ad- vanced in irrigation technologies such as efficient low pressure center pivot irrigation and micro-irrigation and weather-based and soil mois- ture sensor-based irrigation scheduling. Moreover, improving decision support tools integrating weather, soil and crop information will ensure progress towards the sustainable objectives of agriculture.

Though AI helps to enhance the visibility of agriculture SC, more at- tention need to be focused on the food retailing phase for predicting consumer demand, perception and buying patterns. A precise prediction of food requirements or food consumption behavior of buyers helps to avoid overstocking, overproduction, resources overutilization and guaran- tee the fair income and price to farmers and buyers respectively. Dey et al. (Dey and Shekhawat, 2021) enhance the back and forward linkages in supply chain, reduce transportation cost and delivery time, enhance farmers' awareness on price, selling quotas, available stocks and online showcases and reduce the risks involved in contract arrangement. Subse- quently, investments in AI applications in agriculture industry have exhib- ited the possibility of achieving four objectives in agriculture sustainability while enhancing the farmers' livelihood, minimizing food production cost, controlling food price fluctuation and ensuring food choices to consumers. It is observable that AI application in achieving the second sustainable objective – alleviate poverty of farming community, remains scantly addressed. On this note, there is a vital requirement to design comprehen- sive framework of AI that should be used in agriculture SC.

Vilani Sachithra: Conception and design of study, Acquisition of data, Analysis and/or interpretation of data, Writing –original draft, Writing – review & editing L.D.C.S. Subhashini: Conception and design of study, Acquisition of data, Analysis and/or interpretation of data, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing.

