This paper introduces a new meta-heuristic optimization technique called Hurricane-based Optimization algorithm (HOA). The underlying concepts and ideas behind the proposed method are inspired from nature and based on the observation of hurricanes, radial wind and pressure profiles. In HOA, wind parcels move in a spiral course outward from a low-pressure zone called the eye emulating hurricanes in the real world. During this process, wind parcels search for a lower pressure zone (new eye), which is considered as the optimal solution. The HOA is tested with several benchmark functions frequently used in the area of optimization. The obtained results exhibit the high performance of the proposed method.

In order to obtain accurate solution for large-scale optimization problems, exact optimization algorithms are not efficient enough to provide an appropriate solution with a high-dimensional search space. Therefore, to overcome these limitations, new optimization technics have been developed, most of them based on a metaphor of some natural or man-made process. The main goal is to find a good feasible solution that is at least reasonably close to being optimal.

However, these algorithms suffer from a major shortcoming, i.e. being trapped in local minima. In order to overcome these limitations, many other optimization technics have been developed. Some of these technics are Gravitational Search Algorithm (GSA) [10], Cuckoo Optimization Algorithm (COA) [11].

This paper is organized as follows: Section 2 provides a brief review of hurricanes as a meteorological phenomenon and the concepts and ideas behind HOA in details. In Section 3 the experimental results are demonstrated. Finally, conclusions are given in Section 4.

A hurricane is a low-pressure zone with a warm core that forms over tropical and subtropical oceans. The center of the hurricane is known as the eye (Figure 1). Immediately outside of the eye is the Eyewall region, an area of vigorous tall/deep clouds, and the strongest observed winds. The surrounding spiral bands, called Rainbands, are localized areas of tall/deep clouds, heavy rain, and high winds.

r and ș are radial and angular coordinate respectively in polar coordinates; (x, y) is the location in Cartesian coordinates; the real numbers (ex, ey) are the coordinates of the spiral center (eye). The real number a > 0; b controls how tightly the spiral whirls and in which direction. In the extreme case that b= 0, the spiral becomes a circle of radius a.

where Ȧ is the angular velocity defined by the user, within the interval [0, 2ʌ]. Rmax is the radius of the maximum wind speed. This parameter is defined in the interval  0,  . Under the constraint R0 < Rmax. rand is a uniform random variable in the interval [0, 1].

Table 2 presents the experimental results of HOA in terms of the average final best value (Avg) and the standard deviation (SD). In this table, x* is the optimum for the problem, and f(x*) is the best achievable fitness for that function. According to experimental results HOA shows a great performance in solving some benchmark functions. In general the results are close to the global optimum. The small standard deviation values prove the convergence of HOA.

In HOA, wind parcels start spiraling outward from the eye. The velocities are controlled by a predefined model. In this process, wind parcels search for a lower pressure zone (new eye position). Once new lower pressure is discovered, its position becomes the eye and the process starts all over again.

To prove its performance, HOA is tested with several benchmark functions with different dimensions. The statistical results show the effectiveness of the proposed method in solving various nonlinear functions. In further work, HOA should be compared to other metaheuristic optimization algorithms.

