Today, most of countries strive to provide electricity supply for its industries and inhabitants. While the demand for electricity and the prices of fossil fuels are growing and the nuclear electricity production is resisted in some countries, one of the ways to solve the problem is to increase production by renewable resources. Hydroelectric power plants do not pollute air, devastate the countryside by opencast or underground mining or by transport of fuels and raw materials. They are waste-free, independent of raw materials import and highly safe. Their flexible electricity production and ability to accumulate energy increases efficiency and reliability of power network [1].

In history, the Czech countries were at the top of Europe in terms of using hydro power and thanks to specific hydrologic conditions, the hydraulic propulsion was widespread. The last precise counting of establishments with hydraulic propulsion which included the numbers, type, and parameters of hydraulic engines was taken in 1930 by the Tax and Pensions Offices. The counting originated the List of hydraulic structures of Czechoslovakia (1934), the data of which was drawn upon in Table 1.

Table 2 gives an overview of installed capacity of electricity production in Czech hydropower stations in 2008. In the CR, approximately 3.3 % of total electricity production is produced by hydropower stations which (including pumped storage) represent approximately 12 % of installed capacity of Czech power stations. Most of this capacity (90 % ap.) is produced on facilities with installed capacity more than 5 MW. In terms of the CR, an SHS is a facility with 10 MW maximum installed capacity, while in EU terms an SHS is a facility with 5 MW maximum installed capacity [2].

The natural conditions for building hydraulic structures in the CR are not optimum. Our streams do not have the needed heads and the sufficient quantity of water. This is the reason for low share of hydroelectric power stations on total electricity production in the CR. Similarly to wind energy, there is little potential to be used as alternative energy source. The hydro power will always be only additional source, however, using more small-scale hydropower stations would be advantageous and beneficious because local resources in addition to the standard ones could be used. Moreover, compared with the wind power, the hydraulic power is more reliable and less costly.

Primarily thanks to subvention of purchasing prices of renewable resources, grants and low-interest loans, many SHSs have been built. These are hydroelectric plants with 10 MW max. installed capacity. Further increase of the output of hydroelectric power plants may be achieved by modernization of the technology or building of new plants in new areas. Most of so far unused areas have low heads, which would impede return on investments.

Some of the Czech water companies have taken a significant opportunity - using the energy of water conveyed in ducts. Water companies produce and supply drinking water - great water volumes are conveyed in water ducts under pressure - this can be used for electricity production. They have started building SHSs at the entry points into the water treatment plants and water cisterns and using the hydroelectric potential of the conveyed water, both drinking and untreated. There is another important advantage – possible holding of water which means partial regulation of electricity supply [3].

The simplest machine set of a SHS contains an asynchronous generator and an adjusted water pump operating in a turbine regime [4]. A simple technical solution enables accurate regulation of pressure in consumption place with the help of servo-valve to deal with changing flow parameters, more machine sets working parallely can be positioned (Fig. 1). Series production components are used for assembly, which helps minimize the acquisition and service costs and speeds up the return on investments.

Fig. 2 shows an SHS on the penstock bringing untreated water into the water treatment plant. The systems used for regulation of turbines and fitting of bearings provide 100 % security in preserving the sanitariness of water, so it can be still classified as drinking water [5].

There are a lot of water treatment facilities using SHSs in the CR, however their volume of produced electricity does not go public. That is why there is no integrated statistic of GWh generated by SHSs. According to accessible data the amount of produced electricity from one SHS is more than 90 MWh/year for an SHS installation in a water reservoir and up to 2.5 GWh for SHS installation in water treatment plant. There are tens of SHSs in a water supply structure.

Production of electricity from renewable sources is supported in the Czech Republic. By law, power distributors have to connect every renewable energy source into the network. The price of electricity produced in such way is determined by The Energy Regulatory Office [7]. The minimal purchase price is by law guaranteed for 15 years in advance with the possibility of an annual correction +- 5%.

The purchase price is subordinated to the condition of guaranteed simple payback period of 15 years. If produced electricity is not supplied into network but used to cover the company's own energy consumption, a model of financial support called “green bonuses“ is introduced. It means that the market price of electricity is increased and covered for by the operator of the local distribution or transmission network to the benefit of the SHS owner.

Putting small scale hydropower stations into operation will be increasingly advantageous, as they can exploit the hydraulic potential of the given region. They represent a permanent source of propulsion which belongs to what we call “clean“, renewable energy sources. Their construction does not demand the use of technologies which jeopardize the environment. Their operation takes only minimum electricity necessary for the service of the facility and does not pollute the environment. With respect to the lack of suitable regions, the construction of small-scale hydropower stations on water feeders and exploitation of unused heads is natural. With the support of purchase prices and approving attitude of distributors to connecting of such power stations into network, more small-scale hydropower stations can be built.

