As a result, researchers begin to apply non-contact, rapid field mea- surement methods, such as near infrared spectroscopy (Oravec et al., 2019; Takamura et al., 2018), Raman spectroscopy (Doty and Lednev, 2018a; Rosenblatt et al., 2019) and computer vision, to detect material evidence at crime scenes. For near infrared spectroscopy, Takamura et al. demonstrated a dry urine trace detection method based on Fourier transform attenuated total reflection infrared spectroscopy, which fi- nally indicated the chemical source of gender difference in urine donors (Takamura et al., 2019). Zhao et al. proposed a nondestructive detection

for this experiment, including apple juice, Coca-Cola, coffee, oolong tea and milk. Cotton denim fabrics covering light, medium and dark colors are chosen to carry these liquids. To simulate different residual time, we dilute each liquid with different concentrations covering concentra- tions of 100%, 50%, and 25%. Hence, 15 experimental liquids are ob- tained viz. apple juice, Coca Cola, coffee, oolong tea and milk with concentration of 100%, 50%, and 25%, respectively. The solutions pre- pared above are used to contaminate the three colors of fabrics to get 45 experimental groups. Plus 3 groups that are not contaminated, we eventually have 48 experimental groups.

are respectively captured under working and corrected exposure time. Id is obtained when the lens cap is closed, and is used primarily to reduce the effects of dark currents in the imaging chip. To guarantee the stabil- ity of the calibration process, ten reference white and dark images were acquired each time, and then averaged for correction.

As described above, the distribution of the liquid on the fabric and the composition of the fabric are uniform. Therefore, we ignore the spa- tial information of the collected hyperspectral data, and only analyze the spectral information. However, the spatial information of hyperspectral image is very useful in practical application scenarios. For example, at an actual crime scene, the location of the liquid residue on the fabric is unknown to us, and we can scan the entire fabric using hyperspectral imaging system to eventually find the exact location of the liquid residue.

For each image, we collected 2000 spectra. Since there were 5 samples for each material condition, a total of 10,000 spectra were ultimately selected for each material condition. For each category, 80% and 20% of spectra were randomly selected as calibration and prediction sets.

Random forest (Breiman, 2001) is a supervised machine learning al- gorithm that just emerged in this century. It focuses more on accurately describing the data and classifying them into corresponding categories, as well as summarizing the data. The standard SVM focuses more on binary classification, but it has applied in multi-category classification as well (Belousov et al., 2002). The optimization strategy is shown in Algorithm 1.

ROC Curve and AUC: receiver operating characteristic curve (ROC Curve), is a common indicator to evaluate the advantages and disad- vantages of binary classifier. The x-coordinate is FPR, and the y- coordinate is TPR. In general, the closer the ROC curve is to the upper left corner, the better the performance of the classifier is.

Based on the set proportion, we first divide the all data set Sall into train- ing set Strain, and test set Stest. Then, we train SVM on the Strain using the de- fault parameter values of SVM classifier, and test set Stest is used to calculate the evaluation indicators to quantize the quality of the model. After training and testing, the classified right samples Sright and wrong samples Swrong are respectively assigned with the labels of Lright and Lwrong. Based on the right samples Sright and the obtained SVM classifier, we develop auxiliary classi- fier RF to get the optimal classification model. It follows the criterion that the evaluation values of classification model can reach the best, which are calculated by classified wrong samples Swrong. More specifically, we assign the parameters generated by randomizer to SVM, and then change the pa- rameters of RF to get the best-performing model. Meanwhile, we record every parameter pair (PSVM, PRF), and eventually we choose the best pair (PSVM(best), PRF(best)) to realize optimal model.

Compared with the spectrogram of fabrics, the spectrogram of liq- uids is much messier. Even after treatment, there is still much burr and sharp bulge, and the curve is more irregular. The spectrogram of coffee, in particular, shares a similar trend with coke, apple juice and tea, perhaps because of their close color similarity.

components of the fabric are more sensitive to the light of two wavebands. With color deepens, the first crest begins to gradually de- cline, and almost vanishes in terms of dark fabric. Thus, we draw the conclusion that the first wave crest can mainly distinguish the three kinds of fabrics. Meanwhile it may be the characteristic wavelength of these kinds of fabric.

In this work, we develop the hyperspectral imaging system for the detection of liquid residue traces at the crime scene. After gaining hyperspectral images and preprocessing, classifiers viz. SVM and RF, are selected to establish the classification models. Based on these, the optimal combination strategy, SVM combined with RF is chosen to con- struct model. The system can achieve the tasks of classifying liquid cat- egory, liquid concentration, and even different liquid categories on denim. It can be seen from the fact that all positive indicators over 81%, even some over 91% when tackling the most challenging task, de- tecting different liquid categories on denim. Furthermore, the system performs even better when classifying liquid category and liquid concentration.

Zhu, Xinran, Huang, Lihua, Wei, Wei, Guo, Kai, Ling, Liqing, Huang, Huijie, 2019. Applica- tion of reflection transform imaging in trace detection. 14th National Conference on Laser Technology and Optoelectronics (LTO 2019). vol. 11170. International Society for Optics and Photonics, p. 111702Q.

