The basic hypothesis of this science focuses on the study of cutting tool wear with regard to the elimination of occurrence of poor-quality holes when drilling into new austenitic ELC (Extra Low Carbon) stainless steels. The problem of drilling holes with diameter D=2 to 5 mm resides in the fact that 35 to 50 % of these holes do not comply with prescribed requested requirements. The cutting tools screw drills as monoliths get damaged and wear out. The result of the damage is very often the unforeseen destruction of the cutting tools; therefore their operational lifespan is reduced. On the basis of practical experience and experiments carried out in the past 25 years, we have observed that the operational lifespan of screw drills is reduced by 50 %. This work presents the results of experiments focusing on the study of the damage process in screw drills with diameter d=4 mm when drilling into new low-carbon stainless steels. The paper is to contribute to the development of the theory of the cutting process, especially with new and practical experience, and new insights on the process of cutting the technological methods - drilling.

The present market requires high quality products and the corresponding properties. Requirements that are imposed on these products (eg. resistance to various aggressive environments, resistance to heat and temperature effects, resistance to high mechanical loads, etc.) they can meet only materials with special physical, chemical, mechanical and other properties. In doing so, the technological process, the requirements for reliability, durability, and to reduce the weight of structures directly and indirectly affect the development and use of special new material.

The study of metal cutting can be accessed in several ways. When analyzing the theoretical foundations of cutting metals to describe these regularities and phenomena: regularities and processes of formation of particles on surfaces cut, regularities wear process of cutting tools, regularities drive the cutting process, cutting zone phenomena Davim, 2008 and Jurko, 2009. The current development in the theory of knowledge is characterized by cutting the fact that the study area are the cutting zone, which are in the close proximity to transformation of layer of material removal to chip. This approach is not correct. Since the that formed during cutting complex dynamic phenomena, the field should in theory be extended to the cutting technological properties of machine-tool-object-fixture, and in particular the continuity properties of the elements with the rules of the system mentioned above. The main models orientated on the quality surface of parts is:

The foundation of the cutting process rests in the complete plastic deformation of the separated material (in the form of chips) at T<i>W, for defined conditions and a defined technological system M-F. With respect to economics, the application of progressive cutting tools should bring the following: a faster return on investment (e.g. cost of a new machine), increasing the machine performance (e.g. if we use a technically older machine) and increase of the productivity of operator work. Currently, one of the cost items that has an effect on production costs for 1 component piece is: cutting tool cost. Every company includes a different percentage of cost of the cutting tool for their total costs of producing one component piece, Nakazawa, 1989. Although cost of the cutting tool make up only part of the total costs for producing one component piece (5 % to 10 %), they have a significant impact particularly on the following:

Cutting process T<i>W. Affects the overall result (e.g. damage to the cutting tool, roughness of the machined surface, failures, defects and changes to the mechanical properties of the work piece) of the machined surface on the component. Extent of machine stand time  damaged cutting tool (e.g. its durability, or service life ), ensuring system logistics (e.g. storage, maintenance, service). Number of required operations

The duration a component is required to stay within the company (e.g. during changes to the technological procedure). The number of cutting tools, which must be in stock (e.g. to ensure the availability of tools, and their logistics). One of the fundamental conditions for the economic utilization of CNC production machines is the optimal course of machining process for the criteria defined, Shaw, 2005.

Analyses of samples plastically deformed layers under the surface of machined steel ELC X01Cr18Ni10TiN can confirm these allegations. Autors indicates that for steel ELC X01Cr18Ni10TiN, resizing a layer of plastic deformation is related mainly to the material structure and properties of austenitic grain size. Hardening uneven layer width from 18 m to 280 m, example as shown in Fig 1, generated by the cutting conditions of 40 m/min to 45 m/min and feeds on larger than 0.04 mm.

For evaluation of the cutting tools life were applied criterion VBK=0.05 mm. Measurements were made using an optical microscope without removing the cutting tool from the fixture. Cutting tools and the chips were analyzed for electron microscopy (SEM). Plastic deformation initiates the so-called cutting edge wear. chipping, especially for the discontinuous method of machining such as drilling. Tool wear occurred continuously for steel with the use of a cutting tool in dry machining. In this respect, at increasing cutting speeds tool plastic deformation takes place with gradual laminar flaking of the surface on the cutting tool Fig 2a and with destruction of the coat (frittering) over the front area Fig 2b; tool wear is influenced by the formation of built-up edges and by coat flaking. Stainless steels are influenced by charging due to intensive mechanical reinforcement during machining, Peckner, 1999.

