The accuracy of the interpolation method for identification of nonlinear dynamical systems based on the Volterra model in the frequency domain is studied. To highlight the n-th partial component in the response of the system to the test signal the n-th partial derivative of the response using the test signal amplitude is found and its value is taken at zero. The polyharmonic signals are used as test ones. The algorithmic and software toolkit is developed for identification processes. This toolkit is used to construct the informational model of test system. The model is built as a first, second and third order amplitude–frequency characteristics and phase–frequency characteristics. The comparison of obtained characteristics with standard is given.

The new methods and supporting toolkit are developing to automate the measurement of parameters and taking into account the characteristics of the CC. This toolkit allows obtaining the informational and mathematical model of such nonlinear dynamic object, as the CC [1], i.e. to solve the identification problem. Modern continuous CCs are nonlinear stochastic inertial systems. The model in the form of integro-power Volterra series used to identify them [2–5].

The additional research of new method of nonlinear dynamical systems identification, based on the Volterra model in the frequency domain is proposed. This method lies in n-fold differentiation of responses of the identifiable system by the amplitude of the test polyharmonic signals. The developed identification toolkit is used to build information model of the test nonlinear dynamic object in the form of the first, second and third order model [8].

The main purpose was to identify the multifrequency performances characterizing nonlinear and dynamical properties of nonlinear test object. Volterra model in the form of the second order polynomial is used. Thus, test object properties are characterized by transfer functions of W1(j), W2(j1,j2), W3(j1,j2,j3)  by Fourier-images of weight functions w1(t), w2(t1, t2) and w3(t1, t2, t3).

The weighted sum is formed from received signals – responses of each group (fig. 1). As a result the partial components of CC responses y1(t), y2(t) and y3(t) are got. For each partial component of response the Fourier transform (the FFT is used) is calculated, and from received spectrum only an informative harmonics (which amplitudes represent values of required characteristics of the first, second and third orders AFC) are taken.

The surfaces shown on fig. 5–8 are built from subdiagonal cross-sections which were received separately. 1 was used as growing parameter of identification with different value for each cross–section in second order characteristics. Fixed value of 2 and growing value of 1 were used as parameters of identification to obtain different value for each cross-section in third order characteristics.

New values of test signals amplitudes were defined and model were validated using the test object. Excellent accuracy level for received model is achieved as in liner model so in nonlinear ones. Given values are greatly raising the accuracy of identification compared to amplitudes and coefficients written in [12]. The accuracy of identification of nonlinear part of the test object growth almost 10 times and the standard deviation in best cases is no more than 5%.

