specific map of desired properties is used to control the application rate. While, in the case of a sensor-based approach, the information of desired properties is collected on-the-go using sensors, and the applica- tion rate is regulated according to the processed information. However, the suitability of these approaches mainly depends on the nature and objectives of a particular site-specific farming task. In general, the map-based approach is preferred for the properties that almost remain the same for an extended period or change quite slowly, such as organic matter and soil texture. On the other hand, the sensor-based approach is preferred for the quickly changing soil properties and crop characteris- tics (Ess et al., 2001).

In the case of variable-rate chemical spraying for plant disease con- trol, the map-based approach is not practically appropriate, as the dis- eases spread across the whole field very rapidly. Hence, the accuracy of sample data and the derived disease maps are time-sensitive, which means that the disease distribution may have changed by the time the map is prepared. These maps are also not readily available to make timely decisions on disease control, mainly due to the laborious and time consuming conventional visual plant disease estimation methods (Dammer et al., 2008). Moreover, the operational performance of the map-based variable-rate spraying system is affected by the accuracy of positioning devices, which is not the case with the sensor-based ap- proach. In the sensor-based approach, no additional costs for labor

The above literature reviews show that the image processing tech- nique with necessary electronic hardware and spraying system could be successfully employed for variable-rate spraying of agrochemicals in diseased crops. Therefore, the goal of this study was to develop an image processing technique based real-time variable-rate chemical spraying system for ensuring the precise use of input chemical based on the plant disease severity level. In order to achieve this goal, the pres- ent study was carried out under the following specific objectives (1) To develop an image processing algorithm for real-time estimation of plant disease severity level. (2) To develop a variable-rate spraying system for the precise application of agrochemicals based on plant disease severity.

In the present study, a chromatic aberration (CA) based color image segmentation algorithm was developed for detecting the diseased re- gion in paddy crop. The proposed image segmentation algorithm consisted of three steps, i.e., color component extraction and analysis, selection of characteristic operator, and thresholding segmentation (Hu et al., 2009).

needs to be observed. The disease severity is defined as the disease in- fected area of a sampling unit (leaf or plant surface) and expressed as a percentage or proportion of the total area (Nutter Jr et al., 1991). Thus, by utilizing the image processing approach, the disease severity of paddy leaves was given by the ratio of total pixels of the diseased region

prototype was operated without activation of cameras and other control functions, and both spraying nozzles remained open throughout the spraying operation. Then, the sprayer was operated in the VRA mode by activation of cameras and other control func- tions. In this case, the nozzles were not kept open all the time; in- stead, their opening or closing was controlled by the actuation of respective solenoid valves, and the opening time duration was de- pendent on the plant disease severity level. Before each test, the stor- age tank was filled with spray solution up to a specific mark, and the amount of used chemical was measured by refilling the storage tank

up to that particular mark again. The amount of chemical consump- tion was recorded for all five subplots in both the operational modes. The distance between image capturing point and spraying nozzles was 250 mm, and the total time lag between the image acquisition and the spraying was found to be about 800 ms. Hence, the maximum speed of operation was limited to 0.9 km/h. Therefore, the speed of op- eration in both the operational modes was maintained at about 0.9 km/

A manually operated real-time variable-rate chemical sprayer was developed to apply the chemical dosages corresponding to the plant disease severity level. The variable-rate chemical sprayer prototype comprised of pump, solenoid valves, spray nozzles, relay switches, web cameras, microcontroller board, Laptop, and 12 VDC battery. The image processing technique was used to identify the diseased region of the paddy plants and also determine their disease severity level. The field performance of developed sprayer prototype was evaluated in terms of percentage reduction in applied agrochemical during the VRA mode as compared with the CRA mode. The field testing results

