In this paper, an improved image denoising method based on a nonlinear thresholding function with adaptive bayes threshold in Nonsubsampled Contourlet Transform (NSCT) domain. In overcoming the shortcomings of the same threshold, the noise deviation of the different sub-band are estimated based on the coefficients of different directional and level sub-bands in NSCT domain, and the thresholds of every sub-band is estimated by Bayesian threshold estimation method. After choosing the thresholds, a nonlinear thresholding function was chosen to overcome the shortcomings of the soft and the hard thresholding function. The simulation results show that the proposed method in this paper can remove Gaussian white noise more effectively, and get a higher PSNR value and keep image texture and detail information more clearly, which also has a better visual effect.

With the rise in the number of image sensors (or pixels) per unit area of a chip, modern image capturing devices are increasingly sensitive to noise. Camera manufacturers, therefore, depend on image denoising algorithms to reduce the effects of such noise artifacts in the resultant image.[1] Recently proposed denoising methods use different approaches to address the problem. Image denoising is used to remove the additive noise while retaining as much as possible the important signal features. Denoising images corrupted by Gaussian noise using wavelet techniques is very effective because of its ability to capture the energy of a signal in few energy transform values. Wavelet transform is good at energy compaction, the small coefficient are more likely due to noise and large coefficient due to important signal feature. So, Wavelet denoising is an important technique in the area of image noise reduction. Over the last decade, it has been widely used in images denoising. [2-6]

Wavelet transform is an efficient image denoising algorithm, but it lacks shift and orientation invariance, and is poor in directional selectivity. Aiming at the shortcomings, Martin Vetterli and M. N. Do[7] put forward a kind of “Real” two-dimension signal sparse representation method: Contourlet transform, which has multi- resolution, local time-frequency and the opposite directions. Then the contourlet transform is used widely in images denoising, and have a well performance. [8-9] However, Contourlet transform lacks the shift invariance which due to the sampling process, the image will produce false Gibbs distortion and invariance which due to the sampling process. In 2006, the nonsubsampled contourlet transform (NSCT) was proposed, and it is a fully shift-invariant, multiscale, and multidirection expansion [10]. The performances of denoising methods in NSCT domain have proven to be very efficient in image denoising.[11-13]

In this paper, an improved image denoising method based on a nonlinear thresholding function with adaptive bayes threshold in NSCT domain. In overcoming the shortcomings of the same threshold, the noise deviation of the different sub-band are estimated based on the coefficients of different directional and level sub-bands in NSCT domain, and the thresholds of every sub-band is estimated by Bayesian threshold estimation method. After choosing the thresholds, a nonlinear thresholding function was chosen to overcome the shortcomings of the soft and the hard thresholding function. The simulation results show that the proposed method in this paper can remove Gaussian white noise more effectively, and get a higher PSNR value and keep image texture and detail information more clearly , which also has a better visual effect.

In contourlet transform, the Laplacian Pyramid (LP) and the direction filter bank (DFB) are employed for multiscale decomposition and directional decomposition, respectively. To get rid of the frequency aliasing of the contourlet transform and to achieve shift-invariance, the nonsubsampled contourlet transform (NSCT) was proposed based on nonsubsampled pyramid filter bank (NSPFB) and nonsubsampled direction filter bank (NSDFB). Fig.1 shows the decomposition framework of NSCT. Fig.1 (a) displays an overview of the NSCT. The structure consists in a bank of filters that splits the 2-D frequency plane in the sub-bands illustrated in Fig.1(b). NSCT is a redundant transform which has shift invariance, multi-scale and multi-resolution, it samples on the filter, then analysis and synthesize the filter, the design and reconstruction of this filter is easy to be realized, which could better collect frequency and more regularity.

The noisy images may contain additive noise and multiplicative noise, and the most common White Gaussian noise is chosen as the noise model in this paper. NSCT is linear transformation, so its coefficients are divided into two parts: coefficients of original image and coefficients of noise. The coefficients of original image is large and concentrated, while the coefficients of noise is small and dispersive. Therefore, a proper threshold method can be set to deal with them. The image signal can be recovered after reconstruction with the new NSCT coefficients. The basic principle of the shrinking threshold denoising algorithm in NSCT domain is comparing NSCT sub-band coefficients with the thresholds, the coefficient which is less than the threshold is set to zero, while the greater one retained or modified. So threshold denoising algorithm mainly involves two key problems: the estimation of thresholds and the choice of thresholding function. In this paper, the threshold is estimated by the adaptive Bayesian threshold method, and a nonlinear thresholding function is chosen to deal with NSCT sub-band coefficients.

In Bayesian threshold estimation, the noise variance σ 2 is estimated as a same value in each directional and each level sub-bands. However, NSCT is not an orthogonal transform, the noise variance of sub-bands in each directional and each level are different in the NSCT domain. So, the noise variance of every sub-band is estimated independently. In this paper the noise variances are estimated based on the sub-band coefficients of each directional and each level.

coefficient of the original signal. In these methods, the nonimportant coefficients are set to zero. In hard thresholding, the important coefficients remain unchanged. In soft thresholding, the important coefficients are reduced by the absolute threshold value. However, there is deviation between the coefficients and the original ones. So, a nonlinear thresholding function is applied in the NSCT domain for denoising in this paper. The thresholding function is as follows:

To evaluate the performance of the proposed approach, this section compares the proposed scheme with other popular denoising schemes in Wavelet, Contourlet and NSCT domain based hard-thresholding. The three benchmark images named Lena, Barbara and Boat (8-bit grayscale, size 512  512 ) are used for the experiments. The noisy images are obtained by adding Gaussian white noise (noise standard deviations ranging from 10 to 40) to the noise free image. We adopt the peak signal-to-noise ratio (PSNR) to test the denoising effect. The PSNR results of various are shown in the Table.1. The denoised results of the standard image Lena with noise standard deviation σ  40 are shown in the Fig.4. The peak signal-to-noise ratio is defined as:

Table.1 shows the PSNR results of the four methods on the experimented images corrupted by different noise variance of additive Gaussian noise. The results show the proposed method gives highest PSNR for all the experimented images. In addition, it consistently provides better results than other denoising methods for different images and noise levels.

In this paper, an improved image denoising method based on a nonlinear thresholding function with adaptive bayes threshold in NSCT domain. In overcoming the shortcomings of the same threshold, the noise deviation of the different sub-band are estimated based on the coefficients of different directional and level sub-bands in NSCT domain, and the thresholds of every sub-band is estimated by Bayesian threshold estimation method. After choosing the thresholds, a nonlinear thresholding function was chosen to overcome the shortcomings of the soft and the hard thresholding function. The simulation results show that the proposed method in this paper can remove Gaussian white noise more effectively, and get a higher PSNR value and keep image texture and detail information more clearly , which also has a better visual effect.

