With the proliferation of smartphones, digital data collection has become trivial. The ability to analyze images has increased, but source authentication has stagnated. Editing and tampering of images has become more common with advancements in signal processing technology. Recent developments have introduced the use of seam carving (insertion and deletion) techniques to disguise the identity of the camera, specifically in the child pornography market. In this article, we focus on the available features in the image based on PRNU (photo

A picture is worth a thousand words. Photos do not lie. These banal phrases have been around for a long time, and there has been little reason to question the reliability of a photograph in the current era until the recent presence of powerful graphics editors and developments in digital media technology [1]. Many low-cost software are accessible and make it trivial to manipulate images (e.g., Adobe Photoshop, Corel Paint Shop Pro, Skylum, Canva, Stencil, etc.), especially digital images.

Image attribution is a vital job in the framework of digital multi- media forensics [2]. In recent years, it has added a great deal of consideration to combat counterfeiting and exposing the truth. Modern cameras (DSLR, compact, and cell phone models) generate large images with millions of pixels, which offer sufficient evidence for reliable device identification [3]. In the court of law, captured images or video mate- rials are presented as substantial proof. Therefore, tempered images or videos may be shown as false evidence [4]. Due to its implications in several fields of application, the identification of camera models is one of the problems in the image forensics community [5]. To do this, the brand and model of the camera that is used to take an image must be determined. Solving this problem could help an expert point out the

Seam deletion and seam insertion resize the image with better flex- ibility than cropping and resampling and operate on a simple algorithm [7]. Here, we analyze artifacts caused by seam carving using only retargeted images because the positions where the seam is inserted and removed vary with the content and region in the image [8,9]. Accord- ingly, retargeted images generated by seam-carving are more chal- lenging to classify than linearly scaled images with periodic characteristics, since the seams are globally scattered according to the intrinsic features of an image [10]. The seam can horizontally or verti- cally cross the image, i.e., from left to right or top to bottom, and each

In image forensics, image manipulation causes changes in intrinsic statistics [18,19], and forensic techniques to capture seam-carving ar- tifacts must look at the characteristics of the retargeting process. The statistical changes caused by seam removal or insertion in retargeted images can be captured by handcrafted feature-based approaches [20, 21]. Sarkar et al. proposed a set of 324-dimensional Markov features (Shi-324) and used a supervised support vector machine framework [22]. Wei et al. introduced an SVM-based approach in Ref. [23] using

To address the implicit problem of these feature-based approaches, techniques using different learning frameworks have been proposed to enable the network to automatically learn forensic features. Many ap- proaches to CNN-based multimedia forensics have been proposed using deep learning [8,19,20]. CNNs for computer vision can learn features from the data using preprocessing layers or network components that are specialized for learning low-level features. CNN-based forensic ap- proaches have been designed to learn forensic features while suppress- ing the content of the image. Bayar et al. [28] introduced a constrained convolution layer, which is referred to as BayarNet, that forces the CNN model to learn prediction error filters to produce low-level forensic features. According to Ref. [29], H-VGG is used in conjunction with VGGNet [30] with high-pass filtering (HPF). This model suggests double compression artifacts within a decoded intracoded frame (I-frame) of

sisting of fake videos and showed that Xception could detect artifacts during the generation of fake faces. A framework for steganalysis in both spatial and JPEG domains was presented by Boroumand et al. [25]. To explore low-level artifacts, SRNet operates without the pooling layer in the early and middle stages. As a CNN-based method, Ye et al. proposed YeNet [32], which includes a preprocessing layer for seam-carved image detection.

examine two major methodologies, i.e., seam insertion and deletion. Section 3 deals with acquiring forged images, while Section 4 examines the selection of blocks and numerical analyses experimental approach and decision matrices calculations, correlation patterns, features. We discuss the impact of a 1D CNN model on our proposed approach in Section 5, followed by a conclusion in Section 6.

Within the testing images (constructed by following the steps in Sections 2 and 3), the proposed method chooses a block that has not been subjected to seam removal or addition. The seams seldom run across a highly textured area or regions with edges. Therefore, these regions are less likely to be infected. A gradient magnitude can help

In this phase, the internal weights of the model were reorganized over various iterations. Finally, the dataset features were used to train the model. In this part, the experiments for the proposed CNN archi- tecture were implemented using the jupyter notebook of the Anaconda distribution. Compared to the commonly used neural network (NN),

Our example illustrates a complex problem and a solution through the seam function for insertion and deletion scenarios. We consider restricted forced seam carving to identify camera sources for Microsoft Lumia 640 LTE C10 in the seam deletion case and for Apple_iPad Mini C1 in the seam addition case. As shown in Refs. [34,35], none of the

[43] to investigate the effect of varying the number of groups used in the process of constructing camera fingerprints. Specifically, the experiment involved comparing the use of 10 groups (as in our current approach for detail see subsection 4.1) to the use of smaller or larger numbers of groups, such as 5 or 15 groups. The dataset was expanded from 10

The purpose of these ablation studies was to assess the effect of this change on the results. Our analysis revealed that the ablation study had a strong correlation with the concepts presented in our approach. This information is useful for improving the accuracy and reliability of our framework in source attribution tasks.

This suggests that the model may be struggling to learn the more complex patterns present in the seam insertion data, leading to lower accuracy. However, the similarity in the loss function values indicates that the model is still able to effectively learn and optimize the objective function in both tasks. Further analysis, such as examining the confusion matrix, may provide more insights into the model performance.

gerprints to characterize a device may be more reliable than a single PRNU, as we found in an observation. Then, we extracted five features from the correlation values with the series of PRNUs that enabled us to link seam images (deletion and insertion) to their source device. In the next phase, we fused the 1D CNN to validate IMGCAT based on the results recorded from feature extractions. The results prove that the proposed

will explore how we can specialize the CNN to learn additional char- acteristics as well as traces of camera models (e.g. scaling, rotation, blurring, etc.). Meanwhile, how to utilize LSTM capabilities directly for localization by training with split layers and corresponding mitigation strategies on synthetic images.

Irshad M, Law NF, Loo KH. CamCarv - Expose the Source Camera at the Rear of Seam Insertion. In: Rutkowski L, Scherer R, Korytkowski M, Pedrycz W, Tadeusiewicz R, Zurada JM, editors. Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 13589. Cham: Springer; 2023. https://doi.org/ 10.1007/978-3-031-23480-4_2.

