Due to severe signal degradation caused by multipath propagation and the limited bandwidth and the time-varying and space-variant nature of the underwater acoustic channel, underwater acoustic communication is difficult. A suitable for underwater acoustic channel communication mode must be employed. Implementation and design of the real-time speech communication system based on orthogonal frequency division multiplexing (OFDM) technology, AMBE-2000 was used to compress the speech coding. The main hardware circuit and software design of speech communication system were analyzed, speech signal was inset comfortable noise, eliminated echo, controlled volume, finally through the system debugging and channel pool test. It proved that the underwater acoustic speech communication system was feasible, speech was clear.

On the land, the radio is usually used in no cable communication. The absorption and attenuation of underwater radio are large. No matter how far the transmission distance, can only use large antennas and high transmission power, or can not complete underwater communications tasks. Compared to all kinds of known as form of energy, the only sound waves in the underwater spread for best performance, which allows to sound waves as the carrier of the underwater acoustic communication become the mainstream of the underwater communication. In 1945 the earliest underwater speech communication system had been developed by the United States navy underwater acoustic laboratory. This system was used in the communication between the submarines, which used single side band modulation with carrier frequency 8~11 kHz, work distance a few kilometers.

OFDM technology is used in the underwater acoustic speech communication system in this paper. It had some advantages. Firstly, the using rate of the frequency spectrum was higher. Secondly, the capability of multipath interference resistance and the frequency choice decline were stronger. Thirdly, the capability of decline-poor through the united coding of sub-carrier waves was stronger too. Finally the implementation of DSP was easier because of the modulation and demodulation of OFDM through the using of IFFT and FFT. In the underwater acoustic communication field these advantage of OFDM were the same as which was used in the land wireless communication field. System hardware design and system software test had been completed, finally the underwater acoustic speech communication system had been debugged. The pool test proves the feasibility of this system. Speech effect is clear, can satisfy the hearing requirements.

In an OFDM system, a high rate bit stream is divided into several low rate streams that are transmitted in parallel and simultaneously on different frequency, i.e. sub-carriers. By parallel transmission, the symbol duration is increased; therefore the relative amount of time dispersion, which is caused by multipath delay spread, is decreased. To avoid inter-symbol interference (ISI), a guard interval (GI) is inserted into OFDM symbols. The length of GI is chosen to exceed the channel delay spread. Meanwhile for avoiding the inter- channel interference (ICI), OFDM symbols in the guard interval are cyclically extended. The major sources of distortion for underwater acoustic communication systems are multipath fading and ISI. OFDM has significant advantages with bandwidth efficiency, immunity against ISI and combating frequency selective fading.

Where sk(t) is the transmitted signal for the kth information symbol ak. 1/(N)1/2 ensures symbol energy of unity. Δ f=1/Ts (Ts is one OFDM symbol duration) to ensure orthogonality among carriers, and (2π /N) ki is the phase offset used to generate the spreading code for ak which ensures the orthogonality among the N information symbols. fc is the carrier frequency.

Speech signal processing module is mainly made of CODEC and AMBE-2000. The high-performance stereo audio CODEC is specifically designed for the digital signal processing (DSP) chip by TI company. It is great flexible for AMBE-2000 chip in speech rate choice and forward error correction (FEC) rate. The user of AMBE-2000 chip can grow at 50 bps, free set in 2.0 kbps~9.6 kbps data rate range. The user must allocate more data rate percentage to FEC coding for the channel of the high bit error rate (BER). AMBE-2000 basic working principle diagram is shown in figure 3.

TMS320VC5509A provides three high-speed, full duplex, multi-channel buffer serial port - McBSP, each serial interface can support 128 channels, at speeds of up to 100 Mb/s. Multi-channel buffer serial port (McBSP) can provides a direct serial port in TMS320VC5509A DSP or between DSP and other devices of system. It is feasible that DSP can directly connect with other C55xx DSP, CODEC of industrial standard port, and other serial (ADC/DAC) devices of system. Different McBSP of DSP number and the pin number is also different.

The I2C module starting and ending conditions: If SCL is high, starting condition is defined as SDA change from high to low, says data transmission start. If SCL is high, ending condition is defined as SDA change from low to high, says data transmission end. As shown in figure 7.

This paper designed a half-duplex and low power consuming underwater acoustic speech communication system based on OFDM technology. The theory and key technology of OFDM were analyzed. A low power consuming operational amplifier and converter of A/D and D/A were used in the design of the hardware. Furthermore AMBE-2000 was used to compress the origin speech coding and TMS320VC5509A DSP was used to modulate and demodulate the speech signal. Finally, the feasibility of the underwater acoustic speech communication system based of OFDM technology is proved through the test in the pool.

