It is very necessary for embedded applications to protect important data. A realization of the data Encryption Standard algorithm based on FPGA is presented in this paper. The implementations of the DES (data encryption standard) algorithm based on hardware is a low cost , flexible and efficient encryption solutions. This paper uses a method of iteration of the loop, with key size of 128 bits and realized by lookup table based on S-box. The simulation waveform showed that result in FPGA meet the requirements.

Data encryption standard uses a key to custom conversion, so the decryption can be performed. They know the especially key used to encrypt. DES (data encryption standard) is A typical block cipher, it takes a plaintext bit fixed length string and changes it by much complicated operations into cipher text bit string. This string is same length. In the case of data encryption standard, the size of block is sixty-four bits. The key apparently composed of sixty-four bits; but, 8 bits are used uniquely for checking parity, and are then discarded, only fifty-six of those are effectively used by the algorithm. Therefore the effective key length is fifty-six bits.

As other block ciphers, Data encryption standard is not a safe way of encryption. It must be instead by a mode of operation. This key is usually transmitted or stored as eight bytes. 1 bit in each eight bit of the key may be used for error check in key distribution, generation, and storage. Bits eight, sixteen,..., sixty-four are used in ensuring that every bit is odd parity.

The combination of substitutions and permutations is called a product cipher. The arithmetic includes implement substitutions , combinations and permutations between key and text to be encrypted, when ensure the operation can be implemented in all directions. The principal part of the arithmetic are as below: Part of the text into sixty-four bit blocks; permutation of blocks; divide the blocks into two parts: right and left; substitution and Permutation step will be repeated sixteen times; recombining of the right and left parts and then reverse permutation. as shown in Figure 1.

A flow of representative design includes an implementation which must be verified at many stages in the conversion to final hardware. The design stage includes selecting an appropriated section of the project between software and hardware, then partitioning of the software and hardware constituents based upon the suitability of realization in various tools and with different languages. The internal operation in each iteration of the DES algorithm can be realized by combinational logic. The system control part should be controlled by the iterative times. The overall diagram of the DES algorithm is shown in Figure 2.

The logic operation of iteration is accomplished in the combinational logic circuit. The combinational logic circuit consists of the following modules: Extended operation, The encryption algorithm, The compression arithmetic, Replacement operation and Exclusive-OR. The management and control of the iterative process is accomplished in the sequential logic circuit. The sequential circuits is described as state machine. It is shown in Figure 3.

It is very difficult for the designed circuit to use illustrative diagram for large design with hundreds of basic gates. Hardware description The language of hardware description supply standard text based expressions of the behavior and framework of circuit. So hardware description languages are preferred way to design logic in FPGA. VHDL is a language that was designed to explain the behavior of FPGA ,an application-specific circuits of systems in the design of electricity. The function of electronic component is described by VHDL in many areas. In order to increase the precise of electrical circuit, VHDL simulation model is created. the foundation for building larger circuits is consist of Combination with schematics, system level descriptions and the simulation model.

When the completion of the design, in order to check the correctness of the design, the first thing is simulation,and then program the result in the FPGA chip on the board. it is very necessary to simulate it in order to ensure its correctness. The software named Quartus II can be used to simulate the behavior of design. The result of simulator is showed by the oscillogram .

