Abstract Analytic Hierarchy Process (AHP) is one of the popular decision support systems for multi-criteria decision making problems. The AHP has different theories for prioritization, consis- tency evaluation and consistency improvement, a review of which is presented in this study before diving deep into the core contribution. Consistency evaluation is one of the key computations while using the AHP. This paper describes a method that can be employed to improve the consistency of the judgment matrix utilized by using the Cosine Consistency Index (CCI). The approach described uses a cosine maximization method to revise the entries in the judgment matrix on an iterative basis until the CCI is improved. The recommended method entails that it is possible to modify any judg- ment matrix to achieve CCI of desired level. Finally, the proposed algorithm is tested with numer- ical examples and improved CCI values are validated through paired sample t-test. The results of this study showed that the algorithm significantly improves CCI values with the inclusion of pro- posed approach.

The Analytic Hierarchy Process (AHP) is one of the more popular decision-making techniques that are widely utilized to address Multi-Criteria Decision-Making (MCDM) prob- lems. This method breaks down the problem into a hierarchy of sub-problems. Then from the elicited judgments from experts on the comparative performance or criticality of the sub-problems, priorities are computed. These priorities enable the decision making related to sorting, ranking or selecting the most suitable alternative in MCDM problems [1]. One of the biggest advantages of a AHP approach is that it helps decision

makers to dissect a complex issue into its constituent parts in a manner that is more simplistic [2–6]. However, as a MCDM tool, it does have inherent disadvantages and the way in which criteria are aggregated is often criticized as potentially risking a loss of information, for example, in situations in which trade- offs between good and bad scores occur. Furthermore, AHP involves a large amount of pairwise comparisons [4], which could sometimes become tiring during judgment elicitation. Moreover, some of the studies adopt fuzzy set theory [7] and analytical network process [8,9] to offset the limitations in tra- ditional AHP. Also various theories exist as to which decision making processes can effectively help a group of people to mutually agree on problems and opportunities. Techniques such as structuring, ordering, grading and evaluating have been comprehensively explored across a wide variety of studies relating to group decision making processes [10]. Previous research into AHP as a MCDM tool has indicated that it can be very effective when applied to a group decision problem because it allows the priorities of each participant to be accu- rately estimated [11–15] and subsequently improved through quantitative methods [16–18] before being aggregated into a set of preferences that reflect the requirements of each partici- pant [19–24].

In order to ensure that AHP is implemented in an effective manner, it is important to ensure that the judgment matrix upon which it is based has a Cosine Consistency Index (CCI) that is approximately equal to 1. According to the literature [25], it is acceptable for a CCI to be above 0.90, but anything below 0.90 is unacceptable. However, while their insights are useful, they failed to extend how CCI can be improved. Con- structing a judgment matrix that delivers an acceptable CCI is extremely challenging because it is very difficult to compare the various elements of the matrix, and the human capacity to do so is limited. Moreover, some recent studies on decision making in hierarchical collaborative production planning [26], knowledge discovery [27] and service-oriented enterprise architecture [28] have failed to address and statistically validate [29,30] consistency improvement in preferences. This becomes all the more critical for the experts in more complex problems and in the presence of incomplete or subjective information.

One method of improving the CCI of matrices that demon- strate inconsistency (CCI < 0.90) could be to return them to experts who have the ability to restructure them via a series of relevant judgments in a manner that ensures increased CCI. Although such an approach may yield reliable and accurate results, it is largely impractical because of both the longer time requirements of such an approach and the availability of experts for subsequent rounds of judgment elicitation. As such, there is a need to develop a method of improving the consistency of judg- ment matrices that demonstrate CCI < 0.90, so that the revised matrix achieves an acceptable consistency (CCI P 0.90). Once such a matrix has been developed, it would then be possible to derive the reasonable priority vector of the first matrix by apply- ing the Cosine Maximization Method (CMM). The CMM cal- culates CCI value by calculating average similarity between priority vector and each column of AHP matrix with an objec- tive of maximizing the CCI value. Previous research have exam- ined this type of approach [15,31–35] and highlighted the need for methods of consistency improvement through convergence focused iterative approaches.

Before moving on to the actual contribution in the current study, it is important to review the background of develop- ments in the methods of AHP. So we first evaluate the different methods within AHP and subsequently the different methods for consistency evaluation within AHP. Subsequently we nar- row down our discussion to the Cosine Maximization (CM) and CCI approach developed by Kou and Lin [25] and how the current study extends it.

The prioritization method provides a process by which the reli- able priority vector can be obtained from expert judgments. In recent years, a number of prioritization methods have emerged. However, the performance and suitability of these decision support methods have met with a lot of academic con- troversy and often it has been proposed to try out hybrid approaches for improving results, from the classic literature to recent studies [25,36,37]. A review of 20 popular prioritiza- tion methods within AHP has been summarized in table pro- vided in the supplementary materials (i.e. Eigen vector method [38], weighted least squares method [39], additive nor- malization method [15], least squares method [40], gradient Eigen weight and least distance method [41], geometric mean method [42], geometric least squares method [43], logarithmic least squares method [44], goal programming method [45], log- arithmic goal programming method [46], fuzzy preference pro- gramming method [47], unusual and false observations [48], singular value decomposition method [49], interval priority method [50], linear programming method [51], data envelop- ment analysis method [52], correlation coefficient maximiza- tion [53], Bayesian prioritization procedure [54], weight estimation with evolutionary strategy [55], and heuristics and re-evaluation based method [56]). Since there are so many approaches for prioritization under different constraints and contexts, Srdjevic [57] argued that a better priority vector can be derived when various prioritization methods are com- bined. The availability of so many methods within AHP also highlights the difference of outcome in comparable methods, due to which there is a need to explore methods on improving consistency of priorities.

have been reviewed in table provided in the supplementary materials (i.e. logarithmic-least squares [58], geometric consis- tency index [11], random index method [59], the induced matrix method [60], statistical consistency test [61,62], consistency ratio measure [63] and harmonic consistency index [64]). Vargas [65] employed a statistical approach to develop a statistical method- ology for the consistency test. Consistency index in previous the- ories has been used as a reliable source to validate the final solution and to interpret weights for each expert in consensus models [66,67]. Further, group decision making problems can be effectively described by multiplicative preference relations using consensus degree [68]. Some of the previous studies have tried to assess the vulnerability pairwise comparison matrix using dynamic changes to criteria importance by focusing on preference at one or more times [69]. In this study, we focus on the Cosine Maximization Method, which is one of the emerg- ing approaches. The reason for focusing on this method is because it provides high flexibility and efficiency based on mul- tiple performance criteria such as Euclidean distance and mini- mum violation for improving the consistency of a judgment

methods and additive normalization methods, while it performs better than weighted least square methods and logarithmic least square methods. Further in terms of Euclidean distance based error measures, CMM has the lowest error reported as com- pared to other methods such as Eigen vector based methods, additive normalization methods performs, weighted least square methods and logarithmic least square methods. This is why, this study focuses on the CMM and attempts to address some of its existing limitations as discussed in forthcoming sections.

A range of approaches associated with consistency improve- ments was investigated by many authors, such as Peters and Zelewski [70] and Ishizaka and Lusti [71]. Moreover, one of the recent studies proposed a set of properties that describe a family of functions for representing inconsistency indices [72]. Seventeen common consistency improvement methods have been reviewed in table provided in the supplementary material (i.e. Eigen value improvement [73], convergent itera- tive algorithm [33], least square method [74], triplet selection [75], heuristic algorithm [70], controlled error consistent matrix development [71], weak transitivity [76], Gower plot and linear programming [77], auto generate consistent matrix [16], con- trolled linguistic preference deviation [78], adaptive AHP method [79], missing value multi-layer perceptron [80], orthog- onal projection and linearization [81], integer programming

This study has not addressed methods by which CCI thresholds can be identified, nor has it examined the relation- ship between the consistency of CCI and PCM. While there is no benchmark cutoff measure for CCI, given its implications for PCM, it is pertinent to expect a CCI of at least 90% [25]. Through considering the practical application of CM, it becomes apparent that this method does offer some distinct advantages over prioritization approaches. It is easy to com- pute, provides a consistent measurement method and is unique. However, the method will only be effective if it is applied to a complete and precise PCM that offers the required

Let N = {1, 2, .. . , n}. Recall that a judgment matrix A = (aij) is an n × n matrix, all of whose entries are positive such that aji = 1/aij, for all i, j ∈ N, especially aii = 1, i ∈ N. The judg-

However, this approach does not take into consideration the fact that the people’s perceptions and the decisions they make are likely to vary in response to their psychological states and the information to which they have access. As such, Eq.(19) does not hold. Hence, we can take the comparison matrix A

A. Judgment matrix A demonstrates an unacceptable CCI (CCI < 0.90) and it is natural that any attempts to improve it will involve first attempting to modify the entry ars. It is important that the corresponding entry asr is also modified in

sets. These datasets are PCMs that were collected as primary responses for prioritization among alternatives for the prob- lem, namely information search channel selection [99]. The users were asked to select preference between the pair for seven different criteria that influence consumers’ search for informa- tion on Internet.

The summary statistics such as mean, standard deviation, and standard error along with their confidence limits of differ- ence for paired variables are displayed in Table 3. The test is significant (t = 26.415, p = 0.000), indicating that there is a significant improvement in CCI with the WAM approach.

The summary statistics such as mean, standard deviation, and standard error along with their confidence limits of difference for paired variables are displayed in Table 6. The test is significant (t = 26.172, p = 0.000), indicating that there is a significant improvement in CCI with the WGM approach.

This paper described the use of a corrective model that utilizes cosine maximization to produce a comparison matrix that exhibits consistent CCI. The CM technique is used to maxi- mize the sum of the cosine angle between each column vector and derived priority vector of a PCM. An algorithm has been suggested for determining transformed PCM and the weight vector. The cosine maximization was employed to amend a pair of entries that exhibited maximum errors, thus ensuring that the resulting matrix maintained all major information that was present in the original matrix. Through applying either the WAM form or the WGM form detailed in Step 5 of the approach, it was possible to revise the matrix in an effective manner. As such, the approach recommended is viable and can be applied to inconsistent CCI ratings of <0.90 in order

to create a positive reciprocal matrix that demonstrates CCI P 0.90. Further, for given scenario it was possible to establish that average number of iterations required in achiev- ing a CCI P 0.90 for WAM form and the WGM form is almost similar. The algorithm converges to CCI = 1 but this study limits its improvement scope to near approximate value

of 0.90 to address the research gap of Kou and Lin [25]. More- over, the number of iterations of WAM and WGM to achieve desired consistency level depends on context specific require- ments and computational time and cost constraints. Finally, the algorithm was tested with numerical example and improved CCI values were validated through paired sample t-test. It can be concluded that algorithm significantly improved CCI values with the inclusion of proposed approach. The study successfully carried out in the present research has considerable consequences for managers. Notably, it is possible to exploit the proposed soft computing technique as a crucial decision-making instrument for managers. This is advantageous with respect to the way it can optimize the matrix consistency to desired level. In the context of optimiza- tion, it is possible for managers to utilize the technique to select different alternatives without being subject to bias toward a certain alternative or criteria. In terms of applicability, a major challenge of using AHP for empirical research is getting ample number of consistent responses which may facilitate generaliz- ability of results. This approach will ensure that more

The next steps of the research should involve the practical application of the proposed approach to real-life case studies. Through using these case studies, it will be possible to compare the effectiveness of the proposed methodology with similar existing approaches. This work can potentially be extended in the future to include the amalgamation of statistical mea- sures that can precisely describe optimal consistency levels. Further, some future research can be in direction of improving the algorithm which reduces the number of iterations for reaching the optimal consistency index using cosine maximiza- tion method. Moreover, the purpose of study was to develop a CCI improvement method rather to check the significant devi- ation of new matrix priority vector from original matrix prior- ity vector. However, future studies can focus on adding constraint that checks for significant deviation of new matrix from original matrix for achieving optimum consistency level. Some possible limitations for proposed method are that the CM for priority vector derivation method fails on imprecise and incomplete matrix. The scope of conversion of imprecise information and incomplete judgments from experts to priori- ties that satisfy all requirements surrounding consistency (or even consensus) has not been explored. Finally, threshold for CCI for achieving desirable value is yet to be derived using relationship between PCM consistency and CCI, and could be taken forward in future exploration of the method.

