Most practical target tracking are usually maneuvering, while most target tracking algorithm are linear filter. More estimation error is introduced from linear filter. Nowadays more and more researchers pay their attention in Maneuvering Target Tracking algorithm. Particle filter has been developed for estimation of nonlinear system states. This paper presents an improved particle filter, which can apply the maneuvering target tracking problem. In practice, the particle filter would take abundant computation for estimate the maneuvering target tracking. The ChinaGrid system use the agile and distributed federations to reduce the computing time, which achieve to fast resolution for particle filter computation of target tracing application. Lastly the simulation proves it.

solve two basic tasks. One is the estimation refining procedure, which need to infer the accurate estimation target position from noise measurement data. The other is to predict the target position in next time that information used to form forecasting windows limiting the target in the future. [2] So the kernel problem of target tracing is to estimate the states of the moving target, such as position, velocity and acceleration. Most target tracing algorithms belong to Bayesian theoretic. Kalman filter and particle filter are popular Bayesian filters for target tracing based on their probabilistic nature. [3]

Particle filter uses a mass of particles with the target status to approximate posterior distribution for the target, which main idea is from the Monte Carlo Simulation Theory. Particle filter prefer much particle approximation method to directly estimation. However it can improve the tracing performance, its computation is very high. Only using a large numbers of particles might the particle filter achieve better estimation results dealing with complex target tracking. Therefore huge and highly efficient architecture is needed for particle filter.

The huge sharing of computing and storage resources can be proved by the Grid technology, which uses the virtual method to arrange the compute mission to distributing machines. [5] So the problem in particle filter for maneuvering target tracing which is restricted by the capability of computer can be solved by taking the Grid framework. This papers proposed a framework for particle filter in maneuvering target tracing, which take the ChinaGrid as the base. The simulation proves that this framework can work well for complex target tracking.

Nowadays ChianGrid has been covered over about one hundred famous universities in China, which purpose to build a national-wide system for grid computing to provide the service for education. The ChinaGrid makes use of most advanced internet and distributing computing, sharing technology. [8] ChinaGrid framework provides a platform for the user to development their application in the ChinaGrid, which is called as ChinaGrid Support Platform (CGSP). This platform works as a tool suit with API function for each application. The figure 2 shows the framework of CGSP.

Particle filter bases the Bayesian rule. If target state is stabilization, the filter performance will satisfy the practice requirement. When tracing system wants to catch a maneuvering target, the particle filter does not suit to this condition. And this paper addresses an improved method based on particle filter which can deal with maneuvering target tracing. Fig.3 shows a normal corner maneuvering route.

From above figure we can find that in the corner of the route the target motion state, such as acceleration and velocity, change vary much. Almost tracing filter predicts the future position by accumulation on the target motion state estimation. So in the point where target begin maneuvering, the performance decline very much.

About target maneuvering, we can take it as the aberrance for target motion states. According this idea, we can introduce the aberrance into particle. Like nature, the preservation species take the aberrance to deal with circumstance variety. The improved particle filter every time will take some particles to vary states. When target begin maneuvering, there are some aberrant particle that can catch the target. The improved particle filter flow is shown Fig.4.

This paper build an improved particle filter based on ChinaGrid framework for maneuvering target tracing system. And the lastly simulation proves that our algorithm can deal with maneuvering target tracing problem. And the ChinaGrid system provides the computer resource for huge particle computer. This technology will help practice target tracing system.

