Particle filter algorithm is poor at consistently maintaining the multi-modality problem and remains particle degeneracy phenomenon. This shortcoming can be addressed through using Mixture Particle Filter (MPF) to model the target distribution as a non-parametric mixture model. According to computational complexity of the particle filter algorithm, Gaussian Particle Filter (GPF) is used. The particle set is obtained by sampling of Gaussian density function instead of re-sampling to improve the computing speed of particle filter algorithm. In this paper, combined with the advantages of GPF and MPF, GM-MPF algorithm is proposed to improve the real-time of MPF. The experimental results show that GM-MPF algorithm can effectively solve the problem of multi-modality, particle degradation and achieve real-time multi-target tracking.

Object detection and tracking is an important task in the field of computer vision. Object detection and tracking technology is one of the critical technologies in computer vision. Object detection and tracking has been applied to computer vision applications domain such as video surveillance, traffic control. Object tracking method based on filtering theory is that object tracking transforms to probability density function estimation in image sequences, for example, kalman filter [1] or particle filter [2-4] to track the object. The linear Gaussian system can only be solved by kalman filtering. However, this linear Gaussian assumption does not often establish due to abrupt object motion, camera motion, changing appearance patterns of both object and scene, image noise influence, illumination changes, the complex scene. Particle filtering method is sample-based conditional density propagation by learning the characteristics of dynamic model and visual observation model. It shows good performance to solve non-linear and non-Gaussian problem and deals effectively with object occlusion. Particle filtering has become to a powerful tracking algorithm in the field of object tracking.

each particle [5] in the paper. Monte Carlo-based particle filter algorithm is poor at consistently maintaining the multi-modality problem and remains serious particle degeneracy phenomenon. In recent years contraposing its degeneration phenomenon, the sequence importance sampling (SIS) and the sequence importance resampling (SIR) technique has been proposed. Gaussian particle filter (GPF) [6] algorithm that Gaussian distribution approximates posterior distribution is an improved particle filtering algorithm to reduce the particle computational cost and enhance the real-time. The method is also applies to solve non-Gaussian systems and does not require re-sampling to avoid particle depletion. The jaco vermaak et al proposed Mixture particle filter [7] to solve the multi-modal and non-Gaussian systems. Combined the ability of Mixture particle filter to maintain multi-modality effectively with real-time requirements of GPF, GM-MPF algorithm is proposed in this paper.

In this system, particle filter theory is applied to track object of video. Each object is indicated with rectangle to determine the location and size of the object. Secondly, the system equation is described by a state equation and an observation equation. The speed and direction of object motion associates with that of few frames before, so there are not abrupt changes. In this paper second-order autoregressive process is used to represent the state equation mutation and observation equation is mainly based on the HSV color histogram model.

GPF algorithm reduces the complexity but remains particle degeneracy phenomenon. In previous experiments, we learned that PF can not solve multi-modality problem. The corresponding experiment result is shown in the experimental section. During multi-target tracking process, particles will transfer to one object, so PF algorithm can not be achieved multi-target tracking and MPF is proposed.

Multi-target tracking is realized via combining the Gaussian distribution with MPF in this paper. MPF algorithm is applied in tracking m objects with N particles, so Each object ,m independent filter, is allocated M = N/m particles, Particles are divided into m intervals in this paper. The posterior distribution of each interval is approximately estimated by Gaussian distribution to realize multi-target tracking. The concrete realization is as follows:

The experiment is based on the OPENCV computer vision library and is implemented in the visual studio 2008 software platform. The video comes from the PETS 2001 / DATA SET [8] and there are multiple targets in 350 frame, The experiment is to remove the previous 350 frames and starts to process from 351 frame at first. Gaussian mixture modeling background method is used to detect target and the region of interest [9] is marked in experiment. In the process of object tracking, particle filter is applied to solve the nonlinear and non-Gaussian problem. In the paper 100 particles are employed to achieve two objects tracking. Each target can be obtained 50 particles. More and more objects tracking can be achieved by changing the coefficient of the target number and the number of particles during the experiment. This paper compares the improved particle filter with improved mixture particle filter to achieve two objects tracking. The result is shown as Figure 1 and 2.

It is shown that the vast majority of particles after the 27 frame have been transferred to another target in Figure 1 and all have been transferred in the 29. Obviously improved particle filtering algorithm is poor in maintenance of multi-modal distribution of the target. However, mixture particle filter algorithm models the filtering distribution as a mixture model to better cope with the multi-modality. In Figure 2 it is observed that this mixture particle filter is able to maintain the

It is evident from the graph that root mean square error RMSE of (N = 200 and 300) is smaller than RMSE of (N = 100). The smaller number of particles is, the larger tracking error is, but the higher computational complexity is. With the increase of the number of particles, algorithm tracking accuracy is improved greatly and the time of the algorithm computation also increases. The average processing time of 50 frames with 1000 particles is compared among the four kinds of algorithms in Table 1. Gaussian particle filter (GPF) algorithm that Gaussian distribution approximates posterior distribution is an improved particle filtering algorithm to reduce the particle computational cost. GM-MPF can enhance the real-time of MPF.

Particle filter algorithm is poor at consistently maintaining the multi-modality problem and remains particle degeneracy phenomenon. This shortcoming can be addressed through using the component of Mixture Particle Filter (MPF) to express independent particle filter. Neff of improved particle filter and the mixture particle filter is used to describe the particle degradation. Gaussian Particle Filter (GPF) is used to reduce computational complexity of particle filter algorithm. The particle set is obtained by sampling of gaussian density function instead of re-sampling to improve the computing speed of particle filter algorithm and to obtain more accurate estimation performance. Combined with the advantages of GPF and MPF, GM-MPF algorithm is proposed. Meanwhile, comparing to the processing time of PF, GPF, MPF, GM-MPF, the experimental results are shown that the improved algorithm enhances the real-time and system estimate accuracy of the MPF during multi-targets tracking.

