The numerical prediction of the low-frequency self-noise of the sonar platform with sound absorbing wedge is carried out. Considering the acoustic-solid coupling effects of sonar district in the flow field, the structural response of the platform and sound radiation pressure is calculated. The vibration characteristics of the sonar platform and the vibration/noise reduction of the sound absorbing wedge are analyzed. Based on the sound absorbing wedge laying methods, four arithmetic conditions are designed. The influences of different covering arrangement on the acoustic radiation characteristics of the sonar platform are compared.

The self-noise level of sonar platform area is highly related to the performance of sonar. Reducing the self- noise level can not only improve the detection signal capacity of sonar, but increase working distance as well. The prediction of self-noise can estimate its level quantitatively, in addition, the prediction of different noise resources effects on self-noise can help to determine the measures to control self-noise and its quantitative technical indicators.

This article studies the noise and vibration reduction effects of sound absorbing wedge in low frequency comprehensively, as well as the influence of arrangement of sound absorbing wedge on the vibration and sound radiation characteristics [5]. The specific conditions are shown in Tab.1.

Compare the shape of radiation sound pressure curves in Fig.3(a) and Fig.3(b) we can find that covering the sound absorbing wedge significantly weaken the peak of radiation sound pressure level of the back wall, the upper-platform and the lower-platform and the total self-noise pressure level of the platform area.

Fig.4 shows that the various laying methods under100Hz do not have obvious effects on reducing radiation sound pressure level of various components. Exclude the excitation frequency: above 100Hz, which has a resonance effect. The highest radiation sound pressure level is in the 50% covering condition, followed by the

As shown in Fig.4, in the single-frequency excitation of no laying conditions, the model has multi-order natural frequency. The peaks appear in 160Hz and 250Hz on the radiation sound pressure curves. The sound absorbing wedge material characteristics weaken the peaks of radiation sound pressure in the back wall, the upper-platform and the lower-platform and the total self-noise pressure of the platform area significantly.

[2]. Pang Fu-Zhen, Yao Xiong-Liang, Jia Di, Yu Dan-Zhu. Experimental investigation of the effects of sound absorption wedges on the underwater acoustic characteristic within a Compound Plate & Cylindrical Shell Structure [J]. Journal of Ship Mechanics, 2011, 15(5): 570-576. (in Chinese)

