abstract. In total 48 papers were selected for more detailed analy- sis: six from the International Journal of Critical Infrastructure Pro- tection, thirty from the IEEE Transactions of Smart Grid and twelve from the IEEE Transactions on Power Systems. In this first stage, papers concerned with the relation between ICT and power sys- tems were included, also when interdependencies were not partic- ularly mentioned in the title or abstract. However, papers clearly concerning the development of new or improved ICT technology for use in power systems were excluded, unless its impact on power system reliability was also considered. When in doubt, the paper was included.

In stage 2, each of the papers selected based on title and abstract was read by at least one researcher. Four researchers cooperated on reading the papers. Papers clearly not meeting the selection criteria were excluded, but when in doubt the papers were read by one additional researcher in stage 3. A total of 22 papers were excluded in stage 2, leaving 26 papers for stage 3. Five researchers took part in this stage. Each paper was read by at least one additional researcher. Papers that were considered borderline papers, and papers that were considered not to meet the selection criteria, were discussed in the full group before a decision on whether or not to include or exclude the paper was made. In the end, 14 papers were included in the study.

In the first reading of the papers (stage 2), the researcher read- ing the paper made a written summary of the scope of the paper, the method used to identify or analyse interdependencies, as well as any interdependencies identified in the paper. In the second reading of the papers (stage 3), the reader of the paper made a cat- egorization of the paper according to the interdependency cate- gories in Table 1 as well as the method categories in Table 2. In both stages, the reader of the papers could provide additional com- ments if necessary.

General approaches that include both ICT and power aspects (1 paper): Chen et al. [30] propose strategies for hierarchical construction of petri net models by different experts for various parts of the system. The combined petri net models attacks in the smart grid and may include multiple coordinated attackers as well as a combination of physical and cyber-attacks.

Studying ways the power system may be attacked via the ICT system (2 papers): Zonouz et al. [32] propose a framework for evaluating potential contingencies due to remote cyber-attacks, as a complement to traditional power system contingency analysis that analyses accidental failures. Srivastava et al. [33] provide ways of estimating how an attacker may determine which relays to attack in an Aurora like attack, taking into account attack feasibility as well as power system consequences.

Studying power system reliability impact of failures of specific ICT functions or components (5 papers): Both Aminafar et al. [34] and Panteli et al. [35] study impact of situational awareness on power system reliability, though with varying methods and scope. Aminafar et al. [34] study the impact of wide-area mea- surement system (WAMS) malfunction, while Panteli et al. [35]

emphasize the human aspect of situational awareness, where ICT systems influence the human operator’s perception of the current system state. Both König et al. [27] and Lei et al. [36] address reliability of substation automation and protection sys- tems, and Lei et al. [36] also propose how the result of such a reliability analysis can be used as input to broader reliability analysis of the overall power system. Jiang and Singh [37] pro- pose ways to include protection system failure and repair rates as input to power system reliability evaluations.

Studying power system reliability impact of ICT failures at a general level (4 papers): Falahati et al. [23] and Falahati and Fu [38] pro- vide quantitative calculations of power system reliability indices such as ‘‘loss of load probability” and ‘‘expected energy not served” due to failures in the ICT system. Chiaradonna et al.

[39] model the combined power and ICT system using the stochastic activity network (SAN) formalism, which is based on Petri nets. The usefulness of the approach is demonstrated through modelling and analysing cases where the communica- tion network performance is reduced at the same time as a fail- ure has happened in the power network. Beccuti et al. [40] extend the work of Chiaradonna et al. [39], using the SAN for- malism primarily to model the power grid, while stochastic well-formed nets (SWN) are used to model a denial of service (DoS) attack in the communication network.

As illustrated in Fig. 2, most papers put effort into including both ICT and power aspects in the modelling. As examples, Beccuti et al. [40] (P2) create one model of the ICT part of the system, and another for the power part, and then combine these in the analysis, whereas Lin et al. [31] (P7) present a framework for co-simulation of a power system and an ICT network. In some cases, both ICT and power aspects are included, but there is a slight emphasis on one of the aspects. Zonouz et al. [32] (P14), one the one hand, put more emphasis on the ICT part in the paper, as malicious attacks through the ICT part of the system are the new addition to the contingency analysis; Chiaradonna et al. [39] (P4), on the other, put a slight emphasis on power aspects in their model, something that is put forward as a motivation for the work of Becutti et al. [40] (P2).

Some of the papers are, however, mainly concerned with either the ICT or the power part of the system, and treat the other part more superficially. Either the main emphasis is on the power sys- tem, but the failure rates of ICT components such as protection sys- tems (P8) or PMUs (P1) are taken into account, or the main emphasis is on the ICT part of the system, but the failure rates of power components (P9), or the consequences for the power system (P10, P13), are taken into account. For the more focused papers, it varies to what extent they suggest ways in which the results from the targeted models or analysis they suggest can be used in addi- tional analysis that covers a larger part of the system.

No papers aim to cover all relevant threats or failures. The majority of the papers only consider accidental failures, and a few exclusively consider attacks, as illustrated in Fig. 3. There are only two papers (P2 and P4) that clearly cover both, but then in a limited fashion – considering communication network perfor- mance problems either due to failures or attacks,1 as well as the loss of a line in the power grid either due to an accidental failure

although Chiaradonna et al. (P4) discuss the possibility that repair rates of control system components may increase due to a large blackout. None of the papers address common cause interdepen- dencies. One paper (P3) does not emphasize any of the interdepen- dency categories, but rather aims at including all types of attacks in the model.

The methods used in the included papers vary greatly. Nearly half of the papers (P1, P5, P6, P10, P11, P13) present tailor made methods to model or analyse particular aspects of the combined power and ICT system. One paper (P3) uses Petri Nets, and two more (P2, P4) use models that are based on the Petri Net formal- ism. Markov models are used in three of the papers (P8, P12, and P14). One of these (P12) uses fault trees to estimate probabilities that are needed as input to the Markov model. One paper (P9) uses Probabilistic Relational Models (PRM), and one paper (P7) uses the simulation frameworks Network Simulator 2 (NS2) and Positive Sequence Load Flow (PSLF) to simulate the communication and power network respectively. An overview of the main methods used in the papers is given in Table 6, in terms of the method cat- egories defined in Section 3.

As can be seen from Table 6, dynamic methods are used in half of the papers included. These are able to deal with time dependen- cies, but at the cost of complexity. Consequence methods are also used in half of the papers, in some cases in combination with cau- sal methods. Topological analysis methods are used in three of the papers.

In this paper, we have studied how recent research results pub- lished in three major archival journals identify and analyse inter- dependencies between the power and ICT systems. As we did not aim to cover all research in this field, but limited the study to three journals, there are relevant research results that are not covered by our literature review. However, as we took a systematic approach to studying the literature, we claim that the results are able to say something about the state of the research field, as well as the main research focus.

As shown in Section 4.2, the included papers vary in scope and methods used. As such, it seems that the current research on power and ICT interdependencies is at a relatively early stage where a large number of approaches are suggested. The suggested approaches are evaluated using test cases, but none of them is evaluated in a real-life setting.

Identification of interdependencies between power networks and ICT is a research area that is given close to no attention in the journals that we have studied. In the included papers, it seems to be assumed that these interdependencies are already known by the analyst. However, both the power network and the ICT system are highly complex systems. In smaller test cases, it is likely that such interdependencies can be identified relatively easily, and that the analyst is able to have a sufficient overview of the combined sys- tem. In real cases, this is however likely to be much harder to achieve. In Section 3.1, we identified a few methods that we consider useful for identifying interdependencies at a high level. There is a need for research on how adequate these methods are in addressing power and ICT interdependencies and in providing input to analysis of interdependencies. New or adapted methods may be needed.

When addressing interdependencies between power networks and ICT, there is a need for competence on both the power system and the ICT system, as well as on methods for identifying and ana- lysing interdependencies. To ease interdisciplinary collaboration, it seems wise to use models that are as simple as possible. Tradi- tional risk analysis methods, such as fault trees, reliability block diagrams and event tree analysis, have gained much of their suc- cess from their ease of use and understanding. In contrast, many of the approaches suggested in the papers are quite complex to understand and use, and may thus be a poor choice as a basis for interdisciplinary communication.

As both the power and ICT systems are complex, simple models are however unlikely to cover all system aspects at a level of detail necessary to understand the reliability impact of the interdepen- dencies. This is likely to be difficult also for complex models. None of the papers presents models that are able to fully include the combined power and ICT system and a wide array of threats. Thus, there is a need to understand how models can be used together, and in particular how simple models can be used together with complex models in order to achieve both interdisciplinary under- standing and the necessary detail. In some of the papers it is explained how the work can be used as input to other analysis. One example is the cyber-physical system interface matrix sug- gested by Lei et al. [36] that makes it possible to include ICT fail- ures in more traditional power analyses.

Also related to the needs of the DSOs and TSOs are considera- tions of what type of input is required in the models. A few of the papers mention the difficulties of obtaining reliable data on ICT components. In particular, König et al. [27] discuss the diffi- culty of obtaining failure rates for control and protection systems. Most papers are however mainly concerned with presenting mod- els that can be used for analysis, and less concerned with address- ing whether or not relevant data are available. Zonouz et al. [32] are however concerned with the ease of building the model, and present an approach that builds a model automatically. A model of the ICT system is generated by utilizing data that are already measured and present in modern control centres. This model is then connected to a state-based model of the power network, in an online manner.

The papers mainly cover cascading and escalating interdepen- dencies, in particular in terms of incidents in the ICT system that causes or escalates failures in the power systems. Of the interde- pendency categories in Table 1, these are the most important ones in order to understand how the integration of more ICT in the power network influences power system reliability. However, of the included papers, the majority is concerned only with accidental failures, and only a few papers take intentional attacks into account. With the use of more ICT in the power network, and increased connectivity among ICT components, the malicious threat from remote attackers is becoming more and more real. There is a need to understand the implications of the risks associ- ated with cyber-attacks for power system reliability. The tradi- tional models for power system reliability analysis are however concerned with accidental failures. Extending or complementing these to deal with ICT component failures is thus easier than to aim for also dealing with attacks. If including attacks in the models, the concept of failure rates will be different since the models need to take into account an intelligent adversary rather than accidental failures. In addition, there are limited data available related to probabilities, consequences and propagation of cyber-attacks in power systems; thus, the problem of obtaining the necessary input data for the models is even more difficult when including cyber- attacks in the analysis.

None of the papers we have studied use empirical data to iden- tify or analyse interdependencies, although there have been rele- vant incidents that could be used as a basis for analysis. This may be due to confidentiality issues. However, failures, and also near misses, are an important source for learning and are likely to be useful in understanding how the power and ICT systems depend on and influence each other.

Interdependencies between the power and ICT systems already have an impact on the reliability of the power system. With the ongoing transition towards a smarter grid, this will increase in the future. In this paper, we have presented the results of a litera- ture review of the current state of research on power and ICT inter- dependencies and their impact on power system reliability. In particular, we have reviewed which interdependency types that are covered in existing work, as well as which methods that are used to identify and analyse interdependencies. We found that research on interdependencies in the combined power and ICT sys- tem is at an early stage. Cascading and escalating interdependen- cies are covered, in particular in terms of incidents in the ICT system that causes or escalates failures in the power systems. The methods presented in the papers are however not yet able to provide an overview of interdependencies in the power system at large, and at the same time take into account a wide array of both intentional and accidental threats. Methods for identification of interdependencies seem to be lacking. We recommend that future research addresses these limitations of the current methods, and puts more attention on identifying the needs of TSOs and DSOs for identifying interdependencies and understanding their impacts.

This research has been performed as part of the AFTER project funded by the European Commission (grant nr. 267188), and the Flexnett project funded by the Norwegian Research Council (pro- ject nr. 245412). The authors would like to thank Gerd Kjølle for useful comments and suggestions when preparing this paper.

