Based on intra-symbol piecewise linear channel model, a novel piecewise equalizer is proposed for OFDM systems in high mobility environment. In this proposed scheme the complex ICI caused by fast fading channels has been resolved as new OFDM subsystems' simple ISI and lower ICI, respectively caused by the average channel and the time-varying channel over a piece-period. By further employing the characteristics of the channel matrix, a successive `ISI' and `ICI' mitigation based equalization with low complexity has been realized. Simulation results show that the proposed scheme has lower computation complexity than the comparative one, while perserving good performance.

By expanding the symbol duration and adding the cyclic prefix, OFDM systems can easily overcome the multi-path dispersion by simple 1-tap equalization [1]. On the other hand, OFDM systems become more susceptible to time-variations as symbol length increases. Hence, the equalization over fast fading channels becomes a challenging and important issue for OFDM systems [2].

The existing equalization schemes over fast fading channels can be roughly divided into 2 classes, namely, pure-equalization and turbo-equalization. The pure-equalization schemes usually assume the channel information completely known by the receiver, and focus on low complexity data symbol estimation by fully using the channel characteristics [1],[3]-[4]. While the turbo-equalization schemes estimate the channel and/or data symbol and equalize the channel alternatively and iteratively, and generally perform better than the former at the cost of higher complexity [5]-[6]. Despite the rigorous requirement of complete time varying channel information, pure-equalization schemes with low complexity still preserve their importance. First, because the tradeoff between the equalization performance and complexity is still a challenging problem, even with complete channel information [3]. Second, because turbo-equalization schemes usually employ pure-equalization as data symbol estimation component.

Inspired by the piecewise linear channel model in [2], a low complexity intra-symbol piecewise pure- equalization scheme over the fast fading channels is proposed in this paper. Based on the intra-symbol piecewise linear channel model, the complex ICI caused by the fast fading channel is resolved as the new OFDM subsystems’ simple ISI and lower ICI, respectively caused by the average channel and time-varying channel over a piece-period. By fully exploiting the piecewise linearity of time varying channels, a successive ISI and ICI mitigation based equalization is realized with low complexity.

This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces the intra-symbol piecewise OFDM system model and section 3 describes the proposed equalization scheme. Further complexity analysis and some simulation examples to demonstrate the performance of the proposed scheme are provided in section 4 and 5 respectively. And conclusions are drawn in section 5.

The first term and the second term in the right hand of equation (7) individually represents the M ‘symbols’ through the average channel and the linear time-varying channel in different piece-periods. The third term in the right hand of equation (7) represents the inter-symbol interference (ISI) of the OFDM subsystems owing to missing of cyclic-prefix between neighbouring symbols, which has also been shown in Fig. 1.

