Many problems of computer science, communication network, transportation systems, etc. can not be modeled into graphs, but into multigraphs only, and then can be easily solved. Nowadays, the networks are expanding very fast in huge volumes in terms of their nodes and links/arcs. For a given alive network, in many situations, its complete topology may not be always available to the communication systems at a given point of time because of the reason that few or many of its links/arcs may be temporarily disable owing to damage or external attack or blockage upon them, and of course they are under repair at that point of time. Besides that, in most of the cases the cost parameters corresponding to its links are not crisp numbers, rather intuitionistic fuzzy numbers (or fuzzy numbers). Thus at any real time instant, the complete multigraph is not available but a submutigraph of it is available to the system for executing its communication or packets transfer. There is no mathematical model available in the existing literature to represent such type of real time network. In this paper the authors propose a mathematical model for such types of multigraphs be called by ‘Real Time Multigraphs’ (RT-multigraphs) in which all real time information (being updated every q quantum of time) are incorporated so that the communication/transportation system can be made very efficiently with optimal results. It is a theoretical work, a kind of intuitionistic fuzzy mathematical model being the most generalized form of the crisp multigraphs.

1  x  X . For each x  X the values μA (x) and vA (x) represent the degree of membership and degree of nonmembership of the element x to A  X, respectively, and the amount A(x) = 1 - μA (x) - vA (x) is called the hesitation part. Of course, a fuzzy set is a particular case of the intuitionistic fuzzy set if A(x) = 0,  x  X. For details of the classical notion of intuitionistic fuzzy set (IFS) theory, one could see the book [2] authored by Atanassov.

Multigraphs may be of two types: undirected multigraphs and directed multigraphs. In an undirected multigraph the edge (i, j) and the edge (j, i), if exist, are obviously identical unlike in the case of directed multigraph. For a latest algebraic study on the theory of multigraphs, the work [14] and also [4, 11, 13] may be seen.

A multigraph H = (W, F) is called a submultigraph of the multigraph G = (V, E) if W  V and F  E. The Fig.1.(b) shows a submultigraph H of the multigraph G. We now consider the modeling of a very real situation of networks and define a generalized notion of multigraphs/graphs.

In most of the real life problems of networks, be it in a communication model or a transportation model, the weights of the arcs are not always crisp but intuitionistic fuzzy numbers (IFNs) or at best fuzzy numbers. For example, the Fig.2 below shows a public road transportation model for a traveller where the cost parameters for travelling each arc have been considered as IFN which are the more generalized form of fuzzy numbers involving two independently estimated degrees: degree of acceptance and a degree of rejection.

For a given node u the node v will be designated as a ‘neighbour’ node of u if u has at least one link from u to v. In our work here we consider more real situations which are actually and frequently faced by the present communication systems. For example, consider an Adhoc Network or a MANET where there may exist multiple paths between two neighbour nodes, but because of some reasons one or more number of paths may be temporarily damaged and hence temporarily unavailable for transmission of packets by a node u to its neighbour node v. This is a very useful information to the communication system if available to the sender

In real life situation, because of natural phenomenon (flood, earthquake, thunderstorm, solar storm, etc. etc.) or because of some kind of external attack or technical failure or because of an predictable/unpredictable damage of the link, etc. (to list a few only out of many such type of real life problems), it may happen in reality that during a period of time the rth link uvr of the node u to its neighbour v is non-functional (r = 1, 2, 3,….,n). In our proposed model, this is a precious information and is available with the node u here in advance.

Corresponding to every neighbour node v, there exist a Link Status Vector (LSV) Iuv = (i1, i2, i3, ….., in) of u, where at any given point of time ir takes any of the two values from {0,1}	for r = 1, 2, 3,….,n with the following significance :-

If a node u has k (0) number of neighbour nodes v1, v2, v3,…,vk, then u carries k number of LSV: Iuv1, Iuv2 , Iuv3 ,……,Iuvk. In our mathematical model, we propose that there is a system S for the multigraph which updates all the information vectors of all the nodes after every quantum time . This quantum  is fixed (can be reset) for the system S a multigraph, but different for different multigraphs, in general depending upon the various properties of the physical problem for which a multigraph is modelled.

For a given node u, if Iu  and at least one member of Iu is non-null at a given time, then the node u is called a communicable node for that instant of time. If u does not have any neighbor node then Iu = , and in that case it is trivial that further communication is never possible. However, if Iu  and all the members of Iu are null vectors at a point of time, then it signifies that further communication is not possible temporarily.

