Abstract The lower visibility of the satellite in the acquisition stage of a GPS receiver under worst noisy situation leads to reacquisition of the data and thereby takes a longer time to obtain the first position fix. If the impulse noise affects the GPS signal, the conventional ways of acquiring the satellites do not guarantee to meet the minimum requirement of four satellites to find the user position. The per- formance of GPS receiver acquisition can be improved in the low SNR level using inverse spiking filtering technique. In the proposed method, the estimate of the desired GPS L1 signal corrupted by impulse noise (gn) is obtained by the predic- tion error filter (hopt), which is the optimum inverse filter that reshapes the noisy signal (yn) into a desired GPS signal (xn). In the proposed method, to detect the visible satellites under weak signal conditions the traditional differential coherent approach is combined with the inverse spiking filter method to increase the num- ber of visible satellites and to avoid the reacquisition process. Montecarlo simu- lation is carried out to assess the performance of the proposed method for C/N0 of 20 dB-Hz and results indicate that the modified differential coherent method

At present GNSS (Global Navigation Satellite System) consists of two fully operational global systems, the United States’ global positioning system (GPS) and Russia’s GLObal NAvigation Satellite System (GLONASS), as well as the developing global and regional systems, namely Europe’s European Satellite Navigation System (GALILEO), China’s COMPASS/Bei-Dou, India’s Regional Navigation Satellite System (IRNSS) and Japan’s Quasi-Zenith Satellite System (QZSS). GPS is used in a large number of safety critical applications and has become essential for precise timing reference and synchronization purpose in telecommunications networks (Zhu et al., 2010). GPS signal power levels are extremely low, due to the long satellite-receiver distance. The commercial GPS receiver is easily affected by vulnerable effects of interference and noise. The GPS receiver mounted on or inside manned or autonomous vehicles is easily affected by impulse noise caused by motor emissions. This leads to a drop in the carrier power to noise density ratio. Hence, it is important to have an effective method to detect and filter the noise. Spectral signal processing consists of time and frequency excision, pulse blanking and pulse spiking techniques which are used to prevent loss of lock caused by the effect of noise (Borio et al., 2008).

acquisition in order to improve the SNR. Dividing the set of input data into smaller blocks then stripping the C/A code from the data and performing FFT based parallel code phase search technique (performing an algebraic sum of the signal) are known as coherent detection (Bao-Yen and Tusi, 2005). In the non coherent integration method, summing the data blocks of squared correlation val- ues of the acquisition process (performing an absolute sum of the signal) yields good correlation. This increases the signal strength by a factor of 2 and noise

improvement is less compared to the coherent integration method but requires fewer operations. Also non-coherent integration is not affected by the navigation data bit transition since the correlation results of the coherent integration time are squared before summation. When the correlator output is multiplied with the complex conjugate of the successive correlator output this method is termed as dif- ferential coherent detection and thus by doing this a high degree of correlation is being maintained. Hence, the SNR loss in differentially combining detection is de- creased in comparison to non-coherent combining detection. Fallahi et al. (2012) calculated probability of detection and the ROC (Receiver Operating Character- istic) using coherent, non-coherent and differential detection at various power lev- els of GPS signal.

In this section, the spiking inverse filter based noise excision is proposed for excis- ing the impulse noise. The received noisy GPS L1 signal which has a C/N0 below 20 dB-Hz is subjected to the spiking filter and the output of the spiking filter is given to the A/D converter with a sampling frequency of 11.999 MHz .If 1 ms of data is analyzed, the number of samples can be found as 1/1000 of the sampling frequency (11.999 · 106/1000 = 11,999 samples) with a single bit resolution (Bao- Yen and Tusi, 2005). The digitized data obtained after A/D is given as an input to the acquisition process with peak search algorithm.(Mao et al., 2008).

The  ‘‘performance’’  matrix  P  is  a  projection  matrix  with  size (N + M + 1) · (N + M + 1) and has trace equal to M + 1, while its eigenvalues are either 0 or 1.For the sum of all the eigenvalues to be equal to M + 1, there should be M + 1 eigenvalues that are equal to 1, and N eigenvalues equal to 0. Therefore, the matrix P has rank M + 1 (Mathew and Narayana Dutt, 1993), and if the desired vector x is selected to be any of the M + 1 eigenvectors belong- ing to eigenvalue 1; the resultant estimation error will be zero. The desired vector x is chosen as spikes or impulse i.e. x = dn. Here h is the best least squares approx- imation that reshapes yn into a unit impulse. Considering the vector x to be a unit impulse occurring at the i-th instant, x = d(n  i).

where Pii represents the i-th diagonal entry of the projection matrix. Once the ma- trix of inverse filters is computed, the optimum among them is selected as the one which has the smallest error. Since the delay i may be positioned anywhere from i =0 to i = N + M, there are N + M + 1 such spiking filters, each with error J. The filter which has the optimal delay i corresponds to the smallest of the error J or, equivalently, to the maximum of the diagonal elements Pii. The particular col- umn i of P for which Pii is maximum will give the extracted data; The correspond- ing system model is shown in Fig. 1.

The GPS signal and its corresponding spectrum are shown in Fig. 2a and b respectively. Impulse noise power level of 12 dB is mixed with GPS L1 signal and it is excised through spiking filter are shown in Fig. 2c and d. The spectrum of the retrieved signal resembles the original signal spectrum and the noisy signal power spectral density as shown in Fig. 2e and f.

The performance metric of the spiking filter is determined by the maximum diagonal entry in a performance matrix or the error function (1  Pii) with respect to the order of the filter which is shown in Fig. 3a and the impulse response of the spiking filter of order 50 is illustrated in Fig. 3b.

The acquisition result of SVN-16 obtained by the conventional methods for sin- gle msec, coherent, non-coherent and differential coherent detection for the noisy data is shown in Fig. 4.This depicts that the start of C/A code is not perfectly aligned with the incoming signal C/A code due to the many cross correlation peaks that exceed the autocorrelation peaks. So the above mentioned traditional meth- ods fail to detect the decision statistic or threshold condition of the visible satellite. Processing of single msec data results in worst correlation. Similarly analyzing of coherent and non-coherent detection also provides many cross correlation peaks. By comparing the outputs in Fig. 4, the conventional differential coherent approach gives a better performance of detecting SVN-16. Only 2 SVNs surpass the threshold condition but minimum 4 SVNs are required to find the user position.

Next the same noisy data are tested with the spiking filter combined with differ- ential coherent detection (modified differential coherent). Increased visibility of the satellites [SVN 3, 9, 10, 13, 16, 23 and 30] in terms of distinct peak (perfect alignment with C/A code) is shown in Fig. 5. This approach performs better com- pared to other traditional methods and ensures that the corrected code phase and Doppler frequency enhance the acquisition performance. The results of Table 3 show the visible satellites, their respective Doppler frequency and code phase.

generated PRN-3 is correlated with the impulse noise buried GPS signal having a C/N0 ratio of 20 dB-Hz and the probability of false alarm ( pfa) is kept at 10—2. The probability of detection (PD) is computed for different integration periods. Fig. 6 shows the Montecarlo simulation results for 10,000 trials to ensure the effectiveness of the performance comparison between the coherent, non-coherent,

differential and spiking filter combined differential detection methods. Initially the Coherent detection integration period of 10 ms is analyzed. Due to navigation data transition problem, integration time cannot be extended beyond 20 ms and this method can detect only 35 dB-Hz C/N0 level with 100% of probability of detection. Non coherent integration period of 36 ms gives 100% probability of detection only in the signal range of 30 dB-Hz. Both the methods fail to detect the weak signal at 20 dB-Hz power level. Differential detection also fails to detect the signal and it gives only 50% of detection with the same input power level. The inverse spiking filter integrated with the differential detection performs better and is able to locate the PRN 3 with 90% of detection.

Acquisition stage gives only a rough estimate of the frequency and code phase of a satellite signal. Hence it is required to refine these values in order to confirm whether the acquired satellite metrics is correct or not i.e., code and carrier lock is achieved with the incoming signal to keep track and demodulate the navigation data for a particular satellite. Thus to track a GPS signal, two tracking loops are used. One is code loop known as delay lock loop (DLL) or early-late tracking loop which is used to track the C/A code phase and the another one is phase-locked loop (PLL) which is used to track the carrier frequency of the incoming signal with Doppler shift. Both loops are intercoupled. The impulse noise affected GPS signal is given as the input to the tracking module and in-phase and quadrature part of

The impulse noise affected signal processed through traditional differential detection for SVN-3 is tested for tracking and the performance is given in Fig. 7. SVN-3 is tested during the acquisition phase as this satellite does not satisfy the threshold condition and is an invisible satellite. Here the PLL and DLL errors are not considerably reduced to the minimum extent. The input and reference signals are not in-phase and the Ip and Qp values contain only noise. The demod- ulation of navigation data is not possible in this case due to loss of lock with the incoming signal and the tracking fails to demodulate the navigation data. From the results we conclude that the noise is not effectively excised; so reacquisition of GPS data is required.

The tracking operation is next tested for spiking filter combined with differen- tial detection. For this method, the carrier frequency settles after 100 ms period and is shown in Fig. 8a. It is inferred that lock has been achieved for the GPS signal power level of 20 dB-Hz. The code-phase error and PLL error of SVN-3

are plotted in Fig. 8b and c. The outputs show that the code and carrier loops are tracking the incoming signal with good accuracy. When the input and reference signals are in-phase, the I arm only contains the navigation data as indicated in Fig. 8d and the Q arm contains only noise. The binary navigation data demodu- lated from the I arm are shown in Fig. 8e.

differential detection is suitable in the range of 25 dB-Hz. The proposed method efficiently excises the noise and provides 90% of probability of detection for C/N0 of 20 dB-Hz and passes the tracking operation with successful demodulation of the navigation data. Further tracking results can be passed onto the bit and frame synchronization modules to find the user position with good accuracy.

