The evolution of Machine-to-Machine (M2M) communication al- lowed machines to exchange instructions or information without the need for human intervention. A massive number of devices can be grouped together to form an M2M network by having an interconnected link with the network that is deployed over a large area. It is expected that M2M networks will be widely used in a range of smart space applications [1], including those for the home, workplace, health- care, smart city, industrial automation, smart parking, etc. A wireless network technology for M2M communication is necessary for these extensive IoT applications in order to manage the system efficiently and effectively.

The IEEE 802.11ah standard (also called Wi-Fi HaLow) is expected to be the solution for M2M communications in the future. Exciting features of IEEE 802.11ah consist of: (i) transmission range of up to 1 km in outdoor areas, which is much longer than Wireless Personal Area Network (WPAN), (ii) data rate of at least 100 kbps for IEEE 802.11ah, that is higher than Low-Power Wide Area Network (LPWAN), and (iii) it can associate up to 8191 numbers of devices with an Access Point (AP) [2]. Theoretically, the signal coverage range of an IEEE 802.11ah AP is up to 1 km. A hierarchical identifier structure, also known as an Association Identifier (AID), is adopted to handle a huge number of stations (STAs). By using these AIDs, all the stations of an AP are detached into several segments, known as Traffic Indication Map

The remaining paper is organized into four different sections. Some related works of IEEE 802.11ah are discussed in Section 2. Section 3 explains the proposed model to optimize the RAW for bidirectional traffic. Performance evaluation of our proposed scheme is presented in Section 4. Finally, Section 5 concludes the paper.

RAW is one of the most popular MAC features to improve network performance. Though RAW can be used to improve scalability for large networks, its performance depends on network conditions. In that matter, Delay and Energy-Aware RAW Formation (DEARF) scheme is developed by [3] for supporting delay-sensitive devices. However, they considered only uplink traffic. Regarding throughput optimization, Nawaz et al. [4] proposed a method to choose RAW slot duration based on the size of the group for increasing uplink throughput. For improv- ing the system performance, the author of [7] proposed a mathematical model for finding RAW parameters. Considering a novel retransmission mechanism to improve the uplink energy efficiency, Wang et al. [5]

proposed an efficient window control algorithm that utilizes the next empty slot for uplink retransmission. Badihi et al. [10] investigated an actuation case and checked the performance of the network, tak- ing power consumption and latency at the actuator side. The author of [11] predicted a method consisting of a saturated network with uplink traffic conditions, and all the stations are grouped based on their geographical positions. Hazmi et al. [12] examined the network performance considering RAW features in non-cross slot boundary use cases for various schemes. Kureev et al. [9] considered the throughput and energy efficiency of IEEE 802.11 ah considering a heterogeneous network and a faultless mathematical model proposed for evaluating energy consumption and average throughput of the network.

Initially, all the STAs are connected with the AP, which divides them into several groups based on their traffic characteristics. The AP cumu- lative the information received from the frames and identified the STAs traffic nature, and arranged them in respective RAW groups. The RAW grouping procedure is accomplished based on their packet arrival time.

depending on the i value. These method helps to perceive the traffic nature of the network. All the homogeneous traffic is assumed to be periodic, and event-driven traffic is assumed to be critical. The stations having downlink traffic are given preference without losing sufficient information for making decisions.

This paper presented a RAW mechanism for an IEEE 802.11ah net- work having uplink and downlink traffic (i.e., bidirectional traffic). The proposed scheme considers challenges related to finding optimal RAW size over event-driven downlink and periodic uplink traffic. Our scheme can predict the traffic accurately and schedule appropriately with less

contention. Also, efficient downlink traffic is proposed without losing the content of fresh data. It improves the performance of throughput, latency, packet delivery ratio, and energy consumption to a great extent as compared to the existing state-of-the-art. The experimental analysis clearly depicts its importance for extensive and latency-aware saturated networks. We consider various decisions for actuation in a smart environment based on only fresh data; however, the growing complex activities, which combine decisions based on historical data. In the future, we plan to work on optimizing the RAW size by considering historical data over heterogeneous application scenarios.

Hazmi A, Badihi B, Larmo A, Torsner J, Valkama M, et al. Performance analysis of IoT-enabling IEEE 802.11 ah technology and its RAW mechanism with non-cross slot boundary holding schemes. In: 2015 IEEE 16th international symposium on a world of wireless, mobile and multimedia networks. IEEE; 2015,

