Abstract Organizational commitment has been studied extensively world over and hundreds of research articles are available however a few studies address organizational commitment in IT sector high technology employees. In Pakistan insufficient research is available specific to IT sector employees. The present study is an attempt to better describe these factors which can induce organiza- tional commitment in Pakistani IT sector high technology employees.

Managing turn over is a increasing challenge especially for companies employing high technology professionals (Dockel, 2001). Managers have to bolster IT profes- sionals’ sense of self-worth by treating them as intellectual assets, not operating expenses, and by helping them shape and direct their careers, so they can gain experience within the enterprise rather than outside it (Pare´and Tremblay, 2000). The above findings of some researches conducted on of high technology IT pro- fessionals validate that their retention is becoming difficult for business managers and organizations are interested in finding out ways which can induce organiza- tional commitment in IT sector high technology employees and reduce turn over. The studies conducted in this regard found significant relationships between orga- nizational commitment and employee retention factors like compensation, train- ing and development and supervisor support. Dockel (2001) conducted a research in this regard however this research was specific to telecom industry and South African working environment. Hence it cannot be applied globally

a similar job in other organizations) in regard to issues such as compensation and benefits, performance evaluation, promotions, and mandates, the less they will intend to leave current employer (Pare´and Tremblay, 2000). Because of the high technology employees commitment to their team, group based pay may result in more commitment to organization (Dockel, 2001). Earning was found to be not significant though it is positively related to continuance commitment (Johns, 2005). Employees constantly review if their salary is still competitive (Dockel, 2001). Those in the highest ranks calculate costs and benefits, which may impact their thoughts of leaving (Moynihan et al., 2000).

In addition to above there are researches which suggest that one should not organizations should not solely rely on compensation, e.g., A retention strategy that solely focuses on compensation conditions and benefits is not likely to favor commitment and loyalty of employees and offer any guarantee in satisfaction and retention. Further, such a strategy is not likely to compensate for the lack of pro- fessional recognition and chances of advancement and for a little stimulating IT job (Pare´and Tremblay, 2000). While a focus on competitive pay packages to attract and retain talented cadres is clearly effective in manifesting job motivation, complimentary strategic HR practices are profoundly important in reducing staff turnover (Chew, 2005). Commitment stemming from economic and pragmatic considerations may actually lead to poor performance and leadership (Moynihan et al., 2000). Merely increasing wages will increase individual’s percep- tion of low alternatives but has no impact on improving the alignment of employee goals with the organization (Iverson and Buttigieg, 1999).

These diverse findings highlight importance of compensation. It needs to be tested whether organizational commitment in Pakistani IT professionals can solely be induced through compensation or there are some other factors in addition to compensation. However literature review strongly establishes relationship between organizational commitment and compensation. Hence in present study Compen- sation is one of the independent variable and its relationship with Organizational commitment will be seen in the findings.

the organization. This is true in every professional field, but is perhaps more acute in IT (Pare´and Tremblay, 2000). Proper training of managers and supervisors to recognize profile of each individual coupled with training in how to turn around perception that the organization controls can considerably improve retention efforts (Rossi, 2000). Organizations should have a process for encouraging, plan- ning and investing in high technology employee’s professional development (Dockel, 2001). Training, support for training and motivation to learn were signif- icantly and positively associated with overall commitment and its types, i.e., affec- tive commitment and normative commitment (Ahmad and Bakar, 2003).

Indeed, it seems that a successful employee whose work performance is recognized by his superiors and his peers will tend to do more than what is formally required of him (Pare´and Tremblay, 2000). For high technology employees supervisor sup- port gives them a chance to make difference on job, try out new skills and receive feed back on performance (Dockel, 2001). Employees emotional attachment to, identification with, and involvement in the organization is positively related to supervisor care and concerns about their employees, opinion, values and general well being (Soulen, 2003). The perception of the employees that the organization does support them is with strongest positive correlation with affective commitment (Mayer et al., 2002) where as supervisor relationships had a more and stronger relationship to turnover intention (Raabe and Beehr, 2003). These findings are suf- ficient to argue that supervisor support is strongly related with organizational commitment and due to its relationship it is one of the independent variables and its relationship with organizational commitment will be tested in Pakistani IT professionals.

naire was based on well tested questionnaire like Allen and Myers Organizational commitment questionnaire (OCQ). Dockel (2001) used similar questionnaire to find out the Organizational Commitment in high technology employees in South Africa. The questionnaire with some modifications as per local requirements of Pakistan was used. Since the questionnaire was successfully used in previous stud- ies and well tested by researchers on internal consistency and other measures hence in the present study the same questionnaire was used to test the level of organiza- tional commitment in Pakistani IT sector professionals. Participants had to indi- cate their agreement with each item on five point Likert scales (endpoints: 1 = strongly disagree, 5 = strongly agree).

Questionnaires were printed and given to the heads of the respective human resources departments of each organization. Participation was anonymous to have an impartial opinion. The questionnaires were accompanied by a covering letter explaining the confidentiality and importance of this research.

Although these selected organizations employed thousands of employees but the professional Information Technology employees were in limited numbers. A total of 85 IT professionals were serving in these organizations and due to their limited number whole population was taken as sample. Out of these respondents 77 responded making response rate 90%. Keeping in view the limited number of IT professionals in public sector organizations the sample is sufficient for analysis of various results.

The frequencies of qualification show that 77% of the respondents possess masters or higher qualification. The reason for this percentage is that only High Technol- ogy IT professionals were included in this study. This is also a reason why total sample size was 77 out of thousands of employees. Many respondents also possess professional IT certifications (not shown in this table).

The findings in Table 5 indicate that 44.2% of the respondents have shown their native language as Urdu which is also the national language of Pakistan. Punjab is the biggest province of Pakistan and 27.3% respondents have shown their native language as Punjabi. Some foreign nationals are also working in these IT organi- zations showing their native language as English.

As already highlighted at Table 2 most of the respondents are young. Table 7 regarding tenure indicate that 61% respondents have a tenure up to four years in their respective organizations. Thus study gives a better understanding of level of organizational commitment of young IT professionals in Pakistan.

**p < 0.01). The IT professional feel that they are praised on positive performance by their boss. They are provided with a feed back on their performance. The find- ings are supported by Dockel (2001) and Soulen (2003). Raabe and Beehr (2003) also found a negative relationship between supervisor support and turnover inten- tion. Recognition on job well done intrinsically motivates individuals so the orga- nizations should take such steps that IT professionals are not under valued. Moreover organizations should devise a mechanism so that efforts of IT

The relationship between Training and development and organizational com- mitment is also significant (0.349**, **p < 0.01). These findings are supported by Shelton (2001) but Dockel (2001) did not found a significant relationship though it was positive. The response from questionnaire indicate that the IT professionals feel they are not being provided the job related training and sufficient time is not allocated for this training. These professionals are working in an industry where new technology is replacing the existing technology quite swiftly and training is the only way through which these professionals can update their knowledge about the new technologies. Hence the organizations should devise a detailed training program after necessary need assessment and allocate sufficient time for training of these professionals.

Majority of the studies were conducted measuring the relationship of three com- ponents of organizational commitment, i.e., Normative, Continuance and affec- tive components with different variables such as pay, Job characteristics, Supervisor support etc. and some also found the relationship between organiza- tional commitment and these factors as a whole. Since no such study was con- ducted on Information Technology (IT) professional in Pakistan the study found the relationship of three variables, i.e., Pay, Supervisor support and Train- ing and Development on Organizational commitment as whole.

The first hypothesis of present study was that compensation is significantly and positively related to organizational commitment. From the above discussions and significant correlation values it is established that among high technology IT pro- fessionals in Pakistan compensation is significantly and positively related to orga- nizational commitment. Thus hypothesis one is established.

out the world and in Pakistan as well. The business mangers should devise such HR policies that these professionals find them at a place where they have a com- pensation package which is competitive to any other organization. IT profession- als must be provided trainings frequently not only for their personal development but also to gain the competitive advantage through latest technologies. The super- visors of these IT professionals should recognize that managing IT professionals is different than other professionals; they should be involved in decision making to increase level of organizational commitment.

