Abstract Knowledge sharing in general and contextual access to knowledge in particular, still represent a key challenge in knowledge management framework. Researchers on semantic web and human machine interface study techniques to enhance this access. For instance, in semantic web, information retrieval is based on domain ontology. In human machine interface, keeping track of user’s activ- ity provides some elements of the context that can guide the access to informa- tion. We suggest an approach based on these two key guidelines, while avoiding some of their weaknesses. The approach permits a representation of both the context and the design rationale of a project for an efficient access to knowledge. In fact, the method consists of an information retrieval environment that, in the one hand, can infer knowledge, modeled as a semantic network, and on the other hand, is based on the context and the objectives of a specific activity (the design). The environment we defined can also be used to gather similar project elements

Knowledge sharing is still a main problem to deal with in organizations. Although, studies in semantic web and human machine interface provide tech- niques to enable a better access to information, these techniques are not sufficient in terms of allowing a contextual access according to user needs. In fact, in the semantic web framework (Berners-Lee et al., 2001), the information access is guided by the ontology of the user domain. However this type of ontology is built as a consensual concept definition of the domain. Therefore, it can be considered as a reference of the concepts used in a given domain while any user generally has her/his own representation of the domain, which is more or less close to domain ontology. Moreover, the structure of the domain ontology is usually provided by a knowledge engineer who introduces her/his own representation to build this ontology.

In the context of knowledge management within companies, there are numerous challenges in developing effective corporate memories, including problems in asset capture, representation, retrieval, and reuse (Hilbert et al., 2006). Besides, user activity evolves over the time and, subsequently, her/his information requirement changes according to the context of her/his activity. Several works on human machine interface (Jing et al., 2002) study the way to keep track of user activity in order to offer a personalized information retrieval. Studies in ergonomics prove that information about the objectives and the environment of an activity are essen- tial for a better understanding and an accurate representation of that activity.

In our approach, the above important aspects are taken into account. We focus on the designer activity, in which, tasks and activities can provide relevant infor- mation about the objectives of the designer activity. We defined methods and structures for a construction of a memory of design projects focusing, particularly, on the two parts that we consider as essential in such category of projects: the pro- ject context and the design rationale (Bekhti and Matta, 2003). The produced pro- ject memory can be considered as a referential resource in an organization. This resource is structured not only as a domain ontology, providing links to relevant documents, but also as a semantic network accurately linking up concepts consti- tuting the project context and the design rationale. The information retrieval pro- cedure is based on semantic relations between these concepts and can, hence, offer a contextual information access. We used conceptual graphs to represent concepts in a design project as a semantic network structure. We used ‘‘Corese’’ (Corby and Faron-Zucker, 2002) as an information retrieval tool as a semantic search engine.

The rest of this paper describes, in its second and third sections, the designed structures of project memory and a suggested approach that enables the capture and representation of knowledge used and produced during design project. Section 4 argues the need of contextual information retrieval in design. Section 5 describes how a project memory has been represented using conceptual graphs and RDF formalisms. Information retrieval as carried out with Corese (Section 6) is based on the relation between the constructed conceptual graph and its RDF representation.

The first stage of our approach consists of a form-based transcription. These forms help to record and classify basic elements of a design problem discussion. That is, elements like problems, argumentation and decision. These forms can be used to record, in a structured and prompt way, all the information elements that can be collected during a design problem solving discussion. The goal is to enable a real time structured transcription of the discussion during design meet- ings. The structure of these forms (Fig. 2) permits to distinguish the key elements of the discussed problem and to classify participants’ arguments along with their possible suggestions.

The principal objective of the content structuring is to enable an intelligent access to knowledge represented in the project memory. Our idea is to make possible a flexible access to the project memory according to several viewpoints. This form of access is described in the information retrieval section of this paper. The second stage of our approach consists of a structuring based on a cognitive analysis of the

forms filled out during the direct transcription. We were inspired by the ap- proaches of design rationale representation (Karsenty, 1996; Buckingham, 1997; Klein, 1993) to define a structure of representation, putting ahead elements of influence in a negotiation/discussion, such as arguments, criteria of justification and suggestions (Fig. 3).

Notes are initially grouped by participants (members) who, during the meeting, are identified either by their names or by their visual aspects. In fact, the direct transcription that we propose follows, on the one hand, the traditional methods of notes taking during meetings and permits, on the other hand, a model-based information structuring. This transcription can easily be realized by a meetings secretary. No deep analysis is required in this type of transcription. Note also that a chronological recording of the design rationale is supported by this method of transcription.

The selection of criteria is guided by a classification of common design argu- ments types (Fig. 4). The method we propose can be compared to meetings report- ing where the direct transcription is similar to notes taking and the structuring to summary reporting.

One of our key suggested ideas is to integrate the traceability procedure in the process of projects realization itself. This implicates a slight change in project structures and organization and permits the capture of knowledge during the pro- ject realization and not afterwards. This aspect is very important as the knowledge that emerges during any project realization is volatile and can hardly be reconsti- tuted after the project is over.

manager). This kind of meeting can be held after a number of project phases and at the end of the project realization. This makes possible to reformulate the argu- ments, the suggestions and the criteria and to re-examine their classification. The structure of the memory encourages the project members to explicitly express their knowledge, enriching by that the contents of the memory.

The structure represents the logic of discussion. Participants (project members) discuss each part of the problem by expressing their opinions supported by argu- ments. The participants can also provide suggestions concerning the design prob- lem. The collection of arguments and suggestions allows the team to take a decision concerning a part of a problem. Thus, the part of the problem is either totally solved or will be discussed again in the same manner and will go through the same cycle. This enables to see the evolution of this element during the prob- lem solving process until its final version.

In the structure, the arguments are classified according to their types or natures. Each argument or suggestion is related to the member who emitted it. The fact that the competencies and the role of each member are indicated permits to see the relation that may exist between the contributions (arguments and suggestions) of the participants and their competencies and skills. This is essential for a prob- lem solving context comprehension.

Problem/decision. The global problem discussed during design meetings is split into sub-problems or elements of problem. This permits to represent these ele- ments of discussion through the different phases, connect them and elucidate the evolution of each of them during the project completion.

Arguments. One of the most significant elements of any negotiation is the argumentation. In our approach the argumentation is an essential element of the representative structure since it is the origin and the cause of the evolution of the discussion of the problem and consequently of the decision-taking.

Suggestions. The arguments advanced by the speakers during meetings often lead them to present their own suggestions concerning a given part of the discussed problem; we envisaged in the model a space for suggestions of project members (participants). The suggestions are linked to the arguments and the par- ticipants who emitted them.

Project members/participants. The representation of the participants in the structure is important; it permits to bind the arguments and suggestions to their emitters. Each participant is characterized, primarily, by his competencies/skills and his role in the project (see context). This permits to clearly understand the lo- gic and the reasoning of the members and the motives of their opinions.

Designers need to learn from previous experiences in order to find out how to deal with new problems in their activities. They generally are in a situation of handling designs of new products and need information about similar design situations. Their needs are essentially focused on different elements of past design projects (types of problems, decisions, constraints, arguments, criteria, etc.). The structure defined in Fig. 1 can help in this special form of information retrieval. The infor- mation retrieval process can be guided not only by classifications of problems, projects, etc. but by similarity between project descriptions. Relations between project elements must play an important role in this information retrieval process. For instance, designers may need to know why a given suggestion has not been considered (rejected), who decided that, under which constraints, having which re- sources, competencies, which other suggestion has been approved instead, etc.

For that precise reason, we propose to represent project memory as a semantic network and to use semantic inference engine to conduct the information retrieval process. The resulting memory is not a simple list of documents or parts of doc- uments but a network presenting on the one hand, the relations between project elements and on the other hand, pointing the relevant documents. Designers can therefore have a contextual information retrieval that can be very useful in their design activity.

Indexing documents can either be simple using metadata and keywords (currently recommended in HTML documents) or complex using semantic networks and ontology (defended by semantic web) (Martin, 1995). Semantic Networks have shown a great ability in terms of information structuring and information retrie- val. (Steyvers and Tenenbaum, 2005) demonstrated that developing search and re- trieval algorithms that exploit the large-scale structures of semantic networks is likely to be a project of great promise, for both cognitive science research and information retrieval applications.

We choose conceptual graphs to represent our semantic network. Conceptual graphs are a formalism that offers a highest structure of the semantic relations be- tween concepts (Chein and Mugnier, 1992). In this formalism, there are a number of inference functions (Sowa, 1984) that helps in information retrieval. We partic- ularly note projection, joint, generalization and specialization functions. This for- malism has been used and validated in numerous applications and its effectiveness is now commonly approved.

Moreover, the structure of conceptual graphs (especially support and graphs) is close to RDF (Resource Framework Description) and RDFs (Resource Frame- work Description Schema). Thus, it can easily be translated to RDF and XML respecting semantic web recommendations (RDFS, 2004). This connection be- tween conceptual graphs, RDF and XML can provide a number of specific func- tions that give more power for information retrieval. The Corese search engine developed at INRIA (Corby et al., 2000) is based on this principle.

The Corese search engine (Corby and Faron-Zucker, 2002) is dedicated to the que- rying of corporate semantic webs in which documents are described through RDF annotations. Corese interprets RDF metadata in the conceptual graphs model in order to exploit the inference capabilities of this formalism. The RDFS (RDFS, 2004) and conceptual graphs models share many common features and a mapping can easily be established between RDFS and a large subset of the conceptual graphs model. The information retrieval in Corese is based on this mapping. In fact, the Corese query language is RDF with addition of some extra conventions introducing variables and operators. An RDF query statement is interpreted as a conceptual graph query and is processed by a conceptual projection of the query on the annotation graphs. Therefore, Corese enables to process information

Knowledge captured from design projects is structured in XML files. In fact, as we explained in the knowledge acquisition method above, a project secretary, can keep track of the knowledge from the context and the decision meetings of a de- sign project. She/he uses a tool (DyPKM) (Bekhti and Matta, 2003) that generates an XML file. The tool, the secretary uses, helps to classify concepts like sugges- tions, arguments, problems, participants, etc. and to establish semantic relations between these concepts. DyPKM interfaces are designed to clearly display classi- fication trees of design problems. That is, identifying from project members ex- changes: suggestions and arguments concerning a given design problem, related criteria but also grouping arguments, suggestions, tasks, etc. by design decisions (Fig. 5).

Structures and content are transformed to an XML document (Fig. 6). An XSL file is defined in order to generate a related RDF file (Fig. 7). These two files are then integrated in the knowledge base of Corese in order to assure an efficient search process.

The structure of the project memory (Fig. 1) is implemented using RDF schema (Fig. 8). Corese inference engine explores this schema in order to retrieve informa- tion from RDF files. These RDF files form a knowledge base of the represented design project. We illustrate in the following two examples the way information retrieval within a project memory is performed.

A designer may also need to know what are the skills or competencies that contrib- uted to solve a design problem in a previous design project and which argumenta- tion criteria were considered? The particularity of this query is that these concepts (design problems and competencies), are not directly linked in the project memory structure (Fig. 1). In fact, there is a direct relation between a design problem and the related suggestions and arguments. Arguments and suggestions have direct links to corresponding criteria. There is also a link between arguments, suggestions and participants who emitted them. Concepts like skills or competencies of each project member are represented in the structure and linked to the related member (Fig. 12).

Corese engine performs an approximate projection that is based on a joint rela- tion in order to build a meta-relation between the given concepts. Accordingly, Corese engine infers unlinked documents or linked by transitivity documents. The given results are always an RDF file (Fig. 13).

Examples presented in this paper are extracted from a design project of profes- sional safety evaluation rules (Bekhti and Matta, 2003). DyPKM and Corese have to be validated on other design projects. We also plan to define a graphical inter- face to display results as graphs or trees, clearly illustrating the relations between the elements of design project.

Finally, the environment we defined can also be used to gather elements of sim- ilar design projects in order to build a global classification of tasks, problems, arguments, etc. produced in a company. These classifications can show the evolu- tion of design strategies in the company.

