Ethiopia, the inability to exploit existing technologies for yield develop- ment results in low maize yield (Asfaw et al., 2012; Abate et al., 2019). Low yield harvesting is results in food shortage caused by a lack of tech- nological access have been reported in the country (Bewket, 2007; Dijk et al., 2020).

Around the late 17th century, maize crops were introduced in Ethiopia (Huffnagel, 1961; Abate et al., 2015). In Ethiopia, maize is cul- tivated in highland, midland, and lowland agro-ecological zones (Elias et al., 2013; Tessema and Simane, 2019; Dendir and Simane, 2019).

climate (rainfall and temperature), soil, land use, and elevation were in- cluded in prior studies. However, the land surface temperature (LST) was not considered in physical land suitability assessment in the previ- ous research. Thus, this research intended to incorporate the LST as a physical land suitability determining criterion.

The study area has a large variety of soil types. Among the existing soil types, Haplic Alisols was the most dominat which covers an area of 4235.7 km2 (61.0%) and the least dominated soil type was Rhodic Nitisol with an area of 518.6 km2 (7.5%).

Ethiopian National Meteorological Agency. We interpolated the climate data of four stations using Inverse Distance Weighting (IDW) tech- niques to obtain annual rainfall data for areas using stations in and around the study area. This annual rainfall was interpolated with a 30 m resolution and then extracted to the study area.

In the present study, the LST was retrieved from the thermal bands of the Landsat OLI/TIRS of 2020 (Adeola et al., 2017). The mono window algorithm was applied to retrieve LST from the thermal bands of the OLI/ TIRS images. Accordingly, LST was retrieved from Landsat 8 (OLI/TIRS) with thermal bands of band 10 used by mono-window algorithm fol- lowing (Guo et al., 2020; Sekertekin and Bonafoni, 2020). Digital num- ber (DN) was converted to the spectral radiance of thermal bands of Landsat TIRS (Dener and Alves, 2016; Ziaul and Pal, 2018).

The ASTER DEM with 30 m resolution downloaded from USGS website (https://www.usgs.gov/) and used to obtain the altitude (meter). From this organization we extract the topography of the study area, which very crucial to understand land suitability for maize production. Maize crop cultivation was more favorable in lowland areas and vice versa (Gorfu and Ahmed, 2011; Rashid et al., 2013).

Soil data of the study area was obtained from the Ministry of Water and Irrigation Engineering and clipped to the study area. In addition, the soil data were converted to raster format by 30 m spatial resolution and reclassified according to a previous study Debesa et al. (2020) for over- lay analysis.

Understanding land suitability for crop production enhances yields and contributes towards the achievements of UN Sustainable Develop- ment Goals such as no poverty and zero hunger. Land suitability evalu- ation for maize production at watershed scale is crucial to enhance food security in agriculture-based economy like Ethiopia. Several factors such as: climate, LULC, LST, soil, topography, and infrastructure's data were used to evaluate physical land suitability for maize production. In this study, geospatial techniques were employed to identify physical land suitability for maize production in the study area. The results of the study showed that the area with low elevation and high LST are highly

