Metal intermetallic laminated (MIL) composites are fabricated upon reaction sintering of titanium and aluminum foils of various thicknesses. The intermetallic phase of Al3Ti forming during the above processing gives high hardness and stiffness to the composite, while unreacted titanium provides the necessary high strength and ductility. Some results of studies of microstructure and some mechanical properties of layered composites are presented on the example of Ti-Al system. Static and dynamic tests results are discussed for the case when the intermetallic reaction was interrupted in the course of intermetallic sintering and also for the case when it was completed.

air reaction sintering of chemically active metal foils under pressure [1]. The work results [2] show that the main factor enhancing toughness of a composite material is layered morphology; fiber and particle morphology comes next. The advantages of layered composite materials are not limited to high values of strength and stiffness of intermetallic phase and high toughness of the metal constituent. Geometry of the layered structure allows, by changing the ratio between thicknesses of metallic and intermetallic constituents, achieving desired levels of the composite material mechanical properties. Required ratio between thicknesses in a layered metal-intermetallic composite is, in its turn, ensured by such selection of thicknesses of initial metal foils when one of the components would be completely consumed for forming the intermetallic. The remaining volume of the second component would be responsible for ductility and toughness of the composite metal component.

To evaluate the structure of composites, we used scanning (Quanta FEI equipped with a microanalyzer) electron microscopes. X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis of phase composition was performed with a DRON-3 diffractometer using monochromatized CuK radiation. The microhardness was measured on a PMT-3 microhardness tester at a load of 0.5 N.

Impact bending tests were carried out at room temperature on V-notched specimens (10 × 10 × 55) mm using a Tinius Olsen IT 542 (United States) instrumented pendulum impact testing machine. The maximum stored energy of the machine was 542 J, and the impact speed was 5.47 m/s. Two types of specimens were prepared: specimens with the crack arrester and crack divider orientation. The works of crack nucleation and

Presentation of strength properties for layered composites is discussed for only two cases. First case we have when the reaction is interrupted (Fig. 3a - interrupted reaction structure) and sintered composite has about 15-17% of intermetallic together with the rest of unconsumed aluminum and residual titanium. Second case we have when the reaction is completed (Fig. 3b - complete reaction structure) and for our choice of initial foil thickness relation MIL - composite has 15-17% of residual titanium and 83-85% of Al3Ti phase.

The results for static load indicated that the MIL composites exhibited anisotropic features both for mechanical properties and fracture behavior. It should be noted a significant difference in mechanical properties determined by static compression for the load application directions along and across the layers (see Table 2). For example, proportional limit differ by a factor of about 1.5 and the shortening at a peak load differ by a factor of 7. A pronounced anisotropic character of the mechanical properties is also observed during impact bending tests. It is established that the impact strength and total energy of fracture, depend strongly on the orientation of the notch. For the samples with arrester orientation, the crack propagation energy is higher than that in the case of divider orientation samples by a factor of about 4 (see Table 2).

Loaddisplacement impact loading diagrams are also indicating to the high energetic intensity of the crack passing process through the composite layers. Presence of load oscillations before its maximum points to additional absorption of impact energy when a deflection of crack by interface of layers is occurred. In spite of different character of fracture behavior for crack arrester (Fig. 4a) and crack divider (Fig. 4b) oriented samples visible on load-displacement impact loading diagrams (Fig. 4b, 5b) there is no significant discrepancy in dynamic strength values.

Electron microscopic studies were performed at the Electron Microscopy Center of Collaborative Access, Ural Branch, Russian Academy of Sciences. Measurement of the mechanical properties were performed at the Center of Collaborative Access "Testing Center of Advanced Materials and Nanotechnology", Ural Branch, Russian Academy of Sciences. Measurement of the impact toughness were performed at the Center of Collaborative Access "Plastometriya", Institute of Engineering Science, Ural Branch, Russian Academy of Sciences.

