In this paper, an implementation of a LBP (local binary pattern) based fast face recognition system on symbian platform is presented. First, face in picture taken from camera is detected using AdaBoost algorithm. Second, the pre-processing of the face is done, including eye location, geometric normalization, illumination normalization. During the face preprocessing, a rapid eye location method named ER (Eyeball Search) is proposed and implemented. Last, the improved LBP is adopted for recognition. Although the computational capability of the symbian platform is limited, the experimental results show good performance for recognition rate and time.

Face recognition has been widely used in different fields. Many face recognition algorithms have gained encouraging performance. Recently, with the popularity of digital cameras in mobile devices increasing rapidly, an increasing attention is given to a new application field of face recognition on mobile phones [1].

This paper introduces the implementation of a LBP based fast face recognition system on symbian platform in detail. The architecture of our system is shown in Fig. 1 (a). The system contains face detection, face pre- processing and face recognition, which are introduced in section 2, section 3 and section 4 respectively.

Face detection is the first step in face recognition system. Its reliability has a major influence on the performance and usability of the entire face recognition system [3]. Reference [4][5] summarized a lot of face detection methods. In this paper, AdaBoost based method is adopted for face detection because so far it is the most successful ones in terms of detection accuracy and speed. This method can detect faces efficiently under illumination and background variation conditions. Fig. 1 (b) shows a result of face detected by AdaBoost.

Face pre-processing is an important step of the face recognition system. Its reliability has an important influence on the recognition rate. Fig. 2 shows some examples of face image detected by AdaBoost. These images differ from each other in background, size, illumination, and so on. Therefore, each image has to be normalized by same standard. The face pre-processing mainly contains geometric normalization, illumination normalization and noise filtering. Generally, the first step of preprocessing is eye location.

There are many methods of eye location. Considering the limited amount of memory and a less powerful processor of mobile phones, some complex and time consuming methods are not suitable. In this paper, a quick and efficient eye location method named ER (Eyeball Search) is proposed and implemented, which is a good trade-off between time and accuracy.

As shown in Fig. 2, these images are detected by AdaBoost. As a face has been detected, we can estimate the area which contains the positions of the two eyes. Then, precise eye location is done by searching eyeballs in the area. The concrete steps of Eyeball Search are given as follows.

If a face image with size w×h is divided into four regions averagely as shown in the first picture in Fig. 3, in almost all cases, the eyes exist in the first and second region. The center point C with coordinate (w/2, h/2) is one boundary point. Through a great deal of experiments, we determine the other two boundary points A

where gn is the gray value of points around (x, y) as shown in the second picture Fig. 3, N is total number involved. As the size of images we use is 320×240, the size of faces detected is about 100×100. The rough shape of eyeball is like Fig. 3 (b).

are also noises in them. In this paper, histogram equalization is used. This method usually increases the global contrast of many images, and through this adjustment, the intensities can be better distributed on the histogram. Then we use Gaussian filter reducing the noises in the face images. Fig. 5 shows an example.

The local binary pattern (LBP) [7] was originally proposed for texture description and has achieved promising result in texture classification. In [6], Ahonen proposed a method of face recognition using LBP. Firstly, the face image is divided into R non-overlapping blocks (or regions) of same size. Secondly, every Histogram of LBP codes are calculated over each block. Thirdly, the R histograms are concatenated into a global histogram as the description of the face image. Lastly, a nearest-neighbor classifier is used for face recognition by chi-square distance.

Labeling all “non-uniform” patterns into one pattern makes the feature vector shorter but also means losing more information. Reference [8] presented an improved LBP named hierarchical multiscale LBP. The first picture in Fig. 7 shows an example: the pattern of big radius is non-uniform pattern, but the pattern of small radius is uniform pattern. Thus, we label it to the uniform pattern according to the smaller radius.

First, for each pixel the pattern of the biggest radius is calculated. For those pixels whose pattern is uniform pattern, a sub histogram is built. For those pixels whose pattern is non-uniform pattern, the pattern of smaller radius is further calculated. The process stops when the new pattern of the pixel is uniform pattern or

Using hierarchical multiscale LBP for recognition is similar as shown above. First, the image is divided into R blocks of the same size. Then the hierarchical multiscale LBP is calculated for each block. Next, all the hierarchical multiscale LBPs are concatenated into one histogram for recognition. Last, the chi-square distance between histograms is used for classification.

done. In experiment 1, for each people, 4 pictures on first date are randomly selected for enrolment, and all the rest for recognition. In experiment 2, for each people, 4 pictures on first date and 4 pictures on second date are randomly selected for enrolment. In experiment 3, for each people, 4 pictures on each date are randomly selected for enrolment. The recognition rate is shown in table 2.

This paper introduced an implementation a LBP based fast face recognition system on Symbian platform in detail. The AdaBoost algorithm is used for face detection. During face preprocessing, a rapid eye location method is proposed and implemented. In the last, improved LBP is adopted for recognition. Eventually, the system can process about 2.5 frames per second and its average recognition rate is up to 87.78 %.

