Thailand is a world famous market of colored stone. This is because of the good quality of natural gemstones sources, especially ruby and sapphire, together with the skilled craftsman for gem cutting as well as professional jewelry design and setting. Recently, good quality gem materials have reduced against increasing of price. This situation makes the lower quality gem material attracted the suppliers since their quality can be improved by heating process. According to the process heating with gas feeding, the changes in chemical structure of trace elements inside the stone may improve their color and clarity; this process is then so-classical  [Chucharuwong, 1999]. This process has been widely accepted in

the international gem markets, although a few chemical additives such as borax may also be added during the heat treatment for crack healing and consequent clarity improvement. However, heat treatments have been modified for a few decades; some chemical additives may have been added in the process with trial and error by the gem treaters. These also include lead glass which may lead environmental impact, particular human health, in case they can be altered by natural process and/or daily chemical reactions.

In this study, Three-Stage Sequential Extraction Procedure or BCR test which has been suggested by the Standard, Measurements and Testing program (SM&T), formerly called the    [Rauret et al., 1999] was applied for the leaching procedure of treated rubies claimed as classical heat treatment. This method has been used to determine heavy metal concentrations, especially cadmium, chromium, copper, lead, manganese, nickel, vanadium and zinc in soil or sediment. BCR three stages  composed of exchangeable, reduction, and oxidation steps. Kanjanabut et al., [2010] investigated the lead contents in lead glass-treated ruby from two companies and found that the lead contents increased towards steps of testing due to more corrosion of gems. However, in natural conditions, these three steps of leaching do not continuously occur in order. Therefore, this study was planned to alternate steps of the suggested sequences and investigated the effect of leaching steps to the lead content obtained.

Each treated ruby was followed the leaching procedure of three-stage sequential extraction procedure (BCR), including: 1) Exchangeable step (BCR 1), 40 ml acetic acid (0.11 mol/l-1) was added, followed by16 h shaking; 2) Reduction (BCR 2), 40 ml hydroxylamine hydrochloride (0.5 mol/l-1) was added, followed by16 h shaking and 3) Oxidation (BCR 3), 10 ml hydrogen peroxide (8.8 mol/l-1) was added, followed by heating at 80±2ºC using hotplate until volume reduced to 3 ml, then 10 ml hydrogen peroxide (8.8 mol/l-1) was added

BCR 3 (oxidation step) usually yielded the highest effect on extraction. Except samples from factories 1 and 7, BCR 1 obtained higher lead concentrations than those of BCR3. For samples of factories 2 to 6, cracks of rubies were appeared significantly by BCR3 step which they are compatible to lead concentrations in leachate. On the other hand, samples of factories 1 and 7 were clearly cracked after BCR1 test.

According to series I, treated rubies yield the highest lead content in BCR 2. For series II, BCR 2 has been carried out initially but it yield lower lead contents than that obtained from series I. This can suggest that BCR 2 may yield higher efficiency after activated by other BCR steps.

This research is financially supported by The Gem and Jewelry Institute of Thailand (GIT) and National Research University Project of Chulalongkorn University. The authors appreciate Dr. Bhuwadol Wanthanachaisaeng for his coordinating and collecting ruby samples from many sources. Thanks also go to GIT and Environmental Research Institute of Chulalongkorn University for laboratories and analytical

Kanjanabut, K, Chotipong, A, and Sutthirat, C,. Working towards a Procedural Standard in the Testing for both Stability and Assessment of the Impact on Health of Lead Glass-Treated Rubies and Beryllium-Treated Sapphire. The Journal of The Gemmological Association of Hongkong. 2010; 31:48-54.

