To optimize the 3-stages planetary gear reducer (PGR) in the Earth-Pressure-Balance Shield Machine (EPBSM), it is necessary to firstly define the EPBSM environment. The needed torque of the cutter-head, therefore, is analyzed when the EPBSM cutting the earth body. The load of any PGR is allocated according to the equivalent principle in the size between the force and its response one and the distributing uniformity of the PGRs around the main axle gear. Because the structure of the main drive system is equal to a huge planet-gear reducer made of 8 planetary gears, for the main axle connected with it gear, one side is connected with a bidentate coupling, the other is connected with an elastic shaft to realize the dual connection floatability of the main axle gear and support the whole main axle gear so that the relative displacement can be compensated to high degree among the PGRs resulting from the uneven force when the cutter-head cuts earth body.

Here, T1 is the torque produced by the soil shear force. T2 is the shear torque generated by the cutting heads cutting the soil. T3 is the frictional resistance torque produced by the cutter-head driving the sediment seal. T4 and T5 are the torque generated by the axial and radial load, respectively. T6 is the torque done by the stirring bar agitating the soil. K is safety coefficient. T is the needed torque driving the cutter-head. The concrete

Where, T is the needed torque driving the cutter-head. D is the outer diameter of shield machine.  is the torque coefficient, whose value varies from the outer diameter of shield machine and soil body, for the EPBSM, its value region is 1.4~2.3.

Here, T0 is the output torque of a single PGR. T is the needed torque of the cutterhead. n is the number of PGRs.  is the uneven coefficient of load among PGRs. d1 and d2 are the graduated circle diameter of the gear in the output shaft and the gear in the main axle, respectively.

As can be seen from Fig.1, the 8 three-stages PGRs are uniformly assembled around the main axle gear, which is driven by the gear of output shaft of PGR, its structure, therefore, is equivalent to a large planetary- type reducer that has 8 planet gears (the difference between them is that it hasn’t planet carrier and inner gear, the 8 planetary gears can only rotate around its own axis and can’t do around the main axle), its mechanism sketch is seen as Fig.2, so the factors that has an impact on the uneven coefficient Kp of the load among the planetary gears also influence the load nonuniformity among PGRs, for example the level of gear manufacturing precision, the degree of the load transmission, the stiffness of the component structure, gear material and tooth surface hardness, the run extent of the tooth surface, the level of engagement speed, the number of planetary gears, the property of the load-sharing device, and so on[6].

Because the shafting motion of the output gear axles of PGRs and the main axle of the shield machine cutter-head is low speed and heavy load, we can assemble a bidentate coupling[7] and an elastic shaft in the main axle, as is shown in Fig.2. On one hand, one side of the coupling is connected with the main axle driven by the gear of PGRs, the other side is done with the main axle driving the cutter-head so that the relative displacement resulting from the uneven force from the cutter-head can be compensated to high degree, on the other hand, an elastic shaft is installed in the other side of the main axle, which can not only keep floatability, but support the main axle gear. Therefore, the relative displacement among the gear axles of PGRs resulting from the uneven force can be compensated to realize the load-sharing, so the uneven coefficient  of the load

