Data aggregation is an important method to reduce energy consumption in wireless sensor networks. Cluster-based data aggregation usually consists of two phases, inner-cluster aggregation and fusion data transmission from aggregators to base station. Most of existing schemes are mainly focus on the efficiency of the second phase and all inner-cluster sensors will transmit their readings to the aggregator. Authors proposed a location-based inner-cluster data aggregation scheme to improving the efficiency of in-cluster aggregation. Agent nodes are selected with assist of nodes’ location and only the nodes have different readings with agent nodes transmit their data to cluster head, therefore, the data transmissions in the first phase are reduced effectively. Simulation shows that our scheme has fewer transmissions than that of related schemes and reduces the communication overhead effectively.

transmits the sensor readings to the base station (BS). Due to the broadcasting characteristics of WSN, all neighbors of the transmitter will receive the messages transmitted by the transmitter, thus, the most effective way to reduce the energy consumption is to reduce the unnecessary transmissions. Data aggregation is such a method to prolong the lifetime of WSN by reducing the redundant transmissions.

Recently, many data aggregation schemes for WSN have been proposed. Al-Karaki et al. propose exact and approximate algorithms for data aggregation [1], Aonishi et al. study the impact of aggregation efficiency on GIT routing [2], Gatani et al. propose a robust and efficient data gathering method for Wireless Sensor networks [3], Considine et al. propose an approximate aggregation techniques for sensor databases [4], Villas et al. propose a scalable and dynamic data aggregation aware routing protocol for wireless sensor networks [5], Heinzelman et al. proposed LEACH [6] for the network clustering and cluster head election; Younis et al. proposed HEED[7] in which the residual energy was taken into account cluster head election.

In these schemes, the cluster-based data aggregation [6] [7] usually consist of two phases, first phase is the inner-cluster aggregation and the second, fusion data transmitted to the base station. We know that the WSN has features such as the cluster is a relatively small area and sensors will have same or similar readings if they are close, but most of cluster-based schemes pay more attention to the second phase and all sensors will transmit their readings to aggregator in the first phase. In our scheme (LBDA: Location-based inner-cluster data aggregation), the mentioned features will be utilized to reducing the inner-cluster transmissions.

In our scheme, the cluster was divided into four regions and each node can calculates which region it located in using location information. For each region, cluster head knows how many nodes located in and selects some agent nodes for each region. Also, the communication range of agent node should cover its region. Only the nodes located in the same region and have different readings with agent node will transmit their data to cluster head and therefore reduce certain number of inner-cluster transmissions.

In this paper, we have some assumptions about the network. 1) The network was clustered and each inner- cluster node was 1-hop away from the cluster head. Some clustering algorithms, such as ACE [8], can fulfill this task. Fig.1 (a) and (b) show the clustering results and corresponding logic topology of the network; 2) sensors can achieve their location by GPS or some location algorithm [9] [10], any inner-cluster nodes and cluster head each know other’s location and Id; 3) there are multi-type sensors deployed in the network, for example, the temperature sensors and humidity sensors, and all sensors have the same communication radius Rc (Rc=40m); 4) inner-cluster parameters are follow normal distribution with mean  and standard deviation  due to the features mentioned in section 1 and sensor readings are rounded to integer because the measuring errors are unavoidable.

For reducing the inner-cluster transmissions, the cluster is divided into four regions R1, R2, R3 and R4 counterclockwise as shown in Fig.2 (a). In Fig.2 (a), the light-colored area is region R1 and the dark area is the report region (RR). If we denote SA as the circle with point A at the center and Rc as radius, denote SB as the circle with point B at the center and Rc as radius, Rc is the communication radius of sensors, thus, we have that RR=R1  SA  SB. It is obviously that the communication range of any nodes located in RR will cover R1, and these nodes are report nodes. As shown in Fig.2 (b), the nodes marked with ’*’ are report nodes. The

keep silent if its reading equals that of the agent node which located in the same region, otherwise, Ni will transmits its reading to cluster head. It is obviously that there are (Num_1A - n) sensors have the same reading with agent node N1 if n sensors of type A located in R1 transmit their data to Ch. In this way, Ch can achieve all data in the cluster and corresponding counter by common comparison and transmits the fusion data to base station.

In Fig.3 (b), Ntrans means the total number of inner-cluster transmissions of the network. Fig.3 (a) shows that the inner-cluster transmissions in different clusters of LBDA is less than that of TCDA when  various from 1 to 0.6 and Fig.3 (b) illustrates that the total inner-cluster transmissions of LBDA is less than that of TCDA. From Fig.3 (b) we know that the number of total transmissions has decreased follow the decrease of standard deviation . The reason is that the small  makes the sensor readings more concentrated and results more sensors have same readings with the agent node, thus leads to more nodes keep silent in the processing of data aggregation.

L. A. Villas, D. L. Guidoni, R. B. Ara´ujo, A. Boukerche, A. A. Loureiro, “A scalable and dyna- mic data aggregation aware routing protocol for wireless sensor networks”, In proceedings of the 13th ACM international conference on Modeling, analysis, and simulation of wireless and mobile systems, MSWIM ’10, 2010:110–117.

