We hope that a collection of time-series like the one presented here may benefit not only seismologists, but a broader community including data scientists interested in informative data such as seismograms recorded on the Earth surface. After explaining the procedure adopted for an automated labeling of the waveforms (Section 2), we describe in detail the features of the dataset (Section 3). An application of supervised ML to a binary classification problem is presented in Section 4. Specifically, we show the ability of a Convolutional Neural Network (Krizhevsky et al., 2012) trained on our dataset to recognize earthquakes from noise in unlabeled data (i.e. test set) based on single-station recordings. Possible

We present in this Section a simple application of the dataset to a signal classification problem. Specifically, we trained a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) (Krizhevsky et al., 2012) to discriminate between recordings of noise and recordings of earthquakes; the trained model therefore represents a single-station local-earthquake detection algorithm.

unit (ReLU) activation function (e.g. Nair and Hinton, 2010) is used throughout the whole architecture except for the last layer, where a fully-connected layer with one neuron returns the classification of the waveform using a sigmoid activation function. Crossentropy (e.g. Goodfellow et al., 2016) and Adam (Kingma and Ba, 2014) are the loss function and the optimization algorithm used throughout the model, respectively.

We have shown in Section 4 that the trained model can be applied to detect small earthquakes in regions that were not represented in the training set. The high accuracy achieved (96.7, 95.3, and 93.2% on training, validation, and test set, respectively) brings evidence that the same method can be applied to real-time detection of earthquakes on individual stations, by streaming continuous data in batches of 27 s on the condition of pre-processing the seismograms as in Section 2. In this regard, a possible attempt to further improve the performance of the algorithm would be introducing one or more recurrent layers in the model (e.g. Mousavi et al., 2019b), to account for the temporal relation between the seismic phases arriving at the receivers.

purpose of enriching the actual catalogues by detecting small, local earthquakes that could not be detected by other methods commonly employed (for example the STA/LTA; e.g. Withers et al., 1998); without relying on multiple stations, this would prove especially useful in areas with scarce density of receivers. We have shown that the large variety of geological and tectonic settings covered by our data supports the generalization capabilities of the detection algorithm. On the other hand, for carrying out specific tasks like improving the completeness of the catalogues in certain locations, it might be beneficial to focus only on a portion of the dataset; training a machine learning algorithm on those data would then enable to incorporate the geographic characteristics of the investigated region in the trained model, possibly leading to higher accuracy in the detection. In addition, it might be worth investigating if such a collection of AN data could allow to efficiently simulate seismic ambient noise and extract information on the distribution of noise

Other possible applications of our dataset are connected to signal- processing tasks. Denoising of the waveforms (e.g. Mousavi et al., 2016) and detection of anomalies due to e.g. electronic failures of the sensors are an example; when dealing with real data, it is common to observe the presence of anomalous, meaningless signals which might introduce a bias in the results of a study. In fact, while visually checking the seismograms collected, we noticed the presence of a few instances of such anomalies; although we estimated the amount of such signals to be very small in comparison to the number of healthy waveforms in our

Availability of similar benchmark datasets is, at the present time, very limited. To our knowledge, the only instance of something comparable in size and built on a global scale has been published in a recent, inde- pendent work by Mousavi et al. (2019a); differences, however, arise from the distribution of the receivers, processing, and duration of the 3-component seismograms. Our global dataset is intended to be used for carrying out a multitude of seismological and signal processing tasks

Catalogues of seismic events were downloaded from Istituto Nazio- nale di Geofisica e Vulcanologia (INGV) Seismological Data Centre (2006), International Seismological Centre (2019) (Storchak et al., 2013, 2015; Giacomo et al., 2018), and IRIS Data Services (0000). The facilities of IRIS Data Services, and specifically the IRIS Data Management Center, were used for access to waveforms, related metadata, and/or derived products used in this study. IRIS Data Services are funded through the Seismological Facilities for the Advancement of Geoscience and Earth- Scope (SAGE) Proposal of the National Science Foundation under Cooperative Agreement EAR-1261681. Seismic waveforms have been downloaded using EIDA archive (http://www.orfeus-eu.org/eida) from the following network operators: Arizona Geological Survey (2007), Penn State University: AfricaArray (2004), Alaska Earthquake Center (1987), Swiss Seismological Service (SED) at ETH Zurich (1983), Cali- fornia Institute of Technology and United States Geological Survey Pasadena (1926), Geological Survey of Canada (1980), Institute of Geophysics, Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic (1973), RESIF -

We are grateful to three anonymous reviewers for their insightful and constructive reviews. We thank the makers of Obspy (Beyreuther et al., 2010). Graphics were created with Python Matplotlib (Hunter, 2007). The Grant to Department of Science, Roma Tre University (MIUR-Italy Dipartimenti di Eccellenza, ARTICOLO 1, COMMI 314 - 337 LEGGE 232/2016) is gratefully acknowledged.

Institut De Physique Du Globe De Paris (IPGP), Ecole Et Observatoire Des Sciences De La Terre De Strasbourg (EOST), 1982. GEOSCOPE, French Global Network of Broad Band Seismic Stations. Institut de Physique du Globe de Paris (IPGP). https://doi.org/ 10.18715/GEOSCOPE.G last accessed January 2020.

