Electrochemical processes usually occur under condition of electric neutrality of a system as whole and its macroscopic parts separately. A set of electrochemical reactions may be quite complicated, but the deviations from neutrality usually have scale determined by Debye length only, i.e. known types of chemical processes cannot result in appearance of macroscopic electric charge and electric currents.

One should underline that hydrogels (polymer networks) were investigated intensively during last few decades [1-3]. This polymer material is of great interest mainly due to its pronounceable reaction on slight variation of external conditions. Hydrogels initially swelled in water up to very high degrees (1000 g/g and more) may change their volume sharply due to variation of temperature, ionic strengths of surrounding media, influence of electric current, etc.

Interactions between different types of hydrogels are much less investigated that hydrogels themselves; one can found only separate reports on this subject in current literature [4,5]. Besides, cited articles [4,5] are devoted to contact interactions of hydrogels. Now we report about sufficiently new phenomena, which demonstrate possibility of electrochemical interactions between specimens placed at quite long distance from each other.

A polyethyleneymine (PEI) gel having =NH groups (gel-1) was placed at the bottom of cylindrical tube filled by distillated water (Fig.1) and cross-linked polyacrylic acid (PAA) was placed on the glass filter just above the first specimen under the upper level of water (gel-2). Gels were synthesized in the same manner as described in ref. [6].

The main visible result of long-distance interactions between gel-1 and gel-2 is an additional swelling, i.e. resulting swelling ratio of PAA gel is about 1.2-1.5 times higher than in pure water. The dependence of swelling ratio K of PAA gel on distance between specimens (from 1.0 up to 20.0 cm) is shown at Fig.2. Different curves correspond to different values of initial swelling ratio K0.

It is easy to see that obtained curve is non-monotonic one: additional swelling of PAA gel sufficiently depends on the distance l. Here we should underline that typically swelling ratio has maximum just in pure water (in comparison with other solvents). In particular, adding of salt or organic compounds leads to contraction of the specimen with releasing of water in surrounding solution. In other words, obtaining much higher swelling ratio is surprising fact as it is.

Long-distance interaction between polymer networks results in anomalous behavior of swelling ratio with increasing of salt concentration too (Fig.3). Normally the adding of salt leads to decreasing of swelling ratio [7-9]. Nevertheless, in our experiments swelling ratio increase in salt solution of relatively low concentration.

Normally reactions (1) and (2) do not break up the electric neutrality of a system, but in our case the first reaction takes place in volume of one specimen, and the other occurs in volume of specimen which is placed at relatively long distance. Hydrogen ions generated in volume of the first sample are chemically bonding by neighboring specimen. In other words, polyacrylic acid gel (reaction 1) may be considered as a donor, and the gel-2 as an acceptor of protons (reaction 2). Consequently, both gels obtain non-zero electrostatic charge (Fig 4), and behavior of the system now is determined by macroscopic charge distribution.

First, non-zero charge of each specimen leads to repulsion of charged functional groups of each gel from each other. It is necessary to underline, that charges of functional groups inside each gel actually is moveable. Their motion has the same mechanism as holes conductivity in semiconductors. A proton may disconnect from a –COOH group and join to neighbor dissociated –COO- group. Totally, such process may be considered as motion of –COO- charged “particle”. Repulsion of such negative particles leads to formation of a thin charged layer at surface of a specimen, which take part in long-distance interaction with acceptor of protons, while the degree of dissociation of weak carbon acid is low.

This additional force is relatively strong when the distance between specimens is short, and this force is obviously negligible when one specimen is placed quite far from another. Consequently, the dependence of additional swelling of hydrogel on distance l may be explained by peculiarity of non-compensated charge distribution only. Moreover, magnitude of electric field, which appears at the surface of a specimen involved in long-distance interaction is limiting factor of charging. Indeed, vector of electric field cross the surface in any case (when the specimen is fixed quite close to oppositely charged one, and when they are placed sufficiently far from each other too).

As well as in the case of classic swelling of polyelectrolyte hydrogel [11], this field plays a double role. First, it acts on charged particles concentrated near the surface of the specimen resulting in additional swelling. Second, the same action promote decomposing of =NH+2 groups and may tear out hydrogen ions, i.e. magnitude of the field restrict electric charge of both specimens. Obviously, this factor restrict total amount of ions involved in reaction (2) also.

Low-molecular ions are separated between hydrogel pair in this reaction (3); besides, low-molecular salt is removed from solution into gel pair volume, i.e. anomalous ion exchange actually takes place. Normally reaction (3) cannot take place at all, but in the case of long-distance interactions between hydrogels it became quite understandable. Indeed, reaction (3) is a total of two different processes, which take place in different specimens.

Macroscopic electric charge of both samples after process (3) is likely to be compensated if total amount of low-molecular ions in solution is enough, and electric field will be close to zero. Nevertheless one should take into account, that decreasing of eclectic field moves off the factor, which restricted total amount of protons involved in reaction (2). Consequently, an additional portion of hydrogen ions may be bonded by R2=NH groups. This ions give new charge to =NH-gel, which, obviously may be compensated by low-molecular ions if their total amount in solution is enough, etc. Thus, the reaction (4) may take place until all hydrogen ions will be changed by potassium ions.

Fig. 2 represents direct experimental evidence of anomalous ion exchange phenomenon. Namely, it is well known [11], that polymer networks based on carbon acids may demonstrate respectively low swelling ratio due to low degree of dissociation of weak polyacid (30-80 g/g for typical specimens). On the contrary, degree of dissociation of the same gel in the salt form (R1-COONa) is much higher (100-900 g/g, [1,2,11, 12]). Curve 1 at Fig. 2 corresponds to product of reaction of anomalous ion exchange, while swelling ratio reach values, which are normal for gel in salt form and never can be obtained for acid gel of used type.

The most obvious applications of observed phenomenon lie practically in the same field that for ion exchange (water purification, enrichment technologies, etc). Nevertheless, anomalous ion exchange has some sufficient preferences. First, the ionic exchange system based on phenomenon of long-distance interactions between hydrogels is easy renewable. Indeed, it is enough to apply mechanical stress for releasing concentrated salt solution. Second, anomalous ion exchanging gives possibility to get out arbitrary salt from solution, etc.

Thus, one can say that interactions between acid and protonized polymer hydrogels demonstrate an example of chemical process, which results in appearance of macroscopic electric charge. Generally, this charge may be considered as a chemical signal, which can propagate for a quite long distance and used for artificial neuron networks development in future. Other applications of observed phenomena are connected with anomalous ion exchange, for example for deep purification of water solutions from low-molecular salts.

