Forests play a critical role in our ecosystems by providing various ecological, economic, social, and cultural services (Chen and Meentemeyer, 2016). However, diseases caused by invasive pathogens are an increasing threat to forest health (Flower and Gonzalez-Meler, 2015; Fei et al., 2019). Management options may be limited and prohib- itively expensive depending on the extent of pathogen spread and es- tablishment, so early and accurate detection is essential, particularly for invasive pathogens that may not yet be broadly distributed or are cryptic in nature. Current methods for disease detection include

observation of visual symptoms, followed by molecular confirmation when needed. However, visual assessment of disease symptoms manually is laborious and prone to errors (Bock et al., 2020; Bian et al., 2022). While early molecular detection methods can generally be developed, they often involve labor-intensive procedures, high costs, and operational limitations (Schaad and Frederick, 2002; Fang and Ramasamy, 2015).

Recent technological advancements have produced new tools, espe- cially spectral imaging combined with artificial intelligence, for rapid and accurate plant phenotyping, including early plant disease detection in both crops and trees (Mishra et al., 2020; Bian et al., 2022). By combining traditional imaging with spectroscopy, spectral imaging can capture both the spatial and spectral features of an object, including healthy and diseased plants, thus enabling the identification of subtle changes associated with disease development before visible symptoms

The averaged spectrum of a leaf sample was calculated by averaging the spectrums of all the pixels in the leaf regions. The preprocessing steps of averaged spectra derived from hyperspectral image cubes were adapted from Wei et al. (2021a). First, wavelengths at two extreme ends (<490 nm and >900 nm) were removed. Then, spectra were smoothed using a Savitzky-Golay filter with a second-order polynomial and a window size of 11 data points. Lastly, the number of features was reduced by half to 156 wavelengths/bands using a self-developed spec- tral binning function. In comparison, averaged spectra derived from the 6-band multispectral image were directly used for further analysis.

To better interpret classification models built upon machine learning algorithms, spectral and spatial feature importance patterns were plot- ted for the best-performing SVM models built upon averaged spectra derived from hyperspectral images and the ResNet18 CNN model built upon multispectral images, respectively. In the linear SVM models, spectral feature importance was measured by coefficients, representing the weights assigned to each predictor variable in the linear combina- tion that was used to make predictions. In the ResNet18 CNN model built upon multispectral cube images, the class-specific feature heatmaps were generated using Gradient-weighted Class Activation Mapping (Grad-CAM) (Selvaraju et al., 2017). The highlighted regions in each Grad-CAM heatmap represent relatively important features for the model's prediction, which might indicate symptomatic leaves in the current study.

symptoms among the four elm genotypes in the current study is consis- tent with previous studies (Flower et al., 2017; Pinchot et al., 2017), which found NA 57845 as susceptible and Princeton and RV 467 as resistant to DED. Previous studies found RV 141 to initially exhibit high tolerance to DED (Flower et al., 2017; Pinchot et al., 2017), with symptom development increasing substantially two years after inocula- tion (Flower, personal communication).

Results indicated that HSI had an advantage in detecting DED during the early stage of infection before disease symptoms were visible to human eyes. The rich spectral information provided by HSI could potentially capture plant early responses to the pathogen infection. Meanwhile, MSI combined with deep learning also showed an advan- tage in capturing symptomatic spots on the leaves once foliar disease symptoms appeared because of its high spatial resolution images. The innovative engineering design of LeafSpec, which includes an enclosed imaging chamber with embedded uniform light sources, ensured the imaging quality with a high signal-over-noise ratio and thus built a suc- cessful foundation for further machine learning-based analysis.

On the other hand, we acknowledged that the current study had some limitations. Firstly, as a proof-of-concept study, the elm trees evaluated were grown under a controlled environment. Factors like dif- ferent light conditions, seasonal variations, or interactions with other pathogens might influence the spectral signatures of the leaves.

Secondly, only four genotypes of American elms were included in this study due to logistical constraints. For future studies, it would be valu- able to explore a broader range of elm genotypes to further assess the model's generalizability and validate models developed in this study under different environmental conditions, potentially enhancing its ap- plicability. By broadening the scope of evaluated elm genotypes and testing in varied environmental settings, we believe there is immense potential to refine and extend the applicability of the proposed imaging solutions that would pave the way for advanced, accurate, and efficient DED detection and resistance screening in the future.

