The first step in any ML experiment is to extract impactful features from the raw data Chandrashekar and Sahin (2014); Dash and Liu (1997). The goal of feature extraction is to find the most informative group of features (unique patterns) to improve the effectiveness of the classifier. Feature extraction, also called feature engineering, ex- tracts features from the original data to achieve accurate classification. Feature extraction is an important step in ML as classification perfor- mance can decrease if features are not carefully selected Kebonye et al. (2022).

construct a reduced dimensional representation of a dataset while maintaining as much discriminative information as possible. To prevent the implications of excessive dimensionality, it is frequently used before building classification or regression models. There are many feature se- lection methods in supervised learning, classified into three categories, as shown in Fig. 2. The most commonly used DR techniques are princi- pal component analysis (PCA), Partial Least Squares Regression (PLS), and linear discriminate analysis (LDA). However, algorithms based on metaheuristic approaches such as genetic algorithms (GA) are gaining ground in the field of feature selection.

The best nutrient management strategies are predicted based on a set of characteristics Khanal et al. (2018); Jian et al. (2020). For example, 17 nutrients are necessary for optimal crop development, including ni- trogen, phosphorus, and potassium. They are all equally important to crops, although their proportions are constantly changing. Because of these variations, the availability of nutrients in the soil affects plant growth, as the soil is the most important source of these nutrients for plants. If any of these nutrients are lacking, crop yield is reduced. In ad- dition to the nutrients already mentioned, the following section dis- cusses some other common features that can be divided into three categories:

nificant impact on agricultural productivity. Even low levels of rainfall can have a detrimental effect on crops, and production can fluctuate sig- nificantly due to extreme variations in rainfall amounts and periods. On the other hand, weather conditions are more complicated than just a rainy or dry climate. There are a number of climate features to consider. Total daily and annual precipitation, high-yield and well-distributed precipitation, and the Shannon diversity index (SDI) for precipitation are some of the most common. Other characteristics include daily max- imum and minimum temperatures and total solar radiation, pest infes- tation under various atmospheric conditions and weather patterns.

Algorithms for nutrient management include soil type and texture, organic matter, pH, accessible and exchangeable nutrients, total inor- ganic and organic carbon, and the total capacity of a soil to hold ex- changeable cations (CEC). Qin et al. (2018) created two additional characteristics: a water table-adjusted available water capacity (AWCwt) and a ratio of cumulative seasonal precipitation to AWCwt (RAWCwt). Both features are used to reflect field-level hydrologic con- ditions and are dependent on conditions that are meant to showcase how soil hydrology impacts nitrogen dynamics. Taking into consider- ation that the amount of nitrogen lost under wet conditions is consid-

harvest key, fresh and dry biomass, fertilizer rate, and nutrient uptake Ahmed et al. (2021). The information contained in the red and near- infrared (NIR) canopy radiances is used mainly in common vegetation indices: Ratio Vegetation Index (RVI)[4] and Normalized Difference Vegetation Index (NDVI)[5].

for nutrient management and fertilizer recommendation. It addresses the many factors that influence yield and how machine learning could help predict fertilizer recommendations. Table 1 and Table 2 show a se- lection of articles from the literature on this topic. An extensive search was conducted to select relevant studies that use machine learning for nutritional management of cropping systems. In the first step, keywords

such as “nutrient management”, “machine learning in agriculture”, “fer- tilizer forecasting” were used in various combinations including “ma- chine learning in nutrient management”, “fertilizer recommendation tools with machine learning” for a broad search through Science Direct, Pubmed, and Scopus. At a first level, publications were classified into two general categories: Nitrogen Management and Nitrogen Phospho- rous Potassium (NPK) Management. Only articles published in peer- reviewed journals were selected. Although climate prediction is critical to agricultural productivity, it is not covered in this review because ma- chine learning applications to climate prediction are part of a separate area of study. Finally, all articles covered here were selected for the pe- riod from 2010 to July 2022 and found to be all within the scope of this work.

In recent years, many applications of nutrient management models have surfaced, especially regarding nitrogen recommendations, as it is considered very important for yield estimation Puntel et al. (2016); Dai et al. (2013); Castaldi et al. (2016); Shi et al. (2021). In the present time, the implementation of ML techniques for N management can be divided into different approaches such as EONR and NNI determination, remote sensing and spectroscopy.

Determining the economically optimal amount of nitrogen can be influenced by various factors such as rainfall and management practices. Advances in ML paved the way for better Economic Optimum Nitrogen Rate (EONR) predictions that take these various parameters into ac- count. Qin et al. (2018) looked at the prediction of EONR from field trial data at two different time points: i) seeding, ii) split application

time points. Model-derived features such as AWCwt and RAWCwt and weather data were used to build the prediction algorithm. RR provided better results compared to LR, LASSO and Gradient Boosted Regression Trees (GBRT). However, the results of this study cannot be generalized due to the limited data sets. Ransom et al. (2019) evaluated the ability of a set of machine learning and statistical algorithms to improve

nitrogen recommendations for corn using measured soil properties along with weather variables from 49 sites in the Midwestern United States. The authors examined different modeling scenarios for improv- ing three different nitrogen recommendation tools and tested whether adjustments for multicollinearity and accounting for the interaction be- tween soil and weather parameters would result in improvements. Per- formance was evaluated using the out-of-sample RMSE and included soil and weather data prior to each nitrogen recommendation tool. RF provided better nitrogen recommendations, but compared to the per- formance of the models in terms of number of variables, the decision tree provided the best fit with the smallest number of variables. The results showed that reducing multicollinearity slightly improved the performance of the different ML algorithms.

The objective of a study by Correndo et al. (2021) was defining the importance of soil, weather conditions, and cropping management in estimating and magnifying uncertainty in key components affecting the nitrogen response of corn yield. When yield without fertilizer, Yield at Economic Optimum N Rate (YEONR), and nitrogen fertilizer ef- ficiency (NFE) are considered in EONR. Bayesian statistics were used for the N response curves fitting along with Extreme Gradient Boosting that evaluates the importance of the traits in the predictability process. EONR was the most difficult attribute to estimate, with an average un- certainty of 50 kg N ha-1. Weather accounted for about two-thirds of

the variation in estimated values for YEONR, EONR, and NFE. Uncer- tainty in all aspects of the N response mechanism was also influenced by weather conditions (72% to 81%). With a constant but moderate con- tribution, soil factors explained both the predicted N response and the associated uncertainty (10% to 23%). Model uncertainty as a form of risk, potential seasonal weather predictions, and the development of probabilistic frameworks to optimize this data-driven decision process for corn nitrogen application should be considered in improving nitro- gen decision support systems.

Wang et al. (2021b) investigated the possibility of improving in- season N-nutrient index (NNI) along with corn grain yield prediction by combining management, soil, and weather data with’GreenSeeker’ data, an optical sensor that instantaneously measures crop health and vigor using NDVI. RFR was compared to Lasso linear regression (LLR), which contains similar combined data from multiple sources, and to the simple regression model, which uses only plant data. Studies of corn nitrogen fertilization and crop density were conducted at four sites in northeastern China. Using the RFR model to predict grain yield to simulate the response of corn grain yield response to a range of nitro- gen fertilizer applications at different growth stages is an innovative method for seasonal nitrogen fertilizer recommendations that have been developed. The simulated results were as good as the measured results. The RFR model-based recommendation technique, which

combines crop sensing data with soil data, is a promising avenue for corn nitrogen management. To improve machine learning-based N rec- ommendation for seasonal seeding, additional data from the year of the site, varying conditions on the farm, and sensors with more spectral ranges are needed. Similarly, data from the RapidSCAN active canopy sensor was also combined with Genetic*Environmental*Management (G*E*M) information to increase the accuracy of NNI estimation in the Midwestern U.S. under a variety of weather, management and soil variables Li et al. (2022);

Qiu et al. (2021) presented that conventional methods for monitor- ing nitrogen nutrient index (NNI) require manual real field measure- ment data, which is time-consuming and costly, red-green-blue (RGB) imagery from unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) is an alternative. In this study, six machine learning algorithms were used to extract rele- vant data for predicting the NNI and vegetation index (VI). The results of predicting the NNI of rice using these algorithms showed that the methods of RF performed the best in each growing season, with the best NNI prediction occurring during the filling and early maturity stages. At the early maturity stage, rice NNI was found to be significantly related to both available nitrogen in the soil (AN) and yield. Combining RGB imagery from UAVs with ML algorithms provided a robust and sim- ple solution for instant validation of rice NNI that improved nitrogen use efficiency and provided suggestions for precise fertilization in rice crops despite its limited accuracy.

as input data for the FNN to predict N content. With R2 = 0.903, RMSEP = 0.307%, and a residual prediction error RPDp = 3.238 for N concentration, the model SAE-FNN performed quite well. The results show that with a combination of hyperspectral imaging and deep learn- ing, it is possible to quickly and non-destructively detect N concentra- tion in canola leaves to provide better fertilizer recommendations.

applied transfer learning, considering (V4, V6 and R1) as growth stages. The leaf samples were then digitized to generate 384 images represent- ing the 16 nitrogen treatments considered in the study. The results showed significant differences with respect to each growth stage. How- ever, CNNs built using RGB images provided great results (average 61.8%) compared to traditional text-based methods (average 50–60%) Montes Condori et al. (2017).

Similarly, in the study by Kou et al. (2022), RGB images of the cotton canopy were acquired using a UAV digital camera. The nitrogen content of the cotton canopy was predicted using two cotton cultivars and six nitrogen gradients. Forty-six features were extracted from the image after image preprocessing, and CNN were used to extract deep features. Pearson and partial least squares were used feature selection. For accu- rate prediction of nitrogen content of cotton crowns, manual features were used as input to build linear regression models, support vector machines, and one-dimensional CNN regression models. Deep learning based features were used as inputs to build a two-dimensional CNN re-

gression model. The results were R2 = 0.80 and RMSE = 1.67 g kg-1 for Xinluzao 45 and R2 = 0.42 and RMSE = 3.13 g kg-1 for Xinluzao 53, in- dicating that cotton nitrogen content can be predicted on a large scale

In addition, soil properties such as total nitrogen can be determined by combining ML algorithms and spectroscopy. These algorithms are an excellent alternative to simple regression models when the goal is to in- crease the accuracy of the regression. Partial least square regression (PLSR) is a widely used approach for processing multivariable inputs, extracting successive linear combinations of the spectra to achieve the coupled goals of effectively explaining response variation and optimally explaining predictor variation. This is the most commonly used method in soil spectroscopy and chemometrics and has proven successful in assessing water and nitrogen status. The availability of large data sets coupled with better training and the provision of highly accurate models is one of the major challenges for this system when applied to nutritional management. Predictive models have been developed using several technologies, including PLSR, which reduces the number of features required, and neural networks, which compensate for non- linearity Wang et al. (2021a); Tavakoli and Gebbers (2019); Morellos et al. (2016). Table 1 summarizes and includes brief descriptions of the above studies.

and probabilistic models with site-specific predictive models for fertili- zation of potato crops in eastern Canada. Using statistical models, potato (Solanum tuberosum L.) performance is often associated with fertilizer requirements. Because of the many variables involved, such as soil, land management, genotypes, weather, and pests and diseases, it is dif- ficult to predict appropriate nutrient levels. This study compared differ- ent models for evaluating NPK requirements for high quality and yield as a function of soil, land management, and weather. They used data from 273 field trials conducted in Quebec between 1979 and 2017.

the prediction of marketable tuber yield, the ML models gave R2 values of 0.49–0.59, which were higher than the R2 of the Mitscherlich model (0.37). Some models did not agree in obtaining optimal rates from dose-response surfaces under constant conditions. Gaussian processes

and in nutrient management and fertilizer recommendations in partic- ular, the literature shows that research needs to focus on the availability of data, including all the important factors that need to be used to over- come the limitations Ransom et al. (2019); Wang et al. (2021b); Yu et al. (2010); Cholissodin et al. (2016). Table 2 summarizes the above work for the case of nutrient management subcategory.

The development of a nutrient management tool using machine learning generated a great deal of interest in the scientific community, which recognized the importance of food security and the sustainability of its processes Thompson et al. (2015). With the revolution that our modern agriculture is experiencing today, the use of various sensors, smart irrigation systems, and remote sensing, more and more datasets are becoming available Chlingaryan et al. (2018). These large datasets have emerged simultaneously with major advances in computer science such as machine learning, which has led to incredible break- throughs in this research area. In this paper, we collected and reviewed various machine learning approaches in the field of nutrient manage- ment. Analysis of these articles revealed that in the nitrogen manage- ment category, Random Forests was the most frequently used ML

In the Nitrogen category, we can see a high presence of image inputs, reflecting the emerging trend and the wide use of multi-source images (HS, RGB, NIR, etc.). This has been enabled by the development and af- fordability of this technology along with high computational power. By integrating machine learning with IoT data, farm management sys- tems are evolving into true artificial intelligence systems that provide better recommendations and insights for future decisions and actions, with the goal of increasing productivity. To this end, it is envisioned that the use of machine learning models will become even more popu- lar over time, enabling the development of integrated and applicable technologies. Despite the great strides that have been made recently in the field of nutrient management, actual practical/accurate applica- tion is currently a challenge. Many limitations have come to light that are related to the methods used and are both intrinsically and extr- insically related to the target problem. The current state of nutrient management using digital imagery and machine learning was also discussed to provide an in-depth analysis of the various challenges faced by many researchers working on this topic. Collecting datasets with such precise factors and for a specific crop is usually not an easy

To determine suitability for practical application, basic data from studies of crop response to nutrients in fields with cross-validation are needed. Soil properties John et al. (2020), plant density, weather indi- ces, plant variety, plant growth stage and N, P, and K fertilizer rates, are all very important and should be considered in data collection be- cause they can directly affect the model output Trontelj ml and Chambers (2021). Yield response can vary by plant variety in addition to the fertilizer rate proposed by recommendation systems. In addition, field trials would directly impact yield and improve not only biomass, but also solution sustainability and soil health. This practice would shed light on forgotten features such as SOM and tillage systems, lead- ing to a better understanding of soil dynamics and better recommenda- tions. For example, Ransom et al. (2019) and Qin et al. (2018) tested several models and algorithms to improve nitrogen requirement for

However, we believe that data availability is the bottleneck when it comes to taking full advantage of what ML can offer to the field of fertil- izer recommendations. We encourage researchers to share their data with the community to enhance the capabilities and impact of the research. We also encourage researchers developing ML-based recom- mendation systems to suggest the best suitable features and develop other features that can be collected at a large scale. In addition, it is crucial to standardize the methodological approach to nutrient manage- ment systems based on a detailed description of the entire system so that results from different experiments and parts of the world can be logically compared.

community. However, this also leads to many misleading publications by researchers who either do not know exactly what ML expertise is re- quired or do not have the proper soil and plant nutrient knowledge. This phenomenon has led to a great pipe dream Schut and Giller (2020); Lischeid et al. (2022); Paudel et al. (2021) in which scientists confirm the accuracy of their models while considering the wrong parameters. Given the rapid progress ML has made in recent decades, it is very likely that the world will see an increase in the applications of ML models. The integration and applications are becoming more and more remarkable. ML algorithms show great potential when properly used for support or decision-making. The fusion of spectral and spatial features and unique hybrid processing systems that complement each other's limitations would definitely improve the understanding of soil dynamics. This success will likely be paired with better yields leading

Backhaus, A., Bollenbeck, F., Seiffert, U., 2011. Robust classification of the nutrition state in crop plants by hyperspectral imaging and artificial neural networks. 2011 3rd Work- shop on Hyperspectral Image and Signal Processing: Evolution in Remote Sensing (WHISPERS). IEEE, pp. 1–4.

John, K., Abraham Isong, I., Michael Kebonye, N., Okon Ayito, E., Chapman Agyeman, P., Marcus Afu, S., 2020. Using machine learning algorithms to estimate soil organic car- bon variability with environmental variables and soil nutrient indicators in an alluvial soil. Land 9, 487.

