Abstract Financial services organisations spend a significant amount of their IT budgets maintain- ing legacy systems. This paper identifies the characteristics of legacy systems and explores why such systems are so costly to maintain and support. Three models for the assessment and management of legacy system costs are examined and a new meta-model that addresses differences between the existing models is proposed. The new meta-model is then applied to a large UK financial services company - FinCo. Input data for the new meta-model are provided by the company’s senior busi- ness and IT executives and the results compared with the firm’s actual legacy system management plans. The paper concludes by identifying improvements the company should make to these current legacy system management plans and its longer-term strategy for managing legacy systems.

Over fifteen years ago Bennet et al. [4] observed that research into legacy system assessment approached the subject as a technical issue rather than as a broader business problem. More recently Alkazemi et al. [5] recognise this technical ‘‘bias”, noting the need for tools for senior management to be able to make informed decisions about legacy systems, while Plant [6] identifies the difficulty of engaging senior management in such decisions.

maintenance costs [5,7,8]. However, while the earlier published models include a wide range of assessment criteria they do not include more contemporary architectural considerations such as extensibility and interoperability. Conversely, a recent model by Alkazemi et al. [5] lacks recognition of detail such as lines of code and control flow as proposed by De Lucia et al. [7]. In an attempt to address these anomalies and unify the positive features of the varying approaches, this paper pro- poses a new meta-model derived from a range of existing mod- els. The utility of the meta-model is then assessed through its application to FinCo - a large UK financial services company. By using a case study we seek to answer the following research questions: is the meta-model effective for analysing the company’s core IT system, Customer Service System (CSS), to assess whether it is a legacy system? And, if so, does the meta-model identify appropriate solutions to contain the maintenance costs for CSS? Further details of our research methodology, findings and conclusions are discussed below.

Many of today’s legacy systems were built in a time when computer processing and storage capacity were far more expensive than they are today [15]. Consequently, efficiency frequently took precedence over a system being understood or maintainable, with the inevitable consequences in terms of degradation [13]. System degradation can also be caused by poor documentation and version control amongst other fac- tors, but as De Lucia et al. [7] observe, whatever the cause such deterioration inevitably increases maintenance costs. This lar- gely explains the high proportion of total IT expenditure organisations commit to system maintenance. Furthermore, Alkazemi et al. [5] contend legacy systems do not reflect con- temporary architectural advances such as the emphasis on pro- gram reuse and construction of component libraries. These more recent approaches facilitate the constant evolution of sys- tems and help prevent systems becoming legacy with their resultant high maintenance costs.

A number of solutions to minimise the cost of maintaining legacy systems have been proposed. For example, De Lucia et al. [7, p. 642] refer to ‘‘ordinary maintenance, reverse engi- neering, restructuring, reengineering, migration, wrapping, replacement with commercial off-the-shelf software and dis- carding”. These authors acknowledge that there is confusion in the use of some of these terms in the literature, noting reengineering and migration as examples.

Bennet et al. [4] are more concise in proposing, ‘‘discard”, ‘‘wrap”, ‘‘outsource”, ‘‘freeze”, ‘‘carry on” and ‘‘reverse engi- neering” as potential solutions. As it is unlikely that out- sourcing would negate the need to implement one of the other solutions proposed, the suggestion that outsourcing offers a solution for managing legacy systems must be ques- tioned. The viability of carry on as a solution for an indefinite period also seems questionable for a business critical system. Additionally, it is highly likely that even a very stable old sys- tem will need some form of remediation at some point. For example, if the availability of people with the skills required to support an obsolete language is in decline this will require some form of corrective action.

Where there is consistency in the legacy system literature is in recognising that a decision on the best option to manage such systems should be based on a structured assessment incorporating economic and quality factors. These decisions must be taken and supported by a broad range of stakeholders within the organisation and not limited to technical consider- ations alone [14,18–20]. Additionally, research by Khadka et al. [11] suggests that the characteristics of an organisation operating and supporting the legacy system must be consid- ered. It is essential that organisational factors such as resis- tance to change and/or weakness in systems support be reflected in any proposed system solution.

The model output can then be plotted on a decisional matrix [14] that indicates a recommended solution (Fig. 2). In the case of FinCo the model’s output was compared with the company’s actual legacy system management plans to iden- tify areas of divergence and thus potential improvements in these plans.

Given the organisational nature of the subject under investiga- tion and the design of the meta-model it was clear that a case study that provided the basis for situational analysis was an appropriate research approach [21,22]. Time and resource con- straints combined with access opportunities meant a single case study was both a pragmatic course of action while also providing the necessary exploratory device/pilot study to test the utility of the meta-model [23]. As a large financial services company with four million accounts FinCo was identified as a highly relevant case study, not least because in common with many other similar companies FinCo estimates that mainte- nance of its core system, CSS, which supports the majority of the firm’s business operations, accounts for 75–80% of the annual IT budget.

Documentary analysis was also conducted on FinCo’s cur- rent IT plans to determine the actual decisions FinCo had made about its core system, CSS. The research data were anal- ysed using the meta-model proposed in Section 4, and the results applied in the decisional matrix. The model’s output was then compared with the company’s actual legacy system management plans to identify areas of divergence and thus potential improvements in these plans.

With 11 system characteristics and 10 respondents there were a total of 110 responses for this part of the questionnaire. 75 of the 110 responses agreed the characteristics were applica- ble to CSS and 29 said they may be. Six of the responses were negative and none answered, don’t know. The high proportion of positive responses to these questions suggests that FinCo’s CSS platform conforms to the definition of legacy systems proposed in Section 2 and should be treated as such. No legacy system attributes other than those already identified in the literature were proposed in response to the open question asking for suggestions of new attributes that should be considered.

For each individual business attribute, the very low to very high and don’t know answers by respondents were re-coded as values from 1 to 5 and 0 respectively, to facilitate plotting on the decisional matrix. Questionnaire responses with the same value for each of the business value attributes were aggregated across the ten FinCo respondents and results tabulated in Table 2. 66% of the 100 attribute values were recorded as high or very high. Only 5% were rated low or very low.

4.12. This compares with a maximum value of 5 and places CSS in the top two quadrants of the decisional matrix. The high business value indicates that the solution recommended by the assessment will be to conduct extensive re-engineering, replacement by a commercial off-the-shelf system (COTS) if available, or continue normal system maintenance. The techni- cal value is required to complete the assessment and identify a recommended solution.

Maintainability attributes account for 72% of all don’t know responses by FinCo. To explore the impact of this con- centration of don’t know responses on the overall results, the analysis was rerun excluding all the maintainability responses. Though the outcome is an increase in the technical value for FinCo’s CSS from 2.32 to 2.63, the combined business and revised technical value remains in the same quadrant when plotted in the decisional matrix.

More than a third of respondents demonstrate uncertainty about the six organisational attributes identified in the litera- ture influencing legacy system remediation plans in FinCo (Table 4). This doubt is reinforced by FinCo’s IT plans which show limited signs of these factors being considered. The inter- nal development and maintenance value index is 4.4 compared with a maximum value of 5 and lower index values for all of the other attributes. This suggests that FinCo may have a gap between its emphasis on internal development and mainte- nance and its organisational capability to deliver its legacy sys- tem management plans through these means.

The remediation actions planned by FinCo for its legacy sys- tem were identified by reviewing the company’s IT plans. These plans conclude that no suitable COTS is available to replace FinCo’s CSS platform. This finding is consistent with the high business value placed on the specialist functions per- formed by CSS.

centre management. These extensive plans are consistent with the recommendations made by Sommerville [14] for systems mapped in the HBV-LTV quadrant when no COTS is avail- able. While the plans involve outsourcing of the data centres to capitalise on external expertise in this area, there is little evi- dence of any other limitations in FinCo’s organisational attri- butes influencing the legacy system remediation plans or being addressed as part of these plans.

In this paper we set out to construct a legacy system assess- ment meta-model and then carry out situational analysis of the utility of this device by applying it to a real case – FinCo. In so doing we accept the argument that one rationale for using a single case study is that it can confirm or challenge whether a theory’s or model’s propositions are correct [22,23]. Our aim was therefore to use FinCo to examine the effectiveness of the meta-model for analysing IT systems and assessing whether these are legacy systems, and, if so, the util- ity of the meta-model for identifying appropriate solutions to contain legacy system maintenance costs.

as such. The high proportion of positive questionnaire responses also indicate that the business and technical value attributes proposed in the meta-model are valid for use in legacy system assessment. We would add, however, that this is not a particularly surprising finding given our meta-model combines business and technical factors with contemporary architecture attributes and organisational considerations from three existing, research based, models – as discussed in Sec- tion 3. The value of the unified meta-model is therefore that it provides a holistic approach that recognises the real-world complexity of legacy systems. Thus, while we accept the widely held view that generalising from a single case study is difficult, our view is that given the meta-model’s construction it could prove a useful analytical device for any organisation in a sim- ilar situation to FinCo.

That said, there are several important observations to make on the meta-model by way of concluding this paper. The first is to note that despite the disparate knowledge of the FinCo respondents all but one of the individual outcomes plot into the HBV-LTV quadrant when mapped onto the decisional matrix. This is also true for the mapping of the consolidated response and the consolidated response excluding all answers from the maintainability section. Thus we conclude that although the technical knowledge of the assessment partici- pants varied considerably the results show a high degree of consistency in the output of the meta-model.

Second, given our knowledge of the FinCo respondents we attribute the high number of don’t know responses to the main- tainability section of the technical attribute list compared with business attributes as due to the limited technical knowledge of the senior business respondents. By comparison, members of FinCo’s technical team were better placed to offer a view on both business and technical attributes. This suggests that bias- ing the assessment participant selection in favour of senior technical representatives may lead to a more informed analy- sis. However, such an approach would serve to perpetuate the concerns discussed earlier in the paper about the lack of broad business participation in such important and potentially very expensive decisions for FinCo, as well as ownership of the outcome [4–6]. An alternative approach would be to share the output of the meta-model and decisional matrix with all the FinCo respondents in a group meeting to help foster discus- sion on the results and build greater common understanding and ownership across the institution. Another approach might be for respondents to complete the questionnaire in a joint forum where all of the participants have the opportunity to gain a greater understanding of the questions and foster debate about potential concerns.

Finally, we note that FinCo’s IT plans to reengineer to improve quality are consistent with the actions expected for a system assessed as being in the HBV-LTV quadrant of the decisional matrix when no COTS is available. This indicates that the meta-model has identified an appropriate solution for FinCo to contain its CSS maintenance costs, as asked in the research questions. However, these plans do not reflect the organisational constraints identified through the compre- hensive, real-world assessment provided by the meta-model. While a very high percentage of FinCo responses indicate the legacy system solutions selected are influenced by the organisational attributes explored, there is only limited evi- dence of this actually happening in FinCo’s IT plans. This weakness in the proposed plans may have become evident

and constructively debated had the questionnaire been com- pleted in a joint forum or the results of the questionnaire dis- cussed in such a forum. They were not. Our view is, therefore, that failure to consider organisational constraints when formu- lating legacy system solutions is likely to have a significant detrimental impact on FinCo’s ability to execute its plans – as it would for organisations more broadly, we would argue. Ultimately, then, we would argue that the meta-model based assessment of FinCo’s CSS legacy system suggests the com- pany re-examine its plans to ensure it has the organisational capabilities to deliver on them. Furthermore, by applying the meta-model to each of the platforms in its portfolio of systems, FinCo has the opportunity to establish an understanding of the relative needs of its platforms from a legacy system man- agement perspective and incorporate this portfolio assessment into its long-term IT strategy.

G.R. Gangadharan, E.J. Kuiper, M. Janssen, P.O. Luttighuis, ‘IT Innovation Squeeze: Propositions and a Methodology for Deciding to Continue or Decommission Legacy Systems, Grand Successes and Failures in IT’, Public and Private Sectors, International Federation of Information Processing, Springer Link, 2013, pp. 481–494 [Online]. Available at

