An improved algorithm based on the modified histogram & mean shift is proposed in order to deal with difficulties in tracking small target of infrared imaging under complex background. The new algorithm is based on a lower dimension combining characteristic weighted histogram, the analogical degree measurement is determined by the Bhattacharyya coefficient, and the target is located through the mean shift. In order to improve the precision and robustness of the modified mean shift algorithm, particle filtering is used to obtain the optimal position estimate. Test results show that, the tracking point fluctuation could be reduced to no more than 2 pixels with the modified algorithm, for the test case.

Small infrared target tracking under complex background is the key technology of precision-guided and early warning system. Compared with visible images, infrared images generally have the problems of low Signal Noise Ratio (SNR) and poor imaging contrast. The poor visibility of small target, the negative impact of illumination and Image noise, and the lack of homogeneity of the brightness in background area, would make tracking become more difficult. Mean Shift algorithm, which utilizes probability density function of pixels within the target region as the feature and transforms tracking to an optimization problem of a similarity function [1], is widely used in target tracking because of the characteristics of simple, robust, and real-time performance. However, because of the disability of characteristic information extraction from small target by using weighted histogram, the algorithm is not so desirable for tracking small

infrared target when the target moves too fast or has partially similarity with the backgrounds, which would cause the system unstable to miss the tracking target. This paper presents an improved mean shift tracking algorithm. By extracting several characteristic from target area, the algorithm structures a lower dimension combining characteristic weighted histogram, and combines mean shift with particle filtering [2], in order to precisely locate the small target and steadying in sequence infrared images. Test results show that the improvements on classical mean shift tracking algorithm are quite effective.

Classical mean shift tracking algorithm uses gray histogram to describe the target appearance. Each pixel within the target region is given a larger value when calculating the probability histogram. The inner pixels are given a large weight, and outer pixels are given a smaller one. Given a set {xi} i=1m of n points in the 2D space R2, the multivariate kernel density estimation with kernel k1 (||) and window radius h, computed in the point y is given by

similarity coefficient,and Cu is normalization constant,which is calculated from       1. Figure 1(c) shows the new histogram which is calculated by formula (6).Compared with the classical histogram in figure 1(b), the new histogram can take a more balanced probability distribution and more target information, which will benefit the follow-up tracking.

Mean shift is a kind of non-parametric density estimation method, which was expected to be applied to in objects Segmentation and tracking. The successful application was done by Dorin Comaniciu .etc [5] [3]. Then based on Taylor series expansion of the formula (9), y can be approximated as

To verify the effectiveness of the proposed algorithm, the target tracking tests are carried out. The size of infrared image for test is 320*240 pixels, the image’s SNR is about 3.8754, the frame rate of the video is 15 frames per second. All the implementations of the classical tracking algorithm (algorithm1) and the modified algorithm (algorithm2) have been

Among the 70 frame images from a image sequence, the modified algorithm could accurately track the target location. Target acquisition probability was close to 100%. Figure 2 shows several frames among the tracking results by the modified algorithm. It is observed that, the tracking effect can be well maintained even the background luminance of images obviously changed. Figure 3 shows the trace of the tracking points by algorithm1 and algorithm2. From figure 3(a), it can be seen that algorithm 1 lost its efficacy obviously. Compared with algorithm 1, the whole process of algorithm 2 was robust as we have seen in Figure 3(b). Figure 4 shows the tracking error of the two algorithms on horizontal and vertical direction. The statistical results show that, with algorithm 1, the tracking point seriously deviated from original target before long. While using the proposed algorithm 2, the tracking point fluctuation could be reduced to no more than 2 pixels successfully.

This paper presents a modified algorithm for small target tracking of infrared imaging. Aiming at the problem that the target characteristic distilling method based on weighted grave histogram is complex and unable to detect targets motion locus timely, sampling efficiency of which is low, a lower dimension combining characteristic weighted histogram method was put forward. In order to precisely locate the target, a small target tracking method based on both mean shift and particle filtering was brought forward. The tests show that the algorithm is able to locate the small target precisely in sequence images when the target is moving swiftly in complex circumstances. It can adapt to the changes of light and similar background, improve the robustness of tracking algorithm.

