Mentions: The number of times a media outlet is mentioned in tweets by other people in the ‘Twittersphere’ (the entire microblogging Twitter world is referred to as a Twittersphere) is indicative of how actively others look up to it. It abstractly measures the popularity of the media outlet. The total number of mentions of a media outlet in the period of observation are determined and used as a measure of their popularity. This is called the number of ‘overall mentions’.

Replies: User replies may either agree or disagree with the media outlet. The agreement/disagreement is determined by sentiment score comparison of the tweet and reply. The subject identification methodology, as suggested in Section 5.2, is also used as a parameter for this decision. An agreement is defined as the case when polarity of the tweet and reply are the same (for the same target subject). Similarly, a disagreement is classified as the case when polar nature of the tweet and reply conflict with each other.

Tweet Activity Time: The time interval for which a tweet is active is a measure of its short term impact. If a tweet by a media outlet re- mains active for a long duration, it implies that the tweet elicited a good response from the target audience and hence the impact of the news bias was sizeable. The tweet activity time is measured by finding the time difference between the time of tweet and the last reply on the tweet. The Twitter API [16] is used to obtain the timestamp of a tweet.

Indirect/Induced Followers: Along with the direct followers, the audience of a tweet also includes a number of people who indirectly view the tweet as a result of someone whom they follow. For example, if a user A retweets a user B, then the tweet by user B automatically gain the followers of A as its audience. Similarly, other tweet re- actions (like and replies) induce indirect followers as they cause the tweet/post to appear on the user’s newsfeed. It is calculated by summing the number of followers of all user-id’s who react to a tweet.

Note: Due to lack of labelled datasets and highly subjective nature of biases, supervised approaches cannot be applied for this use case. These formulations use a statistical approach where the value of constants (parameter weights) and operators used in the formulations are based on theoretical investigations. The formulae may be improved in the future by taking various other factors which might not have been included presently into account.

Influence Factor (IF) of a media outlet: A measure of how influ- ential a particular media outlet is. It is a function of the direct fol- lowers and number of mentions of the media outlet in the Twittersphere. Let F be the number of followers and M be the number of overall mentions of a media outlet. These two parameters together determine the popularity of the media outlet. The value of F directly measures the audience viewing a tweet by the media outlet, and M measures how actively people engage the media outlet in their dis- cussions. IF is given by:

dm: Disagreements do not promote the bias shown by the tweet. However, they still increase the reach of the tweet. They are therefore inferred to show influence, but lesser than the baseline i.e. fav leading to a weight assignment of 0.6.

4. Persistence (P) of a media outlet: Denotes the resolute of the media outlet. It captures how consistent a media outlet is about its opinion. The persistence of a media outlet is measured by observing its pre- vious tweets and their polarity scores in relation to the latest tweet released by the media outlet, i.e. P is a function of the polarity of past tweets and the latest tweet of the media outlet.

The value of a is chosen to be 0.3 to provide fair weightage to both the last tweet and the series of previously made tweets. It was observed that choosing values of a > 0.3 masked the effect of the historical tweets and

(1) that p could have moved. For example, if p = 1 and PS = — 1, the absolute difference between the two is 2, but this difference is over the range —1 to 1 i.e. 2, thus a persistence of 1-1 = 0. Also, for another

A BIS timeline is also constructed for a neutral media outlet, which serves as a null model. This study chooses DD-News to serve as the neutral outlet. DD-News is a government-funded media outlet with a reputation of providing the most objective news to viewers. This justifies its selection as the null model to calculate the threshold value for checking bias.

The maximum value of the absolute BSIS values on the BSIS-time plot of the media outlet (DD in our case) as obtained from the graph is noted as Neutral Limit (NL). The neutral outlet is said to tweet within the po- larity threshold of NL. It is used as a parameter for calculating the polarity threshold value for a media outlet from its BSIS plot.

Equation (8) given above is used to normalize the value of Neutral Limit NL by accounting for the IF values of the media outlet under study and the neutral outlet (DD in our case). This, in turn, normalizes the value of T which makes it fit for comparison with the BSIS for a media outlet. For example: If a media outlet has a higher value of BSIS due to larger values of F, m, it will still be comparable against a larger value of threshold T generated by Equation (8). Equation (8) will generate a comparatively higher value of T for the media outlet as the ratio of

The same is illustrated using the BSIS -timeline as shown in Fig. 8. The red (Fig. 8(a)), blue (Fig. 8(b)) and green (Fig. 8(c))lines respectively are used to draw the BIS plots for a media outlet for biases for/against the BJP, INC and AAP. The black line represents the threshold limit. The media outlet can be noticed to be ‘alarmingly’ biased towards BJP at several instances (the red line crosses the threshold line several times). The plot also shows that the outlet has a slight negative ‘alarming’ bias towards AAP (the green line in the plot crosses the threshold sometimes). The plot for INC (blue line) stays reasonably within the threshold limit and the media outlets’ bias is not labelled as ‘alarming’ in the given time interval.

The observations made also reveal that most media outlets are far more biased on live TV than in print and social media. Bias detection in Television media could therefore be an important extension to the model. A naive solution is to convert Live TV stream to Natural Language in text and then apply a similar model to detect biases. Also, media biases in terms of panel representation, think-tank citations and selective news coverage should be dealt with.

As seen by means of a series of experiments, journalists and media outlets are responsible for an opinionated mechanism of news reporting which has a deleterious impact on its consumers. More than 40% of the tweets analyzed were found out to be polar. Also, a fraction of as high as 41% of reactors were conditioned through such ‘biased’ polar tweets. This shows that an alarming number of people get conditioned by polar, subjective and biased news every day, something, which goes past the naked eye of humans around the world.

In today’s world where digitization has made people’s life extremely easy, care must be taken to avoid misuse of the dependence on this medium. Consumers should not blindly trust media sources and use their rationale before developing an opinion on an issue. This research aims to help users detect bias in news media by proposing a model for alarming bias detection. The study also shows how media conditions the opinions

Fig. 8. a BSIS plots of a media outlet for political party: BJP. BSIS plots of a media outlet for political party: INC. 8c BSIS plots of a media outlet for political party: AAP. The above-mentioned process can be represented using the flowchart given below in Fig. 9.

attempt to condition the news-consumers in making them believing a falsified report. Tech giants like Google and Facebook have recently started working in this direction. This research aims to address a small fragment of this larger problem of subjective news and its short term impact on the society in large.

Swati Aggarwal designed and supervised the study. Siddharth Shi- khar was responsible for the collection of data and wrote the manuscript. Tushar Sinha pre-processed and organised the data as well as prepared the graphs and tables used in the study. Yash Kukreti worked on the experiments and Analysis of the study and developed the database. All the authors reviewed the final manuscript.

