In the paper we suggested a method for video sequence handling with the aim of producing a single noise- free image. An algorithm for the image alignment based on the approaches of dot matches search and the resolution capacity enhancement has been elaborated. A method for multiple images stacking has been proposed to produce a single noise-free picture. The proposed method has been successfully experimentally tested using developed software tools.

Let us consider this algorithm functioning in details. Suppose, we have two black and white (monochromic) images, ImageRef and ImageCurrent. Each image is represented as HxW elements matrix. It is necessary to find a transformation of ImageCurrent matrix into ImageRef matrix which would minimize the luminance difference of the images (with minimal luminance difference of the images).

The essential idea of the algorithm is to process consequently the images of the video sequence in order to align the images to the pivotal image ImageRef. It is the first image that is chosen to be the pivotal one. Every image ImageCurrent undergoes the iterative handling. Under each iteration the picture resolution grows bigger and the dot math search is performed [7, 8]. Further on, from the dot matches found matrix transformation operators are calculated.

The submitted algorithm is based on defining the coefficient of the contribution that each image makes to the common sum. The contribution coefficient k is the marker of the image noisiness; the higher the noise, the lower is the coefficient, similarly the lower the noise the higher is the contribution coefficient. The possible contribution coefficient value lies within the range of k [0,1].

value to the array of pixel brightness for the median method of image quality improvement is made. Thus, the most noisy images contribution factor of which ki  0 , will not participate in the formation of the final image Isum . As the result of the algorithm work the final image Isum is received.

On the basis of the proposed method of image quality enhancement software tools has been developed [12] It has been tested on images obtained from standard television camera (TC) of water-cooled power reactor (WCPR) in the process of preventative maintenance (this procedure is performed every year on nuclear power plants in Russian Federation). On the single images, obtained from TC, impulse noise caused by work of common radio and electronic test equipment is found. In Fig. 3 a comparison of a single grayscale series image and of the enhanced image, obtained by stacking image series by the proposed method of image quality improvement, is shown.

For the experiment images 5.1.09 - Moon surface ɢ 7.1.03 – Tank have been chosen. Next, two test video sequence have been generated using the mentioned images. White Gaussian noise has been imposed on every single image of video sequences and image quality of received video sequences has been improved applying various methods, in particular, by median composition of images sequence method, by the method, implemented in RegiStax (This program is designed for equalization, addition and image processing in formats BMP, JPEG, FITS, TIFF , or series of AVI frames) [14] and the proposed method of image series stacking taking into consideration the contribution factor of each image. Quality enhancement results are presented in Tables 1 and 2:

While conducting research and development relating to the topic of this paper a method of video sequence processing in order to receive a single non-noisy image has been suggested. The images series alignment algorithm has been developed on the basis of dot matches search and of resolution capacity improvement approaches. The multiple images stacking algorithm has been developed to receive a single non-noisy image.

