Whether green house gas emissions are mainly responsible for global warming or not, the truth is that they have to be reduced in order to improve air quality and to be able to face many problems which span from environmental issues to economical and political ones. Nuclear hydrogen production (NHP), defined as those processes that obtain energy from nuclear reactors to drive the chemical plants in which hydrogen is produced, have been studied since the early 70's as an effective way to provide clean fuels to the automotive and electricity industry. In the past, this concept was really far from industrial application; however, recent advances in nuclear and chemical technology are bringing these plants closer to reality. Two of the most promising NHP technologies have an important step in common: sulfuric acid decomposition, this part of the process is the most energy demanding and the one which operates at the highest temperature; therefore if some improvements in energy usage can be done in this section they will have a strong and positive impact on the whole process efficiency. In the present study, a very simple but realistic methodology is presented to simulate and analyze this important section, validation is achieved through direct comparison with experimental data and a thermal optimization is performed. A 4% reduction in energy consumption is achieved by varying the reactor's outlet temperature.

At the inlet of the bayonet reactor a minimum of 40% mol concentration is desirable [3], therefore water evaporation starts downstream with a flash concentration section. The concentrated acid is sent to the recirculation mixer where it is mixed with the condensed acid that remains after passing through the decomposer, the mix entering the reactor is preheated with the hot effluent, recovering energy by this operation. Figure 1 shows a schematic view of the reactor.

A progressive acid vaporization followed by: chemical decomposition (reaction 1), gas heating and finally another chemical reaction (reaction 2) occur inside the reactor. For thermal integration purposes, this is called cold stream. After exiting the catalytic section, the hot gas starts a cooling process in which its residual heat is transferred to the cold stream; this is called hot stream.

A study of the experimental data reported in Chemical Engineer's Handbook [4] was performed along with numerical analysis. Dynamic interpolation and extrapolation based on this data and computational programming are the basis for SEAS V 0.1, a sulfuric acid modeler which has been developed by this research group.

Figure 4 shows a screen shot of SEAS V 0.1, where the difference of energy requirements is explained. When the reference substance is the sulfuric acid feed to the bayonet (see fig. 1 for reference points), both data, experimental and simulated correspond to 370 kJ/mol [5].

optimization. Figure 5 shows results for this study. According to figure 5, an alpha of 79%, corresponding to an outlet temperature of 144°C reduces the energy consumption in 4% compared to an exit alpha of 70% or the equivalent outlet temperature of 127°C. This case is calculated for an inlet stream at 40°C and 40%mol of sulfuric acid.

