Residual magnetic error remains after standard levelling process. The weak non-geological effect, manifesting itself as streaky noise along flight lines, creates a challenge for airborne geophysical data processing and inter- pretation. Microleveling is the process to eliminate this residual noise and is now a standard areogeophysical data processing step. In this paper, we propose a two-step procedure for single aerogeophysical data microleveling: a deep convolutional network is first adopted as approximator to map the original data into a low-level part with nature geological structures and a corrugated residual which still contains high-level detail geological structures; second, the mixture of Gaussian robust principal component analysis (MoG-RPCA) is then used to separate the weak energy fine structures from the residual. The final microleveling result is the addition of low-level structures from deep convolutional network and fine structures from MoG-RPCA. The deep convolutional network does not need dataset for training and the handcrafted network serves as prior (deep image prior) to capture the low-level nature geological structures in the areogeophysical data. Experiments on synthetic data and field data demon- strate that the combination of deep convolutional network and MoG-RPCA is an effective framework for single areogeophysical data microleveling.

2018). To extract the space localized anomaly details, Fedi et al. (2003) proposed the discrete wavelet transform based magnetic fields decorru- gation methods. Microleveling can also be achieved by statistical methods (Gorune et al., 2018; Davydenko et al., 2014; Zhang et al., 2018). Gao et al. (2021) designed a leveling method based on curvelet transform. Leveling error in data can be effectively removed due to the multi-scale and multi-directional features of curvelet transform.

capture a great deal of low-level image statistics priors. Using the network as a handcrafted prior, they demonstrated excellent applications in image denoising, super-resolution and inpainting. Without training dataset, Liu et al. (2021) used U-net structure as seismic data prior, and applied to seismic data missing trace reconstruction. Qiu et al. (2021) proposed an unsupervised denoising method for seismic random noise attenuation by using the high and low impedance of ConvNet to noise and seismic data.

The paper is organized as follows: Section II introduces deep con- volutional network and MoG-RPCA in detail; Section III presents the model structure and parameter selection process used in this paper. In Section IV, we conduct experiments and discuss the results. And in Sec- tion V, we draw our conclusions.

We use MoG-RPCA to separate the fine scale structures from the re- sidual of the deep convolutional network. The robust principal compo- nent analysis (RPCA) is a powerful method, which decomposed the given data matrix into low rank matrix and sparse matrix (Vidal et al., 2016; Huang et al., 2017). The formula of RPCA can be expressed as

where L is a low rank matrix and S is a sparse matrix. RPCA has suc- cessfully solved many machine learning and computer vision problems. Wu et al. (2019) proposed a workflow to attenuate seismic traffic noise using the lp-norm RPCA. Zhao et al. (2014) developed a generative RPCA model under the Bayesian framework by modeling data noise as a mixture of Gaussians (MoG). This method (MoG-RPCA) has shown good effects on random noise removal and background subtraction.

However, we find that most of the fine structures retained in the re- sidual after deep convolutional network processing is sparse, which can be extracted by MoG-RPCA. We can use this method to extract the fine structures from the residual and add it to the nature geological structures obtained by using deep convolutional network. Therefore, the micro- leveling of aerogeophysical data can be realized by the two-step pro- cedure we proposed.

MoG-RPCA. The deep convolutional network does not need dataset for training and can capture the low-level nature geological structures in the areo-geophysical data. The specific network structure is determined for microleveling effect, computational cost, and number of parameters. MoG-RPCA is used to further extract the weak energy fine structures in the corrugated residual and obtain the microleveling result. We use synthetic and field areogeophysical data to conduct the experiments and show the effectiveness of the proposed method. The two-step micro- leveling procedure can be used to generate labels for the supervised machine learning microleveling methods.

