Since its inception, micro-blog becomes the new hotting darling of the network application and user's favor with its real-time and convenience of use. Gathering a large number of users on the micro-blog and relative freedom of speech information, mirco-blog proves to be a powerful tool to grasp the pulse of the community. In 2011, the number of users of the micro-blog more than 195 million, a growth rate of 208.9 percent, was the explosive growth [1].Moreover, micro-blog application range is more extensive, such as micro-blog tracing of Fukushima earthquake hot events micro interviews, reflects the dense humanity atmosphere and strong social influence. The media storm as micro-blog fission propagation effects, can easily lead to enormous

influence, the slightest mistake will lead to a strong negative effect, ethical issues it raises also gradually apparent and increasingly grim, the prominent problem is that micro- blog might trigger the moral space disorder and moral behavior anomie [2]. At the same time, the academic community has gradually begun to attach importance to research the effective supervision of the micro-blog and yielded some results, such as the development of the micro-blog service and self-discipline convention; guiding micro-blog operators to adopt measures to ensure micro-blog content management; proposing micro-blog users to improve their moral consciousness, strengthening self-discipline, and actively supervising the activities of the micro-blog to find objectionable information, to improve their own moral accomplishment, etc. [3].

Unlike traditional blog, micro-blog is a mini blog; users can rely on a variety of Internet tools to release news instantly, the update time in seconds. Because each time a user can only send 140 characters, so in the early days the information usually appear "fragmentized", in the "self speaking" state. However, with the increase of users, information transmission frequency is also a substantial increase in its spread or "presents" will be grouped in the form of a "hot topic". Information from the initial stage of "fragmentized", to the stage of development of the information classification, polymerization, transmission, can use for reference in the field of natural science self-organization theory to analysis. "Self-organization" is a kind of system from disorder to order, from the lower order to advanced orderly evolution and development of the phenomenon. In fact, micro-blog as an information production system, can be regarded as an "information self-organizing" process [4].

Combining self-organization theory, there is no specific intervention in information self-organizing external conditions, the system is out of external imposed any instruction. The micro-blog now in the technology uses on Folksonomy to micro-blog information organization, Folksonomy helps users to store and manage their information resources through the Tag technology, and provides the sharing and communication platform. They providing users with based on the Tag technology information management mode has also become a kind of new type of network information organization tool: users choose words resource dimension according to their own needs , each adding a word called for resources to add a "Tag" ; Each Tag is equivalent to the user a classification of resources, resources according to the different Tags are organized to different classifications. All users, resources are in a shared platform, the same Tag can also polymerize the same classification of resources from different users. Such information organization pattern has two obvious characteristics: one is in the process of adding Tag to resources, the user need not follow any previously defined for classification or vocabulary; the second is the activity space of each user is not isolated and closed, but opening, sharing, so also is interaction.

In order to achieve the purpose of easy to use, free classification is cancelled for the control means to language. Although based on the label of the method can easily and efficiently achieve similar resources polymerization, the lack of the relationship between semantic relationship between semantic control and category cause the inconvenience to browse and search. Without any increase in the cost of users, the application of the system can adopt certain technical means, through combining with other information organization methods or other information organization methods for free concept, optimization of free classification, in order to improve the effect of browsing and searching, enhance the user experience. At present, foreign researchers have actively spread a variety of test, mining the data label level at the same time constructing ontology based on free classification is the main technical method now.

However, it is complex and difficult to realize the construction of ontology. At present, ontology have concept updated delay problems to get concept in the network environment, it makes that ontology construction and ontology using phase separation, unable to form effective feedback. Author thinks that, the fusion of Ontology and Folksonomy, should be a new integration based on both advantages and disadvantages, construct a similar body structure based on Folksonomy.

In the specific implementation, firstly user labels oneself or others micro-blog information through the Folksonomy, namely for micro-blog information resources on Tag, the Tag in essence is a kind of metadata by users, and have many different types of metadata functions, including resource description, positioning, rights management, etc. In the user plane, metadata representative by label is very simple, completely using natural language, has no difference among the theme, the author or source elements, also does not have controlled vocabulary limited. And in the system level, can use a particular metadata format to carry on the description, in order to make better use of the label information to realize appreciation of this simple metadata from users. Because the Tag number and the constantly changing ,for each Tag constructing ontology is impossible, only can we optimize the popular tags to construct ontology.

In order to meet the needs of building ontology by Folksonomy, the author simplifies the ontology structure , only keeps concept, attribute, examples and related semantic information, the ontology structure based on Folksonomy simplify the existing ontology construction model, only guarantee the micro-blog information this small ontology semantic property, called "micro ontology" by author. Micro ontology construction is easy to realize by RSS push and ontology structure . RSS provides gathering different information to a single page technology platform, so that different sites sharing content.

The characteristics of micro-blog information in spreading are in the following aspects. (1) Information fragmentized, compared with the blog, micro-blog is a more rapid communication mode. Users spend very little time and thinking with short speech production communication content;(2) polymerization of the audience; (3) real-time communication; (4) information delivery, micro-blog information not only can be searched and browsed by the user, but also can use RSS technology to push.

In fact, for micro-blog information dissemination, the hot spot is the need to control and warn of the content. So we only need to test the micro body in a certain time increasing number of examples can know micro-blog dissemination of information, so as to effectively supervise popular micro-blog dissemination of information, and take corresponding measures, such as reducing RSS information delivery and so on in the technical level controlling micro-blog dissemination of information. Figure 1 shows this paper structures micro-blog information supervision model, this model proposes in the technical supervision mode and methods of the micro-blog information, converts the regulation of the micro-blog information for micro ontology and micro-blog information communication ontology to realize the monitoring technology, this has very strong feasibility.

