The development and professionalization of a video game requires tools for analyzing the practice of the players and teams, their tactics and strategies. These games are very popular and by nature numerical, they provide many tracks that we analyzed in terms of team play. We studied Defense of the Ancients (DotA), a Multiplayer Online Battle Arena (MOBA), where two teams battle in a game very similar to rugby or American football. Through topological measures – area of polygon described by the players, inertia, diameter, distance to the base – that are independent of the exact nature of the game, we show that the outcome of the match can be relevantly predicted. Mining e-sport’s tracks is opening interest in further application of these tools for analyzing real time sport.

In recent years, the development of video games has grown considerably. Technological advances have allowed the democratization of the computer and many more people can now access video games on tablets or mobile phones. This hobby has also overtaken cinema, music and even television.

Although artificial intelligence has really improved, facing a mechanical entity does not provide the same ingeniousness or reactivity as a human controlled player. Online games also allow players to challenge each other, making it possible to compete with people from all over the world and even establish a sense of team spirit with people they have never met. The growth of networks makes the game with other humans easier, by suppressing distances. Interest communities are developing and make the games live over time, by feeding forums, writing guides or organizing events and special challenges.

Achieving well on these games requires an often intensive and regular training regimen. The players tend to behave like real sportsmen and their practice overtakes the framework of a simple hobby [1]. Electronic sport becomes popular and the concept of cyber-athlete is emerging2. These athletes can be sponsored by computer equipment suppliers, they take part to worldwide competitions with cash prizes and passionate crowds. Dealing with virtual communities and establishing event organizations may lead to new jobs such as: broadcasters, managers, agents, referees. The market of the electronic sport audience is very promising.

Our interest is in video games that follow the principles of a real collective sport, bringing into opposition two teams, according to a well bounded and regulated game-play. In particular, we study a Multiplayer Online Battle Arena (MOBA) whose objective is about conquering the field of the opponent, as in rugby or American football. This kind of game offers a high reproducibility of situations since the field does not vary over the games. Lots of similarities are then observable between matches played in the E-games environment and the actual sport environment and as such, may make generalizations of what is happening on the actual field of play, easier and studying MOBAs in the sport context, fruitful.

Defense of the Ancients (DOTA) (described in Section 2.2) is a MOBA that consists of two teams of five players who compete on a virtual battlefield. The same battlefield is used for every game. The goal is to push the opposing players in their camp and destroy the iconic building.

The bases are located at the opposite corners of the map (see Figure 1). At the bottom the camp Sentinel, and at the top the clan Scourge. It takes thirty seconds to go from one clan to the other in the middle lane and one minute from the outside lanes. The discs represent defensive towers. Three main paths (central, two sides) are available. Every 30 seconds, three small independent armies leave each base and walk towards the enemy base. On their way, they encounter a small autonomous opposing army. The three encounters define the front.

Embodying a hero with powers, the human player follows the progression of his autonomous armies to help them destroy the towers, and then the buildings at the base. If a player suffers too much damage, his hero is knocked out and dies (for a given amount of time). A MOBA could be seen as a simulation of rugby with five player teams on a very large field with three balls in three different lanes.

A MOBA is a team-play oriented game. Each player chooses a hero from a list of a hundred. Each hero has its own characteristics (strength and weakness). The composition of the team is constrained by the choices of hero made by each player.

During the game, it is vital for each team to coordinate its actions and react to the actions of the opposing team in the most efficient way. These actions are coordinated spatially and temporally, and significantly alter the front line by breaking through the enemy territory, uncovering an opponent. "One versus one" is possible in the game, but isolated actions of a single player are rarely decisive. The MOBA offers a game based on competitive balance in which the reversals are possible and often decisive throughout the game.

An analysis was conducted on 1,120 DOTA games. We studied the relevancy of topological clues about the position of the players, for predicting the outcome of the match. No knowledge about the game was used, except the one allowing for computing the movement speed of the players, which was necessary for inferring their positions.

This sample came from the saved games uploaded by the players, either because they were proud of the result or because they required refereeing by the administrators, for example because some rule had been violated or some bad behavior occurred. This fact can lead to a bias in our study (discussed in Section 3.5).

In order to compare the rough estimate of these clues, the square root of the area is used. It gives a clue which is homogeneous to a distance. Every clue is normalized so that it represents a percentage of the gap between the two bases.

Each match led to a mean of these differences, a standard deviation and a standard score4. These statistical measures better qualify the variations of the clues between winners and losers. Table 1 sums up these variations according to the area of the polygon, its gathering ability, inertia, diameter and remoteness, for the two sample groups Normal and VIP.

The first column of this table tells that the area is very variable but little relevant for the winning. On the other hand, inertia and gathering ability, and to a lesser extent diameter and distance, are really more relevant. The winning team has a better gathering ability and a weaker inertia. These clues are a sign of an advantage for the team having the best mobility.

Table 1. Statistical analysis of the differences of topological clue between the winning and the losing team. The values, which are provided for each corpus (normal or VIP), are the means of the mean for each match, their standard deviation and the standard score.

In order to validate the relevancy of the topological clues for predicting the outcome of the match, we realized some experiments with supervised classification. This decision method enables the computation of a model for the prediction of a class variable, such as the win/loss ratio for a team. Besides its decision-making potential, supervised classification can validate the relevancy of the topological clues. If a reliable model can be computed, it means that these clues are contributory and relevant.

These results have opened a way which is complementary to existing professional expertise. The method consists in analyzing a game starting from the behaviors of the players, considered as tracks. Knowledge is extracted from these tracks and allows to suggest strategic recommendations.

We have detailed a track based system for competitive video games and studied its potential for a strategic analysis of the team play. We introduced low-level topological clues, allowing for characterizing the space structure of a MOBA. We showed that these clues were relevant for predicting the outcome of the match. Despite the bias due to the corpus setting and the tools used for extracting the knowledge, the topological clues were easy to compute and required no preliminary knowledge. At the end, these clues were relevant for studying and analyzing the team balance in collective electronic sports.

