Discovering of optimal cluster through the help of optimization procedure is a recent trend in clustering process. Accordingly, several algorithms have been developed in the literature to mine optimal clusters. Most of the optimization- based clustering algorithms presented in the literature are only focused on the same objective given in the well-known clustering process, k-means clustering. Instead of k-means objective, some more effective objective functions are designed by the researchers for clustering. So, hybridization of those effective objectives with optimization algorithms can lead the effective clustering results. With the aim of this, we have presented a hybrid algorithm, called MKF-Cuckoo which is the hybridization of cuckoo search algorithm with the multiple kernel-based fuzzy c means algorithm. Here, MKFCM objective is taken and the same objective is solved through the cuckoo search algorithm which is one of the recent optimization algorithm proved effective in many optimization problems. For proving the effectiveness of the algorithm, the performance of the algorithm is comparatively analyzed with some other algorithm using clustering accuracy, rand coefficient, jaccard coefficient and computational time with iris and wine datasets. From the results, we can prove that the hybrid algorithm obtained 96% accuracy in iris data and 67% accuracy in wine data.

iterative procedure by considering the objective of minimizing the sum of squared error. After that, various authors were tried to find some problems in k-means clustering and introduced improved algorithms. One of the modified algorithms based on the fuzzy logic was fuzzy c-means clustering [2] that makes use of membership function and centroid computation procedure to iteratively find the best centroid. After introducing various algorithms by the researchers, the clustering algorithms are classified into two major categories, such as, partitional clustering and hierarchical clustering. On the other hand, some other different clustering algorithms were also presented in the literature which is grid-based clustering [3], projection-based clustering [4], subspace clustering [5] and density clustering [6].

Then, optimization algorithms were introduced for clustering process. In optimization-based clustering, researchers took clustering objective as minimum sum of squared error and they have used optimization procedure defined in their algorithm for solving clustering objective. Based on the similar kind of procedure, genetic algorithm [7], Particle Swarm optimization [8], bacterial foraging optimization [9], simulated annealing [10], artificial bee colony [11, 12] and firefly algorithm [13] were applied for clustering. Here, most of the algorithms have taken centroid sets as solutions to generate optimal cluster centroids. Meanwhile, some authors used hybrid optimization algorithms for clustering [14, 15], where two different optimization algorithms are combined to achieve effective results in clustering. At the same time, some simple modifications were done in standard optimization algorithm and then, it has been applied for clustering [16]. While obtaining more effective cluster results, k-means and FCM operator are additionally added into the optimization procedure by some authors [17, 18] with the objective of improving the convergence in clustering process.

After analyzing the literature completely about the clustering process, we have taken the objective defined in MKFCM algorithm [19] and this objective is solved using recent optimization algorithm, cuckoo search [20]. Here, solutions are encoded based on cluster centroid and optimal cluster centroids are achieved through the help of MKFCM objective function. The advantages of incorporating MKFCM objective into the clustering process is that kernel space can identify variance among the data point even better compared with the clustering done through only data space. Also, multiple kernels into one distance function can also lead to effective distance measurement so that effective clustering can be achieved since distance finding is the core process of any clustering process. According to the cuckoo search behavior in finding the best nest to lay egg, the searching of best cluster is done with the fitness of MKFCM objective. Here, new solutions are introduced based on levy flight equation that is effective in generating nearest neighbor solution with the inclusion of clustering objective. The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 presents the hybrid algorithm developed for clustering and section 3 provides experimentation performed for hybrid clustering and detailed results along with comparative analysis. Section 4 presents conclusion of the paper.

As per the literature review, the clustering process can be easily reformulated as optimization problem. The objective clustering optimization is that, to search of best cluster centroid with the help of iterative procedure. Accordingly, several techniques have been proposed in the literature for searching the optimal centroid in the problem space. But, most of the algorithm uses the same objective to find the optimal centroid with the help of minimizing the sum of squared distance in between the data objects. In our work, we have used an effective objective function that can lead to better results in searching the optimal centroid. With the motivation of this, we have utilized multiple kernel-based FCM algorithms and its objective has been taken for our research and it is combined with the recent cuckoo search algorithm to find the optimal centroid very quickly. The main contribution of the paper is hybridizing the cuckoo search which is one of the better algorithms for optimal search and with the MKFCM algorithm, which is one of the recent clustering algorithms proved effective in

clustering. When hybridizing both the algorithms, the optimal search can be easy and at the same time, effective solution can be achieved because we have used MKFCM objective in optimal cluster centroid search. The whole process of the algorithm can be explained in three important phases such as 1) Initial solution encoding 2) Objective function for clustering 3) Algorithmic procedure for MKF-Cuckoo search.

The searching of optimal solution through the help of any optimization algorithm needed an effective solution representation so that the searching efficiency to find quick solution can be improved. With the aim of this, the initial solution for our clustering process is random centroid taken from the input dataset. Suppose, initial nests given for the cuckoo search is P . Then, the algorithm takes P initial solutions from the input database. Every solution taken from the dataset contains m * k matrix. Here, m represents the number of centroid needed and k represents the number of attributes given in the database. So, m * P records are taken from the database and represented in P solution.

The objective function is taken from the clustering method given in [19] and it has been used as fitness function. Here, objective function considers distance minimization among the data points with its nearest neighbor cluster centroid. But, the distance finding makes use of kernel-based distance and fuzzy membership function. The overall objective of the hybrid clustering algorithm is denoted as below:

Once a new solution is generated, lower bound and upper bound conditions are checked. Every value placed in new solution of m * k matrix is checked. If the value obtained in new solution based on levy flight is greater than upper bound, the values are replaced with upper bound value. If the value is less than lower bound, new value is replaced with lower bound value. The upper bound and lower bound value for every attributes are initially found out from the datasets. LB and UB is the maximum and minimum values of the every attributes presented in the input database.

The two datasets such as iris and wine datasets are taken from Machine Learning Laboratory [21] for experimentation of the MKF-Cuckoo algorithm in clustering. Iris dataset: The data set contains three categories with equal number of data objects, where each category refers to a type of iris plant. There are 150 instances with four numeric features in iris data set. There is no missing attribute value. The attributes of the

iris data set are sepal length in cm, sepal width in cm, petal length in cm and petal width in cm. Wine dataset: This dataset contains chemical analysis of 178 wines, derived from three different cultivars. Wine type is based on 13 continuous features derived from chemical analysis: alcohol, malic acid, ash, alkalinity of ash, magnesium, total phenols, flavanoids, nonflavanoid phenols, proanthocyaninsm, color intensity, hue, OD280/OD315 of diluted wines and praline. The quantities of objects in the three categories of the data set are 59, 71 and 48, respectively.

The performance of the proposed hybrid clustering algorithm is analyzed with different cluster size such as 2, 3, 4 and 5. The proposed method is executed for different iterations and the performance is analyzed for iteration 10 and 100. The gradual results obtained are shown in the following table 1.

Here, the analysis can be done for both iris and wine datasets with different cluster size and different iterations. The accuracy for iris dataset is 68% in cluster size 2. So in order to increase the accuracy we increase the cluster size to 3, 4 and 5. So clustering accuracy increases to 89%, 95% and 96% simultaneously. When the cluster size increases the time automatically increased. But we obtained less accuracy values for 100 iterations when compared to 10 iterations. The accuracy is 89% in 100 iterations. For wine data set the accuracy is 67%. When comparing both data sets, iris has better results.

We have presented a hybrid algorithm, called MKF-Cuckoo which is the hybridization of cuckoo search algorithm with the multiple kernel-based fuzzy c means algorithm. Here, solutions are encoded based on the cluster centroid and the optimal cluster centroids are achieved through the cuckoo search algorithm which is one of the recent optimization algorithm proved effective in many optimization problems. The advantages of incorporating MKFCM objective into the clustering process is that kernel space can identify the variance of among the data point even better compared with the clustering done through only data space. Here, experimentation has been done using iris and wine dataset. For proving the effectiveness of the hybrid algorithm, comparative evaluation was done with the help of clustering accuracy, rand coefficient and jaccard coefficient. From the results, we identified that the hybrid algorithm obtained 95% accuracy in iris data and 67% accuracy in wine data. The future direction of this work is to incorporate the effective objective function and the modification in cuckoo search algorithm.

