A lot of research has been done to improve the fatigue strength of materials by creating compressive residual stress field in their surface layers through the shot peening. In the present work, it is found that relaxed residual stress field varies with shot peening intensity and affects weight of EN 45A spring steel leaf springs. A stress approach model for weight reduction of leaf springs used in automotive vehicles has been experimentally developed simulating with industrial environment. Paper discusses a time saving and reliable method of predicting thickness and weight of leaf springs at various shot peening intensities for industrial applications. A model based on experimental results has been developed which predicts weight reduction of leaf springs for a given stress at varying shot peening conditions.

The complexity of the increasing expanding global competition and technologies led to various attempts to develop structures for systematic treatment. Present trend in industry is to use cheaper material with improved mechanical properties to ensure reliability of structures. This can be accomplished by various treatments including shot peening. There are various types of adjustments in the machine but in the present work shot flow rate was changed to achieve required Almen intensity, and other parameters were kept constant.

the new challenges in the field of manufacturing engineering. Vinkel Arora et al., 2011 suggested that computer aided model of leaf springs may be prepared in CATIA and analysed in ANSYS. The CAE analysis of leaf springs was performed for various design parameters and loading conditions. The main objective of the work was to reduce the time and cost related to actual experimental set up by providing CAE solution. It was concluded in the paper that CAE tools provide a cost effective and less time consuming solution in comparison with experimental testing but the error may vary in the specified range.

Most of researchers focused on improving fatigue resistance of structures by using shot peeing process to impart compressive stresses in the surface layers which opposes tensile load on structures like suspension system of vehicles. Schijve J., 2003 recommended that accurate fatigue predictions for full- scale testing which designers prefer are still unpredictable. In the previous studies, the possibility of weight reduction of components by varying intensity was not considered. In the present work, the estimation of weight reduction at various shot peening intensities of leaf springs has been discussed through computational methods.

Cyclic-stress curves as per ASTM specifications of specimens were determined using an axial fatigue-testing machine. The S/N curves were plotted as per standard procedure mentioned by Aggarwal et al., 2005. Laboratory testing of leaf springs was done on a test rig and bending stress was calculated as per formula mentioned by Aggarwal et al., 2006. The static stress of 432 MPa was applied to leaf springs by hydraulic ram. Hydraulic actuators limits were set according to alternating load and stress ratio of 0.5 was used. The unpeened and shot peened material was subjected to shots of varying intensity and each time improvement in fatigue life was recorded.

For the determination of compressive residual stress changing with depth, the layers of strip of 3 x 7 mm on test shot peened specimen were removed by electrochemical machining. The compressive residual stress field (CRSF) induced by shot peening was determined by X-ray diffraction method, using the Raystress equipment. The accuracy of stress measurement was    20 MPa.

Additional tests were performed to verify the possible variation of the residual stresses induced by shot peening under cyclic loading. It was found that relaxation of compressive residual stress field (RCRSF) occurred after a definite number of fatigue cycles due to opening /propagation of micro cracks and the same was measured on specimens by X-ray diffraction technique. Greater the stress CRSF relaxation, the lesser is the fatigue life.

