In general there are three or four schools of learning, in the design of educational material; these schools are: Behaviorism, Cognitivist, Socio-Constructivist and Humanist. Behaviorism strategies allow teach the facts and are used in the implementation of the course to show the formulations, algorithms or mathematical expressions of the method discussed, in this case the natural spline method. Cognitivist strategies will be used to teach the processes or procedures to be followed in the development and application of numerical method Included in this work. Constructivist strategies aim to develop a high level of thinking.

A variety of pre-learning activities can be used to prepare the student for the lesson details, as well as to inform the student of the importance of taking their lessons online and show you how you can benefit from it. There is also a variety of learning activities that can be offered to the student to achieve the expected learning outcomes. Students need to interact with the interface to access the materials available online. The student interacts with the content to acquire the information needed to form the knowledge base. Students interact with each other and with the teacher. It should provide opportunities for students to transfer what they learn to real life applications.

An acceptable definition about the concept of interaction is understood as reciprocal events that require at least two objects and two actions and this happens when these objects and events are mutually influenced each other. Interaction serves as a wide variety of functions in the educational transaction. These functions allow control students, facilitating adaptation based on student input, allowing various forms of participation and communication and acting as a significant learning support program. Interaction is the component that defines the educational process and occurs when the student transforms the inert information passed from one student to another and builds on knowledge value and personal application [4]. Interactivity is a criterion for the selection of media for educational delivery. The interaction is fundamental to the creation of learning communities.

The control group will receive instruction in the traditional way, i.e., face to face and without the use of equipment designed for an online course. The experimental group will receive instruction completely online. Once applied the tests are evaluated and calculate means and variances for the data for each group are provided; which determines whether or not there are significant differences, in the mean or calculated averages.

The task of the designer and teacher of online courses is to select, adapt and improve (through reflection, feedback  and  evaluation)  educational  activities  that  maximize  the  potential  of  the  Web. The creation of a model is usually the first step toward developing a theory. The model illustrates most of the key variables that interact to create contexts and educational experiences online.

