This paper is based on mathematical and electrical modelling of living tissues and their electrical bioimpedance. Impedance is complex, dynamic, depends on frequency and changes with time. The equivalent electrical circuit of a tissue in the Fricke-Morse and Debye model as well as the electrical safety checks for medical devices and the standards for medical equipment and how to measure leakage currents are presented in this paper.

To ensure a safe medical environment and detection - prevention of adverse effects on patients and users, electrical safety checks are probably the most important issue. For this purpose, certain control protocols- standards in accordance with international standards IEC 60601-1 are applied. With these control protocols the medical devices are checked to determine if their operation is safe and if they are within the specified safety limits so that they operate correctly for both the patient and for the user. The standard defines the requirements of the tests for protection against possible hazards including electrical grounding protection, earth leakage currents, patient leakage currents and patient auxiliary currents, which will be analyzed below. Also HEI 95 and DB9801 standards are recommended for the checking of medical devices [4].

For the proper checking of medical devices there are tests for the insulation to check whether there are leakage currents. These tests use AC current and test equipment at certain levels of humidity. The measuring resistance value for class I devices should be greater than 50 Mȍ but may, in some rare cases, be less.

The current flowing from the enclosure or other accessible metal parts of the appliance to earth or to another part of the enclosure through another conductive path other than of the protective earth conductor is called Enclosure Leakage Current. Such currents are likely to flow on the housing even when the protective earth conductor presents no discontinuity through another conductive path other than that of the protective earth conductor. The schematic interpretation of the enclosure leakage current measurement is shown in the following figure.

Checking the patient leakage current is divided into two checks of which the first examines the current flowing through the applied parts and from the device, while the second examines the current that will flow through the parts when a potential difference appears in the patient because of the existence of an external power supply. For the first check, all electrodes are connected together and the measuring device is placed between the protective earth conductor and the connection of the electrodes. In the second check an external voltage is applied to the electrodes through the checking device and a power supply is inserted between the terminals of the measuring device and the protective earth conductor. For internally powered devices with accessible metal parts in particular, the patient leakage current is measured between the electrodes and a point on the housing and the terminals of the measuring device are placed accordingly.

Medical facilities are different from ordinary household and industrial premises, because they should combine smooth functioning with some increased security requirements. A typical example is the emergency electrical loads of a hospital (for instance operating theatres, blood refrigerator and intensive care unit) which, in the event of a power failure, are powered by a power generator. All buildings should have a grounding system to eliminate any risk of leaking electricity. For this reason, there should be a distribution network with three lines which are responsible for the insulation. The earth normally encountered is the operating ground and the protective earth. The difference between grounding and earthing protection function is shown below

The grounding function is necessary for the operation of the circuit and the grounding protection is designed to protect people from the leakage current to the metal casing of an electrical device with which they come in contact. The way in which the protective grounding works is shown below, where the resistance of the human consists of two parts: the core (about 500 ȍ) and skin (1 ... 100 Kȍ depending on its humidity) [7].

The more humid the skin the smaller the resistance. When a person comes into contact with the metal housing of a shielded electrical device, in which a leakage current occurs ((a) in the above figure), then the leakage current is limited (resistance Ra), depending on the value of total resistance of the ground circuit. The equivalent circuit of the above arrangement of the leakage current is shown in (b) of the above figure. From the equivalent circuit above we see that if Req << Ra then Ir >> Ia

Therefore, for the best possible protection we should seek a grounding resistance value, which approaches the theoretical value R = 0. The total value of earth resistance is, in practice, a few ȍ. According to the above, when there is no protective earth installation, or the value of the ground resistance is large (and the resistance of the human body is small) then there are risks to humans who come into contact with the metal casings of the various electrical devices [7].

