Power Quality enhancement in a distribution network is achieved by shunt compensation device known as Distribution static compensator (DSTATCOM).In this paper, three different system topologies for Distribution Static Compensators (DSTATCOMs) are modeled and tested using Simulink’SimPowerSystem Toolbox for power system quality studies. Simulation tests on a distribution system, equipped with the unbalanced and non-linear load. With the different system topologies of Distribution Static Compensators (DSTATCOMs) it is observed that power factor can be improved in supply system. The DSTATCOM controls are based on Synchronous Reference Frame control. The modeled DSTATCOM topologies can be used to develop and test different, control strategies and methods for the DSTATCOM. These models can also aid instructors in teaching power quality courses.

to evaluate the performance or propose control strategies for DSTATCOM to improve its performance [2-10]. Time domain simulations and /or practical experiments have been used to perform these studies.Time domain simulations have been shown to provide accurate prediction of the behaviour of Voltage-Sourced Converter (VSC) based FACTS devices [11]. There are many packages available to model and simulate VSC based FACTS devices such as EMTP, PSCAD, MATLAB/SIMULINK, PSIM. MATLAB/SIMULINK is the most widely used package in engineering sciences since it has many toolboxes that cover all engineering applications [12]. This paper models and simulates three different system topologies for Distribution static compensator (DSTATCOM) using Simulink’SimPowerSystem Toolbox. The DSTATCOM topologies are based on Synchronous Reference Frame (SRF) control [13].

The simulation results of sysem2 are depicted in Fig.7. The waveform of Load current, Compensator current, Source current and Terminal Voltage are same as in Fig.6 but the magnitude of load current is comparatively increased. Power factor can be improved after the DSTATCOM is switched on. The DC link voltage Vdc exponentially increasing with time as shown in Fig. The DC link voltage is not maintained constant but tending towards the value of 250 V.

The simulation results of sysem3 are depicted in Fig.8. The waveform of Load current, Compensator current, Source current and Terminal Voltage are same as in Fig. 6. Power factor can be improved after the DSTATCOM is switched on. The DC link voltage is maintained constant at 500 V before and after the DSTATCOM is switched on. This allows the DSTATCOM to improve Power Factor with almost no interruption in the load current.

This paper has developed models for different system topologies of the Distribution Static Compensator (DSTATCOM) using Simulink’SimPowerSystem Toolbox. The control of the DSTATCOM system topologies is based on Synchronous Reference Frame control. Time domain simulations have been used to verify the operation of these models. These models can be easily modified to:

