The state parameter and work state of Aero-engine in the whole flight envelope are change greatly. So the controller should deal with parameter perturbation, disturbance and the change of external condition. In this paper the neural network sliding mode variable structure decoupling controller based on model reference adaptive for the aero-engine is designed. RBF neural network is used as the output of the sliding mode control, and sliding mode switching function is used as the neural network input. The weight of RBF network is adjusted adaptively by the error between reference model output and actual output. The results of simulation show that Model Reference Adaptive Neural Sliding Mode Controller (MRANBSMC) has a good control effect in the whole flight envelope. It eliminates the chattering phenomenon effectively and decouples well, which has a good robustness and control tracking performance in the disturbance and parameter perturbation.

MRAC has the characteristics of clear performance and simple design method. The original adaptive model tracking control is designed either based on Lyapunov stability theory or the conception of hyper- stability to cope with the system parameter change or external disturbance. The two methods can ensure the error to be zero in finite time, but the common weakness of which is they can’t quantitative design the transient performance of error. To solve this problem, variable structure control has been highly thought of by its good transient performance and resistance to a wide range of parameters change ability. Since the 70s extensive research has been conducted on tracking model based with this method [1].

This paper proposes a combination of neural network and sliding mode control (SMC) is to control the aero-engine based on MRAC theory. SMC system includes reachable stage and sliding stage [2][3]. And only at sliding stage the system has robust to parameter perturbation and external interference. So the NN SMC scheme enable the system to be at sliding mode at began and keep it, and therefore eliminate the reachable stage. At the same time the NN can compensate the sliding mode switch control by introducing neuron control. When there is disturbance or parameter perturbation, the deviate state trajectory can automatic convergence to the sliding surface. The controller not only keeps the system to be robust under perturbation and external disturbance, but also to deceases or eliminates the chattering.

In the variable structure sliding mode control system the design reference model should satisfy two conditions[6]:  reference model should reflect desired control performance index,  it should meet completely tracking model match condition (8).Double variable control system is studied, which will cause coupling effect. So the reference should be decoupling system. In this paper the proper reference model that confine with performance index, is gained through state feedback decoupling and pole assignment for the engine model.

As is seen in fig.3, fig.4 and fig.5, when altitude and Mach number are (0,0),(2,1.4),(17.3,1.82) respectively, step response curve of control system has no overshoot. When input is [1,0],adjusting time is about 2s , When input is[0,1],adjusting time is about 1.2s,and the steady state error is zero. It is also shown that there is no chattering in the control of MRANBSMC.

The Model Reference Adaptive Neural Sliding Mode Controller can decouple very well for the engine low-pressure rotor and turbine rear total temperature. And when disturbance and parameter perturbation exist, the response curve of control system does not obviously change. Nominal point and non nominal point of the same region in the whole envelope will get good results. This result proves that the control system has strong anti-jamming capacity, robustness and fairly good accuracy in its static and dynamic control. The controller enhances robustness of the control system, avoids the chattering in sliding-mode control, and improves the tracking converge.

