extravehicular activities is developed under the complex system theory. The astronaut in space suit with the backpack is described with a complex system model. Then a coupled forward-inverse dynamics model is present to calculate the motions of every subsystem and the whole system dynamically without introducing additional variables for multi results problem; and a sensor-actor model is built for analyzing the torque on the joints generated by the space suit which expands the analytical space from two dimensions to three dimensions. Finally, in order to show the effectiveness and feasibility of the method, application examples of the constrained operations are presented.

even rescue for spaceflight accidents, need to be implemented by astronauts outside the space vehicles. However, EVA is also a type of difficult and expensive task, for it must be completed with limited time, work space and energy by astronauts wearing special space suits with heavy backpack in microgravity environment [1]. Therefore, each task needs a particular design before implementation and each astronaut needs hundreds of hours for training before launched to space [2]. All of the preparations need to be carried out under the conclusions from studies on the motions of suited astronauts in microgravity. Modeling and Simulation (M&S) is chosen as a good method for studies on EVA for the reasons that physical microgravity simulators have inherent limitations, even today it cannot recreate the same microgravity environment as that in space yet, and differences between operations in space and on the ground will shade some important information [3][4][5][6][7].

 Coupled suit-induced torques on one joint. Current models of the space suit generated torques are only applied for joints with a single DOF. If a joint has more than one DOF, the interaction between torques on different orientations is omitted [see Fig. 1 (b)].

In next section, a novel method for M&S of the motions of astronauts during EVA is discussed in details. Then in section 3, some applications on preparations for space station mission are introduced, in order to show how to use the method. At last, discussion and recommendation for future work are presented respectively.

A tree structure configuration of the suited astronaut with links and joints is shown in Fig. 2, which is designed on the base of an improved Hanavan model [12]. The head and the backpack are isolated bodies in the configuration although there are zero DOF between them and the torso for the reason that if the three bodies are combined as one part, some characters about the inertia tensor will be left out. And in order to describe motion of the whole body in the reference frame, there is a 6 DOFs joint (J11) between the torso and the environment (L00) which is the so- 

In practice, the types of given information for different parts of the astronaut are different, for example, it may be easy to the force on the hand but difficult to catch its motion, while for the elbow, it is easy to get its angle but difficult to have the torque on it. Therefore a method is formulated by integrating forward and inverse dynamics in one framework, as shown in Fig. 3. There are two types of elements in the model: the link

Where h is the history of the angle . In fact, torques generated by space suit passively depends not only on the history of the input, but many information about the joint. If there are one more DOFs on the joint, torques in different orientations will affect each other. And the angular velocity will affect the torque too. So the torque generated by space suit is:

Where  is the angle on different DOF. For the number of DOFs in the joints of the suited astronaut is less than four (as shown in Fig. 2), the models of joints with different DOFs are shown in Fig. 4: 1 DOF in (a), 2 DOFs in (b), 3 DOFs in (c). In the models, the sensor to get the motions of the joint and the actor to exert torques on the joint are included as basic elements, and between them there is a computational element with the function in Eq. (5). The memorizers are included in the computational element to restore the history of the angle. A set of weighted sum functions is used for Eq. (5), and the values of weights qi,j can be got from physical experiments.

During the task, the astronaut pulls the handle by his left hand to move a load in direction to himself. There are three constrain conditions in the task which is typical for almost all of the EVA operations. The first is operating without constrain as shown in Fig. 5 (a); it is common for many primary EVAs because the tether for security seems never frapped. The second is working with the feet constrained, as shown in Fig. 5 (b). For more and more complex EVA tasks, the portable foot restraint is used commonly. The third is operating on a suspension which is designed for emplace the space suit on the ground. There are several rigid connections between the suspension and the backpack, which means only the left arm can move during the operation.

It is very easy to model the system on the base of the configuration present in section 2.1. For the first condition, the model can be got only by connecting a link to L41 by a 3 DOFs joint. For the second condition,

which is shown in Fig. 6 (a). And for the third condition, the model can be got by deleting more than half of the basic configuration as shown in Fig. 6 (b), for it is not necessary to analyze the parts of the body except the left arm.

The method introduced in the paper is based on complex system theories, in which the suited astronaut is divided into many subsystems, and then organizes the system model according a tree structure configuration. Then the coupled forward-inverse dynamics model is used to avoid indeterminations of limbs; and the sensor- actor model is used for modeling the torques generated by the space suit in three dimensions space. With the method, we can analyze more complex EVAs to be implemented in the future. But there are still many limitations in the method:

