Delegating the responsibility of safe driving on an autonomous vehicle needs the autonomous system to be extremely robust. In an attempt to design a robust guidance system for the autonomous vehicle we decided to go refer the most complex system designed which is “humans”. In humans we peculiarly observe that there exists an array of senses we possess that provide the required robustness and efficiency in chores that we perform. It clearly displays that in human beings the various senses we possess precisely complement each other to support a process. On this basis we propose an introduction to optimization of lane detection and tracking. Also the scalability of computation for smart vehicles such as auto park assist, cruise mode or auto lane keep assist continue to grow for driverless manoeuvre thus removing the possibility of manual or judgmental error in driving. We model a ground vehicle in a turning manoeuvre, such as a step lane-change where modeling process follows that of a vehicle undergoing translational as well as rotational motion. We shall be using this to design the control algorithm for executing a lane change maneuver under a safety set of rules using Dynamic Matrix Control which is a subset of the Model Predictive Control. This requires that we transform the vehicle lateral variable into the fixed coordinates. The application depends on recursively obtained sensor readings in a feedback loop mode for processing and deploying a corrective action tot exploits non-linear functions of the state and finds control inputs such as state of system, position, acceleration, peer movement to recursively estimate and improve the quality of resulting estimation for collision avoidance and target localization.

Delegating the responsibility of safe driving on an autonomous vehicle needs the autonomous system to be extremely robust. In an attempt to design a robust guidance system for the autonomous vehicle we decided to go refer the most complex system designed which is “humans”. In humans we peculiarly observe that there exists an array of senses we possess that provide the required robustness and efficiency in chores that we perform. It clearly displays that in human beings the various senses we possess precisely complement each other to support a process. Let us take a brief example case shown in figure 1a-b.

Suppose a human has to navigate from a blue room to a red room in a complex of rooms where the additional information for navigation is that the red room is extremely hot while the blue room is cold. As seen the path the human follows to reach the right destination is V-R-N-J-F-B-C-D path where he uses his eyes for identifying the color. Also the temperature increases as the human approaches the hotter room. This additional sense increases speed of approach and also facilitates choosing the direction and hence the path for reaching undergoes optimization. This indicates that the navigation efficiency increases as an array(in this case two) of sensors which are eyes and skin are used for color detection and temperature sensing respectively. This can now be equated to autonomous navigation system. Suppose a vehicle needs to navigate for place A to place B. Primarily a GPS will be used for navigation by utilizing its co-ordinate information for path determination and tracking. To complement this navigation process we propose to add the element of pedestrian and lane tracking mechanisms for making navigation robust and fast. This is illustrated in figure 1b.

1 = -xx3 + (Fyf + Fyr); 2 = x3; 3 = (l1Fyf – l2Fyr); 4 = -xx2 – x1	(23) Where,  = Steering angle of front wheel; = Heading angle; Fyf/r = Lateral force on front tire/rear tire; m= mass of vehicle=1280kg, I=2500kg.m2; I= Moment of Inertia of vehicle = 2500 kg.m2; l1 & l2 = distance from centre of gravity to front axle & rear axle =1.2m and 1.22m respectively.

In figure 3 each car is associated with the following state vectors- position (x, y), velocity (v), acceleration (a), and current lane (l). It will update its information based on current speed & heading of its neighbour which will be a random, stochastic and indeterminist function of time and thus do a lane contention. It will then use this information and based on its own safety & control calculations make a decision whether to continue in the same lane or undertake an overtaking manoeuvre as shown in 3(a-c) below.

We have introduced our work with stress on need of more sensing requirements for robust autonomous self-driven and self-aware vehicles. With this, we introduce the concept of lane contention and the need for mathematical modelling based on the reason that software computation being faster can reduce the constraints on hardware. The modelling is used to train the system to initially learn the behaviour of the car from prior references and, with change in the dynamics of the vehicle optimize itself to provide same performance irrespective of hardware weaning thus introducing optimization at run time. We have then validated our work with control of a formation of vehicles using simulation based on results obtained from Scilab computation.

