elements, and the distribution of the elements is regular. So I started from this point to improve the algorithm, and simplified the calculation of the connection weights matrix, and avoided a large amount of data storage. As a result, the space complexity reduced to O(n) from O(n2 ) , meanwhile, the time complexity is improved. This is a great improvement.

In the image processing, image restoration has been one of the most important basic research subjects. Many application fields need clear and high quality images, so image restoration (such as denoising, deblurring etc.) is of great significance. The traditional image restoration method is mainly about image filtering processing. With most of the image information existing in the edge portion, therefore, image filtering is needed to not only remove the blur and noise from the image but also to keep the detail of the image. Because of image details and noise in frequency bands aliasing, making the image smoothing and the edge details remain becomes a pair of contradiction and the traditional filtering methods are difficult to deal with this kind of problem. The development of neural network technology in recent years to solve this contradiction of the image restoration provides a new method (Zhou Y T and Chellappa R, 1988; Paik JK and Katsaggelos AK, 1992; Yubing Han and Lenan Wu, 2004; Perry S.W and Guan L, 2000; Erler K and Jernigan E,1994; Wu W and Kundu A,1992).

Neural network for image restoration model was first put forward by Zhou et al. (Zhou Y T and Chellappa R, 1988). They linked image restoration with Hopfield neural network through the energy function, and converted image restoration into optimization problem of the neural network calculation. However, using the Zhou method there are shortcomings that the network model is huge and network state is updated slow and so on. In order to overcome these disadvantages, Paik et al. (Paik JK and Katsaggelos AK, 1992) put forward an improved Hopfield neural network model for gray-scale image restoration. Later, the Paik method was improved by many scholars from the network model and the convergence rate and so forth (Yubing Han and Lenan Wu, 2004; Perry S.W and Guan L, 2000; Erler K and Jernigan E, 1994; Wu W and Kundu A, 1992). Literature (Yadong Wu, 2006) on the basis of Paik algorithm, using the regularization term based on the harmonic model, proposed a neural network algorithm based on the harmonic model. But the author in the

Based on the two points above, we think that in the course of the algorithm, there is no need to generate the Toeplitz matrix H , and only need to calculate its certain numerical values according to the rule. If we do so, for the original algorithm space complexity and time complexity will have a very big improvement. The following describes the algorithm of calculatingW .

In the space complexity, the improved algorithm only has the linear complexity O(n) ; relative to the original algorithm of O(n 2 ) .This is a great improvement, and also the main work done of the algorithm. In order to test the improved algorithm restoration effect, degraded images all use 1 9 motion blur. And we join

This paper first studied the complexity of the original algorithm, and then had a detailed analysis of the calculation process of connection weight matrix, finding the internal structural features. By the form of Theorem 1and 2 it was summarized and the theorems was applied to the original algorithm. Then we put forward a new improved algorithm saving time and space and finally did the data simulation experiment, which not only deepened the understanding to the algorithm, but also illustrated the advantages of the improvement algorithm.

