In this paper, we propose an algorithm of moving-object detection via the sparse representation and learned dictionary. First, compress image in order to reduce data redundancy and bandwidth. Then initialize data dictionary with CS measurement values and sparse basis, train and update it through the K-SVD which can get the sparsest representations. At the same time, we consider the correlation between the dictionaries which can effectively reduce the dictionary redundancy. Carry out the selective reconstruction depending on the sparse coefficients to determine whether the target invades, which can decrease the amount of data to calculate and is better to achieve real-time. We segment the moving- object through the robust principal component pursuit(PCP) for that the image is consisted with low-rank of the background regions and the sparsity of the foreground regions. Analysis, simulation, and experimental results show that our scheme has a good detection result, which can significantly decrease data redundancy and the demand for bandwidth at the same time.

method[3].Those algorithms are all based on pixel values, which the common drawback is data redundancy occupied lots of bandwidth and complex calculation. To solve the problem of large amount of data, scholars have introduced compressive sensing (CS) technology[4-5], which can reduce the transmission bandwidth and storage memory effectively. Unfortunately, signal decomposition of the above algorithms uses nonlinear orthogonal transformation which can’t consider the correlation between images, making signal less sparse.

In this paper, we propose an algorithm of moving-object detection via the sparse representation and learned dictionary. Make the sparse coefficient sparser according to the CS measurements and sparse basis which are used to train dictionary initially. Update the dictionary continually through K-SVD to strengthen the sparse representation of the dictionary capabilities. Reconstruct the image depended on whether object occurs, which can reduce the amount of data to calculate and is better to achieve real-time. Finally, image consisted of low-rank of the background component and the sparsity of the foreground component can be recovered through the robust principal component pursuit(PCP) individually.

During transmission, the transmission of just the measurements can restore the original high-dimensional image ( M  N ), which reduces the bandwidth of the signal transmission. Encoding and decoding of compressive sensing are used for reducing the data redundancy, but failed to consider the relation between adjacent frames. So we mention the dictionary in the next section.

sparse dictionary to represent the CS measurements based on the K-SVD algorithm. In addition, the update of the dictionary can exclude the interference of the external environment (light, etc.). The K-SVD algorithm is promoted by the K-means clustering algorithm, which is the iterative approach. What’s more, allowing a change in the coefficient values while updating the dictionary column vectors will accelerate convergence, since the subsequent column vectors update which is based on more relevant coefficients.

element is removed. We define first column of U as d ,and the first column of V multiplied (1,1) as θ k . The two kinds of the end of the loop iterations, one is to set a number of iterations, this article is set to 20; another is to set the error value of the reconstructed image and original image.

Read into a video stream X , the measurement matrix and wavelet sparse basis are ϕ and φ respectively. We will get measurement Y via CS that can complete the image compression to reduce data redundancy and bandwidth requirements. Assign values ϕφ to the data dictionary to complete the initialization of the dictionary. Through the OMP algorithm for continuous learning dictionary, get the best

capabilities. Read into the test image, using CS K-SVD algorithm to update the dictionary after CS. The measured values compared with the data dictionary refactoring, to determine whether the target invade, thus selective reconstruction. The final problem can be transformed into a classification problem by setting a threshold of the two types of data individually. The whole process is shown in the figure 1.

Segment the moving-object regions while reconstruct the measurements in this paper. Video streams are formed with background region matrix, foreground region matrix and error matrix. As in paper[11] mentioned the principal component pursuit analysis, background is low rank, foreground is the sparse component. Given

We form 100 frames into the matrix to construct the background model, and each frame is written as a column vector(streaming video at 25 frames per second, size of image is 512*512). So training sample size is 262144*100 and CS sampling rate is 20 %. Then initially compressed measurement matrix is 52428*100. The initial data dictionary is represented by the measurement, training iterations is 30, sampling column number

After establishing background model, the video starts to monitor. Read into the images of moving objects, complete the CS’s compression and K-SVD’s background reconstruction. By comparing the Euclidean distance of data dictionary, determine whether there is a moving target, and then conduct selective reconstruction. As shown in Figure 3(a), column vector is the Euclidean distance between measurements for the reconstruction of the input image and background models. The circle stands for images include the moving target, and plus sign for the non-moving target images. Thus, we can see that by setting a threshold between two values then determine whether the goal invasion or not. Here we set the threshold value as 4*1012.

By using the proposed K-SVD algorithm, we can obtain the background model as Figure 2(c), which ruled out suspicious foreground and the movement goal to the background’s disturbance. As this method is based on the brightness of the color property, the three RGB components, if use traditional background difference method for processing, it is very sensitive to brightness change. Here, for the time difference between moving target image and background image is two hours, the light intensity of car surface metal reflector changes sharply, reflecting the vehicle location’s pixel gray values are mutated on the image. After the traditional method of background difference, stationary cars will be detected, mistaken for moving targets, as is shown in Figure 3(c). Shown in Figure 3(a), the proposed segmentation method is an effective solution to a brightness change, rule out the disturbance of suspicious foreground, and improve the accuracy of target detection.

The study proposes an algorithm based on the sparse representation and learned dictionary to detect and segment the moving-object, which can effectively decrease the data transmission through the CS and K-SVD algorithm. Update the dictionary continually through K-SVD to strengthen the sparse representation of the dictionary capabilities. The selectivity of the reconstructed image reduces the amount of calculation achieving practical application of real-time. Reconstruct the moving-object and background individually through PCP method which the image is consisted of low-rank component and the sparse component.

