In this paper authors offer the new method for solving coherent tasks in distributed computing system, based on resources of personal computers. Parameters of such resources are dynamically varying and that makes it hard for their application in distributed computations. To achieve ability of effective usage of personal computers, proposed method uses multiagent approach: proactive agent controls every personal computer in distributed computing system, and process of task solving is dispatched decentralized by interactions of agents. To solve every incoming coherent task agents of the system unite into community and that makes it easier to dispatch and perform computations. The main benefit of proposed method is decreasing the price for creating and maintenance of distributed computing system.

The main problem of using such personal computers (PCs) in distributed CS is varying of their parameters (such as performance and so on) any moment due to their owners actions. Another problem is probability of coexistence of many different PCs in one distributed CS. All that makes the process of effective distributing and solving of tasks very complicated.

Solving coherent tasks in such distributed CSs based on private PCs collaboration is considerably more difficult task. Today effective loading of a distributed CS while solving coherent tasks is a challenge [5]. However, solving such tasks in case of varying of parameters of PCs dynamically changes is even harder, that is why creation of new method of organizing of distributed computation of coherent tasks is very important task.

This new method is based on multiagent approach [6] and collective decision-making principles [7]. In the proposed method of distributed CS organization, we try to avoid dedicated servers and to make a decentralized organization of the distributed CS [8]. Every PC of distributed CS has proactive agent software installed. Interaction between program agents of the system realizes process of dispatching of task solving.

The first problem we faced appeared because distributed CS can consist of different set of PCs any moment. That is why interaction between user and distributed CS is complicated because user does not know where to send his task. To solve this problem, we decided to use passive service nodes that serve as "bulletin boards" (BB) [9]. A structure chart of proposed decentralized distributed CS is shown on figure 1.

As it can be seen, distributed CS is divided into three layers. Executive computing nodes (ECNs on the figure) perform almost all service tasks in such distributed CS. Agents dispatch the process of solving user tasks in distributed CS. In order to solve coherent tasks they create dedicated communities. The system may experience failures of PCs, variation of PCs computing power, reducing of network bandwidth, and all that can cause increasing of the task solution time. In case of all this situations community of agents have to change its composition in order to solve the task in time, specified by user.

At first, user has to present the task in right form to let the distributed CS perform the solution. We decided to represent task in the system in form of task information graph (TIG). TIG is a graph where vertices represent subtasks of the user’s task and arcs represent data transfers between subtasks. In the TIG G (Q, X) every vertex qi represents i-th subtask. For very subtask user specifies the estimated computational complexity Yi. Every arc x(qi, qj) is specifies to the amount of data Wij in transfer from subtasks qi to subtask qj.

The main benefit of proposed algorithm is ability to adjust computing process to actual parameters of personal computers of distributed computing system. Two proposed algorithms allow solving coherent tasks in distributed CS based on personal computers with varying parameters. The next step is exploring effectiveness of proposed method and algorithms.

Verifying the efficiency of proposed algorithms for solving coherent task in distributed CS based on private PCs resources is very hard task because there is great amount of parameters in such system and it is almost impossible to carry out experiments with real hardware. That is why we had to create the program, which allows modeling the distributed CS containing of up to 1000 PCs solving up to 250 tasks. [12]. The form in the right shows a set of tasks of the distributed CS, their statuses ("new" / "solving" / "solved") and its parameters (the maximum time for solution, complexity, number of virtual points for solution, etc.). Each task in this table has different color. A visual representation of distributed CS PCs can be found in the center. Each circle represent modeled PC and its color matches the color of the task that is solving at PC.

The main target of experimental research is the practical proof of efficiency of proposed algorithms, but also we wanted to evaluate of the relative loss of processor time on PCs due to dispatching of the decentralized computing. That is why we had to carry out several series of experiments with different parameters of PCs and computer networks. While researching on the proposed algorithms, we used some types of real tasks we work with in Southern Federal University [13]. We decided to use percent of actual load at PCs, which can show loss of processor time due to organizational purposes and percent of tasks, solved in time, which show efficiency of system for end-user [14]. There are many important parameters in distributed CS that is why we decided to use planning of experiments: we divided parameters to three groups: Primary (system parameters) (P), Secondary (parameters of specific tasks and PCs) (S), and Tertiary (user-conditional

The results show that the percent of actual load at PCs was good: from 72% to 92%. That means that time loss due to organization ranged from 8% to 28% of the total time. Modern researches in the same directions [5] show that average effectiveness of solving coherent tasks in distributed CS is about 40%, which means that proposed methods are effective.

To achieve ability of effective usage of personal computers proposed method uses multiagent approach. The main benefit of presented method is decreasing the price for creating and maintenance of distributed computing system. This approach was already successfully used in decision support, forecasting and diagnostic systems for oilfield equipment [15-18].

Hisamutdinov M.V., Korovin I.S., Kalyaev A.I. (2013). The Application of Evolutionary Algorithms in the Artificial Neural Network Training Process for the Oilfield Equipment Malfunctions’ Forecasting, 2013 2nd International Symposium on Computer, Communication, Control and Automation (3CA 2013) Proceedings. – Atlantis press. Pages 253-257.

