Spectrum sensing is used in cognitive radio systems to detect the availability of spectrum holes for secondary usage. The simplest and most famous spectrum sensing techniques are based either on energy detection or eigenspace analysis from Random Matrix Theory (RMT) such as using the Marchenko-Pastur law. These schemes suffer from uncertainty in estimating the noise variance which reduces their performance. In this paper we propose a new method to evaluate the noise variance that can eliminate the limitations of the aforementioned schemes. This method estimates the noise variance from a measurement set of noisy signals or noise-only signals. Extensive simulations show that the proposed method

access the radio spectrum, andspectrum sensing is an active approach used in CRS to locate spectrum holes in underutilized spectrum for opportunistic access. In spectrum sensinganopportunistic useractively measures the radio environment foravailable spectrum holes. There are many different types of spectrum sensing approaches depending on the hardware used for sensing, the sensing entities, sensing dissemination and sensing techniques [1].Reliability of a sensing technique depends whether it can accurately ascertain the presence or absence of a licensed user signals in the band of interest. The sensing techniques can be classified as transmitter detection, interference-based detection and receiver detection [2]. The underlying hypotheses of primary signal detection are as follows [2]:

In this paper we present a techniquefor noise variance estimation that addresses the limitations of current blind spectrum sensing techniques. That is, both energy detection and eigenvaluebased techniques use the noise variance in their hypothesis testing criteria, so both are reliant on the correct estimation of noise variance. Any uncertainty in noise variance estimation will greatly affect theiraccuracy, resulting either in missed detection of spectrum holes or interference to the primary user.Our proposed method for noise variance estimation could be used for setting the decision thresholds for energy detection based spectrum sensing and also for calculating the upper and lower bounds of the eigenvalues using the Marchenko-Pastur law.

The performance of the proposed scheme is tested through extensive simulations and is found to be efficient in terms of estimating the noise variance. In our simulations we have considered various signalswhile evaluating the proposed scheme. In the next section, the performance of the scheme is evaluated through extensive simulations, and the mean error in estimated noise variance has been evaluated by varying the SNR, number of measurements and number of samples per measurement.

To address the noise estimation problem, we consider multiple measurement sets, M in number, from the same portion of the radio spectrum, i.e. multiple measurements of the same signal under analysis. We assume N numbers of samples are collected for each measurement set. Let a single measurement set of the signal be represented by SM (N)where M represents a separate measurement and N represents the number of samples for the measurement, such that S1 represents a complete sample set for the first measurement, S2 represents a complete sample set of second measurement, and so on. SM represents the complete sample set for the last measurement, i.e.

Multiple simulations have been carried out to check the performance of the new method for estimating the noise variance. Each simulation has been repeated 1000 times for each set of numbers of samples, number of measurements and the SNR.The mean error of noise estimation is calculated using equation (2) where Var is the known noise variance and ıଶis our estimation of the noise variance.

We have proposed a novel method for estimating the noise variance that can be used in situations where multiple data sets are available. We have also shown that the mean error for estimating the noise variance is very low for higher numbersof measurements, hence making it suitable for energy detection, multi-antenna based spectrum sensing and also for co-operative spectrum sensing. The higher performance of the proposed scheme in estimating the noise variance demonstrates its suitability for establishing the detection thresholds in hypothesis testing in energy detection and Marchenko-Pastur law based spectrum sensing and it is the next milestone for our proposed noise estimation scheme to test its performance for the aforementioned spectrum sensing schemes.

