Fruits quality characteristics, including external quality (such as color, size, and shape) and internal quality (such as soluble solids, titrat- able acid, and firmness), are the basic factors affecting the consumers' desire of purchasing (Nghia et al., 2014). Nowadays, consumers' pursuit of fruits quality is not only limited to external quality, but also extends to internal quantity. Citrus is planted widely in the world for its high nu- trition and unique flavor. Soluble solids content (SSC) is one the most crucial internal attribute determining consumers' purchasing desire also plays an important role in guiding orchard management. However,

Furthermore, citrus is a complicated natural product composed of a great variation of external and internal structures, the SSC and skin thickness are significant from proximal to distal of fruits, as well as the peel color in sunlit and shaded also. Diffuse reflectance spectrum is mainly collected from local position or superficial layer region, the non- uniform distribution of chemical components would weak the predic- tion accuracy of intact fruit. Hence the full transmittance mode can overcome the inhomogeneous condition to some extent through ac- quiring more internal tissue information. Dull and Birth (1989) argued that the peel in the light path would not change the fundamental de- pendencies between the spectrum data and chemical components. Therefore, full-transmittance mode maybe is a promising technology for the determination of SSC with high accuracy and robust in citrus.

The variable selection methods have been widely applied to predict the internal quality of thin-skin fruits such as pears (Fan et al., 2015; Zhang et al., 2018) and apples (Tian et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2019), but there have been few reports on thick-skin fruits such as citrus. The thicker skin and complex structure of citrus interfere with the light ra- diation to acquire the information of internal tissue, and increase the difficulty of effective variables selection and prediction model

development, resulting in the internal quality prediction of intact citrus developed slowly (Krivoshiev et al., 2000; Fraser et al., 2003). Therefore, the specific objectives of this study were to: (1) investigate the feasibil- ity of full transmittance mode on the prediction of SSC in thick-skin fruits; (2) compare the performance of different spectral preprocessing methods; (3) analyze the distribution of effective variables selected by different variable selection algorithms; (4) compare the accuracy of pre- diction models built by the combination of different spectral prepro- cessing methods and variable selection algorithms.

CARS is a novel algorithm proposed by Li et al. (2009), in order to re- tain the wavelength variables with a large absolute value of regression coefficient in the PLS model, CARS employs the adaptive weighted sam- pling technique to evaluate the importance of each variable, N variable subsets are obtained through repeated screening, finally, the variables closely related to the measured components are extracted after cross validation for each variable subset. According to the importance level of each wavelength, the Monte Carlo (MC) sampling is used to ran- domly select N sample subsets with the principle of iterative and com- petitive for developing N PLS calibration modes, and the variable subsets with the lowest RMSECV are defined as the key variables. As a new variable selection method, the CARS performs better when dealing simultaneously with uninformative and collinear variables (Zhang et al., 2018). Details of the CARS methodology could be referred to the previ- ous literature (Li et al., 2009; Wu and Sun, 2013).

The linear PLS model is the most widely applied and robust algo- rithm for its insensitive to collinear variables and tolerant to large num- bers of variables. PLS could explain the correlation between the original spectrum and the target properties using the no more than 20 latent variables (LVs) extracted from the original wavelength, so it is com- monly employed to analyze the internal content of fruit. In this research, the PLS models were developed based on the full wavelengths spectra and the effective variables selected by SPA, CARS, and GA, then the per- formance of all developed models was compared for evaluating the fea- sibility of full transmittance model on the prediction of SSC in thick-skin fruits. The root mean square error of calibration set (RMSEC) and pre- diction set (RMSEP), the correlation coefficient of calibration set (Rcal) and prediction set (Rpre), were selected as the evaluation parameters for these PLS models. A good prediction model should have a higher Rcal and Rpre, and a lower RMSEC and RMSEP. The higher the Rpre and the smaller the RMSEP, the stronger the prediction ability of the model is. The residual predictive deviation (RPD) also was introduced to further evaluate the performance of the prediction results. RPD is the standard deviation of the predicted sample reference data divided by the predicted standard error (SEP), which provides the standardiza- tion for SEP. Generally, the RPD value is divided into three levels to de- fine the performance of prediction models, 1.5 to 2 indicates that the model can distinguish high or low values of the target variable, 2 to

more flat than the original and other preprocessed spectra. MSC and SNV were effective to highlight the peak and valley of the spectra profile and balance the distribution of variables by correcting the difference of optical path. However, the Smoothing method had no significant effect on noise reduction, and the first derivative method seems to greatly am- plify the noise. In conclusion, MSC and SNV performed better on noise reduction and simultaneously emphasized the spectral feature, both methods might be optimal for improving the transmittance spectral quality of citrus.

number of variables selected by SPA was significantly lower than CARS and GA. The distribution of selected variables varied with the dif- ference of variable selection algorithms. The difference in size and distri- bution of selected variables is mainly caused by the difference in the selecting mechanism of algorithms and the collinearity of pretreated spectra (Li et al., 2014b). SPA is designed to obtain variables with small collinearity preferentially, caused the number and correlation of selected variables to be less and lower, respectively. CARS was firstly used to eliminate the uninformative variables existed in full spectra (Fan et al., 2015), however, GA is an algorithm performing the searching principle of random and global, it still carries out the global search for avoiding local minimization in the later iteration period, leading to some redundancy variables were often included in the optimal subset (Durand et al., 2007).

Wang and Xie, 2014) and 811 nm (Li et al., 2014a) also were reported as important variables to predict fruit quality and yielded good perfor- mance. It is worth noting that 810 nm is one of the absorption peak of the original transmittance spectrum, its adjacent band (811.61 nm) was selected as an effective band by SPA, simultaneously. Therefore, the effective variables selected by SPA are closely related to water and carbohydrate in navel orange fruit, which helped to explain the relation- ship between the developed model and SSC parameter.

SPA was considered as the best variable selection algorithm in this study, which may be contradictory to previous reports. The difference in spectral acquisition mode and the fruits variety may contribute to this result. Although variable selection algorithm can eliminate most of the noise, interference and useless information of the spectra, spectral preprocessing is still the powerful tool to eliminate spectral differences caused by optical path changes between samples, to correct scattering differences caused by various sizes of particle, and to improve SNR (Sig- nal Noise Ratio). Therefore the combination of spectral preprocessing with a variable selection algorithm will be the indispensable link in the analysis of Vis/NIR spectroscopy.

