This paper presents a novel Gaussian mixture approximation smoother (GMA) for estimation the nonlinear system state. The smoothing implementation is transformed into computing some Gaussian weighted integrals, which triggers the development of the new GMA-URTSS algorithm by applying unscented transformation (UT). Simulation application demonstrates the superior performance of the proposed method.

In general, the above-mentioned GA smoothers approximate the state PDF using a single Gaussian, such that they are only suitable for the case that the state PDF is the gaussianity or unimodality, and that the system model is at most weakly nonlinear. However, a state which is initially Gaussian will inevitably become sig- nificantly non-Gaussian if propagated over a sufficiently long time span. In this situation, although the single GA smoother is better than the corresponding GA filter, it still inevitably results in inaccurate state estimate. Consequently, a Gaussian mixture approximation (GMA) to the smoothing PDF is more appropriate than the GA as a result that: 1) it can effectively approximate any PDF as closely as desired (in the L1 norm) [6] by using a weighted sum of Gaussian densities, and 2) it enables a more accurate representation of the nonlineari- ties in the dynamics and measurement models. Therefore, there is a great demand to develop the correspond- ing GMA smoother for nonlinear system in a reentry tracking problem. Up to the present, an explicit and sys- tematic solution to the derivation of the GMA smoother has been seldom reported.

Here, motivated by the fact that the GMA is more accurate than the GA, we present the GMA smoother for the ballistic reentry tracking problem. The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II formulates the investigated problem and recalls the standard GA filter and smoother. Section III derives the GMA smoother on the basis of the standard GA estimators. Section IV gives the simulation application for the reentry track- ing problem. Some conclusions are drawn in section V.

In general, the GA smoother in (3) is a forward-backward smoother [3]. As seen from Fig. 1, in the forward pass, the GA smoother uses the GA filter to compute the filtering density up to p( xN | ZN ) . In the backward pass, it implements (3) for rolling backwards from pGA(xN 1 | ZN ) to pGA (x0 | ZN ) . Through initialization

The heart of implementing the GA smoother is how to compute the nonlinear Gaussian weighted integrals in (4). However, for the nonlinearity of fk ( ) and hk ( ) , the GA smoother is only formal in the sense that it rarely can be directly used in practice since the model nonlinearity causes the intractability and infeasibility of analytically computing such integrals. For this reason, some numerical methods are required for approximat- ing such integrals, e.g., the linearization and the corresponding GA smoother is the existing GA-EKS in [2]. At the same time, as a result of the better precision of unscented transformation (UT) than the linearization, we can also develop the existing GA-URTSS in [2] by using UT for computing such integrals.

Note that as shown in (3), the GA smoother starts from the initial density pGA ( xN | YN ) . Similarly, the GA smoother is the foundation of developing the GMA smoother, hence, according to (7), the GMA smoother is initialized as follows, i.e.

In estimation accuracy, the proposed GMA-URTSS and GMA-EKS algorithms outperform the existing GA-URTSS and GA-EKS in [2], respectively. Moreover, expect for some time steps, the ARMSE of the GMA-URTSS is less than that of the GMA-EKS since the UT technique is superior to the first-order lineariza- tion in approximating the posterior mean and covariance of the nonlinear state. Fig. 2 and Fig. 3 make us be- lieve that the GMA smoother performs significantly better than the corresponding GA smoother in estimation precision.

Motivated by the fact that the GMA is more accurate than the GA, based on the existing standard GA filter and smoother, we propose a general GMA smoother for estimating the nonlinear state from racking a ballistic target on reentry. Furthermore, the new GMA-URTSS algorithm is developed by using UT for numerically computing the Gaussian weighted integrals in GMA smoother. The simulations show that the proposed GMA- URTSS outperforms the corresponding GA-URSS by its superior estimation accuracy.

