In order to avoid the problems of existing methods, a numerical simulation method for two-dimensional airflow over complex terrains is developed in this paper for the engineering use of flight dynamics. Based on the potential flow theories, the effects of terrains on the wind field are considered by a serial of two-dimensional vortexes, whose strengths are solved by combining with the ground boundary conditions. Numerical examples are studied by the proposed method, and the method is also evaluated by comparing the results with ones from the existing method. The result shows that the two- dimensional profile of complex terrains could be described by a cubic spline curve precisely. The computation procedure proposed in this paper is very simple and efficient, and it could provide a result of wind field with considerable accuracy. Therefore, this method could be used for flight principle evaluation and flight simulators.

During take-off and landing, aircrafts are always affected by the atmospheric disturbances at low-altitude. The disturbances will also have a great influence on the flight characteristics of aircrafts that are executing the missions like low-altitude manned penetration. The techniques of wind field modeling and simulation are very important for both of the flight safety and flight dynamic response analysis. As the complex terrain is the main

Based on the potential flow theory of aerodynamics and the boundary conditions of terrain shapes, a numerical simulation method has been proposed according to the engineering application requirements. This method could simulate the wind field at low-altitude that influenced by arbitrary terrain profiles. Moreover, numerical examples have been studied, and the results are compared with the ones mentioned in reference [3] and [4].

The Cartesian coordinate system Oxy is used to describe the terrain shape and wind field, where, the origin O is an arbitrary point, the x axis represents the horizontal distance, and the y axis represents the altitude. For the two-dimensional cases, the complex terrains could be represented by a complex curve in plane Oxy (as shown in Fig. 1). In this paper, the terrain curve is simulated by a cubic spline curve. If the cubic spline curve passes through a number of predefined points (xi, yi), where, j=1, 2, …, m, and m is the number of the points. Then the cubic spline curve could be described by a serial of third order polynomials

Similarly to the solving approach of vortex lattice method in aerodynamics, the curve that describes the terrain is divided into a number of straight line elements, and the number is n. A two-dimensional vortex is arranged at the quarter point of each element. Choose the three-quarter point of the element as the colocation point. At this point the actual boundary condition is implemented. Therefore, the effect of the terrains on the wind field could be represented by the sum of induce velocities of all the vortexes at any arbitrary point in the wind field. Use the uniform free stream to represent the wind field without terrains, the stream function is,

For the ith element, assume that the vortex strength is i. The coordinates of vortex is (xvj, yvj), which could be obtained by cubic spline function eq.(1), also does the coordinates (xcj, ycj) and normal vector ni of the collocation point. Based on potential flow theory, the stream function of ith vortex is

In reference [3], the airflow over a single mountain is simulated by the ideal flow around a cylinder. One of the streamline has been chosen as the shape of the terrains, a factor S is used to get different mountain shapes. And reference [4] simulates the airflow over multiple mountains by superposition of the ideal flow around multiple cylinders. Because of the inherent property of the method, the kind of terrain shapes that could be modelled is limited. Moreover, all the parameters need manual adjustment, in order to get a much more approximate result of the mountain shape.

The flow around a cylinder could be solved by superposing two fundamental solutions of potential flow, which are the doublet and the uniform free stream. Write the speed of uniform free stream as V, which is along the x axis. The number of doublets is l, coordinate of ith doublet is (xi, yi), and the radius of the relative cylinder is Ri. Therefore, the stream function of the wind field is,

The wind field is defined as x  [-3000,3000] y  [0,500]. In this area, the terrain is divided into 100 elements. Set V=5 m/s. Fig.2 shows the distribution of the wind velocity over the terrains, and Fig.3 shows streamlines calculated by the proposed method and the analytical solution of the flow around a cylinder. Viscous effects are both not considered. Table 1 lists the magnitude and direction of the wind velocities at several positions; it also lists the difference between the numerical results and the analytical results. Where, (x, y) is coordinates of the position has been analysed, and V is magnitude of the wind velocity, and  is the angle between the x axis and the wind velocity.

The wind field is defined as x [-5000,6000] y [0,1000]. Velocity of uniform free stream is 5 m/s. In this area, the curve of terrain is divided into 200 elements. Fig.4 and Fig.5 shows the results of wind velocity and streamlines over the multiple mountains. As same as table 1 table 3 also lists the magnitude and direction of the wind velocities at several positions, it also lists the difference between the numerical results and the analytical results.

Fig. 2 ~ Fig. 5 indicates that, the methods mentioned in reference [3] and [4] could only get the symmetrical terrain models. Compared with the analytical results, the numerical results obtained by the proposed method match it very well, the errors of the velocity magnitudes are all less than 1%. And the absolute values of the error of the velocity direction are about 5%. And the error could be decreased by increasing the elements number.

Because the ideal flow over a cylinder has a fixed type, the terrain shapes that could be simulated by this method are still limited, even the shape factor is used. Therefore, a lot of parameter adjusting work will be needed for the multiple cylinders superposition method to simulate an arbitrary terrain as shown in fig.1, and it has a pretty low efficiency.

For the terrains shown in fig.1, the sea level range is x  [-, 0], with a gentle slope at x  [0, 1000], it transfers to the complex terrains at the range of x  [1000, 4000]. The plain range is x  [4000, +]. The wind field is defined as x  [-2000,6000] y  [0,2000]. Velocity of uniform free stream is still 5 m/s. Using the straight line and cubic spline curve to describe this complex terrain shape, and the curve of terrain is divided into 400 elements. Fig. 6 and Fig.7 shows the results of wind velocity and streamlines over the complex terrain.

Based on the aerodynamic potential flow theories, a numerical simulation method for two-dimensional airflow over complex terrains is developed in this paper. The effects of terrains on the wind field are considered by a serial of two-dimensional vortexes, and the vortex strengths are solved by combining with the ground boundary conditions. Numerical examples are studied by the proposed method, and the method is also evaluated by comparing the results with ones from the existing method. Conclusions are summarized below.

