The Transit power train mounting system is a three-point support. The first two points are the hydraulic suspension and the rear point is rubber mount. Test equipment includes Power train mounting system, acceleration sensors, charge amplifier, and computer for record processing. Its test layout is shown as Fig.1[1].

Figure 2 is a test structure flowchart of vibration response test. Power train assembly produces vibration during the test. In the flow process shown in Fig.2, acceleration sensors will transform vibrations into signals in the form of (time-domain signals), then by the charge amplifier mounting point vibration response of acceleration of time-domain signal up or down to enlarge, and then enterer into a computer, the computer saves through data acquisition software[2].

Next step, the two hydraulic mount the powertrain mounting system had been replaced by a rubber mount, to ensure that the hydraulic suspension system suspension layout consistent, this time measurement vibration acceleration on the right front rubber mounts, and comparative analysis with the right front hydraulic suspension at the acceleration curve of the upper and lower points in Fig.4, Fig.6 are available[4][5].

Vibration acceleration curves from the suspension point of the system under steady state conditions of engine, it can be seen that, with increasing engine speed, the acceleration of point of each suspension increased significantly, especially in the high speed range of the engine in 2000(r/min) when the trend is obvious. The vibration acceleration of each suspension point, with the engine speed change is not obvious, and its increasing trend is relatively flat and within the measuring range, the vibration rms value is always maintained at the following eight, is not particularly large fluctuations. Left front hydraulic suspension at the vibration response is greater than the right front hydraulic suspension at the vibration response, which is due to the reason of the powertrain left of center of mass; hydraulic mount at the vibration level is greater than rubber mount at the level of vibration. This is because the powertrain system center of mass offset the former hydraulic mount to carry 80% of the mass of the powertrain.

The above results show that different conditions (steady state and startup), the power train hydraulic suspension system and rubber suspension system vibration response test to compare the hydraulic mount and rubber mount between the two separated vibration performance of the pros and cons, and start the conditions vibration response spectrum analysis, in-depth study of the vibration isolation performance of the Transit powertrain mounting system. Experiments show that compared with the rubber mounting system, the isolation effect of the hydraulic mount systems has obvious advantages. To meet the comfort of the vehicle on the isolation, it is clear that isolation is better.

