Based on the solution structure of white differential equation of DGM(2,1) model, we deduce the new 2-order grey derivative expression. In the specific application, we use new 2-order grey derivative expression instead of old expression to estimate parameters. Through accumulating example, we can see that the optimized DGM(2,1) model has higher simulation precision obviously.

The grey system theory which founded by professor J.L. Deng is a kind of theory which analyze the system on uncertainty in less data, incomplete information and devoid of experience[1]. As the elementary model, GM(1,1) model has applied extensively in the past twenty seven years, and obtain some satisfactory effect. But in the process of application, many scholars also discover the defects of GM(1,1) model. In order to make up the defect of GM(1,1) model, let grey model has more extensive application., scholars have done a lot of jobs. These jobs can be divided into two sorts generally, one sort is to optimize GM(1,1) model straightly by changing background value, grey derivative, the accumulation method of parameters, the optimized GM(1,1) model can be applied extensive[4,5,6,7]. Another sort is to construct some new grey models, such as GM(2,1)

model, DGM(2,1) model, Verhulst model, and so on. DGM(2,1) model is a kind of new grey model which is constructed by grey derivative and second-order grey derivative[2],[3]. DGM(2,1) model can make up some defect of GM(1,1) model, but it still has its own defects. In this article, we deduce the new 2-order grey derivative expression based on the solution structure of white differential equation, and estimate the initial value in time responsive according to the principle of minimum of error sum of squares. so we construct optimized GM(2,1) model by optimizing 2-order grey derivative in order to make white differential equation and grey differential equation be more consistent. Through accumulating example, we see that the optimized DGM(2,1) model has higher simulation precision obviously.

