This paper presents a new fault sustainable interconnection network (IN) called as Irregular Augmented Shuffle Exchange Network–3 (IASEN–3) and its routing algorithm. The Performance of IASEN–3 has been evaluated and compared with existing IASEN–2. The experimental results shows that IASEN–3 is more efficient than IASEN–2 in terms of throughput and processor utilization. These results are analyzed in faulty and non–faulty network environments.

applications makes them fast and reliable. The efficiency, cost and various other factors makes it better and more robust than the other INs [1, 2]. Sometimes, MINs faces the faulty situations during data transmission process [2–5]. This situation may arise due to any link failure or any switch failure. Both conditions create disturbance in the network and degrade the performance of network [3–8]. This paper deals with the switch failure problem and presents a new IN named Irregular Augmented Shuffle Exchange Network–3 (IASEN–3). The IASEN–3 performs well in case of multiple faulty switching elements (SEs). The designed pattern of IASEN–3 is inspired by IASEN–2 [8] and therefore, performance of IASEN–2 is compared with IASEN–3 on

the basis of various performance parameters. Data packets are transmitted through IASEN–2 [8] and IASEN– 3 to a preset number of destinations. Results show that IASEN–3 has better throughput and processor utilization than the IASEN–2 [8] in faulty and non–faulty network scenario.

The rest of the paper is structured as follows: In section 2, structure of IASEN–3 is discussed. Section 3 shows the routing algorithm. In section 4, the performances factors are explained. Results are shown in section 5. At last, section 6 is followed by conclusion and references.

(AE1) will get the request of that particular stage. If AE1 is busy or faulty then request will be arrived at second alternate SE (AE2). In case all the SEs i.e. PSE1, AE1 and AE2 of first stage or PSE3, AE1 and AE2 of third stage are not responding properly then request will be dropped. If request arrives at SE i of second stage and it is busy or faulty then SE j of second stage will receive the request. If it is also busy or faulty then request will be dropped. Finally, we can say that, if the required SEs of all three stages are in working condition then data will be transmitted from the given source to its given destinations otherwise data transmission process will be stopped. In third step of algorithm the term “Node” may be the SE of second stage or the given destination.

In this paper, we have examined the performance of IASEN–2 and the proposed MIN in faulty and non– faulty network conditions. Data packets have been transmitted through IASEN–2 and IASEN–3 and in both conditions it is seen that IASEN–3 produces results that are better than IASEN–2. The theorem and routing algorithm makes it reliable and more fault tolerant as compared to IASEN–2. Future work may include the following things:

