A cluster is a segment [a,b] of particles with a density of y, 0 ≤ y ≤ 1 and a length of x  b  a . The cluster moves in certain direction on the ring with a velocity of v  F( y) . If there are obstacles, it stops (incompressible). F is a state function.

A ring network is a set of rings on the plane. Rings touch each other in the common nodes. Multiplicity (number) of touches in one node is not more than two. Let’s classify ring networks by number of touches, number of common nodes for one ring. This value is constant, except rings, which are located on the border of the network. Besides, the notion "regular networks" includes equidistribution of common nodes on the ring.

Isolated movement of clusters in the ring network is a movement of each cluster on its own ring in a certain direction with the rule FIFO (first input, first output) of common nodes. Let all clusters be uniform. That is, they have equal density and, therefore equal velocity. Since the relative measure of the set of initial conditions, that lead to the competition of clusters for a common node within a limited period of time, equal to zero, we will not consider possible scenarios of settling conflicts. However, if it is significant, we can consider the equiprobable method of regulating movement of two clusters through a common node.

Proof: If the cluster K2 is approaching common node B. Then K1 must go through this node at this period of time, since node A is occupied by K2. Obviously, K2 can't go through B and stops, so K1 can't go through A.

Proof: If any i-cluster is located in both nodes, then at the current time (i-1) and (i+1) clusters are located in one node and the same arrangement with appropriate neighbor clusters. Then there is a cluster with length greater than π. This cluster is the last one without a node in this odd chain, so we receive a contradiction.

Proof: For both closed and open two-element necklaces this feature is verified using the following method: currently, each node is assigned one of three values Xi:1, if the proper item is nearly equal to t and is constant. Thus, there is a defined partially-linear function in the ordered and consecutively numbered set of nodes with values 0,1,-1, according to vectors X = (X1,..., X2n). It's easy to see, that the sum of coordinates of this periodical vector gives us a criterion of monotony U(t):

There is a one-to-one correspondence between each coordinate -1 of vector X and coordinate 1. Indeed, coordinate -1 means, that neighbor contours don't interact, and are in anti-phase, moreover one of the clusters is located before the node, for example, on the right. Thus, on the right of coordinate -1 there is coordinate 1. While on the left of coordinate -1 there can't be coordinate -1. So, the sum of coordinates of vector X is non- negative. From another point, there are nodes with interacting contours if the system didn't reach maximal value. In this case, in order for the rate of change of the potential function to be equal to zero, it is necessary for interacting clusters and neighbor clusters with a negative velocity to be located in a definite location, that excludes constancy of the potential function.

The newly developed NODE model software allows for the creation of a cluster movement simulation in a closed necklace consisting of 2n rings. You can locate clusters, specify length and density of clusters and set the number of rings in the necklace n. Adjacent nodes are marked by a vertical line, which is crossing proper contours.

In the article qualitative properties of incompressible cluster flow on the ring network is considered, main properties and simulation results are formulated. Propositions and proofs of this results and properties are obtained. Newly developed software simulates cluster movement on the ring network and proves this results by simulation.

