Abstract The ability to control data and information through the Internet can be challenging. Pre- liminary analysis showed that some tampering and forgery may occur to some words of the Quran in the electronic versions that span the Internet. Such small modifications may not be noticed by public audience. The holy book of Quran includes a unique feature in that its worldwide copies are all identical. The 114 chapters (Suras) and all their verses and words are preserved in the exact form. As such, we designed and evaluated a model and a tool to evaluate the integrity of the word- ing in the e-versions of the Quran through generating a Meta data related to all words in the Quran preserving the counts and locations. Such Meta data can be used in the same way hash algorithms are used in security to check the integrity of a disk and its data files where any small change in the data will result in a different hash value. We conducted several experiments to evaluate the different parameters and challenges that can impact the automatic authentication process of Quranic verses based on information retrieval and hashing algorithms.

is no control on the type, nature or details of information uploaded to the web by any user. Accordingly, credibility and accuracy are the foremost concerns when reading informa- tion from the web. Credibility can be linked to the website, hosting the information, author of uploaded data and the type of data or information itself. For example, in social networks or even news websites the same story can be told in exactly opposite versions given by two different websites or authors.

and digital signatures. Document control is related to permis- sions before and after publishing the document online. Docu- ment control then is needed to be dynamically applied in a manner that document can be tracked even after publishing it online. Integrity is about making sure that the document is not altered by any unauthorized person and hence is authenti- cated. In digital signatures, signed documents should be veri- fied by the people who signed it (i.e. non-repudiation).

Nowadays, many multilingual copies of the holy Quran are available online. The holy Quran is originally written in Arabic language. The exact wording and statements in Quran verses are identical for all Arabic versions of the Quran.1 However, one problem with translation is that it may change, intention- ally or unintentionally the meaning of some verses when trans- lated to another language. This is a general problem when dealing with translation. On the other hand, for the same lan- guage, it is possible that the same verse be written in different words due to intentional fraud or due to language translation issues.

Hashing algorithms or checksums are used to verify the integrity of data in files, disks and databases. The hashing algorithms or tools take file or data as inputs and generate a unique decimal or hexadecimal number in a way where any small change that may occur to the data in the file will cause the hashing algorithm to produce a new random number that is different from the previous number that was generated before the modification. The Holy Quran is reserved and inte- grated in all its chapters and verses word by word and letter by letter. Hence using hashing algorithms to check automatically and frequently whether there is any possible modification can be an effective tool to authenticate Quran electronic versions either for the whole Quran version or in parts: chapters or verses. Accordingly, Hashing can be generated for the whole Quran as one unit, chapter by chapter or even verse by verse. Fig. 1 below shows an example for hashing codes using the verse:

As shown in Fig. 1, different hashing algorithms generate different hashing values for the same verse. Moreover, hashing algorithms do not differentiate between small and large modi- fication. Any tiny modification will change the hash codes just like a large modification.

The identity and integrity of the data must be periodically and systematically verified through mechanisms such as Secure Hash Standard (SHS) and Secure Hash Algorithm (SHA) [1]. Quran verses can be considered plagiarized or unauthenticated even for one letter change. Hence, hash algorithms are good option as such algorithms are very sensitive even for a very small change in data or documents.

It should be mentioned that in this research we are not focusing on encryption but rather integrity checking. The prob- lem is that in our scenario for Quranic documents online, the relation between information providers and readers is not a typical e-commerce one-to-one relation in which typical hash or encryption algorithms can be sent to the known receiver or customer. Accordingly, private keys intended for a particular receiver will not be applicable in our scenario where the tool is expected to check quickly through the Internet that Quranic documents are authentic and do not contain tampering.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 dis- cusses the related work to this research field followed by a dis- cussion of the adopted methodology in Section 3. Section 4 discusses the developed authentication system, while the exper- iments are presented and discussed in Section 5. Section 6 pre- sents the conclusion and future work.

A unique aspect in Arabic is the addition of Diacritic marks or Tashkeel symbols (small ﻭ, small ﺃ, small ﻱ, Tanween: , stress or shaddah). Those are added to letters to give different meanings or ways of spelling letters. They may cause problems to indexing and querying of data in cases whether those Diacritics are added or ignored. We will present few of the proposed solutions to handle Tashkeel in Arabic.

Papers that tried to detect Diacritics proposed morpholog- ical rules to do that. Known patterns and an initial training set are used to match subject word for one of the morphological rules. Hidden Markov Model (HMM) is used where the hid- den states are the possible diacritized selections of the words. In Arabic text, Diacritic marks can be challenging whether they exist or not in the Arabic text. If they exist, the challenge will be to read or parse them correctly especially as they need extra resources in addition to typical letters parsing in all other languages. On the other hand, Diacritic marks are necessary to Arabic words to clarify words and statements from ambiguity.

Letters in Arabic have different forms based on their loca- tion, accordingly, indexer needs to understand that: (ﺁ,ﺃ ,ﺇ) are all forms of the same letter. Fig. 2 shows a sample of a Sphinx table of Unicode character set that can be used as part of an indexer to guide the indexer for letters of different forms. The goal here is to acknowledge that many Arabic letters have different forms and hence a Unicode character table needs to have equivalent forms of similar letters. As mentioned earlier such issues are solved technically once the right encoding scheme is used.

The removal of online documents’ replication is discussed in [2]. In many cases, the exact document is published in more than one website. This may not be related to plagiarism but to copies replication. This is actually quite common in the Inter- net world. The work presented in [2] used hashing comparison to discover and remove possible replication in web documents. The aim was to improve indexer optimization where one copy of the document will be stored if many documents have the exact same hash value.

The digital Quran verification and authentication is very rare; an algorithm to verify the fundamental text for Quranic quotes is presented in [3]. In order to generate a standard form of Quran verses, the algorithm is stemming some of the special Arabic characters [3] that may make the comparison process difficult. This includes Harakat or Tashkeel that can change the letters’ spelling and the different shapes for some letters as well. While removing such symbols can facilitate the infor- mation retrieval processes, they may cause false alarms where some plagiarism may only occur in those parts which will then be missed or not detected. The work in [3] did not specify any limit or range to consider verses as not authenticated. It used Information retrieval and language processing methods with no utilization of security such as hashing methods.

Sbbah and Selamat [9] have developed a framework for Quranic verses authenticity detection in online forum. They used a numerical approach to detect Quran quotes. The numerical approach calculates the diacritical ratio (DR) of each word in the text. Their authentication system depends on defining the weights of Quranic letters and diacritics and calculate the identifiers of distinctive Quranic words.

Yusoff et al. [5] discussed authentication in Hadeeth and used the historical traditional methods used to authenticate Hadeeths in current digital evidence authentication. Writers and collectors of Hadeeths used to follow the sequence or chain of Hadeeths authors and check their authenticity one by one. A deficiency in one member of the chain may weaken the whole chain and the Hadeeth itself.

Other research works as in [7] discussed the usage of digital signatures to authenticate information or documents through the web. This can work in e-commerce applications and emails where the typical two ways of communication exists between either sender and receiver or client–server. However, in our case, such architecture does exist and hence such methods can- not be used to check whether the information or the document was tampered or not. In Quran verses verification system, an authenticated copy of content is preserved and web content is surveyed for possible – different copies. It is also important to distinguish some changes related to Tashkeel, fonts, etc. that should not be classified as tampering. In particular we mean that some versions of the Quran include Tashkeel or Dialects and others do not. Hence comparison should take this into consideration.

In our case, the goal is to use information retrieval tech- niques to look for documents that include unauthenticated Quranic verses. Authentication algorithms are then required to check whether these millions of documents online have the same – literally authenticated versions of the Quran. Of course such algorithms have two possibly contradictory requirements: performance and accuracy. Algorithms should be able to search through the Internet for possible frauds with a high accuracy and quick speed. False alarms may also arise due to issues such as different readings of the Quran where some specific letters or words are different from one reading to another.

Quran verses. Since Quran verses are literally identical, we developed an authentication system that will index verses one by one in its indexer and will frequently search any possi- ble – mutation in the verses. The authentication system will be able to frequently search the Internet for web pages that may include such fraud verses and index them for monitoring, alert, logging and verification.

The details of developing the authentication system are dis- cussed in more detail in Section 4. The goal of this research is to design a search engine or authentication system that is able to retrieve results based on a search query. A customized Quran search engine or information retrieval system should focus on parsing and indexing Quran verses from all over the web. For proposed program search user interface and queries will then represent verses or part of verses.

The algorithm to develop the authentication system is shown in Fig. 3. The authentication system will start by check- ing whether the verse is written with Harakat and Tashkeel or not to decide which version of the Quran to search. Then the algorithm will look for the verses that are similar to the verse in question; some verses or part of them can be replicated in the Quran. The verses that have perfect match (similar- ity = 100%) or verses that are partially match (similar- ity P 70%) are selected to authenticate the verse in question. Then, the hash code for the verse in question is generated and compared to the selected verses. If the hash code of one or more verses is identical to the hash code of the verse in ques- tion then the verse is authenticated, otherwise the verse is tampered.

We have conducted an experiment to evaluate the top websites that are used to search for Quranic verses. This is based on the popular search engine Google. We built a customized crawler to search through Google for Quran verses one by one from the first to the last verse. For each verse, we collected informa- tion related to the approximate number of index pages in Goo- gle for the verse. This represents the approximate number for web or Internet links that include the queried verse. The devel- oped crawler uses Quran verses as search queries. Results are retrieved from embedded information in search web pages. Meta data related to the retrieved web pages are collected and saved in a dataset. Google ranks retrieved results based on its popularity page rank algorithm.

Fig. 4 shows a small sample of the collected data. We col- lected the first 10 links that are retrieved from Google search which indicate the most visited websites for the specific verse. The number of indexed pages in Google is approximate, see Fig. 5, where this can be a direct indicator of the verse popu- larity. Quranic digitally published verses can be indexed as part of the whole Quran in some websites that include the whole Quran chapters and verses. In some other cases, some chapters or verses of the Quran may be indexed or included in some

In order to deal with the verses having Harakat and Tash- keel, we have considered two versions of the Quran: one that considers Harakat or Tashkeel and one that does not. Quran indexed in the web can be with or without Tashkeel. In many cases, search engines and their queries can be sensitive to these symbols that are unique in Arabic language; hence a search for verse that does not include Tashkeel in the query may not retrieve results for verses that include Tashkeel symbols.

For the Quran authentication system to work properly, we built an indexer that includes all Quran verses (based on the version available on the Islamweb website) where each line or row in the indexer includes one verse. Information about each verse should include its chapter, sequence number, con- tent and number of characters and MD5 hash value. MD5 hash value is saved as the hash table value besides the verse as a key object, see Fig. 7.

1, SHA-256, SHA-384, SHA-512, Tiger, and Whirlpool gave different values for the verses with and without Tashkeels. We repeated the process several times and noticed that all hashing algorithms for all evaluated verses show different hash values comparing with and without Harakat or Tashkeel. We noticed however, that different implementations for the same hashing algorithm may give different hash values for the same text. As such, the system should use the same algorithm imple- mentation for initial and consecutive authentications or verifi- cations. This is what we have done in developing the authentication system where we used the MD5 hashing algo- rithm for hashing purposes.

This simple experiment showed that if we want to check correctness or authenticity of verses with Tashkeel and exact form, hashing algorithms can be used. However, if we want to stem those parts, hashing algorithms will not be then effec- tive unless those additions are stemmed from all verses. In the second experiment and in order to check whether same hash functions can produce same hash codes, we tried different implementations for the same hashing algorithm and check hash values for several verses. We believe that verse should be the standard unit to measure with. Sizes of smaller or larger than a verse can have several issues and challenges specially related to false alarms.

In this experiment we have fixed the source of Quran text to one website, in this case, (http://quran.com). First, we evalu- ated using MD5 hashing from three websites: http://www.file- format.info referred to (Hash1), http://www.hashemall.com referred to (Hash2) and http://www.md5hashgenerator.com referred to (Hash3). Table 1 shows results of three samples using verses with Tashkeel.

This experiment shows that not all hashing functions are identical or should always produce same hash values for same text. Nonetheless, this is not due to reliability issue with hash- ing algorithms. Rather, it has to do with the detail implemen- tation of the hashing algorithm. Hashing values for the same algorithm implementation for the same text should always pro- duce same hash values.

We have used our authentication system to check one of the online copies of the Holy Quran available in one of the Arabic websites that index Arabic books and documents (The compre- hensive library: http://shamela.ws/), and we noticed that there are records of some Quranic distortion in some verses. The risk is that such versions may be exposed to non-Muslims or Mus- lims who have little experience of the exact wording of Quran verses.

One popular example of this is a popular program called (Qaloon). At least one version of this program is discovered with examples of incorrect verses’ wording. Following are examples of the incorrect wording of some verses and their correct ones. We also included hashing values for both cases to simply show that an automatic hash based algorithm can easily detect such distortion.

Hash values are randomly generated. Hence one difference may result in a completely different hash. Hence the idea is not to see how much the text is far from the actual text. The idea is to come up with a Boolean decision: Version is iden- tical relative to the original authenticated copy or not.

A customized Quranic crawler is developed to search for Quranic verses through the Internet and index pages and infor- mation about websites that include those verses. We developed a case study to analyze Google top 10 search results for Quranic verses where we retrieved results for the verses one by one for the whole Quran. This was part of an initial assessment to eval- uate the credibility of websites that include Quranic verses and that are most popular according to Google ranking algorithms. Results showed that while some of the most frequently vis- ited websites for verses search are authentic and credible, how- ever, in many other cases, some verses are indexed by less credible websites according to some subjective metrics that we defined or according to the fact that some of those pages are related to personal or social networks that are managed

While we only conducted the current experiments on Quran verses, we believe that same process and tasks can be applied to evaluate Hadeeths as well. The case of Quranic verses can be considered easier as Quranic verses are literally identical even in the different Quran readings (with some few and minor exceptions). However, for the case of Hadeeths, some Hadeeths are mentioned in different wordings where this needs to be considered in the authentication evaluation process.

Kamsin, Amirrudin, Abdullah Gani, Ishak Suliaman, Salinah Jaafar, Rohana Mahmud, Md Sabri, Aznul Qalid et al., Developing the novel Quran and Hadith authentication system, in: Information and Communication Technology for The Muslim World (ICT4M), 2014 The 5th International Conference on, IEEE, 2014, pp. 1–5.

Noor Jamaliah Ibrahim, Zaidi Razak, Zulkifli Mohd Yusoff, Mohd Yamani Idna Idris, Emran Mohd Tamil, Noorzaily Mohamed Noor, Abdul Rahman, Noor Naemah, Quranic Verse recitation recognition module for support in J-QAF learning: a review, Int. J. Comput. Sci. Netw. Secur. (IJCSNS) 8 (8) (2008) 207–216.

