A-SMAC protocol based on sensor node data traffic dynamic adjusting node listen and sleep time. Based on A-SMAC protocol, sensor nodes sent out the underlying error decisions .In this paper, we propose an adaptive fault-tolerant algorithm (AFTA) of node. According to the results of fault tolerant judgment, use of A-SMAC protocol dynamic adjusting node listen and sleep time, realize the combination of data judgment and node dynamic listening. Our

However, BFTD frequent communication between adjacent nodes, that leads the energy consume fast .A- SMAC protocol based on data traffic dynamic adjustment to listen and sleep time. A-SMAC protocol does not contribute to the reliability of the underlying data judgment. Usually send out unreliable information, result in wrong decision to Fusion Center.

Using environment characteristic value if there has been a marked change, the node redundancy testing information of fault tolerance, will introduce more mistakes. So we define the node decision threshold area concept (such as those described in [7]).Through the threshold region to estimate changed in the environment. Here we suppose the threshold area:	𝗍	Įı	𝚗	Įı , The parameter is the standard variance of

A-SMAC protocol could base on the node throughput to measure the size of network traffic. Set the parameters used for statistical nodes in each cycle to send and receive packets number. We adopt the two threshold method (respectively set as S, M) can be divided n into three kinds of circumstances.

Increase the time of data packets, can transmit more data in the effective time. AFTA propose if the environment changed, send three consecutive decisions, so that we can make the node to transmit data traffic increase. Then, according to A-SMAC protocol make duty ratio increases, listen time increases, can make decision information sent out in time, reduce the decision delay data.

We define the 90 nodes were randomly distributed in the area, between two nodes in turn form pairs of CBR stream transmission link. Adaptive incident detection algorithm adopts the method of sliding window- restart. Determine the length L of the sliding window, binary decision threshold th, and a threshold area parameters.

Fig.4.2 shows error reduction performance of AFTA. We can seen from the diagram when data acquisition number L take more than three times, the AFTA is superior to using spatial correlation of (adjacent nodes N = 4)Bayesian fault tolerance detection algorithm at error reduction.

Energy consumption and event monitoring has been one of the important indices for wireless sensor network performance .In this paper, AFTA is proposed. This approach require data time correlation to fault tolerance through Threshold area. The proposed approach also determines the combination of algorithm and A - SMAC protocol.

The simulation results demonstrate that this approach can significantly reduce the unnecessary data to send and lead energy consumption is lower than A-SMAC protocol. It is also shown that the AFTA improve the ruling data transmission efficiency effectively, makes the system has a higher real-time performance and reliability is better. As a future extension, AFTA approach can be developed that can be used for even larger networks.

