Based on the fuzzy cut method, the fuzzy concept lattice was analyzed and researched and a new kind of concept lattice which called variable precision concept lattice was proposed. This kind of concept lattice can be constructed with every different confidence through selecting different level. Two corresponding construction methods, context cut method and concept cut method, were discussed in the two different angles, and some results were given. Furthermore, a case study was carried on.

In the real world, the relationship between the extent and intent is not certain at all the time. Much more often, the fuzzy relations exist in the concept, and they can not described by the accurate concept lattice. The usual formal concept [1] is a two-tuple which consists of extent and intent. The extent of a concept is the element set and the intent is the set of attributes which all the elements have. Burusco[2] First, the fuzzy logic Applied to the concept of grid, followed by Belohlavek [3-6], Georgescu[7] studied the fuzzy concept

lattices; Fan [8] such as the establishment of the four kinds of fuzzy concept lattice, with Concept lattice on the background of the four kinds of classic form one-to-one correspondence, and research-based fuzzy Concept of the grid fuzzy inference problem. Many scholars introduces fuzzy concept lattice [9-16] successively to express the fuzzy relationship between extent and intent. It was more close to reality, and accord with the fuzzy concept ideas of human. In the other hand, it plays a crucial role in the practical problems processing.

Concept lattice can be used for the discovery, sort and display of the concept. The binary definition made that concept lattice is very suitable for association rule. In many cases, people just need a series of fuzzy rules, but not the completely determined rules. And people’s demand for the degree of rules is also varying according to the different times. Therefore, this paper tries to use the method of fuzzy cut set to construct a classic concept lattice under the fuzzy formal background. This kind of concept can be adjusted with the different valuing of  .

Fuzzy set is an important concept which was proposed by American computer and cybernetics expert L. A. Zadeh in 1965, and then the mathematic basic is put forward for the quantitative description of fuzzy concept and the objective regularity of fuzzy object. The basic idea is expanding the membership relation in the classic set theory, and the membership degree is expanded from the two numbers (0 and 1) to the interval[0,1] .

Fuzzy concept lattice and weighted concept lattice, the extent contains the objects which meet all the attributes in the intent. To find the concepts which have partial attributes, we must scan the concept lattice and combine the concepts. The time cost is so larger especially for large concept lattice. While, in the rough concept lattice, although the concepts which have partial attributes can be searched, but there may be a lot of objects which only have an attribute of the intent, thus the support and confidence degree of constructing association rules will be greatly reduced. In practical applications, we often care the object set which have a

The relationships between fuzzy concept lattice and classic concept were analyzed in this paper, and then the ideas of fuzzy cut set were introduced into the construction of concept lattice. A new kind of concept lattice was presented to describe the different confidence of rules. A case study proved that this kind of concept is valuable. The next study is to apply this tool into the engineering practice, such as rules extracting, fuzzy decision, and intelligent control, etc.

