It is important to research and find out opinion leader in time of increased huge number of Micro Blog users around our world and daily life. Our governments in different countries around the world have found that it is a vital fact to analysis and control message spreading in Micro Blog and other social network. For the reason that opinion leaders always play vital role in information spreading in Micro Blog and it is necessary to detect opinion leaders precisely. In this article, we has constructed a SINA Micro Blog APIs based Micro Blog crawling and analysis tool. Furthermore, a novel MapReduce based Micro blog crawler and node betweenness approximation computation method was proposed better accuracy and less running time to detect core opinion leaders in Micro Blog graphs.

In recent years, our earth has experienced some important changes such as culture globalization, Internet popularization and so on. In the last decade, there are more crisis accidents in social public which occurred much more frequently than before especially in some serious natural environment cases. All the government public management around the world cannot avoid the challenges which has become particularly vital in recent years. These public crisis events began to frequently occurred in China also. There are some examples. SARS broke out event in 2003 of China, big discussion over in Blogs for WenChuan earthquake in 2008,Sichuan Lushan earthquake in 2013, April 20 and so on. From mentioned above events, we can infer

The rest of this article will be organized as follows: section II gives a detailed introduction on the related research work on complex network for Betweenness computing, node centrality and parallel computing, including introduction of three important centralities for social network analysis in important opinion leader detection. Section III will presents detail information of our SINA APIs based crawler. In Section IV will we will present the parallel Design details of parallel SINA Micro blog crawler .And In Section V, we developed an effective Betweenness approximation algorithm for large scale graph and evaluated it in experiments on real SINA Micro Blog User social network dataset. Section VI concluded the paper.

For the reason that node’s Betweenness centrality reflects the vital role of node in information transmission and node’s important role social of network structure,it is necessary to develop some fast algorithm to computation node’s Betweenness centrality statistic with lower computation cost and better precision .There are some traditional computation methods such as such as GN [6],Fast GN[6] and Floyd Warshall algorithm [6].Among all the existing Betweenness comuputation algorithm ,it is necessary to compute all node’s Betweenness in the whole network.And because its heavy computation cost in time complexity , GN algorithm and Floyd Warshall algorithm often needs o(m2n) in network with high density and o(n3 ) in some sparse network in the network with m edges and n nodes.In recent years ,there some researchers proposed some faster Betweenness computation algorithm for whole network such as Brandes [7] developed the faster node Betweenness computation algorithm on whole network based on graph backtracking algorithm.In 2001,Brandes’s algorithm has the time complexity of o(mn) in undirected and unweighted graph,while time

With the development of various computation in and industries and services, both in the fields of physics, chemistry, biology and so on. There for in the manufacturing industry, military industry, telecommunications service industry field needs the powerful computing ability and data analysis ability. But in actual computation , all node’s Betweenness centrality computation in social network always needs very heavy time complexity so that it is necessary to develop some parallel Betweenness centrality computing algorithms.In many cases, the calculation and data processing requirements can not be able to complete the computing work

for results which have strict requirements and limitations in computing speed, needing time and accuracy. The traditional uni-processor and serial program has resulted many problems in some large-scale data processing and calculation.And in these cases, enterprises and scientific researchers always demands calculation for the data (Data-Oriented Computing) as the most important thing.In order to support these large-scale computing tasks, related hardware support system have emerged one after another, such as Intel Paragon, IBM SP2, Intel TFLOPS in 1990s, and Lenevo’s dawning-1000 distributed memory computer. They are all present to carry on large scale cluster computation as Amazon cluster system, Google and Yahoo (typically containing tens of thousands of computing nodes) cluster ,and the new IBM super computer HPC Roadrunner, which have reached the computing capability of billion times.

On the other hand, researchers used MPI[9] and Hadoop[10] to develop parallel program to promote algorithm running efficiency. Programming method and theory of MPI is often difficult for program developers and existing methods and algorithms does not construct node Betweenness approximation algorithm for the whole social network especially in large scale graph in MapReduce APIs.It is necessary to construct that in MapReduce API to cut down computation complexity.

We designed and implemented SINA Micro Blog APIs based crawler which can be found the crawling process in Figure 1.When Micro Blog information crawling began, Crawling DB thread get a random user ID from database and retrieve its Micro Blog fans user into crawling queue. For an example which can be founded in Fig 2,the Crawler thread will search and get the Micro Blog home page of the initial user a and push its fans b,c,d into the crawling queue. After process of a, the crawling thread will handle b,c,d and so on.

From Fig.3,the Betweenness approximation result can be found in a dataset which comes from SINA’s Micro Blog user fans relationship graph in case of July 21 rain storm case of Beijing in 2012,and there are 1000 nodes was randomly selected to make Betweenness estimation. In Fig.3,we can find the selected node number in x-axis and the Average Euclidean distance among estimated Betweenness value and real Betweenness value of selected 1000 nodes mentioned above in y-axis.From Fig.3. MAXMIN strategy was found to be the best one and deviation of MAXMIN strategy reaches still below 0.1 while Pivot number reaches 80.

approximation computation method was proposed in large scale social graph for some emergency case in our daily life such as rainstorm. And it is proved that our algorithm gained better accuracy in less cost of commutating time. It is useful to detect some important opinion leaders in social network in large scale graph and in parallel data mining.

