A portfolio optimal model with cardinality constraints is researched, in which the minimum of Value-at-Risk is taken as the objective function. We give a hybrid differential evolution algorithm to solve the model and make the case study with sixteen alternative stocks from Shanghai and Shenzhen stock market. The numerical results show that the given model is reasonable and the given algorithm is effective.

Since 1970s, financial risk has emerged increasingly due to the economic globalization, the rapid development of the modern information technology and financial system innovation. How to control financial risks effectively becomes the focus to financial regulators and investors. Therefore, how to measure risk has been a very important research subject.

risk measure. In 1991, Konna and Yamazaki [4] adopted mean semi-absolute deviation as the risk measure and proposed a linear programming model of portfolio, which is called as the mean - absolute deviation model. This model can be solved effectively by linear programming method. But the study only measured the deviation level of future returns and expected returns, and didn’t make comprehensive accurate quantitative calculation to risk of loss. Consequently, the Group of Thirty proposed a new risk measure tool named

We apply differential evolution algorithm to solve the problem in order to obtain reasonable results which ensured the feasibility of our solution. The numerical results show that the model is reasonable and the given hybrid algorithm is effective. That is to say, this paper provides an effective method for the portfolio optimization model with cardinality constraints.

introduced by Price and Storn [1112] . The DE algorithm has gradually become more popular and has been used in many practical cases. This is mainly because it has good convergence properties and is principally easy to understand. The individual of DE is a real vector, D is dimension of individual, NP is Population scale,The adaptive differential evolution algorithm of solving integer programming works as follow:

105 to 108 in general ,which depends on the practical problem. Other constraints’ processing is given in the following algorithm. Our problem is solved by using differential evolution algorithm. Then we give a hybrid which is produced by combining penalty function method and differential evolution. Parameters are set as

Step8. If the amount of the nonzero elements of trial is not between k1 and k2 , we can produce a new trail according to Step 3 and Step 4. If elements of trial are between l and u , break; else, return step 7 and go on.

under different confidence level, we have different portfolio weights and corresponding risks. From loss value, high confidence level states that investors are more dislike risk. This also reflects conservative investors will select bigger confidence level. The portfolio weights of the stocks are satisfied the constraints condition of our model. Figure 1 shows the results of algorithm operation for 500 generation under differential level, and in 200 generation algorithm convergence stabilize which shows that the algorithm is feasible.

0.018 to 0.026. With the increasing of return threshold, the value of risk is increasing, this also meet high-risk and high-income principle. In this progress, if investment tends to focus on several stocks, it goes against dispersive risk, so the corresponding risk loss will increase in value.

Under different confidence level, Table 3 gives the corresponding value of VaR when return threshold increased from 0.018 to 0.026. Then, we can map out the return and risk efficient frontier, see Figure 2. From Figure 2, the smaller confidence level, the closer the efficient frontier of portfolio to graphic top left. This is because higher confidence level corresponds to higher degree of risk aversion. In the same expected yield, the lower confidence level of corresponding risk is smaller, this also accord with theoretical results.

