Due to simple and rugged motor construction, potentially low pro- duction cost, excellent torque/speed characteristics, high operating effi- ciency, and inherent fault tolerance, switched reluctance motors (SRMs) are emerging as an attractive drive unit ranging from modern electrical vehicles to high speed aircraft applications (Kamalakannan et al., 2011; Wen et al., 2013). In recent years, substantial research efforts have been devoted to various aspects of SRM such as speed regulation perfor- mance analysis, controller design and instrumentation, drive applica- tion, where the accurate knowledge of the SRM's electromagnetic characteristics is a defining property for all these cases.

To date it remains challenging when precisely characterizing the pa- rameters for control purpose since an SRM presents highly nonlinear characteristics due to the motor's doubly salient structure and its inten- tional operation in deep magnetic saturation for higher power density (Miller, 2001; Dowlatshahi et al., 2014). Moreover, a prominent sub- problem associated is that the current accurate in-lab measurement re- sults are rarely applicable in engineering, especially when the precise parameter evaluation is desired. The considerable errors between the in-lab characterization and field application stem from manufacturing and material variations from the prototype, neglect of phase mutual

couplings, diverse winding copper and iron losses, and the chopping loss of power electronics devices. Therefore, although precisely charac- terizing the SRMs is extensively investigated (Zhang et al., 2010; Parreira et al., 2005; Wang et al., 2014) and gives perfect insight into the physics, there still exists a necessity to develop a rapid approach on characterizing the motors individually. In this sense the core issue is how to comprehensively replicate the operating scenario during the characterization process, where an in-situ characterization lends itself to serve this goal.

The organization of this paper is as follows. Section 2 proposes a pre- cise SRM characterization model for an SRM, with an emphasis on dis- criminating the definition of phase and incremental inductance. Section 3 describes a COTS circuitry based in-situ characterizing ap- proach for the motor, and the merits of this measuring method are also highlighted. Parameter measurement results and parameter char- acteristics are illustrated in Section 4, followed by a reliable in-situ cross-validation method. Some conclusions are given in Section 5.

modules to form a compact asymmetry half bridge power converter for SRM. Take Phase A for an example, when S1 and S2 are switched on simultaneously, the phase winding is excited by the D.C. source up to rated current, which is limited by a comparing circuitry associated

In the SRM control board the instantaneous maximum phase current is limited to 13.0A during test, and the maximum current during motor operation is 9.0A. The current sensor is LEM HMS 05-P with the accuracy of 1%. The encoder is OMRON E6C2-C with the resolution of 2000 pulse/ round. The general controller is a 32-bit 150MIPS TMS320LF2812 DSP which includes a 16-channel 12-bit on-chip 3D converter with the

12.5 M sampling bandwidth. An Altera FPGA EP2C8Q208C8 (8 speed grade) is selected to expand the I/O and execute online CMAC NN com- putation, which has 8256 logic cells and 165,888 memory bits. Mean- while the FPGA has a 16 M byte SDRAM for temporarily reserving the sensor-acquired data.

here using the decaying current profile is more appropriate for higher currents since the voltage fluctuation during a falling current is negligi- ble and fairly constant (Gobbi et al., 2006). This is because the measure- ment during a decaying current is carried out by eliminating the applied voltage to the winding, and an alternative path to the winding current is provided through a freewheeling diode connected across the machine phase, hence no current drains from the filter capacity. The voltage across the winding during the decaying current is only the forward volt- age drop of the diode. In contrast, the applied source voltage varies while the current is increasing, giving rise to errors due to quantization and its use in the evaluation of flux linkages (Krishnan, 2001).

In order to validate the effectiveness and accuracy of the characteri- zation, two aspects are considered in this paper. First, decaying current is used to characterize the incremental inductance and at the same po- sition the rising current is used to validate its result. This approach is name after cross-validation because both the currents are shapes by the identical inductance regarding to the fixed position. The second as- pect is that a numerical model is built according to the decaying current model and then a full process is simulated and experimentally recorded to show their agreement.

The precisely measured electromagnetics data and established model enable detailed and precise examination of SRM behavior over a wide variety of simulated operating conditions without the limitations associated with drive circuits, transducers or instrumen- tation, as the case we used for validating the characterization preci- sion in Section 4.2. And it worth noting that all the electromagnetic parameters are able to be manipulated under a unified computa- tional framework.

Xiao Ling:Conceptualization, Data curation, Formal analysis, Meth- odology, Validation, Writing - original draft.Liang Gong:Data curation, Formal analysis, Investigation, Methodology, Validation, Writing - orig- inal draft, Writing - review & editing.Bingchu Li:Data curation, Method- ology, Validation.Chengling Liu:Funding acquisition, Project administration, Visualization, Writing - review & editing.

