The use of biomass is increasing because it is a form of renewable en- ergy that is broadly accepted as a substitute for fossil fuels (Saosee et al., 2020). Biomass is organic material used to generate heat energy. Bio- mass, such as wood chips, sawdust, and agricultural residues such as rice husks, rice straw, bagasse, sugarcane leaves, palm kernel shells, and coconut shells, is waste from agro-industrial factories. These waste products are processed into biomass pellets in order to increase their value. Nowadays, biomass in pellet form is favoured because it provides a low moisture content, high density, and consistent size. Bio- mass pellets are also more convenient to store, and they are easy to manage, move, and transport due to their grain-like flow characteristics (Zafar, 2022).

where Rsample is the absolute reflectance value of the biomass pellets, Rdark is the reflectance of the background (dark reference), and Rwhite is the reflectance value of the acrylic sheet (white reference). The Rdark was collected when the light source unit was turned off, and the Rwhite was obtained by scanning a Teflon whiteboard. R was used to create a prediction model in the next step.

The optimal model for predicting the true density was investigated. The model was developed using different spectral pre-treatments, and the variables (relative reflectance value at its corresponding wave- lengths) selected using different methods were compared. Before model creation, either the raw spectra or the pre-treated spectra (including the first derivative [D1], second derivative [D2], and standard normal variate [SNV]) were used for model development (Liu et al., 2014). The model was optimized using selected wavelengths obtained from the correlation method (CM), variance method (VM), co- variance method (COVM), and successive projections algorithm (SPA) and genetic algorithm (GA) methods (Sratthaphut and Ruangwises, 2012; Fei and Yong, 2009). After that, their performance was compared. The variable selection was investigated, including CM, VM, COVM, SPA, and GA. For variable selection by CM, the correlation (r) between X (spectral data) and Y (true density) was determined. The absolute values of r were determined, and its corresponding wavelengths were

and partial least squares (PLS) regression has the advantages of both GAs (maximum fitness) and PLS regression (maximum covariance be- tween the absorbance value and measured value) (Sratthaphut and Ruangwises, 2012). Pitak et al. (2021b) reported that the model for ele- mental prediction (C, H, N, and S) developed using the GA wavelength and PLS regression provided a higher accuracy than the model devel- oped using the full wavelength range.

0.81 < R2 < 0.90 and 2.5 < RPD < 3 indicates a good prediction model, 0.66 < R2 < 0.80 and 2.0 < RPD < 2.5 indicates an approximate prediction model, and R2 < 0.66 and RPD < 2 indicates a poor prediction

Therefore, this model was excellent and could be used for quality measurement. The RSEP (relative standard deviation of prediction), which is the relative ratio of the absolute error of prediction to a refer- ence value, showed that every predicted value gave an error of approx- imately 6.40% of the reference value (John et al., 2007).

The NIR hyperspectral imaging technique is proposed for rapid mea- surement of true density of biomass pellets. The prediction model were developed using the full wavelength range, CM, VM, COVM, SPA, and GA coupled with four pre-treatment methods including raw spectra, D1, D2, and SNV. Then, their performances were compared. The result dem- onstrated that true density model was excellent and could be used for quality control. The most appropriate method predicts the true density of GA biomass pellets and spectral conditioning with D1 by using 53 wavelengths. Then, a distribution map can show the specific properties of the biomass pellets, in a form that can be easily viewed and used in various procedures in the industrial sector, such as quality control in the production process and quality selection before the product is sold. The model can also be developed for other materials and applica- tions in the future. The appropriate model and important wavelength

