initiation (Veraverbeke et al., 2017) a range of meteorological and envi- ronmental factors influence their ability to spread and the speed at which they spread. These factors include local climatic conditions, to- pography and vegetation type. Also, the condition and density of vege- tation are fundamental factors that influence the behavior of wildfires and their ultimate wide ranging impacts on surrounding agriculture, ecology, environments and forestry.

The rate of wildfire spread depends on a wide range of variables combining with wind speeds and directions, displaying complex non- linear interactions. The condition of the fuel bed (McAllister, 2019) and its geometry (McAllister and Finney, 2016) influence the spreading rate of wildfires. Likewise the wind-driven transportation of firebrands (Caton-Kerr et al., 2019; Tohidi and Kaye, 2017; Manzello and Suzuki, 2017) and the nature of the firebrands (Hedayati et al., 2019) impact how wildfires develop and spread in specific regions. The aerated condi- tion of the litter layer beneath the trees and shrubs, particularly its per- meability in broadleaf forests (Wang et al., 2019; Fehrmann et al., 2017), is influential because it affects the extent of wind driven convection through the fuel bed (De Gennaro et al., 2017).

have been employed to assist in wildfire prediction. These include ge- netic algorithms coupled with wind field and environmental models (Artes et al., 2016; De Gennaro et al., 2017). Some models distinguishing wind velocity and direction are exploited using domain decomposition

of linear relationships within datasets (Sanjuan et al., 2016) and probabilistic analysis (Quill et al., 2019). Zhang et al. (2019) developed a spatial prediction model for forest fire susceptibility employing a convolutional neural network verified with data from historic fire loca- tions in Yunnan Province, China. An adaptive neuro-fuzzy inference sys- tem (ANFIS) was applied to classify forest fire hotspot data in central Kalimantan, Indonesia (Wijayanto et al., 2017). Jaafari et al. (2019) eval- uated hybrid models combining neuro-fuzzy logic and metaheuristic optimization to predict the probability of wildfires spatially in the Hyr- canian region of Iran.

In complex datasets, with non-linear relationships between multiple input variables careful feature selection is essential. The highly skewed distribution of the dependent variable means that just a few data re- cords with extreme values are located in the distribution tail. The TOB method offers three distinct prediction-performance insights to feature selection based on the input variables it includes in its data matching procedure.

the total burn area distribution in the positively skewed distribution considered here. This fundamental characteristic tends to make RMSE a more effective optimization objective function for such highly skewed datasets than MAE. However, MAE is also a useful objective function to consider as it provides a distinctive insight.

The prediction accuracy of the TOB model compares favourably with that published for this same dataset using a range of regression and sta- tistical based machine learning algorithms applied to all twelve vari- ables with and without feature selection (Cortez and Morais, 2007; Castelli et al., 2015). Cortez and Morais (2007) applied a trial and error feature selection procedure involving the evaluations of four dis- tinct combinations of some of the input variables were considered. Their feature selection analysis identified a high-performing SVM

Notes: (1) These results identify the solutions that are best able to minimize RMSE and MAE for all 517 data records in the dataset. (2) Based on TOB data matching sensitivity analysis the 1-Var model (DC only for record matching) is the most promising for generating low RMSE for BA predictions. On the other hand, the 1-Var model (RH only) for record matching is the most promising for generating low MAE for BA predictions for the dataset.

The optimum TOB model achieves a more accurate best RMSE (62.21 Ha; 1-Var (DC) model), when applied to the full dataset, compared to the best RMSE value for published results for other machine learning al- gorithms (i.e., RMSE = 63.7 Ha for the SVM model of Cortez and Morais, 2007). That optimum TOB model achieves a similar best MAE of 12.717 Ha applied to the full dataset. This almost matches the best MAE value for published results for other machine learning algorithms (i.e., MAE = 12.71 Ha for their SVM model of Cortez and Morais,

These prediction accuracy comparisons confirm that the TOB model can generate prediction accuracy for the total burned area for the dataset studied comparable to the best prediction accuracy generated by a range of regression and/or statistical based machine learning algo- rithms. Moreover, the TOB model has the additional benefit of transpar- ency and forensic access to the components involved in each of its predictions. This additional attribute, which is considered a vital ecolog- ical benefit for forest-fire datasets, because it facilitates data mining and yields greater insight to the similarities of specific events with other burn events recorded in the dataset. It also reveals over-fitting as and

In data mining terms, the TOB model can go far beyond total burn area predictions with this and other forest fire datasets. It can provide information concerning the broader similarities between conditions and outcomes associated with specific fire incidents alongside each pre- diction. For the TOB algorithm to data mine the forest fire dataset, se- quential sample numbers (identifiers) 1 to 517 have been assigned to each data record in the order in which they are listed in the UCI database file (UCI Machine Learning Repository, 2008).

There is nothing unusual about the two data records considered (#144 and #369) and the TOB algorithm provides predictions with rel- atively low errors for both of them. There is an improvement on the ini- tial TOB Stage 1 predictions in both cases by the adjusted weights (defined by the TOB Stage 2 solution applied with Q = 6) for the vari- able errors used in the TOB Stage 2 predictions. The TOB Stage 1 predic- tions list the top-ten matching data records and display them in descending rank order. The column second from the right shows the fractional contribution of each matching data record to the BA (Ln) pre- diction and those contributions are arranged in descending order for the

TOB Stage 1 calculation. For data record #144 the top three matching re- cords contribute ~77% to the BA (Ln) TOB Stage 1 prediction. This changes to ~63% for the three matching solutions with the lowest squared errors contributing to the BA (Ln) TOB Stage 2 prediction. On

The results presented demonstrate that optimized data matching has significant benefits for predicting total burned areas of forest fires and for data mining the associated datasets. Indeed, the transparency achieved significantly exceeds what is achievable with regression- based machine-learning methods, and this can provide beneficial in- sights for agricultural, ecological, environmental and forestry datasets. In particular, the transparency provided by the predictions of the TOB algorithm provide insights that are ecologically significant regarding the pros and cons of particular high-performing prediction solutions. It clearly identifies the most influential combination of data records (historical burn events) contributing to each prediction. However, the analysis presented raises some important issues related to highly posi- tively skewed and generally asymmetrical distributions that are typi- cally associated with the burned areas of data sets compiling historical forest fire incidents in different geographic areas. It is difficult to de- velop machine learning solutions that accurately predict BA for the bulk of the data records (small to modest total burned area incidents) and, at the same time, provide accurate BA prediction for those few burn events located in the right-side tail of the distribution (largest total burned area incidents).

The results and analysis presented justify the combined use of prediction accuracy metrics MAE and RMSE to root out high- performing solutions. RMSE as an objective function focuses more on the right-side tail of the BA distribution. On the other hand, MAE can reveal important information about the absolute predic- tion errors in the parts of the distribution containing most data re- cords. Optimizing models separately using both MAE and RMSE as objective functions minimizes errors and provides more ecological insight to those predictions.

The detailed data mining made possible with the TOB solutions re- veals a good deal of useful information about each data record (burn event). Information about the influences on accurate and inaccurate predictions associated with specific optimized solutions. This can help to surface important ecological information that is useful in making ap- propriate response decisions to specific burn incidents. It identifies which are the most useful TOB models and the most influential variables that provide, and consistently justify, BA predictions. Such improved confidence in BA predictions, and the greater understanding of the fac- tors influencing each burn event derived from associated data mining, should lead to more appropriate responses to burn events as they hap- pen. Moreover, it should lead to more informed follow-up mitigation re- sponses that help to limit agricultural, ecological, environmental and forestry damage from similar incidents that might occur in the future.

An optimized data-matching machine learning algorithm can pre- dict the total burned areas of a well-studied forest fire dataset from Portugal (Montesinho Natural Park) to a high degree of accuracy. While doing so it provides exceptional data mining insights (that are not immediately obvious) with which to interrogate each historical burn event. The transparent open box (TOB) algorithm avoids the use of regression, correlation and statistical distribution assumptions in making its predictions and does not involve any hidden layers or com- plex calculations.

For the dataset studied, TOB feature selection sensitivity analysis identified drought code (DC) and relative humidity (RH) as the most in- fluential, of the thirteen variables considered, on TOB's total burned area predictions. The use of mean absolute error (MAE) and root mean squared error (RMSE) of the total burned area predictions separately as objective functions to minimize provides complementary informa- tion with respect to specific burned-area predictions from the highly positively skewed total burned area distributions of forest-fire datasets. The results indicate that transparent optimized data matching machine learning reveals more in wildfire datasets than regression-based ma- chine learning algorithms.

The consideration of cumulative absolute error (and squared error) differentials, displaying all data records, aid the comparisons between the detailed prediction analysis achieved by high-performing TOB models. Graphical representations of these cumulative error trends fa- cilitate data mining and reveal the few problematic data records that negatively influence the overall prediction accuracy achievable by spe- cific model structures. This enables model structures to be selected that focus prediction accuracy on specific sectors of the total burned area distributions and/or more broadly across the entire distributions. This ability provides knowledge that is beneficial for sound agricultural, ecological, environmental and forestry responses to better respond to and manage specific burn events and potentially limit the impacts of fu- ture similar events. The method proposed could be readily adapted to predict and data mine generic agricultural systems that are dependent on complex interactions between weather and environmental variables going beyond regression- and correlation-based methods.

