Prion diseases are fatal neurodegenerative disorders caused by an aberrant accumulation of the misfolded cellular prion protein (PrPC) conformer, denoted as infectious scrapie isoform (PrPSc). The slow and fast motion models of huPrP and huPrP (E200K) structures were analyzed with the GNM in this paper. It can be seen that the largest fluctuation values corresponding to the helix 1. Residue 147 and residue 150 play an important role in the stability of the helix 1. The major consequence of the E200K substitution appears to be the redistribution of surface charges, resulting in an altered electrostatic potential in the mutant protein. This change is likely to affect the stability of the helix 1. Thus, their behavior might reflect that of wild-type PrP or that of mutants associated with transmissible forms of the disease.

disorders is the conversion of a normal prion protein, PrPC, into a pathogenic (scrapie) form, PrPSc [1, 2]. The transition between PrPC and PrPSc occurs without any detectable covalent modifications to the protein molecule [3]. PrPC is a soluble protein with a high content of Į-helices, whereas PrPSc is characterized by a high ȕ-sheet content [4]. Considering that the “protein-only” hypothesis suggests a change of protein conformation as a possible cause of the onset of TSEs, the three-dimensional PrP structures have attracted keen interest. So far, NMR solution studies have been described for monomeric, cellular forms of PrP [5, 6]. Although some studies provide valuable insights into the PrP, the mechanism of conformational transitions of the PrPC-PrPSc is not fully clear [7, 8].

In this work, we used a simple model called the Gaussian Network Model (GNM) to study the dynamic properties of PrP. It is a coarse-grained model which is topology-based and independent of sequence specificity [9]. This model can provide the dynamic properties of proteins near an equilibrium state (usually native state). In this model, each residue is represented by its C-alpha atom, and the detailed interactions between residues to be in contact in the native state are replaced with springs. Some studies have indicated that such a simple treatment of the interactions in the native protein is sufficient to account for many experimental facts [10,11].

The NMR structures of huPrP include a globular domain and an N-terminal flexibly disordered “tail”. The globular domain contains of three Į-helices that encompass residues 144–154 (helix 1), 173–194 (helix 2), and 200–228 (helix 3) and a short anti-parallel ȕ-sheet comprising the residues 129–131 and 161–163 (PDB: 1QM2) [5]. The structure of the E200K variant of huPrP was characterized by NMR spectroscopy (PDB: 1FKC), which is similar to the wild-type huPrP [6].

The GNM describes a three-dimensional protein structure as an elastic network of C-alpha atoms connected by harmonic springs within a certain cutoff distance. For all springs, the force constant is taken as identical. The dynamics of the structure in the GNM is fully defined by the topology of contacts described by the Kirchhoff matrix ī. For a network of N interacting sites, the elements of ī are defined as [9]

The slow modes represent functionally relevant motions of protein. The fast modes correspond to geometric irregularity in the local structure and the fluctuations associated with fast modes are accompanied by a decrease in entropy larger than that for slow modes. Therefore, residues acting in the fast modes are thought to be kinetically hot residues and they are critically important for the stability of the tertiary fold [9].

2. It is seen in Fig. 2(a) that the slow motions of mutant is similar to the wild-type PrP. The flexibility of helix 1 in the mutant is higher than that of the wild-type PrP. This indicates that the helix 1 can show more large movement and this may be result in the conformational transitions of protein. But the fluctuation of residue 147 in the mutant PrP decreased remarkably, and the residue 150 with the fluctuation values approximate to zero in the fast motion mode, as shown in Fig. 2(b). The peaks of the fast modes correspond to residues that were thought, in the GNM, to be important for the stability of the protein. The fluctuation decrease of two residues implies that the PrP became more unstable in the mutant structure than in the wild-type structure.

Helix 1 mainly contains some charge and hydrophilic residues. So the ability of hydrophobic interactions is poor. The stability and conformational transitions of helix 1 are mainly affected by the electrostatic interactions. The Glu200—Lys replacement has an effect on the distribution of charges on the protein surface, thus the change affects the stability of helix 1. The presence of additional positively charged patches in the E200K variant could further promote these interactions, placing the protein in an environment that is especially conducive to the transition into the pathogenic PrPSc conformation.

The PrPC to PrPSc transformation involves a conversion from a soluble and predominantly Į-helical protein to an aggregated form, which is substantially enriched in ȕ-sheet. The slow and fast motion models of huPrP and huPrP (E200K) structures were calculated by the GNM in this paper. It can be seen that the largest fluctuation values corresponding to the helix 1. Residue 147 and residue 150 play an important role in the stability of the helix 1. The major consequence of the E200K substitution appears to be the redistribution of surface charges, resulting in an altered electrostatic potential in the mutant protein. The above change is likely to affect the stability of the helix 1. Thus, their behavior might reflect that of wild-type PrP or that of mutants associated with transmissible forms of the disease.

