Data mining technologies are widely used and help people to make good decision and good money since appeared. While at the same time, the side effects incurred are concerned by data holders and researchers. Some information extracted from mining can be considered sensitive and needed to be hidden for safe data sharing. A lot of approaches of hiding have been proposed. There is still a lot of room to improve the efficiency and quality. The work focuses on the quality measurements of hiding approaches to guide the sensitive association rule hiding process. Several crucial quality measurements are defined. The requirements of sensitive association rule hiding are described. The transformation strategies of database are proposed. Examples are illustrated and quality measurements are compared.

Data mining technologies are widely used and help people to make good decision and good money since appeared. While at the same time, some knowledge extracted from the data mining can be considered sensitive which may potentially reveal sensitive secrets and cause serious privacy problems [1-3]. This problem is dealt with privacy preserving data mining.

Privacy preserving data mining is a novel research direction in data mining. It analyzes the side effects incurring in data privacy. Privacy preserving data mining hides sensitive knowledge by modifying the original database in a way that sensitive knowledge disappeared with less affecting on non-sensitive knowledge.

A lot of approaches of hiding have been proposed. Usually, based on the discovered association rules and hiding requirements, the hiding of sensitive association rules is executed manually or automatically after data mining process. There is still a lot of room to improve the efficiency and quality. The work focuses on the quality measurements of hiding approaches to guide the sensitive association rule hiding process. Several key quality measurements will be proposed in this paper. The reminder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the problem of association rule hiding. Section 3 presents the quality measurements. Association rule Hiding strategies are illustrated in section 4. Conclusions and future works are described in the last section.

The goal of sensitive frequent itemsets hiding is to construct a new, sanitized database D-sanitized from D-original, which makes F-sensitive  F-sanitized=, where F-sanitized is the set of all the frequent itemsets on D-sanitized at the same pre-defined minimum support threshold as  (or higher) , while less affecting the non-sensitive itemsets , i.e., F-sanitized=F-original-F-sensitive.

The goal of association rule hiding is to construct a new, sanitized database D-sanitized from D-original, which makes R-sensitive  R-sanitized=, where R-sanitized is the set of all the association rules on D- sanitized at the same pre-defined minimum support threshold and minimum confidence threshold as  and  (or higher) , while less affecting the non-sensitive association rules , i.e., F-sanitized=R-original-R-sensitive.

Assuming some predicting items contained in the left hand of an association rule and it is so crucial to infer a conclusion which is the right hand of the association rule. There are might multiple items contained in the right hand of association rule. It is only need to hide rules with one item in the right hand instead of multi- items’ ones. We have theorem 1 as follow.

The strategies are based on theorem 1. According to theorem 1, if association rule such as A  {i-left} {i- right} is hidden, then all the association rules such as A  {i-left} B  {i-right} (B) are hidden. To hide rules such as A  {i-left} {i-right} , it is needed to check the transactions contained {i-left, i-right} and increase the appearances of item i-left in the transactions to increase the support of the left hand or decrease the appearances of item i-right in the transactions to decrease the support of the right hand. The transformation of database is repeated until good quality measurements are arrived.

Currently, approaches for privacy preserving of association rules are basically based on the same fundamental theory of adjusting supports and confidences. The work focuses on the quality measurements of hiding approaches to guide the sensitive association rule hiding process. Several crucial quality measurements are defined. The requirements of sensitive association rule hiding are described. The transformation strategies of database are proposed. Examples are illustrated and quality measurements are compared. Lots of algorithms are proposed by researchers and a lot of room for improvement of the current hiding methodologies. It is quite challenging to arrive at each of the best quality measurement.

[1]VS Verykios and A Gkoulalas-Divanis, “A survey of association rule hiding methods for privacy”, in Privacy Preserving Data Mining: Models and Algorithms, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2008, pp. 267-289. [2]A Gkoulalas-Divanis and VS Verykios, “Privacy preserving data mining: how far can we go?”, in Handbook of Research on Data Mining in Public and Private Sectors: Organizational and Governmental Applications, IGI Global, 2009, pp. 1-21.

