has been abstracted to a single function. The exact reward gained per block mined is another element which varies based on the cryptocur- rency being considered and duration of the operating period. When performing the profitability calculations, this needs to be taken into careful consideration as, for some cryptocurrencies, the block reward can change across the lifespan of any particular cryptocurrency. For example, Bitcoin halves its block reward every 210,000 blocks, mean- ing that though it originally rewarded 50 bitcoins (BTC) per block mined [34], the current value is 6.25 BTC. The reward is expected to approach 0 by approximately 2140 [35].

An important fact to emphasize is that Eq. (9) takes into account the introduction of further quantum computing machines onto the network. This is because difficulty is defined at the protocol level of a blockchain as a mechanism to ensure that the block time stays within certain bounds. For example the Bitcoin blockchain’s difficulty operates so that over a period of time, if the block time exceeds or is less than 10 min, the difficulty of the PoW problem is corrected to bring the block time back in line with the pre-defined desirable time. This means that the introduction of quantum computers onto the network will in fact decrease the block time as they have a quadratic advantage over their classical peers. The Bitcoin protocol will thereby increase the difficulty of the PoW algorithm. This is then taken into account within our equation. Introduction of quantum computers into the mining ecosystem could potentially cause a dramatic increase in the difficulty. This means that the equation presented here will take into

For our case-analysis scenario, let us consider using a cloud quan- tum computing service. IBM [36], amongst others, have announced for-profit cloud-based quantum computing services. This is a natural scenario to consider since most quantum computation in the near future is likely to involve cloud-based services [37,38]. This scenario has a composite advantage as well: it obviates the need for an initial investment, requiring instead only that the potential miner pay the

Next, let us consider a time-frame. According to the roadmap set out by IBM, a quantum computer which can run a quantum search algorithm on Bitcoin’s hashing function can be expected by roughly 2023 [22]. To be conservative, we consider 2025 to be an estimated ‘year zero’ in which a quantum computer can run a quantum search on hash-based PoW and so 01/01/2025 shall be used whenever a given date is required.

The value of Bitcoin has had a general increasing trend year-on- year, however due to the volatile nature of cryptocurrencies, no single prediction can be made. Therefore the values shown in Table 1 will account for various BTC to USD conversion rates including the current price (as of 17/12/2020 this was $23,536.12) [4], the average price over the last 12 months (taken as the average closing price from 01/01/2020 until 17/12/2020, $10,385.49), a predicted conservative price ($31,000) and a predicted high-end price ($100,000).

The final element of the equation to be assigned is the hash rate equivalent of the quantum computer. How the hashing power will increase as the development of quantum computers continues is not known. Thus, we consider two possibilities. In the first scenario, we take the clock-speed of (one of) Google’s current quantum computers

compared to classical alternatives, according to Eq. (10). Firstly, intro- ducing quantum computers into a PoW based blockchain, as discussed, will consequently increase the hash-rate of the entire network, thereby shortening the average time it takes for the network to calculate a block. According to a blockchains protocol this will cause an increase in the PoW difficulty parameter in order to recalibrate the block-time to the prescribed value.

Increasing the difficulty parameter of PoW has been shown to solidify the quadratic advantage of quantum computers as miners. This advantage means that there will be greater incentive for investment into quantum mining technologies as the profit margin when compared with their classical counterparts will increase. This greater incentive will once again increase the number of quantum miners on the network, thereby decreasing the block-time and increasing the PoW difficulty in turn. This creates cycle within which quantum computing technologies will, eventually, completely replace classical miners, as the later cease to be cost-effective.

This cascading effect also has a security benefit for the network itself. As soon as the majority (roughly) of the miners are quantum, the network itself become impervious to 51% attacks based on quantum advantage alone. It would still be technically possible to mount such an attack, but such an attack would only succeed by using other methods such as miner-collusion, rather than by merely leveraging quantum advantage.

Over time the increased difficulty parameter of PoW will lead to classical miners being made obsolete. The increase in difficulty will cause the PoW problem to become exponentially harder for both classical and quantum devices. However, the impact to classical min- ers is quadratically worse, over time, than the impact to quantum miners. Eventually, this will lead to all quantum miners being more cost-effective than classical miners (regardless of their initial setup costs).

Quantum computation gives a definite advantage over classical computation for the purpose of calculating PoW for blockchains. As we have seen, in Section 3, this quantum advantage can be used by an adversarial party, in order to attempt what are called 51% attacks, on the cryptocurrency. The possibility of these types of attacks is, however, in the reasonably distant future.

Our security analysis is mathematically consistent with the previous analysis of Bitcoin quantum security by Cojocaru et al. [42]. The authors there conclude that Bitcoin can be made safe against quantum adversaries, but only by assuming strong bounds on the computational power of these quantum adversaries—never a safe assumption.

/ig. 2. Self-propagating cycle of increasing quantum advantage on PoW networks. Adding quantum miners to the cryptocurrency network increases the network’s hash-rate. An increased hash-rate will raise the difficulty parameter. An increased difficulty parameter increases the relative quantum-advantage. This, in turn, increases the profitability of quantum-mining, which in turn motivates the introduction of more quantum miners.

Moreover, it is unlikely that any PoW system can be derived that is not susceptible to some form of quantum advantage. This is because PoW, by definition, requires a problem whose solution is hard to compute (to ensure miners are required to do meaningful work for their PoW), while being fairly easy to verify (to ensure any third party can verify that the work has been performed). And these are exactly the type of problems where quantum search algorithms provide definite advantage over classical.

One suggestion is to switch the method of PoW from a hashing function to another computationally hard problem, such as lattice based PoW schemes [43] or schemes involving multivariate quadratic func- tions [44,45]. These schemes may indeed reduce the quantum advan- tage, but they cannot remove it. Grover’s algorithm has already been shown to provide a speed-up in solving the shortest vector problem in lattice problems over the best known classical algorithms [46].

More generally, as discussed earlier, PoW requires a mathematical problem that is hard to solve, but easy to verify. In order to remove any quantum advantage, the best classical algorithms that solve the problem must not only be inefficient, they would also have to not rely at all on brute-force search (with or without heuristics). This makes the creation of a quantum-resistant PoW consensus mechanism very unlikely.

[51] or other alternatives [52]. All of these consensus systems are different enough from PoW – and from each other – that they would require their own post-quantum security analysis. The work presented here focuses on PoW, as it is today by far the most widely deployed— both in terms of number of users and the market capitalization of the cryptocurrencies that use it.

Another safeguarding mechanism would be to move the entire cryptocurrency from ASIC miners to quantum miners. In Section 4, we discussed the possibility of doing this. We showed that mining cryptocurrency, using quantum computation, can quickly become a profitable proposition. In Section 4.1 we gave a precise formula that

Another clear next step is to take the work we have developed here, as well as real-world economic data, and use both together to create accurate, predictive, models. Several useful predictive models could be developed to help inform, say, investment strategies into quantum tech- nologies, hedging strategies for cryptocurrency investors and miners, etc. We have made some simple predictions here, in Section 4.3. These simple models are meant, mostly, to showcase the power of the math- ematical machinery we have introduced—and to hopefully motivate their use in creating more accurate, powerful, predictive models. Even

Dan A. Bard: Validation, Formal analysis, Investigation, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing. Joseph J. Kearney: Validation, Formal analysis, Investigation, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing. Carlos A. Perez-Delgado: Conceptualiza- tion, Methodology, Investigation, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing, Supervision, Funding acquisition.

The authors would like to acknowledge funding through the EPSRC, United Kingdom Quantum Communications Hub (EP/T001011/1), and from the Casper Association Academic Grants Program. The authors would also like to thank Joanna I. Ziembicka for useful comments during the preparation on this manuscript.

Alagic G, Alagic G, Alperin-Sheriff J, Apon D, Cooper D, Dang Q, Liu Y-K, Miller C, Moody D, Peralta R, et al. Status report on the first round of the NIST post-quantum cryptography standardization process. US Department of Commerce, National Institute of Standards and Technology . . . ; 2019.

