According to the problem of emitter characteristic parameters are showed by interval and uneasy to identify, an emitter fusion recognition method based on the PSO-BP neural network is proposed. The method train the network by training samples which are reasonable structured according to the distribution in the interval, so as to determine the network structure and confirm the emitter type through the emitter characteristics parameters. At the same time, the BP neural network is optimized by Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO) algorithm. The coding method of the network output, training data size and deviation rate on the influence of the recognition are researched by simulation, and the validity of this method are verified by the results.

In the modern electronic reconnaissance, the battlefield environment is complicated. The hostility will take all kinds of measures against in the fight. So radar emitter characteristic parameters have some random and fuzzy because of all kinds of the existence of the interference and reconnaissance and the error of measurement of equipment itself. How to recognize the radar emitter in a complicated electromagnetic environment of reconnaissance has very important military significance [1]. There are a lot of existing classic

methods, including method based on the bayesian theory, method based on the fuzzy pattern recognition, method based on the rough set theory [2], method based on evidence theory, method based on artificial neural network, and so on. These methods have relatively successful applications in recognition of radiation sources. But these methods are generally aim at the measured parameters showed by the scalar form, and solve the problem of radar emitter recognition whose parameters are measured with some error. For another case of the measured parameters are interval type is less discussion.

Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO) algorithm [3] was proposed by Kennedy and Eberhart in 1995. The hypothesis in a D dimension target search space, M particles of representative problem potential solution constitute one species x [x1, x2 ,..., xM ] . The i particle information can represented by D dimensional

algorithm. In the practical applications, need to limit the scope of x to [Xmin , Xmax ] . Similarly, v is also required limited within a certain range [Vmax ,Vmax ] , usually Vmax take 10% ~ 20% of the x domain.

However, the BP neural network is easy to fall into local optimum in the training process. In order to overcome the deficiencies of the BP neural network, the PSO algorithm are used to obtain the optimal initial value of the network weights and thresholds. Using the PSO algorithm to train the BP network, the particles in the PSO algorithm need to be encoded. The dimension of each particle is equal to all the BP neural network connection weights number and thresholds number. The dimension number is

obtain the radiation source type [4]. From the point of view of neural network classification, its purpose is to confirm the nonlinear mapping of parameter feature space and radiation source models space. The characteristic parameters mainly are carrier frequency RF (radio frequency), pulse width of the PW (The pulse width), pulse repetition interval PRI (The pulse the repeat interval), the modulation of the MOP (pulse modulation on the in radar pulse) [5], and so on.

Deviation rate  ij is closely related to the target recognition rate . Large deviation rate show that a wide range of features parameter values. It means that the possible overlap parts are more among different types of radiation source characteristic parameter ranges, and less conducive to the target identification. Therefore, it can be concluded that the bigger deviation rate, the lower recognition rate. Recognition rate can defined as

Where, Nr is the correct identification number, and N0 is the total number of identification. This paper reasonable constructs training samples according to the distribution of the radiation source characteristics parameters in the range. In this process, the neural network is equivalent to the data fusion center. The fusion recognition model is shown as Fig.1.

In order to verify this algorithm performance, the emitter recognition simulation was carried out. Proposed there are 3 species of radar in the template radar library, the characteristic parameters of the radar as RF, PRI and PW. According to the literature [1], the specific parameters are shown in Table 1.

Simulation A: 1500 emitter samples to be identified are structured based on data in Table 1, corresponding to 500 samples per radar, and randomly selected half of them as training samples, the other half as test samples. Assuming the emitter characteristic parameter values uniformly distributed in the range, then to identify emitter samples are uniform random sampling in the known characteristic parameter value range of template radar. Training samples are normalized and used as the input of BP neural network and PSO-BP neural network. The input nodes of neural network are as same as the number of radar types, and the output node number is 1. The corresponding relations are shown in the Table 3 of PSO-BP1. The number of hidden nodes identified as 3 according to the empirical formula (3). Parameter settings in the PSO algorithm are

Simulation B: In order to study the deviation rate influence on recognition rate, while maintaining the data in Table 1 median value unchanged, assume all kinds of radar deviation rate are the same. When the emitter characteristic parameters obey uniform distribution in the interval, then according to the mean value and deviation rate can determine characteristic parameters range and construct the training samples. The number of samples is as same as simulation A. The curve of recognition rate in the different deviation rate is shown in Fig.4(a). Label PSO-BP1, PSO-BP2 and PSO-BP4 on behalf respectively of the output node number of 1, 2 and 4. The figure aims to study the different coding method influence on recognition rate. The corresponding relationship is shown in Table 3, and the symbol O in the table on behalf of the output layer nodes.

According to the Fig.4(a), it is obvious that the smaller of deviation rate of characteristic parameters the higher recognition rate, which is consistent with theoretical analysis results. In addition, the recognition rate of different curves in Fig.4(a) is different, which indicates that the number of different encoding methods and network output nodes have influence on recognition rate. The more number encoded bits, the higher recognition rate. But the increasing of encoded bits will enlarge the complexity of the network, and eventually result in increasing running time.

A kind of emitter recognition method based on PSO-BP neural network is proposed. The biggest difference related to the method of fixed value of characteristic parameters is the construction of sample data. The deviation rate is defined in the model to reflect the degree of the value of the characteristic parameters deviate from its center, and then the deviation rate influence on recognition rate is studied in the simulation. PSO algorithm is applied to improve the BP neural network. The simulation results show that the PSO algorithm can effectively overcome the defects of the BP neural network. Simulation experiments also studied the influence of the neural network output coding and sample data size to recognition rate. The final results show that the proposed target recognition method is effective and it has some value in engineering. The main problem of model is no considering the characteristic parameters with discrete value in the selection of emitter parameters, such as modulation information MOP. The next research focus is to construct model of more general while without losing practicality.

