The identification of high-quality marine shale gas reservoirs has always been a key task in the exploration and development stage. However, due to the serious nonlinear relationship between the logging curve response and high-quality reservoirs, the rapid identification of high-quality reservoirs has always been a problem of low ac- curacy. This study proposes a combination of the oversampling method and random forest algorithm to improve the identification accuracy of high-quality reservoirs based on logging data. The oversampling method is used to balance the number of samples of different types and the random forest algorithm is used to establish a high- precision and high-quality reservoir identification model. From the perspective of the prediction effect, the reservoir identification method that combines the oversampling method and the random forest algorithm has increased the accuracy of reservoir identification from the 44% seen in other machine learning algorithms to 78%, and the effect is significant. This research can improve the identifiability of high-quality marine shale gas res- ervoirs, guide the drilling of horizontal wells, and provide tangible help for the precise formulation of marine shale gas development plans.

curves to identify sweet spots in shale formations. Amosu et al. (2021) used support vector machines to effectively identify high-quality reser- voirs in the Eagle Ford Shale. Vikara et al. (2020) used the machine learning-informed ensemble framework to solve the effective classifica- tion of Marcellus shale reservoirs. Although a variety of high-quality reservoir identification methods for shale have been proposed, there are still some problems in the identification of sweet beds. First, the biggest problem is that the sample set used for modelling is unbalanced due to the unavoidable biases of core sampling. This will lead to some types of reservoirs that are not easy to predict and is worse when high-quality reservoirs are not easy to identify. Second, the nonlinear approximation capabilities of different algorithms are also different, resulting in differences in prediction effects. This paper proposes a rapid identification framework for high-quality marine shale reservoirs that combines the oversampling method and random forest algorithm to quickly identify high-quality reservoirs in shale gas wells. This method significantly improves the identification effect of high-quality reservoirs

In this study, there are two main techniques applied to the task of reservoir identification: oversampling methods (Tao et al., 2020; Sol- tanzadeh and Hashemzadeh, 2021) to solve unbalanced data and random forest algorithms (Ao et al., 2020; Feng et al., 2021) to solve classification problems. Combining these can achieve the purpose of quickly identi-

Random forest is an ensemble learning algorithm based on decision trees. It uses bootstrap technology to extract randomized samples from original samples to construct a single decision tree. At each node of the decision tree, a random feature subspace is used to select a sorting point. Finally, these decision trees are combined to obtain the final prediction result through a majority vote. Before we have a deeper understanding of random forests, we need to introduce decision trees first because it is the basic classifier in the random forest algorithm.

performance improvement, which leads to unsatisfactory training and prediction accuracy. To solve this problem, an ensemble learning algo- rithm is used to integrate multiple decision trees. Bagging and boosting are two categories of algorithms in ensemble learning. Bagging algo- rithms uniformly randomly sample from the original data so that the training of each basic classifier in the ensemble is independent of the others. The process of the random forest algorithm can be divided into three parts:

terion is a decrease in the information gain ratio. The above process is repeated to construct the tree nodes one by one until the stopping conditions are met. These stopping conditions can be that all the data in the subdatasets are distinguished or the number of samples in the leaf nodes is less than a preset threshold.

expanding the size of the samples of the minority categories while maintaining the original scale for the samples of the majority categories. Oversampling methods include nonheuristic and heuristic algorithms. The typical nonheuristic method is random oversampling. In this way, the size of the minority types of samples is increased by simply copying some of the minority types of samples. The random oversampling method is relatively simple and convenient to apply and can help the prediction result. In this paper, the oversampling method is selected to rebalance datasets in the reservoir identification problem based on logging as much as possible.

Two key pieces of information can be obtained from the classification results of reservoir categories in different wells. The first point is that there are certain differences in the distribution of reservoir types be- tween different wells. For Well B, type I reservoirs account for the largest proportion of all reservoirs. This is consistent with the current under- standing of the block. Well B has a higher single-well production and is also the most studied well. The difference in the proportion of Type I reservoirs between different wells is large, which also emphasizes the task of reservoir identification, especially for high-quality reservoirs that have a small number of cores and are relatively short for development plans. Recognition is a very meaningful work. The second point is that there are differences in the number of different reservoir types in any

well, and the number of core samples corresponding to Type I reservoirs is relatively small. This is because the thickness of the highest quality reservoirs in the study area is relatively lower than that of other types of reservoirs. They are thin, so it is very important to find Type I reservoirs and drill horizontal wells. The small number of core samples corre- sponding to Type I reservoirs leads to the fact that when modelling the reservoir identification process, the model tends to classify Type I res- ervoirs as other types of reservoirs, resulting in the inability to accurately find Type I reservoirs. The exploration and development of shale gas is very challenging.

reservoirs, we showed that the random forest algorithm ach- ieved the best prediction results. In addition to the prediction accuracy of the other algorithms being lower than that of the random forest algorithm, they also have relatively poorer pre- diction effects for the highest quality Type I reservoirs. The random forest algorithm can achieve the best prediction results, increasing the prediction accuracy from 44% to 78%.

