Abstract The MAC layer misbehavior of the IEEE 802.11 standard can have a negative impact on the wireless network’s performance, similar to the effects of denial of service attacks. The goal of this misbehavior was handling the protocol to increase the greedy nodes transmission rate at the expense of the other honest nodes. In fact, nodes in IEEE 802.11 standard should wait for a random backoff interval time to access to the channel before initiating any transmission. Greedy nodes use a malicious technique to reduce the channel waiting time and occupy the channel. This paper intro- duces a new scheme to detect such malicious behavior, which is based on statistical process control (SPC) borrowed from the industrial field in a quality management context. To the best of our knowledge, this approach has not been proposed in state of the art, reports concerning the detection of greedy behaviors in mobile ad hoc networks. The approach has the power to identify greedy nodes in real time by using a graphical tool called uˆ control charty´that measures the throughput and the inter-packet interval time for each node, and raises an alert if this measure is over a defined threshold. The validation of all obtained results is performed in the network simulator NS2.

One of the most significant advantages of the IEEE 802.11 standard is the fair access to the medium. However sharing the transmission channel makes the networks vulnerable to several attacks such as jamming, black holes, and greedy behavior (MAC layer misbehavior) [12].

Our paper is organized as follows. The second section is dedicated to presenting the architecture of the IEEE 802.11 with all its layers. An overview of the research works related to the IEEE 802.11 MAC layer misbehavior is shown in the third section. The fourth section proposes our detection scheme of the IEEE 802.11 MAC layer misbehavior (greedy node). In the fifth section, the authors evaluate the perfor- mance of their approach using the NS2 simulator. Conclusions and perspectives are presented in the last section.

The IEEE 802.11 protocol covers the physical layer and the Medium Access Control (MAC) layer as described in Fig. 1. The MAC layer is the same for all IEEE 802.11 standards. However, the physical layer is divided into three categories: FH (Frequency Hopping Spread Spectrum), DS (Direct Sequence Spread Spectrum) and IR (Infrared).

The IEEE 802.11 MAC layer defines the access method Carrier Sense Multiple Access/Collision Avoidance (CSMA/ CA) working as follows. Before transmitting, a node first lis- tens to the shared medium (such as listening for wireless signals in a wireless network) to determine whether another node is transmitting or not. If the channel is free for a DCF Inter- Frame Space (DIFS) time, then the station transmits a frame which is acknowledged after a Short Inter-Frame Space (SIFS) interval time with an ACK frame.

The CSMA/CA access method defines the Binary Exponen- tial Backoff (Fig. 2) in order to resolve the access medium problem when several stations want to transmit data simulta- neously. This method requires that each station chooses a ran- dom waiting time between 0 and the size of a contention window CW (value equals to a number of time slots), and expects the number of slots before transmission [1].

Other authors [17] also proposed an extension to the 802.11 standard that ensures a uniformly distributed random backoff through the protocol of coin flipping by telephone. The main idea is to let both the sender and receiver agree on a random value of backoff through a public exchange using an engage- ment method inspired by the protocol of applying flipping coins over the telephone. However, it is still unable to detect collision between sender and receiver.

An approach of greedy nodes detection in IEEE 802.11 was proposed [5] based upon the linear regression between instants of transmission to calculate a detection threshold and without requiring modifications to the standard. This idea results from the strong linear correlation noticed between nodes in terms of transmission instants.

The authors in [19] proposed a modeling of an 802.11 net- work with MAC layer misbehavior attacks. They consider n nodes in a network, with the presence of l greedy nodes mod- ifying the backoff timer. The misbehaving nodes choose a ran-

However, there are major causes of variation that require change. These cases are called special causes. The process becomes out of control, and thus we must look for the cause. The SPC method provides an effective and proper tool to separate the ordinary from the extraordinary by creating a powerful graphic called uˆ control charty´, among these charts are: The Shewhart control chart for individual measurements

{B, C, D, E, F}. The purpose is to identify which among this set of stations is a greedy one. Therefore, this detection scheme is implemented at every station to designate the cheater station through the supervision of the average reception throughput and the mean inter-packets time by control charts. The control is performed automatically for every node belonging to this set

For the computation of the thresholds (control chart parameters), we need a minimum of 20 values [13], but for the network monitoring, we draw every calculated value (for the throughput and for the inter-packets time). This is the real-time detection that we highlight in our paper. The detec- tion scheme is performed at any receiving node for every trans- mitting station (as in Fig. 4). In fact every node has the right to explore its received packets. We can emphasize that one honest node in the state of transmission is sufficient to calculate the control chart parameters (see Figs. 5–7).

To achieve our detection method of the IEEE 802.11 MAC layer misbehavior [9], the simulator NS-2 can be used with some useful tools for processing traces files as explained by [8,11]. In our case we have chosen the simulator with the soft- ware platform and parameters depicted in Table 2.

The detection thresholds and the tolerance interval depend on the number of nodes; therefore, each receiver updates these parameters for each number of transmitters. In our work we tested the detection scheme in an ideal environment which depends on the number of nodes with constant bit rate traffic. The statistical process control is a useful and strong tool for supervising and detecting strong derivations in any type of environment (realistic or theoretical). Thus, the purpose is the separation of the extraordinary from the ordinary situations.

The misbehavior at the MAC layer by changing the backoff mechanism can lead to performance degradation of the net- work. In this paper we tried to propose a novel detection scheme for this misbehavior based on the supervision of two metrics (reception throughput and inter-packets time) through statistical process control charts. Our detection scheme pre- sents several advantages. It does not require any changes in the IEEE 802.11 protocol and it can be implemented at any receiving node. Its most significant advantage is the detection of such attack in real time by visual graphs.

