Adaptive noise cancellation is a method of estimating signals, which are corrupted by additive noise or interference. This method employs a primary input, which is the corrupted signal, and a secondary or reference input, which is the noise correlated with the noise present in the primary input. The reference input is adaptively filtered and sub- tracted from the primary input in order to obtain the signal estimate. The adaptive noise cancellation method can be employed whenever an appropriate reference input is available [1,2].

Thakor and Zhu [3] proposed several adaptive filter structures for noise cancellation and arrhythmia detection in ECG signals. The diverse forms of noise like baseline wander, 60 Hz PLI, muscle artifacts, and motion artifacts were eliminated from the ECG signal [3]. Hamilton [4] investigated the relative performance of an adaptive and nonadaptive 60-Hz notch filters for the reduction of PLI in the ECG signal. Ziarani and Konrad [5] proposed a nonlinear adaptive method of elimination of PLI from the ECG signal. The proposed method offered a robust structure and is shown to have a high degree of immunity with respect to external noise [5]. Raya and Sison [6] proposed an adaptive noise

cancellation method to remove motion artifacts in stress ECG signals by using an accelerometer. The adaptive noise cancellers in [6] are imple- mented using the two of the most widely employed adaptive filtering algorithms, viz. LMS and Recursive Least Squares (RLS). Martens et al.

[7] proposed an improved adaptive noise canceller for the reduction of the fundamental PLI component and harmonics in the ECG signal. Behbahani [8] simulated and tested an adaptive noise cancellation method using the LMS algorithm for removing the 60 Hz PLI. Lin and Hu [9] developed an efficient RLS adaptive notch filter for the suppression of PLI in the ECG signal. They also proposed a PLI detector that employed an optimal linear discriminant analysis algorithm for the detection of PLI in the ECG signal [9].

[16] developed an adaptive Kalman filter to enhance the quality of the ECG signal. Dhubkarya et al. [17] implemented an adaptive noise canceller for denoising an ECG signal and tested the performance of the system using various algorithms such as LMS, Normalized Least Mean Square (NLMS), and RLS. Chandrakar and Kowar [18] employed the RLS algorithm for the removal of different kinds of noises from the ECG signal. Kim et al. [19] proposed a motion artifact removal method using a cascaded 2-stage LMS adaptive filter for an ambulatory ECG monitoring system. Mugdha et al. [20] conducted a study of the RLS algorithm in noise removal from ECG signals and concluded that the RLS algorithm is more efficient in removing noises from ECG signals than the LMS algorithm.

Ebrahimzadeh et al. [21] compared various kinds of ECG noise reduction algorithms such as LMS, Block-Based Least Mean Square (BBLMS), NLMS, Unbiased and Normalized Adaptive Noise Reduction (UNANR), and RLS. Sharma et al. [22] used an adaptive noise canceller that employs LMS algorithm for ECG noise removal and concluded that an increase in the step-size increases the noise as well as the rate of convergence. Satheeskumaran and Sabrigiriraj [23] proposed a Variable Step Size Delayed Least Mean Square (VSSDLMS) adaptive filter to remove the artifacts from the ECG signal. Sehamby and Singh

[24] used an LMS-based adaptive noise canceller to derive a noise- free fetal ECG signal. Haritha et al. [25] surveyed different filters and denoising techniques used for ECG signals. Qureshi et al. [26] proposed a cascaded 3-stage adaptive noise canceller to eliminate three types of artifacts from the ECG signal, viz. baseline wander, 60 Hz PLI, and motion artifacts. The same algorithm was used in all three stages of the cascaded adaptive noise canceller. The results of a cascaded 3-

adaptive noise canceller employed in their work uses the SSLMS algo- rithm [28]. Gilani et al. [29] employed an LMS-based adaptive noise canceller to remove the 50 Hz PLI from the ECG signal. Venkatesan et al. [30] studied a Delayed Error Normalized Least Mean Square (DENLMS) adaptive filter with pipelined architecture to remove the white Gaussian noise from the ECG signal. Srinivasa and Pandian

[31] eliminate the 50 Hz PLI from ECG signal using an LMS-based adaptive noise canceller. Xiong et al. [32] have shown that the cosine- based adaptive algorithm is superior to the standard LMS algorithm in reducing the high amplitude motion artifact noise from the ECG signal. Saxena et al. [33] remove the 50 Hz PLI from the ECG signal using an NLMS-based adaptive noise canceller. Manju and Sneha [34] performed ECG denoising using Weiner filter and Kalman filter. Their results have shown that the Wiener filter performs better than the Kalman filter for ECG noise removal. Khiter et al. [35] proposed a novel adaptive denoising method called self correcting leaky normalized least mean square algorithm with varied step size and leakage coefficient for reducing the muscle artifacts from the ECG signal. Yadav et al. [36]

The sign adaptive filters are used for the processing and analysis of ECG signals as they are computationally less complex. However, the performance of a sign adaptive filter is compromised because of the clipping effect due to the application of signum function to either the regressor vector, estimation error, or both. The SRLMS, SELMS, and SSLMS algorithms are also known in the literature as the Sign Regressor Algorithm (SRA), Sign Algorithm (SA), and Sign-Sign Algorithm (SSA), respectively. The SRLMMN algorithm is a combination of the SRLMS

to remove the respective ECG artifacts as mentioned above. We suc- ceeded in achieving an SNR improvement of 12.7319 dBs, which is better than the other compared methods. It is found that the pro- posed cascaded 4-stage adaptive noise canceller employing the LMMN, LMF, LMMN, LMF algorithms outperforms those that employ the LMS, LMS, LMS, LMS algorithms, the LMF, LMF, LMF, LMF algorithms, the LMMN, LMMN, LMMN, LMMN algorithms, and the SRLMMN, SRLMF, SRLMMN, SRLMF algorithms in terms of SNR improvement. It is also found that the performance of a single-stage adaptive noise canceller employing the SSLMS algorithm is comparatively poor in terms of SNR improvement as compared to the other seven algorithms studied in this work, viz. LMS, LMF, LMMN, SRLMS, SELMS, SRLMF, and SRLMMN. The different types of normalized adaptive algorithms and their respective sign counterparts in identifying the best candidates for the removal of multiple artifacts from the ECG signal using adaptive filters in cascade as discussed in this work will be the subject of our future studies.

Kim H, Kim S, Helleputte NV, Berset T, Penders J, Hoof CV, Yazicioglu RF. Motion artifact removal using cascade adaptive filtering for ambulatory ECG monitoring system. In: Proc. of the 2012 IEEE biomedical circuits and systems conf. (BioCAS 2012). Hsinchu, Taiwan; 2012, p. 1.

