mechanisms, such as gear boxes, chains and screw coupling, allowing high precision control to be achieved. It is a trance that linear motors are widely used in high performance CNC machine tools [1]. The vector control system of permanent magnet synchronous linear motor doesn t have the advantage of high precision control and high dynamic performance, but also can change speed more conveniently, as a result, the system attract more and more scholars to pay attention home and abroad [2]. The experiment has built the model of vector control system of PMSLM based on the environment of MATLAB software, which can provide the design and work of actual system with a new measure.

Because that three phase permanent magnet synchronous linear motor has the characters of Multi variable, nonlinear and strong coupling. Engineers can t control anyone of three phases directly. To control it more conveniently, the model should be described in the d-q coordinate system. According to unified theory of electric motor, the equation from three-phase static coordinates to rotary two-phase coordinates as follow:

Vector control is based on the principle that to maintain constant magnetic flux in the motor in the d-q axis the stator current vector is decomposed into two components: a component of the rotor flux vector coincides generated magnetic flux, which called the excitation current component; Another one is perpendicular to the flux vector, generated torque, which called torque current component. Through regulating the position and size of the stator current vector, the component of exciting current and torque current can be controlled well. Thus, AC motor can come true decoupling of the magnetic field and torque which is the same as DC motors. The frequency control system of motor speed for AC motors has the same advantage like the DC motors. According to the third equation building abc-dq module as follow

Connecting the voltage equations of equilibrium module and the mechanical movement equations of equilibrium module, which was packaged as a sub-module system, and forming the linear motor simulation module, shown in Figure 6 below. Applying the package technology on SIMULINK module and packaged module is added to the SIMULINK toolbox, so that the linear motor servo control system can be used directly. Linked the SVPWM module and linear motor module which formed a closed loop system, the simulation model was shown in Figure 7.

Based on the simulation environment of Matlab/Simulink, the simulation model of speed loop can be established in conditions of no-load, which be shown in Figure 7. Among them, the role of the current loop is to accept the current deviation signal, and generates a voltage signal which can control the on-off switch of electronic devices of SVPWM (center frequency is 10KHZ). Output of SVPWM was linked directly to the winding of Permanent Magnet Synchronous Linear Motor so that could achieve the goal of controlling s movement. By controlling the extern part of the speed loop, adjust the deviation signal of speed, which was looked as output current command. The inner ring is current loop, and it control received current of PMSLM by regulating controller in current loop.

In order to check whether the simulation model is valid or not, the simulation experiment was completed in Matlab7.1 Software. Because of the nonlinear component, the experiment select ode23td algorithm which is a variable step way, the relative error and absolute error is 0.001; the parameters of PMLSM are: phase resistance R = 3. 2   axis inductance Ld =8mH, q-axis inductance Lq = 8mH, the flux of permanent magnet

For AC servo control system, Rapidity, Accuracy and Stability are the main performance indexes to estimate whether it is efficient. The simulation result shows, when a speed command is given, the permanent magnet linear synchronous motors (PMLSM) can attain the given speed by adjusting the speed loop and current loop and the Rate response curves in time domain is more ideal. The speed loop simulation system can run smoothly and features excellent dynamic and static performances. The experiment fully illustrated and proved the correctness of PMLSM mathematical model and the feasibility of this control algorithm and it offered the thinking for the further designing and adjusting of direct drive system.

