The dynamics force of iced-conductor is the driving force of conductor galloping; its variation is depended on the aerodynamic character of iced conductor. The aerodynamic character of iced conductor is the key factor of galloping of iced-conductor, but the result of theoretically analysis and numerical simulation has the certain limited, and it isn't suited for the requirement of transmission line anti-galloping project. In the paper, basing on the development, research status and the theoretically analysis of iced-conductor aerodynamic character, the simulation tests in wind tunnel of typed iced conductor is stetted up and put into practice for typical shapes, namely, crescent-shaped and D-shaped, under different wind speeds and with different ice thicknesses, and the systemic study is carried into execution. The result of research indicated that the experimental result can not only provide the original date for the galloping analysis, but also validate the affectivity of numerical simulation, support the research of mechanism and control of galloping.

Galloping of overhead transmission line is the instability status because the conductor's cross- section characteristic is variable for the eccentric Icing under wind excitation. In the meteorological disasters in China, galloping has the high frequency in occurrence, the wide range in affecting, and the large losses in resulting. It is a serious threat for the security and stability of the power grid.

excitation mechanism [1]: When the damping of transverse vibration equation is less than 0, that the system of "negative damping", the wire vertical self-excited vibration will occurs. In 1970s, Nigol [2-4] proposed the theory of reverse excitation mode: when the damping term of torsion vibration equation is less than 0, the system will produce to reverse the self-excited vibration, lateral vibration of a wide range of excitation by coupling, the galloping is occurs. In addition, the angle of attack is changes for the wire eccentric inertia, and the positive feedback is formed between the corresponding lift and the transverse vibration. With the gradual accumulation of transverse energy, the galloping is occur, that is galloping inertia coupling mechanism. So, it is essential to grasp the iced-conductor's aerodynamic parameters for the research, prevention and treatment of galloping. At home and abroad, relevant experimental and calculated data is relatively lack, it is

In order to systematically master the typical shaped iced conductor's aerodynamic parameters characteristic, an in-depth theoretical analysis is carried out. Making use of test in wind tunnel, the dynamics characteristics of iced conductor is researched with different iced thickness and wind speed. For the different conditions of iced conductor's aerodynamics research, the systematic analysis result of parameters characteristic is given.

The test is carrying out in the lower wind tunnel of 1.4X1.4m, it is Open-type closed test section wind tunnel, and the test wind speed is 10m/s-65m/s. The force measuring device is three-component balance of FGC03A/FGC3B, the data acquisition system is PXI, and the data of attack angle, speed pressure is controlled by industrial control computer.

From the figure, the lift, drag and torsion coefficient have the less relevant with the wind speed values, except for the individual peak point. As the lift and torsion coefficient, the wind is larger; the peak point is more obviously near 20 ° angle of attack. Contrast the calculations with experimental values, it is closely of the result between the numerical with experiment. The whole calculation of the simulated curves in the 30 ° angle of attack is obviously skewed to the right, but the overall calculation of the trend is similar. The value of the drag coefficient of calculates has the similar trend with test, but the value is significantly less, and there is a maximum deviation at 90 °attack angle.

From the figure 9, the lift coefficient is increased with the increase of iced thickness when the attack angle range is 0 to 90, otherwise, when the attack angle rage is 90 to 180, there is little relativity between the lift coefficient and iced thickness. For the drag and torsion coefficient, the value of parameter is increased with the increase of iced thickness in the all attack angle range. Therefore, the approximate aerodynamic parameter value is obtained with different thickness of the iced conductor by interpolation calculation.

