Energy efficiency of DC distribution systems is researched in this paper. Efficiency calculation models of feeders and loads are established, efficiencies of AC/DC, DC/DC and DC/AC are analyzed. Moreover, energy efficiencies of an AC system and two DC systems, monopole and bipolar, are calculated and compared. The efficiency improvement of office building supplied by DC power system compared to supply by AC power system is demonstrated. From analysis, it is showed that the energy efficiency is higher in DC distribution system than AC distribution system.

In this paper, the energy efficiency of DC distribution system is treated. Firstly, the concept of DC distribution system is introduced, and the figure of DC distribution system is showed. Then, energy efficiencies of the feeder, the power electrical devices and the load are analyzed, and their calculation models are established. Finally, the total energy efficiency of DC distribution system is calculated and analyzed.

Energy efficiency index of power feeder mainly include that active power loss, transmission efficiency, energy loss and loss rate of feeder. The calculation models of AC feeder, monopole DC feeder and bipolar DC feeder are compared as follows. The operating mode of DC feeder is metal loop operating mode.

From Fig.1, it is reflected that the curves of transmission efficiency and loss rate in cable of YJV22, single- phase cross-sectional area is 240mm2.We can compare the loss rate of AC feeder, monopole DC feeder and bipolar DC feeder according to these figures. By analyzing the result of the graph, efficiency of the power cable in a bipolar DC feeder that voltage level within a range from 10kV to 30kV is always optimal, and its advantage is obviously compared to AC feeder when the voltage level is 10kV. As the voltage level rises, the efficiency advantages of bipolar DC to feeder AC feeder is narrowing. Therefore, it has the highest efficiency to supply power in bipolar DC feeder.

From the power systems of the server in data center mentioned above, the difference of energy efficiency between AC power supply and DC power supply is the power conversion devices and feeder losses. The power conversion devices include UPS, transformers and converters, etc. Figure.2 made it clear that within the server, the data switching equipment and other core IT equipments operate at the same voltage of DC. So whether in AC or DC power supply system, the energy consumption of the core device inside the server is the same in the same operating environment.

In calculating, it is assumption that the losses of feeders in the building are neglected. On the basis of calculating models of loads and loads daily curves, the energy loss of building and main loads on one day can be calculated, the results are presented by Tab.3.

Compared to AC feeder and monopole DC feeder, bipolar DC feeder has the highest efficiency through calculating the models. And the efficiency of office building is higher when supplied by DC power than supplied by AC power. The efficiency of office building has ascended about 14.90%. Furthermore, the theoretical basis that DC supply system replaces AC supply system in office building is provided.

STARKE M, LI F X, TOLBERT L M, et al. AC vs. DC distribution: maximum transfer capability[C]// Proceedings of IEEE Power and Energy Society General Meeting-Conversion and Delivery of Electrical Energy in the 21st Century, July 201-24, 2008, Pittsburgh, PA, USA: 1-6.

