[3]and flow control [4] [5] could be addressed. Retransmission ensures that an entire frame can be appropriately decoded. Users do not see the broken image, and do not waste bandwidth. Flow control addresses the rate of data transmission that is adjusted dependent on the available network bandwidth. Frames per second are reduced by low bandwidth, but an image can still be viewed appropriately, without a black screen or freeze-frame occurring.

a user datagram protocol (UDP). UDPs exhibit packet loss and congestion problems, but the RTP does not include standards of retransmission and flow control. Moreover, most RTP applications do not implement a retransmission mechanism; therefore the effect on voice streaming is slight, but that on video streaming is severe.

Increasing bandwidth has allowed video streaming to become mainstream. Video data are large and, therefore, require division into multiple packets; however, frames cannot be decoded appropriately when one packet has been lost. This prevents users from seeing an image appropriately and also wastes bandwidth. Flow control mechanisms are therefore critical.

Once a sender initiates the sending of video streaming data, the receiver determines the packet loss based on the sequence number in the RTP header. When packet loss occurs, the receiver sends the RTP packet to the sender. The RTP packet contains the same sequence number as the lost packet, but does not contain payload data. The sender can determine which RTP packet is lost and retransmit the RTP packet in the next time slice, when receiving the empty RTP packet. The detailed retransmission mechanism is presented in Fig. 1.

Using the above method still incurs a problem; after packet loss occurs, successful retransmission must be confirmed before subsequent frames are sent. However, waiting for a packet halts the function of the system. Thus, the receiver sets a timer for each retransmission request and discards the frame when the timer runs out. The system can continue normally without decoding the unnecessary frame, preventing a broken image from appearing and a performance overhead from being incurred.

RFC4588 provides an RTP payload format for performing retransmission. Compared with the proposed method, RFC4588 exhibits several weaknesses. First, it requires an RTCP (Real Time Control Protocol), which increases the complexity of the system and consumes performance. Furthermore, it requires another channel to perform RTP retransmission, such that a RTP streaming requires three channels. Finally, it uses SDP to perform retransmission requests, the format of which is complex and exhibits a large packet size, increasing the parsing time and bandwidth requirements. The differences between RFC4588 and the proposed method are listed in Table 1.

This paper presents a retransmission and flow control method. Retransmission can reduce the effect of packet loss on video streaming by using a small number of retransmission packets. Flow control controls the sending rate based on the number of packets lost, so that the sending rate adheres to the available bandwidth. Retransmission and flow-control improves the performance of video streaming, and users can clearly appreciate the difference when viewing images.

