The information in agricultural IoT is mainly obtained through many sensors. In agriculture, sensors are mainly used for environmental infor- mation monitoring, animal and plant life perception, and quality safety and traceability. Currently, there are three types of sensors that are widely used in agriculture: physical property sensors, biosensors, and micro electro-mechanical sensors (You and Tang, 2013). Physical prop- erty sensors realize signal conversion through sensor-sensitive physical changes; biosensors use biological sensitive components to transmit in- formation based on the response to the outside world; micro electro- mechanical sensors are products of new technology, and they have excellent characteristics, such as low power consumption and high reliability (Li et al., 2015). The information sensing mechanism of the sensor includes electrochemical sensing, optical sensing, electrical sens- ing, and remote sensing. Optical sensing mechanisms mainly include the fluorescence quenching effect and spectrophotometry, which are used for soil inspection and chlorophyll content determination (Li et al., 2017). Each chlorophyll sensor also has different advantages and disadvantages, as shown in Table 1.

planting and transplantation, pesticide spraying and terrain moni- toring, soil structure analysis, and so on. The electrochemical method is based on the electrochemical properties of the sub- stances in the solution and their change rules, which can be used for the analysis of soil chemical composition, crop growth and development, and so on (Adamchuk et al., 2004).

Data transmission is a vital part of agricultural IoT, and WSN is an important information transmission means. The data trans- mission technology commonly used in agricultural IoT is shown in Fig. 2. Different sensor networks have different characteristics, as shown in Table 2. Communication technology should not be used randomly when transmitting agricultural IoT information,

The ultimate purpose of information processing is to collect and an- alyze the acquired data. In the process of agricultural production moni- toring, much production data is collected, and they have the characteristics of being in real-time, dynamic, and massive. Using IoT technology, the production data can be stored and analyzed to a certain degree, and corresponding data patterns can be found. Cloud computing technology is mainly used for information processing, and it can effec- tively solve the problem of storage, calculation, and the related process- ing of massive agricultural production data. Many emerging cloud

service platforms can realize the storage, searching, and analysis of mas- sive agricultural information. Cloud computing technology includes data mining, data analysis, AI, and other technologies. Data mining tech- nology can be used to meet the requirements of data integrity, accuracy, and standardization, and to support follow-up expert systems and users for further operations. Data mining technology can clean and extract the agricultural big data, discover the internal connections among the data, and store and manage them in different categories. Artificial intelligence technology has powerful information analysis capabilities in controlling irrigation, identifying pests and diseases, crop harvesting, and so on. Using machine vision, image recognition, and other technologies, AI can perform accurate judgment and prediction based on the obtained agricultural information, thus achieving intelligent decision-making. The current theoretical methods of AI technology include dynamic Bayesian networks, Kalman filtering, D–S evidence theory, and rough set theory.

regarded as major options for IoT applications in smart farming (Glaroudis et al., 2019). They presented seven protocols, and compared with respect to their performance, and measured in terms of relevant key indicators. Farooq et al. constructed a smart farming with relevant technologies (Cloud and Edge Computing, Big Data analytics and ma- chine learning, communication networks and protocols, and robotics), and analyzed application domains, relevant smartphone, sensor-based applications, and security and privacy issues in IoT-based agriculture (Farooq et al., 2019). Erlangga et al. aimed to create a mobile learning that provides information and interactive communication about vegeta- ble production needed by farmers using internet and mobile cloud com- puting concept, for better communication, sharing of information and profitability in agriculture (Erlangga et al., 2020).

to perceive individual objects. Once a tag enters the magnetic field, it re- ceives the radio frequency signal from the reader. Using the energy ob- tained by the induced current, it transmits its product information stored in the chip to the receiver or actively transmits signals at a certain frequency. After the information is received by the reader, it is decoded and then sent to the central information system for relevant processing (Qu and Yang, 2011). Combined with related network communication technology, RFID can realize long-distance automatic identification of objects, which makes it very suitable for agricultural IoT and realizes real-time monitoring of agricultural-related objects. Radio-frequency

identification is waterproof, and it has a fast-scanning speed, simple in- formation modification, large data storage capacity, and high security. Compared with traditional bar code and magnetic card technology, RFID is more efficient and can transmit more information, which meets the large-scale identification needs of agricultural IoT (Luis and Loredana, 2011). Radio-frequency identification is mainly applied to agricultural areas such as agricultural product safety and traceability, especially in the field of food safety, which mainly includes agricultural product circulation, crop growth, livestock breeding, and meat food sup- ply. Ampatzidis et al. applied RFID technology in fruit tree monitoring to

analyze the growth status of the fruit (Ampatzidis and Vouqioukas, 2009; Bowman, 2010). Research on identification methods based on RFID has been expanding. Accurate location identification, positioning, and navigation are the research hotspots. These applications focus on in- tegrating RFID information with location information from other tech- nologies, such as ZigBee, global positioning system (GPS), and wireless sensor network (WSN) (Yue et al., 2018). He designed a wireless RFID system based on ZigBee technology, which improved the sensing and processing capabilities of the RFID system (He, 2020).

3S is a collective term for remote sensing (RS), global navigation sat- ellite system (GNSS), and geographic information system (GIS). It is a comprehensive technology that combines the three to realize fast, accu- rate, and reliable collection, analysis, and updating of agricultural infor- mation. The schematic diagram of the complementary effects of the three is shown in Fig. 4.

Remote sensing technology uses different forms of sensors to re- ceive various electromagnetic wave information of ground objects from RS platforms at different heights and processes the received in- formation to detect and identify different ground objects and their characteristics from a distance. It can solve the problem of monitoring crops that are scattered and geographically complex. At present, RS technology has formed a three-dimensional earth observation sys- tem including aerial photography and satellite remote sensing. It has leaped from local observation to global quasi-synchronous obser- vation and is gradually expanding from visible light to infrared, far- infrared, and even microwave and ultra-long wave (Li and Yang, 2018). Agricultural RS technology has a unique effect on the monitor- ing and management of large-area open-air agricultural production. It can monitor crops that are scattered in type and located in complex terrain. It has four research directions: agricultural resource investi- gation, crop yield estimation, agricultural disaster forecasting, and precision agriculture (Gao et al., 2020). Nowadays, RS technology is playing an important role in the management and protection of farm- land water conservancy projects (Ma et al., 2019), ecological environ- ment monitoring (Chui, 2017), and real-time decision-making on agricultural fertilization (Li, 2017).

Monitoring animal information (body temperature, food intake, dis- eases, and so on) enables people to promptly understand the physiolog- ical and nutritional status of animals and ensure their healthy growth. Usually, an animal information monitoring system is composed of sen- sors, actuators, wireless link and terminal equipment (Fig. 6).

of pigs was automatically measured based on infrared technology (Meng, 2018). Timely observation of body temperature can effectively prevent the occurrence of diseases. To improve the efficiency of wildlife rescue centers on rehabilitation, quarantine monitoring, and scientific release, Jia used sensors and RFID technology combined with modern biometric technology to collect state data of wild animals and transmit them to the terminal through wireless transmission technology based on the ZigBee protocol (Jia, 2020).

Plant life information to be collected mainly includes visual informa- tion (diseases and pests, fruit enlargement status, leaf area, and so on) and internal information (chlorophyll content, crop nitrogen, photosyn- thetic rate, and so on). A typical plant life information monitoring sys- tem is shown in Fig. 7.

By fully investigating the specific conditions of the citrus growing environment, Porto et al. designed a citrus traceability system based on IoT technology (Porto et al., 2011). This system can prevent and con- trol the spread of plant diseases so that citrus growth is promoted. He et al. summarized plant nutrient monitoring, disease, insect pest sens- ing, and the acquisition of plant life information along with spectro- scopic  technology  and  nuclear  magnetic  resonance  imaging

technology for plant information perception (He et al., 2013). Park et al. deployed WSNs to calculate the dew point on the leaves of plants in a greenhouse based on the sensed information (Park and Park, 2011). Then, through automatic adjustment of the greenhouse environment, plant diseases that may be caused by condensation were effectively prevented and controlled. Through computer vision technology, Li et al. realized successful non-destructive monitoring of the growth of plants in a greenhouse and collected the leaf crown projection area and plant height information (Li et al., 2003).

Intelligent agricultural machinery enables efficient, standard, com- fortable, and interactive agricultural machinery operations. It can inde- pendently complete cultivation, sowing, transplanting, fertilization, drug spraying, feeding, irrigation, picking, harvesting, and other opera- tions. It can also collect information on soil, water quality, crops, and aquatic products, which provides technical support for the implementa- tion of precision agriculture and healthy breeding (Ma and Sun, 2020). Fast, accurate, and comprehensive agricultural machinery service infor- mation can be provided by introducing IoT into agricultural machinery applications and using technologies like sensing, positioning, and

2020). It can not only save manpower, overcome subjective operating errors, and improve the reliability of data but also promote the scientific management and scheduling of agricultural machinery. Aiming at the lack of systematic standard system guidance in the standardization work of China's intelligent agricultural machinery and equipment, Hu et al. studied and constructed a framework of China's intelligent agricul- tural machinery and equipment standard system (Hu et al., 2020).

Intelligent agricultural machinery IoT includes internal IoT, cluster IoT and remote IoT. Internal IoT refers to the communication and control between sensors, actuators and central processing unit in agricultural machinery. Cluster IoT refers to the communication and control be- tween the same or different kinds of agricultural machinery operating in the same area. Remote IoT refers to the communication and control between the operation site and remote terminals and servers. The struc- ture of intelligent agricultural machinery IoT is shown in Fig. 8.

In terms of agricultural product quality safety and traceability, agri- cultural IoT is mainly applied to agricultural product warehousing, lo- gistics, and distribution. Through electronic data exchange, bar codes, RFID electronic tags, and other technologies, automatic identification and the input and output of warehouse of goods can be achieved. Using WSNs, storage workshops and logistics distribution vehicles can be monitored in real-time to achieve the goal of traceability of the source and destination of the main agricultural products. Many devel- oped countries have conducted in-depth research on agricultural prod- uct traceability systems and have already had relatively mature

were designed based on RFID technology, which can manage the infor- mation at each key stage of the vegetable life cycle from production, cir- culation, sales to after-sales, realizing the monitoring of vegetables from the source to the final consumer. The safety and quality of vegetables were greatly improved. Diao et al. built a web and GIS-based vegetable quality and safety early warning and traceability platform based on the actual needs of vegetable quality and safety supervision and traceability (Diao and Nie, 2015). This platform visually displayed the information at each stage of vegetable production and sales and improved the level of vegetable quality and safety management. Gu et al. used RFID to design electronic tags and coded individual pigs, carcasses, and seg- mentation parts, which included all the information in the entire life cycle, including the slaughter, processing, and sales stages of individual pigs (Gu et al., 2018).

Fig. 9 depicts head count of various topics of interest related to research articles discussed in current study from 2011 to 2021. The head count depicts that there is a lot of inclination towards the term “Animal and plant life information monitoring” in comparison to any other topic.

Currently, IoT is generally divided into three layers: the percep- tion layer, the transport layer, and the application layer. While research on a single layer is relatively in-depth, research and dis- cussion on the entire IoT system structure are relatively lacking. This results in unstable data transmission, difficulties in data sharing, potential safety hazards in transmission, and poor posi- tioning accuracy and stability, which reduces the timeliness of data transmission by IoT.

The agricultural IOT relies on high-speed wireless WAN for data transmission. However, in the remote agricultural environment, the wireless communication signal is weak, so it is unrealistic to realize high-speed data transmission. Therefore, we can only im- prove the data coding efficiency to ensure the real-time perfor- mance of the system.

Agricultural IoT system structure and perception node deploy- ment and management need to be researched. The architecture should be distributed, open, and resource-service sharable. By this, interconnections of various heterogeneous systems and resource sharing can be realized, and more detailed and specific agricultural information can be obtained.

