Physical isolation among different confidential levels Networks are always being used to keep data unrevealed, information unilateral transmission system transmits data across networks. Information security module is essential in system and being used to make sure data untouched in low confidential level network. MD5 algorithm is used in digital signature and RSA arithmetic is used encoding and decoding process. Experiments approve its efficiency and security.

According to《Law of PRC Keeping National Secret》rule: “Computer which recorded national secrets cannot link to internet or other public networks directly, must isolate from them, it is called “physical isolation”. Networks of government, military and bank are independent to keep data safe. Physical isolation solved disclosure in a way, but set obstacles to obtain information from external networks. Unilateral Transmission System transmits data from low security level to high unilaterally, and prevents data from leaking out. Security module uses RSA and MD5 algorithm to insure data against destroying, tampering and replacing, promises its security and reliability. [1]

Unilateral Transmission System includes gap and software system, gap is laid between different security level networks, data “flows” through it unilaterally from low security level network to high, and there is no direct physical link in it. Host computer in low security level network (external network in short) encodes data to QR codes, camera in gap catches QR codes which include data and display on screen, then host computer in high security level network (internal network in short) decodes them back to data. Security module consists of RSA encryption and MD5 signature process which applied to terminal computer in external network, and decryption, signature authentication process applied to host computer in internal network.

Assign primitive A, B, C, D to variable a, b, c, d. Divide 512 bits data block to 16 strings of 32 bits. Compute Each 32 bit string 4 rounds. There are many processes in a round, the first process in 4 rounds are different, the rest process are the same. These are 4 nonlinear functions used in process.

After these 4 rounds compute process, add A, B, C, D to a, b, c, d separately. Then compute next group of data, the output are the cascades of A, B, C and D. When all the groups of data are computed, cascade the outcome, we get the MD5 results. [2]

Format clear data. Use PKCS format: EB=00||BT||PS||00||D, BT means type of block, PS is filling cluster, D is clear text. The beginning is 0 to insure the length of EB is more than k. public key encryption BT=02, private key decryption BT=01. When BT=02, PS is non-null random number; when BT=01, the value of PS is FF.

Divide original clear text from clear text in PKCS format. The process is also check integrality of data. If problems below happen then decryption failed: cannot divide clearly; filling cluster is less than 64 bit or mismatch with type labeled by BT; BT is not accord with practical type.

