Are analyzed varied experimental data on DNA fluorescence inside neutrophils and other aerobic cells in flow cytometry with nanometer spatial resolution, in the large populations of cells. Fluorescence distributions, for histograms various ranks r, define classes of Good and Bad information networks DNA for good and bad health of different people, in a very dense, fractal packing of information and entropy in networks of ‘exponentially small worlds’, at variation types of positive and negative stability for information distributions. In all cells exists invariance (homeostasis) for total Shannon entropy E=lnr in hierarchy networks entropy of any scales, for any rank r. Entropy's noises form signals for self-regulation of informational homeostasis. The main reconstructions of correlations and noises, for homeostasis support, at any states of health, occur in branching distributions of central moments in the most large-scale networks of entropy, for rank r <32.

peripheral blood and for other cells of human and chickens, for different dyes and varied excitations of fluorescence [1-5]. Oxidative activity of DNA is visualized at fluorescence. In each experiment is observed fluorescence of three-dimensional (3D) DNA nanostructures of all non-coding and coding parts of DNA in full set of chromosomes inside cells. Each cell makes a chaotic Brownian motion at chaotic rotations in the jet of blood, flowing through the laser beam, during measurements. Therefore, each fluorescence histogram defines a representative statistics for various two dimensional (2D) projections on the photomultiplier all possible detailed spatial images of fluorescing 3D DNA in large populations of cells.

In real life of all DNA in the group of cells cannot select, determine and allocate only a single separate contribution of only non-coding and only coding parts of separated DNA in combined correlations, synergy of joint actions of full set 46 chromosomes inside cell. Detailed analysis statistical data on 3D DNA fluorescence inside neutrophils [1-4] shows that actual correlations and topology stochastic coils of complex networks DNA for full set of chromosomes in living cells are characterized by non-Gaussian statistics, very high dense packing in networks DNA consisting from a mix of normal and abnormal fractal structures, changeability and flexibility in self-regulation of information and entropy, which provide high adaptability DNA inside cells for real life. Complexity real life 3D DNA inside living cells is much higher than statics coding single linear fragment of DNA, their combinations, gene networks or biochemical schemes in textbooks, in standard genomic researches lonely DNA, etc. Here exist many unsolved problems in mathematics, natural science, etc However, there are some overall patterns, universal features and switching in networks DNA which allow classify different types of correlations and information networks DNA inside cells for any given donor in given time [1-4]. New physical and mathematical patterns for information activity 3D DNA define new opportunities in self-regulation and medical diagnostics of health and immunity. Recording, transfer and self-

Three original histograms are shown in Figs.1 for illustrations fluorescing neutrophils in the blood different healthy and unhealthy men. Detailed descriptions experimental procedures for physical measurements and dyeing DNA by ethidium bromide, etc presented in [1-5]. This is high sensitive method for diagnostics many different and complex diseases, early diagnostics of illnesses, hidden diseases [1-5]. In Figs.1 presented normalized distributions for frequency of fluorescence flashes P(I) , of information J(I)=-lnP(I) and information entropy E(J(I))=p(I)J(I), based on normalized distribution of information (see eqns. (3),(4)) [1-6].

Fig.1. (a) Normalized dependence frequency of flashes P(I) on their intensity I(r=256) for fluorescing DNA in neutrophils; (b) only central part of histogram (a); rhombuses points correspond to bronchial asthma. Total number of flashes is N0= 76 623; quadrate points correspond to the healthy donor, N0= 40 109; triangle points correspond to the oncology disease, N0= 40 752; (c) Logarithmic dependence LnP(I) frequency of flashes P(I) on their intensity I(r=256); (d) Normalized distributions of information entropy E(J(I)) in the dependence on fluorescence intensity I(r=256)

Fig. 2. (a) Dependence of Hurst index H(E,r)) in networks of entropy DNA (fractal dimension D=2-H) on logarithm of range for three different people; (b) Dependence of (ln(lnr/D(r))) on double logarithm of range r in multi-scale networks of ‘real worlds’ for fluorescing DNA inside neutrophils; an ideal network of ‘exponentially small worlds’ ,without fractals (D=2), corresponds to violet line with round dots; overall trends of ln(lnr.D(r)=A(lnlnr)+B presented here as the linear approximations in networks of ‘exponentially small worlds’; (c) Dependence of normalized frequency distributions Shannon entropy E(I, r=4) on intensity I at rank r=4. The continuous lines correspond to the parabolic approximations of probability density distributions. Varied types of concave and convex lines correspond to changes stability for probabilistic distributions at various states of health, at transcritical bifurcations [6]; initial histograms see in Figs.1.

According to Fig.2b information entropy DNA in real time [1,2,4,6], packed in various and very dense networks of ‘exponentially small worlds’, which have fractal and structural differences even in twice double logarithmic scale, for one human and different people. These structural variations interconnected with different types of stability in ranged distributions of fluorescence in Fig.2c Change types of smooth approximations for distributions in Fig.2c (concave/convex parabola) corresponds to changes of stability for varied probabilistic distributions in transcritical bifurcations [6,7]. Thus we define General State of Health in the form of answer Yes/No or healthy/sick, as a form of parabolic approximations of ranged fluorescence distributions, as concave/convex parabola, for all people in vivo and at medical treatment [6,7]. Moreover, this answer Yes/No coincides with change of trends, i.e. positive/negative sign, for dependence fractal dimension in networks for DNA activity on scale of networks for all people in real time [1].

Thus packing, switching, stability form the keys for regulation of information activity DNA inside living cells. According illustrations in Figs.1,2 real traffics in DNA networks always are not smooth [4]. Forced smoothing DNA activity inside cells belongs to the games without rules and meaningful, sensible goals.

Let us consider hierarchy multi-scale distributions of fluorescence, presented in ranged histograms for frequency of entropy E(p(I,r)). Detailed analysis experimental data [ 2, 6] shown that total entropy E(J,r)=<J(p(I,r))>=-<lnp(I,r)> is invariant, identical for given r in all cells [2]. Dependence of E(J,r)) on rank r, as it is illustrated in Fig.3a, is logarithmic

Accuracy of this empirical approximation of varied and all experimental results approximately equal to 2% , that corresponds to experimental errors. This empirical invariant defines informational homeostasis of oxidative activity of 3D DNA in full set chromosomes inside living cells [2,6]. Information transforms at DNA activity inside cells, at variations of inner and external conditions, for all cells, ensure stability, adaptability and vitality cell at self-regulation of homeostasis [2,4]. This self-regulation is defined by the local deflections from average homeostatic level of information entropy, i.e. is defined by the local noises or

Number m determines the order of moment M (e(r), m) and the order of Hölder ‘s averages  e(m, r)  . Three illustrations for distributions of central moments M(e(r=4),m) and Hölder’s averages <e(r=4,m> at rank r=4 presented in Figs.3b,3c. These distributions are determined on the base of histograms of rank r=4 for information entropy in Fig.2d. Full descriptions these averages for any values of m and r presented in [2].

Fig.3. (a) Dependence of total Shannon information entropy E(J,r)=lnr on rank r; initial histograms at range r=256 shown in Figs. 1; (b) Distributions of central statistical moments M(e(r=4),m) for fluctuations of entropy e(r) near homeostasis; initial histograms presented in Fig. 2c; lower and upper branches correspond to the even m=2,4,6... and odd m=1,3,5..… ; (c) Distributions for averages of Hölder

According to Fig.3c various individual distributions of Hölder’s averages, for even m=2,4,6... and odd m=1,3,5..., increase with increasing number m, with various saturations of chromosomal correlations of entropy at different states of health until the value of m=46 . We need all 46 chromosomes in cells, as one

Fig.3c depend on health status for given person at given time, at a strong switching of branches for inflammations (asthma) with respect the same branches for a good health and oncology. The same switching observed at increasing number m for exponential distributions of central moments M(e(r),m) in Fig.3b.

in a cell are very important characteristics for information activity DNA inside cells. These levels of s(m  46, r) defined by all values of m  46 for all averages of Hölder  e(m, r)  , but not only the lower numbers of m  1,2 ... for different 46 chromosomes inside cells and many types of various chromosomal

any cells in body any aerobic beings in the case of any local disorders of any origin, such as inner diseases, infections, traumas, etc. This determines the defensive response and immunity during reconstruction of fractals and complex information networks DNA in all cells living inside us [1,2,4,6 ]. Thank self-regulation.

