This study presents experimental and analytical results obtained from the application of a reinforced self-compacting concrete jacketing technique for the rehabilitation of shear damaged reinforced concrete beams. Three shear-dominated beams were initially subjected to monotonic four-point bending loading. The damaged beams were first restored using self-compacting concrete jackets that encased the bottom width and both vertical sides of the beams including small diameter steel bars and U-formed stirrups and then retested. The applied jacket was designed to increase the shear capacity of the initially tested beams and to alter their brittle failure mode to a more ductile one. Test results indicated that this jacketing technique is a promising rehabilitation method since the strength and the overall performance of the jacketed beams was ameliorated with respect to the initial specimens. Analytical results of the flexural and the shear capacity of the tested beams are also presented. Comparisons between test data and predicted strength values showed a good agreement.

Recently, the rehabilitation of flexural damaged reinforced concrete beams using self-compacting concrete jackets has been experimentally investigated [7]. Test results indicated that the flexural capacity of the jacketed beams was ameliorated with respect to the capacity of the initial specimens. The application of this self-compacting concrete jacketing technique is extended herein to shear-dominated beams.

Three reinforced concrete beams with total length 1.6 m and cross-sectional dimensions 125/200 mm have been constructed. Geometrical and reinforcement characteristics of these specimens are displayed in Figure 1 (beams A1, A2 and A3). The mean compressive and tensile strength of the commonly used concrete of these initial specimens was 24.8 MPa and 2.1 MPa, respectively, as measured from uniaxial compression and splitting tests of six cylinders per testing, respectively. The measured tensile yield strength of the deformed longitudinal steel bars and the mild steel stirrups was 570 MPa and 255 MPa, respectively, whereas their ultimate tensile strength was found to be 770 MPa and 357 MPa, respectively. Beams were designed in order to demonstrate shear failure mode and for this reason inadequate amount of stirrups has been provided.

After the initial loading, the shear damaged beams were rehabilitated using reinforced jackets made of self- compacting concrete. The thickness of the jackets was 25 mm. Jackets encased the bottom width and both vertical sides of the damaged beams (U-formed jacketing). The steel reinforcement of the jackets consists of small diameter 5 mild steel straight bars and U-formed stirrups with tensile strength at yield 255 MPa and at ultimate 357 MPa. The geometrical and reinforcement characteristics of the jacketed beams are shown in

Initially tested beams sustained severe shear damages, spalling of concrete cover and intense diagonal cracking. All loose concrete fragments were completely removed and the missing concrete parts reconstructed by jacketing reformed and re-casted by self-compacting concrete. No special roughening of the surface of the damaged beams was performed prior jacketing construction. L-shaped mild steel dowels with 5 mm diameter were installed in the vertical sides of the initial beams in order to support the longitudinal bars of the jacket. Dowels were bonded by injected epoxy resin into 7 mm holes that were drilled before. The amount of the provided dowels was rather low; every side bar of the jacket had dowels 5 per 150 mm. Steel bars, stirrups and dowels of the jacketed beams were all welded together.

Cast-in-place self-compacting concrete with the mix proportions shown in Table 1 was used. The cement of the mixture contained 305 kg of CEM IV (W-P)/B 32.5 N and 51 kg of CEM II 42.5 N. Fine and coarse aggregates with maximum diameter 8 mm were also used. Further, superplasticizer (Glenium 21), retarder (Pozzolith 134 CF) and viscosity modifying admixture (VMA) were added in order to bring the required water reduction and fluidity, and to increase cohesion and segregation resistance [8]. The measured mean self- compacting concrete compressive and splitting tensile strength was 40.1 MPa and 3.3 MPa, respectively. After jacketing formwork stripping the final result was generally good and the limited superficial imperfections observed were fixed using high-strength, low-shrinkage and rapid-hardening cement paste [9].

The experimental behavior of the initially tested and the jacketed beams is presented in Figure 2 in terms of bending moment versus mid-span deflection curves. An increase of the loading bearing capacity of the jacketed beams with respect to the corresponding initial beams can be observed. Further, the cracking patterns at failure of the beams are displayed in Figure 3. All initially tested beams exhibited diagonal cracking and typical brittle shear response whereas all jacketed beams showed pure flexural failure and ductile behavior.

The examined self-compacting concrete jacketing seems to be an effective rehabilitation technique to shear damaged reinforced concrete beams. The load bearing capacity and the overall structural performance of the jacketed beams was ameliorated with respect to the initially tested specimens. A good agreement between the predicted results and the test data of this study can be observed.

