The simulation method is useful to investigate short-circuit test of transformer and the short-circuit test of transformer is an important method for the study of transformer features. In this work, the simulation model of short-circuit test of transformer is designed. And the variable frequency power supply and shunt capacitor are considered. From the simulation results, use the shunt capacitor, the power supply can be reduced. Use the high frequency source, the capacitor can be reduced as well. This has significance in transformer test research and engineering application.

Short-circuit test of transformer is an important method for the study of transformer features. The simulation method for short-circuit test of transformer is useful to investigate the working principle and characteristic of transformers. And there are many kinds of software to finish the simulation, MALAB/Simulink is one of the most popular software in this field. Some application such as the model and simulate the dynamic behavior of ac-powered electromechanical contactors[1], the integration of Matlab and Excel to conceptualize the relationship between abstract mathematical models to practical situations[2], using specially designed exercises about substation lightning protection in teaching high voltage course in Matlab[3], modeling of power systems on the transient analysis[4], the surge modelling of a transformer[5], etc. in this

By the short-circuit test of transformer, the copper losses of the transformer can be obtained. Short-circuit test of transformer, which shown in figure 1, is conducted by shot-circuiting the secondary terminal of transformer, then applying a reduced voltage to the primary side. When the rated current flowing in the second windings, the input voltage of the primary side is Vsc, the input of current of the primary side windings is Isc the input active power is Psc, and the input reactive power is Qsc.

In this work, the simulation model of short-circuit test of transformer is designed. And the variable frequency power supply and shunt capacitor are considered. From the simulation results, use the shunt capacitor, the power supply can be reduced. Use the high frequency source, the capacitor can be reduced as well. This has significance in transformer test research and engineering application.

