Aim of this work is to characterize the thermodynamics of a thermal storage system based on the latent heat of a paraffinic Phase Change Material (PCM). The heat exchange between the heat transfer fluid and the PCM and its phase change are investigated. Under simplifying assumptions, it is shown that the governing equations are the three energy conservation equations written for the heat transfer fluid, the wall and the PCM. The PCM energy conservation equation is written in terms of enthalpy. All three parabolic differential equations are numerically solved according to a finite difference approach implemented in MATLAB language. The simulations are conducted in order to derive the temperature profiles inside the PCM and to estimate the time needed to complete the melting of the PCM. Different simulation campaigns are conducted varying the inlet temperature of the heat transfer fluid. The obtained results can be used as guidelines for more careful studies of the thermal storage system and for subsequent analysis and optimization processes.

Fossil fuel depletion and air pollution have pushed the world to face up the environmental sustainability challenge. Environmental sustainability is expressed through the use and optimization of renewable energy. In the field of energy saving, heat storage plays a very important role.

In the field of power supply, energy demand and energy availability often do not coincide in time; therefore, the use of thermal storage system could be desirable. There are three main ways for storing thermal energy, i.e., in the form of: sensible, latent or thermo-chemical energy. The heat storage in the form of latent heat can be effectively achieved by means of PCMs (Phase Change Materials), i.e. materials characterized by high latent heat of fusion, which through solidification and melting are able to store and release heat.

The thermal storage, in the form of latent heat, has the important advantage of accumulating a large amount of heat in a very small volume, hence presenting a high thermal storage density. The work of Zalba et al. [1] presents an exhaustive review with regard to the classification of PCM. PCMs are generally divided into two main categories: organic (paraffinic and non-paraffinic) and inorganic (mainly hydrated salts). Organic materials have many advantages such as: congruent melting; non-corrosive behavior; high latent heat of fusion; broad range of melting temperatures (depending on the number of carbon atoms in the molecule); minimum tendency to sub-cooling; chemical stability; scarce or null toxicity. A common drawback to all organic materials is the low thermal conductivity, which determines the formation of very high thermal gradients during the transient heat transfer. The main advantage of inorganic PCMs is the high storage capacity per unit volume (about twice that of the organic compounds). Their main drawback is that they melt in an incongruent way. The thermal storage system, under investigation, is composed of a shell and tube heat exchanger. The heat exchange is performed between the Heat Transfer Fluid, which flows inside the tubes, and the PCM inside the shell.

In this paper the unsteady heat transfer between the operating fluid and the PCM is numerically investigated using a finite difference scheme. The operating fluid is air and the PCM is organic paraffin. The convective heat transfer coefficient is computed by means of empirical relationships as functions of the Reynolds number, the Prandtl number and the geometry of the heat exchanger. Considering suitable and realistic simplifying assumptions, the governing equations of the problem are the energy conservation equations written for the HTF (Heat Transfer Fluid), the wall and the PCM. The first two equations are discretized using explicit schemes, whilst the last is discretized using a semi-implicit scheme. The phase change of the PCM is analyzed by writing the energy conservation equation in the form of enthalpy of the PCM.

The effect of natural convection in PCM liquid phase is widely neglected in modeling PCM thermal system (as done by Trp [11]). The main reason is that, considering only the conduction mode of heat transfer in the PCM, the analysis of thermal systems is highly simplified. Furthermore, with Rayleigh numbers lower than 1·106, this hypothesis leads to an acceptable margin of error [12].

Considering these assumptions, the governing equations can be written in a cylindrical reference system. They are: the conservation of mass and energy and the momentum balance equations for the HTF; the energy conservation equations for the walls and the PCM. Regarding the PCM, temperature is a function of the enthalpy (Fig. 2).

The system of equations, described above, requires the solution of the flow field, the heat transfer and the phase change simultaneously, using finite element technique [13]. Additionally, the HTF flow is assumed inviscid, incompressible and 1D [14]. These three hypotheses implies that it is possible to decouple the equations of motion from the equations of energy and to ignore the continuity and momentum equations of the HTF. The main heat exchange mechanism within the HTF is convection. Hence it is possible to model the heat transfer within the HTF through the definition of a convective heat transfer coefficient h. Known the Reynolds number, Re = 1150, the Prandtl number, Pr = 0.727, and the characteristic size, Di, of the heat exchanger, it is possible to calculate the Nusselt number, Nu = 1.86 (Re Pr Di/L)1/3 [15], [16]. Knowing the Nusselt number, the coefficient of convective heat exchange can be determined as h = Nu λ/Di.

The unsteady 2D axisymmetric problem described by the differential equations 2-5 is numerically solved using a finite difference scheme. Being i the generic axial node, the spatial derivative is discretized by means of a first order forward finite difference in the first point and a first order backward finite difference for all the other points. Eq.2 and Eq.3 are discretized in time using the forward Euler first-order accurate scheme. Being m the time step, Eq.6 for the HTF and Eq.7 for the wall are obtained:

The computational domain is discretized using 21 nodes in the axial direction and only 5 nodes in the radial direction. This is a rather coarse grid but the main idea is to develop a fast code capable to rapidly provide an estimation of the time scale of the melting process. The grid can be easily refined increasing, however the computational costs. Once ∆x and ∆r are been defined, the time step ∆t is computed in such a way to respect the stability of the numerical calculation. In particular ∆t = 0.1 min(∆x, ∆r)/(2vin).

The numerical solution is based on the computation of the values of the fluid and wall temperatures for every i-th node at the new time as a function of the values measured at the previous time according to the explicit Euler scheme. These temperature values are set as boundary conditions for the solution of the PCM energy conservation equation. Observing the spatial discretization of the PCM energy conservation equation, it is observed that the value of the enthalpy in the j-th node depends on the enthalpy value assumed in nodes j- 1 and j+1. In this way, for every i-th axial node there is a tridiagonal block system.

The PCM absorbs the heat transferred from the fluid through the wall. From the radial temperature distribution it is possible to observe how, inside the PCM, a thermal gradient is generated, whose slope decreases as time increases. The high thermal gradients depend on the low thermal conductivity of the PCM and its large thermal inertia (high specific heat).

Furthermore, the increase in temperature over time becomes slower with increasing radial abscissa (Fig. 3- a). In fact, when the heat is transferred from the HTF to the first cell of the PCM, a portion of it is accumulated whereas the remaining portion is transmitted to the adjacent cells far away, hence receiving only a small amount of the heat flux. Moreover, as the heat is transferred to the PCM, the enthalpy of the cell at immediate contact with the wall reaches its incipient melting condition and, until the entire latent heat of fusion is not transferred, the temperature remains constant. As a result, the thermal gradients between the various cells are lacking and there is a further slowing of the increase in temperature.

The same considerations can be performed for different values of the HTF inlet temperature. The temperature distributions in the axial position with i = 11, Fig. 3-c and Fig. 3-d, show how lowering the inlet temperature from 600K to 475K (Fig. 3-c and Fig. 3-d) and 350K respectively (Fig. 3-e and Fig. 3-f), the trend in the radial temperature distribution is preserved but the time needed to reach a regime configuration increases.

