pollution[1]. The on-line, continuous measurement of the soot concentration has the increasingly importance to prevent effectively atmosphere pollution. To obtain the soot emission, soot concentration has to be measured in real time. So it is highly desirable to develop an automatic continuous instrument that is suitable for the measurement of the soot concentration[2].

The common methods of measuring the soot concentration are the ISO-Kinetic Sampling techniques and the Extinction. The principle of the ISO-Kinetic Sampling is briefness, but its disadvantages are that its result is not credibility enough and cannot carry through continuous measurement. The Extinction principle is based on the Lambert-Beer Law. The concentration figured out from the Extinction is related to the average extinction efficiency and the average diameter. The former can be calculated by the Mie theory and considered as the approximated 2[3]. The average diameter is a variable parameter. It must be measured on- line for determining exact concentration of soot in the dust[4].

A new Scattering-Transmission method on measuring soot concentration based on the Scattering integration method and the extinction theory of soot concentration is presented in this paper. Compared with Extinction method, it need not know the soot average diameter in the dust flow in advance. The soot concentration measurement instrument is developed and the experiment is carried out.

The denominator of the Scattering Integration method equation is I0, so the sensitivity is not very high. If the denominator changes to the extinction light intensity, the sensitivity should be increased. Considered that the incidence light intensity is unchanged and its volume is large enough; comparing to the increase of soot concentration, the extinction light intensity decrease gradually. If the soot is sparse, I0 is regarded as the constant. Then replacing I0 with It, we can obtain a new formula—Scattering-Transmission method.

The laser 1 is located on the focus of the collimator Lenses 2 and the laser beam is changed into the parallel light. The parallel light beam is divided into two beams through the splitter prism 5. The reflection light is focusing on the photodiode 3 OPT101 through the focus lens 4. The optical signal is converted into the current signal I0 as the original light intensity. The transmission beam is across the soot space 6. The

the photodiode. The measurement signal I2 of the photodiode is included the transmission light and the small angle scattering light. The difference of the photocell light signal I1 and the photodiode signal I2 is a certain angles of scattering light intensity signal.

The hardware structure of the soot concentration measurement system is shown in Figure 6. The MCU of the voltage waveform detection system is 89C2052, the analog-to-digital conversion chip is ADC0809, the communication chip is MAX232, the watchdog chip is X25045[5-7]. The output voltage signal of the weighing sensors is enlarged by the amplifier circuit and changed into the digital signal by ADC0809. The MCU collects a plurality of sensor output voltage signal simultaneously and sends the measurement data to the monitoring system through the MAX232.

The SCM software uses KeilVersion2 development platform and uses the modular design method. The software of the detection system includes the analog-to-digital conversion, the signal filtering and the data transmission subroutine. The SCM software flow chat is shown in Figure 7.

A novel technique, the Scattering-Transmission method, for measuring soot concentration based on the Scattering integration method and the Extinction theory, has been developed. The new technique need not pre-required knowledge about the soot average diameter and the soot diameter distribution. Numerical simulation by using the Mie theory has also infirmed the validity of this technique. Based on the method, a soot concentration measurement system has been developed. The measurement system uses the 89C2052 as the MCU and can transfer the on-line measurement data to the monitoring computer. The measurement system is installed in an exhaust dust of an industrial duct. The experiment results that the Scattering- Transmission method can on-line measuring the soot concentration.

