The situation is different for predictive modeling. In medicinal chem- istry, ML is mostly applied at the level of individual target-directed projects using relatively small data. Each of these projects provides a specific context for modeling. In data science, the context dependence of data structuring and analysis is known to work against generaliza- tion of knowledge extraction, which requires abstraction from project- based data sets and project-specific analysis criteria [25]. By contrast, in medicinal chemistry, project focus takes center stage and confines the applicability of ML. Furthermore, the predominant small data frame- work in medicinal chemistry also suggests alternative strategies for ML. Rather than heavily investigating methodologies whose strengths de- pend upon large data volumes, approaches such as transfer learning

[26] or active learning [27,28] can be applied that are capable of pre- dicting molecular properties or new compounds on the basis of sparse data. Transfer learning makes it possible to use data from related pre- diction tasks (targets) for modeling; active learning derives predictive models from minimal sets of informative training instances. In medici- nal chemistry, these approaches are particularly relevant for addressing novel targets with interesting disease biology for which only limited compound information is available. All in all, there is much room for further computational developments with practical utility for medicinal chemistry.

Returning to the greater life science arena, there are other areas where DNNs have achieved unprecedented advances such as in de novo protein structure prediction [29]. Regardless, DL will ultimately only become an integral part of interdisciplinary life science research if it measurably impacts experimental programs. Importantly, further estab- lishing DL in interdisciplinary settings is only possible if life science in- vestigators and drug discovery practitioners agree to rely on predictions for experimental design. This requires increasing model acceptance in interdisciplinary research. As is the case with any new technology, time will be required until DL can realize its potential in this area. However, there are specific requirements that must be met to further increase the confidence of experimentalists in predictive models.

Experimentalists are naturally reluctant to rely on predictions that are diﬃcult or impossible to understand. Given the black box nature of DNNs, this presents a major obstacle for the acceptance of such models for experimental design. Therefore, increasing attention is being paid to approaches for “explainable AI” (XAI) that make it possible to rational- ize the results of ML/DL models and interpret predictions in chemical or biological terms [30,31]. Among others, these include methods for the identification of features making largest contributions to individual pre- dictions or the determination of feature sets that are minimally required to produce an accurate prediction. Closely related to XAI approaches are methods to quantify the uncertainty of predictions [32–34]. Obtain- ing uncertainty estimates also helps to build confidence in predictive modeling. Although there are ML approaches that yield prediction un- certainties, for example, probabilistic (Bayesian) modeling [34], most methods including DNNs produce endpoints without uncertainty esti- mates, which are subject to further analysis.

to experimental evaluation in real-life projects. In interdisciplinary re- search settings, prospective applications require confidence in predic- tive modeling. However, it must also be considered that predictions re- lying on project data are inevitably influenced by data generation pro- cesses and data integrity [35] and that predictions might succeed or fail for different reasons. Accordingly, an incorrect prediction might not nec- essarily be attributable to methodological failure. Hence, in prospective applications, predictions should be analyzed, explained, and carefully evaluated within a given project context and care should be taken not to prematurely generalize successes or failures.

The rise of AI in many scientific fields comes along with promises and new challenges. AI and DL are often synonymously used, although DL is only a part of the AI spectrum. In the life sciences and drug discovery, many DNN variants are being considered for method development and different applications. However, in interdisciplinary research, DL will ultimately only meet expectations if it positively impacts experimental programs. This will require time, making immediate breakthroughs un- likely, especially in drug discovery. For example, medicinal chemists currently witness methodological advances in synthesis design through DL. However, these new approaches are not easily accessible in the prac- tice of medicinal chemistry. Thus, transforming expert-dependent com- putational models into robust and readily usable computational tools is one of the grand challenges in the field. More prospective applications will also be essential to further advance DL in interdisciplinary research and demonstrate true impact on high-profile projects. In turn, this will require narrowing the gap between DL and experiments and further in- creasing the confidence of practitioners in predictions.

For AILSCI, method development efforts, practical applications, and perspectives concerning the development of AI approaches at interfaces with the life sciences are equally relevant. High scientific quality is an essential criterion for publication in AILSCI, which also strongly encour- ages data sharing and open science initiatives. Furthermore, diversity of authors and research topics is highly desired and submissions of “off- the-beaten-path” contributions are strongly encouraged, for example, as conceptual analysis, methods, or viewpoint contributions. Notably, in line with its specific aims, AILSCI has launched several Themed Ar- ticle Collections (TACs), which essentially correspond to special issues and focus on, for example, young investigators or women in AI. Going forward, these and other TACs are expected to play a major role for AILSCI’s further development.

Struble TJ, Alvarez JC, Brown SP, Chytil M, Cisar J, DesJarlais RL, Engkvist O, Frank SA, Greve DR, Griﬃn DJ, Hou X, Johannes JW, Kreatsoulas C, Lahue B, Mathea M, Mogk G, Nicolaou CA, Palmer AD, Price DJ, Robinson RI, Salentin S, Xing L, Jaakkola T, Green WH, Barzilay R, Coley CW, Jensen KF. Current and fu- ture roles of artificial intelligence in medicinal chemistry synthesis. J Med Chem 2020;63:8667–82.

Stokes JM, Yang K, Swanson K, Jin W, Cubillos-Ruiz A, Donghia NM, McNair CR, French S, Carfrae LA, Bloom-Ackermann Z, Tran VM, Chiappino-Pepe A, Badran AH, Andrews IW, Chory EJ, Church GM, Brown ED, Jaakkola TS, Barzilay R, Collins JJ. A deep learning approach to antibiotic discovery. Cell 2020;180:688–702.

Jumper J, Evans R, Pritzel A, Green T, Figurnov M, Ronneberger O, Tunyasuvu- nakool K, Bates R, Žídek A, Potapenko A, Bridgland A, Meyer C, Kohl SAA, Bal- lard AJ, Cowie A, Romera-Paredes B, Nikolov S, Jain R, Adler J, Back T, Petersen S, Reiman D, Clancy E, Zielinski M, Steinegger M, Pacholska M, Berghammer T, Boden- stein S, Silver D, Vinyals O, Senior AW, Kavukcuoglu K, Kohli P, Hassabis D. Highly accurate protein structure prediction with AlphaFold. Nature 2021;596:583–9.

