The development of FACTS-devices has started with the growing capabilities of power electronic components. Devices for high power levels have been made available in converters for high and even highest voltage levels. The overall starting points are network elements influencing the reactive power or the impedance of a part of the power system. The series devices are compensating reactive power. With their influence on the effective impedance on the line they have an influence on stability and power flow [7, 8].

A static synchronous compensator (STATCOM) is a regulating device used on alternating current electricity transmission networks. It is based on a power electronics voltage-source converter and can act as either a source or sink of reactive AC power to an electricity network STATCOM reactive power output is independent of voltage magnitude – i.e. Constant current even under low voltage limit. With the commercial breakthrough of high power gate turn-off devices, the road is paved for an additional step forward in flexibility of AC transmission and distribution systems: STATCOM, or the Static Synchronous Compensator [3, 8]. The name is an indication that STATCOM has a characteristic similar to the synchronous condenser, but as an electronic device it has no inertia and is superior to the synchronous condenser in several ways, such as better dynamics, a lower investment cost and lower operating and maintenance costs. The use of a STATCOM is that the reactive power provision is independent from the actual voltage on the connection point [2].

The figure1 shows the equivalent circuit of a STATCOM system. The GTO converter with a dc voltage source and the power system are illustrated as variable ac voltages in this figure. These two voltages are connected by a reactance representing the transformer leakage inductance [1].

The STATCOM (Phasor Type) block models an IGBT-based STATCOM (fixed DC voltage). However, as details of the inverter and harmonics are not represented, it can be also used to model a GTO-based STATCOM in transient stability studies. The figure below shows a single-line diagram of the STATCOM and a simplified block diagram of its control system. The STACOM block is a phasor model which does not include detailed representations of the power electronics. You must use it with the phasor simulation method, activated with the Power gui block. It can be used in three-phase power systems together with synchronous generators, motors, dynamic loads and other FACTS and DR systems to perform transient stability studies and observe impact of the STATCOM on electromechanical oscillations and transmission capacity at fundamental frequency [3].

The rectifier and the inverter are 12-pulse converters using two Universal Bridge blocks connected in series. The converters are interconnected through a 110-km line and 0.5H smoothing reactors as shown in Fig.3. The converter transformers (Wye grounded/Wye/Delta) are modelled with Three-Phase Transformer (Three- Winding) blocks. The tap position is rather at a fixed position determined by a multiplication factor applied to the primary nominal voltage of the converter transformers (0.90 on the rectifier side, 0.96 on the inverter side). Here, MATLAB/SIMULINK program is used as the simulation tool.

Two 6-pulse Graetz bridges are connected in series to form a 12-pulse converter. The two 6-pulse bridges are 275KV, 60 Hz totally identical except there is an in phase shift of 30° for the AC supply voltages. Some of the harmonic effects are cancelled out with the presence of 30° phase shift. The harmonic reduction can be done with the help of filters. Firing angle at rectifier station and extinction angle at inverter station are varied to examine the system performance and the characteristics of the HVDC system. Both AC and DC filters act as large capacitors at fundamental frequency.

At the rectifier side, when the fault is applied at time t=0.03sec, voltage and current magnitudes are of the order of 1pu and 3 p u respectively and alpha angle is equal to 15 degrees which is shown in Fig .6.If alpha angle is changed to higher value the system takes longer time to reach steady state .If alpha value increases, current value decreases. The waveforms obtained at rectifier side are same for different types of faults.

At the inverter side, when the fault is applied at time t=0.03sec,voltage and current magnitudes are of the order of 0.1pu and 2.8pu respectively and extension angle is equal to 168 degrees which is shown in Fig 7. The waveforms obtained at inverter side are same for different types of faults.

In Fig .8, when three phase fault is created at time t=0.1sec, the active and reactive power is maintained at 800KW and 400KVAR respectively from time t=0.02sec to t=0.2sec.At time t=0.35sec both active and reactive power attain stability and becomes steady state. It is observed that no power fluctuations occur in P and Q after t=0.35sec.

In Fig 9, It is observed that a Line to Ground fault is created in the inverter side of HVDC system at time t=0.01sec. The Fuzzy controller activates and clears the fault. Before the fault a Vabc=0.36pu and Iabc=0.06pu. After the fault is cleared at t=0.09sec, the recovery is slow and there are oscillations in DC voltage and current of the magnitude 0.36pu and 0.04pu respectively.

From Fig 10, It is observed that line to ground fault is created in the inverter side of HVDC system at t=0.01 sec. When these faults occur in the system, it takes more time to reach the steady state operation. The Fuzzy controller activates and clears the fault. Further, with the addition of STATCOM the system reduces oscillations and get pure sinusoidal waveform at voltage Vabc=0.36 p. u and current Iabc=0.04p.u at time t=0.3 sec.

In Fig 11, when a fault is created at time t=0.01sec, the active and reactive power is maintained at 800KW and 400KVAR respectively from time t=0.02sec to t=0.35sec.At time t=0.35sec both active and reactive power attain stability and becomes steady state. It is observed that no power fluctuations occur in P and Q after t=0.35sec.

From Fig 13, It is observed that Double line to ground is created in the inverter side of HVDC system at t=0.01 sec. When these faults occur in the system, it takes more time to reach the steady state operation. The Fuzzy controller activates and clears the fault. Further, with the addition of STATCOM the system reduces oscillations and get pure sinusoidal waveform at voltage Vabc=0.36 p. u and current Iabc=0.04p.u at time t=0.3 sec.

In Fig 14, when a fault is created at time t=0.01sec, the active and reactive power is maintained at 800KW and 400KVAR respectively from time t=0.02sec to t=0.35sec.At time t=0.35sec both active and reactive power attain stability and becomes steady state. It is observed that no power fluctuations occur in P and Q after t=0.35sec.

According to the results, the STATCOM improves the system performance under the transient and the normal conditions. However, it can control the power flow in the transmission line, effectively. With the addition of STATCOM, the magnitude of fault current reduces and oscillations of excitation voltage also reduce. The "current margin" is essential to prevent misfire of the thyristor valves. DC filters and AC filters can not only eliminate the harmonic effects but also reduce the Total Harmonic Distortion (THD) as well. The current waveform in the case of a conventional controller has a lot of crests and dents and suffers from prolonged oscillations, whereas by using Fuzzy controller, DC current fast returns to its nominal value. The overshoot in case of the Fuzzy controller is slightly less than conventional controllers. It is more economical for the HVDC transmission system to transfer more power as the power factor is almost near to unity and the energy loss is low. STATCOM, however, has shown its flexibility in easing line congestion and promoting a more controllable flow in the lines. STATCOM will be very useful for deregulated energy market as an alternative choice for more power generation to the load area.

