An analysis method for static aeroelastic response considering the effect of Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) aerodynamic pressure distribution was developed in this paper. The aerodynamic pressure and the steady aerodynamic influence coefficient matrix were computed by the high-order panel method and then were corrected according to CFD pressure distribution on the 3D body-surface panel element. The static aeroelastic response was solved by modal method coupling with the structural model. A high-aspect-ratio wing was taken as an example to evaluate the analysis method, and the aerodynamic pressure obtained by CFD method with Euler equation was used for aerodynamics correction on 3D body-surface panel element in this study case. The method was then evaluated by comparing the results with those from the low-order panel method using external aerodynamic pressure and the high-order panel method. The results indicate that the method could provide correct results. The method could be used in the preliminary stage as well as in the detailed stage of aircraft design to provide design guideline of static aeroelastic response analysis.

The static aeroelastic problem determines flight load, lift loading, drag, efficiency of control, trimming of the aircraft, static stability and maneuvering quality on steady flight conditions. It also has an influence on modern aircraft with high performance which cannot be neglected on the aspects of performance, static and dynamic stability, etc. At the same time, in the preliminary and detailed design phase of aircraft, a more precise and highly efficient analysis method is demanded, as the design cycle of modern aircraft is shorter.

A static aeroelastic analysis method based on surface element and leaded in CFD pressure distribution, which is applied to the early and detailed design stage of aircraft, is recommended in this study. Derived from external nonlinear steady aerodynamic pressure distribution data, correction factor is used to make amendments to aerodynamic influence coefficient matrix and steady aerodynamic pressure distribution of high-order panel method based on three-dimensional surface element. The static aeroelastic response analysis result is accurate and high efficiency because of combining with modal method to make an elastic revision.

Where the functions F, G, ƒ, and g are linear matrix manipulations, which depend on the geometry only. Also, note that µ0, µx, µy, µxx, µxy and µyy are the five basic unknowns for each panel, and µ0,  , µx can be evaluated based on these values . As a result, for each panel, only five unknown doublet parameters are left. At each panel, Neumann boundary condition or Dirichlet boundary condition is imposed to solve for the source and doublet strength. Due to the strength and gradient continuity of the doublet on the panel corner point, the function to describe source and doublet can be attended.3,4 The pressure coefficient, aerodynamic derivatives and so on can be obtained by solving the small disturbance potential equation based on these

The desired aerodynamic loading was calculated at cruise conditions of Mach 0.785 at 112000m. Aerodynamic force at 1°, 2°, 3° and 4° attack angle are separately calculated using high-order panel method and CFD method. Then the CFD results are used to make an amendment to the aerodynamic force in high-order panel method. Combined with modal method, the top-ten order elastic modal are chosen to make a static aeroelastic analysis.

The result data in this study is non-dimensioned on basis of following parameters. They are shearing force (mg), bending moment (mgl), twisting moment (mgc) and wing tip vertical displacement(l). m represents wing mass, g is gravity acceleration, l is reference half-wingspan, c is reference chord.

Above contrast results show that the wing's upper and lower surface aerodynamic force is well revised in this method. The revised aerodynamic pressure and its distribution trend are well matched with that of the origin CFDs'. It is confirmed that this revise method gets good accuracy and validity.

The variation of aerodynamic coefficient vs. angle of attack are calculated using high-order panel method, low-order panel method and CFD, when Ma=0.785, as shown in Figure 5. In the figures, ‘low- order panel method-CFD' denotes the low-order panel method result corrected with CFD data, the same as follows.

The comparison of the above figures conclude that: in rigid case, when aerodynamic force comes from high-order panel method, the aerodynamic force coefficient increases linearly with the angle of attack. Revised by CFD data, the high/low-order panel method aerodynamic force curve turns out to be a little nonlinear  and the curve slope becomes larger. At the same time, it can be seen that the variation trend and numerical value of aerodynamic force coefficient curve are almost resembled between high/low-order panel method revised by CFD data.

high/low-order panel method whose aerodynamic force is revised by CFD data. Due to limited space, only variation of shearing force, bending moment and torsion moment are compared here, as shown in Figure 6. In the force analysis of the wing, the projection of the reference coordinate's origin point on the wing root chord is in the middle of the wing root chord. X axis is rightward along spanwise, y axis is backward and coincide with fuselage axis and z axis is upward. In this article, shearing force, bending moment and torsion moment all indicate the spanwise integral result of wing aerodynamic force in the force analysis coordinate.

From the comparison of shearing force and bending moment distribution along wingspan shown above, it is clear that in rigid case, the difference about aerodynamic force numerical value and variation trend between high-order panel method and high/low-order panel method which is revised by CFD data are all very small. Then after revised in elastic further, the difference is smaller. From the comparison of the curve of torsion moment along wingspan, the difference between high-order panel method and high/low-order panel method which is revised by CFD data in the numerical value and trend in rigid and flexible cases are small. But in torsion moment distribution, the result of high-order panel method is higher than high/low- order panel method revised by CFD data. The main reason is after the CFD data revision, pressure center in chordwise move back from leading edge.

This paper introduces a method that uses CFD data to revise the aerodynamic force of high-order panel method. The result is compared with the high-order panel method which is applied to the initial design stage of a plane and the low-order panel method revised by CFD data which meets the requirement in detailed design stage. The effectiveness of this method is researched by a practical case and the major conclusions can be summarized below.

