The increasing hitches related to environmental issues have forced researchers to look out for safe and efficient methods of power generation, which consequentially calls for the renewable energy sources, out of which wind energy is recognized as the most rapidly growing technically viable and cost-efficient renewable source for power generation. Implementation of renewable energy source needs extensive usage of power electronics based utility interfaces to effectively meet the IEEE 1547 renewable energy power quality standards. In this paper, a digital controller based on modified ‘IcosФ’ algorithm has been developed for achieving an effective custom power device interface, with power sharing between the grid and renewable energy source, along with reactive power compensation and power factor correction on a dynamically varying linear load system.

The concern for the environment has given rise to electricity generation from renewable resources. Today wind energy is one of the most economically competitive renewable energy technologies and several countries around the world have plans to significantly increase the contribution of wind energy to their electricity supply. The wind power generation is increasingly considered as a promising alternative from the aspect of the potential economy and essential environmental advantages. Interconnection of wind electric generators to power system grid could lead to many disturbances, such as: voltage fluctuations, flickers, harmonics, instability, blind power regulation problems and transients reported in various literatures. These challenges regarding the network integration of wind power mainly consists of keeping an acceptable voltage level and power balance of the system. In order to efficiently harness the energy from a wind source suitable interface techniques[3-4] are chosen from various interface possibilities, a very novel invention called ‘Custom Power Device’ is implemented, in which STATCOM is used as an interfacing unit between grid, renewable energy source and load. The scheme proposed here counter-acts the power quality problems.

In this paper, STATCOM interface configuration for renewable energy system is described in section II along with the facets and mathematical proof .The modelling of control algorithm have been focused in section III. Section IV and section V deals the simulation results and discussions of proposed configuration.

The schematic representation of the STATCOM interface for Renewable Energy Source (wind energy system) with its proposed controller circuit shown in Fig.1, which comprises of a three phase source (grid) of 400V, 50Hz, and two linear RL loads of 5.6kW real power and 3kVAr are switched at different time intervals. The STATCOM unit is designed for reactive power compensation and power factor correction as demanded by the load; the STATCOM unit is an inverter with DC link capacitor which gets its control signal in the form of pulses from a controller circuit. The control pulses are generated using modified IcosФ algorithm, which in turn causes the STATCOM to provide the reactive power compensation and power factor

The Icosφ algorithm is able to provide harmonic, reactive and unbalance compensation in a three phase system with balanced/unbalanced source and load conditions. This has been proved and reported in [1]. Here the algorithm aimed to provide reactive power compensation, power factor correction and real power exchange from the renewable energy source.

The sensed load current and source voltage are given as the input to the controller circuit. The load current is given as an input to a second-order low pass filter (which has 50 Hz as its cut-off frequency), this filter is used to extract the fundamental load current which has an inherent phase shift of 90 . ‘Detect negative’ logic is being used to detect the zero crossing instant of the source phase voltage. The corresponding response is given as one of the input to the sample and hold circuit and the other input is derived from the second order low pass filter along with the 90° phase shift. The output of the sample and hold circuit is the required amount of ‘IcosФ’ magnitude. The ‘IcosФ’ magnitude is now multiplied with the unit amplitude of the corresponding source phase voltage to get the desired mains/source current for each phase.

The control over the real power exchange has been introduced by including gain factor ‘k’. The magnitude of the gain is chosen by the user depending upon the load requirements and availability of renewable energy source generation. For instance, when the magnitude of the gain is chosen as ½, the real power supply from the mains is reduced by half and the rest is supplied by renewable energy source (wind energy) using the STATCOM controller circuit as an interface.

Apart from merely being an interfacing unit, another imperative function of a STATCOM is the ability of real power exchange from renewable energy source to load and grid. It has been perceived that when the load requires power that is more than the power supplied by the source, the STATCOM unit takes an active part and supplies the required active and reactive power. Similarly, when the renewable energy output is higher than that of the load power, the STATCOM unit delivers the excessive power back to the grid. But small amount power loss will take place at STATCOM unit at light load conditions .These cases have been proven in the simulation analysis and the results are tabulated in Table 1.

Table.2.its clear that load real power kept at constant value but reactive power various according to power factor. For the low power factor loss in STATCOM is more and less for high load power factor. The reactive power delivered by the STATCOM is higher than the reactive power supplied by the source for all case of power factor.  The proposed Modified IcosФ controller validates the ability of achieving power factor improvement, reactive power compensation along with real power support from the renewable energy source for a dynamic linear load system with STATCOM interface.

