Permanent magnet (PM) machines have become prevalent in very high-speed applications due to its simple structure and high power density. Permanent magnets is the most mechanically vulnerable rotor part, and can not withstand the large centrifugal forces during high-speed rotation. Therefore, the magnet must be contained in a non-magnetic enclosure shrink-fitted onto the PM, which would limit stresses in the magnet and ensure the transfer of torque from the magnet to the shaft at elevated speeds. The strength analysis methods of enclosure for high-speed PM rotor by means of analytical method as well as finite element non-linear contact analysis are introduced. As an example, the strength analysis results for a high speed PM rotor at speed of 60000r/min are presented. The analysis results show that the theoretical calculation value meet the requirements of protecting the permanent magnet in high rotation speed.

The most important task of the rotor design is the reliable operation of the high-speed PM rotor. With the increase of rotor speed, the interference fit between the PM and enclosure will decrease. On the other hand, the interference fit between the PM and enclosure could be changed due to the different temperature expansibility of PM and enclosure. The contact pressure between the PM and enclosure must be large enough over the whole speed range in order to guarantee the PM withstanding compressive stress.

The interference fit between the PM and enclosure has important effect on the reliable operation of the PM rotor. If the interference fit is very low, the enclosure will be loose and the PM will be destroyed because of the enormous tensile strength during the increase of speed and temperature. If the interference fit is very high, then the electromagnetism performance of the high-speed PM machine will be subjected to impact. Fig.2 gives the theoretical calculation process of interference fit.

Fig. 3 shows the interference fit versus stress between enclosure and PM considering temperature and speed. The Von stress in enclosure increase with the increase of the interference fit, while the tangential stress in PM decrease. When the interference fit is more than 0.08mm, the Von stress in enclosure exceeds the permissible tensile strength. When the interference fit is less than 0.02mm, the radial stress in PM exceed the permissible tensile strength. While the interference fit is 0.05mm, the stresses in enclosure and PM are all meet demand and more reasonable.

Fig. 5 shows the static stress and contact pressure in PM and enclosure. The tangential stress in enclosure is 218244 MPa, radial stress is -25.90.065 MPa, Von Mises stress is 194238 MPa which is below half the permissible tensile strength 500MPa. The tangential stress in PM is -144-118 MPa, radial stress is -26

-0.084 MPa, Von Mises stress is 106145 MPa, which is much less than the compressive strength limit 800MPa. The contact pressure between the enclosure and PM is 26MPa. Maximum equivalent stress in the enclosure is at the inner surface and the equivalent stress decrease with the increase of enclosure's thickness.

When temperature heated up, due to the effect of thermal expansion and contraction, the interference fit between the enclosure and PM further decrease, the compressive stress in PM further decrease certainly. Figure 7 shows the stress and contact pressure in PM and enclosure with 150  temperature and 60000rpm speed ,the tangential stress in enclosure is 303347 MPa, radial stress is-160.024 MPa, Von Mises stress decrease to 431469 MPa which is still below the permitted tensile stress. The tangential stress in PM is

The stress analysis of the PM rotor is extremely important to the reliable operation of high speed machines. This paper describes the interference fit and mechanical stress of enclosure as well as permanent magnet in a high speed rotor. Based on thick walled theory, analytical method of mechanical stress and fitting in the rotor is presented. A 2D finite element model based on the finite element non-linear contact is successively introduced to perform the strength analysis for a high speed PM machine with rated speed of 60000r/min. The FEM result is generally in good agreement with analytical result. Three models that represent still rotor and the rotor rotating at the target speed of 60000 rpm at both room and maximum temperature are analyzed, both the PM and the enclosure satisfy an intensity request at their critical stage.

