CNC hydraulic swing-type plate shears is one of the important plate processing equipments, whose safety performance and shearing accuracy are determined by the structure of its frame and tool carrier. The current mechanical property analyses of plate shears mostly only use finite element tools and simply apply uniform load, which can not reflect true work status of the plate shears. By integrating original structures of the frame and tool carrier, two working status' static performances of the plate shears are analyzed with finite element method in this paper, where the uniform load or moving load are separately applied according to its work statue. The analysis results are verified by the later stress-strain tests according to which structural improvements are proposed to provide basis for improving properties of the plate shears.

Swing-type plate shears is a metal processing equipment, which fractures plates into required sizes through relative motion and reasonable clearance between the movable blade and static blade. With the rapid development of China's industry, individualized needs of plate shears grow rapidly. The frame and the tool carrier are the major components of the plate shears, whose strength and stiffness directly determine the safety performance and shearing accuracy.

Based on empirical formulas and parameters, majority of current domestic plate shears are designed by abiding the traditional theory and rules. However, stress concentration and overall force distribution of the machines can not be accurately obtained according to the traditional design methods, which leads to high-end performance requirements unsatisfiable[1]. To solve this problem, plate shears mechanical properties are studied at home and abroad. Stiffness and strength of the frame were obtained by Xiangjun Gu according to the linear analysis and modal analysis with ANSYS[2]. Through analytical processing the model established in ANSYS, Xinhua Yang improved structure and mechanical properties of the machine[3]. By programming information of each step of the moving load in ANSYS, deformation, equivalent stress and equivalent strain of the frame were studied by Yingying Liu[4]. But most of the literatures only theoretical analyzed with uniform load, which didn't analyze their

The frame's underside is full-constrained based on the actual situation. Two reference points, whose degrees of freedom are constrained only to rotate around the X axis in local coordinate system, are established at the centers of left and right plate of tool carrier and coupled with two holes separately. In order to remove rigid displacement of the tool carrier, translation constraint of y, z directions are applied to the contact point between the cylinders and tool carrier in the global coordinate system[7]. The frame bed-body is meshed with tetrahedral element, while the beams and tool carrier are meshed with hexahedral element.

Based on the analysis result, maximum stress of the frame which occurs at the throat fillet is 110.2Mpa as shown in Fig. 2, while the maximum displacement which occurs at the middle of the front vertical plate is 0.5261mm as shown in Fig. 3.

15 points are arranged along the static tool apron and coupled with the underside and front of the static tool apron. Shearing force and shear thrust are respectively applied and divided into 16 load steps. The inheritance between forces are abolished by setting in the load manager to make the forces taking effects in their single steps[8].

When the shearing force and horizontal thrust haven't been applied in step-1, the minimum stress occurring at the throat fillet is 71.71MPa, while the minimum displacement occurring at the top place in the front vertical plate of the frame is 0.1634mm.

It's shown in Fig. 4 that the whole stress change in a slowly upgrade tendency during the shearing position shifting right. The maximum stress which also occurs at the throat fillet achieves 112.2MPa at step-16, relative increased by 1.8% to uniform load condition. Meanwhile the larger stress domain in front vertical plate shifts right. The maximum displacement remains unchanged at 0.5264mm in the middle of front vertical plate. But the deformation domain of the frame horizontal stand shifts right as the load step increasing.

It is shown in fig. 5 that the maximum stress is 57.52MPa, which occurs at the contact position between shear cylinder and wing boards. In addition, bottom of the region where the wing boards being welded with the front plate is a relatively larger stress area.

As it shown in fig. 6 that the maximum displacement is 0.377mm, which occurs at the lower end of the intermediate position of the front plate. The upper end of the intermediate position and the two ribs are also the bigger displacement area.

The stress-strain test on the frame of plate shears is accomplished with DH3816 static strain gauge and 45° rectangular rosette. Fifteen testing points are arranged at the four corners of the cylinder mounting holes on the frame, throat fillet, bearing hole, front vertical plate and lower area of workbench, where larger stresses and displacements occur. Four specifications of shear plates are tested according to four different thicknesses and lengths of sheared plates. The test strain are calculated into stress based on the formulas as follow

Informations can be drawn from the comparison that the results of analysis and test have value gaps around 20% because of taking the environmental influences from test site into account. Such as the shearing force is calculated based on traditional empirical formula, whose value is bigger than actual value and leads to greater shear stress in later finite element analysis. The overall data are within the allowed range except individual testing points. The conclusion can be drawn that the forgoing finite element method[9] is reliable and the calculation results of maximum stress of throat fillet are also accords with the actual working mode.

Based on the existing structure of frame and tool carrier of the hydraulic swing-type plate shears QC12Y-4×2500 and the actual shearing process, uniform load and moving load are applied and analyzed by using load step in the finite element analyses. Through comparing the two status, it is indicated that the moving load arrangement more fully reflect the impact from shearing process on its performance. Experimental data of five testing points of throat fillet are extracted and contrasted with the analysis results which are later verified to be reliable.

