To increase use range of distillers' hops, and to retain the original nutrients and characteristics of distillers' hops, inlet temperature and outlet temperature and sample concentration has been studied of yield and rehydration rate with orthogonal design, quadratic polynomial stepwise regression, and response surfaces. The results showed that optimum conditions of spray drying is when inlet temperature is 162  , outlet temperature is 84  , sample concentration is 3.4g/200ml, feed temperature is 70 ~ 80  , fan power is 95%, fluid flow rate is 0.25L/h. In this condition, product yield is 56.432%, rehydration rate is 183.647%.

China is a beer-producing country, and has been the world's largest producer for many years (Dai and Zhang, 2010). Distillers' hops are one of beer-producing waste, which isolated solids with heat-coagulum and hop-residue in whirlpool tanks (Liu, 2004). Distillers' hops were produced 1.5 ~ 4.0kg / t of raw materials (Zong et al., 2009). Each year more than 20 million tons of distillers' hops were produced. Distillers' hops are rich-nutrition, high water content, so can easily corruption, and were greatly impact treatment and use.

Spray drying is a very important industrial drying means (Liu et al., 2011). It has a very wide range of industrial applications, such as foods, medicines etc (Xiang et al., 2011). Advantages of spray-dried are drying quickly, large drying area, good product quality, less destruction of active ingredients, etc (Wang et al., 2011). In order to protect original nutrients and characteristics of distillers' hops, yields and rehydration characteristics of distillers' hops samples with spray-dried were studied. New way of processing for distillers'

Centrifuge tubes (2.5ml) were dried, weighed, and labeled. 1.000g sample and 2mL water were added in tubes, were vortex (5min, Vortex-Genie 2, Scientific Industries Co., Ltd. USA), then were centrifuge (5000r/min, 10 min). The precipitations were weighed and calculated rehydration rate (Zeng et al., 2007).

The distillers' hops was taken to a laboratorial spray dryer BUCHI, B-290. Feed temperature of 70 ~ 80  , 95% of fan powers, fluid flow rate of 0.25L/h are set according to the results of single factor experiment (data not shown). Inlet temperatures, outlet temperatures, sample concentrations were varied in accordance with the levels defined at the experimental design.

From range analysis results table 2, we can obtain that the orders of every factor affect yield and rehydration rate are Inlet Temperature>Outlet Temperature>Feed Concentration. The optimal conditions of yield and rehydration rate are that inlet temperature are 160  , outlet temperature are 85  , feed concentration are 3.5g/200mL.

Using DPS (Data Processing System), test data were analyzed with quadratic polynomial stepwise regression. The mathematical models were established. The process conditions were optimized. The mathematical models of the relationship between yield and rehydration rate with the various factors are as follows:

Analysis of the two mathematical models showed that the two equations are lack of interaction terms or the coefficient interaction terms are extremely small. It can be seen from analysis of variance for the two regression equation, that the contribution of all interaction terms are very small to the regression model and were to be removed (Liu et al., 2010).

It can be seen from the degree of bending of the surface in Figure 1. When one of the factors was fixed, Yield and Rehydration rate will increase and then reduce with another factor increases. The interactions between factors are not significant. Inlet Temperature has significant performance on Yield and Rehydration rate for the most surface steepest. The impact of Outlet Temperature is followed with Inlet Temperature. Feed Concentration has significant performance on the Yield and Rehydration rate, but slightly lower than the other two factors.

In this experiment, the gaps of optimal conditions for product yields and rehydration rates are not too much. And to facilitate operation, verification conditions were selected Inlet temperature are 162  , Outlet temperature are 84  , and Feed concentration are 3.4g/200mL. The results showed that yields are 56.432% and rehydration rates are 183.647%. Relative errors are 2.36% and 6.04%, respectively.

Yield of the samples and rehydration rate of distillers' hops with spray drying which were affected by inlet temperature, outlet temperature, feed concentration were studied with orthogonal design. Mathematical models were established by quadratic polynomial stepwise regression on the experimental results. The models are reasonable and reliable which were proved, can be used to predict the yield of the samples and rehydration rate. Response surfaces were drawn, and studied factors and their interactions. It was proved that three factors have not significant interactions. Optimum conditions solved for the models are Inlet temperature are 162  , Outlet temperature are 84  , and Feed concentration are 3.4g/200mL. Under these conditions, yield of the samples and rehydration rate in verification tests are 56.432% and 183.647%, respectively.

This research was funded in Fund project of Sichuan provincial Department of Education (11ZB248), Science & technology project of Sichuan University of Science & Engineering (2010XJKRL002). The authors also thank China Resources Snow Breweries (Zigong) Co,. Ltd. for supplying the distillers' hops.

