The centroid change equation, which is about six-track rescue robot with four swinging arms for mine emergency rescue, is solved by center of mass theory the relationship between the centroid and angle of swing arms is derived. The graphs of the robot’s centroid and the chart of the angle of the swing arms are drawn by calculation and Adams simulation, the results are agreement with each other. The rationality of the formula inference and the correctness of secondary development of Adams are verified. Then the plot of centroid changes is drown when rescue robot acrosses three steps, which provides the theoretical basis for the future study for controlling of robot’s posture and the judgment of its stability when it crosses barriers.

Virtual prototype simulation has been used in all walks of life, and Adams is the most widely used simulation software, namely Automatic Dynamic Analysis of Mechanical Systems. The system can simulate the motion of a mechanical structure and output the curves of the motion’s displacement, velocity, acceleration, torque and so on, but it cannot directly output the displacement curves of the center of mass for motion mechanism. Centroid change have a very important meaning in motion mechanism design and research. With the aid of the secondary development in Adams simulation software, the center of mass’s change curve of the motion mechanism is solved.

As shown in Fig.1, the origin of the coordinate system is been established on the robot’s driving wheel axis, the axial center of the driven wheel is O6, and the axial center of the four-arm wheel are respectively O2,O3,O4 and O5. Six-track rescue robot with four swinging arm can be divided into five particle, ie front left arm, front right arm, the main body, rear left swing arm, rear right swing arm, and five centroid is Gi, the quality of the i- th dot is mi, the coordinates is (xi, yi), i = 1,2,3,4,5, and the coordinates of the centroid of the entire robot is G (x, y). The distance between O1 and O6,O1 and G1,O1 and O2,O1 and O3,O6 and G4,O6 and O5 is respectively

Adams has a strong secondary development function. There are two main forms of cycle command: for/End and while/End. For/End command is mainly adopted in this article. Adams conditional loop commands are adopted to redact codes and establish .CMD file through a text editor. The file will be done according to the program flow diagram (Fig.2), and then open the motion mechanism which requires solving the centroid from the Adams simulation software. At last, carrying out the kinematic simulation of virtual prototype, the centroid displacement curve can be plotted in the Adams /Postprocessor.

In the Matlab simulation calculation, each parameter of the rescue robot will be brought into the formula (3) and (4). The robot main body mass is m1=80.12Kg, swing arm mass is 1.97Kg, L=498mm L’=177mm. The curve is draw by using Matlab, and it is shown in (a) and (c) of Fig.3. The dynamics model is established for the six-track rescue robot with four swinging arms according to the requirements of simulation in Adams, then the appropriate software environment and parameters are been set , posture of robot is been adjusted.

The graphs, showing the relationship between the centroid change of rescue robot and the change of swing arm angle of the four swing arms, are been drawn through Adams/Solve. The simulation results are been shown in the (b) and (d) of Fig.3.

Various parameters of the robot are used in the Matlab simulation calculation, the curve of the centroid change compared to that gotten through the use of Adams simulation software, which establish a three- dimensional simulation model. The analysis results are shown in Fig.3. In the two special circumstances of hypothesis, the simulation experiment is consistent with theoretical calculations, so it is verify the rationality of centroid curve formula and the correctness of Adams secondary development, which measure the centroid

Six-track rescue robot with four swinging arms is designed for the environment which is more complex and uncertain. In order to adjust the rescue plan timely, the people who control the robot can track the robot and learn about working condition through the centroid curve of the robot. To take robot climb stairs as an example, it can be seen that the centroid changes over time about points of A  B  C  D  E  F in Fig.4. At the very beginning, the four swing arms of robot are parallel to the ground, A, B are the point that the front swing arms contact with the first and second steps. C is the contact point between the driving wheel and the first step, D is the contact point of the front arm and the third step, E is the contact point of the driving wheel

In this paper, the centroid change of six-track rescue robot with four swinging arms has been analyzed by means of center of mass theory. The relationship between centroid curve and the angle of swing arm are been reasoned analysed. And then, the relationship is verified by the simulation software. At last, the main conclusions are as follows:

