the world, accounting for about 50% of the world's total production. About 700 million pigs are slaughtered each year. Pork production ac- counts for about 64% of all meat production (Yuan and Yuanping, 2016; National Bureau of Statistics of the People's Republic of China website, 2018). According to statistics, the annual output of pigs, cattle, sheep and poultry in 2017 was 84.31 million tons, of which pork pro- duction was 53.4 million tons. Therefore, pork industry is the absolute pillar of China's meat industry (China Government Network, 2018).

Traditional pig body temperature measurement is manual. Lubricat- ing the mercury column before measurement, hold the end of the ther- mometer with a string of about 15 cm, attach a wire clip to the other end of the string. Insert the mercury column into the pig anus when measur- ing, the iron clip clamps the hair above the pig's tail for fixing. Remove the thermometer after 5 min, wipe the mercury column and read the data. It is necessary to appease the pigs of different temperaments be- fore measuring the rectal temperature of the pigs, which can reduce the strong stress of pigs, so as not to affect the healthy growth of pigs (Jiao, 2017).

Dewulf et al. (2003) evaluated the suitability of infrared thermome- try by an experiment, which was set up to assess whether it was possi- ble to predict the rectal temperature based on the body surface temperature of pig. The body surface temperatures of the ears, feet, sides and anus were measured in 12 weaned piglets for 45 consecutive days. These temperatures were compared with daily rectal tempera- tures. The results clearly demonstrate that there was no reliable predic- tion of rectal temperatures from these temperatures, but most of them were significantly correlated with rectal temperatures. Libo et al. (2010) used a mercury column thermometer, an electronic thermome- ter, and an infrared thermometer to measure the temperature of 1000 pigs respectively before slaughter in a slaughterhouse. It was found that the detection rate of the high-temperature pigs was about 93% by comparing the rectal temperature obtained from the mercury column

Infrared technology was used in military surveillance, industrial in- spection, medical diagnosis and other fields firstly. In recent years, it has been applied in the field of agriculture, and has been continuously explored and developed in the fields of crop growth monitoring, agri- cultural product quality inspection, and livestock and poultry disease detection. According to different methods, infrared technology can be divided into based on point temperature analysis and based on field analysis. The point-based analysis system is represented by the infrared thermometer, and there are hand-held and fixed temperature measur- ing devices. The field-based temperature measurement system is repre- sented by infrared camera. The development of infrared camera began in the late 1920s. Infrared imaging technology can break through the obstacles of the night environment and broaden the limitations of human vision. It can provide real-time monitoring of all heat radiating objects. Infrared cameras have been widely used since their inception and continue to evolve. Using infrared camera to get pig body tempera- ture can reduce labor consumption, simple operation process, reduce pig stress, avoid cross-infection of livestock, reduce farming costs, and

McManus et al. (2016) studied the application of infrared thermal imaging technology in animal metabolism, nutrition, inflammation pro- cess, disease, ectoparasite detection and reproduction is described, re- sulted that infrared thermal imaging is innovative, low-cost, fast and effective. It is sensitive to changes in animal heat patterns, but this method may not be sufficient to determine the cause of animal fever. Soerensen et al. (Soerensen and Pedersen, 2015) evaluated the applica- tion of infrared temperature measurement technology in the measure- ment of pig body temperature, explored the relationship between skin,

Xie et al. (2004) used the rat breast adenocarcinoma 13762 MAT (a tumor that has been used for the identification of anti-angiogenic drugs) as a research object, and explored the feasibility of infrared imag- ing technology for detecting angiogenesis of malignant tumors. No tumor surface temperature elevation associated with the tumor was ob- served in the experiment, but some constant and very significant tem- perature reductions were found to be produced by relatively small tumors (N0.5 cm diameter), yielding a conclusion that temperature changes were independent of tumor size. It is speculated that this phe- nomenon may be due to the poor vascularity of rapidly growing tumors. Analysis showed that elevated peripheral temperature of breasts re- ported in breast cancer patients is unlikely to be caused by tumor growth leading to angiogenesis, possibly due to chronic inflammatory reactions around breast tumors, which means infrared imaging may have a considerable prognosis value. Liu et al. (Jinqi, 2016) obtained clinical mastitis, recessive mastitis, and normal lactating cow breast temperature through infrared camera, and found that the differences in breast surface temperature of the three types of lactating cows

Meng et al. (Xiangxue, 2016) measured the epidermal temperature of the buttocks, vulva and eyes of nearly 1000 normal pregnant sows by infrared camera, and analyzed the correlation of skin temperature of the three parts. It was concluded that the vulva of the estrus is higher and the estrus of the sow can be identified, so that the actual production can be guided through the temperature change.

Health assessment of animal is getting more and more attention. Marcia et al. (Salles et al., 2016) tested 24 small cows in 35 days, using infrared cameras to capture infrared images of different areas of the cow, including the left and right eye areas, right and left eyes, left fore- limb tail, left forelimb skull, left and right flank and forehead. In all the body regions studied, the thermal imaging forehead temperature has the highest correlation with the rectal temperature. The forehead and left and right flanking temperatures are related to the ambient temper- ature and humidity closely, which could be used to studied the body temperature regulation and body heat generation in the future. LokeshBabu et al. (2018) used the thermal imaging camera to measure the collateral-related cervical injury crown band and hoof skin temper- ature from the perspective of animal welfare and economic loss. It was found that when the hoof has a lesion, the surface temperature of the squat leg will increase, and an early thermal detection of the lesion can be performed using an infrared camera. Siewert et al. (2014) mea- sured the temperature of the pig's head by a thermal imaging camera and detected the early fever of the pig by differential ROI (region of

With the continuous exploration of the application of infrared tech- nology in the livestock and poultry breeding industry, the infrared image processing technology based on livestock and poultry breeding industry is also exploring and developing constantly. The image pro- cessing method based on active shape model proposed by Cootes et al. (Cootes, 2000) which is a method for searching for an object of a specific type in an image. Wirthgen et al. (2011) applied this method to infrared image processing for the first time, expounded the comprehensive ap- plicability of thermal infrared image to this method, and proposed an improved algorithm. Through the image processing, landmark display, shape creation and initialization, 2 million infrared images of cows is handled successfully, which revealed that the direction of further re- search is to process and analyze the infrared images of moving animal targets. Liu et al. (Bo et al., 2013; Bo, 2014) used the infrared camera and visible light camera to obtain the target pig image at the same time, and proposed an image registration algorithm based on ray con- tour feature points for multi-source images. Using the characteristics

of the infrared image to get a clear outline of the pig's foreground firstly, the problem is transformed from image registration to parameter matching of the feature point set. 50 infrared and visible images had been matched automatically with a registration rate of 94% and the av- erage registration error is b1 pixel, which is better than manual registra- tion. Based on this, a fusion method of visible image and infrared image of pigs based on non-subsampled contour wave is proposed. Through the fusion application of infrared image and visible image, more surface and behavior data of pig are obtained, the body surface temperature of pig ear root could be get in time, flow chart of pig ear root area

Lu et al. (2018) evaluated the health status of piglets using an infra- red camera. An automatic extraction of the ear-based temperature algo- rithm based on the top view is proposed. Firstly, the head of the piglet was identified by the training classifier, and then the two ear base points were located based on the feature points of the head contour, and the highest temperature in the circle centered on the ear base point was

Many infrared image processing technologies used in other fields have begun to explore the applicability in the pig industry, which fur- ther promotes the development of infrared temperature measurement. However, infrared image processing technology generally has problems such as large imaging noise, low image contrast, and narrow gray scale. Infrared imaging is easily affected by non-uniformity and invalid pixels, resulting in low actual resolution. These image processing challenges will still hinder the development of infrared temperature measurement technology in the pig breeding industry in the future. The enhancement of key technologies for infrared image processing will further promote the application of infrared camera temperature measurement in the pig industry. The exploration of the applicability of infrared image pro- cessing technology in other fields in the pig breeding industry will fur- ther promote the achievement and product development of infrared temperature measurement technology.

Today, with the continuous development of Internet of Things agri- culture, the pig breeding industry is also changing in the direction of informationization and automation. The non-contact, real-time and long-distance characteristics of infrared temperature measurement technology represented by infrared camera conform to the concept of IoT agriculture. In the process of development, we continuously ex- plored the combination with other information management technolo- gies and emerging farming technologies, laying a foundation for building a more efficient farming model and breeding process, and its future development prospects are very bright.

