Granular computing theories in the field of computer are introduced into the statistical analysis of qualitative data, based on the traditional qualitative data analysis methods. Multidimensional qualitative data by use of information system are described, and the mathematical model of qualitative data cluster model based on granular computing is given. The feasibility and the superiority are verified by treating massive data. This method may provide a new train of thought for analysis of large and complex qualitative data.

There is high consistency between description for data in information system (Liu, 2001) and description for qualitative data in nature, while the former is more suitable for large data description. First, qualitative data are represented by information system. Then meaningful variable subsets are determined by using of the concept of granularity and solving the granularity matrix progressively (He, 2005, and Yao, 2000). The purpose of classification for massive qualitative data is realized finally.

From the perspective of the information theory, the information content can be used to measure the size of granular, the relationship between granolas represent the degree of dependence similarity or contain (Luo, 2007). Task of cluster analysis is to find the optimal subset and then realize the cluster of observation object. According to this idea, change of importance degree of cluster variable subset can be used to judge the end of cluster process. The mathematical model of qualitative data cluster model is given based on granular computing, the purpose of classification for massive qualitative data is realized, and the feasibility and the superiority are verified by treating massive data (Pu, 2002).

Second,  defines the minimum value of the importance degree of cluster variable subset, the maximum value is 1, considering setting the critical value  according to the percentage of importance degree, for instance, importance degree of 5% is 0.05, importance degree of 1% is 0.01, similar to the significance level setting,  can be set by different level.

Cluster variable subset B1  {a2 , a4} , variable a2 represents detergent product if it had used trademark M , variable a4 represents liked trademark. As can be seen that variable subset represents spending habits of the informants. Therefore informants can be classified according to spending habits: 1) informants who had used detergent products of trademark M , liked trademark is X ; 2) informants who had not used detergent products of trademark M , liked trademark is X ; 3) informants which had used detergent products of trademark M , liked trademark is M ; and 4) informants who had not used detergent products of trademark M , liked trademark is M . Facts also indicate consumers pay much more attention to brands than softness and temperature of water, such classification fits the reality.

Qualitative data are described by using information system, a mathematical model of qualitative data cluster is given based on granular computing, and a new method of determine best cluster variable subset upon the basis of analyzing variable subset is proposed. This cluster method not only fits cluster which has one important classification structure data, but also fits cluster which has multiple important classification structure data. Examples show that this model is highly effective in the face of massive data, and provides a new idea for analysis of huge and complex qualitative data.

