The paper realizes dual encrytions of images by using Logistic and Lorenz chaotic systems to change the the locations and the sizes of Pixel values. The dual encrytions hide the encripted information in the carriers and prevent it from being noticed, improving the safety of the information transferred. The process of decryption is the reverse process of encription, which withdraws the information and undergoes anti-scrambling with secret keys to restore the images identical to original ones. The peak signaltonoise ratio between the restored pictures and the original ones is 21.78. The experiments prove that this method preserves the good ramdon of chaotic order. In addtion, it makes decipher really difficult and therefore improves the safety of the encrypted pictures.

encryption of pictures differs from encryptions of words mainly because of the large number of data, high redundance and Pixel values relations. Chaos is a movement controlled by nonlinear dynamic system. Its regularity, ergodicity and intrinsic stochastic properties of chaotic motion and unpredictablity makes its popular in encrypting pictures. Encryption transfers and hides the information before transferring in order to improve safety during the process. The receivers can use encryption key to restore encrypted information. Information hiding technology uses the insensitivity of human beings and redundancy in multi-media digital signals to hide secret information so that it can be safely transferred.

In which a,b,c are system parameters,the typical value are a=10,b=28,c=8/3,while a,c remain unchanged,when b>24.74 ,Lorenz system enters chaotic state. Numerical Integration can be used to solve the differential equations. The four-step Runge-Kutta is used to get the solution and the step size is 0.01. As a result, a numerical sequence is achieved at good ramdon. Lorenz system is a three-dimentional chaotic system, so the numerical sequence achieved is a three-dimentional real value array. The different ways of three chaotic encryption process undergoing single variable and multivariable make the designs of encryption sequences multiple.

Find out the numbers which do not appear in arithmetic progression S from replaced sequence T and put them in set ret. Then find out the numbers that appears reaptedly in replaced sequence and their locations. Locate the pixel values of the numbers in sequence ret in the places where the repeated numbers appear. Place

R1, R2 , R3 with the length of M ×N according to formula (3). First delete integer in the chaotic sequeces and take their absolute values, and then binaryzate them with threshold value 0.2 and get sequences R' , R' , R' .

Though there are slight differences in color, no mosaic effects appear and the visual effect is much better. Because the size of the segments are the same in encription picture and carrier picture, the arithmetic is much simplier than the privious one in the realization process. In addition, the time is shorter in the simulation process with the former arithmetic 15.307s and the latter only 4.1099 s.

The process of extacting hidden information in encription picture is the reverse operation of encripting information.Through the encription key, conversion code encripting data can be easily gotten and encription picture can be restored through anti-scrambling data. Fig. 5 shows the restored picture.

Arithmetic effect measurement based on pixel is a quantitativen measurement which allows fair comparism among different arithmetics. Many distortion measures or quality measures dealing with visual information belong to difference distortion measures. Now the measure index in picture visual coding compression are Signal to Noise Ratio (SNR) or Peak Signal to Noise Ratio (PSNR) with dB as their unit. The SNR of the picture reflects the changes before and after the picture data are processed. It shows the statistical average of the change of the picture data. The higher the SNR is , the better the effect will be.The definition of PSNR is as follows

For the carrier picture, the SNR is 56.36 before and after hidding the picture information and the effect is good. The SNR of the original and the restored picture is 21.78 and the differeces mainly appear in the places where there are obvious color changes and thick complex textures.

