Agriculture is a complex system science and the knowledge of it is consisting of much concepts and relationships. In order to find out the important domain knowledge from complex agriculture knowledge system, we need to concept modelling effectively, so as to better supporting distributed information retrieval, analogy inference and data mining based on knowledge system. As a kind of classical knowledge theory of the ontology, it can be used to solve the knowledge presentation problem.

There have been many researches on agricultural ontology field at domestic and overseas.The organization FAO started an agricultural ontology service plan in the year 2001[3], and the original ontology consisted of three parts that the safety food, the fishery and nutrition. A bio-security ontology model was proposed by Lauser [5], and at the first, the core ontology was constructed, then according to the heuristic method, the core ontology was extended. A research of Kokla and Kavouras is about geographic information ontology, which emphasized on heterogeneous geographic data heterogeneity’s building in the aspects of classification and integration [4] made research. The first Ministry of Agriculture Ontology research monographs, Study and Application of Agricultural Ontology [6], introduced the researches and applications of agricultural ontology from three points: system of basic theory, technical methods and practical application respectively. National Academy of Agricultural Information Institute has done some prospective studies on Agricultural Ontology, and published many papers.

Ontology is a concept of philosophy in the first time, and then with the development of computer, ontology has been widely applied to the semantic web, intelligent information processing, information integration, etc. Gruber [7] thought ontology is equal with the sharing concept. Sharing concepts include domain knowledge modeling to the conceptual framework, the related agreements of interoperability need the interaction between the subjects and contents, and the theory is used to represent specific areas of common agreement. Studer [8] and other scholars thought that the ontology has four characteristics: explicit, formal, shared, and conceptualization.

Define agricultural ontology as "the science of agricultural have a set of identity, the concept of system clear and formal specification". Agricultural ontology mainly by the agricultural knowledge of the concept, the relationship between the concept and the computer can identify the formalization description language composition. Building agricultural ontology goal is to form for agricultural information organization structure of the common understanding, understanding and analysis of the agricultural domain knowledge, in order to further the establishment agriculture semantic network laid the foundation. Therefore, agricultural ontology is about computer language of agriculture concept of knowledge representation, carrying on the agricultural knowledge organization, developing agriculture knowledge service of scientific methodology. Define the agricultural Ontology as follows [9]:

In order to model the agricultural system based on the ontology, we need to classify the agricultural knowledge according to certain criteria. In this paper we divide the agricultural knowledge into three parts: the subject of labor, the means of labor and the agricultural production process, as shown in figure 1.Among them, the subject of labor is the center of the agricultural ontology system, it’s a kind of static knowledge and entrenched generally. The means of labor, it means that the material and the material conditions which can influence the subject of labor in the agricultural production process. The agricultural production process can be regarded as production cycle combination of the subject of labor in different stages.

Attribute of AO is used to describe the concept of agriculture ontology; it has a function of limiting concept and examples. Attribute of AO can be summarized from different knowledge as follows: first of all, the crop belong to plant, it inherits related properties of plant, such as genetic property class, shape and structure property class, distribution property class and so on; besides, the crop have their own property class, for example, the growth environment property class including weather and other growing conditions. Each properties class including several properties, so they can form a full property description of the crop in a sense. In order to manage ontology expediently and reflect the hierarchy relationship among the properties, we describe the property and relationship as an ontology system and called it the crop property ontology. The

After building the agriculture ontology and the agriculture knowledge-base, there is a very important work we need to do, that is checking and reasoning on the knowledge. But it will be fantastic based on the existing ontology. So we should construct a consistency of axiom base.

The axiom of the agriculture ontology is tautologies in logic which do not need to be proved. There are many axioms in the agriculture ontology; some of them can be composite a set to explain the specific class, relationship, connection and restriction among attributes in the agriculture science. Some of the axioms will be used to check and reason on the ontology knowledge. We list following axioms in table 2.

If the knowledge representation for agricultural production wants to achieve the service of the integration knowledge level, with no ambiguous existing and same information in the same field and the diffidence application system, the help of ontology is necessary. The organization Agriculture Ontology (AO) manages the system resources and makes foundation for information exchanging. [10] As the knowledge resources of agricultural classification and description of the conceptual system, AO is defined as the five elements of ontology approach{c, ac, r, ar, h}, and c stands for a set of concept; ac stands for a set of each attributes of concept; r stands for relationship set; ar stands for a set of each attributes of relationship; h stands for Concept hierarchy. Take tomato pest control ontology for example:

This paper puts forward a kind of agriculture domain knowledge ontology representation method. Agricultural ontology is a include agriculture terms, definitions and regulate the relationship between terms system, is the agricultural field concept, the concept and the concept of the relationship between formal representation of each other. Through the crop planting information that expression and integration unity, transform the natural language description or unstructured information into formal, structured knowledge records. And use that knowledge to support agricultural problem solving and decision support effectively. United ontology evaluation standards’ building and extracting the universal ontology knowledge are significant. By studying methods with the adjusting ability, it can increase It is can increased the adaptive learning efficiency.

