The study investigated the improvement of slowly digestible starch fraction of cardaba banana via octenyl succinic anhydride (OSA) modification process. A nonlinear (Response surface methodology [RSM] and artificial neural network [ANN]) and linear (partial least square [PLS]) models were employed and their predictability was compared. The result revealed that all the modelling techniques were accurate in predicting the experimental process. The optimized RSM values for the production of slowly digestible starch (SDS) fraction were OSA con- centration of 4%, reaction time of 47.49 min, and pH of 10 with a predicted SDS value of 44.64%. Among the modelling techniques, ANN was adjudged as the predictive model for improving the SDS yield. The regression co- efficient coupled with the variable important in the projection (VIP) values of the PLS model indicated that the OSA concentration was the most important factors responsible for high SDS yield. Finally, a structural comparison of the optimized starch against native starch revealed the formation of high ordered crystalline structure of the starch due to the impregnation of the modifying agent to the hydroxyl group of the cardaba banana starch.

Green bananas are common herbaceous plant which belongs to the genus Musa (Arvanitoyannis et al., 2008). It originated from Southeast Asian, however, many species had been traded many decades ago which had led to the cultivation of bananas in more than 100 countries worldwide(Arvanitoyannis et al., 2008). Among the species of banana cultivated in Africa especially South-Western Nigeria is the Cardaba ba- nana (Musa ABB).

Cardaba bananas (Musa ABB) are majorly utilized in food product development such as fried chips. They are a group of under-utilized ba- nanas which are easily prone to post-harvest spoilage. Their propensity to spoilage is due to their moisture content which is relatively high as well as it metabolic and physiological features (Olawoye and Gbadamosi, 2020a). A report of Ravi and Mustaffa (2013) depicts that cardaba banana contains a high pulp starch content of 83.26%, in which the amylose content is 35.18% while the amylopectin content is 48.08%.. This high starch content makes cardaba banana an important raw material in starch production.

Resistant starch belongs to the starch fraction that resist digestion in the small intestine but undergo fermentation by the colon microorgan- ism to produce short-chain fatty acid (SCFA). This SCFA provides the body with additional energy as well as a high concentration of butyrate; a beneficial chemical that helps to reduce cancer of the colon. Food high in SDS and RS is associated with low glycemic index and hence, the de- mand for the designing of starch food with low glycemic had increased in recent times. However, starch in their native state contains a high fraction of rapidly digestible starch which in turn resulted in high glu- cose response and hence, the need to modify the native starch to over- come this challenge. Generally, starch modified using physical,

Response surface methodology (RSM), a statistical and mathemati- cal modelling method used for experimental design, building of model, evaluating the inter-correlation between experimental factors and to determine the optimum processing condition for maximization or minimization of experimental response. It is basically an optimization tools used after which the insignificant independent variables had been screened out. RSM a found many applications in food processing opera- tion such as bioactive compound isolation (Olawoye and Kadiri, 2016), starch isolation (Qi et al., 2018), production of high resistant starch (Mutlu et al., 2017), and starch crystallinity (Purohit and Rao, 2017) for- mation of cross-linked starch.

Partial least square regression analysis (PLS) unlike RSM is a non- linear supervised classification, statistical and mathematical modelling methods used to develop and established the relationship between two experimental data sets. Although, PLS had found little application is food, however, Chen et al. (2012b) and Maulidiani et al. (2013) used it in comparison with artificial neural network and support vector regression to model the antioxidant activity in green tea and Pegaga ex- tract, respectively.

The ANN Modelling and optimization was carried out accroding to the methods of Olawoye et al. (2020). To predict the output variable (SDS), two transfer functions were used which were multilayer full feedforward (MFFF) and multilayer normal feedforward (MNFF), while different learning algorithms such as incremental backpropagation (IBP), quickprob (QP), genetic algorithm (GA), batch backpropagation (BBP), and Levenberg-Marquardt algorithm (LM) were used to train the ANN data sets. The ANN architecture consisted of input, output and hidden layer. The transfer function of output and hidden layer was iteratively determined through the expansion of sev- eral networks. Optimal network topology was likewise determined. A default stopping criterion of 100,000 iterations was set on the ANN dur- ing training.

Partial least square regression modelling of the experimental data was performed using Simca (v. 14.1, Umetrics, Umea, Sweden). The BBD experimental data (17 observations) were used for the PLS model- ling in which the OSA concentration, reaction time and pH were used as the input variables (X), The SDS of the starch was used as the output variable (Y). The BBD experimental data sets were split randomly into two groups in which 11 observations were used for training data sets while 6 observations were used as testing data sets. Models were devel- oped using the training data sets to find the optimal parameters while the validation of the model was done using the testing data sets. The ac- curacy of the experimental model was done using the R2 and Q2. The co- efficient of determinant (R2) indicates the goodness of fit of the experimental model while the goodness of prediction of the experimen- tal model for the Y-variable as well as the significance of the PLS compo- nents is depicted by Q2. The validity and degree of fit of the PLS model were determined using a permutation test. The variable importance in

According to Olawoye et al. (2017), a model is said to be accurate in predicting the experimental data sets if the R2 is higher than 0.8 and the RMSE is as low as possible. The high R2 (0.999) coupled with low RMSE (0.1263) of the PLS model indicates the goodness of fit of the model, the

