Game theory is used to solve engineering problems, according to behavioral expressions, derived a number of algorithms from simulation of human behavior. The paper, adopts competition-cooperation game method to optimize passive suspension. The calculation results show that the competition-cooperation game method could be used to solve muti- objective optimization problems. During the game, all game partiers abide by some constraint protocol based on collective rationality; by negotiating, game partiers make some “concession” mutually, and reach trade-off equilibrium solution. Maybe the results is not the best optimal results to the game party, it is a relatively acceptable solution, which means the co-operative game result for multi-objective is a non-inferior solution.

Also multi-objective optimization has been put up for many years, the application of multi-objective optimization to solve engineering problems never decay. The most important thing in solving multi-objective optimization engineering problems is find the Pareto-optimal solutions. On many occasions, there are no Pareto- optimal solutions [1-3]. So it is imminent to find a good way to solve multi-objective optimization problems. In recent decades, there appeared many algorithms, such as ant colony, genetic, particle swarm, artificial fish- swarm, and the corresponding improved algorithms etc.

The goal of multi-objective optimization is to find the optimize value. While the game theory, is to find each game party's own maximum profit. They have the same similarity: finding the Pareto solution. Game theory is used to solve multi-objective optimization problems, especially in engineering fields. Based on the game party's behavior, game theory can be divided into cooperative, selfish and non-cooperative game.

Cooperative game is all the game partiers follow the same conventions, each game party cooperative with the others for pursuing own maximum profit, maybe the profit is not Pareto solution; Relative to the entire game, the Pareto solution is in its own interests. Compared with cooperative game, non-cooperative game means that all game partiers competitive with each other for the pursuing own maximum profit; During the game, each game party wants its own maximum profit, the result got comes the other game party's lost. The author [4-5] set up a multi-objective solution based on game theory, as well as gave the description of how to transform multi-objective problem to game theory and the calculation of each game party's strategy space. With the adoption of Nash equilibrium model, Stackelberg model, the design results show the multi-objective game method is an effective method. Combined the cooperative and competitive game theory, the paper used competition-cooperation model to optimize a suspension vehicle model, and find a new way to solve multi- object engineering problem.

The paper adopts cooperative game. During the game, game partiers abide by some constraint protocol based on collective rationality; by negotiating, game partiers make some “concession” mutually, and reach trade-off equilibrium solution. Maybe the results is not the best optimal results to the game partiers, it is a relatively acceptable solution, which means the co-operative game result for multi-objective is a non-inferior solution.

