The continuation education is very important for people who have left school to work to increase their competence and skills. To avoid the disadvantages of the common test paper generating methods, genetic algorithm is used to generate the test paper automatically. The concrete design process of test paper generating based on genetic algorithm is discussed in this paper, and some corresponding parameters setting have been compared and defined. The application results demonstrated that the genetic algorithm was an effective tool in the test paper generating.

The test paper generating system is an expert system to generate the test paper automatically according to such specified parameters as the number and the type of the exam questions, the degree of difficulty, the scope of knowledge, etc. Most of the traditional test paper generating algorithms are easy to lead to local optimal solution and slow convergence. In this paper, we present an efficient intelligent paper generating method based on the genetic algorithm according to the mathematical model and better effects have been obtained.

Genetic Algorithm (GA) is a kind of stochastic search process that is capable of adaptive and robust searching over a wide range of searching space, which first appeared in the Ph.D. thesis of Bagay in 1967. In 1975, genetic algorithm was first introduced by Prof. Holland for use and admitted formally. A typical genetic algorithm in its simple form works with a set of N data structures called individuals, each representing a separate solution to the specific problem [1-2].

To solve a problem with genetic algorithm, the solutions space of the problem should first be mapped to be a set of codes. The binary code is used in the classical genetic algorithm, which “1” means a question item is selected, and “0” means a question item is not selected. This is an easy coding method, but the question number can not be controlled exactly and the coding is very long when the test base is very large. If the real number coding is utilized, the optimization efficiency will be increased effectively.

In the design of the test paper generating system based on genetic algorithm, an independent coding strategy is used, which is fitted to the practical condition of generating test paper. By means of selecting such parameters as the variation operator, the adaption crossing, and the weighted adaption function properly, there are no needs to control the problems’ type, the problems’ number, or the problems’ mark, and the efficiency has been increased to a great extent. On the basis of the effects obtained from practical application, it was demonstrated that the genetic algorithm is a powerful tool for parameter optimization, which can be successfully applied in many fields.

