The gas-liquid two-phase flow phenomenon exists in nature and modern industrial processes widespread, and that is closely related to the human being’s life and production. The flow pattern, which is the distribution of the phase interface in the two flow media, has a great influence with the flow characteristics and the heat and mass transfer characteristics; meanwhile, it also affects the precious measurement about the flow parameters and the operating characteristics of two- phase flow system. As a result, the study of the flow pattern of the gas-liquid two-phase flow has an important practical value and academic significance; it has been therefore an important topic of the research field in gas-liquid two-phase. There are many parameters to reflect the flow pattern changes, such as void fraction, temperature signals, pressure, differential pressure, conductivity and so on. In the references [1-9] all the differential pressure signal parallel to the horizontal flow direction has been analyzed, which has been used widely in the identification of the flow pattern. However, those have been researched under the typical flow pattern in the laboratory, few for the flow pattern transition. In 2008, Li De Fang et al., [10] have proposed one method to identificate the transition by combining characteristic of PSD and relative statistical variance. In the paper, the object to be analyzed is also the gravity differential pressure fluctuation signal perpendicular to the flow direction in horizontal pipe. Because the pressure direction is perpendicular to the flow direction,

the resistance has no effects on the signal and the gravity differential pressure has a directly relation with the phase holdup. Therefore, the method for the pattern transition has a universal applicability. The characteristic parameters of the gravity differential pressure signal, which is based on the wavelet analysis, can reflect the related information from the stratified flow to annular flow, and combined with interphases force to analyze the motivation of flow pattern transition. The work will provide a new method to reveal the gas-liquid two-phase flow motivation management.

Experiments have been carried out in the gas-liquid two-phase flow experimental equipment in the low-pressure adjustment of the Tianjin University. Fig. 1(a) shows the connection of the experimental equipment. In the experiment, water and air were the working objects, and air come into the mixer through air compressor and turbine and water come into the mixer from the pumped and the electromagnetic flow meter. The gas-water mixture from the gas-liquid two-phase mixer flow into the separator after the measurement in the measuring tube, and then gas into the atmosphere and water into the tank so that they were used for recycling. The inner diameter of the test pipe was 50mm. The new split-type high-frequency differential pressure transmitter was used to measure the differential pressure signal which is vertical to the horizontal flow at the entrance. The method will avoid the measurement accuracy caused by the pressure guiding pipe connecting the high- pressure and the low-pressure with the pressure tap directly. What’s more, the distance between the two pressure taps was 50mm and the measured pressure signals were collected and recorded by the NI data acquisition system. The data acquisition frequency was 1000Hz.

It take advantage of the haar wavelet to decompose the differential pressure fluctuation signal of six layers, so there are seven scales—a6,d6,d5,d4,d3,d2,d1, and after the binary discrete wavelet transform, their frequency ranges are 250~500Hz 125~250Hz 62.5~125Hz 31.25~62.5Hz 15.55~31.25Hz 7.775~15.55Hz 3.8875~7.775Hz. Then the

The gravity differential pressure fluctuation signal perpendicular to the horizontal flow is not only related to the phase holdup, but also can reflect the interphases force. By extracting the characteristic quantities, it is proved that the wavelet energy is sensitive to the transition from the laminar flow to the annular flow; besides, by the analysis of the variation the characteristic parameters change with the flow parameters, combining with interphases force to analyze the motivation of flow pattern transition. It is simple, convenient, safe and accurate to obtain the gravity differential pressure fluctuation signal whose characteristics change significantly as the flow pattern changes. This is a new method for the identification of gas-liquid two-phase flow pattern.

