Oxygen-enriched pyrolysis for the treatment of municipal solid waste (MSW) was proposed in this paper. Its advantages with respect to air pyrolysis, such as high efficiency, lower heat loss and emissions, have been described based on mechanism analysis and thermodynamic calculations. Effects of oxygen concentration, equivalence ratio (ER) on gas products and their heat values were investigated by theoretical calculation. It was found that with the increase of oxygen concentration the gas yield and heat values decrease, with the increase of ER, the content of CO and CH4 decrease, while the content of H2 varied from increase into decrease with ER=0.27 as the turning point. When ER exceeded 0.30, the pyrolysis controlled reaction became into the combustion controlled reaction. The most suitable ER for oxygen-enriched pyrolysis ranges from 0.20 to 0.30 and water content of MSW should be controlled in the range from 15% to 25%.

Therefore, choice of ER was very important in oxygen-enriched pyrolysis process. ER could control the components and heat values of gas products. In addition gas product quality could be improved owing to the increase of oxygen concentration within a certain ER range.

Solid wastes include general solid waste and hazardous solid waste. Municipal solid waste (MSW) included in general solid waste means the solid waste, semi-solid or liquid waste produced by activities of living in the city or services for urban households. Ways of dealing with MSW are roughly divided into solid waste landfill, part recovery, part fermentation and heat disposal. Due to many advantages of MSW heat disposal, such as high efficiency, large volume reduction rate, part of the energy available and without taking up a lot of land resources, particularly increasing the calorific value, many developed countries have used heat treatment to dispose MSW. [1-4] Heat disposal technology is divided into thermal incineration and pyrolysis, the former technology is more mature, and the latter is a new technology developed in recent years.

Many issues, such as high inert gases content, the low heat value, large amount of smoke and so on, still exists in simple pyrolysis or combustion. The simple oxygen-enriched combustion technology can not fundamentally solve these issues, solid phase (non-homogeneous) combustion control and production of secondary pollution. In order to solve the above problems, oxygen-enriched pyrolysis technology for the treatment of MSW was proposed. The mechanism of MSW oxygen-enriched pyrolysis was explored, and the associated systematic study was carried out, which could provide the theoretical basis for the conversion of

In order to make the theoretical calculation have universality and industrial applicability, the parameters of MSW are obtained from Wuhu Nanling County Urban Waste Recycle Bin. The chosen MSW (p= 520 kg/m3) was a mixture of irregular shaped substances, whose main components were plastic, paper, cloth, vegetation, white plastic, food waste, etc. after screening. Elemental analysis was shown in Table 1, where ash component has not been included in the dry combustible components elemental analysis and the sum of its components in the table was the difference between 1 and the ash content.

Organic components of MSW are distilled in the dry distillation layer generating CnHm gases in which CH4 is the main component. Water-gas reaction and reduction reaction of CO2 coming from the oxide layer mainly occurs at the carbon materials layer in reduced layer The oxidation reaction of waste carbon and oxygen occurs in the oxide layer. Therefore, the produced gases are mainly composed by CO, H2, CnHm and so on [18]. In dry region MSW is dried and dehydrated by the high-temperature walls of the pyrolysis device and high- temperature gas produced in other reaction regions, which makes preparation for further crack of

In pyrolysis process, chemical bonds of organic compounds in MSW rupture into small molecules and solid residues. At high temperature polymers can accelerate the motion of polymer molecules and their chemical bonds can be broken producing free radicals. These highly unstable free radicals can react with the surrounding various types of molecules or radicals to form more free radicals, causing the polymer degradation and crosslinking. The chemical bonds with a low binding energy can be easily broken when

The calculation of theoretical temperature for MSW oxygen-enriched pyrolysis was obtained by adding enthalpy of the combustible products of gasification process and checking drawn against. And the actual furnace temperature will be lower than the theoretically calculated temperature. When using air as oxidant, excess cold air coming into the furnace and nitrogen contained in the air with the content of 79% make the furnace temperature reduced, increase the heat loss, while produce excessive smoke emission. And there are still inert N2 and incompletely reacted O2 retaining in the produced gases.

However oxygen-enriched pyrolysis technology uses enriched oxygen gas (less inert components) as oxidant. Accordingly, the reactions could react adequately accompanied by small smoke emission. The resulting gasification products include a small amount of N2 and oxygen-enriched pyrolysis technology exhibits less heat loss relative to the air pyrolysis. The heat input of the reactor is generally composed by three parts: low calorific value of fuels, caloric from external heat source to heat the oxidants and caloric from the steam injected into the furnace. The calculation of the three compositions is shown as below:

It can be seen from Eq. (11) that enthalpy of pyrolysis products contains enthalpy of the inert N2 which causes heat loss only without any reactivity. Therefore, attributed to the input of enriched oxygen gas (less inert N2), the heat loss of oxygen-enriched pyrolysis caused by inert N2 is much smaller than that of air gasification conducing to excellent energy-saving.

Equilibrium constant method and Gibbs minimum free energy method are usually used to evaluate the complex chemical equilibriums in thermodynamics. Herein we use the Gibbs minimum free energy method, namely use the system's Gibbs minimum free energy under the isothermal isobaric conditions as an equilibrium criterion. When conducting oxygen-enriched pyrolysis, oxygen-enriched air and MSW are fed into the experimental device under a certain condition (certain temperature and pressure) for complex chemical reactions. The device is considered to be a closed ideal reaction system. When the system reaches chemical equilibrium, the Gibbs free energy of entire system reaches minimum [20, 21] which can be calculated according to the formula shown as below:

The parameters of various substances in the calculation are determined in the light of thermodynamic data reference manual. [22, 23] And chemical reactions participated in the pyrolysis process are calculated according to Eq. (1) - (6). The temperature and pressure of the system are set as constant. The pressure is set at 1.013×105 Pa ascribed to that the actual equipment is working under atmospheric pressure. The reaction temperature can be calculated in accordance with the first law of thermodynamics [24]:

confirmed that the reaction temperature maintains the uniform value. Because other substances only suffer the enthalpy changes at different final temperatures, besides the MSW combustion heat release effects. The reaction temperature can be calculated by the MSW release heat through calculating its low calorific value. Herein, the effects of the equivalence ratio (ER, the ratio of input oxygen to the oxygen required for complete combustion of the substances) and oxygen concentration on the composition of gas products were investigated. Oxygen concentrations were 20%, 40%, 60%, 80% and 100%, and ERs were selected in the range from 0.20 to 0.40, respectively. The results are shown in Figure 1 and 2.

concentration. It could be observed that the heat value of the gas product has a rapid increase with the increased oxygen level, which is the result of the interaction between the increase of combustible gases and decrease of nitrogen content. The heat value of gasification products decreases with the increase of ER, especially when ER is greater than 0.30 the heat value gas product declines rapidly. This is attributed to that the increase of CO2 content and the decrease of CO and CH4 contents as a result of the increase of ER. When ER transcends the transition point (ER=0.25), H2 content begins to decline, leading to rapid decline in heat value.

To sum up the above theoretical calculations and analysis, the value of ER between 0.20 and 0.30 is propitious to pyrolysis and the composition of gas product can be controlled directionally through control ER. Increase of oxygen content is conducive to the improvement of heat value, but oxygen cost and energy consumption is also increasing with the increase of oxygen concentration, therefore, a balance should be required in the practical application process.

Through the theoretical analysis and calculation of the MSW pyrolysis, it could be found that increase of the amount of oxygen enriched is available to a substantial increase of gas production and gas heating value. With the increase of ER, the contents of CO and CH4 decreased, while the content of H2 changed from the increase into reduction with ER= 0.27 as the apparent transition point. When ER is greater than 0.30, the reaction controlled by the pyrolysis changed into combustion controlling. So ER ranging from 0.20 to 0.30 is the most suitable to oxygen-enriched pyrolysis and the water content during oxygen-enriched MSW pyrolysis should be controlled at 15% to 25%.

In short, the choice of ER is crucial in the MSW pyrolysis process. It can not only control the heat value of gas products, but also directionally control the component of the products. To a certain equivalence ratio extent, increase of the oxygen concentration can improve grade of gas products.

