The popularity of municipal sewage sewers system leads to producing a massive quantity of domestic wastewater sludge; how to treat and dispose of the sludge is becoming an environmental problem. The sludge is rich in nutrients, and it is often applied to soil as fertilizer or soil conditioner in many developing and developed nations. However, the influence of heavy metals contained in sludge on the crop growth and quality is a major concern when the sludge is reused on farmland for growing edible crops. The objectives of this research are to analyze the municipal sewage sludge for heavy metal contents and their bond fractions, and to conduct crop growth experiments to evaluate the influence on crop growth and quality by applying the sludge as soil additives for growing crop. The experimental sludge samples were collected from Taichung Fu-Tien wastewater treatment plants. The sludge contains Cu, Zn, Ni and Cd with concentrations exceeding the maximum levels legally allowed in Taiwan farmland soil. Most Cu exists in organic bond fraction; Zn is in Fe-Mn oxides bond fraction, Ni is in organic bond fraction, and Cd is in Fe-Mn oxides bond fraction. Three batches of plant growing and harvesting were carried. The crop growth results reveal that the growth of plants grown in the second batch of planting is obviously suppressed, and the extent of influence increases with higher ratios of sludge applied to the soil.

The municipal wastewater treatment system is an important infrastructure to treat domestic wastewater for protecting the receiving body and the environment; the system generates a large quantity of biological wastewater sludge that must be properly treated and disposed of in order to prevent secondary pollution problems [1]. Many developed and developing nations tend to dispose of sludge by reusing it as fertilizer or soil conditioner [1], e.g. about 60 % in UK and USA, and 53 % in Europe [2] Wong and Selvam (2006) [2] asserted that sludge reuse by applying the composted sludge to land is the most economic method for treating domestic wastewater sludge because resources recovery from the sludge is also achieved. However, domestic wastewaters contain as high as 0.5~2 % [2] or even 4% [3,4] of heavy metals on a dry weight basis. The metals contained in Hong Kong Tai Po municipal wastewater sludge include 112 mg/kg Cu, 110 mg/kg Mn,

2.22~3.68 mg/kg Cd, 455~533 mg/kg Ni, 929~1090 mg/kg Cu, 4.85~10.80 mg/kg As, 289~357 mg/kg Cr and 0.277~0.681 mg/kg Hg [5]. These concentrations are higher than the stipulated maximum concentrations for use on farmland to grow edible crops. Hence, there are serious risks for applying the sludge as soil conditioner because the metals may potentially contaminate the environment and/or food chain [6].

The sludge collected from Fu-Tien Water Resources Recovery Center contains on average 76% water content. Analyses of metals contained in the dry sludge are shown in Figure 1. Among these metals, concentrations of Ni and Cd vary over a wide range. The current limitations on metals contained in farm land are 200 mg/kg for Cu, 250 mg/kg for Cr, 5 mg/kg for Cd, 500 mg/kg for lead, 200 mg/kg for Ni and 600 mg/kg for Zn in Taiwan. Hence, Cu and Zn contained in all sludge samples have concentrations exceeding the limitations. All sludge samples contain Zn twice the legal limitation of Zn in soil; half of the samples contain Ni exceeding the limitation. Cd is the easiest among all metals to be absorbed by plants; rice plant has a specially capability of absorbing Cd from soil. Although Cd has the lowest concentration in sludge, for some of the sludge samples, Cd exceeds the limitation. The analysis results show that applying the domestic sludge on farm land for growing crops has a potential risk of contaminating the soil.

The bonding fractions of various metals contained in the sludge are shown in Figure 2. For Cu, the majority (74 %) exists in the sludge in organic bond fraction, about 73 % of Cr exists as residual fraction. Cd about 60 % and 34 %, respectively exist in Fe-Mn oxide and carbonate fraction. About 77 % of Pb as residual fraction, 40 % of the Ni distributes in the organic bonding fraction, followed by Fe-Mn oxide bonding (28%) and residual fractions (22%). Most Zn exists in Fe-Mn oxide bonding (43 %) followed by organic bonding form (29 %) and residual fraction (16 %). Among the five bonding fractions, the exchangeable and the carbonate bonding fractions are the most easily absorbed by plants, followed by Fe-Mn oxides and organic bonding fractions; the residual fraction is the least absorbable [9]. The results also indicate that heavy metals contained in the sludge are low percent in exchangeable and carbonate bonding fractions thus alleviating the

adverse impact of applying the sludge on the soil environment. Among the six metals, Cd has the lowest concentration; however, it is the most easily absorbable metal by plant. Hence, Cd is more strictly controlled in the soil of farmland for growing edible crops; its maximum allowable concentration is limited to only 5 mg/kg in Taiwan. Zn has the highest concentration among the six metals in sludge; its concentration is higher than twice the allowable maximum concentration (600 mg/kg) for soil used to grow crops. The exchangeable and carbonate bonding fractions of Zn account for 12 % of the total Zn contained in the sludge; the Fe-Mn oxides and organic bonding fractions account for 72 %. Although plants have weak absorption toward Zn in Fe-Mn oxides and organic bonding forms, the accumulated long-term influence caused by the soil complicate chemical and biochemical reactions cannot be ignored [3,4,9]. Similar observation is also seen for copper; the soil contains copper with 74 % in organic bond form; the risk associated with copper on the soil environmental and plant growth cannot be ignored either.

Results of all three batches show that the cabbage grown in both control without sludge addition and in soil with 1:5 sludge addition do not show much difference in metal content. Fig. 3 shows that except in the second batch that the cabbage plant height for the soil with 1:5 sludge addition is slightly shorter, in the first and third batches, the plants grown in the soil with 1:5 sludge addition are obviously taller than the control set. Therefore, addition of adequate quantities of sludge to farm land has definite benefits, and as shown by the results obtained in this study, the sludge addition of 1:5 (sludge/soil ratio) or less is not expected to cause problems of high heavy metal concentrations in the crop.ection headings should be left justified, with the first letter capitalized and numbered consecutively, starting with the Introduction. Sub-section headings should be

Concentrations of heavy metals, i.e. Cu Zn and Cd, contained in domestic wastewater sludge often have reached the levels that adversely impact a direct application of the sludge on farmland for growing edible crops. However, heavy metals exists in sludge mostly in the form of Fe-Mn bonding fraction, organic bonding fraction, and residual fraction that cause little or no obvious on the metal content in the crop during the initial stage of sludge application. With increasing cycles of planning, watering and plant rhizosphere metabolism cause the metals contained in the soil to be released gradually so that the plant growth is adversely affected by heavy metal contained in the sludge. However, adding adequate amount of sludge to soil shows some benefit to stimulate the plant growth. Results of laboratory studies suggest that the addition of sludge should not exceed 1:5 (sludge/soil). When the sludge addition exceeds 1:3 (sludge/soil), both the growth and heavy metal content in Chinese cabbage will be adversely affected. Future application of domestic wastewater sludge depends on farm should emphasize the development of advanced technology to remove heavy metals from the sludge in addition to regulating the practice through legislation of relevant laws and regulations.

