The immersion cycle corrosion test chamber is various steel accelerated corrosion test equipment. An intelligent control system is designed in this paper, to control temperature and humidity of the chamber during the test. There are an expert controller to control temperature, and a fuzzy controller to control humidity of the chamber. The practical application has achieved good results.

Steel corrosion is a very serious problem; atmospheric corrosion is the most common type of corrosion. Atmospheric corrosion related to many other factors, such as air temperature, humidity, and hours of sunshine, rainfall, dust fall, alternate wetting and drying of the frequency and so on. Natural environment exposure experiment is to study the atmospheric corrosion of the most commonly used test methods.

The temperature and humidity control of closed chamber is difficult. Once the overshoot occurs, either the temperature or humidity is very difficult to adjust to the desired value. Obviously, this is a controlled object in poor working conditions and with a variety of uncertainties. The model uncertainty of the process makes the control system more complex. Due to the nonlinear and difficult modeling, this system becomes difficult to control. Conventional PID control strategy is commonly used, can not meet the requirements of temperature control and humidity control in Immersion cyclic corrosion test chamber.

To solve the above problem, the intelligent control system is designed in this paper for weathering steel corrosion test. The system includes a simple temperature expert controller and a humidity fuzzy controller by correction factor method. The proposed method has been successfully used for weathering steel corrosion test, and achieved satisfactory results.

The accelerated corrosion test is generally carried out in the immersion cyclic corrosion test chamber. Using infrared heating lamps (heated air temperature) and the refrigeration equipment (inhibit excessive temperature) controlling the chamber temperature. Using steam atomizer to control the humidity of the test chamber, the method of control pulses to control the speed of the humidification  Infrared heating lamps and a steam atomizer are installed in the test chamber shown as Fig 1.

The pulse-type humidifier controls the humidity of the test chamber, humidifier pulse signal trigger control to produce steam for humidification, making humidity changes uneven in the chamber. The humidity of the test chamber by a variety of interference, there are many uncertainties. Therefore, it is not possible to establish the mathematical model used to control humidity.

The fuzzy set theory is introduced by Zadeh to deal with the uncertainty and imprecision related with information concerning several parameters. The fuzzy control has emerged as one of the most active fruitful areas for research in the application fields. Fuzzy controller has been considered as a reasonable and effective alternative to solve nonlinear, complex, and poorly mathematical model problems in industrial process control. In a fuzzy controller the control actions are handled by fuzzy rules, which is a logical model of the human behaviour of the process operator. The method of fuzzy control does not require an internal precise mathematical model or transfer functions for practical control system. Fuzzy control theory has been one of major application in the control fields.

Fig.3(a) shows temperature control effect of a conventional PID method, Fig.3(b) shows the effect for the temperature expert control system in this paper. The two control effect shown in the set temperature of 45  . The temperature fluctuations of PID control in the range of ±8  . The temperature fluctuations of this paper an expert control system is in the range of ±1  , to meet temperature requirements of the chamber.

Fig.4(a) shows humidity control effect of a conventional PID method, Fig.4(b) shows the effect for the humidity control system in this paper. The humidity fluctuations of PID control in the 10% range. The humidity fluctuations of the fuzzy control system in this paper are in the range of ±1  , to meet humidity requirements of the chamber.

