The large coal-fired power generation system characterizes as complex structure, highly coupling and nonlinear correlation between energy consumption and external environment, resources and load demand. The attribute reduction method based on fuzzy rough set (FRS) was introduced to extract the dominant features related to energy consumption and eliminate the redundant features as well. Taking the reduced attributes as input variables, which provide the important base for analyze the energy consumption of the coal-fired power unit.

The large coal-fired power generation system was composed of many complex subsystems, and there were high-dimensional nonlinear associative relationships among various operating parameters. To determine the relationships among parameters under different operating conditions, and reconstruct the system operating state, thus the optimum controllable parameters of the boundary condition can be obtained, and then the operation optimization strategies can be formulated. All of this can be summarized as the analysis of complex systems modeling.

As the main way of energy production, large-scale coal-fired units, including (ultra) supercritical units, will bear rapid peak regulation operation, frequent change of working conditions in long time, stand the test of factors such as complex coal quality, the cold junction and environment etc. Its energy consumption level has distinct time-varying characteristics. Considering the characteristics of large coal-fired generating units, as well as the coupling effects of external factors, it was an important foundation of achieving energy saving of coal-fired power generation process to reveal the spatial and temporal distribution of unit energy consumption within the scope of total working conditions. However, due to the characteristics such as mechanism complexity, nonlinear, time-varying, large time delay, strong coupling, uncertainties and random disturbances of the equipment, systems and process, the traditional mechanism modeling method was difficult to establish the exact energy consumption space-time distribution model.

In response to these characteristics, features were extracted from real data of thermal power units though attribute reduction method based on fuzzy rough set (FRS) in basis of data mining technology in the paper. The relationship was analyzed among variables, between variables and energy consumption distributes, to reduce attribute table, drop redundant data. That provides the important research base for real unit energy consumption characteristics analysis in depth.

The function of knowledge classification of the rough set theory was achieved through attribute reduction. Attributes (characteristics) of the information system was not equally important, or even some of the attributes was redundant. The system will be mostly simplified by reducing attribute of knowledge in maintaining the system’s ability of classification, deleting irrelevant or unimportant attribute knowledge to extract the most relative characteristics and variation of the properties.

The following was the relevant definition of the reduction of knowledge in rough set theory. Information system S=<U, CUD, V, f >, U was a non-empty objects set; C and D were the properties sets. Namely the condition attribute set was C and decision attribute set was D; V was a set of attribute value ; f was an information function. namely f :U×(CUD)→V. It specifies the object's property values of U in each group.

The classical rough set theory can only deal with discrete or symbol-based property information system. The large-scale coal-fired unit energy consumption decision table (Table 2) based on the unit's actual operating data (shown in Table 1) was continuous real-value in this paper, and they need to be reduced by attribute discretization methods. But the discretization process will bound to lose some important information to have a negative impact on the classification results. Therefore, the reduction method based on fuzzy rough set theory attributes were adopted in the paper, fuzzy sets were used to replace the precise set, the fuzzy similarity relation was introduced to instead equivalence relations on the universe of discourse, the classical rough set theory was extended to fuzzy rough sets.

The supply coal consumption of decision attribute was discrete fuzzy, the class was divided into 8 types. Divide universe of discourse in the T-similarity relation. Global about and partial reduction get the 10 key energy consumption characteristics (Table 3) were calculated based on fuzzy rough set attribute reduction algorithm shown in Figure 1.

Thermal system with specific device structures, material properties and system structures conducts the process of combustion, heat transfer, mass transfer and flow through each device inside and shows corresponding running state parameters in the constrained conditions such as uncontrollable boundary conditions (such as power generation load, the local meteorological conditions, coal quality, etc.), controllable boundary conditions (such as the turbine initial operating parameter, circulating water flow, boiler primary or second air flow, etc.),system structures and device characteristics. These state parameters were ultimately expressed as the thermal and economic performance indicators of the unit’s thermal efficiency or power consumption rate.

Therefore, the 10 attributes based on fuzzy rough set attribute reduction algorithm were extracted as input variables. The conclusions were consistent with the theoretical analysis; the key parameters affecting the unit energy consumption were the unit boundary condition parameters for the operation. This method provides an important basis for further study on optimization of unit consumption characteristics and operating parameters.

