This paper first describes the relationship between the smart grid and smart AVC. By some problems of the conventional AVC’s practical application connecting with the actual situation of the current grid development, this paper points out that the traditional AVC is unable to adapt to the development needs of the current grid and the tendency of intelligent AVC development.Through the research and the comprehensive exposition of the embedded Smart AVC, including intelligent AVC’s new features, it points out that the future development direction of the Smart AVC and some features needs.

Currently, the intelligent grid is subject to pay a high attention on a global scale. Europe and the United States regard the intelligent grid as an important part of their national strategy. State Grid Corporation of China has put the concept of "strong intelligent grid" forward, and proposed a three-step strategic planning "strong intelligent grid" fully completed by 2020. The intelligent grid is a new transmission and distribution

system, which is the integration of modern power engineering technology, distributed generation and energy storage technologies, what’s more, advanced sensing and monitoring control technology, and information processing and communication technology of new power transmission and distribution system. It is able to provide users with a range of value-added services and to realize the interaction between the grid and the users. Simultaneously it has self-healing and self-adaptive capacity, realizes the flexible access to new energy control, and achieves the intelligent analyses and intelligent decision on mass surveillance information. As a content of the smart grid construction --- intelligent automatic voltage control (Smart AVC) also faces with the need for simultaneous construction of smart grid [1]. Smart AVC answers the problem that the traditional automatic voltage control system has not involved and the future of Smart AVC must involve. Traditional AVC conducts the reactive power and voltage optimization control from the point of view of the whole network. In addition, it made an important contribution to the economic operation of the power grid. However, with the continuous development and growth of the grid and the optimal control of the continuous influx of new energy power generation, traditional reactive power optimization has been difficult to make the grid on a layer of stairs. Therefore, the establishment of intelligent automatic voltage control (Smart AVC) system has been imperative [1] [2].

Traditional AVC is a voltage and reactive power optimization control in particular run cross-section. In essence, it is an optimal power flow problem and can be described by a non-linear optimization mathematical model. Usually, the security of the power grid operation is treated as the constraint conditions. And improving the economy is treated as the optimization objective. What’s more, traditional AVC realizes the whole network reactive power integrated optimization. The mathematical model can be briefly described as follows:

The shuttle of traditional AVC and EMS uses plug-AVC model. The model of AVC and data acquisition is realized by making interfaces with EMS. But this method brings a larger workload to run maintenance staff. They often maintain two systems of EMS and AVC, which is repeated labor and whose efficiency is too low. While traditional embedded method can also achieve AVC system embedded in the EMS system, but it also has two drawbacks as follows: 1) data-read uses the API functions provided by the EMS manufacturers good- way package to read the database; 2) opening high-level database permissions may bring the security risks to the EMS system.

The randomness of wind speed leads to the uncertainty of wind power. Wind power is directly proportional to wind speed’s cubic. But only part of wind energy can be used by wind turbine, which is converted into mechanical power. The expression of the random power:

In general, the synchronous generator is usually divided into two synchronous generators: the synchronous generator has the ability to regulate the excitation and the excitation regulator does not have the capacity. The former’s control method has two kinds, which are named as voltage control and power factor control. But most of the actual synchronous generator is lack in excitation control capacity. In actual production, when the number of poles is short and the speed is high, salient pole structure is adopted.

The objective function of the voltage offset is to minimize the sum of the offset amount of the voltage of each node and the ideal voltage value range, i.e. to increase the voltage levels of the load node. Function can be expressed as:

Traditional AVC just gives an alarm or unusual information, and does not give a reason for alarm or abnormal in the alarm and abnormal. As a result, traditional AVC leads the users that are unable to position these problems timely and accurately, and brings difficulties to the users when dealing with some extreme cases. In this case, if the cause of the alarm and abnormal real-time accurate is given real-timely and accurately, some unusual faults can take timely and effective solutions to ensure grid more secure and stable.

The inference engine is an important part of the expert system. it uses the knowledge reasoning in expert systems. Using expert experience, knowledge and some reasoning methods, we can introduce the results. By analysis and reasoning of the inference engine, we can use some information through the reasoning problem reasoning and restoring.

This article makes some prospects on Intelligent AVC embedding method and functions of the system in the future based on the analysis of the disadvantages of traditional AVC. And on this basis, it elaborates based on the standard CIM intelligent AVC embedding method and intelligent AVC, which differs from some of the new features of the traditional AVC in detail. Then it provides a new train of thought for the future of the development and perfect of Smart AVC.

