Based on the grey system theory, the paper establishes an electricity demand forecasting model for Jiangsu province, and verifies it using the data from the year 1997 to 2012. The result shows that the accuracy of this forecast model is “superior". This proved that GM (1, 1) model used for the electricity demand forecasting of Jiangsu province can fully meet the needs of the forecast of electricity. In the mean time, the electricity demand of Jiangsu from the year 2013 to 2015(which year is the end of China's twelfth five-year plan) was forecasted by applying the model and the result shows that the electricity consumption in Jiangsu province will increase rapidly in the next few years. Up to the year 2015, it will reach 0.7187 trillion kW·h, which requests the acceleration of the generation of power, so as to meet the needs of the economic development of Jiangsu province in the next few years.

Grey System Theory is a kind of systematic and scientific theory initiated by Chinese scholar Professor Deng Julong in the 1980s. Currently, it has been widely used in the power demand forecast. The theory agrees that all the random sample varieties are the changing grey varieties within a range, that is to say the whole random process is considered as the grey variety varying within a certain range. According to the past and the present known or uncertain information and with the approach of data generation, the raw data can be transformed into a greatly regular generating series and then the related research and modeling can be done. This method can be applied when there are few raw data, and the accuracy of forecasting can be highly increased by accumulating the data certainty relatively enhanced to some extent and the data uncertainty relatively weakened to some extent. Grey forecasting model is predicting with the model of GM, which is short for Grey Model. GM Models can be divided into GM (1, n) model and GM (1, 1) model: GM (1, n) model is the grey model established by the first order differential equations with n variables, which is a forecasting model established between the load and n influential varieties; while GM (1, 1) model is the most common grey model, which is established by the first-order differential equation only with a single variable and is also the special case of GM (1, n) model [2]..

A good forecasting model requires a rather small C , that is, the best C is smaller than 0.35, and not bigger than 0.65. Another indicator by which to judge it is good or bad is a larger small error frequency P , which is required to be bigger than 0.95 and not smaller than 0.7. According to the value of P and C , there are four

The forecasting model of power consumption in Jiangsu province is established in this essay through the grey system theory. And the accuracy of the model is tested by the data from 1997 to 2012 and it turns out that the accuracy is “superior”, for the indicator value: P  0.95 and C  0.35 , which illustrates that the electricity consumption of Jiangsu province by GM (1, 1) is consistent with the electricity forecast.

