To deal with the problem of low efficiency and low convergence speed in searching the global optimum, Niche Genetic Algorithm was used in reliability optimization of software system. Linear programming works with multi-variable and multi-constraint were solved successfully. And also, the searching performance of the genetic algorithms was improved by introducing the stochastic tournament model, the uniform schema crossover operator and the non-uniform mutation in the genetic algorithm. The simulation results show that the Niche Genetic Algorithm can resolve the multi-module complex software system's reliability allocation effectively, which can improve the computing speed and the resolution quality effectively.

The original of the Genetic Algorithm is the computer simulation research on biological systems. It was put forward by professor J.H.Holland in the university of Michigan in 1960s [1]. Genetic Algorithm is a random search technique based on imitating the natural selection, species evolution and population genetics. And it is particularly suitable for getting the optimal solution of combinatorial optimization problems [2]. In recent years, Genetic algorithm has been applied in many fields and has become an important method of researching artificial intelligence and information processing technology [3]. The reliability optimization of

software system, which is also called reliability allocation problem of software system, is to find an optimal reliability allocation scheme of software system under the conditions of a certain resource constraints. It makes the system obtain the highest reliability. Generally speaking, there are a large number of local extreme points. It is difficult to solve the global optimal solution accurately. Many scholars have achieved good results in solving the combinatorial optimization problem with intelligent optimization algorithms. But it is still rare to see the research on reliability allocation problem of software system with Niche Genetic Algorithm [4].

The reliability optimization of software system was researched based on Niche Genetic Algorithm in this paper. And it was compared with other heuristic optimization algorithms. The theoretical analysis and simulation results show that Niche Genetic Algorithm is suitable for solving reliability allocation problem of software system. And also the operating efficiency and the solution quality are improved.

In the formula,  stands for the reliability target of the software system with n modules and m operations. That is a combinatorial optimization problem with a linear function and multiple constraints. So Niche Genetic Algorithm is imported to solve the engineering problem.

The genetic algorithm which simulates biological niche genetic is produced by using the concept of niche genetic. The purpose of the algorithm is to form and maintain a variety of sub-populations and do parallel search in the search space. It is often used to solve multimodal function, multi-objective optimization and simulation of complex systems [6]. Niche Genetic Algorithm simulates the fittest principle of biological evolution by maintaining a group of individuals. Repeated selection, crossover and mutation of the individuals are carried out until the global optimal solution is obtained.

The primary task of an algorithm is the encoding method. It affects not only the design method of crossover operator, mutation operator, but also the convergence speed of the algorithm. The genetic algorithm which is based on real-coded is the actual description of the continuous parameter optimization problem. There is no binary encoding and decoding process which can greatly increase the efficiency of the algorithm.

determined by the given constrains. That is the search space. The reliability allocation value can be obtained using formula 4 after getting the value of (λ1, λ2 ,", λn ) . And we can calculate the reliability index of the whole modules by using formula 4 and formula 5 repeated.

First, the whole solution space is divided into N small intervals. M individuals in each small interval are generated randomly. Then, an N ×M population is generated. The initial population is evenly distributed throughout the solution space by this method. Each individual has a greater probability to participate in the algorithm because of the significantly difference between each individual. The system's reliability goals can be tested by formula 7. New individuals can be generated until it meets the given constraints. That is to say, the cost of the software should be within the specific range and the reliability of the system should achieve the given goal.

We use the (ȝ + Ȝ) selection strategy in the niche technology. It is considered to be the highest kind of selection pressure in evolutionary algorithm between several popular selection mechanisms. The (ȝ + Ȝ) selection mechanism can produce the fastest local convergence rate when the crossover operator paired in the population. The (ȝ + Ȝ) selection strategy is to select the ȝ best individuals in the ȝ parent individuals and ȝ an individual cross Ȝ tall individual.

Stochastic Tournament Model is selected in this paper. The winners become the next generation of individuals by the method of competing. In each generation of groups, K individuals are selected to constitute a small group randomly. And then, the fittest individuals are copied to next generation among the K individuals. The copy of the individual still returns to the parent groups and participate in the next random selection. This kind of selection will repeat M times and produce M next generation of individuals. In the method, we usually set K = 2.

Uniform Schema Crossover Operator is used in this paper. A random template is produced before the crossover operating. The crossover operating will carried out if the gene position of individual is 1. Compared to the single point crossover in traditional genetic algorithm, it has greater variation of the area and random mutation probability. And thus the search space is more effective and the local search ability is improved.

Mutation operation in genetic algorithm means the gene value of certain genes in the individual is replaced by other gene value. The local search ability of genetic algorithm is improved by mutation operation. The diversity is maintained and the premature phenomenon is prevented.

A Nun-Uniform Mutation is used in this paper. It refers to a random perturbation of the original genetic value. The new gene value is the result of the disturbance. A slight change in the solution space is made for each mutation operation.

The development and investment of the software system is 186,000 yuan and the profit is 48%. Other parameters are as follow: ϕ1  0.21, ϕ2  0.48 , ϕ3  0.31 , ρ  0.975 . The lower limit value of each module is as follow by the analysis of fault trees and the division of the importance of the modules. (I1 I2 I3) =

It is a combinational optimization problem with one linear objective function and 3n+2 linear constraints. N means the number of modules. Ȝi(i=1,2,3) is the failure rate parameter in the modules. That is to say, the cost of the software should be minimized in a certain task time. And the reliability of the software should be greater than 97.5%.

Linear programming works with multi-variable and multi-constraint were solved successfully by using Niche genetic algorithm in multi-module software system. At the same time, the search ability of genetic algorithm was improved by using Stochastic Tournament Model, Uniform Schema Crossover Operator and Non-Uniform Mutation. The simulation results show that Niche Genetic Algorithm in solving the multiple modules of complex software systems reliability allocation problem was efficient and effective. The next step, we will do some research on improving encoding, genetic operators and selection strategies. In short, the reliability of software systems based on genetic algorithm optimization problem worthy of further research.

