Abstract This article describes the basic directions of state policy in the use and implementation of cloud computing. It answers the question about the applica- bility of foreign cloud services for the processing of personal data of citizens of Russia. It describes the systematization of cloud services in Russia and the EU. It defines some specific measures to ensure the protection of personal data using the standards of the EU and Russia.

The term ‘‘cloud computing” is often used in various spheres of public life. It refers to technology created to optimize business processes and improve the service quality of different service providers and to increase people’s informatization level. Questions on people’s interpersonal relationships arise more acutely in the field of medicine, government, banking and the private sector. The application of cloud computing is a strategically important development for computer technologies and offers the opportunity to provide different services.

The active introduction of cloud computing posed questions for legislators about the specifics of regulating people’s behavior online. These questions concern data security when it is stored in the cloud, and whether cloud computing is privately- or government-owned. Questions about the requirements for cloud Internet Service Provider’s (ISP) effective functions, as well as an ISP’s responsibility for its own actions and those of third parties, remain unanswered. Is it possible to be sure that technology which allows us access to cloud comput- ing is reliable and safe? What if public information and IT systems are hosted abroad?

In this article we will not consider the questions of the processing of state secrets or publicly accessible data by cloud computing. Rather we will address the main issues with cloud computing as far as data protection is concerned. Kristina Irion has described this problem, saying ‘‘many governments have raised concerns about national data sovereignty when government information is moved to the cloud. How can confidentiality of public information assets residing in the cloud be ensured? What if public information and IT systems are hosted abroad?  ”

Although currently the active application of the term ‘‘cloud computing” in the Russian Federation, and implemented programs for public e-health and e-government are based on cloud computing, this term has no legislative definition. The State Program of the Russian Federation ‘‘Information Society (2011–2020)” considers the development of cloud computing to be one of the main priorities for 2015. The creation of a national platform of cloud computing is provided for in this government program. It is planned to connect all the public authorities of the Russian Federation in the period of 2011–2020 [30]. In fact, cloud computing was taught at technical universities in 1990s and the further development of this technology at public institutes was predicted.

Consequently, we use the definition of the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE). According to the IEEE’s definition published in 2008, ‘‘Cloud data processing is a paradigm within which information is constantly stored on servers on the Internet and is temporarily cached with the client party, for example on personal computers, game consoles, laptops and smart-phones [15].” The IEEE, investigating the prospects for developing cloud computing, drew a parallel between this technology and the internet. In Russia, IEEE companies operate in Siberia, the Northwest (St. Petersburg) and Central Russia (Moscow) [32].

Unlike Russia, the European Union passed a law in 2012, in which it was spec- ified that ‘‘Cloud computing in simplified terms can be understood as the storing, processing and using of data on remotely located computers accessed over the internet.” This means that users can command almost unlimited computing power on demand, that they do not have to make major capital investments to fulfil their needs and that they can access their data from anywhere so long as they have an internet connection. Cloud computing has the potential to slash users’ IT expenditure and to enable many new services to be developed [6].”

The Cloud Security Alliance (CSA) discussed the importance of this problem of data protection, particularly personal data, in cloud computing. ‘‘Data privacy considerations are often overlooked in the development phase of the cloud, Inter- net of Things and Big Data solutions, and instead are viewed through a maze of complicated regulations and guidance [4].” Angela Adrian remarks also that ‘‘unfortunately the legal infrastructure is inadequate to secure privacy.” [[1], p. 49] This problem is very important for Russia. In 2010 the Deputy Minister of the Ministry of Communications and Mass Communications, Ilya Massukh, said that ‘‘these kinds of proprietary technologies in Russia are practically non-existent, therefore this sector is actively engaging with foreign companies such as

Google [20].” But, in 2014, a Russian Advisory Council from the Ministry of Communications and Mass Media Communications was created to improve the development of, and implement a state policy for, standards and legal regulation of cloud computing. The Advisory Council aimed to develop suggestions for improving the legislation for cloud computing to ensure the regular interaction of the Ministry of Communications and Mass Media with the expert community on cloud technologies [29].

EU Member States are also attempting to solve the problems which have arisen for users and developers of cloud computing. On 11 September 2013, the European Commission (EC) adopted a legislative package called ‘‘Connected Continent: Building a Telecoms Single Market.” The website claimed that ‘‘the package could boost the cloud computing market in Europe, as, among others, it aims at improving the quality of service that new services (such as cloud computing, video-conferencing, 3D printing) can offer [7].”

In Russia, according to the Order of the Government of the Russian Federation of 22.02.2012 No. 238-p Rostelecom1 was appointed the sole executor for the fur- ther creation and development of complex information technology and telecom- munications infrastructure including cloud computing and e-government for 2012–2014.

Rostelecom must execute the list of activities of the Russian state program ‘‘Information Society (2011–2020 years).” This program includes the development of a portal for public services, the development of a common space of trust in elec- tronic signatures, the development of interagency electronic interaction and a sin- gle identification system. It is planned that Rostelecom will engage in the development of mechanisms which enable the use of mobile devices for access to e-government services and to the state-mail address which is used for the inter- action between citizens and government agencies.

Rostelecom must create common directories and qualifiers for state information systems and it must develop systems such as the ‘‘Electronic Registry Office,” ‘‘E-Regions” and ‘‘E-democracy.” The basis for the implementation of these systems is a cloud computing platform. These systems offer infrastructure and software as a service (IaaS and SaaS). [The Official website of the Ministry of Communications and Mass Communications of the Russian Federation]

The Strategy ‘‘of the development of information technologies in the Russian Federation for 2014–2020 and planning until 2025” directs the creation of a Russian national platform for cloud computing [31]. For the realization of this strategy, the Russian government operates as the sole customer for everything needed for the Russian market for information technologies. Rostelecom devel- oped and launched a cloud platform in August 2011. This helps Rostelecom sell their computing resources and software to third parties. In the future, this platform could be integrated into the national platform of cloud computing.

The Decree of the Government of the Russian Federation of July 20, 2011 N 1275-p approved the concept of the creation and development of an integrated information system for the state management of public finances, the so-called ‘‘Electronic budget.” This concept was recommended to the executive authorities of the Russian Federation and local authorities for the development of systems of public (municipal) finance. The subsystems of ‘‘Electronic budget” system will be available as a service for citizens of the Russian Federation, the municipalities or government sector organizations on a pro bono basis. These subsystems will be submitted as a model of ‘‘Software as a Service” (SaaS).

The closed part of this portal consists of ‘‘private offices” which can be available to users with the appropriate authorization and electronic signature keys. The closed part is the common point for user access to all services of the ‘‘Electronic budget,” which will include a unified system of management of user access levels, depending on their powers. These services will be available to users of the cloud platform in areas such as medicine, housing, energy, and transport.

An example of the application of cloud computing for providing public services is the UK. In 2010 the UK started a project called G-Cloud (‘‘Government cloud”). This optimizes the activities of government data centers and reduces gov- ernment spending. Features of the G-Cloud include flexible scaling, open access to resources, an adequate level of security, a high degree of standardization and extensive information sharing. Such features make G-Cloud an attractive and eco- nomical solution to the complex architecture of internet-based administration. It is planned that through the G-Cloud the British authorities will have been able to reduce IT costs by over 20% in 2014 [25].

In the UK, a government gateway (Government Gateway) was introduced which provided the centralized online access to the government cloud. The Government Gateway has helped to bring together the disparate public internet resources of Great Britain, and also has closed a thousand duplicate administra- tion sites out of a previous total of four thousand. This government gateway allows the exchange of information between portals. In addition, it stores all infor- mation in case of the failure of one of the subordinate portals. All citizens and legal entities are required to register in the Government Gateway for work and

Of course, answers to the above questions are linked to the category of informa- tion (limited access or open information) and also to subjects of the relationships such as the ISP, the user or the government. Cloud technology can belong to foreign or Russian ISPs. Information can be public or have limited access (ch. 2 Art. 5 of Federal law ‘‘Information, Informational Technologies and Protection of Information”) [9]. Limited access information can be personal data; ‘‘know-how”; and secret data imported from companies, and is regulated only by Federal legislation.

According to Art. 7 of the Russian Federal law ‘‘On personal data,” ‘‘the users of personal data and other persons who have access to personal data are obliged not to disclose this information to third parties and not to impart personal data without consent of the subject of personal data. The other cases must be provided by the law [10].”

According to item 11. Art. 3 of the Federal law ‘‘On personal data,” the cross- border transfer of personal data is the transfer of personal data to the territory of a foreign state, to the authority of the foreign state, to a foreign national person or a foreign legal entity.

Art. 19 of the Law ‘‘On personal data” states that the Russian operator of per- sonal data has to establish in the agreement with the foreign handler of the infor- mation, the duty to comply with the confidentiality of personal data, to ensure to the safety of personal data, and also to comply with other requirements to protect personal information. According to item 3. Art. 12 of the Law ‘‘On personal data” the operator of personal data must be convinced that the foreign country to which the data are transferred provides adequate protection for people’s rights to their personal data. The Federal law ‘‘On personal data” specifies that states can be considered in two groups of countries:

However, if a cross-border transfer of personal data is being carried out in for- eign states which do not provide adequate protection for people’s rights to their personal data, then the user of the personal data must receive, in written form, that person’s consent for their personal data to be transferred. These relationships between foreign ISP (operator of personal data) and the owner of personal data are regulated by the two Russian laws. They are the Federal law ‘‘On personal data” and the Federal law ‘‘On electronic signatures” [11].

2 Australian alliance; The Argentine Republic; The State of Israel; Canada; Kingdom of Morocco; Malaysia; United Mexican States; Mongolia; New Zealand; The Republic of Angola; The Republic of Benin; The Republic of Cape Verde; The Republic of Korea; The Republic of Peru; The Republic of Senegal; Republic of Tunisia; Republic of Chile; Hong Kong Special Administrative Region of the People’s Republic of China; The Swiss Confederation//The Order of the Federal Service for Supervision of Communications, Information Technology and Communications of March 15, 2013 No. 274 ‘‘On approval of the list of foreign countries that are not parties to the Convention of the Council of Europe Convention on the Protection of Individuals with regard to Automatic Processing of Personal Data, and provide adequate protection of human subjects personal data”// http://www.garant.ru/products/ipo/prime/doc/70268490/#ixzz3E8YwESIQ.

In accordance with part 4 Art. 9 of the Federal law ‘‘On personal data,” the participants in the relationship have the right to use an electronic signature to create a written form of their agreement. Art. 4 of the Federal law ‘‘On electronic signatures” defined the rights of parties in the electronic interaction been using any information technology and (or) the technical means to apply an electronic signature. However, the Federal law ‘‘On electronic signatures” requires that participants (the provider of personal data and owners of personal data) must approve of these actions. This approval can be placed on the main web page of the cloud ISP which handles personal data. The owner of the personal data must agree with these conditions.

However, there is another view. Vladimir Kanashevsky writes that sending an e-mail message from a Russian user to a foreign cloud ISP of personal data cannot be signed with an electronic signature. ‘‘The foreign ISP potentially can be brought to civil liability in accordance with Russian law. In connection with this action, the claim for the damages and compensation for moral damages can be brought to the foreign operator [14].”

I do not accept the opinion of Vladimir Kanashevsky. Firstly, this author did not consider the provisions of the Russian Federal law ‘‘On electronic signatures.” This law points directly to the recognition of foreign electronic signatures. Article 7 of this law indicates that ‘‘if an electronic signature is created in accordance with the law of a foreign state and the international standards then it is recognized in the Russian Federation as an electronic signature that corresponds to the Federal law ‘‘On electronic signatures.” Also, according to part 2 of Art. 7 of this law ‘‘On electronic signatures,” an electronic document signed by an electronic signature cannot be regarded as illegal only on the basis that the electronic signature verification key certificate is issued in accordance with the rules of the foreign law. [Federal law ‘‘On electronic signatures,” 2011]

Secondly, part 2 of Art. 9 of the Federal law ‘‘On personal data” determines that the consent of the subject of personal data can be given in any form. For example, this form can be an e-mail message. Thus, the Federal law ‘‘On personal data” and the Federal law ‘‘On electronic signatures” define the legal conditions of consent recognition.

However, be aware that the Federal law ‘‘On personal data” allows the ISP of personal data not to obtain the consent of the subject of personal data if the cross- border transfer of personal data is carried out ‘‘for the execution of a contract. And party to this contract is the subject of personal data.” (part 4 Art. 12 of the Federal law ‘‘On personal data”). Thus, this Federal law indicates the presence of the preliminary agreement on cooperation.

of the telecom operator to entrust the processing of personal data of clients to third parties even if a telecom operator has not received the consent of this person. This is the case only if the telecom operator processes the personal data in accor- dance with the contract for the provision of telecommunications services, and/or the telecom operator acts for the implementation of the rights and legitimate inter- ests of the service provider or the client. However, the Federal law ‘‘On commu- nications” did not disclose whether the operator had to warn of the fact that personal data was processed by a third party.

In 2013–2014, the overall transmission model of personal data to external operators was changed in Russia. The list of cases expanded in which consent is not required from the subject of personal data on processing their data by third parties. So in terms of legal regulation in Russia, the implementation of any cloud service through the use of foreign cloud has become easier.

Of course, the cross-border transfer of data is associated with problems of trans- mission security and the processing of personal data. Experts in the technical sphere claim that it is impossible to ensure the absolute safety of these technologies [2]. Noriswadi Ismail has also written about these problems [18].

Providers of cloud services must address the questions of data security. The technological complexity of security in the cloud means that a virus-infected file from one client can infect other connected and inactive clients. In connection with this, there is the danger of compromised data being stored in the cloud. The responsibility for protection lies with the provider. Users of cloud services need to be sure that the provider uses security tools. The provider of cloud services should allow the user to check the level of protection and should record the actions of all clients who have access to the cloud.

Also it is difficult to select a required standard from all the existing standards. A European Commission communication described this problem: ‘‘A jungle of standards generates confusion by, on one hand, a proliferation of standards and on the other hand a lack of certainty as to which standards provide adequate levels of interoperability of data formats to permit portability; the extent to which safe- guards are in place for the protection of personal data; or the problem of the data breaches and the protection against cyber-attacks.. . [6]”. The authors propose to

But here it is necessary to bear in mind that there is no legal obligation to choose standards in the European Union or the Russian Federation. The choice of technology depends only on the parties to the relationship. Usually, the respon- sibility lies with the cloud ISP of personal data for the choice of the standard. Taiwan chose this approach. Fa-Chang Cheng and Wen-Hsing Lai write that ‘‘The Information Industry in Taiwan is now trying to realize the accountability concept through building up the certificate system in protecting the personal infor- mation privacy, especially for the purpose of protection within Cyberspace [8].”

Noriswadi Ismail writes about solution adopted by Microsoft. ‘‘Microsoft pro- poses the amendment of CFAA’s civil action provision that the cloud service pro- viders possess a private right of action against those who illegally access their data- centers or secure unauthorized access to their customers’ accounts. This proposed cause of action shall allow cloud service providers to combat digital criminals on behalf of their customers.” [[18], p. 252]

The European Network and Information Security Agency (ENISA) proposed using ISO27001. Moreover ENISA noted that all suppliers must demonstrate compliance. They are NOT required to be accredited but compliance is verified through yearly submission of their information security management system and associated policy documents.

The Federal law, ‘‘About Technical Regulation [12]” in Art. 12 permits the voluntary application of standards in the field of a hardware–software. At the same time, the Russian Federation is actively cooperating with such organizations as the Technical Committee (TK) in the field of standardization. This has given Russian experts the opportunity of working in the international field of IT standardization. The international organization is the joint technical committee IS0/IEC JTC1, ‘‘Information technologies,” with its subcommittees and working groups. The Russian experts working in this organization have had the opportu- nity to vote when standards have been discussed and new rules proposed.

Russia has not produced an official, systematized description of the risks asso- ciated with cloud computing. However, there is a systematized list of requirements for the protection of the information contained in information systems. Thus, in 2013, the Federal Service for Technical and Export Control promulgated an Order ‘‘On approval of requirements on data protection that do not constitute state secrets and that are included in state information system [28].” In this Order, cloud computing is mentioned only in claim 24 as ‘‘the measures of information protec- tion that is being selected and is being implemented in information system...can apply to the environment of virtualization and cloud computing.”

In 2014, the Ministry of Communications prepared a bill ‘‘On Amendments to Certain Legislative Acts of the Russian Federation regarding the use of cloud computing [23].” This proposed amendments to the Federal Law ‘‘On Informa- tion, Information Technologies and Protection of Information.” It included the concept of ‘‘cloud computing” and the qualification requirements for providers of cloud computing services; requirements for financial stability of the respective suppliers; data protection which is processed by such providers; rules for tariff regulation of prices for cloud computing services; conditions for the use of cloud computing and rules for the provision of cloud services; and responsibilities of the parties. Simultaneously, the bill proposes to amend the Federal Law ‘‘On personal data” to establish protection for personal data subject to cross-border transmission.

The adoption of this bill should enable a definition of the scope of legal rela- tions, rules and regulations applicable to the parties involved in such relationships. However, it has not yet been introduced into the State Duma for consideration. This is a serious impediment to the further development of relationships in connec- tion with cloud computing in the Russian Federation.

Internet interview with the head of the department of information technologies, communication and information security of the Ministry of Internal Affairs of the Russian Federation, Lieut-Gen of internal service Tyurkin M.L. Development and introduction of modern information technologies in system of the Ministry of Internal Affairs of Russia, The system GARANT Legislation with comments.

