To the theory of jacquard knitting machine, this paper has proposed a new needle drive model of magnetic suspended needles. This model, based on hybrid suspension of electromagnets and permanent magnets theory, discussed needle model in the specific motion trail,through theoretical analysis and simulation of motion trail, revealed that realize the specific motion trail by maglev drive needle is available, and provide a new researching method of drive needle model for displace traditional knitting principle of mechanical multi-stage transmission. In theory, the model discussed the knitting principle of maglev drive needle in detail, and through the simulation and theory model of the trail, proved that the jacquard efficient is higher, and the structure is simpler and programmable. The electromagnetic and permanent model that the paper involved provide the basic theory for further discussing experimental program of drive needle, set relevant parameters.

Magnetic suspension technique is a new technology in the twentieth century. It is characteristic of non-contact, without friction and wear between objects, so as to increase the life of device in the process and improve the running condition of device. It thus has been widely used in the area of traffic, mechanical, air craft and so on.

This paper combines the jacquard knitting needle selection mechanism to build the needle model of magnetic suspension-type drive by using hybrid system that combines electromagnet and permanent magnet. Through researching the model, a non-mechanical drive needle pattern is put forward. The hybrid suspension-type drive makes needle motion change from “multiple-stage drive” to “zero drive” to replace the traditional jacquard needle selection (multiple-stage drive), and get rid of relying on triangular cam without rigid shock and use the function of programmableness to realizing kinds of technical knit.

The device of needle that suspension-type drive uses is the electromagnets and permanent magnets drive. As shown in Figure1, the figure shows that there is no mechanical transmission, and the drive principle is using electromagnetism and permanent magnet theory. Through the suction and repulsive force caused by electromagnetic device and permanent magnet control the needle reciprocating motion in the radial direction, the needle's linear motion in axial suspension is realized. While up-and-down motion of the needle is realized by changing the parameter of size, direction, mode of the current in the electromagnet device, it can change the force and its direction, and then control its height and velocity.

The Figure 2 is the development of needle motion trail in triangle cam. The motion trail of magnetic suspension-type needle also need realize loop formation, tucking and floating threads as traditional needle dose. It should guarantee the loop formation height is 9mm, tucking height is 3mm and the floating threads is the starting point in the radial direction.

Based on electromagnetic and permanent magnet speciality, the force between electromagnet and permanent magnet would jump when the current turns its direction. In other words, the force on the permanent magnet would jump to the opposite direction, when electromagnet is the reference. On that basis, the laws of needle's acceleration, velocity and displacement are studied. As the polynomial movement rule is applied to high-speed occasion, the law is used to study the needle's loop formation and tucking motion in the system. And the size of acceleration can be adjusted discretionarily by change the current, so it can setting initial acceleration discretionarily, and find the most suitable curve.

Based on needle's actual motion and force analysis in the suspension system, needle motion is divided into two stages in loop formation motion: rise phase and decline phase. The direction of acceleration of permanent magnet is upward in the rise phase, and it is downward in the decline phase. As shown in Figure 2, there is a short silent period in radial direction; the time is used for hooking the yarn and the acceleration and velocity of needle is zero at the position.

The	initial	condition	in	the	second	stage is:t21=0.003s ,t22=0.007s ,s21=0.004m ,s22=0.009m ,a21=-100m/s2 ,a22=0m/s2 ,v21=23167m/s ,v22=0m/s Where: t21 is initial time, t22 finish time, s21 initial displacement, s22 finish displacement, a21 initial acceleration, a22 finish acceleration, v21 initial velocity, v22 the finish time. Figure 5 is the curve of displacement, velocity, and acceleration in the first stage.

Figure4.(b) shows the curve of the total rise phase of loop formulation. The acceleration is jumping from positive to negative directly, and the size is from increscent to decreasing. It illustrates the current changed its direction at 3ms, and makes the force between electromagnet and permanent magnet from mutually exclusive to mutual attraction and the size of current is variational with the change of acceleration.

The	second	stage: t21=0.003s ,t22=0.006s ,s21=0.004m ,s22=0m ,a21=100m/s2 ,a22=0m/s2 ,v21=-23432m/s ,v22=0m/s,Where: t21 is initial time, t22 finish time, s21 initial displacement, s22 finish displacement, a21 initial acceleration, a22 finish acceleration, v21 initial velocity, v22 the finish time. Figure 5 is the curve of displacement, velocity, and

From Figure 6(c), it shows in the whole braiding process, the acceleration is hopping ceaselessly. It illustrates the current turn to reverse direction with the hopping of acceleration. After get the movement rule of the needle, it can get the default trail shown above by adjust the current.

Based on traditional jacquard knitting needle selection mechanism, the paper puts forward a drive theory of hybrid suspension that put direct drive replaced multi-drive by using electromagnetic to act on the needle directly. According to the analysis simulation of motion trail of the needle, it get the curve of displacement, velocity and acceleration of the needle, and the model by using the method of equivalent magnetic circuit, finally get the acting force relationship between electromagnet and permanent magnet. These theses aim at providing a sound theoretical base for confirming each parameters of current, electromagnet and permanent magnet.

