Now how to improve the developing efficiency and enhance the scalability of network management system has become a hot issue in the current research. In this paper, according to the actual demands, understanding the functional requirements and analyzing the process of network topology management, we propose the hierarchical network topology management system based on managed object and view mechanism. Using an object-based management method, it achieves the expansion of the three-layer model of network topology management; using the view mechanism, it reduces the dependence on the specific needs for the system and achieves a hierarchical network topology management system.

With the expansion and complexity of network scale, management and maintenance of the network has become critical. And network management systems(NMS) have become an important part of network construction and maintenance[1]. Meanwhile, network topology management(NTM) is the basic part of NMS, and most of the functions will be through topological graph to reflect.

Network topology is the physical or logical layout, corresponding the physical or logical relationship between network nodes. Grasping the topology information accurately is the basis of a series of functions[2]. NTM is a flexible and difficult subsystem. It not only requires to design the interfaces, through graphic symbols display the connection relationship between devices and attribute, but also deals with the real-time interactions with network performance and alarm subsystem, reflecting the monitoring function[3].

NTM has its fixed life cycle. First is the data acquisition stage. The second is the data analysis stage. And the third is presenting stage, presenting the related topological information according to the user’s demand. And with the change of requirements, it can adjust the presentation of mode and content. The last is using stage. The users can configure and monitor the managed object.

Here we adopt the hierarchical display strategy, the following IP network as an example. The first layer shows the main topology, namely the relationship between router and subnet. The second layer displays interconnection in the subnet; if the subnet also includes router or switch, It can also go deep into the port level for the third layer of topology structure.

Ordinary loading model is generally used, because of the small amount of data. Multilevel loading model is the premise of the hierarchical network. When the system is initialized, it only presents the uppermost data. The multilevel loading model can not only save space, but also improve the speed of loading system.

Data mapping module includes two parts of capturing object and converting object. Capturing object refers to getting the object from database; Converting object refers to the transformation from the obtained object into the identified memory object. Operation mapping module includes acquisition and transformation. Acquisition refers to the operation of topological interfaces, resource tree, information in the table, such as the operational records of modifying/deleting/adding the managed object. Operation transformation refers that the operating results are saved to the database.

The architecture design is the foundation to realize the software system, and one good architecture design helps implement overall hierarchical structure[7]. The architecture based on hierarchical design can be divided into data processing layer, logic business layer and graphical presentation layer. Data processing layer includes data mapping and operation mapping, which is responsible for obtaining the managed objects; logic business layer includes four parts: processing the topology, analyzing managed objects, alarm interface, and performance interface, which is responsible for topological operations and analysis; graphical presentation layer includes topological graph, resource tree and information table,which is responsible for presenting the managed objects. Each layer module communicates by means of the managed object and message mechanism to realize the data exchange and sharing. The hierarchical structure of system is shown in fig2.

According to the location of father’s node to determine the location in the hierarchy, scan the database to get the node number and network topology, and compute the position of node icons, then load icon and form the topological layout. Every five minutes, the page will update the view. The flow chart is shown in fig3.

Information tables mainly include three types: attribute information, error rate information and flow information. The specific form relates to the specific format of managed object. Therefore, we only present the basic information, and some specific characteristics need to be implemented in the extended class.

The system achieves various functions of network topology using hierarchical structure and modular design. Opening interface implements the extension of system, and multilevel loading data improves the efficiency of the system. In this system, first pull data from the database by the mapping method, and use the functional module to handle the data between database and managed object; then analyze the difference and connection through business analysis module to satisfy the needs for topological business. Finally, present the data through the graphical interface. The system is flexible, expansible and easy to maintain. And the performance management system and warning system are required for further study.

The authors are grateful to the anonymous reviewers for their valuable comments and suggestions. This work was supported by the Ministry of Science and Technology of China (“863 program”) under Grant No. 2007AA01Z203, the National Basic Research Program of China(‘‘973 program’’) under Grant No. 2007CB307101.

