FastDB is an open source real-time database with characteristics of high efficiency and the object oriented, supporting the various object-oriented, running on different operating system platform, convenient for realizing CIM data access mechanism. Through the analysis of CIM data access mechanism, this paper states the methods of the resources location, data query, data describing in the process of data access. The realization code, the function and exception handling methods of CIM data access interface ResourceIDService, ResourceQueryService code based on FastDB are given. FastDB can effectively use CPU cycles and memory, to some extent, meet real-time requirements of the system on the data, and increase the development, maintenance efficiency of the whole system in the different industries.

explains how to exchange CIM data. CIS gives detailed descriptions of the information exchange according to the standard way among the applications and interface of public data access, insertion and using among the application systems. In recent years, the interoperability tests have been operated several times based on the model CIM XML at home and abroad , and has been successfully used in the actual system [2]. But with the continuously increasing of system size and application complexity, these are difficult to meet the requirements of various systems and the system function expansion exists a lot of difficulties. At the same time the CIM model is a typical object-oriented model, in the development process, after detailed comparison research, using open source real-time database FastDB as development prototype system. FastDB is the real- time database of the object oriented by using C/C + + [3], supporting SQL query, Web page query, export and import of XML data files, online backup of transaction process and automatic recovery and so on, running on Win32 / Unix/Linux and other kinds of operating system platform, which has brought convenience for the realization of the CIM data access mechanism.

Data Access facilities (Data Access Facility, DAF) is one of the main contents of IEC61970, in order to improve the EMS application and other systems, and application of collaborative work ability as the goal, which accesses CIM public data for different suppliers to provide a public use application program interface (API) and public service mechanism [4]. The design concept of the DAF is to provide a simple application easy API. DAF is one of the most basic CIS interface standard, including DAFDescriptions, DAFIdentifiers, DAFQuery, DAFEvents module, the core of the module is corresponding interface. For the external system of internal system CIM data acquisition system, DAF provides enough interface in the function [5]. This paper only uses DAFDescriptions. Idl, DAFQuery. Idl and DAFIdentifiers. Idl .

DAF makes use of resources, properties, and values to inquiry the formulation results. A resource is anything of an unmistakable identity. Typically, That a unified resource identifier (URI) pluses an optional fragment identifier may label any resource. But, in the DAF inquires and the search results, a more compact ResourceID of URI should be used. A property is the aspect a resource may describe. When appearing in inquires, nature expresses through the type PropertyID, and nature itself is a resource, so PropertyID is defined as a ResourceID. A property has a domain (resource collection) and a range (value collection). The relationship between the resources through some properties is created, and the nature of the domain and range is also a collection of resource.

DAF provides a series of standard data access service of orientation, inquiry, description and inform event and so on, and , through this public data access interface, realizes the integration between application system. DAF mainly includes positioning, and inquiry, describing services The below figure describes a basic DAF data access process. First clients input a series of string, and the server will return to the string in the database of location. Because the string is based on URI format, the access is a standard form, namely resources positioning. And then in the query service, the information users input is a ResourceID positioning and PropertyIDSequence obtained in resource orientation, which is the corresponding with ResourceDescriptione, such as data query. At the last, ResourceDescriptione in query is analyzed and then get the needed data, such as data description.

Function: CIM/CIS server analyzes URI sequence, and the elements will be transformed into the corresponding ResourceID. Finally, return sequence in the same position is assigned. For no analytical URI, corresponding ResourceID is empty (Container and Fragment are 0). The realization HTML code is as follows:

Function: CIM/CIS server analyzes ResourceID sequence, and the elements will be transformed into the corresponding URI. Finally, return sequence in the same position is assigned. For no analytical ResouceID, corresponding position returns to an empty string. When this method errors in inquires (class_id is found, but not a class (or form) or check error), an DAFIdentifiers: : LookupError shows abnormal.

Various industries often need operations of fast storage, query, update, and delete for a large amount data, particularly outstanding in some energy management and other large enterprise applications. In these cases, the high performance real-time database should be chosen. Through the in-depth analysis and comparison, this paper chooses real-time database after FastDB as a prototype system and analyzes the realization process of the CIM data access. Detailed methods of realization of the main interface function, code and exception handling are given. At present there are many real-time databases of the strong performance, but the price is expensive, in not large system construction, the free open source real-time database can achieve good effect, especially in equipments of physical memory enough big.

