Improving or changing any properties of such photosensitive compositions – improving the photosensitivity and/or maximal density of the optical blackening, changing the spectral sensitivity range, - is key. As a rule, such changes of the properties of the photosensitive compositions are achived from modofocations in the photocatalyst or salt of metal (sensitizer). But the influences of the polymer matrix on the photosensitive composition properties were not studied.

To prepare both samples in the first stage it is necessary to disperse the zinc oxide into the polymer matrix. For this, 12 grams of zinc oxide (II) moistened with water was put into 100 ml of the 10% PVA water solution (which was homogenate on the bain-marie before it). After one hour of settling time, the 60 grams of the resulting mixture was coated on the glass plate with an area of 234 sq.cm. Then the composition was dried in a horizontal orientation at room temperature for 24 hours.

Next, the sensitizing of the compositions was made by using the salts of lead and bismuth by dipping the PVA-ZnO composition for the 30 seconds in 1 M bismuth chloride aqueous solution (to obtain the PVA-ZnO- BiCl3 photosensitive composition) or in the 0.1 M lead acetate aqueous solution (to obtain the PVA-ZnO- Pb(CH3COO)2 photosensitive composition). Finally, the photosensitive compositions are dried in a heated air flow for 5 minutes to eliminate moisture.

In the way described, six sets of samples were prepared. Each one they differed by the type of the usable polyvinyl alcohol and by the sensitizer agent. It is well known [6] that a different PVA type has a different count of the acetate groups in its structure. In table 1, the acetate group concentration in the different PVA types, which were used in the experiment, are shown. The acetate group concentration was determined by the standard method [6].

To achieve these aims, samples of the photosensitive compositions were exposed to the integrated spectrum light of a DRT-125 mercury-vapor lamp during various exposure times. The illumination on the sample surface was E=0.105 W/sq.cm., the optical blackening determination was carried out by the approved method using the author's hardware-software complex [3].

influence on the photosensitive composition sensitized by the bismuth chloride or by the lead acetate. So, for the PVA-ZnO-BiCl3 composition, the acetate group volume in the PVA structure has no significant influence on the contrast and the maximal density of the optical blackening, but strongly influences the photosensitivity. In the PVA-ZnO-Pb(CH3COO)2 photosensitive composition, we can see another effect: increasing the acetate group rate in the PVA structure leads to the significant decrease of the maximal density of the optical blackening and practically doesn't influence the contrast and photosensitivity.

Getting results allows the conclusion that the chemical structure of the polymer matrix (the acetate group rate) can influence the photosensitivity of the polymer – semiconductor – salt of metal photosensitive compositions. Of notable importance that photosensitivity is a value that is proportional to exposure which changes the density of the optical blackening of the sample surface on the 0.1 in the comparation with unexposed sample. So, this characteristic describes the increasing density of the optical blackening value in the early stage of the image formation process. On the other hand, it is well known that in the small values of the optical density, the following equation is correct: D~σ, (D – density of the optical blackening, σ – colour centre surface density).

Shtarev D.S., Makarevich K.S., Syuy A.V. Impact of a chlorine ions concentration in sensitizer solution on the photographic characteristics of polyvinyl alcohol – zinc oxide – bismuth chloride composition. Optik - International Journal for Light and Electron Optics 123 (2012), pp. 1095-1097.

