In the aspect of character, after analyses of license plate recognition technology home and abroad, we use weighted statistics to make plate in the image in a more prominent position. At the same time, we combine the thick grid feature extraction and momentum BP algorithm to distinguish license. This method improves the accuracy and speed of character recognition.

With the development of social economy, the automobile industry and the transport industry, road transport has become much more important than railway transport. But with the increasing popularity of motor vehicles, the phenomenon of traffic congestion is getting more serious and automated traffic management has become a serious problem. Intelligent Transport System (ITS)[1] produced an effective solution to this problem, which is proposed on the Intelligent Transportation Society of the United States in the 1990.

License Plate Recognition (LPR) is an important component of ITS, applied in the field of electronic billing. As a special computer vision system in the real-tine case, the LPR system mainly includes the sub system of license plate detection and character recognition. The LPR system involves numerous discipline domains, such as Pattern Recognition and Artificial Intelligence, Computer Vision, Digital Image Processing etc. The LPR system can distinguish the license plate numbers, letters and Chinese characters, making the computerized monitoring and management a reality.

Based on image processing technology, the ultimate goal of LPR system is to identify all the license plate number and the color from the picture. It is difficult to search for license plate characters directly from the collected images. In order to reduce difficulty, the general part of the LPR software is divided into three modules: the license plate location, character segmentation and character recognition. The task of license plate location is to determine plate position from the picture. The task of character segmentation is to cut out one by one after the positioning of characters in license plate images. The task of character recognition is to identify characters by segmentation.

Due to many factors, the quality of images is poor in the process of signal collection and importation. It usually contains different degrees of noise, blurred, tilted and defected. The pretreatment will have a direct impact on the ease of recognition and identification of results. Pretreatment can not only remove the image noise, improve image quality and reduce the negative impact, but also effectively reduce the required storage space of the system and improve the recognition speed. Image preprocessing usually includes gray-scale transformation, noise reduction, and image enhancement processing.

The method of noise removal has airspace law (such as median filtering, k average neighbor, etc.) and frequency-domain method (low-pass filter and high-pass filter). Based on the vehicle license plate identification, the edge definition of objects is higher. Therefore, we select the value filtering to carry on the image smoothing.

In order to enhance the contrast of images, make license plate and the background contrast stretching, to enhance image processing is necessary. In fact, image enhancement is an amendment to grayscale image. The main objective is to improve the definition of contour lines of license plate number. While the balance of technology of the straight side chart is the best and the algorithm is simple. In this paper, we use the gray histogram balanced method to the image enhancement. Suppose having n levels grayscale image, and the probability of i level grayscale appearance is pi , so it contains the information content is

The license plate localization is the region which extract license plate from the plate image containing the license plate. In this paper, we use a weighted statistical method to make plate position to be prominent in the image. It is the concrete principle as follows.

The length and breadth proportion of specific rectangle domain is 3.14:1(standard car license proportion of length and breadth). We carry on the weighting statistics operation to three kinds of graph as shown in figure 1 (a), and get the result as shown in figure 1 (b).

According to statistics of China's motor vehicle licensing standards[3], China has three types of standard license plate to identify different objects at present. They are Chinese character, English character and digital & English, including 51 Chinese characters, 25 capital letters except I and 10 digitals. A total of more than 80 license plate characters have the same size and uniform.

In order to eliminate bias on the lattice position, we need to move the whole lattice images of characters to the stipulation position, this process is known as the location of the normalized[4]. This paper uses the method based on the center of mass position normalization. First, calculate the outside frame of characters, and discover the center, then move the characters center to the position which assigned. The anti-jamming ability of this method is strong. Calculate character center (xc, yc )

For reserved character overall construction and detail characteristic, after normalization, each pixel as a grid point input to neural network sorter. The car license character 5(e.g. Figure 2(a)) is normalized the proportion size of 4 4 (e.g. Figure 2 (b)). The black picture element is 1, and the white picture element is 0.

BP neural network is essentially a set of samples of the input and output that is transformed into a nonlinear optimization problem. It is a learning algorithm through the gradient algorithm for solving the question of the weight (e.g. Figure 3).

The BP algorithm has not only the input spot, the output spot, but also one or many concealed spots. Regarding the input signal, firstly, it should disseminate the concealed stratification spot forward. After action function, BP disseminates the implicit strata point's output signal to the output spot. Finally network gives the output result. Excitation function usually selects the function:

Suppose n points that of characters are Sigmoid in a random network. For simplicity, assign the network have an output y , and the output of any point i is oi , and equipped with N samples (xk , yk )(k  1, 2, 3⋯, N ) . To the input xk , the output is yk . The output of point i is oik . The output of point j is net jk   wijoik ,

where d(k) is the negative gradient on k times,  is learning speed, and  [0,1] is momentum factor. When   0 , The correction of weight is only related with the current negative gradient. The weight revision was decided by the negative gradient which previous time circulated.

where n is input number, m is output number, s is concealed number, and c is integer between 1~10. So, there have 18 Chinese characters, 16 English character and 15 digitals in concealed level. The initial weight of BP network is defined in[0,1] . The initial value of learning factor and the momentum factor is respectively

We can see digital and the letter recognition rate is high by Table 3, but the Chinese character recognition rate isn’t ideal. The reason is that on the one hand, English letter and digital quantity are few, but the Chinese characters are many. On the other hand, the structure of Chinese character is complex. In addition, in the actual operation light, weather, photography and other reasons also affect the recognition rate of Chinese characters.

In this paper we use weighted statistics to make plate in the image in a more prominent position. At the same time, we combine the thick grid feature extraction and momentum BP algorithm to distinguish license. The momentum gradient descent law restrains quickly comparing with the steepest descent law by experiment. As there are so many kinds of plates, the paper only studies the common background of the blue license,

