Recent years, the inter-discipline of bioinformatics and neuroscience has been developed with more and more researchers studying in molecular and cellular level, which resulting huge number of publications and findings. A tool of scientometrics, Citespace II was used to identify the hot topic and evolution map of this inter-discipline with the data download from Web of Science. Five research clusters were found with the method of co-citation analysis. The evolution map of knowledge base with 1991-2012 was described.

Neuroscience appeared in the 1960s and mainly studied the structure and function of nervous system. Research at the molecular and cellular level is an important part of it. With the development of information technology and molecular biotechnology, more and more bioinformatics knowledge, such as gene, are used by neuroscience researchers. The interdisciplinary bring new development for bioinformatics and neuroscience.

The data was downloaded from the Web of Science (WOS) database provided by American Institute for Scientific Information (ISI) in March 12, 2012. “Bioinformatics” was used to search the English articles containing this keyword in title, abstract and keywords. The publication time range is 1899 to 2012. In total, 16031 articles were found. Setting “Neuroscience Neurology” as subject area, we get a total of 235 articles and 2852 citation articles. Because we find that the earliest article of 235 articles was published in 1991, the co-citation analysis of the papers starts from 1991 to 2012.

* Co-citation analysis: if two literatures are simultaneously cited by another literature, these two build the relationship of co-citation. The more the two literatures are co-cited, the tighter their relationship is. Co-citation analysis aims to pick out the different fields of researches by the way of classifying the typical literatures in that subject according to the relationship mentioned above.

The network knowledge mapping of co-citation literature composed by these nodes are shown in Fig. 1. According to the property of the key nodes and their space distribution, we divided the network knowledge mapping into 5 clusters and we marked them by C1 to C5 in time sequence, shown in Fig. 1. These five clusters represent the main research direction of Bioinformatics in Neuroscience. After reading and analyzing the typical literature (frequently cited literature) of the five clusters, we summarized the themes of the clusters from C1 to C2 (shown in table 3).

C1 cluster is mainly about the tools and methods on gene expression and sequencing and the study period focused on the 2003-2006.With the rapid development of Human Genome Project ,the data of the nucleic acid, protein sequence and structure is exponential growing which leads to a higher requirement to the tools and methods. As early as 1990,Altschul proposed basic local alignment sequence search tool(BLAST),which optimized the local similarity measures and became a fast sequence comparison methods(Altschul, Gish et al. 1990).Then in 1998,Eisen raised a system of cluster analysis and visualization presents the results. He

analyzed the genome-wide expression data from DNA microarray hybridization and the output was displayed graphically, covering the clustering and the underlying expression data simultaneously in a form intuitive for biologists. In the result, he found that genes of known similar function grouped together and a similar tendency in human data .Thus he proposed that co-expression of genes of known function with poorly characterized or novel genes may provide a simple means of gaining leaded to the functions of many genes for which information was available currently(Eisen, Spellman et al. 1998).At the same time, with the development of IT, network database arises which, to a certain extent ,solves the problem of the dispersion of biological knowledge. For example, Hosack introduced how to get intuitive graphical abstracts from DAVID and use them to make annotations and summaries of identifiers for gene and protein(Dennis Jr, Sherman et al. 2003).

The topic of researches in C2 cluster is GABAB receptors and citing articles are mainly published in 2003- 2006. GABAB receptors are widely present in the central and peripheral nervous system and participate in many important physiological activities and pathological changes working with Gi/o protein. And it has great significance to study the function and regulation mechanism of GABAB receptor and reveal the molecular mechanism of the GABAB receptor in pathogenic. Margeta-Mitrovic in 2001 analyzed the function of GB1 and GB2 subunits in G protein coupling of GABAB receptors and found that only with GB2, G protein coupling of GABAB receptors was also successfully completed. This result supported an important model: a single GPCR monomer with a specific G-protein contact is sufficient (to achieve its function) (Margeta- Mitrovic, Jan et al. 2001). As of 2001, there is no direct evidence that GABAB receptors are present in the arthropod. Mezler proposed the assumption of Drosophila has the GABAB three subclasses, and based it he found the combined effect of two subclasses is similar to the effect of GABAB subclasses in mammals by cloning and functional expression of the three subclasses of Drosophila(Mezler, Müller et al. 2001).It is new indirect evidence for the presentation of GABAB receptors in arthropod body.

The C3 cluster is focusing on the relationship between gene and diseases with the method of microarray technology,and the cited literature was published in the year from 2007 to 2010.In the post-gene era,there is a rapid expansion in the field of bioinformatics, making it an efficient mean to explore the cause of some kinds of disease using the biological computation in which studying the complicated disease from a genetic perspective has become a hot spot. The data mining methods in discovering morbigenous gene, such as the method based on biological network, sequence analysis, gene expression data, are extremely plentiful. Gene expression microarray technology that rising in the post-gene era is the most used. Just as mentioned in the cluster 3,it is applied to diagnose and cure autoimmune encephalomyelitis(Robinson, Fontoura et al. 2003) and gliomas(Rickman, Bobek et al. 2001).

C5 cluster focuses on codon and transcription related field and the cited literature was published in the year from 2011 to 2012.Grantham put forward codon catalog and genome hypothesis that the genome instead of the individual gene is the basic unit in codon selection in 1980(Grantham, Gautier et al. 1980).Then in 2000, Nakaamura Yusuke find the P53AIP1.This gene has an important impact on cell apoptosis and its

transcriptional activation can be regulated by the phosphorylation ser-46(Oda, Arakawa et al. 2000). Castrochavez compared the common codons of men and other animals(drosophila, squid and so on) and revealed that the third distribution of the most common codons in humans is 12-8-2,CGA,nucleosides ending while 13-6-3,UAG,nucleotide ending in squid(Castro-Chavez 2011).

First, five research fields are found in the cross-cutting areas of Bioinformatics and Neuroscience. C1’s theme is the research tools and methods of gene expression and sequence, C2’s theme is research on GABAB receptor, C3’s theme is the application of the micro array technology in diseases study, C4’s theme is the relationship between microRNA and diseases and C5’s theme is the research on the codon and transcriptional process. From the content of the research, we find that bioinformatics research in the field of neuroscience is mainly about the use of gene technology in disease study.

happened because from 1991 to 2003 was the genomic era when the human genome project just began and bioinformatics had been formed, but still in its infancy and the subject knowledge and technology of bioinformatics was not mature. Therefore, few researches in the field of neuroscience appeared. From 2003 is the post-genomic era because the job of sequencing of the human genome project was basically completed. At this time, academia had a higher demand for gene sequencing and gene expression studies and the tools and methods of gene expression and sequencing was improved which not only promoted the development of bioinformatics, but also promoted the bioinformatics researches’ development in the field of neuroscience.

