Objectives: Using hospital information system (HIS) to classify the patients who were treated in the emergency department and discuss the spectrum of diseases. Methods: We collected the clinical information of the patients who were treated in the emergence department from July 1, 2010 to June 30, 2011. The patients were divided into different groups by their disease, and analyzed the numbers and frequencies of each subgroup. Results: From the data of 12 months, we concluded that the most frequencies of diseases are cardiovascular diseases, respiratory diseases, neurological diseases and digestive diseases. There were no significant difference among the first three diseases, but the patients number of digestive diseases were increased in the winter. And the mortality of critical patients in January and February was higher than other months. Conclusion: 1) The increasing patients number of cardio-cerebrovascular diseases was corresponding to the increasing of aging population, and there were no difference in 12 months. 2) The increasing number of digestive diseases between December to February maybe associated with diet change. 3) The mortality of critical patients in January and February was higher than other months.

critical patients, the treatments of patients with various acute diseases and the task in public health emergencies. At present, the defect of the community health care system, the lack of clinical statistical data and the high mobility of patients make it impossible to track the clinical data and the disease outcome after the patients leave the emergency room. And this is the main defect in emergency department in China, which formed the gap between emergency department and some other specialized departments.

The collection, preservation and statistical analysis of the clinical data are carried out by Hospital Information System(HIS), based on the management method of establishing the hospital computer networking, which already have some perfect mature examples in other countries1. Our hospital began to use HIS since 2008. The related clinical data of the patients during the treatment process can be got by using the real-name registration system, computer inputting and a series of management methods. This study want to analyzed the data of the patients in emergency department, to know the spectrum of disease and help us to manage the clinical work in the future.

There are 44182 patients went to emergency department in our hospital from July 1, 2010 to June 30, 2011. And the numbers of the male patients wers 21308, accounting for 48.2%, the female patients were 22874, accounting for 51.8%. Age range was from 16 to 110 years old, and the average age was 60.07 ± 19.73 years old. Table 1 lists the numbers of patients monthly and ratio of the male or female patients.

We list the main diseases described above in table 3, and analyze disease ratio in every month. There is no significant difference among cardiovascular diseases, respiratory diseases and nervous diseases between each month in one year. The incidence of digestive diseases in December, January and February is increased significantly, and there is significantly difference between the data in January and July.

As a window department of the hospital, emergency department is a important place to rescue the critical ill, and would face lots of urgent and complicated situation. In these days, the informatization was rapidly developed in the hospital. And how to use it to improve the advantage of the discipline and the quality of medical care, is the keystone for the development of emergency department. The data of patients who went to emergency department from July 2010 to June 2011 had been analyzed after the emergency doctor workstation was used in the clinical work in our hospital.

Showed from the statistical data, the numbuer of patients had no difference between each month, no matter the mild or critical ill. It maybe have consequent relationship with the development of emergency medical system and urban trasportation in Beijing. Choosing to call 120 or 999 emengency system or self-driving to the hospital nearby, the patient numbers had not been influnenced by the environmental factors as before, such as climate changes.

There is a significant rise of digestive disease incidence in December, January and February, which might be related to two factors. First, the statistics exclude patients with uncomplicated diarrhea, and the exclusion criteria lead to the decrease of the statistical number in the summer and autumn of infectious diarrhea patients. Second, during the period from December to next February, the Chinese intake more high-fat high fever diet. And some patients suffered from digestive disease, often because of uncontrolled diet, and the incidence of cholecystitis, pancreatitis was significantly higher than in other months.

in January and February, the patient's mortality was significant higher than those in other month. It may be related with patients who didn’t want to go to the hospital and delayed for treatment during the Spring Festival. There are 2276 critical patients received urgent treatment in our hospital, as there are 18 beds in emergency intensive critical unit, the average length of stay is 2.89 days.

The retention of patients in emergency department, including critical patients is still very serious. Most of time, the emergency intensive critical unit was saturated, so some critical patients couldn’t get suitable therapy, and there were some patients who had been transferred to other hospitals because of the lack of beds. We can’t draw the conclusion that there were any difference between the patients number in each month from the data, and it only reflected the retention in the emergency intensive critical unit.

Based on the statistics, we found that there were 19 sudden death patients who were sent to the emergency in one year. Reviewing the clinical data, it took the ambulance more than 10 minutes to get to the hospital, and none of these patients received cardiopulmonary resuscitation on the ambulance. All 19 patients were dead when they arrived the hospital. Although the CRP guidelines of the American Heart Association emphasized the importance of the pre-hospital emergency treatment, the clinical data showed that the mortality of arrest occurred out of the hospital was higher that those happened in the hospital, and the patients received less treatment before the professional arrived.

Hospital information system in China has just started, and how to use the relevant technology and improve the informatization for collecting emergency clinical data is an important work for us2. Using our hospital information system, we collected the the patients’ clinical data from July 1, 2009 to June 30, 2010, and analyzed the spectrum of disease in the emergence department. It can provide the data to consummate the data bank in the hospital and form an early warning mechanism in the future, and it also can help us to manage the public health emergencies and epidemic disease3.

