The method to produce the hollow micro/nano fibers through the bicomponent spinneret of electrospinning was introduced and the influence of the process parameters on the morphology of the micro/nano fibers was presented in the paper. The result revealed that the PAN fibers with uniform hollow construction could be collected while the feed rate of the inner solution was set at 0.08ml/h (single hollow fibers) or 0.06ml/h (double hollow fibers). Meanwhile, the morphology was in good condition with 15kv voltage and 20cm receiving distance.

Electrospinning machine is usually composed of spinneret and solution supply system, fiber collection plate and high voltage power supply. The traditional spinneret, with a circular cross section, helps to produce the circular solid fibers which possess limited use[2,3]. At present, the researchers have developed co-axial elecrospinning device which can produce single and hollow micro/nano fibers through electrospinning[4,5,6].

PAN(MW=50000) was provided by Petro-chemicals Jinshan CO., Ltd; N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF) and polyvinylpyrrolidone K-30 (PVP) were purchased from Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd. A high voltage power supply and a trace syringe pump were used in the experiments, which were purchased from the Kansai Electronics (Su zhou) Co., Ltd, and TECH-Knowledge International, Inc, respectively. The morphology of the fibers was characterized by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) (HitachiS-3000N).

The PAN hollow fibers were fabricated through the spinnerets (as shown in Fig. 1). Also the number and arrangement of the inner channels in a spinneret could be adjusted according to the practical requirement. At the experimental conditions, the cortex solution dropped down by gravity and the inner solution fell down by the force of the trace syringe pump. Eliminating the core layer, the hollow fibers were made with the diameter ranging from nanometer to micrometer. Citing the single hollow and double hollow fibers as examples, the section of the fibers might be changed based on the process parameters. Now the influence of the process parameters on the morphology of the micro/nano fibers was analyzed and the result was shown as follow.

In conditions of certain spinning voltage (15kv) and receiving distance (20cm), the fibers with different inner diameters were obtained by adjusting the feed rate of the inner solution. For the single hollow fibers, the feed rate was respectively 0.02 ml/h, 0.04 ml/h, 0.06 ml/h and 0.08ml/h. The SEM photos of the fibers were clearly shown in Fig. 2.

It could be seen from the Fig. 2 that the inner diameters increased along with the feed rate of the inner solution. When the feed rate of the inner solution was less than 0.04 ml/h, the production ratio of the hollow construction was too small to put into practical use. Increasing the feed rate of the inner solution to 0.08ml/h, the ratio of the hollow construction presented a better state. The feed rate could not be too fast, or the core layers were fractured at risk.

As for the double hollow fibers, the variation of hollow construction showed the similar trend with the  from Fig.2 and Fig. 3. When the feed rates of the inner solution were too small, the fibers of ideal section could not be achieved. Increasing the rate to 0.06 ml/h (As shown in figure 3 (b) shows),

 of hollow construction were considered in a better condition. Continuing to increase the feed rate, the double hollow would merge and the cortices tended to fracture. As a result, the feed rate should not be too fast when fabricating the double or triplicate hollow fibers.

When the voltage was small, the fibers were discontinuous, meanwhile there were beadlike structures called slub PAN filament yarn. High voltage was the best way to decrease the diameters (the higher the voltage, the smaller the diameters), but high voltage should be controlled to a certain range. When the voltage kept increasing, the continuity of the fibers became worsen, and the diameter distribution greater. The research found the optimal condition of the voltage would be 15kv. Meanwhile, the diameters of the fibers could be optimized in the process of after- drawing.

volatilize completely at the receiving distance of 10cm. Along with increasing the distance, the solvent volatilized fully and the solution solidified well, finally the uniform diameter fibers with smooth surface could be collected in the plate (Fig. 5(b) and (c)). When it reached to 25cm, there was larger diameter distribution because of unstable dynamic whip. Judging from these, it was 20cm that was the best receiving distance for collecting the fibers.

ss section views were shown as Fig. 6 with the feed rate of 0.08ml/h (single hollow fibers) or 0.06ml/h (double hollow fibers) of the inner solution, voltage of 15kv and receiving distance of 20cm. In this condition, the outer diameters of fibers ranged from 800 nm to 1  m with the inner diameters being about 300nm-400nm (single hollow fibers) or 100nm-200nm (double hollow fibers).

With the help of the bicomponent spinneret, single hollow fibers and double hollow fibers had been fabricated. This research analyzed the influence of the process parameters on the morphology of the micro/nano fibers. It revealed that the fibers with uniform hollow construction could be fabricated in the plate while the feed rate of the inner solution was set at 0.08ml/h (single hollow fibers) or 0.06ml/h (double hollow fibers). Meanwhile, the surface morphology was in good condition with 15kv voltage and 20cm receiving distance. Also the number and arrangement of the inner channels in a spinneret could be adjusted according to the practical requirement.

