This article introduced an accurate to ascertain the size of fine grinding medium. Comparative grinding tests are done by using cast iron segment steel ball. Grinding test results showed that mill capacity and grinding efficiency of cast iron segment could be really superior to steel ball. Grinding and flotation indexes have gotten obvious improvement when applying optimized fine grinding medium for industrial experiment.

As the world has industrialized, the demands for mineral resources are increasing. As far as our country, billions of tons mineral was grinded by using grinding equipment. Grinding production indexes improvement can make grinding's follow-up homework indexes optimized, such as increasing further valuable mineral liberation degree and reducing valuable mineral over grinding thereby improving concentrate grade, recovery rate of valuable mineral can be increased and metal loss is reduced, etc[1-4]. However, along with the deepening of the exploitation of mineral resource, coarse dissemination size and high grade free milling ore less and less. In order to meet the need of production, people had to mine the refractory low-grade ores which the component is complex and fine-grained dissemination. -200 mesh must up to 80% when these low grade,

In fine grinding, steel ball size is very important. If steel ball over size, crushing force becomes strong, this will lead to penetrability crushing and make ore over crush. If steel ball under size, hitting force becomes lighter, this will make ore less fine. Fine grinding medium is determined exactly, the aim is to form accurate crushing force to grind ore and improve fine grinding efficiency. However, most concentrators generally there is the problem of fine grinding medium over sized. This problem has become more and more serious[5-8].

Comparative experiments are one of the most effective, reliable and directive methods to determine the optimal ball size. In the lab, under the same grinding condition doing experiment with different grinding medium. By comparing the effect of grinding and determine the best grinding medium size. In the case of Haikou phosphate rock (PR) concentrator in Yunnan province and optimize it with optimal grinding medium size. The grinding medium size was ĳ60mm in the secondary stage fine grinding before tuning it. This is obviously larger. So far, Duan’s half-theory formula is the most accurate method for calculating the diameter of the steel ball[9-10].

According to the ball mill’s working conditions on the job. The size of the ball diameter is calculated. The result was shown in table 1 and size composition of the grinding product by using different sizes of ball diameter is shown in table 2.

increased gradually. The optimal ball size isĳ40mm, because the yield of -200 mesh and -0.1mm is the highest and the content of the coarse fraction is the lowest. The result is in accordance with the results of the theoretical calculations. ĳ60 mm was used in the former manufacturing process is obviously oversize.

In the secondary stage fine grinding process, the optimal ball size is 40mm, but different size is better than single size. So we researched the best ball diameter ratio in the end. According to the size composition, we can determine the best ball diameter ratio. The calculated data of the ball diameter in the initial stage was shown in table 3.

According to the ball ratio ĳ60:ĳ50:ĳ40:ĳ30=40:30:20:10, the average ball diameter is 50mm, the total weight is 14kg. And let cast iron segment into a model group, because two new size were added, the large size phenomenon markedly reduce. The size of 35×40, 30×35, 25×30, 20×25 take up one fourth of the cast iron segment group. The two mix groups were grinded in the same test condition in practice. The grinding result was shown in table 4.

As was shown in table 4: Because the grinding area of cast iron segment is bigger than the steel ball, the grind result of the mixed cast iron segment is better than the mixed steel ball group. The product fraction constitute of the cast iron segment is better than the steel ball, not only the yield of the unfine is reduce, but also the yield of the over grinding is reduce, moreover the easy selection fraction (0.074mm~0.038mm) is 9 points bigger than the steel ball group. The fineness(-200mesh) of the cast iron segment is bigger than the stell ball group.

The results of fineness medium optimize are used to do industrial test and the flotation indexes in the concentrator are by statistical in a year. The flotation indexes are shown in table 5. The contrast of the flotation indexes between the before industrial test and the after industrial test are shown in table 6.

After the industrial test, the yield of P2O5 concentrate growing by 2.29 percent more than before the industrial test, the recovery of P2O5 concentrate growing by 2.39 percent. The improvement of the yield and the recovery of the P2O5 concentrate depend largely on the improvement of the grinding product size composition characteristic and the enhance of the mineral liberation degree after optimize the fineness grinding medium. The application of the selective grinding new process improve the grinding process and the flotation index process overall[11].

Steel ball is the traditional fine grinding medium. But it is not the best fine grinding medium. Frist, its grinding area is small and has big hitting power. On geometrical shape analyzes the cast iron segment has a big grinding area and a good turn function, the effect of fine grinding is superior to the steel ball. The fine grinding process mainly on grinding and support by a slight shock, so grinding medium is made of cast iron material which has wear-resisting and low cost, it can avoid weaknesses.

