In real life, an individual user must simultaneously process huge amounts of unstructured data, information and knowledge in various uncertain processes. Moreover, one must permanently switch between them. There are many single-purpose approaches for the processing of knowledge, mining techniques, soft computing or knowledge based systems. However, they are not very user friendly; this is why users need many software solutions to be sustainable. This paper refers to a multipurpose pre-programmed knowledge system called BIKE, which enables individuals to process knowledge and computerize knowledge-based processes as an all- in-one solution. The system works as an interactive software application based on database technology utilizing Boolean logic. It covers several fields in informatics, ongoing from an interdisciplinary definition of knowledge, knowledge tables, and the formulated batch knowledge-processing paradigm. This paper explains and illustrates how it works in practice on a personal level for individuals.

When working with knowledge it is linked to the mental processes of the human mind. These processes are very complex and sophisticated, that is, they are automatically uncertain and have a large variability of potential solutions. This complicates any computer support related to the processing of data, information and knowledge. There are many, however, just single purpose approaches for the processing of knowledge or mining techniques, although an universal approach or software application is still missing.

Knowledge is a key element in teaching and learning, decision-making, knowledge management and other daily-performed processes by individuals. For instance, if one has perfect software for the acquisition of information, it does not automatically mean that it would be a suitable basis for the creation of teaching texts (what about the quality concerning educational content?). As well, when teaching, communication, feedback, what about quality of didactical approaches? Perhaps such software could be perfect for solving automation within a technical system. In living systems it is uncertain that the students or individual users (via informal learning, self - study) would understand the subject matter (it’s a long journey with many processing steps, from the point of selecting optimal content from information sources until the transfer into the learner’s brain). Challenges for computer support in the view of education on an institutional level are discussed exhaustively in [1] (regarding knowledge transfer from textbooks to global social memory).

All knowledge issues mentioned above were solved on an individual’s level within implementation technology-enhanced learning (as one of the European Union research policy priorities) when teaching bachelors. This resulted into developing a supportive personalised system BIKE (Batch Information and Knowledge Editor). The core of this system forms a database application programmed within the conventional FPW 2.6a database platform. However, the application is adapted to present technology, that is, the focus is on interoperability with common internet browsers, Windows, freeware, open sources, office packages, including other database platforms (MySQL, IBM DB2). The use of BIKE enables users to combine informatics activities together, which would otherwise require dozens of single-purpose software applications. The BIKE approach for processing knowledge and mining techniques is illustrated more closely in this paper.

Figure 2. (a) illustrates a method of how people use and process knowledge when solving their daily tasks. Users process information from various sources (internet, personal know-how, journals, mobile phones etc.) step-by-step through many levels to transform it into knowledge which is in their heads. This knowledge is used to support personal processes; however, people must switch among them. The processing of knowledge

Knowledge workers need to permanently search, browse, and mine knowledge from specialised internet databases focused on research news, technological data, scientific information, etc. Moreover, these are mostly multilingual, thus a cognitive load on individuals is extremely high, for example, the EU CORDIS Marketplace database focuses on results from funded projects (http://cordis.europa.eu/marketplace/) in five languages. Fig. 3 illustrates how the user can create a set of browsable navigation files for research purposes.

The bike system was developed with the intention that a computer, like a user’s partner, should expand one’s quality of his life and sustainability. According to one of BIKE’s authors’ opinions (Svetsky) the paradigm and definition of knowledge is analogous to how people think and act. People perform processes that use knowledge that needs to be worked into daily life. Knowledge is also a key element within teaching and learning. The first stage of development was focused on the programming of knowledge flow (I) between information sources and knowledge tables (basically, content issues were computerised). The following came into question, what about knowledge flow (II) – between a knowledge base and teaching processes? What about knowledge transfer between teacher and students? The answers pointed to activities such as, the teacher must prepare teaching material, texts from the knowledge flow (I) and must communicate with students and concentrate knowledge (subject matter) in the classroom in a limited time and space whilst accounting for didactic quality. Thus, the knowledge flow (II) should also be programmed. This resulted in a strategy that technology-enhanced learning is to be understood as the automation of teachers or learning activities, where knowledge is the key parameter. Following this, it was found that writing codes for solving the knowledge flow (II) requires “helping the computer” by unifying the content and the teaching process in order to be computerizable. Without this approach, any programmer would not have an idea of how the communication and teaching process must be programmed. Therefore the approach for technology-enhanced learning must be

The supportive knowledge system BIKE was presented by examples of knowledge processing based on the definition of the knowledge and batch knowledge processing paradigm. This system covers dozens of informatics categories, inter alia, advanced search, retrieval and “string mining techniques” (both off-line and online). This in-house developed database application enables individuals to have support of human decision- making, teaching and learning, knowledge management, administration and other actions in a user friendly way. BIKE works as a user’s partner, it has its own “social memory” that increases an individual’s performance and automates its personal activities. The approach for the solving of knowledge processing was explained in detail and briefly illustrated by the use of the analysed documents and the exploration of a multilingual internet database Marketplace. The BIKE approach was also compared with state-of-the-art. One of the future focuses should be on learning analytics and analysis of students’ behaviour via the use of the BIKE system.

