This paper begins with a brief introduction to the basic knowledge of Smart, as well as the drawbacks of traditional AVC. Then from four aspects, it expounds Smart AVC's main function comprehensively. By some problems of the conventional AVC’s practical application connecting with the actual situation and the new functions of the Smart AVC, this paper points out that the conclusion of Smart AVC is inevitable. It also points out that the future development direction of the Smart AVC.

Smart AVC is an important part of the smart grid’s construction. The technology features of the Smart AVC is information, digitization, automation, and interactive. In Smart AVC’s system’s design and application, it can use structural systematic, fine analysis, intelligent control and interactive harmonization to reflect specifically. At present, the Smart AVC’s building still belongs to the concept level, and its specific implementation is confronted with great difficulties. Simple Smart AVC is not a simple and direct

organization and integration. It requires co-endeavour between power generation, power supply, users and academia and the engineering profession for smart AVC. In the near future, I believe that Smart AVC will be achieved in our country and it will bring incalculable benefits for our lives and the power grid. Smart AVC system can control the grid real-time operation status, detect and eliminate hidden faults. In the participation of less labor, it can avoid blackouts caused by voltage and has the grid self-healing capabilities. In addition, the Smart AVC can optimize grid operation, support the access to solar, wind and other good distributed power, and reduce the power costs and increase supply reliability [1,2].

Traditional AVC can solve voltage qualification rate and power factor qualified rate, reduce the net loss rate and effectively reduce the sub-connected switches of power transformer, capacitors, the number of action times of the electric reactor equipment .And traditional AVC play an important role in these facets. But it exists the fault that adjustment process is not enough narrow, and it is not able to achieve the goal of the true sense of reactive power site and stratified balance finely. What’s more, it also cannot control voltage fluctuations completely reasonably and cannot be self-healing to recover voltage in the grid failure [3,4]. Finally, it claims that the control mode of traditional AVC play an important role in its special field. But due to the imperfections of its function, there are a series of much-needed improvements in the operation, which determines the development of the Smart AVC is required.

The building of Smart AVC need to address not only the traditional AVC’s existed problems, but also to respond to the new problems that may arise in the smart grid actively. Smart AVC’s objectives are as follows: The research and development of Smart AVC should be carried out on the basis of the traditional AVC, and it could be compatible with traditional AVC, reduce waste, optimize resources. Smart AVC is not subject to any channel or grid failure factors. The results from distributed computing adapt to any changes in the operation mode functionality. Smart AVC creates self-healing rely on the closed-loop control system formulated by in- place calculating compensation. It can avoid the purpose of the power outage due to voltage problems, and can effectively resist the attack to help the grid to improve disaster prevention capacity; and is able to handle huge amounts of data, reactive scheduling and active coordination of scheduling [1,5].

Smart AVC’s self-healing function is the ability that the system can restore the voltage level in the case of little or no human intervention when grid causes voltage collapse accident. Essentially the grid quickly achieves the capacity of local reactive balance. To achieve smart grid’sself-healing, the core is real-time decision-making online, realizing trouble-free and stable operation, small fault autonomy run. Preventing the occurrence of cascading failures of large area is grid’s self-prevention and self-recover when the big failure event occur.

state of the smart grid could be partitioned first and the nature of the work that it can be divided into a very fragile area, fault disturbance area and repair and maintenance area when the running state is abnormal. After performing workspace, three non-normal zone can be controlled respectively, and ultimately ensure the grid to optimize the control grid of run in the normal zone. So the grid realizes the optimization run, and optimize the allocation of grid resources. In this way, the power grid operation can be divided into the following five areas: optimized operation zone, routine operation zone, abnormal and vulnerable zone, contingency and fault zone and repair maintenance zone.

It has higher quality power. It uses advanced technology for power electronics and power quality monitoring and compensation techniques to achieve optimization of reactive power and voltage control. It can ensure voltage uninterrupted power quality sensitive equipment, high quality, and continuity of supply.

It is more interactive. It supports in the distribution network access to a large number of distributed power generation unit, energy storage, renewable energy, and the seamless connection to distribution network. And it supports micro-network operation, and increases the flexibility of the distribution network run and load reliability of supply.

open network system, each part of the system can be a two-way communication achieved through the establishment of an advanced communication system. Smart distribution grid AVC carries its own software tools, which are highly integrated interface, trends, reports, and other services within the database, making the system more simple and effective. Smart distribution grid AVC can finely display real-time conditions and matters in the man-machine interface, and can choose to display the conditions and events, event playback, update speed information according to user requirements.

In recent years, with the gradual increase of the energy crisis and the growing awareness of environmental protection, wind power and photovoltaic power generation are increasingly important, and they have become the most promising renewable energy power generation. As the most potential for development of renewable energy generation technologies, wind power has a rapid development in China, and a lot of them are access to the distribution network. Due to random and intermittent of wind energy, wind turbine output power changes with wind speed randomly, and wind farms and network will interfere with the normal operation of the existing distribution system. Therefore, the wind farm active power control incorporated into the distribution network, the reactive voltage regulator and optimized operation with the grid have a widespread concern. Reactive power and voltage control of the traditional grid, by changing the OLTC transformer voltage ratio and switching capacitor banks regulator, reduces network losses and improve voltage quality, when voltage quality requirements are met. Thereby, it enhances the power distribution economy and security of the network operation. The large-capacity wind farms and network operation will interfere with the normal operation of the existing distribution network voltage regulation equipment, and even lead to the distribution network voltage control function failure seriously and affect the optimal operation of the power grid.

