able. For example, modeling outputs of analytical data such as spec- tra (MS, FT-IR, UV–Vis [31]) or more complex in vivo data all the way to more abstract predictions, such as potential success of commer- cialization [32,33] are possible with machine learning. While learning from known molecule related data is potentially valuable, going be- yond what is currently known or state-of-the-art and proposing new molecules to synthesize based on the machine learning models, a physic- ochemical property, or other data is an area of major interest. There has been substantial activity in recent years with small molecules designed and generated by generative models using many different architectures such as Variational Autoencoder [34], Generative Adversarial Networks

optimize molecules and there is a long history of technologies (fragment- based drug discovery [55], structure-based design, computer-aided de- sign etc.). Other technologies such as DNA encoded libraries can rapidly generate billions of potential structures which may need to be scored by machine learning models [56]. A bottleneck for scoring such libraries (or massive numbers of virtual molecules in general) may be in the genera- tion of fingerprints (such as ECFP6) and their storage before processing. One solution is to use the structure encoded as SMILES (or other struc- tural representations such as SELFIES [57]) as the input for modeling using an end-to-end convolution-LSTM model [58]. These types of ma- chine learning algorithms are likely comparable to several others when their statistics are compared, suggesting again that there may be several different machine learning algorithms that can be applied (Table S3). Using convolution-LSTM models for predictions for a billion molecules in a DNA-encoded library, such that calculations take place on the GPU allowing parallel model prediction and pre-processing, produces an ap- proximate 50-fold speed up on prediction generation over models built with ECFP6 fingerprints alone on our in house 10 GPU servers. While this is rather limited example, these types of end-to end machine learn- ing models using SMILES have also been demonstrated in recent com- parisons with ECFP6 for prediction of UV–Vis spectra [31] and may be utilized for other types of datasets as well.

Fig. 2. A case study of generative peptide design for GLP-1. A. An RNN-LSTM was trained on a dataset of 1554 antimicrobial peptides and generated peptides were scored with a GLP-1 agonist model generated from data in ChEMBL. B. dimensionality reduction using a t-SNE plot and nearest neighbor distance of generated proposed GLP-1 agonists. C. visualizing de novo generated GLP-1 agonists alongside commercial GLP-1 drugs to illustrate they are close in chemical property space.

Thinking about the bigger picture, machine learning may also be a means to an end, and that end is the molecule that has a desired ac- tivity which is ultimately patented to create intellectual property that a company then monetizes. Machine learning models applied to the con- tinuum of drug discovery could be readily used to develop a pipeline of small or large molecules for future licensing or to serve as a start- ing point for venture capital investors to found new companies. If mul- tiple companies take a similar approach, then it could create a mar- ket around AI-designed molecule assets for their industry segment. At the same time, such AI-based molecule design companies could offer this expertise and capabilities to others to create a new service industry (contract AI organization). This sharing of expertise and cross fertiliza- tion of data and technologies across molecule-related industries may be inevitable, blurring the boundaries between chemical industries. Such companies can ultimately improve the design and selection of molecules that avoid likely predictable failures associated with undesirable toxicity which is also an area that crosses industries (e.g human, animal health, agrochemical and consumer products) and which is already possible us- ing the knowledge captured by AI. As a perhaps over-used example, the commercial interest and investment in kinase inhibitors is at an all-time high (US$66.7Bn by the year 2025) but the companies in this area are yet to capitalize on the many afore-mentioned AI technologies like gen- erative de novo approaches to developing compounds that target specific kinases or multiple kinases and avoid others. To date, only a few kinases have been used as examples for generative approaches [52] (Table 1) but they could be used for the hundreds of kinases to identify the most chemically tractable, that would never be possible experimentally. We

In summary, we have highlighted several examples that illustrate how AI applied to molecule design may impact several related indus- tries involved in molecule design including the pharmaceutical industry and others. The increased visibility and awareness of the potential of AI as applied to drug discovery for COVID-19 [61] has been one of the few good things to have come out of the pandemic, even if it has delivered few notable successes to date (Table 1). What will be interesting to see is whether AI technology does indeed increase the long-term productiv- ity and success of the new pharmaceutical companies that are attracting so much recent interest. We are cautiously optimistic that the time for AI in the pharmaceutical industry is here and that it will have a lasting impact. While we do not have all the answers to the questions raised in this perspective, our goal was to illustrate a recent observation that we are currently treating these AI technologies like a commodity. There are clearly still significant challenges and opportunities to applying them, leaving plenty of scope for future research and reviews. There are also ethical issues that have not been addressed, as these generative machine learning technologies are so readily accessible that they could be eas- ily misused without the need for too much underlying knowledge. We look forward to discussing these and other topics with the community of scientists that are involved in this field.

CAM and 1R43ES031038-01 from NIEHS (PI – Sean Ekins). “Research reported in this publication was supported by the National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences of the National Institutes of Health under Award Number R43ES031038. The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the oﬃcial views of the National Institutes of Health.”

