This paper presents a non-fragile controller design method based on system quadratic performance optimization. For the additive controller gain variations, the necessary and sufficient conditions for the existence of non-fragile state feedback controller are given and transformed to the LMI problems, which simplifies the solutions to obtain non-fragile state feedback controllers. The flight control simulation results prove the reliability and validity of the method.

System modelling can never describes the engineering plant exactly, and lots of scholars showed interesting on the system optimal problems with system and external uncertainty [ZHOU et al., 1996, YU et al., 2002, WU et al., 2006]. The Guaranteed Cost Control presented by Chang [Sheldon et al., 1972] tackled this problem, and can be seemed as the linear quadratic optimal problem's extension to system uncertainty. But such feedback controller which tackles the uncertainty of controlled plant and the closed-loop performance

optimization needs to be implemented exactly. This demand seems validity, but actually, because of the inevitable uncertainty in advanced controller operation, it's impossible in the actual engineering. The controller uncertainty is composed by environment temperature variation, the digital device's word capacity, data transform error, etc.

As the analysis and synthesis of closed system which is composed of plant and controller, the robust control approach has the consideration of the control fragile problem. And the fruitful results of robust control theory are helpful to tackle the non-fragile problem. Theoretical research and engineering practice show that, if we divide the uncertainty of plant and controller, the robust and non-fragile are interactive. When the robust from the closed system to the uncertainty is stronger, then the closed system is fragile or sensitive to the uncertainty of controller. Keel et al., 1997 concludes that the fragile of controller will be worse as the order of controller become higher. So it's important to consider the controller's uncertainty during the controller design and synthesis, e.g. non-fragile control.

Over recent years, many remarkable achievements have been achieved in developing advanced non-fragile controller [Famularo et al., 1998, Yang et al., 2000], but the common approaches with operator theory or Riccati inequality are complex. According to the additive controller gain uncertainty, this paper presents the non-fragile controller synthesis problem based on the optimal performance control, which controller will be tackled using the LMI toolbox in Matlab® software. A mathematical simulation of flight controller design is presented to show the validity of the method above.

Let X  P1 , K X  W , then the Eq. (6) can be got. If the feasible solution to the LMIs (6) is existed, the control strategy u(t) = W ∗ ( X ∗ )—1 x(t) is the non-fragile state feedback controller.

