A medication method is given for different time interval and the weight change. Due to the patient's weight is different, and the time intervals of the same medication are not easy to realize, and the velocity of the metabolism is not the same at night and day. And the absorbing velocity is also different, so the dosage of the drug should be different at different time points. According to the rate of change of the concentration of drug and dosage is in proportion, that is the modeling mechanism, two mathematical models are established for the daytime and nighttime drug concentrations. Through solving and analysis of being the model, the following conclusions are obtained: patients in the morning dose is relatively large, and at noon and in the evening is the same but less than the morning, as well as the weight and the dosage of the drug dose relationship. Thus according to the model manufacture different dose of pills, the pharmaceutical factory can convenient to patients taking. According to this method, the doctor also can prescribe for the patients of different dose prescription. The patients will be in the shortest possible time to heal, but not of physical harm.

To establish a reasonable medication model, gives the reasonable medication methods, for physicians to prescribe drugs to correct scheme, and for pharmaceutical manufacturers to provide a better production of tablets or pharmacy methods, and better services for diseased fishes, improve diseased fishe cure rate, diseased fishes, doctors and medicine manufacturers to put forward scientific workers a has both important theoretical significance, but also has great practical significance to research topic. Pan, Gao, Qin, 2010 have obtained some medicine models for different time intervals. However, the paper did not consider the person's weight is different, therefore, given the different time intervals and weight change medication model has important practical significance.

This paper is organized as follows: in the section 2, according to the rate of change of the concentration of drug and medication is proportional to the amount of the modeling mechanism, in the 3 given reasonable assumptions, several mathematical models are established for diseased fishes in a variety of body weight of daytime and nighttime drug concentration; in the section 3, the mathematical models are solved and analyzed; in the section 4, these rationality of math models are verified, and some results are obtained for the diseased fishes in the morning dose is relatively large, and the noon and evening dose of the same, but the morning dose is relatively small, as well as the dosage increased with the weight variation laws. Thus for pharmaceutical factory provides scientific pharmaceutical method, and it provides doctors to diseased fishes with different dose prescription scheme issued. Can make the diseased fishes both in the shortest possible time to heal, but not of physical harm.

A1) Taking medicine cycle is 1 days, Taking medicine 3 times a day, morning, noon, evening wear time, time intervals are 6 hours, 6 hours and 12 hours a day, respectively. One morning (credited as n0 day) take this medicine first times early in the morning. Let 600g fish dosage is Qc (Qc is the optimum charge to be cured disease). Due to the average body weight at different times is different, therefore, we will crowd into on the basis of 60kg, every 10kg increment or reduction of 10kg as a phase value, so the initial dose should be Qci

The drug concentration distribution in vivo as shown in Fig. 1, we omitt it here. Fig. 1 shows, the first dose is directly to achieve the required drug concentration levels of Qci to the diseased fishe. Later, at different time points of the dosage according to the number of days are periodic changes. The first day of medication for 3 times is that (Qci,Qi1,Qi1), behind every morning, afternoon, evening medication is (Qi3,Qi1,Qi1), respectively.

According to this model (1), (2), in accordance with the method provided in this paper the medication, the drug's advantages are: can the concentration of drugs in the body from the outset to achieve the required level, and has been the level required from the human body began to decline, thereby maximizing efficacy. The disadvantage is: the first big dose of medication may cause diseased fishe discomfort, adverse effects, such as nausea, vomiting, dizziness, and even myocardial infarction. If there is severe physical discomfort, the description of the first dose is too big, must be properly adjusted, so that it can be adapted to.

Because the strong degree is different for the metabolism of day and night, we are taking a cold, brain atherosclerosis and coronary heart disease diseased fishes with thousands of inspection by the method of the paper, the inspection effect is nice. Now the different doses Qci and (Qi1, Qi1, Qi3) cycle medication method, and the original average quantity medicine method is Q, the cure of a cold days than λ1 =6/8=75%. For the brain artery sclerosis, two kinds of treatment to cure the number of days, ratio is λ2=47/60≈78%. On A-type hepatitis diseased fishes, two kinds of treatment to cure the number of days, ratio is λ3=40/55≈73%. From this, we can see that the results are obtained greatly improve the efficiency of cure in the paper, and this medication method is complete with practical.

(1) and (2), the utility range is wide, can be applied to other fish (such as: turbot, prawn, giant) and terrestrial animal (such as horses, cattle, sheep etc.). However, for other animal, it is necessary to design the initial dose of animal, and according to the animal development, the initial dosage must be adjusted as appropriate.

In this paper, we according to the actual situation of some diseased fishes are as follows: in the day and night with the metabolic rates are different, and of drug absorption rate is different, and the diseased fishes weight is also different. Through to the diseased fishes taking medicine time interval of different actual characteristic, a result is get for the different time the dose is different. And according to the rate of change and medication drug concentration is proportional to the modeling mechanism, in the 3 reasonable assumptions, established two mathematical model in the day and night with drug concentration. Through solving and analysis these models, it is concluded that the diseased fishes in the morning dose is opposite bigger, and in the afternoon and evening dose the same but less than the morning. as well as the weight and the dosage of the drug dose relationship.That is, medication is Qci for the first, after this, according to dose for (Qi1, Qi1, Qi3) this periodic medicine method. Then, with the following disease and as an example: A cold, brain atherosclerosis diseased fishes and A-hepatitis diseased fishes, for the feasibility and effectiveness of the medicine are inspected for the medication method in the paper. Thus for pharmaceutical factory has given a scientific pharmaceutical methods, namely manufacturing cycle dose tablets or potion Qci, and (Qi1, Qi1, Qi3). Finally, for the doctor to be provided with different doses of prescription plan. In order to make the diseased fishe is in the shortest possible time to heal, and not cause to the body harmful.

