The data of production engineering industry has gradually increased after years of development, but it lacks of a unified, interactive, visual information query and show platform. This paper focuses on production engineering construction equipment and scheme of the system architecture of the simulation system, it analyzes the basic required function of the system—model show, stratigraphic simulation, and production data query,and also introduces the key technology of system, including the equipment model transformation, the stratigraphic of the simulation, the realization of human- computer interaction. The system can provide users with complete database information query, intuitively shows the problems of the component parts information and production measures, etc, so it is helpful for engineering design personnel to design program, reporting and analysis.

Determine the hierarchical structure model, through the analysis of the model, the model tree segmentation and separately modeling and model integration at last. The advantage of this is that improve the utilization rate of the model, reduce duplication of work, but also conducive to management. And 3dsmax also offers a hierarchical structure to organize and manage complex model.

We use example technology, and texture mapping technology LOD technology in model optimization. In this project, because many tools is widely used ,so if every tool, component is to recreate, and load into memory to operate, it will cause great waste of resources, so it can use examples technology, the same tools in memory store only one instance, after translation, zoom and turn we can get other tools. The LOD is the technology trading space for time , in this project we constructing some details of the different hierarchy model, when driver the model it can automatically select the relevant details according to judge rules, so as to achieve the real-time model simplified, and do not affect visual result. And texture mapping technology is the

Fracturing, stopping water, acidification, the cutting technology etc that used in increase production, are simulation the liquid like water, oil and foam. Take acidification for example, its principle is through the acid on the rock cementation, or space, crack formation, restore or improve the gap and fracture permeability. So in the simulation, we should inject acid underground, acid in the rock go on chemical reaction, and viscous liquid turn into bubble etc.

Through the particles construction and realization above, we can simulation acidification process better. In the system we use polygon to replace point particle, and use the texture mapping technology to make acid pictures map to the polygon. It can not only improve the efficiency of the draw, and can enhance the authenticity of the simulation. Figure 3 shows the acidification simulation result.

In the realization of dynamic form, we can show required field in a database to users in the form checkbox, users can choose interesting fields to form customization. And in the internal implementation process, user's choosing field is also based on multiple inquires construction data set process. The system will treat all input inquires "logic and" conditions or "logic or", and pass combined inquires into the bottom logical library of dynamic form, operate interactively by processing function of the logical library and database, eventually return the data that meet the conditions and show to the user in the form of form.

The wellbore information dynamic processing and display system is the use of virtual reality technology to display 3d and manipulate, dynamically draw strata and dynamically display assignment measures. According to the actual application feedback, this system can provide a complete inquiry, analysis tools for engineering design personnel, and directly shows the problems of the various parts information, the well completion status and production measures and so on. It also guide the construction work in well site, help drilling crews and other subjects crews interact and cooperate together, and it can be used in the complex accident prevention treatment, real-time data analysis and decision, etc.

