(PVA-ZnO/TiO2-Pb(CH3COO)2) [4], polyvinyl alcohol – cuprum chloride / ferric chloride [5] and some others. These classes of compositions exhibit photosensitivity to UV irradiation. Another general factor for these compositions are realizing the direct blackening processes in it, which means that the visible image forms directly under irradiation without an additional development stage.

Improving or changing any properties of such photosensitive compositions – improving the photosensitivity and/or maximal density of the optical blackening, changing the spectral sensitivity range, - is key. As a rule, such changes of the properties of the photosensitive compositions are achived from modifications in the photocatalyst or salt of metal (sensitizer). The influences of the polymer matrix on the photosensitive composition properties were not studied.

To prepare samples in the first stage it is necessary to disperse the zinc oxide into the polymer matrix. For this, 12 grams of zinc oxide (II) moistened with water was put into 100 ml of the 10% PVA water solution (which was homogenate on the bain-marie before it). After one hour of settling time, the 60 grams of the resulting mixture was coated on the glass plate with an area of 234 sq.cm. Then the composition was dried in a horizontal orientation at room temperature for 24 hours.

In the way described, three sets of samples were prepared. Each one differed by the type of the usable polyvinyl alcohol. It is well known [6] that a different PVA type has a different count of the acetate groups in its structure. In table 1, the acetate group concentration in the different PVA types, which were used in the experiment, are shown. The acetate group concentration was determined by the standard method [6].

To achieve these aims, samples of the photosensitive compositions were exposed to the integrated spectrum light of a DRT-125 mercury-vapor lamp during various exposure times. The illumination on the sample surface was E=0.105 W/sq.cm., and the optical blackening determination was carried out by the approved method using the author's hardware-software complex [3].

From the table it can be seen that the acetate group concentrations in the polymer structure have influence on the photosensitive composition sensitized by the bismuth chloride. So, for the PVA-ZnO-BiCl3 composition, the acetate group volume in the PVA structure has no significant influence on the contrast and the maximal density of the optical blackening, but strongly influences the photosensitivity (fig. 2).

Getting results allows the conclusion that the chemical structure of the polymer matrix (the acetate group rate) can influence the photosensitivity of the polymer – semiconductor – salt of metal photosensitive compositions. Of notable importance is that photosensitivity is a value that is proportional to exposure, which changes the density of the optical blackening of the sample surface on the 0.1 in the comparison with the unexposed sample. So, this characteristic describes the increasing density of the optical blackening value in the early stage of the image formation process. On the other hand, it is well known that in the small values of the optical density, the following equation is correct: D~σ, (D – density of the optical blackening, σ – colour centre surface density).

Thus, in all likelihood, the presence of the acetate groups in the PVA structure initiate the PVA deacylation reactions (removal of the acetic acid residue) in the early stage of the irradiation. It is well known that deacylation reaction occurs more easily in the presence of an electrophilic agent due to its high polarity of the  bond. Such an agent in the PVA-ZnO-BiCl3 composition may be a hydrogen ion H+, formed in the composition during the photoinitiated processes [1].

the early stage of the photostimulates processes, are stipulated by the removal of the acetic acid residue. Once these processes are complited, then the dehydrogenation and dehydration reactions begin. From this it can be explained that the more rapid increase of the optical blackening density in cases, when the 18/11 type of the PVA was used (nearly 14% of the acetate group). Versus other types of PVA, which contain a lesser order of magnitude (table 1).

Shtarev D.S., Makarevich K.S., Syuy A.V. Impact of a chlorine ions concentration in sensitizer solution on the photographic characteristics of polyvinyl alcohol – zinc oxide – bismuth chloride composition. Optik - International Journal for Light and Electron Optics 123 (2012), pp. 1095-1097.

