Regional financial risk that not only influenced by the external factors, but also be restricted by specific economic environments and market structure in this area. Imbalance development in regional economy and finance will make the financial risk having a strong regional characteristic. Otherwise, the resistance ability to local risk of regional finance is weaker; the local financial turmoil could trigger regional financial crisis and even national financial crisis.

Another important content of economic growth is foreign trade. Foreign trade is the core of various countries’ foreign economic relations, which plays an irreplaceable role in the economic development of all countries. Import and export trade’s balance of payments of a country is the important part of current account in its international payments; it is also the significant factor which could affect countries’ balance of payments. Foreign trade multiplier theory of Keynesian economics suggests that exports produce double aggrandized effect to national income and output, and the imports produce double shrank effect to its national income. The scale of the trade balance would eventually affect the economic development in China, and then

The first to propose the concept of financial stress and construct financial stress index is the economists Illing and Liu in Canadian Bank. According to the description of Illing and Liu (2003):”Financial stress is a continuous variable, its extremum is called financial crisis”. The financial stress will increase with the increase of expect financial loss, risk or uncertainty.

In formula (1), CFSIt-k represent CFSI lagging K issue, Xt-ki represent other explanatory lagging K issue. Through the stepwise regression analysis, using T-test, R2-test, DW test, AIC information judgment and others, choosing the best combination of variables and the optimal forecasting equation. The statistics test indexes in the equation are the best. In 5 percent of the significant level, all explanatory variables have passed the T-test; the goodness-of-fit of the equation is higher, R-squared and Adjusted R-squared are 0.970219 and 0.949745, parameter sequence is smooth. According to the results of the table below, we can get the following best prediction equation of the financial stress index:

The result shows that in 2011, the financial stress exponents are all higher than the highest since 2002, namely the financial stress is greater than the four seasons in 2008. In the first three quarters in 2011, our financial stress exponents will keep growing, the third quarter will achieve the maximum 20.96625, and the financial stress will have the trend of decline since the last quarter of 2011. Table 4 shows that we use the equation (2) and get the four quarters’ predictive value of our financial stress exponents in 2011. Figure 2 reveal the trend of annual financial stress exponents’ prediction in our country.

The regression result shows that the GDP growth, real estate price index, broad money growth, the credit balance, the balance of international trade will have positive influence in financial stress exponents, and the price of crude oil rate of change, SUMGDP, the ratio of broad money and GDP, the one-year deposit spreads between China and the United States and Japanese GDP growth will have negative influence. Due to the collinearity existed between the explanatory variables; the consistent of the explanatory variables may not correspond to the actual situation. But, the collinearity will not affect the explanatory variables as a general CFSI to the predictive result.

On the basis of the research of Illing and Liu (2003), this paper ensure the measure index of financial risk by the financial stress exponents constructing by synchronization index of financial risk, confirm the explanatory variables the financial stress exponent itself and the economic and financial index having prescience, and then with the aid of empirical methods to construct the financial stress index early-warning model. The model shows that the explanatory variables lagging four quarters (there are two variables were lagging six quarters and eight quarters) can better fitting our financial pressure exponent trend. That is, according to the known current financial stress exponent and other value of explanatory variables, we can use the model to predict the financial stress exponents of the future four quarters.

This research is supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 71071140), Technology Plan Project of Hangzhou(Grand No. 20102011A22) as well as Students Science and Technology Innovation project of Zhejiang GongShang University (NO.1130XJ1711228) and Modern business centre of Zhejiang GongShang University. We would like to thank the anonymous reviewers for their insightful comments and constructive suggestions provided during the review process, which have greatly contributed to improve the quality of the original manuscript.

