As the most traditional and mature way of generating electricity in the power industry, thermal power has its own advantages, but the industry itself faces many risks. So, it is important to the thermal power industry to have a systematic study of these risks and it has an important significance for both industry operators and national macroeconomic. Power industry is moving from monopoly to competition under the influence of deregulation, as the market instability and security risks of the electricity market, caused by fluctuations of the electricity price and raw materials price, has become a prominent issue. At the same time, according to China's electric power system planning, electric market will be eventually fully opened, the relationship between financial markets and power industry will be more closely, and market participants are facing unprecedented

market risks. Zheng Xinli considered that financial security is the core of industrial safety[1], so it is urgent and important to accelerate the improvement a modern financial system. Other researchers elaborated the basic framework of China's power financial markets, presented risk management strategies and methods[2-7]. Among above of these, the forecast of power financial environmental risk is a very important aspect, however, related literatures are very rare.

Financial environment risk is the risk of loss from adverse changes on financial products held by power generation companies, and the risk of fluctuations in the overall financial environment. Financial investments are risky, financial environment risk happens when the stock market's volatility not conducive to investors, so investors cannot obtain expected investment return or even get losses. For example, the expected rate of return of 25% equity investment, while the actual rate of return of 18%, 12% deviation to reflect the risks.

Radial basis function neural network is a three-layer feed-forward network, including the input layer, hidden layer and output layer. Input layer consists of source nodes; hidden layer is the second layer, the number of nodes is as required; output layer responds to the input mode. From the input layer to hidden layer transformation is nonlinear, while the transformation from hidden layer to output layer is linear. The activation function of hidden layer node is the radial basis function[9]. RBF neural network structure is shown in Fig. 1.

BIAS6 indicators. Take BIAS6 data and the corresponding closing price data as training samples, structure the network and train it. Based on this, input 10 groups of BIAS6 data to the network, obtain the corresponding 10 output groups of forecasted data, shown in Fig. 2.

MA5 indicators. Take MA5 data and the corresponding closing price data as training samples, structure the network and train it. Based on this, input 10 groups of MA5 data to the network, obtain the corresponding 10 output groups of forecasted data, shown in Fig. 3.

PSY12 indicators. Take PSY12 data and the corresponding closing price data as training samples, structure the network and train it. Based on this, input 10 groups of PSY12 data to the network, obtain the corresponding 10 output groups of forecasted data, shown in Fig. 4.

By comparing data in the table, It can be concluded that, the forecast result by RBF neural network from three latitude input vector combined by the three indicators is better than the other models. It’s a general approach of forecasting calculation based on the RBF, therefor, when this method approached to analysis of other indicators related to stock market factors, some more accurate and useful combinations should be draw out. Based on the data above, combined with the current macroeconomic environment and the latest financial policy, we can make a comprehensive assessment of financial environment risk.

This paper constructed data forecast model based on RBF neural network which considered several impact indicators. To verify the validity of the forecast model, three indicators, MA5, BIAS6 and PSY12, were chosen to make the composition of the input vector, which provides an effective algorithm model for the thermal power industry making analysis and forecasting of the financial environmental. In the technical indicator group, BIAS6 and MA5 outperformed other indicators. Using a single indicator to forecast stock closing indices, whether it was a technical indicator, an average stock yield indicator or a closing index indicator, the accuracy was lower than that achieved with group indicators. Of all the hybrid combinations, BIAS6 + MAS5 + ASY12 were the optimum group with the smallest forecasting errors.

In this paper, quantitative indicators were used to forecast the closing indices. However, stock movements are affected not only by quantitative factors, but also by non-quantitative factors, such as macroeconomic policies, regulations and psychological factors, etc. How to integrate these non-quantitative factors into mathematical algorithms using mining techniques to effectively increase forecast accuracy will be left to future research.

