From energy point of view, very actual topic in Czech Republic is redevelopment of concrete constructions in buildings. The article describes theoretical and experimental evaluation of chosen thermal joints of particular building built from reinforced concrete skeleton. The building stands in the central Europe in Brno. Problematic joints of reinforced concrete construction with filling construction were identified using thermo-graphic method. Consequently method of numerical simulation of steady state of heat transfer in 2D was used in software CalA. The aim was to evaluate linear coefficient of heat transfer and to identify critically low temperatures on internal surfaces and the energy losses of chosen details.

Thermo-graphic images were done in 12th December 2011 at 9:00 am using thermo-graphic camera Flir with resolution 320 x 240 pixels. Due to climatic data, temperature of external air was 5 °C, temperature of internal air was 18 °C. Surface temperature distribution on peripheral panel was in a range from 1.3 °C and

Software CalA allows solving of 2D non-steady state of temperature field using method of control volumes. For details, see [2] and [3]. In this software, there was created computational geometry in vertical and also horizontal section. Result gives surface temperature distribution in peripheral panel, which allows comparison with thermo-graphic image. Obtained temperature field also allows evaluation of thermal bridges in peripheral prefabricated panel, mainly in a place of connection. By using thermal fluxes it is also possible to determine linear coefficient of thermal bridges.

Prefabricated peripheral panel of dimensions 3550 x 1170 x 260 mm is made of reinforced concrete load- bearing parts of thickness 160 mm, insulated by foam polystyrene 50 mm thick and provided by surface reinforced concrete layer of thickness 50 mm. Connection of peripheral panel on the height is done by vertical drain and in opposite direction connection is done by tooth. Contact joints are sealed by microspore rubber and imbedded by asphalt known as permanently flexible sealant. Computational geometry of prefabricated peripheral panel was made in squared computational web with dimensions 5 x 5 mm.

There is a good correspondence between experimental and numerical approach – see fig 6 and 7, except of the deviation in levels around 2.0 meters in vertical section – which is clear from the figure 7. This can be caused by geometrical imperfections on upper part of reinforced concrete panels.

Using experimental thermo-graphic measurement, strong thermal bridges were found in reinforced concrete skeleton MS-OB. The most problematic part of peripheral wall is horizontal and vertical connection of peripheral prefabricated panels. This panel connection was simulated in software CalA as steady two dimensional thermal field. Obtained surface temperatures were compared with surface temperatures from thermo-graphic measurement.

The results show that these thermal bridges are caused by construction joint, thus additional contact insulation of peripheral wall by foamed polystyrene with minimal thickness of 100 mm is designed. This arrangement meets the requirements of relevant standards [4] and sufficiently decreases heat losses by linear thermal transmittance L [W/(m·K)] and meets appropriate surface temperature at internal surface of the wall. The combination of used thermo-graphic and numerical method can be generally recommended for designing of reconstruction of similar building structures as [5].

This work has been supported from the state budget of the Czech Republic, through the Specific research at universities of the Ministry of education, youth and sports, the grant No. FAST-J-12-1781. This article originates also with the financial support of the European Union's "Operational Programme Research and Development for Innovations", No. CZ.1.05/2.1.00/03.0097, as an activity of the regional Centre AdMaS "Advanced Materials, Structures and Technologies".

