An algorithm of multi-axis NC tool-path generation for subdivision surfaces is proposed. The algorithm includes two steps: model building and tool path generation. In the section of model building, in order to obtain the deformed surface, the deformation vector is computed which is associated with the curvature and the slope of cutter location surface. In the procedure of tool path generation, the slicing procedure is adopted to get the CL points. In addition, the inversely converted method is used. The method is tested by some examples with actual machining. The results show that the method can effectively reduce the error of the scallop height for subdivision surface and obtain the better shape and quality. In addition, the computational complexity and is scalable and robust.

Free-form surface design and manufacturing are important steps in product developments for free-form surface. Current CAD/CAM systems often defined objects by parametric surfaces, such as B-spline, Bezier, and NURBS representations. When the gouge free tool-path is calculated, these models are not ideal because the surface is not smooth. For example, when a surface is composed with multi-patches it can cause gaps especially when the model is complex. In order to solve this problem it needs splicing and trimming which are

Recently, subdivision schemes are becoming common in the field of geometric modelling because it can use simple patch to represent multi-surface. At the same time, it also combines the parametric surfaces and polygon mesh. These properties make subdivision surfaces become the best choice when the model for design and manufacturing needs to be unified. So far there are some studies are focused on 3-axis machining subdivision surfaces. Joe Kurgano etc. first prove that subdivision surfaces can be applied to CAM [2]. Later, the algorithm of tool-path generation based on Loop subdivision is discussed [3]. In this research we choose Catmull-Clark subdivision surface [4] as our target subdivision surface because of Catmull-Clark surface quadrilateral-based advantages symmetry objects than the triangular mesh in the expression.

From Fig.1.(a),we can see the parameter dw which describes the distance between the two adjacent paths. In addition, the parameter is depends on the tool radius r and cusp height error h . By using the radius of curvature of the are  to approximate the surface in the middle of two adjacent tool-paths, the surface step-over dw can be defined as follows [5]:

Set the slicing plane which is parallel to yz -plane intersects with deformed offset surface. At the same time, the tool-path is generated on the equidistant surface deformation space and the tool-path in parallel to yz - plane. After an inverse deformation, the tool-path can be changed to the original space. Set T ' describes the deformed CL point and Tx describes the original CL point which located within the triangle of ovi1 , ovi 2 , ovi 3 , then

The mean area method is adopted to calculate the normal vector of CL points. The method is based on the coordinates of CL points looking for special triangle which the distance to CL point is less than  , where  is the threshold. Each triangle facet area times their unit normal and cumulative summation, the results are divided by the area of triangular facets and thus the normal vector of CL points. Base on Fig.3., assuming there are m triangle facet which the distance to the point PCL is less than  , than we calculate

In multi-axis machining a new approach constant scallop method is proposed and implemented. The experiments prove that the algorithm in a steep area pass spacing becomes smaller, the tool-path variable density. The method can effectively control the machining accuracy. The method of Catmull-Clark subdivision surface may be extended to other surfaces clearly. This paper described the subdivision surface

