Material used for this experiment was Polymethyl-methacrylate sheets that made from casting process. The specimens were thickness of 60 mm as shown in Fig.1. The properties of PMMA were showed in Table 1. The CNC milling machine ‘MIKRON model WF 21 D’ was used for this experiment. The cutting tool was four flutes High Speed Steel (HSS) end milling cutter, as shown in Fig.2. The experimental data, tool wear, were measured by measuring microscope ‘Olympus CK 40 M’ with image analyser.

Factorial design experiment was applied with 2 experimental models, up-cut and down-cut milling, as showed in Fig 3. Factors used for this experiment were cutting speed, feed rate. Each factor was set at three levels. Cutting speed was set up at 60, 75, and 90 meter per minute, feed rate was identified at 200, 300, and 400 millimetre per minute. Base on previous study[6], the up-cutting was best direction for milling via surface quality of work pieces. So, this experiment was done on up-cutting direction as shown Fig 3. These experiments were tested by pilot study before running the actual experiment.

The actual experiment was randomly selected run. The response results of each experiment were measured for tool wear. The tool wear was measuring on the nose wear of end milling cutter as showed in Fig.4. The tool wear was identified by mean value of nose wear at the end of four cutting edge. Data were analysed by statistical methods to finding the factors affected to tool life.

The results of the tool wear was measuring in every sixty minutes were showed in Figure 5. The tool wear was determined and result was tested by the normality test. An analysis of variance (ANOVA) for tool wear results at cutting time 420 minutes was done. The ANOVA result indicated that the effect of feed rate was significantly difference at the confident level of .05 but cutting speed was not. Also, interaction between cutting speed and feed rate would be affect to tool wear of milling cutter as shown in table 2.

Because of analysis of variance (ANOVA), feed rate was factor affected to tool wear by statistical significant at the 0.05 level. The feed rate is main effect on tool wear of milling cutter. Meanwhile, the high feed rate can affected to tool wear more than low feed rate. The higher feed rate (400 mm/min) can be produced two times of toolwear with lower feed rate (200 mm/min, at cutting speed 90 m/min) as shown in Fig.6.

The cutting speed was not main factor for tool wear. However, cutting speed is an importance parameter to control wear of cutting edges. Since the high cutting speed was applied with high feed rate, tool wear was increase rapidly. On other hand, high cutting speed that applied with low feed rate was produce less tool wear as showed is Fig.8. In order to keep long tool life, the low feed rate together with high cutting speed was recommended to milling PMMA sheets.

This research was investigated the tool wear experiment of HSS end milling cutter in vertical milling for Polymethyl- methacrylate sheet. It could be conclude that feed rate mainly affected to tool wear. Moreover, the wear was influenced by the interaction of feed rate and cutting speed too. Some concluding as following;

