Fig. 2. Simplified bedrock geology map of the study area (UTM Zone 20, NAD 83). Lake sediment samples used in this study are all located in Labrador (NTS 13-L, 13- M, 14-D, 23-I and 23-J). The Mistastin Batholith (labelled MB) is located at the provincial boundary between Qu´ebec and Labrador (near center of the map).

The Southeastern Churchill Province is an elongated sliver of Archean to early-Paleoproterozoic continental crust that was accreted during the Paleoproterozoic, through collision of the Superior (to the west) and North Atlantic (to the east) cratons (Fig. 1; James et al., 1996; James and Dunning, 2000; Wardle et al., 2002; Hammouche et al., 2012; Corrigan

The Mistastin Batholith (C27 in Fig. 2; 1400 Ga), which outcrops as two semi-circular intrusions covering an area of 5600 km2, is of partic- ular importance in the study area (Hammouche et al., 2012). The largest of the intrusions by planar dimensions (to the south) is ellipsoid-shaped (long axis striking at N20E) and measures approximately 144 by 65 km. To the north is a smaller, circularly-shaped intrusion, measuring approximately 26 by 27 km. The Mistastin Batholith is chiefly composed of intermediate potassic intrusive rocks with lesser amounts of monzo- nite, quartz syenite, granite, anorthosite, leucogabbronorite and leuco- gabbro (Van der Leeden, 1995). Notably, this batholith is locally highly enriched in REEs, Zr, Y, Be, Nb, U and Th (Hammouche et al., 2012). One of these zones of enrichment is hosted by the Misery Lake

The lake sediment geochemical data used for this study, the sampling protocol, analytical methodology, quality control and quality assurance procedures are documented in McCurdy et al. (2016). The survey consists of 3441 samples, including field duplicates, and was sampled at a reso- lution of about one sample per 13 km2. The data used in this study is from a campaign to re-analyze lake sediment samples using modern analytical methods as part of the Geological Survey of Canada's GEM program

Zr. All trace elements are presented in parts per million (ppm) and major elements in weight percent (wt %). Pulped samples were digested using a modified aqua regia solution (an equiproportional mixture of HCl, HNO3 and H2O) for 1 h in a hot water bath (95 ◦C). After cooling, the solution was made up to a final volume with 5% HCl and analyzed using an ICP-mass spectrometer (McCurdy et al., 2016). Reliability as assessed by accuracy and precision of the data was determined using field duplicates,

geochemical anomalies related to bedrock mineralization. For one of our workflows, the data was transformed using centered log-ratio (CLR) (Aitchison, 1982). Censored data were replaced with half the detection limit. For a discussion on the appropriateness of the application and ef- fect of log-ratio transformations, particularly as it pertains to data embedding (e.g., feature space geometry), algorithm selection and per- formance impacts for our intended ML task of geochemical anomaly

peralkaline syenite (C27a in Fig. 2; 1409.7 1.2 Ma), located in the southern portion of the largest intrusion (David et al., 2012). The most notable deposit known is hosted by the Strange Lake peralkaline complex (C27b in Fig. 2; 1240 2Ma) with indicated mineral resources of 278 Mt at 0.93% total REE oxide (Miller, 1990; Gowans et al., 2014; Zajac, 2015).

Fig. 5. Scatter plots of prediction results for (a) Th, (b) La, (c) Y and (d) Tm. The best algorithm per element was used. Shown on the graphs are the coefficient of determination (CoD) and median absolute prediction error (MAPE) for each element. Underprediction at high elemental concentrations can be seen.

Following Zhang et al. (2021), we use major and minor elemental concentrations to predict the concentrations of the trace elements under similar assumptions as Grunsky and de Caritat (2019), in that regional lithology and secondary processes have high explanatory power for a majority of the observed geochemical variability. In this manner, we assume that the key variabilities in lithology, alteration and minerali- zation are captured by the data of major and minor elemental concen- trations. Hence, anomalies that by definition, cannot be explained by the rock-forming elements must constitute either noise or additional geological or geochemical processes, some of which are probably asso- ciated with mineralization processes that are of further exploration in- terest. In our technique, the trained ML models serve as implicit and dynamic (they are capable of predicting trace elemental concentrations across many lithologies or rock types, see Zhang et al., 2021) regional geochemical baselines and the prediction residuals are the deviations in elemental concentrations. Although supervised methods are used, they are strictly used to build geochemical baselines and are not used to train

detect anomalies in our technique, cross-validation is not strictly required as mathematical induction would not occur and instead a geochemical baseline (a fitted model) is required. Deviations from the baseline can be measured through a metric, e.g., prediction residuals. However, to understand the prediction performance, model generaliz- ability and to prevent over-fitting (exaggeration of the baselines), we use cross-validation to perform algorithm selection and model tuning. We employ the coefficient of determination (CoD) metric to assess prediction accuracy. The choice of the performance metric is important to anomaly detection, as the CoD metric is sensitive to outliers and therefore, opti- mizing the prediction performance using the CoD metric implies that the geochemical baseline is tuned to suppress outliers and therefore, this optimization suppresses the models’ sensitivity to sparsely sampled

Fig. 9. Regional prospectivity map of Y using the multivariate method. Included in the regional prospectivity map are the lithological boundaries (Fig. 2) and glacial dispersion trends (black arrows). Abbreviations: Strange Lake intrusion (SL); Mistastin Batholith (MB). The glacial dispersal trend from the REE-bearing Strange Lake peralkaline intrusion is visible and extends approximately 100 km to the northeast.

used to produce prediction results using 10-fold cross-validation over 100 runs. The results were thereafter averaged and the prediction re- siduals were calculated for each performance level, for each element. Subsequently, the prediction results were used in two ways to generate geochemical anomaly maps, the first uses either weighted evidence layers of prediction residual maps or single element residual maps, which simulates a knowledge-based method to combine evidence layers to target one or more specific indicator elements. The second uses a PCA- based method to generate a linear combination of prediction residuals (across all elements predicted and using a variety of algorithms for a given performance level) to create maps of the most significant

Our method further advances the data-driven aspect of prospectivity mapping using compositional geochemical data (Grunsky and de Caritat, 2019), as it does not assume underlying stoichiometries nor require principal component interpretation. In addition, our procedure allows for any regression algorithm to be used, and does not assume linearity of elemental relationships, which means that our procedure can incorporate a range of parametric, non-parametric and linear-, nonlinear and neural network-based algorithms and the quality of the mapping would be directly linked to the performance of the algorithms and models, and is not linked to the interpretability of eigenvectors, operator expertise or discipline-specific knowledge. Lastly, we demonstrate that the CLR-transformation is unnecessary for our technique.

Fig. 10. Regional prospectivity map of Y using our ML-based procedure. Included in the regional prospectivity map are the lithological boundaries (Fig. 2) and glacial dispersion trends (black arrows). Abbreviations: Strange Lake peralkaline intrusion (SL); Mistastin Batholith (MB). The glacial dispersal trend from the REE-bearing Strange Lake intrusion is visible and extends approximately 100 km to the northeast. Furthermore, another glacial dispersal trend is visible extending 140 km northeast from the southern portion of the Mistastin Batholith.

unpredictable (CoD <0.1) due to pervasive data censoring. Hence, they were excluded from further analyses and mapping. Comparison of results between those using the raw versus the CLR-transformed data demon- strate that on average, the raw data produces more accurate predictions

(Fig. 3). The best algorithm and its optimal hyperparameters depend on the target element and the type of data used (Fig. 4, see also Table 2). However, within the parameter grid, the random forest regressor is generally the best using either CLR-transformed or raw data (Fig. 4). This is interesting, since the random forest algorithm is not spatially aware in the feature space and therefore, there is no heuristic to suggest any specific embedding geometry. No obvious trends exist for second- and third-best algorithms. However, SVM, Neuronet and AdaBoost tends to perform better than k-nearest neighbors and elastic net, although the performance differential between all algorithms is typically a few percent and sometimes identical to two decimal places. Therefore, complex models can be substituted by simpler and more explainable models with

minor losses of anomaly selectivity. The use of the CoD metric implies that the prediction performance is heavily affected by outliers. However, this is desirable if the prediction residuals would be used to detect anomalies, in which case, it is less risky to suppress large anomalies than to generate more false positives. The prediction results show a systematic under-prediction at higher concentrations for REE indicator elements in the region (as identified in McClenaghan et al., 2017), such as Th, La, Tm and Y (Fig. 5). This implies that rock-forming elements are insufficient to explain higher concentrations of REE indicator elements, which likely contain true regional geochemical anomalies, if they are also spatially coherent. Hence, there are likely less well-sampled geological and geochemical processes operating in the region that enriched some sam- ples with REEs relative to the geochemical baseline. Moreover, there is a general consensus between various algorithms and their best models on the relative size of the geochemical anomalies (the prediction residuals are often statistically similar).

For process validation and to demonstrate an integration of our technique with knowledge-driven methods, we created maps of the original concentrations and the prediction residuals for two groups of elements – REEs (Sc, Y, La, Ce, Pr, Nd, Sm, Eu, Gd, Tb, Dy, Ho, Er, Tm, Yb and Lu) and chalcophiles (Cu, Zn, Ga, As, Se, Sn, Sb, Te, Bi, Tl, Pb, In, Hg, Cd, Ge and Ag). For mapping, only elements that exhibited reliable directional semivariograms that can be fitted with spherical models were used. The extent of the maps was chosen to contain the west-to-east glacial dispersal trend (Geological Survey of Canada, 1980; Batterson, 1989; Zajac, 2015; Paulen et al., 2017; McClenaghan et al., 2017, 2019). Element maps were stacked using per-layer normalization and uniform weighting, to give each element an equal influence on the final map. Final maps of the prediction residuals and the elemental concentrations show similar patterns; however, the residual map is less noisy and more selective, which results in higher visible contrast (Figs. 6 and 7). The dispersal trend is not visible for the chalcophile elemental maps, but is visible in the REE-maps (Fig. 7).

components to produce regression residuals that were mapped (Fig. 9). Maps produced using this method, up to principal component 3 are qualitatively identical with the contrast maximized using principal component 1. For our method, the Y prediction residuals were directly mapped (Fig. 10). A comparison of the two maps shows that the map produced using our method captures the glacial dispersal trend emanating from the Strange Lake peralkaline intrusion and corresponds to the pattern previously identified using gamma-ray spectrometry, lake sediments and lake waters. In comparison, the multivariate method yields a Y-enrichment pattern that is similar to the glacial dispersal trend in the west, but connects to a large body to the east. This large body is unobserved using our technique and undocumented in previous studies of the glacial dispersal trend using boulder mapping, matrix till geochemistry, indicator minerals and airborne gamma-ray spectroscopy data (Geological Survey of Canada, 1980; Batterson, 1989; Zajac, 2015; Paulen et al., 2017; McClenaghan et al., 2017, 2019).

For a multivariate comparison, it is impossible to compare maps of principal components of anomalies against those produced by the multivariate method, since these sets of principal components have different meanings. Instead, we make a comparison between the two groups on a basis of roughly the same amount of manual effort (which we deem a fair criterion, as methods that are less data-driven can be arbi- trarily refined using better knowledge). For both methods, one or more of the principal components should contain known regional geochemical anomalies – the REE dispersal trend. Hence, we chose maps produced by all methods that exhibited the highest resemblance of the dispersal trend. For our method, the highest performing algorithms produced results that (see Fig. 4) feature a single dominant principal component (principal component 1), which captures approximately 24.74% of the region's anomalies. For the multivariate method, principal component 1 explains 32.42% of the data's variability (Fig. 11). The highest resemblance be- tween the principal component maps occurred for principal components

1 of both methods (with a manual examination of the multivariate method's principal components up to number 6) (Figs. 12 and 13). It is clear that the map of principal component 1, derived from the multi- variate method reflects regional geochemical variability (Fig. 12). Prin- cipal component-1 map using the multivariate method is insufficient for further exploration targeting and typically, additional procedures, such as a linear discriminant analysis or elemental regressions against a principal component(s), would be used to further refine desirable exploration targets (e.g., desirable lithologies). In comparison, our

Fig. 12. Map of principal component 1, using the multivariate method. Included in the regional prospectivity map are the lithological boundaries (Fig. 2) and glacial dispersion trends (black arrows). Abbreviations: Strange Lake peralkaline intrusion (SL); Mistastin Batholith (MB). The glacial dispersal trend from the REE-bearing Strange Lake intrusion is poorly distinguishable from the background.

The glacial dispersal trend associated with REE-enriched Strange Lake peralkaline complex is well known and has been extensively documented (Geological Survey of Canada, 1980; Batterson, 1989; Zajac, 2015; Paulen et al., 2017; McClenaghan et al., 2017, 2019). Both univariate prospectivity maps of Y (and similarly for other indicator elements) using the multivariate method (i.e., Grunsky and de Caritat, 2019) and our procedure (Figs. 9 and 10, respectively) clearly demonstrate that a consistent and cohesive pattern is detectable in the lake sediment geochemical data. Lake sediment geochemical data elemental distribu- tion patterns are known to mimic those of glacial till, as indicator min- erals and fragments of mineralization found in glacial till inevitably migrate into local drainage systems where they settle/precipitate into lakes (McConnell and Batterson 1987; Cameron, 1994). In prospectivity maps produced using our technique, the dispersal trend can be traced for

Fig. 13. Map of principal component 1 using the best combination of ML algorithms on raw data, following our procedure. Included in the regional prospectivity map are the lithological boundaries (Fig. 2) and glacial dispersion trends (black arrows). Abbreviations: Strange Lake peralkaline intrusion (SL); Mistastin Batholith (MB). The glacial dispersal trend from the REE-bearing Strange Lake intrusion is visible and extends approximately 100 km to the northeast. Furthermore, another glacial dispersal trend is visible extending 140 km northeast from the southern portion of the Mistastin Batholith.

approximately 100 km to the northeast. This distance is in agreement with that of previous studies. However, compared to the multivariate method, both our univariate and multivariate prospectivity maps clearly highlight another previously undocumented dispersal trend originating from the southern portion of the Mistastin Batholith (Figs. 10 and 13). Recent mapping and exploration of the southern portions of the Mistastin Batholith in 2010 by Quest Rare Minerals and Midland Exploration have found a number REE-bearing deposits that also contain Zr, Y, U, Th, Be, Pb and Nb (Hammouche et al., 2012). Glacial erosion features in the southern portions of the Mistastin Batholith strike N65E, which corre- sponds to the glacial dispersion trend emanating from the batholith. It therefore appears that the dispersal train originating from the southern portion of the Mistastin Batholith is also detectable in the lake sediment geochemical data. However, the composition of the dispersal trends is different between the southern and the northern dispersal trends. A full interpretation of the region's geochemical anomalies is out of the scope of this paper. Lastly, another less-prominent anomaly can be seen southwest

of the Mistastin Batholith (Figs. 10 and 13). A geological investigation in the area does not reveal any known deposits or lithologies that could be associated with REE, Zr, Y, Be, Nb, U, Th deposits. Furthermore, the anomaly is not associated with the local glacial dispersal trend (towards the southeast). Therefore, further work in the area would be required to identify the nature of this anomaly.

There have been many approaches to using geochemical composi- tional data, much of it within the multivariate domain. For the purpose of prospectivity mapping, the key goal is to produce maps that correctly identify, with as high selectivity as possible, true geochemical anomalies that are invariably indicative of the locations of mineral occurrences. Although the definition of geochemical anomaly has not changed, the methods used to delineate baselines from anomalies have continued to evolve and improve. There has been a general trend of further adoption

Fig. 14. Map of principal component 1 using the best combination of ML algorithms on CLR-transformed data, following our procedure. Included in the regional prospectivity map are the lithological boundaries (Fig. 2) and glacial dispersion trends (black arrows). Abbreviations: Strange Lake peralkaline intrusion (SL); Mistastin Batholith (MB). The glacial dispersal trend from the REE-bearing Strange Lake intrusion is visible and extends approximately 100 km to the northeast. Furthermore, another glacial dispersal trend is visible extending 140 km northeast from the southern portion of the Mistastin Batholith.

of data-driven techniques, which can complement or replace knowledge- driven techniques, and especially in brownfield exploration, because the existence of at least partial ground truth allows for model validation. A general change in the discipline of geochemical exploration has been towards larger regional surveys, higher quality data and more capable and sometimes more complex data modelling methods. Consistent with this trend, in this study, we build upon the multivariate modelling approach as demonstrated in Grunsky and de Caritat (2019) by gener- alizing the idea of geochemical anomaly detection, automating much of the data analytics and modelling using a modern ML-based pipeline and removing the intermediary steps that require traditional geological and geochemical interpretation (i.e., of the principal components). Conse- quently, as a product of our approach:

Fig. 15. Map of principal component 1 using the second-best combination of ML algorithms on raw data, following our procedure. Included in the regional pro- spectivity map are the lithological boundaries (Fig. 2) and glacial dispersion trends (black arrows). Abbreviations: Strange Lake peralkaline intrusion (SL); Mistastin Batholith (MB). The glacial dispersal trend from the REE-bearing Strange Lake intrusion is visible and extends approximately 100 km to the northeast. Furthermore, another glacial dispersal trend is visible extending 140 km northeast from the southern portion of the Mistastin Batholith.

data used to train the models. This is unavoidable and delegates the interpretation of the nature of the anomalies (what elements are in them) to the users of the prospectivity maps, where anomalous compositions would have to be understood regardless of the method of discovery. Our results show that a single principal component of the prediction residuals immediately produces a map that qualitatively agrees with the regional ground truth (the Strange Lake peralkaline intrusion REE glacial dispersal trend). Compared to a similar application of PCA in the multi- variate method, we do not require additional principal components to be mapped, interpreted, or further manipulated, at least for this dataset. This is because the ML algorithm training that occurred during the pre- dictive modelling stage already accounted for typical regional geochemical variability in the trace elements, and as such, a single dominant principal component captures the most important regional geochemical anomalies (compare Figs. 12 and 13). Therefore, our method is expected to be more objective and produce more consistent and replicable prospectivity maps than the multivariate method, as

Fig. 16. Map of principal component 1 using the second-best combination of ML algorithms on CLR-transformed data, following our machine procedure. Included in the regional prospectivity map are the lithological boundaries (Fig. 2) and glacial dispersion trends (black arrows). Abbreviations: Strange Lake peralkaline intrusion (SL); Mistastin Batholith (MB). The glacial dispersal trend from the REE-bearing Strange Lake intrusion is visible and extends approximately 100 km to the northeast. Furthermore, another glacial dispersal trend is visible extending 140 km northeast from the southern portion of the Mistastin Batholith.

manual interpretation is not utilized in intermediary steps. When our approach is used in the univariate application to generate elemental anomaly maps, it is clear that our approach is superior to the multivariate method, which requires a convoluted approach to first identify key stoichiometries in the area that vary, then regress a target element against the main principal components to determine the regression re- siduals, which are used to produce anomaly-type of prospectivity maps. In addition, we show that we do not require log-ratio data trans- formations and show that if data transformations such as log-ratio transformations are to be applied to a workflow, then their effects should be quantitatively measured against a baseline (e.g., using raw data). Where it can be shown that they improve the predictive modelling performance, then we anticipate that the application of those trans- formations can similarly result in a higher contrast in resulting geochemical anomaly maps. For these types of comparisons, performance

resulting from a workflow using raw data should be used as a baseline or default, since any transformation must be demonstrably performance- enhancing. In our approach, since we do not assume the existence of stoichiometry in the data, nor do we require extensive manual inter- pretation, our method is more data driven and more flexible. However, as our approach is data driven, the quality of baselines depends on the quality of the data, in the same sense as for multivariate modelling, in that the data needs to capture a substantial geochemical baseline. This is not a drawback that is unique to our approach, but is general to all data- driven approaches, since anomalies can only be contextualized against a large backdrop of non-anomalous data. Lastly, our method is designed to be able to accommodate a range of ML algorithms, such that we leave the choice between complex and powerful, and simple and highly explain- able algorithms to the user through an informed knowledge of their performance differences.

Fig. 17. Map of principal component 1 using the third-best combination of ML algorithms on raw data, following our procedure. Included in the regional prospectivity map are the lithological boundaries (Fig. 2) and glacial dispersion trends (black arrows). Abbreviations: Strange Lake peralkaline intrusion (SL); Mistastin Batholith (MB). The glacial dispersal trend from the REE-bearing Strange Lake intrusion is visible and extends approximately 100 km to the northeast. Furthermore, another glacial dispersal trend is visible extending 140 km northeast from the southern portion of the Mistastin Batholith.

The use of geochemical data continues to evolve and prospectivity mapping has always greatly benefitted by developments in data analysis, modelling and mapping methods. With the proliferation of data-driven methods such as ML, it is possible to simultaneously improve upon existing approaches, while generating entirely new approaches. In this study, we demonstrated a technique to leverage compositional data by using ML methods to improve upon the existing multivariate approach and as a substitute for it in some applications. In comparison with the multivariate method, our technique does not assume stoichiometric variability of elements, does not require geoscientific knowledge-based process discovery and interpretation, does not require data imputation and is flexible with respect to the choice of algorithm to balance the need for performance with the need for model explain-ability. Therefore, our

approach is more data-driven and the workflow itself is almost entirely automatable, which requires little manual interaction. This facilitates the adoption of our technique, especially where the amount of data or pro- jects exceeds the amount of manual labour. For its application in lake sediment geochemistry and for the exploration of REEs in the southeast Churchill Province, our procedure is both more accurate and more se- lective than the multivariate method, to within a comparable amount of manual labour. We expect that our approach would generalize well to other types of exploration geochemical data.

Fig. 18. Map of principal component 1 using the third-best combination of ML algorithms on CLR-transformed data, following our procedure. Included in the regional prospectivity map are the lithological boundaries (Fig. 2) and glacial dispersion trends (black arrows). Abbreviations: Strange Lake peralkaline intrusion (SL); Mistastin Batholith (MB). The glacial dispersal trend from the REE-bearing Strange Lake intrusion is visible and extends approximately 100 km to the northeast. Furthermore, another glacial dispersal trend is visible extending 140 km northeast from the southern portion of the Mistastin Batholith.

The authors would like to thank Annick Morin (GSC) for providing geological mapping support for the study area. We would also like to thank Beth McClenaghan (GSC) and Dr. Robert F. Garrett (GSC, Emeritus scientist) and three anonymous reviewers for providing insightful com- ments that have greatly improved the readability and scope of this manuscript. The authors thank Dr. Hua Wang for editorial handling. Data used in this study is open access and can also be found at the Natural Resources Canada (NRCan) publication database (GEOSCAN) under OF 8026 or ID 298834.

Ghorbani, Y., 2018. Gaining access to high-tech and critical raw materials: a driving factor in developing future concept and methods in mineral processing and extractive metallurgy. In: III Congress of Industrial Engineering of the North of Chile, 22-24th August, 2018, Antofagasta-Chile.

