IMS presents an innovation in the world of telecommunications by providing a concrete Control Platform; the platform enables the delivery of multimedia services with high QoS range and with a soft convergence from circuit-switched services to the switching packet world. The IMS can unify access to multiple technologies and equipment-based IP. Indeed, the heterogeneity of access and technology imposes a challenge or repercussion in QoS, mobility and security. The article focuses on the importance of security, and it proposes a conceptual analysis on existing standards. Finally we propose an approach that meets the needs of a network such as IMS. The study focuses the main interfaces of IMS and security around and inside network with a sensitive context.

Security in IMS networks is an important issue [1], in addition to QoS [2], which will ensure the development of new services on its platforms. Security concerns the user, service provider over IMS and operator responsible for the core IMS. Several research works are concerned with this issue. In this sense, we

propose in this paper an analysis of the highlight work in this field, and an approach to cover the security issues in IMS networks. The approach is mainly directed towards the user and the service provider over IMS. An analysis of the security in this approach led to identify the critical interfaces that need more effort and concentration in order to strengthen security in IMS networks. The paper is organized into sections. Sections two and three respectively present the architecture and the risks related to IMS. The sections four and five present an analysis of existing work and our approach to secure the IMS network.

The IMS permit the convergence and the integration of data and multimedia services like voice over IP (VoIP), video, presence, instant messaging and so on. Multiple protocols are used with IMS but the main one is SIP protocol (Session Initiation Protocol). It provides method for configuring and controlling multimedia applications in IP network. The IMS architecture include four layers (Fig 1) [3], which work together to provide reliable service.

 The transport layer: This layer offer an abstraction of different access network used which can be vendor technology dependent. It provides a unified network operation based on IP, unlike access network that can connect a no IP network users. It’s responsible for assigning IP address and registration for users. The upper layers in the IMS architecture use transport layer transparently without thinking to detail behind network access.

Function), responsible for SIP interaction Home Subscriber Service (HSS), application servers and media servers. The CSCF is itself composed by tree components, each one assume different operation: P-CSCF (Proxy CSCF), I-CSCF (Interrogation CSCF) and S-CSCF (Serving CSCF). This layer includes also HSS which content subscriber data required for handling SIP session. The other component in this layer is PCRF (Policy Control and Charging Rules Function) responsible for charging and control [4].

As can be deduced from the previous section, IMS is based principally on IP protocol. Therefore, it inherits the security issues of IP networks. The IMS architecture is open, distributed and it has the advantage of being flexible in its implementation and deployment. This generates a variety of communication interfaces, which can make the system very vulnerable to attack. Add to that, the services offered on the IMS network must be provided by ensuring confidentiality and respect the privacy of users. Therefore, it is necessary to secure the IMS network at every level of its architecture including the final customer or subscriber device [5].

 Risks in control layer: The IMS core uses two main protocols SIP and DIAMETER. The SIP is messages-based protocol like HTTP. This is why SIP is vulnerable to attacks types DoS (Denial of Service).The most critical attacks against IMS core can target CSCF components, this attacks impact control function and will capture or modify sensitive messages

 Risks in transport layer: As Packet Switching (PS), the layer contains a stream of data packets that consuming the entire bandwidth of a network. The flooding attacks can occur using any available network protocols, such as TCP flood or UDP flood. In Circuit Switching (CS), the attack is especially in a telecommunications network (GPRS, 3G, etc.) by using the protocol GTP (GPRS Tunneling Protocol) to divert logged in user’s network session.

 Risks in access layer: The layer contains a set of IP-based devices. This diversity requires that the control layer differentiate between wire-line and wireless network. The IMS must ensure the authentication of all users during the process of registration; after that, the IMS must avoid other threats from the equipment as viruses, spyware and spam.

Withregard to the importance of network security in general, IMS networks are also affected by this aspect. Several organizations (3GPP, ITU, ETSI, etc.) and others Research work made suggestions and recommendations to secure this type of network. We present in this section the recommendations of the organizations 3GPP, ITU and ETSI.

The UE (User Equipment) and IMS Core association: it need mutual authentication of UE and IMS core. The keys used for this are generated and managed by HSS (Home Subscriber Server). The authentication itself is done by the S-CSCF component [8].

ITU recommendations are intended to any type of telecommunications network and are generic. This model defines two main security concepts: layers and plans. Securities layers relate to rules, these rules are applied to network elements and systems that constitute End-to-End network. Security plans recovering security activities performed in a network (Fig 2) [10].

The TVRA method considers a system as a set of properties that can be physical or logical. Property in the model may have weaknesses that can be exploited by threats. The realization of a threat can lead to a security incident that violates the security objectives. The vulnerability, according to the definition given in ISO, is modelled as a combination of weakness that can be exploited by one or more threats. The method recommends against-measures to protect the system against threats, vulnerabilities and reduce risks [13].

 IMS client: it represents any user who connects to the IMS network in order to access a particular service offered by the network. A client accesses the IMS network via an access network which may be a telecommunication network or an IP network. In the case of the telecommunication network, the user has a SIM card [14] that includes information used for authentication. In the case of IP network, wired or wireless, the user does not have a SIM card.

 I-S interface: used between service platforms represented in the diagram by "Service-BOX" and the IMS core represented as “IMS-BOX”. The traffic exchanged in this interface concern the verification of authenticity of the service platform. It also includes the authorization to offer service on IMS network. It is also based on SIP protocol.

 C-S interface: the interface is used to exchange media content between the client and the service platforms. This traffic can be a VoIP, video conferencing, video streaming or other. Protocols used on this interface depend on the service; it can be a HTTP, RTP and other.

As a drawback, we can say that the detail of what is happening in the IMS core is not taken into account. The impact of this decision on the analysis of security in this model is not very important compared to the advantages. We advance hypothesis that the IMS core network is a closed network in the security perimeter of one provider. The access to IMS internal components is not easy because they are often located in a single server or group of servers not accessible from the outside of the IMS core. The three IMS interfaces presented in Fig 5 are the most exposed in reality to external attacks.

We identify, in our analysis of IMS network security, three critical interfaces namely I-C, I-S, and C-S. The traffic exchanged via these interfaces uses public network infrastructures which are unsafe and insecure. It makes these interfaces most vulnerable and exposed the attacks compared to interface within IMS core network. Indeed, the IMS IP-based client is connected to home network, enterprise network or Wi-Fi public hotspot network in open areas. These networks are also interconnected to the Internet service provider to have access to Internet. So when such IP-based client join IMS network, all the traffic generated by this access is forwarded over an IP network. The risk of attack in this context is more important than inside the IMS core. Similarly, the interface C-S established over IP public network, forward media traffic between the IP-based client and the service platforms represented in the diagram by "service-BOX".

In this approach, we give less importance to interfaces and other components inside the IMS core network. This choice is dictated by two reasons: the first is that the internal components of IMS core cannot be joined from the outside of the IMS network. They are internal to a private network protected by filtering mechanisms and access control. The probability of attacks against these components remains low compared to the risks on the three external interfaces we focus on in this article. The second reason is that by giving more importance to the most vulnerable interfaces we enhance the security overall the network.

The analysis of the security of these three interfaces uses the main security services: integrity, confidentiality and availability. We conclude that improving IMS security need necessary to strengthen these three services in the interfaces C-I, I-S and C-S. The following table summarizes the security service required on each interface according to our analysis.

The confidentiality concerns all interfaces. It must ensure that the content offered in the service platforms should be accessible by only permitted client. It also implies that when the client access to service, the media traffic must be confidential if the two end of communication decide to have this service active.

The integrity concerns any traffic exchanged via these interfaces. The mechanisms for integrity must guarantee to the end user that service platforms is authentic and provide authentic contents. In the other side, these mechanisms must guarantee for service provider that client is an authorized one and has the required permission. To ensure the integrity and confidentiality it is necessary to use another service security is authentication.

The article presents a synthesis of models and pioneering work related to security in IMS networks. It also presents a new simple, but effective, approach to address the security of IMS network. This approach identifies the critical and the most vulnerable interfaces on IMS network. The approach gives more importance to the relationship between a user and a service provider over IMS. The future of this work is to provide adequate security mechanism for each critical interface identified in this approach.

