Monitoring the wear condition of the tramway superstructure is one of the key points to guarantee an adequate safety level of the light rail transport system. The purpose of this paper is to suggest a new non-conventionalprocedure for measuring the transverse profile of rails in operation by means of image-processing technique. This methodological approach is based on the “information” contained in high-resolution photographic images of tracks and on specific algorithms which allow to obtain the exact geometric profile of the rails and therefore to measure the state of the rail-head extrados wear.

The rail wear and other imperfections on tramway track can be both monitored through low-efficiency equipment (e.g. miniprof device) or diagnostic trains which perform track laser scans while monitoring rail travels [1]. More recently the potentialities offered by real-time image processingtechniques to determine the vertical, horizontal and 45° rail wear have been pointed out [2], [3], [4], [5], [6].

To this end the range values of every [3x3] boundary of all the pixels belonging to the original image A have been sought and highlighted. The following equation (5) formalizes the previous difference operation. Therefore, given a generic iteration step t, the suggested algorithm is able to lower the pixel intensities which mark the rail edge of the plane section.

Then we detected some uncertainty areas along the point edges where the profile in the eight directions marked a rough variation or, in any case, a skip over a precise threshold level, localized by three constants [Ti, To, Ts]. Such constants are automatically determined by the algorithm in relation to the maximum, minimum and mean deviation values of the two profiles. In these areas, for each iterative step t the pixel values fill in the matrixes {Si} and {Gi}, well distinct from the matrixes {S} and {G} which instead are almost certainly background and rail. Therefore, at the iterative step t we have:

It should be underlined that, downstream from the previous thresholding operations (cf. eq. 9), the procedure is also able to extrapolate not only the exact contour position (cf. eq.10), but also a first object- based binary encoding which is formalized as follows:

The result which can be obtained by applying the previous relation to the rail part in Fig.1, is illustrated in Fig. 4. This binary encoding is properly refined on the basis of some binary morphology operations. In fact, by carefully examining Figure 4 we note that this binary selection has inside some cavities which do not allow to create a binary large object or blob constituted by close and connected pixels; therefore it requires the application of some mathematical morphology operations [10] which allow to modify the original information and to obtain the matrix BW illustrated in Fig.5 with regard to the whole rail image, which clearly shows a complete connectivity between neighboring pixels.

This research has examined a new procedure based on the imageprocessingtechniquefor determining the rail wear on tramway track. Thisnew non-conventional method, based on the analyses of high resolution photo images, has required the design and implementation of specific mathematical algorithms suitable to provide the cross section geometry of a generic worn-out rail and the measurements of its relevant deviations in comparison with new rails of the same type (Grooved rail and UIC 60 rail). At present, the procedure can be only used for the lab analyses showing high precision in the wear evaluation as well as great rapidity in being performed. So, it is very likely that a conventional laser monitoring system will be combined with a digital one in the future.

Guerrieri M., Ticali D. (2012). Sustainable mobility in park areas: the potential offered by guided transport systems. International Conference on Sustainable Design and Construction, March 23-25, 2011, Kansas City, Missouri, ASCE (2012). Volume: ICSDC 2011, Integrating Sustainability Practices in the Construction Industry, pp. 661-668, ISBN 9780784412046, ASCE Conf. Proc. doi:10.1061/41204(426)81.

Guerrieri M., Ticali D. (2012). Design standards for converting disused railway lines into greenways. International Conference on Sustainable Design and Construction, March 23-25, 2011, Kansas City, Missouri ASCE (2012). Volume: ICSDC 2011, Integrating Sustainability Practices in the Construction Industry, (pp. 654-660), ISBN 9780784412046, ASCE Conf. Proc. doi:10.1061/41204(426)80.

Corriere F., Di Vincenzo D. (2012). The Rail Quality Index as an indicator of the “Global Comfort” in optimizing Safety, Quality and Efficiency in Railway Rails. Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences. ISSN: 1877-0428 (SIIV 2012 “Sustainability of Road Infrastructures” Conference proceedings, 29-31 October 2012, Roma, Italy) – in press.

