When pervasive computing is used to provide technology-driven assistive healthcare, there is a need for the system to be as sophisticated and adaptable as possible, while also being as transparent as possible for both subject and caregivers. A personalized, extensible hybrid reasoning framework has been implemented for the CARA (Context Aware Real-time Assistant) system which aims to satisfy these design goals. It provides context-aware sensor data fusion (including medical and environmental sensors) and incorporates anomaly detection mechanisms that support Activity of Daily Living (ADL) analysis and alert generation. The hybrid reasoning architecture incorporates both rule-based and case-based reasoning; this enables CARA to be more robust and to adapt to a changing environment by continuously retraining with new cases. The rules used for anomaly detection in a smart-home situation are given in a structured natural language, allowing subject or caregiver to inspect and, if appropriate, modify these rules; this supports the goal of transparency. For the case-based reasoning part, attention is drawn to the transparency issues that arise in the evaluation criteria used and interpretation of results.

costs and improving quality of care [3]. A context-aware system is designed to use the context to provide relevant information and services to the user. To achieve pervasive healthcare for independent living [4], a context-aware system should be able to observe, interpret and reason about dynamic situations (both temporal and special) in a smart home environment. Although the straightforward rule based reasoning engine is a competent approach, it still has some unsatisfactory limitations. For example, situation-specific rules may be effective but only apply to a narrow range of problems; whereas more general rules may span a broad range of potential adaptations but not provide domain-specific guidance. Case-based reasoning (CBR) [5,6] is another approach targeting problem solving in domains where structured domain knowledge is known, however it requires an accumulation of sufficient previous cases to accomplish the reasoning task.

In a smart home healthcare scenario, a BAN (Body Area Network) provides the direct information about the individual and the home environmental sensors are deployed to gather information about the environment and possible situation of the person. The system receives the various sensor data via wireless communication protocols (i.e. bluetooth, zigbee). The raw sensor data provides the basic data building the context models for

The remote monitoring services, data mining services, and real-time reasoning services are all essential services that run concurrently. The more recent implementation of the system involves a hybrid reasoning framework combining case-based reasoning and fuzzy rule-based reasoning, (Although introducing case- based reasoning offers advantages in the reasoning tasks, the efficiency of CBR suffers as the size of the case base grows, and therefore eventually a cloud-based solution will be incorporated to lessen load on resource- constrained clients.) In this paper, we focus on some transparency issues associated with using a system with these more sophisticated techniques. Transparency and clarity is important in all systems but especially so in a sophisticated system attempting to provide intelligent services for a human subject in possibly critical situations.

The hybrid architecture analyses the context information (derived from sensors and other information sources) using both case-based reasoning and fuzzy logic based rule engine. Fuzzy logic rules supplement case-based reasoning with expert insight and the ability to disambiguate between cases using domain knowledge. In line with the goal of transparency, rules are described, as much as possible, by means of linguistic terms using user-friendly range-type values derived from expert knowledge. Thus, and example of a rule might be "If the room temperature is very low and the room is occupied then turn on the heater". Fuzzy logic is used for rules to provide a more nuanced approach. It allows the system to make use of imperfect data (e.g. lacks precision, is noisy or ambiguous) and can apply rules to reach a conclusion. In effect, it tries to

model the more human decision making based on imprecise information but does so in a more explicit way, mechanically and much faster. Table 1 gives examples of some simple rules. Such rules are transparent and can be specified by a medical expert or a healthcare giver, and can also be modified by the patient under supervision.

The previous CARA system incorporated a fuzzy-based reasoning engine to provide real-time intelligence for prediction in various healthcare situations [15]. The new context-aware hybrid reasoning architecture enhances the previous fuzzy rule-based reasoning engine with learning ability by incorporating a novel case- based reasoning model. The architecture is implemented based on the jCOLIBRI:CBR Framework [16] and the previous CARA work. Android was chosen as the target OS, and the solution was evaluated on an Android device (Motorola Xoom Tablet). Bluetooth provides the wireless connection between the sensor network and the client application. Comprehensive testing is underway with trials in our lab. This simulation environment models realistic behaviour of a person living in a home environment based on the typical daily routine of an elderly person, and this provides us with Activity Contexts. In addition, simulation of Ambient Contexts models changes of light, room temperature, sound and humidity. Physiology Contexts are derived from the BAN data, and Personal Contexts are derived from the information on the server database.

may become too complex and difficult to understand for both subject and caregiver. Transparency and clarity are therefore important concerns that must be addressed. These concerns are especially important as the system aims to provide intelligent assistance for (possibly vulnerable) individuals in possibly critical situations.

The hybrid reasoning architecture incorporates both rule-based and case-based reasoning; this enables CARA to be more robust and to adapt to a changing environment by continuously retraining with new cases. An important issue of transparency arises for each of the reasoning methods. For the rule-based part, an important goal is that the rules used in the smart-home analysis should be transparent enough to support the subject or caregiver inspecting and maybe modify these rules. The use of a structured natural language and incorporation of fuzzy logic aims to satisfy this goal. Transparency and clarity in interpreting the results of case-based reasoning are also important, and this concern leads to more critical analysis of the test results and indicates the need for appropriate metrics to be used.

