Abstract Chaotic signal generation from microring resonators (MRRs) is presented. Two 1.5 lm Gaussians with spectral profile having powers of 600 mW are input into the system of MRRs. Using nonlinear conditions, the chaotic signals can be generated and propagated within the ring medium. Results show that the chaotic signals can be controlled and manipulated by using additional Gaus- sian input into the add port of the MRRs. A balance should be achieved between dispersion and nonlinear lengths when the propagating pulse is soliton. Chaotic output signals from the ring res- onator can be converted to logic codes then inserted into an optical fiber transmission link which has a length of 180 km in order to perform the transmission performance. The transmitted signals in the form of spatial and temporal solitons can be detected at the end of the transmission link.

with dispersion, can produce optical solitons [5]. Spatially, an intense beam of light in a medium will produce a change in the medium’s refractive index that mimics the transverse intensity pattern of the beam [6]. The pulse of optical soliton can be used to create a spectrum of light over a wide range [7–9]. They are powerful laser pulses that can be applied to generate chaotic filter features. Therefore, the solitons are con- sidered as stable pulse. The solitons have been extensively investigated in many physics studies [10–12]. The MRR system that comprises one centered ring resonator connected to two smaller ring resonators on the right and left sides. MRRs can be used as filter devices where trapping of optical fre- quency or wavelength can be obtained using suitable system parameters. MRRs are simulated using waveguide, where the medium has Kerr effect-type nonlinearity [13]. The Kerr effect, also called the quadratic electro-optic effect (QEO effect), is a change in the refractive index of a material in response to an applied electric field [14].

resonators is proposed. The Gaussians can be used as an input signal into the system via the input and add ports. Parameter c is nonlinear parameter that takes into account the nonlinear properties of a fiber medium. Parameter b1 is in real case always positive [30–32]. The dispersion parameter D (ps/nm/km) can be defined as follows:

MRR system have recently attracted research interest because such pulses are characterized by wide bandwidths and high speeds. One main advantage of a multiple soliton transmission system made of integrated microring resonator is the high data-rate transmission for short and long distance [23,24]. The narrower pulses of soliton are recommended in order to improve the system performances. The attenuation of such soliton signals during propagation is much lower compared to the conventional laser pulses which emit peaks of microme-

As we know, dispersion parameter D is a monotonically increasing function of wavelength. Eq. (3) has only two solu- tions, in the form of either dark or bright soliton. The bright soliton corresponds to the light pulse but dark soliton is rather a pulse shaped dip in CW light ‘‘background”. In other words, the dark soliton is in a fact negation of the bright soliton [33–35]. Where there is maximum of light in the bright soliton, there is minimum of the light in the dark soliton and vice versa. Eq. (2) can be normalized in the form of

where F(X, Y) is transverse field distribution that corresponds to the fundamental mode of single mode fiber. A(Z, t) is along propagation axis Z and on time t dependent amplitude of the mode. After some math manipulations one can come to the equation that governs pulse propagation in optical fibers.

If N is an integer, it represents the order of the soliton pulse. Very interesting situation comes when N = 1. In this case of first order soliton, the pulse does not change its shape at all as it propagates in optical fiber [39–41]. It is evident that for telecommunication purposes is the soliton of first order most suitable, because in this application it is necessary to keep a

The refractive index (n) of the medium varies due to the Kerr effect caused by the nonlinear condition [45]. It can be expressed by Eq. (8). The electric field of the left and right rings of the MRRs system is given by Eqs. (10) and (11). The inte- rior signals can be expressed by Eqs. (12)–(15). Output electric fields of the MRRs system given by Et1 and Et2 are expressed by Eqs. (16) and (17) [46–49]:

with n0 and n2 that are indexes. The optical intensity and the power are presented by I and P. E0 and z are the amplitude of optical field and propagation distance respectively [50–52]. LD is the dispersion length where, frequency shift of the signal

The Gaussians with centered wavelength 1.55 lm and 600 mW power are inputs. In order to form the multi-function opera- tions, for instance, control, tune, amplify, the additional input such as Gaussian with spectral profile is introduced into the system. The ring system exhibits a nonlinear Kerr effect, where the linear and nonlinear refractive indices of the system are n0 = 3.34 and n2 = 2.7 × 10—17, respectively [57–59]. The

where the right/left rings have equal radius of 1 lm, respec- tively. To make a compact ring, a small bend radius is required [60–62]. The coupling coefficients of the MRRs are chosen as j1 = 0.35, j2 = 0.2, j3 = 0.1, and j4 = 0.95. Considering the MRR with radius of 5 lm and coupling coefficient of 0.1, the result of bistability and bifurcation due to the nonlin- ear condition of the medium is presented in Fig. 2.

By generating large bandwidth of chaotic signals, more channel capacity can be obtained and controlled [63–65]. Therefore, stable signals of the chaotic signals and multi soli- ton signals can be seen within the through and drop ports of the system respectively shown in Fig. 4.

ral shape of the multi soliton pulses can be seen in Fig. 8. Here the temporal pulses with FWHM of 100 ps could be generated. Therefore, transmission of the chaotic signals along the fiber optics is performed, where the spatial and temporal soli- tons can be generated and detected using a suitable optical receiver. A further investigation on system performance was conducted using a bit-error-rate (BER) calculation. As illus-

The chaos can be generated in MRRs due to the nonlinear- ities [82], where soliton signals are generated due to balancing both nonlinear (Kerr effect) and linear (dispersion) effects [83]. In the proposed system the results of throughput port show more chaos behavior, where the results from drop port show generation of stable signals as solitons. In this study we used the chaotic signals to generate arbitrary code to be used in a communication system. The function of the proposed micror- ing resonators (MRRs) is to combine and filter the inputs as Gaussians with spectral profile. The filtering process was per- formed during round-trip of the inputs within the MRRs on the right and left sides of the centered MRR, therefore, slicing the spectrums obtained.

as codes via an optical fiber optic transmission link with the length of 180 km. Clear and filtered signals of spatial and tem- poral solitons can be generated and used for many applications in optical communications. Here the spatial and temporal sig- nals with FWHM of 1.34 pm and 100 ps could be generated respectively.

