The basic skeleton is that of a typical television remote with a socket to insert batteries. The touch screen display is roughly of the size 5x3 cm. It is meant to display the current status of the device and gives the user the option to turn it on or off, or set the appropriate mode. We will have a menu button to enter into the settings of the appropriate device. The menu button shows the list of devices controlled by the remote. We navigate through the menu using the + and – buttons provided. The selection of the device can be made using the enter button provided.

The ‘enter’ button is used to select any particular option, and it acts as power ‘on’ button for the appliance as well. The ‘+’ and ‘-‘ buttons have multiple usage. It is used to navigate through the menu screen. It acts as a temperature controller in case of an air-conditioner, fans, water heater, and microwave ovens .It provides volume control in the speakers in television and music systems. It also controls the brightness of the lights.

To manage efficient control of the system in houses of varying sizes, auxiliary radio frequency remote control systems may be used. Its main function is to behave as a repeater[7], wherein it increases the strength of the signal received from the central remote so that the losses incurred due to signal attenuation are compensated for. An auxiliary remote is installed at an appropriate distance from the central control, so that over all connectivity within the vicinity can be improved.

The universal remote control is unicast in nature. It delivers a message to a single specific node/device connected in the network. It utilizes star network architecture. The devices are all connected to the central remote, but are independent of each other.

The remote control consists of a microcontroller chip such as PIC16C5X. We use 2XAA NiMH [2] rechargeable batteries for the central remote which gives a voltage of 1.5V and a current of 700mA. The remote is formed from a moulded plastic, typically acrylonitrile butadiene styrene, or ABS [1]. The sensor for sending and receiving radio frequency waves is encased with a plastic called acrylic or a poly-carbonate. Capacitive touch screens may be used for the remote to increase ease of use.

The auxiliary remote works similar to a Wi-Fi router. It should contain radio frequency transceivers, the same as that in the central remote. The casing of the auxiliary remote is made using plastic like acrylic or a poly-carbonate [6]. The router can be circular in shape, with radius of about 1.5 inches. The circular shape ensures distribution of good signal strength uniformly in all directions.

The most suitable operating system for the remote can be LinuxMCE (Linux Media Center Edition) because it is a free and open source software platform which allows a computer to act as a home theatre PC (HTPC) for the living-room TV, personal video recorder, and home automation system. It allows control of everything at home, from lighting and climate to surveillance cameras and home security. The LinuxMCE package is installed on the Kubuntu OS [8].

The universally accepted citizen radio frequency is 2.4 GHz, which gives a raw over the air data rate of 250 Kbit/s per channel. The distance covered will be in the range of 10 to 20m depending on the construction materials and the number of walls to be penetrated.

The features of the present model of the remote can be further used to develop an android application that can be supported on the phone. This will allow our Smartphone to act like a universal remote control. Also the remote can be made fully touch screen to give a better look to it. Given the current trends, this can be incorporated in the coming years.

The domestic devices used at home are meant to make life comfortable and with the advent of this remote control it can be expected that the management of these devices will be much easier. It can also help us save electricity at our houses. With the expertise of the technological manufacturing giants today, enhanced and smart houses will not be a distant dream.

