It is demonstrated that using non-linear properties of stimuli-sensitive polymers enables dramatic simplification of design of image display systems. Proposed scheme is based on joint action of two heating elements placed in each pixel. Preliminary experimental results showing feasibility of proposed approach are described in this report.

Several schemes of image display have been implemented as of today. Liquid crystal and plasma displays, which create images using a combination of pixels – elements that are capable of independently changing their optical characteristics, are widespread Ergozhin et al., 2008.

A common disadvantage of existing schemes is a bulky system of operation, which requires a large number of electronic switches, the details are provided in Ergozhin et al., 2008. This is due to the fact that, from a radiotechnical point of view, each display element (pixel) represents a two-pole, which is a device with contacts that are used to receive the operating signal. With regard to plasma displays gas discharge cells constitute such two-poles, while a cell filled with a substance that maintains rotation of plane of polarization under the impact of electric pole.

The maximum number of electronic switches that can be connected to a two-pole is, obviously, two. Consequently, the minimum quantity of image-producing operating switches is implemented using the matrix scheme that is currently in use in abovementioned displays. In such scheme each row and each column is operated through an individual electronic switch. Therefore, the minimum number of switches is equal to the sum of number of rows and columns. For the minimum standard of 800x600 pixels it is equal to 1400 switches; for a more prevailing standard of 1024x768 pixels it is equal to 1792 switches.

This paper demonstrates that mentioned disadvantages can be eliminated as a result of utilizing non-linear qualities of stimuli-sensitive, particularly thermo-sensitive polymers. Substances of this kind have been subject of extended research Dergunov et al., Okano, Barker et al. and Tanaka; large number of polymers, whose solutions sustain phase transition as a result of change in temperature, have been synthesized. Previous research Dergunov et al., Okano, Barker et al. and Tanaka indicates that there is a strong relation of the parameters of a solution to stimuli in the area of phase transition, as summarized in Ergozhin et al.

As noted in Ergozhin et al., light-scattering medium (fig.1) with controlled change in optical density can be used in producing images. In this scheme the screen is divided into combinations of pixels, with each one controlled by an independent signals. The screen is filled with the polymer, sustaining phase transition under impact of one or another stimulus. As a result of optical emission affecting lateral side of the screen, pixels that sustained phase transition start scattering the light. Visually they are regarded as illuminated. Pixels that did not sustain phase transition remain transparent and let through the light; under lateral illumination they are perceived as dark.

In the simplest example a resistor providing calefaction of solution by emitting Joule heat may be used to implement phase transition in an individual pixel. In principle, such scheme is functional; however it is not free of disadvantages common to plasma and LCD displays, mentioned above. The minimum quantity of electronic switches (1) in such scheme is equal to the sum of number of rows and columns as well (Fig.2).

(as in fig. 4) number of groups is three. Switches from the set (1, fig.4) commutate, i.e. connect the whole group to power supply at once. Columns # 1, 2 and 3 are singled out in each group. Columns #1 of each group are combined in yet another group that is commutated by the first switch from the set (2, fig.4). In a similar manner, groups commutated by other switches from the set 2 consist of columns #2 and #3 of groups united by switches from set 1.

Optically transparent cuvettes of 1 cub cm were used as cells. A pair of heating resistors with nominal resistance equal to 100 Ohms was placed at the bottom of the cuvette. The cuvettes were filled with 0.1 m/liter solution of poly-N-isopropylacrylamide.

LEDs were used as a source of visible optical emission. Receivers of emissions (light-dependent resistors) were located at the opposite side of the cuvette at 15 mm distance. A specially designed electronic scheme capable of recording measurable values of resistance of a light-dependent resistor in a text file at time resolution of 1-100 microseconds was employed.

In conclusion, experiments of this research prove the feasibility of suggested tensor scheme of image display. It was found that there is a possibility to dramatic simplification of radioelectronic operation schemes of image display by means of employing nonlinear qualities of thermo-sensitive polymers, even if the chosen polymer medium did not show optimal properties for this scheme. Such schemes in their following versions may be used for applications that do not require frequent frame change (billboards and similar devices). Finding and optimization of properties of polymers and composites that show faster response of phase transition, including composites containing immersed nanoparticles, presents significant potential of the suggested scheme improvement.

