Standing balance tests represent the most common way to assess person’s functional ability and they were realized by means of specialized and expensive platforms, especially in clinicians’ environments. Wii Balance Board (WBB) is video- game based device that measures center of pressure (CoP) oscillations and it showed promising performance compared with ‘gold standard’ force platforms. In this paper we propose an open integrated custom application to define balance outcomes using WBB. These outcomes were used to execute a validity analysis of WBB performance compared with baropodometer platform (BP). Ten subjects performed two standing balance tests with open and closed eyes respectively on WBB and BP in separate occasion. Validity analysis was carried out using r-Pearson correlation coefficient, ICC analysis, paired-sample t-Test and Bland-Altman plots. Results confirmed that the WBB, although has a fraction of cost of other platforms, represents a tool suitable for some clinician analysis

Ten volunteers (male = 8, female = 2, age = 28 ± 9,41), without discernable lower limb and major back abnormalities or pathologies, were recruited for this study. They depictured a wide range of weight (72.88 ± 18.13 kg) and height (1,72 ± 0,12 m). Before start the acquisition procedure, each subject was informed about research aims and they subscribed a informed consent. Almost every participant was familiar with the WBB. The Kore University Ethic Committee approved this research.

The FREEMED FM040 (BP) contains passive plates consisting of resistive conductive rubber gold coated sensors. The platform can work at a sampling rate up to 500 Hz, while its active area measures 40 cm x 40 cm. BP was controlled by proprietary software, FreeSTEP. This software, in combination with the platform, can perform several types of analysis and measurement, such as static and dynamic analysis, postural and stabilometric analysis, and biomechanical analysis (gait analysis).

WBB contains four uni-axial vertical force transducers, located at the corners of the board, which are used to assess force distribution (Bartlett et al., 2014). Sensors on the board work at a factory sampling frequency of 40 Hz and they can accurately measure up to 150 kg (330 pounds). The usable surface of the WBB measures 45 x 26.5 cm. The board communicates wirelessly with other devices using Bluetooth protocol. In

Custom application was written in C# to interact with WBB; complementary to C# language, XNA Framework (XNA, 2010) was chosen as underlying platform for graphics and interaction elements. The application was implemented as a game, while the participants to study could be considered as players. After each game (trial test), frame time and raw data acquired from each sensors, carried out as temporal structure, were saved in a tabbed file. WBB data were processed with a Matlab script in order to perform stabilometric analysis by means of center of pressure (CoP) oscillations. CoP was calculated using the equation number 1 for Medio-Lateral oscillations and the equation number 2 for Antero-Posterior oscillations:

Using previous equations, a Matlab script carried out numerical variables used both for balance assessment (see paragraph 2.3) that for the validity analysis proposed in this work; moreover, they were used to make plots typically used in clinician environment, showed in Fig. 2.

We choose this outcome because it is known to be a reliable and valid measure of standing balance control (Salavati et al., 2009). Moreover, considering the predetermined period of trials, total CoP path length resulted analogous to average CoP velocity (path length/ period) (Clark et al., 2010).

Total CoP path length ICC points range (ICCs = 0.79 – 0.83) was in the excellent classification level (Fleiss, 1986) and it outlined validity in both two tests. Bland-Altman plots, see Fig. 3, confirmed the good agreement of two devices showed by means of ICC test.

In this work we addressed the validity of Wii Balance Board to evaluate balance level typically assessed by means of baropodometer platform. In order to fulfill our purposes, we compared results obtained in two balance tests: balance standing with open and closed eyes. Variable chosen for the comparison was total CoP path length. TPL represents a reliable and valid measure of standing balance (Salavati et al., 2009).

Validity analysis was carried out using most commons statistical procedures. Correlation analysis suggested probably agreement between two instruments to assess postural sway path by means of total CoP path length scores. Indeed, OE and CE test revealed high Pearson’s correlation coefficients with significant p- value. As suggested by the authors (Bland and Altman, 1986), in order to define agreement’s level between devices correlation analysis had to be followed by more specific investigations, using inter-class correlation coefficient analysis (ICC) and Bland-Altman plot. ICCs ranked total CoP path length measurement to an excellent level of within-devices correlation. (Fleiss, 1986). Bland-Altman plot, as showed in Fig. 2, outlined the goodness of validity for the aforementioned variable. Moreover, mean differences were consistent with results proposed by Clark and his colleagues (Clark et al., 2010).

Total CoP path length variable results confirmed the promising role of WBB as balance assessment tool, even if any limitations did not permit to think that WBB could immediately replace baropodometer platform, especially for some clinicians’ valuations. Baropodometer platform was assembled with high number of sensors that were able to perform foot scanning and postural loads-map: these analyses are used to design specific orthotics. WBB had only four strain gauge sensors so it could not perform the same evaluations. WBB required a custom-written software and clinicians did not have enough skills to implement this application. Several clinicians used directly the balance tests applications proposed by Nintendo games WiiFit (Franco et al., 2012) even if Wikstrom stated that WiiFit balance activity scores had poor validity with usually CoP measures (Wikstrom, 2012). If custom software could be represented a limitation for clinicians, the flexibility of WBB open new issues for computer science researchers which can work with physical activity colleagues to develop software also for custom game-based physical activity experience (Sgrò et al., 2013).

In conclusion, agreement scores of WBB and baropodometer platform confirmed the promising role of the first as portable, low cost and friendly device for balance assessment. Moreover, the high level spread of WBB and the flexibility of this platform represent an interesting opportunity to promote home-based physical activity training session. In addition, we believe that WBB had the characteristics to represent a digital aided also in educational environment.

