This study is aiming to assess the primary energy consumption, and the energy-related carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions in vehicle cycle for a China passenger car powered by internal combustion engine. Meanwhile, this analysis concerns about the share of coal demand in the total primary energy use. The results show that the vehicle cycle energy consumption and CO2 emissions of a China passenger car are about 91.13 GJ and 11.13 ton per vehicle, respectively. And coal accounting for about 84.5% of the vehicle cycle primary energy consumption is the key contributor to the CO2 emissions in China. The processes of material production and vehicle assembly account for most of the vehicle cycle energy use and CO2 emissions. There are four ways to reduce vehicle cycle environmental impacts: use clean energy, lower the weight of the vehicle under the condition of ensuring vehicle performance, adopt low energy-intensive and low emission-intensive materials in vehicle, and develop advanced vehicle propulsion systems.

The world energy-related carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions will increase from 30.2 billion metric tons in 2008 to 35.2 billion metric tons in 2020 (EIA, 2011). Much of the growth is attributed to non-OECD nations that depend heavily on fossil fuels to meet fast-paced growth in energy demand. Coal is the largest contributor to emissions growth in the non-OECD economies, and accounts for 54% of the projected non-OECD increase in total energy-related emissions. China's emissions account for more than two-thirds of the total increase in non-OECD Asia's emissions. China is one of the world's top three nations of coal-related emission.

Life cycle assessment is an attempt to quantity the environmental aspects and potential environmental impacts (e.g. resources use and the environmental consequences of releases) over a product's life cycle from raw material acquisition through production, use, end-of-life treatment, recycling and final disposal (i.e. cradle-to-grave) (ISO, 2004 and 2006).

Electricity in vehicle cycle is used for vehicle materials production, vehicle assembly and scraping at the end of lifetime. In this analysis, China electricity mix in 2009 is adopted from China electric power yearbook 2010, as shown in table 1. And the loss of electricity transmission and distribution is 6.7% (China electric power yearbook, 2010). From table 1, we can see that coal is the biggest contributor to the China electricity mix. The emissions and energy use associated with electricity generation from residual oil, natural gas, coal and uranium is calculated. And the electricity generations from the “other” group including hydropower (about 15.5%), wind (about 0.7%), geothermal energy and solar energy etc. are treated as zero emission.

In this analysis, a vehicle with the mass of 1324 kg is chosen to be the representative of the mid-size passenger car. The vehicle material composition is shown in table 2. In this paper, the energy consumption and emissions associated with the steel and aluminum are assumed on the basis that 70% of the raw material is virgin, and the remaining is recycled. Other materials are all virgin. Coal is the main energy used in metallurgical industry of China. Coal and electricity are assumed as the main process energy of the metal material production. Based on the consumptions above, the primary energy densities and the energy-related CO2 emission factors of automotive material and the share of coal in primary energy consumption are calculated, shown in table 2. The CO2 emissions in table 2 are the CO2 equivalent including the direct carbon dioxide, volatile organic compounds (VOCs) and carbon monoxide (CO). The VOCs and CO emissions are converted to CO2 emissions based on the carbon ratios of their molecular weights.

used in this analysis. The energy use of vehicle assembly is assumed 70% from China electricity and the remaining from coal directly. Based on this, the CO2 equivalent emission factors for electricity and coal are calculated, are 257.2 kg/GJ and 104.4 kg/GJ respectively.

a China passenger car are about 91.13 GJ and 11.13 ton per vehicle, respectively. And the coal consumption accounts for about 81.8% of the total primary energy use, as illustrated in Fig. 1. Coal is the key energy source of vehicle cycle. Coal is the largest contributor to the carbon dioxide emissions in China.

From Fig. 1, we can find that the material production process is very energy-intensive and accounts for about 70% of the total vehicle cycle primary energy use, and generates over 50% of related CO2 emissions. The coal consumption accounts for about 83% of the primary energy use in the material production process. Coal is the main contributor to the carbon dioxide emissions in this stage.

The assembly process accounts for about 29% of the vehicle cycle primary energy consumption, while the emissions of this stage accounts for about 49.7% of the total CO2 emissions. It is very clear that the vehicle assembly line is emission-intensive, caused by painting process. Coal which accounts for about 84.5% of this stage energy demand is still the main contributor to the carbon dioxide emissions.

We have performed a vehicle cycle assessment of a mid-size passenger car for China with a focus on the energy consumption, coal demand and energy-related CO2 equivalent emissions. The vehicle cycle primary energy use and CO2 emissions are about 91.13 GJ and 11.13 ton per vehicle, respectively. Coal as the biggest contributor of environment impacts accounts for 84.5% of the vehicle cycle energy consumption.

The Material production consumes 63.2 GJ of energy about 70% of total primary energy consumption and releases over 50% of the total energy-related CO2 emissions. The vehicle assembly stage accounts for 29% of the total energy consumption and releases 49.7% of the vehicle cycle CO2 emissions. The energy demand and CO2 emissions of the vehicle distribution and disposal generate puny environment impacts.

From the analysis above, we can find that there are four ways to reduce vehicle cycle environment impacts. First, lower the weight of the vehicle on the condition of ensuring vehicle performance. Second, adopt low energy-intensive and low emission-intensive materials. Third, substitute environment friendly energy for coal as the main process fuel in China. The last one, develop advanced vehicle propulsion system.

