The rapid advancement in information and communication technol- ogies stimulated a connectivity solution for vehicles to improve traffic safety and management. Such a solution is a key aspect of the intelligent transportation system (ITS), which is said to transform the way we travel today. The vehicles communicate not only with each other but also with nearby road-side unit (RSU) infrastructures to warn drivers against a potential accident or other unsafe events. In order to improve safety and mobility of the road travelers, there are various ongoing work on the connected vehicle pilot deployment programs in New York City, Tampa, and Wyoming [1]. The US Department of Transportation (USDOT) claims that the connected vehicle technology has the potential to eliminate up to 80% of the non-impaired crashes [2].

The architecture enhancements to enable LTE-based V2X applications are given in Ref. [8]. The vehicles may receive V2X messages either via unicast or broadcast setup called multimedia broadcast/multicast service (MBMS) [9] over LTE-Uu interface for vehicle-to-infrastructure (V2I) communication. In addition, many additional modes have been intro- duced for direct vehicle-to-vehicle (V2V) communication in Ref. [10]. In one of the modes, V2V resource allocation is managed by the base station (BS); thus the availability of coverage is crucial to ensure collision-free transmission which is unlikely in the case of the contention-based approach employed in DSRC technology. Therefore, ubiquitous coverage is desirable for efficient V2X communication.

Usually, the propagation losses and interference are the major limiting factors for vehicular communication, and their evaluation re- quires BS location information. Recently, BS location data are publicly available, e.g., in OpencellID [11] and CellID finder [12], through esti- mation techniques. OpenCellID in particular incorporated crowd-sourced data collection scheme to estimate the location of the BSs and developed a database consisting of GPS coordinates of all the BS. The location es- timates in the OpenCellID database are accessed using the global identity, which is periodically disseminated by the BS, and it is known as E-UTRAN Cell Global Identifier (ECGI) in LTE.

In this paper, we study the vehicular connectivity performance of the LTE networks based on the drive test measurements carried out using a universal software defined radio (USRP). The measurements are post- processed to decode identity information of the BSs and to evaluate their coverage strength. Primarily, we aim to decode unique identifica- tion of BSs specified by the ECGI and to extract their locations from OpenCellID. The results from the rural, semi-urban, and urban areas of the drive test campaign are obtained to investigate the coverage per- formance and its impact on the temporal connectivity of vehicular users. Our results show that V2I communication is better supported by LTE network deployments in semi-urban and urban compared to rural areas. The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides the literature review. Section 3 describes the drive test measurement setup and the recording process. The post-processing steps performed in MATLAB to evaluate the BS information are given in Section 4. In Section 5, drive test results assessing the performance of the LTE infrastructure are presented,

The pathloss characteristics of V2I channel were evaluated in Refs. [32,38,39] (see also [40,41] for millimeter wave vehicular channels). It is shown that the path loss is affected by the antenna height, and its behavior can be described using the two-ray ground reflection model. In rural/suburban areas, multipath components are not prominent

The primary goal of the post processing is to unambiguously identify the BSs and analyze vehicular communication performance from the measurement data. The ECGI information enables unambiguous identi- fication, and it is extracted from the measurements performed for decoding the SIB1 as mentioned in Section 3. Further, the vehicular communication performance is determined based on the achievable coverage from the measurement data by decoding the MIB as explained in the following section.

that carry cell-specific reference signals [47]. It is relatively measured in dB scale and all the results were obtained by keeping the same USRP gain setting. The V2I connectivity performance of the LTE is studied from the results explained in Section 5. However, unique identification of BSs is necessary to determine the impact of actual network deployments on the V2I connectivity performance. It is achieved by decoding ECGI infor- mation from the measurement data.

The range of cell identification using the PCI is limited to 504, and it might be reused to identify the small cells in dense deployments scenario. This creates ambiguity and therefore BS broadcast ECGI contained within the system information indicated in the SIB1 for unique identification. The SIB1 is transmitted on PDSCH, and the decoding procedure given in Ref. [48] is performed for its extraction from the recorded set of mea- surements specified in Section 3.

Next, we acquire downlink control information (DCI) which is carried on the PDCCH to determine the scheduling information of the data transmitted on PDSCH. The DCI REs in the resource grid is mapped on to Control Channel Elements (CCEs) and their possible locations are checked in search space which comprises of user specific and common as defined in LTE [47]. Typically, the common search space carries DCI messages specifying the resource assignments of broadcast system in- formation on the PDSCH. We perform blind decoding to check for all possible standard DCI formats using a broadcast identity called as System Information Radio Network Temporary Identifier (SI-RNTI) [47]. In order to perform blind decoding, we initially extract all the possible PDCCH REs from the resource grid across the entire subcarrier rows and

Finally, we extract ECGI information by parsing SIB1 bits using ASN.1 compiler. The compiler is installed on linux platform by following the steps given in Ref. [55]. Initially, the SIB1 bits are stored in a file with.per format and decoding is performed to obtain BCCH-DL-SCH-Message. It contains ECGI information consisting of mobile country code (MCC), mobile network code (MNC), tracking area code (TAC) and cell identity (CID) to identify the cell within the Public Land Mobile Network (PLMN) [47].

In LTE, the handover decisions are usually based on RSRP measure- ments, and are triggered when the user moves out of the coverage areas of its BS. In one of the common handover trigger conditions (referred as the A3 condition [56]), the RSRP from a neighboring BS becomes greater than the serving BS by an offset. Then, time to trigger (TTT) duration is awaited and if the condition is still satisfied then handover is initiated [47]. In order to analyze handover, we consider RSRP results from the

where reference signal strength indicator (RSSI) is computed as total average received power of all the REs carrying reference signals in a measurement bandwidth of NRB which includes interference from all the sources [47]. Further, the RSRQ is expressed in terms of signal to inter- ference ratio (SINR), which is usually an indicative of throughput given by Ref. [59].

The errors in packet transmission can be caused due to low signal strength condition. As a result, packet retransmissions occur, increasing the round trip latency between the users and the BSs. In Ref. [60], the impact of RSRP and RSRQ parameters on packet error rate and jitter based on real time transport protocol (RTP) is investigated for voice traffic. The jitter is computed as consecutive differences of packet latency

Karthik Vasudeva, Ozgur Ozdemir: Conceptualization, Methodology, Software, Validation, Formal Analysis, Investigation, Writing-Original Draft, Writing-Review and Editing. Sugan R. S. Chandar: Writing- Original Draft, Validation, Formal Analysis Fatih Erden: Writing- Original Draft, Writing-Review and Editing. Ismail Guvenc: Conceptual- ization, Methodology, Resources, Supervision, Funding acquisition, Writing- Original Draft, Writing-Review and Editing.

