The research is aimed to accomplish an automatic visual inspection system for circular objects using cameras and image processing technique. The main concern of the paper is on the pattern analysis of circular objects based on image analysis. First, the authors propose a computational method using global symmetry to locate objects before the further inspection process. It aims at designing a symmetry measure based on distance weight, phase weight and intensity weight. Such measure can be used to locate centers of circles, even for those with weak contrast under uncertain complex backgrounds. Then based on the measure, similarities of arbitrary circular objects are given and tested. The experimental results for the proposed approach are promising.

When we look at an object with bad quality such as broken edges or contaminated surfaces, we can effortlessly perceive the abnormality without seeing a regular one. People possess a natural visual perception mechanism based on symmetry detection [1, 2]. Accumulated evidences have indicated that symmetry detection appears to have great potentials for computer-vision-based applications [3, 4, 5].

Mathematically, symmetry is defined by some characteristic fixity under a class of Euclidian transformations [3, 6]. As for image processing, definition and detection for symmetry becomes more complex due to the difficulty in selecting definite features. The existing work includes methods based on frequent features by using wavelets [6] and Fourier transforms [5, 7]. And, based on spatial features includes those of using gradients and local points [8, 9, 10]. Also, global symmetry is calculated based on the symmetry of energy, topology, biological mechanisms or other features [2, 4, 11, 12, 13].

However, few efforts have been put to implement symmetry into real vision-based applications. Moreover, it is still a challenging task to extract objects under cluttered backgrounds, especially for objects with weak contrast and varying illuminations. For example, it is well known that there are many classical methods to find circles in images, such as moments, Hough transforms, active contours, least-square methods [14, 15]. However, these methods completely fail when objects' gradients are weaker than those of their backgrounds.

In this paper, we propose a computational method to inspect circular objects using global symmetry. A symmetry measure is designed based on gradients and distances of interest. It is suitable to inspect arbitrary circular objects robustly, even for those with weak contrast under strong cluttered backgrounds. The method is tested in several experiments and has been successfully applied into real vision-based inspecting systems.

It describes the symmetries of intensities, structures and directions. The extreme point of (6) means the point with the maximal symmetric measure. So it is center for circular objects. In cluttered backgrounds, the noise can be efficiently filtered out since it is irregular and non-symmetric.

The symmetry measure described in the paper was inspired by the previous work of Reisfeld [6]. However, we extend the algorithm in the following aspects. Firstly, by extending the distance weight function with different scales of interest distances, a symmetry measure of global or local can be computed. Whereas Reisfeld detects only local symmetry. Secondly, a much simpler phase weight function is given for the detection of bilateral and mirror symmetry of all directions. It’s more efficient in calculating the symmetry measure than the weight in [6]. Thirdly, we add a new intensity weight function for balancing the symmetric weak edges. Finally, we apply the proposed method into real industrial inspecting systems.

Fig. 2. (a) An original CD image, (b) the Sobel gradient map of (a), (c) the gradient map of (a) with balanced intensities using (5), (d) the symmetry map of (c), (e) the separated CD by the proposed method, (f) the Fourier-Mellin transform of (e).

The method is tested in a real application system for inspecting medical lids. The defects of lids include malformed shapes, broken edges, stained surfaces, and so on. Sample lids are shown in Fig.1. The distance weight functions in (3) are constructed by taking the lids' three main symmetric circular patterns,

The other test is given for inspecting compact discs (CDs) which contain non-symmetric patterns, with weak contrasts under a strongly cluttered background, as shown in Fig.2. For speed, only the maximal scale is set in the distance weight function for the purpose of locating objects. The other parameters for calculating the symmetric map are set similar to the above experiment.

In this paper, a systematic approach for robustly inspecting circular objects is given. The proposed symmetry measure, on the one hand, can directly be used to inspect circular objects with symmetric patterns. On the other hand, it can locate arbitrary circular objects under uncertain backgrounds. In the latter case, after the object is located, a content-based descriptor is used to achieve the inspecting task.

