Abstract The Civilian Global Positioning System (GPS) receivers often encounter problems of interference and noise which degrade the receiver performance. The conventional methods of par- allel code phase search acquisition with coherent, non-coherent and differential coherent detection for weak signal acquisition fail to enhance the signal for all conditions especially, when the Carrier to Noise ratio (C/N0) falls below 15 dB-Hz. Hence, the GPS receiver has to employ sophisticated techniques to excise the noise and to improve the Signal-to-Noise Ratio (SNR) of the signal for fur- ther processing. In this paper, a pre-filtering technique of reduced rank Singular Spectral Analysis (SSA) is proposed for noise excision and is processed through coherent, non-coherent and differen- tial detection postcorrelation methods to retrieve the signal embedded in noise. Monte Carlo sim- ulations carried out to examine the acquisition sensitivity at various power levels with the different postcorrelation approaches indicate that the SSA combined with differential detection approach provides a significant performance improvement with lesser mean acquisition time. It has 96% probability of detection at a worst signal power level of —159 dBm (i.e. C/N0 15 dB-Hz), compared to other conventional methods.

Global Positioning System satellites use spread spectrum type of ‘L’ band carrier signal ‘L1’ with carrier frequency 1575.42 MHz and ‘L2’ with carrier frequency 1227.6 MHz which are modulated on 50-bps data stream. This is spread with a pseudorandom code called Coarse and Acquisition (C/A) code consisting of a 1023 chip sequence having a period of 1 ms and a chip rate of 1.023 MHz [1]. In comparison with traditional hardware GPS receivers, presently, software based

GPS receivers are gaining popularity not only for their re- configurability [2] but also provide an excellent research tool for investigating and improving the receiver performance in a wide range of conditions. Also software based GPS receivers allow flexibility in dealing with noise excision. The exploitation of spectrum transforms and mathematical tools are more fea- sible in software and faster performance is achieved [3]. The signal acquired by a GPS receiver is deteriorated by interfer- ence and receiver noise giving false information about the vis- ibility of satellite and is unable to provide a precise position of the user. This paper proposes an approach for signal acquisi- tion enhancement based on software approach for a L1 GPS receiver. The typical C/N0 value of an ideal GPS receiver ranges from 37 to 45 dB-Hz. Under noisy conditions, the GPS signal needs to be acquired with the power level ranging from 160 dBW to 200 dBW [4]. In tracking stage of ideal GPS receiver, signal strength up to 25 dB-Hz is allowed but acquisition is limited to about 35 dB-Hz [5], so acquisition sen- sitivity is more compared to tracking.

The received GPS ‘L1’ signal from the Radio Frequency (RF) front end is converted to Intermediate Frequency (IF) of 4.1304 MHz and sampled at a frequency of 16.367 MHz. For 1 ms of data, the number of samples can be found as 1/1000

the noncoherent integration time equals 40 ms [14]. The earlier reported weakest signal that can be detected in 4 s of data using full bits method is with a C/N0 of 19 dB-Hz [10]. Signal acquisition in the range of 15 dB-Hz can be accomplished by increasing the integration time up to 20 s. But when the C/ N0 falls below 15 dB-Hz, performing acquisition with coherent detection beyond 10 ms does not work due to data transition

samples with a single bit resolution. To ensure good probabil- ity of successful acquisition, we have confined the N value as 16,367 samples. The digitized data obtained after analog to digital conversion are given as the input to the acquisition pro- cess to determine the code phase and Doppler frequency of vis- ible satellites. The simulation parameters are mentioned in Table 1.

achieved with larger M. However, too large values of M lead to an undesirable decomposition which in turn yields mixing of residual components. Sometimes small transitions in M reduce the mixing and lead a better separation, hence SSA analysis was repeated several times using different values of M [17].

subspace (Xr) and noise subspace (Xn). The SVD is performed with another window size (M2) on noise subspace where it is decomposed into (X1r) and (X n). This is continued up to sev- eral window sizes and finally all the signal subspace compo- nents (Xr)+ (X1r) + ... (Xr) are added. This yields good separation of signals from noise. By repetitive trials, the value

chosen rank (r) as 1 for both cases of GPS signal. To under- stand the effect of rank in restoration of weak GPS signals, the noisy GPS signal of power level 150 dBm is applied to the pre-filtering based SSA approach. As per the definition of SSA the number of iteration (k) is limited to 1. The recon- structed GPS signal with rank values of 1, 2 and 3 for three dif- ferent trajectory matrices, autocorrelation, covariance and modified covariance are plotted in Fig. 3.

A code replica indicating better acquisition. Processing gain is the measure of total gain obtained after the signal acquisition and indicates how well the trajectory matrix is able to acquire a weak signal. Along with the processing gain Gp and correlation peak, the other performance metric chosen is Mean Square Error. The mean squared error ^e between the actual and the estimated signal is given as ^e =  1   N—1|e(n)|2.

The results demonstrate that the autocorrelation type of trajectory matrix combined with differential detection in GPS acquisition, achieves the maximum postcorrelation pro- cessing gain of 20 dB at signal level of 150 dBm (Table 7) which is more compared to covariance (17.3 dB) and modified covariance (18.2 dB) methods. Similarly, autocorrelation type of trajectory matrix has produced the highest correlation peak. Though Covariance method is widely used in the SSA approach [18], the autocorrelation method has a full version of trajectory matrix that avoids the reacquisition of GPS data by making 5 satellites to be visible. Also, the Minimum Mean Square Error of 0.2346 is achieved by this method compared to others approaches. The perfect alignment of pseudorandom noise (PRN) code with the incoming signal has been achieved for SVN 31 with high Gp. From the simulation results, it is clear that this method is capable of correcting the code phase of satellites. The combination of autocorrelation with differen- tial detection is the best choice among the others to enhance the signal in the worst case SNR level.

2.2 MHz. For a wavelet based filtering, Haar wavelet with 8 level decomposition is used to de-noise the signal. A compar- ison of SNRs and achieved gain using the different filters shows that the Butterworth filter has obtained a gain of 5.8452 dB little more than Chebyshev filter and wavelet de- noising is able to get only an additional gain of 0.3438 dB. In contrast, the SSA pre-filter outperforms other methods with an impressive amount of 23 dB gain (see Table 2).

Figure 4	Simulation results of SSA on noisy GPS signal. (a) GPS signal at —130 dBm, (b) spectrum of the GPS signal, (c) noisy GPS signal of —150 dBm, (d) spectrum of noisy GPS signal. (e) Noise excised GPS signal and (f) spectrum of noise stripped GPS signal.

The coherent detection method is tested for 150 dBm power level at 4 ms integration time. The method is unable to satisfy the maximum value of the decision statistic (S) and poor cor- relation performance of SVN 31 (Fig. 6a) and the data are tested with the SSA method. Among the locally generated 32-PRN codes correlated with the incoming signal, only SVN-31 crosses the peak condition (Fig. 6b) requiring mini- mum of 4 satellites to find out the user position. Increasing the acquisition data length beyond 10 ms leads to data transi- tion. Longer duration coherent detection increases number of frequency bins to be searched which restricts extending the integration time during weak signal conditions. As coherent integration even when combined with SSA is not able to detect weak signals less than C/N0 24 dB-Hz, therefore non-coherent integration is next to study.

The 150 dBm GPS data are tested for 40 ms duration nonco- herent integration time. Fig. 7.a shows the non-coherent detec- tion result of SVN 31 without SSA where the maximum value of the decision statistic (S) is not arrived, the required thresh- old conditions, and the signal is declared absent. While testing noncoherent integration with SSA, only SVN-31 is found with dominant peak (Fig. 7b). Studies have demonstrated that the Signal Sensitivity increases roughly with square root of inte- gration time [19] and a 10 ms longer integration time gives only 5 dB increase in sensitivity. Hence it is concluded that 100 ms non-coherent integration correlation i.e. one tenth of second data are required to acquire a signal having C/N0 up to 24 dB-Hz [5].

for SVN-31.This is because the noise independent property has capability of removing the squaring loss up to certain SNR values only. On examining Fig. 8a and b it is inferred that dif- ferential coherent scheme is able to detect only one visible SVN-31 for SNR level of  150 dBm. When the signal level is weaker ( 159 dBm), even an increase in integration time to 100 ms does not make any satellite to be visible.

for different integration periods. The Monte Carlo simulation is carried out for 10,000 trials to ensure the effectiveness of the performance comparison between the three detection methods. A weak GPS signal of  140 dBm (34 dB-Hz) i.e. SNR of ( 140 + 144) = 4 dB was set as power level. In order to achieve nominal SNR of 14 dB, a gain of 10 dB is required,

hence signal must be averaged over a sufficiently long non- coherent integration time (20 ms) to build up the SNR to a reliable level (10 dB) (Fig. 10a). In a similar fashion, the power is varied at different levels and the corresponding probability of detection and the Gp are examined. The detection metrics

sition time, however, for dealing with15 dB-Hz weak signal, even after extending the integration time to 100 ms is not suf- ficient enough to meet the decision statistic and the detection probability is around 0.68 only. On the other hand, the SSA combined differential detection does well in the lower SNR level. Fig. 10b shows the Gp improvement of 20 dB under the power level 24 dB-Hz while performing 16 ms differential inte- gration time combined with SSA. The pre-filtering combined differential coherent approach provides a significant Gp of 29 dB within the integration time of 16 ms having 96% of probability of detection under the signal level of 159 dBm. An additional gain of 3 dB with a detection probability of

0.96 is being provided by the pre-filtering combined differential coherent method (Fig. 11) compared with the differential detection approach in the signal range lower than C/N0 20 dB-Hz. Integration Time versus C/N0 is plotted where C/ N0 goes below the nominal level (Fig. 11b), the required non-coherent integration time is in the order of 104 ms whereas performing pre-filtering combined differential coherent detec- tion the required integration is about 20 ms.

The SSA based de-noising approach relies on finding the econ- omy SVD of the autocorrelation trajectory matrix of noisy input samples and maintaining the structure of the matrix by applying suitable rank reconstruction (Toeplitz/Hankel) meth- ods. On testing with noisy GPS signal, this method combined with DFC efficiently handles lower power signal level of 159 dBm with shorter integration time and achieves 3 dB gain improvement within 269.88 s of mean acquisition time. The detection of the number of visible satellites is increased and also the re-acquisition of GPS data is avoided. From the simulation results, the differential coherent detection technique when combined with pre-filtering corrects the deviation in code phase and Doppler frequency of the visible SVN compared to other conventional methods. The SSA based de-noising cou- pled with DFC has an ability to recover the weak signals only up to	159 dBm which is the limitation of current approach. Therefore for an indoor environment, Independent Compo- nent analysis can be used in the SSA signal decomposition step for finding proper rotations of eigen triples in weak signal

where sd is total GPS integration period, kPfa is false alarm penalty time (by keeping k = 10), q is the total number of cells to be searched in the bin and Tcoh = 1 ms for coherent, nonco- herent and 10 ms for DFC. Using the Eq. (4), Tacq is computed for different integration times. Fig. 11c shows that processing 20 s non-coherent data takes the computing time of 4.6785e

Luke Winternitz, Michael Moreau, Gregory J. Boegner, Jr., Steve Sirotzky, Navigator GPS receiver for fast acquisition and weak signal space applications, in: Proceedings of the 17th International Technical Meeting of the Satellite Division of The Institute of Navigation (ION GNSS 2004), Long Beach, CA, September 2004, pp. 1013–1026.

