In large antenna servo control systems, Linear Quadratic Gaussian (LQG) controller is superior to the proportional integral (PI) controller in terms of stability, rapidity and wind disturbance suppression. However, there is still no deterministic method to design the weight matrixes that affect the performance of LQG controller. To solve this problem, a method based on the artificial bee colony (ABC) algorithm is proposed, which aims at optimizing the close-loop system transient response performance. Global searching and local searching are conducted in each iterative step in the ABC algorithm so that searching efficiency is greatly improved. Applied in a weight matrixes optimization problem for a large antenna servo with LQG controller, the algorithm is satisfactory in simulation result, the control effect is better than that based on the trial and error method.

of an optimal state feedback controller and a state observer based on Kalman filter. It is realized by determining the weight matrixes, and the performance of the controller is highly influenced by the choice of weight matrixes, i.e. a poorly chosen weight matrixes would result in an unsatisfactory performance. Therefore, the selection of weigh matrixes is key to the design. In the past, weight matrixes are obtained by trial and error, which not only is time-consuming but also requires practical experiences, and in some cases it cannot obtain the optimal or suboptimal weight matrixes which meet the desired specifications. Adopting the philosophy of optimization computation, weight matrixes can be obtained under certain optimization constraints. This approach can increase design efficiency and computes optimal or suboptimal weight matrixes under certain optimization constraints.

A bionic intelligence algorithm called artificial bee colony algorithm (ABC) which imitates bee colony searching for food resource was proposed by Karaboga et al. [2] in 2007. Although still in its beginning, ABC algorithm has been more and more studied by scholars, because it has less adjusting parameters and is easy to implement. Compared with genetic algorithm (GA) and particle swarm optimization (PSO), ABC conducts global and local searching in each iteration step so that it is more possible to find the global optimal solution and avoid the local optimal solution. It has been successfully applied to unconstrained numerical optimization [2-3], constrained numerical optimization [4], neural network training etc. These studies conducted typical tests to ABC algorithm and obtained satisfactory simulation and experimental results.

Traditional servo system with PI controller [5] is shown in Fig. 1, the difference between input instruction r and output y is called pointing error, e= r-y. This error is the input of PI controller which generates the speed instruction of the system. A problem of PI controller is that if the proportional gain Kp or integral gain Ki have subtle changes, large variations on system characteristics will occur.

Three PI controllers with different parameters are shown in Fig. 2. The figure shows that if Ki is slightly changed, the step response of the system will be greatly changed. If Ki increases, the system will have larger overshoot and will be more vulnerable to disturbances. It is also shown in Fig. 2 that if proportional gain Kp increases, the system vibration will also increase. Therefore, Kp, Ki should be properly adjusted to avoid instability of the servo.

Based on the above analysis, a servo system with LQG controller [6] could be set up as shown in Fig. 3. PI controller and LQG controller generate control signal u collectively. LQG controller consists of an optional feedback controller Kc and a state estimator Ke.. The measurable output y is used to form the control signal; the state estimation  is used to form the closed-loop through feedback gain Kc.

In traditional procedure of designing a LQG controller, designers obtain the control parameters by trial and error. To improve the efficiency of the design and performance of the controller, we study a new optimization algorithm based on the strategy proposed in Ref. [1]. Suppose that a reference model is obtained with the desired performance specification, Ym being its output. Given Q and R, the real output under the same input is Y, define the following ‘1’ norm,

Define f as the fitness function, the process of choosing weight matrixes Q and R is that of minimizing f. The optimization algorithm adjusts weight matrixes Q, R based on the magnitude of deviation between real output Y and the reference model output Ym and updates Kc by solving the Riccati algebraic equation, so that the system response can approximates the reference model response until f reaches a minimum. The matrixes obtained under this condition are the optimization result.

In ABC algorithm, artificial colony consists of three groups of bees: employed bees, onlookers and scouts. In every iteration, employed bees and onlookers are equal in number; the number of scouts is 1. Employed bees and onlookers perform exploitation, while scouts perform exploration. ABC algorithm combines global search with local search so that exploitation and exploration reach a proper balance [2].

There is a controling parameter limit, which records the number a solution has been updated. If a solution representing a food source is not improved after limit iterations, it is abandoned and the corresponding employed bee changes to a scout. Assume xi is abandoned and j  {1, 2, , d}, then a new solution will be generated by scouts with Equ. (12) to replace xi:

A large antenna servo system [4] is used as a simulation example. This model is a large antenna used for deep-space exploration, which has huge flexible structure-with 5000 DOF in its finite element model- and nonlinear characteristics such as friction, tooth gap, speed limit ring, etc. The eighteen order modal model of this antenna can be obtained with system identification technique, based on which the simulation is conducted. The simulation block diagram is the same as shown in Fig. 3, LQG weight matrixes optimization and control are programmed in MATLAB.

The dotted line in Fig. 4 is the optimal step response curve obtained with PI controller. The solid line is the step response curve obtained from the system in Fig. 3, in which the LQG weight matrixes are obtained by trial and error. Overshoot of PI controller and LQG+PI controller are very much alike but the peak time and setting time of LQG+PI controller are much shorter.

Applying the optimized parameters into the large antenna servo system with LQG+PI controller as shown in Fig. 3, we obtain the step response curve as shown in Fig. 5. System overshoot fall from 20% to 0.05% after optimization with the algorithm and is more resistive to external disturbances. The improvement of rapidity and stability shows that using ABC algorithm in LQG controller parameter optimization is superior to the trial and error method.

In this paper, an optimization method to obtain the weight matrixes in LQG controller based on artificial bee colony algorithm is proposed. A reference model is obtained with the expected close-loop performance, weight matrixes are optimized so that the designed servo system can have the most identical characteristics with the reference model. ABC algorithm can automatically select and optimize the weight matrixes of LQG controller, eliminating the cumbersome and complex trial and error process and improving the efficiency of LQG controller design. Simulations on a large antenna servo system demonstrate the feasibility and effectiveness of the algorithm. Applying the optimized weight matrixes into a large antenna servo system, rapidity, stability and overshoot of the system are greatly improved than before.

