The bibliometric analysis was conducted using publications re- trieved from the Scopus database (Elsevier B.V., USA). Scopus database was used since it is the largest abstract and citation database of peer- reviewed literature encompassing science, technology, social sciences, etc. (Ballew, 2009). Also, it includes other relevant information for the study, such as citations per document and country-wise affiliation of all the authors (Agarwal et al., 2016; Hernández-Vásquez et al., 2018).

The literature search was carried out using the search term in the title and abstract field, as mentioned in Table 1, on a single day, May 27, 2021. The validity of the search strategy was determined by manu- ally reviewing the retrieved documents by two authors. The period restrictions were not applied, resulting in documents published from 1992 to 2021. After removing the duplicates, we were left with 805 doc- uments. The information related to citations, bibliography, abstract and keywords, funding, and others were exported as CSV files for further analysis using bibliometric tools. The Scopus database may involve some errors in bibliometric applications (Falagas et al., 2008), for

asterisk (*) is a commonly used symbol to broaden a search by finding words that start with the same letters. It is typically used at the end of a root word. Search terms are not case sen- sitive, so words can be entered in upper case or lower case.

which standardization was necessary for the data. A few documents were detected which were erroneously ascribed to the sphere of author affiliation and country. Thus, a standardization was conducted physi- cally by two authors before conducting the analysis. (See Fig. 1.)

The current study employs VOSviewer version 1.6.16 software (Derviş, 2019; Van Eck and Waltman, 2013) and open-source bibliometrix R-package (Aria and Cuccurullo, 2017) for conducting bib- liometric analysis. VOSviewer software provides maps of various biblio- graphic data that are easy to interpret. VOSviewer can display maps in

different ways along with the functionality of zooming, scrolling, and searching. The popular maps developed using the software are co-authorship, keyword co-occurrence, citation, bibliographic coupling, or co-citation map based on bibliographic data (Van Eck and Waltman, 2010). The maps on VOSviewer are better visualized when the database contains a large number of items (i.e., at least 100 items or more). The other computer programs used in the bibliometric analysis cannot display the maps in such an explicit manner (Pal et al., 2021). The com- prehensive science mapping analysis including the worldwide distribu- tion map of publications and collaborations within the countries was conducted through bibliometrix R-package. The tool is programmed in open source platform R which employs specific tools for both bibliomet- ric and scientometric quantitative research. The co-occurrence network

A plot of the number of publications and cumulative publications on a year-to-year basis was plotted to analyze the research trend in con- nection to the growing scenario linked to traceability relevant to food safety paradigms (Fig. 2). Traceability about food safety is a relatively recent field, with the first papers dating back to 1992. However, it wasn't until 2008 that researchers began to show a significant increase in this field of study. Every year since 2009, at least 30 papers have been published. This year alone (2021), 48 articles have been published thus far. Furthermore, the cumulative publication graph shows that, since 2003, academics all over the world have been paying close attention to the subject of traceability in the context of food safety. The number of cumulative articles has increased exponentially since 2003, with an R2 value close to 0.85 (p < 0.0001).

The Total Link Strength (TLS) is a measurement of a country's collab- orative research with another (Table 2). TLS study revealed that the United States, with a TLS of 98, was by far the most superior country in terms of collaborative research. The US has collaborated on papers with China, the UK, Germany, Italy, the Netherlands, Spain, Ireland, Canada, France, Japan, Belgium, South Korea, India, Norway, Taiwan, Thailand, Kenya, Denmark, Turkey, Chile, and Columbia (Fig. 3). China was in second place, with a TLS of 85. The United States, Italy, the United Kingdom, Canada, Spain, Germany, Ireland, New Zealand, France, Sweden, Columbia, the Netherlands, Japan, Thailand, South Korea, Taiwan, Indonesia, Romania, Singapore, and Hong Kong have all published research documents with China.

The United Kingdom occupied the third position in joint research with a TLS score of 57. Researchers from the United Kingdom, the United States, China, Italy, Canada, Spain, Germany, New Zealand, Ireland, Belgium, France, the Netherlands, Japan, Sweden, Kenya, Finland, and Hungary collaborated on papers. The TLS score and the Country Cooperation Network Map reveal that most nations have a strong research connection with the United States, the United Kingdom, and China. Fig. 3 shows the country collaboration network.

Furthermore, the top organizations that published more than two publications in the same field of research were selected (Table 3). Ac- cording to the bibliometric analysis, eight organizations generated at least three papers during the years. Six of the eight organizations that released more than two publications in the study domain are from China, which is noteworthy.

30.80. It was followed by the Food Science and Technology Programme, C/o Department of Chemistry, National University of Singapore, Singapore and National University of Singapore (Suzhou) Research In- stitute, Suzhou, Jiangsu, China, with four publications and an equal number of average citations per document (34.50). The average citation per document of China Agricultural University, Beijing was the highest

(50.67) though it produced only three documents with 138 citations. The remaining four universities received less than 20 average citations per document and produced three documents in the research area. From the analysis, it can be concluded that the School of Food and Bio- logical Engineering, Jiangsu University, Zhenjiang, China and China Ag- ricultural University, Beijing, China, plays a significant role in the field of research.

and Wu, L. were more impactful than the others. The average citation per document of Thakur, M. was 31.00 (fourth position) and Zhang, J. was in the fifth position with an average citation score of 27.30. Interest- ingly, Wang, J. was at the first position with 16 documents in the re- search area, indicating that even though Wang, J. is a prolific researcher with strong networking and collaboration skills, his research findings are rarely recognized.

fact that high-quality research was published in Food Policy, Journal of Food Engineering, and British Food Journal. This is supported by the fact that these journals have an impact factor exceeding 2.30. Except for Acta horticulturae, Advance journal of food science and technology, and Journal of Food Science and Food Technology, the rest of the journals had an impact factor of over 2.30. It is also worth noting that journals with a higher total link strength had a higher average citation per document than those with a lower average citation per document. This points to the fact that these journals were highly cited by papers published in other journals, as seen by the source-citation relationship map (Fig. 6).

It can be seen in Fig. 6 that there were two separate and closely linked clusters. The document by Hobbs et al. (2005) received the most citations in the first category. The materials from Gowen et al. (2007) were among the most referenced articles in the second group. To sum up, the documents by Loureiro and Umberger (2007), Hobbs et al. (2005), and Gowen et al. (2007) were the most important publica- tions that had a major influence on the concerned research domain.

The results presented in our study showed an increasing trend par- ticularly from the year 2014. The majority of publications and collabora- tions were from countries like the China, US and countries of the European Union. The sources analysis indicated that the organizations publishing more than two documents in the area were mostly from China, Singapore and New Zealand. The findings support the efforts of the developed countries in prioritizing traceability of agricultural

countries. Also, the highest collaboration in publications were observed between USA and China. The results are in consistence with the interna- tional collaboration publication output of China and USA which has showed exponential growth in the past two decades. The growth of science in China during the period has led to major collaboration with G7 countries at the research field (He, 2009; Verbeek et al., 2002). The major limitation of the study could be the reliance on the Scopus data- base which is subject to continuous change and updating in the number of indexed journals (Durieux and Gevenois, 2010; Uthman, 2008). This implies that a bibliometric analysis after an interval of few years may provide substantial variations in the results since the researches in the area is continuously growing with the emergence of several novel tech- nologies. There could be a possibility to combine different databases for better depiction of content in the research area. However, the results obtained in the study can help the researchers to dive deeper into the research area and investigate possible research gaps for future study.

AS was responsible for conceptualization, drafting the manuscript, reviewing and editing. PP assisted in data analysis and visualization. MS contributed in supervision and validation of results, DD assisted in reviewing and editing. The authors discussed the results and implica- tions of the manuscript at all stages.

