Electronic Notes in Theoretical Computer Science 53 (2002)
URL:  http://www.elsevier.nl/locate/entcs/volume53.html  14 pages

Developing a Danish grammar in the GRASP project: A construction-based approach to topology and extraction in Danish

Anne Neville 1
Institut for Fagsprog, Kommunikation og Informationsvidenskab Syddansk Universitet
Kolding, Denmark
Patrizia Paggio 2
Center for Sprogteknologi Copenhagen, Denmark


Abstract
This paper presents work carried out in the GRASP (GRAmmar SPecifications for Danish) project to develop and implement a grammar of Danish within a construction-based framework. The grammar builds on an approach in which standard generalisations about dependency relations interact with constraints on topology and extraction in the definition of a hierarchy of construction types of non-trivial coverage. Thus, this work addresses two of the most discussed top- ics in the literature on Danish syntax – topology and extraction – in the framework of constraint-based linguistic theory. It breaks new ground by providing an (im- plemented) HPSG account of Danish of reasonable coverage, at the same time as providing an interesting testbed for a contruction-oriented HPSG approach.
The approach described has been implemented in the LKB system.



Introduction
GRASP is a project running at the Center for Sprogteknologi (Centre for Language Technology) in Copenhagen, the aim of which is to develop for- mal specifications and implementations covering central aspects of the

1   Email: neville@sitkom.sdu.dk
2  Email: patrizia@cst.dk
 c 2002 Published by Elsevier Science B. V. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.


Danish language. The project is currently working within the two differ- ent theoretical frameworks provided by HPSG on the one hand, and LFG on the other.
This paper focusses on the results achieved so far in the HPSG-oriented part of the project, in which we have developed a grammar of Danish based on the construction-based view of grammar recently arisen within HPSG theory [14].
The grammar builds on an approach in which standard generalisations about dependency relations interact with constraints on topology and ex- traction in the definition of a hierarchy of construction types of non-trivial coverage. More specifically, constituent order patterns well-known from field grammar analyses of Scandinavian languages are recast in terms of a hierarchy of constituent order types allowing for a succinct distinction between main and subordinate clauses on the one hand, and declarative and interrogative clauses on the other. Furthermore, different kinds of ex- tracted phrases are distinguished: this provides the basis for an account of topicalised constructions and various relative clause types. The constraint system set up also allows for multiple gap examples.
Thus, this work addresses two of the most discussed topics in the lit- erature on Danish syntax – topology and extraction – in the framework of constraint-based linguistic theory. It breaks new ground by providing an (implemented) HPSG account of Danish of reasonable coverage, at the same time as providing an interesting testbed for a contruction-oriented HPSG approach.
The grammar has been implemented in the LKB system [4]. LKB is a typed-based system, where not only lexical and syntactic features, but also grammatical phrases and clauses are defined as types. To give an impression of the coverage of our implementation, the GRASP grammar consists of 183 types, 48 of which are phrasal and clausal types equivalent to grammar rules. In addition to basic grammar phrases such as head- complement, head-specifier and a few types of head-adjunct phrases, these cover an interesting subset of clausal types as explained in the following sections. The grammar has not yet been evaluated extensively, the main obstacle being the currently limited coverage of lexical types. In the tests carried out so far, the system performs with a speed of 30.53 CPU msecs per word.

Topology and Clause Types in Danish
Field schemata have often been assumed necessary to account for the topology in languages exhibiting topological properties diverging from those found in English, e.g. German, Swedish and Danish, cf. [10] and [9]. In these accounts, instead of applying to local constituents in phrase struc- tures, a separate domain is assumed to which precedence statements based


on field schemata can be applied, cf. [5]. Importantly, constituents are lin- earised in this domain enabling precedence statements referring beyond local constituents. Here an account is presented which claims that Dan- ish topology and the relation between topology and clause type can be accounted for without such a separate linearised domain. The present account is based on a hierarchy of constructions with the two dimensions headedness and clausality, cf. [15] and [8]. In the headedness dimension, a marking feature encodes topology information in a subset of phrase types. The clausality dimension specifies clause types. A number of construc- tions are subsumed by both dimensions relating topology and clause type. This allows for a straightforward account of the relation between topo- logical properties such as subject-main verb inversion and adverb place- ment, and different clause types such as declaratives, interrogatives, main clauses, subclauses and topicalised clauses 3 .


Data
The examples in (1) illustrate how constituent order and clause type inter- act.
a. Kvinden ser ogsa˚ manden. (Woman-the sees also man-the.) ‘The woman also sees the man.’
(fordi) kvinden ogsa˚ ser manden. ((because) woman-the also sees man-the.) ‘(because) the woman also sees the man.’
Hopper manden?
(Jumps man-the?) ‘Does the man jump?’
Senere hopper manden. (Later jumps man-the.) ‘Later the man jumps.’
(1a) and (1b) show how adverb placement and the main vs. subclause distinction are interdependent. So-called “nexus” adverbs, or central ad- verbs, are placed in postverbal position in main clauses, and in preverbal position in subclauses. Similarly, (1c) and (1d) show that subject-main verb inversion is found in either interrogatives or declarative topicalised clauses, depending on whether or not a constituent appears preverbally
4 .


3 Wh-interrogatives and imperatives are not dealt with in this paper.
4  It should be noted that inversion is also found in conditionals as in


Marking and Topology
To account for the data a modified notion of marking is adopted, cf. [13]. Here the marking values reflect a reinterpretation of the field schema. Mark- ing is used to mark the “nexus field” in constituent structure in order to en- sure that certain constituents appear outside it, whereas others appear in- side it, e.g. nexus adverbs and inverted subjects are positioned inside 5 . A non-inverted subject and complements constitute nexus boundaries. The BCOMARK value (Basic Constituent Order Marking) is structure shared between the non-head constituent and the mother in phrasal construc- tions. The value of BCOMARK is of type bco, subtyped as in (2).

bco

marked	un(marked) va	sv-nv		av
vn	sv	nv
An inverted subject (examples (1c) and (1d)) and nexus adverbs (exam- ples (1a) and (1b)) appear in the nexus field, and they mark constructions with values that are subtypes of marked. The inverted subject marks a construction as BCOMARKvn, a preverbal adverb as BCOMARKav, and a postverbal adverb as BCOMARKva. Non-inverted subjects and comple- ments mark a construction as BCOMARKunmarked, they appear outside the nexus field 6 .
Marking values change values throughout a construction. This means that on the top node of a construction, no record of lower level markings is kept. As it is the markings inside the nexus field that are interesting from the point of view of clause type, a second feature is needed, the BCObco feature (Basic Constituent Order). BCO is an attribute of head, also with

Ser kvinden manden, hopper han. (Sees woman-the man-the, jumps he.)
‘If the woman sees the man, he will jump.’
Such constructions are obvious counterexamples to the observation that verb-initial in- verted clauses are always interrogatives, and remain to be dealt with.
5 Future research will investigate how this marking constrains the occurrence of “light” and negated objects which also occur in the nexus field.
6 It should be noted that the subject in a declarative subclause marks a construction as BCOMARKunmarked, even though it appears in the nexus field in traditional field schema analyses.


values of type bco. It is used to specify, on a verbal head, the actual topo- logical information pertaining to the entire construction in which it oc- curs. The BCO value of the head daughter is constrained by the non-head daughter in a construction. An inverted subject constrains the head’s BCO value to vn, a maximal type indicating inverted constituent order. Non- inverted subjects constrain the head’s BCO value to sv-nv, an underspec- ified type indicating subject-verb order, but underspecified wrt. whether the subject is in the nexus field or not according to field schema analy- sis. The underspecification is resolved by the position of nexus adverbs, as they, depending on their position, constrain the head’s BCO value to va or av. This means that BCOva constrained heads resolve to BCOsv, the common subtype of sv-nv and va, indicating non-nexus subject-verb or- der. BCOav constrained heads, on the other hand, resolve to BCOnv, the common subtype of sv-nv and av, indicating nexus subject-verb order.
BCOMARK and BCO constrain the basic constituent order in (1a) as shown in (3) through (5). (3) is an example of a head-adjunct construc- tion. The verb is lexically underspecified wrt. BCO and BCOMARK. Its BCO value is constrained to va in a construction type, the hd-nexadjunct- non-cl type, and its BCOMARK value is constrained to marked in the same type ensuring that the adverb appears inside the nexus field. The value of BCO is structure shared by the head daughter and the mother, as BCO is a head feature. The marking feature BCOMARK, on the other hand, is structure shared between the non-head daughter and the mother.

ser ogsa˚
BCO




2ser 6





1 va
1


3"ogsa˚
7

2 va#

BCOMARK marked
In (4) a complement is attached. A complement marks the boundary of the nexus field, and the BCOMARK value passed on from the complement daughter to the mother is unmarked. A complement does not constrain the BCO and BCOMARK values of the head daughter, the former value be- ing passed on via the Head Feature Principle to the mother which remains BCOva.



ser ogsa˚ manden
BCO
6	1		7


2ser ogsa˚
4BCOMARK 2	5
3"manden	#

BCO 1 va
BCOMARK 2 unmarked

BCOMARK va
Finally, in (5) a subject is attached. A subject also marks the boundary of the nexus field, and BCOMARKunmarked is passed on from the subject daughter to the mother. The head daughter is constrained to BCOsv-nv in a construction type, the subj-hd-ph type, and as the head daughter is BCOva, the values resolve to BCOsv, the only common subtype of sv-nv and va. This means that the subject is a non-nexus subject. In this way the postverbal adverb resolves the underspecification presented by a pre- verbal subject.

kvinden ser ogsa˚ manden
BCO
6	1		7
4BCOMARK 2	5
"kvinden	#2ser ogsa˚ manden	3
BCOMARK 2 unmarked	BCO 1 sv
4BCOMARK unmarked5









Topology and Clause Types


The constraints wrt. topological properties on the various phrase types as explained in 2.2 are related to clause types as shown in (6), where also the topological constraints on phrase types are shown.



phrase
clause	hd-ph
	

"interrog-cl
#"decl-cl
# 2hd-subj-ph	3
2subj-hd-ph
fill-hd-ph

CONT question
CONT proposition
BCO vn
4BCOMARK vn5
BCO sv-nv
4BCOMARK unm5




interrog-hd-subj-cl
"decl-subj-hd-sub-cl#"decl-subj-hd-main-cl#"decl-fill-hd-cl#

		

In the interrog-hd-subj-cl type the interrogative clause type and the constituent order vn, i.e. subject-main verb inversion, are related, cf. ex- ample (1c). In the decl-subj-hd-sub-cl type the declarative subclause type and the constituent order nv, i.e. nexus subject-verb order, are related, cf. example (1b), whereas in the decl-subj-hd-main-cl type the declara- tive main clause type and the constituent order sv, i.e. non-nexus subject- verb order, are related, cf. example (1a). Finally, in the decl-fill-hd-cl the declarative topicalised clause type and the constituent order vn, i.e. verb- inverted nexus subject order, are related, cf. example (1d). The construc- tion exemplified in (5) is a decl-subj-hd-main-cl, as the postverbal adverb constrains the underspecification of the preverbal subject to sv.


Extraction
Extraction is an important phenomenon to be dealt with in a grammar of Danish, as topicalisation is quite a frequent construction in spoken as well as written language. A treatment of the complete range of constructions for which extraction is relevant, must take into account the interesting fact that Danish, and Scandinavian languages in general, allow extraction out of relative clauses (see [6]), and consequently sentences displaying multi- ple gaps as discussed in more detail in Section 3.1.
The following are examples of the constructions we will be dealing with in this section. All of them presuppose a treatment of extraction 7 .
a. Hami siger kvinden hun tror hun har set i.
(Him says the-woman she thinks she has seen.)
Hami er der ikke nogenj derj vil bo sammen med i.
(Him is there noone who will live together with.)

7 Gaps are indicated in the examples for illustrative purposes although our treatment does not use gaps in the constituent structures.


Jeg kender hami somi/*deri hun bor sammen med i.
(I know him who/that she lives together with.)
Jeg kender eni (somi i)/deri vil købe sofaen.
(I know one who/that will buy the-sofa.)
Jeg kender hami hun bor sammen med i.
(I know him she lives together with.)
Thus, we want the grammar to account for examples of topicalisation with or without multiple gaps, as in (7a) and (7b) respectively; som-relative clauses and resumptive der clauses, as in (7c) and (7d); and bare relatives as in (7e).
Our treatment of extraction builds in short on a proposal by Bouma et al [3], where a type gap-ss is used to establish a sharing of values be- tween the local features of the extracted constituent and an element of the SLASH list. In Section 3.2, we shall see that to account for the different types of extraction site, three different extracted phrases are distinguished corresponding to complement, subject and adjunct extraction. The hi- erarchy of Danish clause types is then extended in Section 3.3 with the relative construction types we are interested in 8 .
To anticipate the conclusion, we find that also with respect to extrac- tion, a construction-oriented approach following Sag (97) [15] constitutes a framework rich enough to provide for the variation found in specific constructions without abandoning the rigour of general formal principles.

Multiple extractions in Danish relative clauses
In Danish, various constituent types can be extracted and topicalised, in- cluding sentence adjuncts, NPs with complement as well as subject func- tion, even infinitival verbal forms. As mentioned in Section 2, topicalised
sentences are characterised by inverted subject verb constituent order (BCOvn). As already noted, Danish allows for extraction out of relative clauses. The following is an authentic example. A and B are two people having a con- versation:
A: Det fungerer godt. (It works okay.)
B: Deti tror jeg der er [nogle familier]j det ikke ville gøre i i j
(That I think there are some families it wouldn’t for.)
Although complex examples such as (8) are possible (and indeed pro- duced maybe contrary to native speakers’ possibly negative grammati- cal judgements) this is not to say that extraction in Danish is completely unconstrained: various proposals have in fact been made in the litera- ture concerning syntactic constraints on extraction in Scandinavian lan- guages.

8 Extraction is also relevant to the treatment of wh-interrogative clauses, which, how- ever, are not dealt with here.


One such constraint has been proposed by Allwood [1], who claims that extraction out of relative clauses is not possible unless the relative pronoun has subject function. Thus, extraction is possible in (9a) but not in (9b):
a. Børni kender jeg mange forretningerj somj j sælger is til i.
(Children I know many shops which sell icecream to.)
b. ?Børni kender jeg mange slags isj somj forretninger sælger j til i.
(Children I know many types of icecream which shops sell to.)
Allwood’s subject restriction has been questioned, e.g. by Andersson [2], who claims that given the right semantic and pragmatic context, coun- terexamples overriding it can be constructed, as e.g. ( 10) (adapted from Andersson):
Selv sma˚børni er der utrolig megetj man kan lære i at gøre j.
(lit: Even small children is there an awful lot one can teach to do.) ‘There is an awful lot you can teach even small children how to do.’
In the same collection, Erteschik-Shir [7] proposes a pragmatic con- straint according to which “an NP can be extracted out of a clause iff the clause may be interpreted as dominant.”(p.177)
From the tests Erteschik-Shir uses, it would seem that being domi- nant is equivalent to belonging to the focus of the sentence, i.e. that part of the sentence contributing discourse-new information. If this is true, Erteschik-Shir’s hypothesis would harmonise with an observation made by Knud Lambrecht 9 that our examples of Danish multiple extractions all seem to belong to the presentational relative construction type [11] (a type of existential construction according to others, e.g. [12]). It is in fact characteristic of presentational relative constructions, contrary to modi- fying relative clauses, that the relative introduces focal information. We shall not pursue this point any further here, but only note that the exam- ples of multiple gaps mentioned in this paper fall nicely into the presen- tational relative category. They all display the pattern ‘NP[extracted] er der NP[indef ] rel-clause’. More investigation is needed, however, to establish a typology of Danish presentational relatives, and to test the hypothesis that this kind of construction allows for more extraction freedom than others, and in particular that Alwood’s subject constraint can be overridden pre- cisely in these constructions.
In conclusion, it may be possible to specify grammatical contexts in which Allwood’s subject contraint can be overridden, and presentational relative clauses seem a good example of such a context. However, in the general case counterexamples to Allwood’s constraint are hard to con- struct and understand. Furthermore, a distinction between subject and non-subject extraction also seems relevant to account for the ungrammat-

9 Oral communication.


icality of a sentence like (11a).
a. *Peter ved jeg at kommer. (lit: Peter I know that/when is coming.)
b. Peter ved jeg at du har mødt. (lit: Peter I know that/how you have met.)
Here, the constraint is that subject extraction is ungrammatical in em- bedded clauses introduced by a complementiser, whilst complement ex- traction is perfectly acceptable (11b). To sum up, the syntactic distinction between subject and non-subject extraction seems necessary to explain why subject and non-subject gaps behave differently at least in certain grammatical contexts. In what follows, this distinction is captured easily by way of different extraction constructions.


Formalisation
Our formalisation builds on the use of the familiar SLASH feature – a list- valued feature in our implementation 10 – to record constituents extracted from their local site. A feature of type gap-ss, in which LOCAL is struc- ture shared with SLASH, is used to represent extracted arguments (sub- ject or complements) on the lexical head’s SUBJ or COMPS list, as done by Bouma et al. in [3]. In Bouma et al.’s proposal, elements of type gap-ss are subtracted from the list of complements of a lexical head by means of lexical constraints. We have instead chosen to introduce gap-ss elements by means of phrasal types.
The type gap-ss appears in two unary phrase types accounting for sub- ject and complement extraction, respectively. In (12) below, we show the type for subject extraction. Besides positing a gap on the SUBJ list of the head daughter, the type allows the daughter node itself to be slashed, thus permitting an analysis of multiple extraction. In contrast, the head daugh- ter’s SLASH is constrained to be empty in the type for complement extrac- tion (not shown here).
2hd-extracted-subj-ph	3
LOC j CAT COMPShi	3	7

6SYNSEM6
2LIST 1 7	7

6	6NON-LOC j SLASH4LAST 2 37	7

4	55
6	2COMPShi
337

6HD-DTR j SYNSEM6LOC j CAT6SUBJ*"gap-ss
#+777

6	6	46
NON-LOC j SLASH 1
577

46	46NON-LOC j SLASH j LIST 2
7557

Another difference with respect to Bouma et al.’s proposal, is the fact
that we do not treat adjuncts as dependents of lexical heads. Therefore, adjunct extraction is accounted for by a different unary type, where gap-ss
10 The actual type is a difference list, which takes the attributes LIST and LAST. These are roughly the same as the more customary FIRST and REST.


does not play a role, and an adjunct of the right type 11 is added onto the SLASH list of the mother node.
The SLASH values that appear in the extracted types are threaded in the relevant phrases (an alternative approach would be lexical amalga- mation, which, however, is not part of the present implementation), to be bound off in the filler-hd-ph type. Here again, care is taken that more than one filler can occur in the same sentence, and that they occur in the right order (crossing dependencies are not supported yet).

Construction types
With a treatment of extraction in place, the hierarchy of construction types can be extended to comprise the clause types in (13) to account for the relative clause types we want the grammar to cover.
(13)

clause


interrog-cl	decl-cl
hd-ph


fill-hd-ph	subj-hd-ph




decl-fill-hd-cl
som-rel-cl
bare-rel-cl	res-der-cl



som-nonsubj-rel	som-subj-rel
As already shown, topicalised clauses (decl-filler-hd-cl) are a type of declarative clause and filler-head phrase. Relative clauses are also declar- ative clauses, further constrained by the fact that they modify a nominal, and are grouped into three types. Som-relatives are filler-head phrases: the relative pronoun is the filler, and shares its REL value with the INDEX value of the modified noun. Bare relatives, on the other hand, are subject- head phrases: due to the absence of a relative pronoun, the INDEX value of the noun they modify is structure shared directly with the INDEX value of the first element on their SLASH list. Finally, the so-called resumptive der-clause, where the pronoun der is always used with subject function, is also a subject-head phrase. We claim that the pronoun in this case does not represent an extracted subject, although other complements may well be extracted from a resumptive der-clause. Therefore, no subject gap is posited, see example (7d). Evidence of this is provided in example (14):
(14) Den film er der ikke nogen som/*der jeg tror gider se igen.
(That film there is noone who/that I think wants to see again.)

11 Danish adverbs can be grouped into different classes depending on where in the sen- tence they can occur.


Fig. 1. Relative clause constraints




NP

det
S
VP
VP

V	NP	NP




NP
SBAR


kender

hun

manden
NP

som
SBAR VP

V

har
VP V
set

(lit: that knows she the-man who has seen.) Fig. 2. LKB parse tree
The constraints at work in the various relative clause types are for- malised in Figure 1.
To conclude this section on extraction and Danish relative clauses, and to show how various construction types interact with each other in the analysis of a single example, we show in Figure 2 the parse tree produced by the LKB system for the multiple gap example det kender hun manden som har set (that, she knows the man who has seen).


The topmost S node is of type decl-fill-hd-cl, the higher SBAR is a som- subj-rel, the lower SBAR a hd-extracted-subj-ph, and finally the lowest VP is a hd-extracted-comp-ph. As for extraction, looking at the tree bottom- up, the first element on the SLASH list is introduced on the lowest VP node, and passed all the way up to the highest VP node to be bound to the LO- CAL value of the topicalised NP. The second element is introduced on the lower SBAR node to be bound to the LOCAL value of the relative som.

Conclusion
We hope to have shown that the constraints on topology and extraction relevant to Danish grammar can be expressed clearly and economically in a costruction-oriented approach. The implementation described here covers a number of Danish construction types of non-trivial complexity so far. However, expanding the size of the implementation is an ongoing pro- cess and we aim to achieve a coverage large enough for the implementa- tion to provide a good starting point for future applications. In the imme- diate future, we would like to deal with other clause types such as imper- atives, conditionals and wh-interrogatives. Also, we would like to extend the coverage to light objects and negated constituents which in Danish are positioned in the nexus field. The addition of other unbounded de- pendency constructions such as clefts are also planned. Further research is also needed to study the issue of extraction in presentational relative clauses, and to set up a typology of this interesting costruction for Danish.

References
Jens Allwood. The Complex NP Constraint in Swedish. In Elisabet Engdahl and Eva Ejerhed, editors, Readings on Unbounded Dependencies in Scandinavian Languages, pages 15–32. Stockholm: Almquist & Wiksell, 1982.
L. Andersson. What is Swedish an exception to? Extractions and island constraints.  In Elisabet Engdahl and Eva Ejerhed, editors, Readings on Unbounded Dependencies in Scandinavian Languages, pages 33–45. Stockholm: Almquist & Wiksell, 1982.
Gosse Bouma, Robert Malouf, and Ivan A. Sag.  Satisfying constraints on extraction and adjunction. Natural Language and Linguistic Theory, forthcoming.
Ann Copestake. The (new) LKB system—version 5.2. CSLI, Stanford, September 1999. Available from:
http://www-csli.stanford.edu/ aac/lkb.html.
Paul Diderichsen. Elementær Dansk Grammatik. København: Gyldendal, 1946.


Elisabet Engdahl and Eva Ejerhed, editors. Readings on Unbounded Dependencies in Scandinavian Languages. Stockholm: Almquist & Wiksell, 1982.
Nomi Erteschik-Shir. Extractability in Danish and the pragmatic principle of dominance.  In Elisabet Engdahl and Eva Ejerhed, editors, Readings on Unbounded Dependencies in Scandinavian Languages, pages 175–190. Stockholm: Almquist & Wiksell, 1982.
Jonathan Ginzburg and Ivan Sag. English Interrogative Constructions. CSLI Publications, forthcoming.
Per Anker Jensen and Peter Skadhauge. Verbalalternationer og topologi. In Per Anker Jensen and Peter Skadhauge, editors, Sætningsskemaet i generativ grammatik. Syddansk Universitet, Kolding, 1999.
Andreas Kathol. Linearization-Based German Syntax. PhD thesis, Department of Linguistics, University of Ohio, 1995.
Knud Lambrecht. Information Structure and Sentence Form. Cambridge Studies in Linguistics. Cambridge University Press, 1994.
G. Milsark. Existential sentences in English. Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press, 1974.
Carl Pollard and Ivan A. Sag. Head-Driven Phrase Structure Grammar. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 1994.
Ivan Sag. Aspects of a theory of grammatical constructions. Lecture given at the First Internation Construction Grammar Conference, Berkeley, April 2001.
Ivan A. Sag. English relative clause constructions. Journal of Linguistics, 33, 1997.
