Available online at www.sciencedirect.com


Electronic Notes in Theoretical Computer Science 354 (2020) 61–74
www.elsevier.com/locate/entcs

Paracomplete Logics Dual to the Genuine Paraconsistent Logics: The Three-valued Case
Alejandro Herna´ndez-Telloa,1 Vero´nica Borja Mac´ıasa,2 Marcelo E. Conigliob,3
a Instituto de F´ısica y Matem´aticas (IFM), Universidad Tecnol´ogica de la Mixteca (UTM), Huajuapan de Leo´n, Oaxaca, M´exico
b Institute of Philosophy and the Humanities (IFCH) and Centre for Logic, Epistemology and The History of Science (CLE), University of Campinas (UNICAMP)
Campinas, SP, Brazil

Abstract
In 2016 B´eziau, introduce a restricted notion of paraconsistency, the so-called genuine paraconsistency. A logic is genuine paraconsistent if it rejects the laws ϕ, ¬ϕ ▶ ψ and ▶ ¬(ϕ ∧ ¬ϕ). In that paper the author analyzes, among the three-valued logics, which of them satisfy this property. If we consider multiple- conclusion consequence relations, the dual properties of those above mentioned are ▶ ϕ, ¬ϕ and ¬(ψ∨¬ψ) ▶. We call genuine paracomplete logics those rejecting the mentioned properties. We present here an analysis of the three-valued genuine paracomplete logics.
Keywords: Many-valued logics, Paracomplete logics, Dual logic.


Introduction
Classically, a negation ¬ for a given logic L is semantically characterized by two properties: (1) for no sentence ϕ it is the case that ϕ and ¬ϕ are simultaneously true; and (2) for no sentence ϕ it is the case that ϕ and ¬ϕ are simultaneously false. Principle (1) is known as the law of non-contradiction (NC) (also known as the law of explosion), while (2) is usually called the law of excluded middle (EM). In terms of multiple-conclusion consequence relations, 4 both laws can be represented as follows:
(NC) ϕ, ¬ϕ ▶	and	(EM)	▶ ϕ, ¬ϕ.

1 Email:alheran@gmail.com
2 Email:vero0304@gmail.com
3 Email:coniglio@unicamp.br
4 We can consider a multiple-conclusion consequence relation ▶ as a binary relation between sets of formulas Γ and Δ, such that Γ ▶ Δ means that any model of every γ ∈ Γ is also a model for some δ ∈ Δ [8].

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.entcs.2020.10.006
1571-0661/© 2020 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier B.V.
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

This is why both laws are usually considered as being dual one from the other. 5 If L has a conjunction ∧ (which corresponds to commas on the left-hand side of ▶) and a disjunction ∨ (which corresponds to commas on the right-hand side of ▶), then both laws can be written as
(NC) ϕ ∧ ¬ϕ ▶	and	(EM)	▶ ϕ ∨ ¬ϕ.
Let L be a logic with a negation ¬. If it satisfies (NC), then the negation ¬ is said to be explosive, and L is explosive (w.r.t. ¬). On the other hand, L is said to be paraconsistent (w.r.t. ¬) if (NC) does not hold in general, that is: ϕ, ¬ϕ b in general. This means that there are formulas ϕ and ψ such that ϕ, ¬ϕ b ψ (or ϕ ∧ ¬ϕ b ψ, if L has a conjunction). Dually, a logic L is paracomplete (w.r.t. ¬) if (EM) does not hold in general, that is: b ϕ, ¬ϕ in general. That is, there are formulas ϕ and ψ such that ψ b ϕ, ¬ϕ (or ψ b ϕ ∨ ¬ϕ, if L has a disjunction).
As observed in [3], (NC) is sometimes expressed as follows:
(NCj)  ▶ ¬(ϕ ∧ ¬ϕ).
However, as the authors have shown in [3], both principles are independent. Moreover, they show that several paraconsistent logics validate (NCj), which is arguably counterintuitive or undesirable. This motivates the definition of a strong paraconsistent logic as being a logic in which both principles, (NC) and (NCj), are not valid in general. In subsequent papers (see, for instance, [2]) strong paraconsis- tent logics were rebaptized as genuine paraconsistent logics. Thus, a logic L with negation and conjunction is genuine paraconsistent if, for some formulas ϕ and ψ,
(GP1) ϕ ∧ ¬ϕ b	and	(GP2)	b ¬(ψ ∧ ¬ψ).
Given the duality between (NC) and (EM), it makes sense to consider (in a logic with disjunction) the dual property of (NCj), namely
(EMj) ¬(ϕ ∨ ¬ϕ) ▶ .
This motivates the following definition:
Deﬁnition 1.1 A logic L with negation and disjunction is said to be a genuine para- complete logic (or a strong paracomplete logic) if neither (EM) nor (EMj) is valid, that is: for some formulas ϕ and ψ,
(GP1D)	b ϕ ∨ ¬ϕ	and	(GP2D) ¬(ψ ∨ ¬ψ) b .
Observe that, in terms of a tarskian (single-conclusion) consequence relation (see Definition 2.1), (GP2D) is equivalent to the following:
(GP2D)  ¬(ψ ∨ ¬ψ) b ϕ	for some formulas ϕ, ψ.

5 The readers should be advised that in [3] the authors use NC for representing T ▶ ч(ϕ Λ чϕ), where T is any set of formulas.

In semantical terms, if (GP2D) holds for ψ then ψ is satisfiable, that is: it has some model.
Remark 1.2 If L is a logic with negation ¬ and conjunction ∧ such that ¬ satisfies the right-introduction rule:
Γ,ϕ ▶ Δ	implies that	Γ ▶ ¬ϕ, Δ
(which implies that (EM) is valid in L, that is, L is not paracomplete) then (NC) implies (NCj). In this case, L is genuine paraconsistent if it satisfies (GP2) for some formula. Indeed, if (GP2) holds for some formula ϕ then (GP1) also holds for ϕ.
Dually, if L is a logic with negation ¬ and disjunction ∨ such that ¬ satisfies the left-introduction rule:
Γ ▶ ϕ, Δ	implies that	Γ, ¬ϕ ▶ Δ
(which implies that (NC) is valid in L, that is, L is not paraconsistent), then (EM) implies (EMj). In this case, L is genuine paracomplete, if it satisfies (GP2D) for some formula. Indeed, if (GP2D) holds for some ϕ, then (GP1D) also holds for ϕ.
Example 1.3
Propositional Intuitionistic logic IPL is paracomplete, but it is not genuine paracomplete: the formula ¬(ϕ ∨ ¬ϕ) is unsatisfiable.
The Belnap-Dunn logic FOUR (with the truth ordering) is both genuine para- consistent and genuine paracomplete.
Nelson logic N4 is both genuine paraconsistent and genuine paracomplete.
The three-valued logic MH, introduced in [4], is genuine paracomplete and explosive. As we shall see, it is a three-valued genuine paracomplete logic which conservatively extends the 2-valued truth functions of classical logic CPL.

Basic concepts
We consider a formal propositional language L = ⟨atom(L), C, A⟩, where atom(L) is an enumerable set, whose elements are called atoms and are denoted by lowercase letters; C is a set of connectives (the signature of L) and A is a set of auxiliary symbols. Formulas are constructed as usual and will be denoted by lowercase Greek letters. The set of all formulas of L is denoted as Form(L). Note that this is an algebra over C freely generated by atom(L). Theories are sets of formulas and will be denoted by uppercase Greek letters.
Deﬁnition 2.1 A (tarskian) consequence relation ▶ between theories and formulas is a relation satisfying the following properties, for every theory Γ ∪ Δ ∪ {ϕ}:
(Reflexivity) if ϕ ∈ Γ, then Γ ▶ ϕ; (Monotonicity) if Γ ▶ ϕ and Γ ⊆ Δ, then Δ ▶ ϕ;

(Transitivity) if Δ ▶ ϕ and Γ ▶ ψ for every ψ ∈ Δ, then Γ ▶ ϕ.
▶ is called structural if, in addition, it holds: Γ ▶ ϕ implies that θ(Γ) ▶ θ(ϕ), for every L-substitution θ. 6 If there exists some non-empty theory Γ and some ϕ such that Γ /▶ ϕ, ▶ is called non-trivial.
Sometimes, in order to define a logic it is required that ▶ be finitary. 7 However, here we consider a logic as it is established in Definition 2.2.
Deﬁnition 2.2 A logic is a pair L = ⟨L, ▶L⟩, where ▶L is a structural and non- trivial consequence relation such that its language contains a binary connective → satisfying Modus Ponens (MP), that is: ϕ → ψ, ϕ ▶L ψ for any formulas ϕ and ψ.
The notation Γ ▶L ϕ will be read as: ϕ can be inferred from Γ in L. The subscript L will be dropped whenever the logic is clear from the context.
The usefulness of a logic depends on the available connectives in its language: thus, as we have pointed out in the introduction, for talking about paracompleteness we need a negation and a disjunction satisfying particular conditions. However, we are going to complete the language with an appropriate conjunction and an appro- priate implication. In Definition 2.3 we establish some conditions on connectives so they can be considered as conjunction, disjunction, and implication.
Deﬁnition 2.3 [1] Let L be a logic in the language L with binary connectives ∧, ∨
and →. Then:
∧ is said to be a conjunction for L when: Γ ▶ ϕ ∧ ψ iff Γ ▶ ϕ and Γ ▶ ψ.
∨ is a disjunction for L when: Γ,ϕ ∨ ψ ▶ σ iff Γ,ϕ ▶ σ and Γ,ψ ▶ σ.
→ is an implication for L when: Γ,ϕ ▶ ψ iff Γ ▶ ϕ → ψ.
Observe that the notions of conjunction and disjunction are the usual ones con- sidered in abstract logic, see for instance [9]. In order to find a suitable implication for the genuine paraconsistent logics L3A and L3B investigated in [6], the authors define the concept of classical implication as follows.
Deﬁnition 2.4 [6] Let L be a logic in the language L with a binary connective →. Then → is said to be a classical implication if, for every Γ ∪ {ϕ, ψ}⊆ L:
Γ ▶ ϕ and Γ ▶ ϕ → ψ imply that Γ ▶ ψ;
Γ ▶ ϕ → (ψ → ϕ);
Γ ▶  ϕ → (ψ → σ)  →  (ϕ → ψ) → (ϕ → σ) .
It is not difficult to prove in the context of tarskian consequence relations that the notions of implication in Definition 2.3 and Definition 2.4 agree. The usual manner to define many-valued logics is by means of a matrix.
Deﬁnition 2.5 A matrix for a language L, is a structure M = ⟨V, D, F⟩, where:

6 That is, for every endomorphism θ over L.
7 Informally speaking, it means that every deduction can be obtained from a finite number of hypothesis.

V is a non-empty set of truth values (domain);
D is a subset of V (set of designated values);
F := {fc | c ∈ C} is a set of truth functions, such that fc : Dn → D if c is a logical connective in L with arity n.
Observe that A = ⟨V, F⟩ is an algebra for the signature C of L.
Deﬁnition 2.6 Given a language L, a function v : atom(L) −→ V that maps atoms into elements of the domain is called a valuation over M .
Any valuation v can be uniquely extended, as usual, to a homomorphism v : Form(L) −→ V such that v(c(α1,..., αn)) = fc(v(α1),..., v(αn)). Now we can define the notion of model:
Deﬁnition 2.7 Given a matrix M , a valuation v over M is a model of the formula ϕ, denoted by v |=M ϕ, if v(ϕ) ∈ D. A model of a set of formulas is a model of each of its elements. A formula ϕ is a tautology in M , denoted by |=M ϕ, if every valuation is a model of ϕ.
Whenever the matrix is clear from the context, the subscript will be dropped.
It is also possible to define a consequence relation by means of a matrix.
Deﬁnition 2.8 [1] Given a matrix M , its induced consequence relation, denoted by
▶M , is defined by: Γ ▶M ϕ if every model of Γ is a model of ϕ. We denote by
LM = ⟨L, ▶M ⟩ the logic obtained with this consequence relation.
In case a logic is defined via the induced consequence relation of a matrix M and the cardinality of set of truth values of M is n < ω then the logic is called an n-valued logic.
Now we define neoclassical connectives. This name can be easily understood if we identify the ‘True’ value with ‘designated value’ and the ‘False’ value with ‘non- designated value’. These conditions are generalizations of those that satisfy and in some way define the nature of the connectives in Classical Logic.

Deﬁnition 2.9 [6] Let M = ⟨V, D, F⟩ be a matrix, D the set of non-designated values, and v any valuation over M . Then:
∧ is a neoclassical conjunction, if it holds that:
v(ϕ ∧ ψ) ∈ D iff v(ϕ) ∈ D and v(ϕ) ∈ D.
∨ is a neoclassical disjunction, if it holds that:
v(ϕ ∨ ψ) ∈ D iff v(ϕ) ∈ D and v(ϕ) ∈ D.
→ is a neoclassical implication, if it holds that:
v(ϕ → ψ) ∈ D iff v(ϕ) ∈ D or v(ψ) ∈ D.
Observe that conditions of neoclassicality of Definition 2.9 are more restrictive than those on Definition 2.3. Specifically, we have that items (ii) and (iii) on Defini- tion 2.9 imply items (ii) and (iii) on Definition 2.3. Moreover, item (i) on Definition
2.9 is equivalent to item (i) on Definition 2.3.

Deﬁnition 2.10 A n-valued function  of arity k (  : V k −→ V ) is a:
Conservative extension of a m-valued function  : V k −→ V1 where V1 Ç V and
|V1| = m, if the restriction of  to V1 coincide with  (i.e.  |V1 =  ).
Molecular if the range of it is a proper subset of V . [3]
Deﬁnition 2.11 Let L1 be a n-valued logic whose set of truth values is V1 and L2 a m-valued logic whose set of truth values is V2, such that V1 ⊂ V2 and the set of connectives of L1 is a subset of the connectives of L2. L2 is called a conservative extension of L1 if all the truth functions in L1 are conservatively extended in L2.
The last definition can be recast in algebraic terms as follows: given L1 and L2 as above, let Ai be the algebra underlying the matrix Mi of Li, for i = 1, 2. Then, L2 is a conservative extension of L1 if and only if A1 is a proper subalgebra of the reduct of A2 to the signature of A1.

Three-valued genuine paracomplete logics
In this section we study logics LM = ⟨L, ▶M ⟩, where M = ⟨{0, 1, 2}, D,F⟩ and 0, 2 are identified with False and True respectively. This implies that 2 ∈ D, 0 /∈ D. We are looking for three-valued genuine paracomplete logics extending con- servatively classical logic, apart from some extra conditions such as neoclassicality, non-molecularity, etc.

Independence of EM and EMj
In Definition 1.1, two conditions for a logic be genuine paracomplete were re- quired. Let us see that these conditions are independent. If we define negation as v(¬ϕ)= 2 − v(ϕ) and disjunction as the maximum of the values of the disjuncts, then depending on the choice of the set of designated values we have one and just one principle satisfied. On the one hand, if the set of designated values is {1, 2}, we can see in Table 1 that the third column from left to right is composed only by designated values. Therefore EM is satisfied, meanwhile EMj is not, since in the fourth column there is a row which has one designated value. On the other hand, if we take the set of designated values as {2}, then the fourth column has not designated values and so EMj is satisfied, but since the third column has a not designated row EM does not hold. This shows that, in order to get a three-valued genuine paracomplete logic, it is necessary to use a different combination of truth tables for the connectives of negation and disjunction.

Genuine Paracomplete Negation
Let us start by analyzing the negation. Since we are considering connectives that are conservative extensions of the 2-valued truth functions of classical logic, we have already fixed some of the values of the truth table for negation, namely those that are boxed in Table 2. As a result of this, only the second row in the table should



Table 1
Independency of principles EM and EM′


Table 2 Possible negations

be analyzed in order to fix the value of the variable n, that denotes the unknown value for negation.
Note that we cannot assign 2 to n. Otherwise, in Table 2, we would have that, in every row, either ϕ or чϕ are designated, validating EM in terms of multiple- conclusion consequence relations. Therefore, n must be in {0, 1}. Up to this point, we know that 2 ∈ D and 0 /∈ D but, if we set 1 as designated, once again in every row either ϕ or чϕ will be designated, thus validating EM. Hence, in a three-valued genuine paracomplete logic we must have D = {2}.
Genuine Paracomplete Disjunction
As in the case of negation, due to the condition of being conservative extension, there are some fixed values in the truth table for the disjunction; they will be boxed in Table 3 in order to be identified. We want to obtain a neoclassical disjunction in order to keep the semantical behavior of the classical disjunction. This condition fixes two more values, which are circled in Table 3, and restricts the value of the three remaining ones as not designated. The symmetry condition reduces the number of variables to d1, d2 ∈ D, since 0 V 1=1 V 0= d1. Finally, the values for d1 and d2 depend on the choice of n in the truth table for negation, either n = 0 or n = 1. Let us analyze by cases.
Case n =0 
Considering the negation whose table takes the value 0 for n, we have the following sub-cases:
If d1 = 0, DP1D and DP2D hold and Definition 1.1 is satisfied, regardless of the value of d2, as Table 4 shows. DP1D holds since, in the third column,


Table 3 Possible disjunctions

Table 4
Truth tables for DP1D and DP2D case n = 0 and d1 = 0

Table 5
Truth tables for DP1D and DP2D case n = 1 and d2 = 0

ϕ V чϕ is not a tautology due to the value 0 in the second row. On the other hand, DP2D holds since, in the fourth column, ч(ϕ V чϕ) has a model due to the value 2 in the second row.
If d1 = 1 then, for any valuation, v(ч(ϕ V чϕ)) = 0 and so DP2D does not hold.
Therefore, the only acceptable value for d1 is 0. Thus we have the combinations d1 = 0, d2 = 0 and d1 = 0, d2 = 1. However, if d1 = d2 = 0, the connective V becomes molecular, which is not desirable. So, if n = 0 we have only one choice to get a genuine paracomplete disjunction, namely d1 = 0 and d2 = 1. See Table 8 left.

Case n =1 
When n = 1, we have the following sub-cases:
If d2 = 0, then DP1D as well as DP2D hold as desired, without considering
d2, as we can see in Table 5 analogously to Table 4.
If d2 = 1, then v(ч(ϕ V чϕ)) ∈ D and DP2D does not hold.

L3A	L3AD


dualizing
−−−−→
reordering
−−−−→








dualizing
−−−−→
reordering
−−−−→








dualizing
−−−−→
reordering
−−−−→





Table 6
Duality between L3A and L3AD
Analogously to the case n = 0 we have only one choice to get a genuine paracomplete disjunction, namely d2 = 0 and d1 = 1. See Table 8 right.
The previous analysis leads us to two different three-valued genuine paracom- plete logics in the language that include ч and V as their unique connectives. An interesting fact is that we can get the same truth tables for negation and disjunc- tion, up to reordering, just considering the negation and conjunction of the genuine paraconsistent logics L3A and L3B, and dualizing them.
By dualizing we mean switching the truth values 2 for 0 and 0 for 2, keeping 1 fixed. In Table 6 we show this process for L3A, in the first two rows the dualized connectives of negation and conjunction of L3A lead us to the negation and con- junction of L3A. Similar process is shown in Table 7 for L3B. This is the reason for naming these genuine paracomplete logics after their duals as L3AD and L3BD respectively.
Deﬁnition 3.1 The three-valued logic LM = ⟨L, ▶M ⟩, where M is the matrix with set of values {0, 1, 2}, 2 as the only designated value, and connectives taken from Table 8a, will be called L3AD. Otherwise, if we take the connectives on the Table 8b, we obtain a logic called L3BD.

L3B	L3BD


dualizing
−−−−→
reordering
−−−−→








dualizing
−−−−→
reordering
−−−−→








dualizing
−−−−→
reordering
−−−−→





Table 7
Duality between L3B and L3BD



L3AD

Table 8
L3BD

Truth tables for ч and ∨ in a genuine paracomplete three-valued logic

Genuine Paracomplete Conjunction
Since the definition of genuine paracompleteness does not impose conditions over the conjunction connective we can choose any of the definable conjunctions in a three- valued logic. Considering, again, conservative extension, neoclassicality, symmetry and non-molecularity, we have a partial table for the conjunction as the one on Table 9 where c1, c2 and c3 ∈ D and it is not the case that c1 = c2 = c3 = 0. Then there are 7 different conjunctions satisfying all these restrictions. However, if we want to extend L3AD and L3BD with a conjunction keeping its duality with


Table 9 Possible conjunctions

the paraconsistent logics L3A and L3B, we must dualize their disjunction i.e. the maximum function. The resulting conjunction for the genuine paracomplete logics L3AD and L3BD is the minimum function, see the third row in Tables 6 and 7 respectively.
Genuine Paracomplete Implication
In [6], a search for implications in L3A and L3B satisfying specific properties was done. Analogously, here we search for suitable implications in L3AD and L3BD.
The condition of being a conservative extension fix four values, see boxes in Table 10a.
By the nature of the logics in this section and the fact D = {2}, see Section 3.2, the conditions in Definition 2.4 can be rewritten as follows:
For any valuation v:
If v(ϕ)=2 and v(ϕ → ψ)= 2, then v(ψ)= 2;	MP
v(ϕ → (ψ → ϕ)) = 2;	A1
v( (ϕ → (ψ → σ)) → ((ϕ → ψ) → (ϕ → σ))) = 2.	A2

Assume that → is a connective satisfying MP, A1, and A2. Then i5 /= 2 as a consequence of MP. Suppose that v(ϕ) = 2. As A1 is satisfied then, by MP, we must have v(ψ → ϕ) = 2, therefore i4 = 2. If i3 = 1 then 1 → (1 → 1) = 1, a contradiction with A1. Hence i3 /= 1. This gives Table 10b.
Up to now we have two possibilities with respect to i5: its value is 0 or 1. In the former case, if i5 =0 in Table 10b, then:
i2 = 2, otherwise A1 would not hold when v(ϕ)=1 and v(ψ)= 2;
If i1 = 0, then A2 does not hold, for v(ϕ)= 0, v(ψ)=0 and v(σ)= 1;
If i1 = 1, i3 = 0, then A1 does not hold for v(ϕ)=1 and v(ψ)= 0;
If i1 = 1, i3 = 2, then A2 does not hold for v(ϕ)= 0, v(ψ)=2 and v(σ)= 1;
If i1 = 2, i3 = 0, then A2 does not hold for v(ϕ)= 1, v(ψ)=0 and v(σ)= 1.
This analysis for i5 = 0 only leave us one option, namely →0 in Table 11. In the second case, when i5 =1 we have:

i3 = 2, otherwise A1 would not hold when v(ϕ)=1 and v(ψ)= 2;
If i1 = 0, then A2 does not hold, for v(ϕ)= 0, v(ψ)=0 and v(σ)= 1;
If i1 = 1, i2 = 1, then A1 does not hold for v(ϕ)=0 and v(ψ)= 0;
If i1 = 2, i2 = 1, then A2 does not hold for v(ϕ)= 1, v(ψ)=1 and v(σ)= 0.
This analysis for i5 = 1 leave us with 4 options, namely →1, →2, →3 and →4 in Table 11.

The five connectives in Table 11 are conservative extensions of the classical im- plication and are implications according to 2.3. Now, if we ask for neoclassicality to be satisfied, see Definition 2.9, we only have →0 and →1. One nice additional feature of connectives →0 and →1 is that any of the logics obtained by extend- ing L3AD or L3BD with any of the connectives →0 or →1, satisfies the positive fragment of classical logic.

There is a criterion for the construction of a ‘paraconsistent’ logic, but in terms of implication and negation. It is due to Ja´skowski and consists on the rejection of
▶ ϕ → (чϕ → ψ) (the law of Duns Scotus). Clearly, this definition is not equiv- alent to the definition of paraconsistency in terms of (NC) but provides another approach to study the implications found in [6]. By analogy, for the paracomplete- ness case there is also a criterion in terms of implication and negation. According to Karpenko and Tomova [7]a logic is ‘paracomplete’ iff ▶ (чϕ → ϕ) → ϕ (the law of Clavius), is not valid in it. This definition does not correspond with the defini- tion of paracompletness in terms of (EM) but it gives an intuitionistic flavor to the implication connective. This kind of logics are called weakly-intuitionistic logics, see [5]. Observe that the logic L3AD extended with the implications →0, →1 or
→3 from Table 11 rejects the Clavius law. On the one hand, the logics obtained by extending L3BD with any one of the implications from Table 11 also reject the Clavius law.


The logic obtained by extending L3BD with →0, namely L3BD
, coincides

with the logic MH introduced in [4], where a Hilbert system for it was presented. But, if we look for a non-molecular implication, just one option is left, namely →1. It is worth to mention that this implication corresponds to the implication of the three-valued logic of Kleene [1].


Conclusions
In this paper we introduce the notion of genuine paracomplete logic, which are logics rejecting the dual principles that define genuine paraconsistent logic. On the one hand, in a similar way to the analysis done in [3], we develop a study among three- valued logics in order to find all connectives defining genuine paracomplete logics. We found two unary connectives that can serve as negation. By fixing one of these




(a)

Table 10 Possible implications
(b)


Table 11
Possible implications for L3AD and L3BD

negations, we discover in each case just one disjunction that works accordingly to our requests established for this particular kind of paracompleteness. On the other hand, if we take the connectives defining genuine three-valued paraconsistent logics, L3A and L3B, and later perform a process of dualizing them, we obtain the same connectives as before. This process lead us to the logics L3AD and L3BD, see Definition 3.1.
In a further step, trying to extend the language with a conjunction, we found seven different suitable connectives for conjunction. Among these, we select the minimum function in order to get L3A and L3B completely dualized.
Finally, by proceeding analogously to [6], we found implications for L3AD and
L3BD which are neoclassical, namely →0 and →1. These implications give place

to the logics L3AD
, L3AD
, L3BD
and L3BD
. This completes our analysis,

obtaining four genuine paracomplete three-valued logics that dualize L3A and L3B. In [4] a Hilbert system for one of these logics was presented. As a future work, we consider to find axiomatizations for the remaining ones in order to have a better understanding of the nature of these logics. For instance, the relations among the connectives is not evident from the truth tables, since they are defined individually. However, suitable axioms can help us to understand the way in which the connectives are related.

References
Ofer Arieli and Arnon Avron. Three-valued paraconsistent propositional logics. In Jean-Yves B´eziau, Mihir Chakraborty, and Soma Dutta, editors, New Directions in Paraconsistent Logic, pages 91–129, New Delhi, 2015. Springer India.


Jean-Yves B´eziau. Two genuine 3-valued paraconsistent logics. In Seiki Akama, editor, Towards Paraconsistent Engineering, pages 35–47. Springer International Publishing Switzerland, Cham, 2016.
Jean-Yves B´eziau and Anna Franceschetto. Strong three-valued paraconsistent logics. In Jean-Yves B´eziau, Mihir Chakraborty, and Soma Dutta, editors, New directions in paraconsistent logic, pages 131–145, New Delhi, 2015. Springer India.
Colin Caret. Hybridized paracomplete and paraconsistent logics. The Australasian Journal of Logic, 14(1):281–325, 2017.
Janusz Ciuciura. A weakly-intuitionistic logic I1. Logical Investigations, 21(2):53–60, 2015.
Alejandro Hern´andez-Tello, Jos´e Arrazola Ram´ırez, and Mauricio Osorio Galindo. The pursuit of an implication for the logics L3A and L3B. Logica Universalis, 11(4):507–524, 2017.
Alexander Karpenko and Natalya Tomova. Bochvar’s three-valued logic and literal paralogics: Their lattice and functional equivalence. Logic and Logical Philosophy, 26(2):207–235, 2017.
David J. Shoesmith and Timothy John Smiley. Multiple-Conclusion Logic. Cambridge University Press, 1978.
Ryszard W´ojcicki. Lectures on propositional calculi. Ossolineum, Wroclaw, 1984.
