EURO Journal on Computational Optimization 9 (2021) 100011

		




Two decades of blackbox optimization applications
Stéphane Alarie a, Charles Audetb,1,∗, Aïmen E. Gheribi c, Michael Kokkolarasd, Sébastien Le Digabelb,2
a Hydro-Québec and IREQ, Canada
b GERAD and Polytechnique Montréal, Canada
c CRCT and Polytechnique Montréal, Canada
d GERAD and McGill University, Canada


a r t i c l e	i n f o	a b s t r a c t


MSC:
90C30
90C56
90C90

Keywords:
Blackbox optimization Derivative-free optimization Mesh adaptive direct search Applications


This article reviews blackbox optimization applications of direct search optimization methods over the past twenty years. Emphasis is placed on the Mesh Adaptive Direct Search (Mads) derivative-free optimization algorithm. The main focus is on applications in three specific fields: energy, materials science, and computational engineering design. Nevertheless, other applications in science and engineering, including patents, are also considered. The breadth of applications demonstrates the versatility of Mads and highlights the evolution of its accompanying software NOMAD as a standard tool for blackbox optimization.





Introduction

The general form of an optimization problem is
min 𝑓 (𝑥),	(1)
𝑥∈Ω

where Ω is the feasible region and 𝑓 ∶ Ω → ℝ (with ℝ = ℝ ∪ {+∞}) is the objective function. The nature of 𝑓 and Ω dictates what optimization
methods and algorithms can be used to solve a given problem. Exploiting specificities of the problem such as linearity, convexity or differentiabil- ity lead to eﬃcient algorithms. There are numerous optimization prob- lems in which such characteristics are either non-existent, unknown, or impossible to detect. This article surveys a significant number of appli- cations from a wide variety of disciplines of direct search methods for such problems over the past two decades.

Blackbox optimization

algorithms for problems where the structure of the objective function 𝑓 Blackbox optimization (BBO) considers the design and analysis of and/or the constraints defining the set Ω is unknown, unexploitable, or
non-existent.
The most frequent BBO situation arises when the evaluation of the objective and /or constraint functions involve the execution of a com-
∗ Corresponding author.
1 www.gerad.ca/Charles.Audet
2 www.gerad.ca/Sebastien.Le.Digabel
puter code or simulation. The code receives a vector 𝑥 and outputs val-
ues in ℝ. In many engineering applications, the code occasionally exits
due to internal errors and fails to produce valid output. This is the rea- son that the output may take values in ℝ rather than ℝ. Invalid output
values are flagged by assigning them the +∞ value. In a minimization
context, the value 𝑓 (𝑥) = +∞ corresponds to an unacceptable trial point
𝑥. Similarly, for the inequality constraint 𝑐(𝑥) ≤ 0, the value 𝑐(𝑥) = +∞
indicates an infinite violation of the constraint. For example, the simu-
lation used for the design of a helicopter rotor blade failed in 60% of the calls (Booker et al., 1999) and the aspen (Aspentech, Accessed: 2020- 11-06) chemical engineering simulator failed in 43% of the calls during the optimization of a process to treat a toxic byproduct in aluminum production (Audet et al., 2008a).
BBO situations do not always involve computer simulations. A less frequent situation occurs when the output is the result of a physical or laboratory experiment rather than a simulation. For example, develop- ing the best cookie recipe is considered in Solnik et al. (2017), where the objective function is a subjective score submitted by participants who taste different cookies.
Audet and Hare define all of the above-mentioned situations as black- box optimization problems (Audet and Hare, 2017). There are no explicit formulations that can be readily exploited.
The simulation or process returning the objective and constraint functions may be time-consuming. For example, automotive valve train design (Choi et al., 2000) requires seconds, sample size identification


https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejco.2021.100011
Received 29 October 2020; Received in revised form 17 September 2021; Accepted 18 September 2021
2192-4406/© 2021 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd on behalf of Association of European Operational Research Societies (EURO). This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/)



for bioequivalence studies in the pharmaceutical industry (Xu et al., 2016) requires minutes, hyperparameter optimization (Audet and Orban, 2006) requires hours, and airfoil trailing-edge noise reduc- tion (Marsden et al., 2007) requires days of CPU time for each execution of the associated computer code or simulation.
High computational cost is not the only challenge. Simulations may provide insuﬃcient significant digits or return different output when executed using the same input more than once. In a calibration con- text of computationally intensive hydrological models (Huot et al.,
2019a), the output of the simulation is rounded to 10−3 to avoid
over-optimizing and to trigger the stopping criteria more rapidly. An
approach for solving stochastic optimization problems is presented
2019), as well as periodical (e.g., angles in [0, 2𝜋]) (Audet and Le Di- ables that cannot be ordered) (Abramson et al., 2009a; Audet et al.,
gabel, 2012);
its exploitation of static and dynamic surrogate models (Audet and Côté-Massicotte, 2019; Audet et al., 2018b; Booker et al., 1999; Conn and Le Digabel, 2013; Talgorn et al., 2018);
its rigorous hierarchical convergence analysis (Audet and Dennis, Jr., 2006; Vicente and Custódio, 2012) based on nonsmooth calcu- lus (Clarke, 1983); the analysis exploits the rigorously defined poll step and the main result ensures, under a local Lipschitz hypothesis,
some point 𝑥̂ for which the Clarke generalized derivative that the method produces a subsequence of iterates converging to

in Characklis et al. (2006) to identify portfolios of permanent rights, options, and leases that minimize the expected costs of meeting a city’s annual demand within a pre-specified reliability. A Monte Carlo simu-
𝑓 ◦(𝑥̂; 𝑑) ∶= lim sup
𝑦→𝑥̂,𝑡↘0
𝑓 (𝑦 + 𝑡𝑑) − 𝑓 (𝑦)
𝑡

lation is used in portfolio selection using real data from the Shanghai– Shenzhen stock market (Chen et al., 2018). A CPU time-related objec- tive function involving numerical fluid dynamics for a lid-driven cav- ity problem (Griebel et al., 1998) (where a fluid in a rectangular con- tainer is subject to forces imposed by the top boundary) is considered in Abramson et al. (2012).
Another diﬃculty associated with BBO problems is that the number of variables may be itself an optimization variable. These are a particular type of categorical variables. In Abramson (2004), Kokkolaras et al. (2001), a thermal insulation problem involves a vari- able dictating the number of heat intercepts, and each of these inter- cepts is parameterized through other variables, some of them being non- ordinal. The optimal design of a small apparatus for magnetic resonance is studied in Lucidi et al. (2005), in which the number of variables and constraints are affected by the values of some discrete variables. More recently, the number of layers of a deep neural network is analyzed in an hyperparameter optimization setting (Lakhmiri et al., 2021).

The Mads algorithm and the NOMAD software

In BBO problems, functions are often nondifferentiable; automatic differentiation may thus produce false and misleading results. Direct search methods (Lewis et al., 2000) are designed to interact directly with the blackbox output without needing to compute or estimate deriva- tives. Derivative-free optimization (DFO) is closely related to BBO. In DFO, derivatives are not explicitly available, but are usually assumed to exist. Therefore, they may be estimated through various strategies, and exploited to guide the algorithm toward locally optimal solutions. BBO and DFO methods have been developed and continuously improved since the mid-1990s. Their maturity is reflected by the existence of two textbooks. The first one dates from 2009 (Conn et al., 2009) and the second one was published in 2017 (Audet and Hare, 2017). In addition, several surveys on the methodology and evolution of BBO and DFO al- gorithms are available (Audet, 2014; Custódio et al., 2017; Kolda et al., 2003; Larson et al., 2019; Xi et al., 2020). However, none of those are devoted exclusively to applications of BBO and DFO.
This article focuses on the mesh adaptive direct search (Mads) al- gorithm, first introduced in 2006 (Audet and Dennis, Jr., 2006). The reasons of focusing on this specific algorithm include:
its simplicity: the pseudocode in the original paper (Audet and Den- nis, Jr., 2006) takes only 12 lines; the algorithm alternates between a flexible global exploration phase called the search and a rigorously defined local exploration phase called the poll;
Its capability to handle many types of constraints: bounds, non- quantifiable, and hidden constraints by the extreme barrier (Audet et al., 2020a; Audet and Dennis, Jr., 2006), quantifiable and relax-
of the objective function 𝑓 ∶ ℝ𝑛 → ℝ ∪ {∞} is nonnegative in every
direction 𝑑 in the hypertangent cone (Jahn, 2007) to the domain at
𝑥̂ (the hypertangent cone is a generalization of the tangent cone for
a domain defined by non-smooth functions);
its ability to deal with a wide range of optimization problems, as il- lustrated by the numerous applications detailed in the next sections.
The Mads algorithm has evolved considerably since its introduction, and may handle groups of variables (these are discussed at the end of Section 2.1) (Alarie et al., 2013), badly-scaled problems (Audet et al., 2016), grey box monotonic problems (Audet et al., 2020b), and multiob- jective problems (Audet et al., 2008d; 2010). Mads allows the incorpo- ration of various heuristic search strategies including VNS (Audet et al., 2008b) and Nelder-Mead (Audet and Tribes, 2018), and its local explo- ration strategies are diversified (Abramson et al., 2009b; Adjengue et al., 2014; Audet et al., 2014; Selvan et al., 2013; Van Dyke and Asaki, 2013). The above extensions inherit from the theoretical convergence guar- antees of the Mads class of algorithm. Extensions involving stochastic problems have been developed (Alarie et al., 2019; Audet et al., 2021a; 2018a; Sankaran et al., 2010) but do not benefit from the same conver- gence guarantees.
The Mads algorithm and its various extensions are coded in C++ un- der the LGPL license and are available in the public domain through the NOMAD software package (Le Digabel, 2011). Version 1 of NOMAD was initiated in 2001 (based on the pattern search algorithm (Audet and Dennis, Jr., 2001; 2004; Torczon, 1997), the ancestor of Mads) and Ver- sion 4 was released in 2021 (Audet et al., 2021b). The original version of the Mads algorithm is part of the oﬃcial MATLAB distribution in
the patternsearch function.3
For clarity, the different variants of Mads that are mentioned throughout this review are summarized in Table 1.

Motivation and structure of the survey

Solving real problems is the main motivation for the development of Mads and NOMAD. Over the years, the algorithm and its implemen- tation have been employed in a broad variety of fields, as illustrated in Table 2 and in Fig. 1. The table was generated using Web of Science (WoS) and the citations of Le Digabel (2011) (328 references as of Oc- tober 27, 2020). For each citation, the citing journal has been examined with the “Journal Citation Reports” tool of WoS, and the corresponding application categories have been counted. For example, the entry “Engi- neering, biomedical: 2” indicates that WoS reports two papers published in biomedical engineering journals citing the NOMAD paper (Le Diga- bel, 2011). WoS categories are grouped in fields with the corresponding overall number of references. The proportions of these WoS occurrences are illustrated in Fig. 1.

able constraints by the progressive barrier (Audet and Dennis, Jr.,		

2009), and explicit linear equalities (Audet et al., 2015);
its ability to treat various types of variables: continuous (Audet and Dennis, Jr., 2006), integer and categorical variables (discrete vari-
3 The MATLAB version of Mads was distributed before the actual arti- cle (Audet and Dennis, Jr., 2006) was published in 2006. Coding was done from the 2004 associated technical report.


Table 1
Description of the different acronyms related to Mads and NOMAD.

Acronyms	Description	References

Mads	The Mesh Adaptive Direct Search class of algorithms	Audet and Dennis, Jr. (2006)
BiMads	Extension of Mads to biobjective optimization	Audet et al. (2008d)
RobUst-Mads	Adaptation of Mads for robust optimization	Audet et al. (2018a)
Psd-Mads	Parallel version of Mads for large problems	Audet et al. (2008c)
Coop-Mads and p-Mads	Two other parallel Mads versions	Le Digabel et al. (2010)
dds-Mads	Hybrid method combining Mads and the global	Huot et al. (2019a) search algorithm dds
NOMAD	A C+ Mads implementation that includes all	Audet et al. (2021b), Le Digabel (2011)
algorithms from this table except dds-Mads



Fig. 1. Left: Distribution of the application fields that cite (Le Digabel, 2011), based on the data of Table 2. Right: “Word cloud” graph of all WoS categories from Table 2, generated with the Word Cloud Generator of https://www.jasondavies.com/wordcloud.


The present survey contains a large selection of applications where the Mads algorithm (via NOMAD, or another implementation, or a custom variant) was used during the last twenty years; this selection is far from being exhaustive, but highlights different areas in which it was successfully applied. It is also important to note that Mads and NOMAD have been improved throughout the years, mainly thanks to the lessons learned by their utilization in different applications.
The main part of this survey is composed of Section 2 (energy ap- plications at Hydro-Québec), Section 3 (applications in materials sci- ence), and Section 4 (applications in computational engineering design). Section 5 considers other application domains where direct search meth- ods have been used, including patents.
Energy applications at Hydro-Québec

Hydro-Québec (HQ) is a public utility company that manages the generation, transmission, and distribution of electricity in the province of Québec, Canada (Hydro-Québec, 2019). This section describes several optimization problems solved at HQ using NOMAD.
Apparatus positioning

One of the first projects using NOMAD at HQ involved optimal positioning of Gamma-ray MONitoring devices (GMON) (Alarie et al.,
2013). A GMON (Choquette et al., 2010) is a monitoring apparatus that measures the attenuation of gamma rays emanating from the ground to infer snow water equivalent (SWE) in remote locations. Kriging is applied to SWE measurements to obtain a grid of estimates over the territory, which is used to forecast the inflows that reservoirs will re- ceive during the snowmelt. The areas of the studied territories range
from 24,000 to 90,000 km2. The GMONs must be positioned to minimize
kriging error estimates. Since the GMONs cannot be installed anywhere
(not over water, urban or agricultural areas, the surrounding vegeta- tion should not be too dense, the soil needs to be suﬃciently rich in gamma radiation, etc.), the positioning domain is highly fragmented and prevented NOMAD from exploring beyond the initial guess. To overcome this diﬃculty, two strategies have been developed. The first one mapped the fragmented domain to a continuous one. The second led to the development of groups of variables in NOMAD. This feature
allows the method to group the 𝑥𝑦-coordinates of each GMON, and to
force movement of only one GMON at a time. Introducing one group of
two variables for each GMON helped to generate better solutions. More generally, this feature allows the user to indicate which set of variables are related with each other. These sets need not be disjoint. The al- gorithm generates directions in each subset associated to the groups, rather than generating directions in the entire space spanned by all variables.


Table 2
Application fields of the NOMAD software.

(continued on next page)


Table 2 (continued)



The positioning of the GMONs was also considered to have SWE mea- surements on the ground to improve and/or complete the snow maps generated from microwave satellite data and near-infrared satellite im- ages (Alarie and Leclaire, 2013).

Hydrological model calibration

A group of projects involving NOMAD considered the tuning of hydrological forecast models. Hydrologists at HQ have developed the model parameter optimization software EAUptim to calibrate the 23 parameters of the conceptual model HSAMI (Fortin, 1999). The model is said to be conceptual because the relationships between the hydrolog- ical variables are described by simplified empirical equations. EAUp- tim uses NOMAD as its optimization library (Minville et al., 2014). By adding threshold constraints on internal hydrological variables to the calibration process, EAUptim improves the model response in val- idation, which is suitable for hydrological forecasts, but also allows ro- bust hydrological projections. EAUptim was used to calibrate HSAMI
over 305 watersheds ranging from 10 to 69,000 km2 to study the im-
pact of climate change on hydrological regimes for the province of
Québec at the 2050 horizon (Guay et al., 2015). The variables of inter- est are streamflow, snow accumulation, and actual evapotranspiration. The model was calibrated with the constraint of correctly rendering the annual cycle. Results indicate that the annual streamflow will increase in the entire province of Québec, but the distribution will vary : stream- flow will be higher in the winter and lower in the summer, while spring floods will occur earlier.
puting cluster to allow parallel evaluations beyond the native 2𝑛 polling Concurrently with this work, EAUptim was deployed on a com- directions of Mads (Leclaire, 2015) (where 𝑛 is the number of variables
in the optimization problem). The aim was to be able to use eﬃciently as many as 1000 cores for exploring the design space. Three parallel implementations (p-Mads, Coop-Mads, and Psd-Mads Audet et al., 2008c; Le Digabel et al., 2010) were integrated with EAUptim’s cluster version. The results showed that using several direction generators (p-
generate multiple 2𝑛 evaluations (up to the number of available cores) Mads) or several independent searches (Coop-Mads and Psd-Mads) to
was not suﬃcient to improve performance proportionally. This work led to the conclusion that a new (fourth) version of NOMAD had to be developed.4
HYDROTEL (Fortin et al., 2001) is another hydrological model used at HQ. As opposed to HSAMI, which is a conceptual model, HYDRO- TEL is physics-based; therefore, while simulating with the former re- quires a few seconds, the latter takes minutes. By comparing different algorithms to calibrate HYDROTEL, it appeared that the performance of the dynamically dimensioned search method (dds Tolson and Shoe- maker, 2007) and NOMAD is complementary (Huot et al., 2014). dds, which adapts its search to a given simulation budget, seems to have the ability to identify quickly promising basins of solutions, while NO- MAD is able to refine nearby solutions. An hybrid algorithm, called

4 This version has been released in 2021 (Audet et al., 2021b).
dds-Mads, combining the global search of dds with the local search of Mads, is proposed in Huot et al. (2019a). Computing time is reduced significantly without sacrificing the robustness and stability of calibra- tions.
A reduced-fidelity physics-based model was developed to be used as a surrogate model for improving the eﬃciency of dds-Mads (Huot, 2019; Huot et al., 2019b). The reduced model was obtained by reduc- ing the simulation period, the number of virtual meteorological stations, and the discretization of watershed into sub-basins. These reductions re- sulted in poor speed-up when applied individually, but combined, they reduced the computational time by a factor of at least 15 compared to the complete model. The best results were obtained by first applying the dds-Mads algorithm to the reduced model and next applying NOMAD to the complete model with the remaining evaluation budget (Huot, 2019; Huot et al., 2019c). Compared to directly applying dds-Mads to the complete model, this strategy reduced the overall computational time from 40% to 64% depending on the watershed.

Parameter tuning

HQ uses three-dimensional models to study the behavior of water moving in canals toward hydroelectric power stations. Such studies are performed with OpenFOAM (Group, Accessed: 2020-11-06), an open- source simulation software for parallel computational fluid dynamics. The eﬃciency of calculations depends on the simulation domain de- composition. OpenFOAM uses single-processor methods to accomplish this, which requires a large amount of local memory. This is particularly limiting when the 3D model contains millions of cells. An alternative method was developed at HQ to address these issues (Beaudoin, 2013). It is based on a library (Laboratories, Accessed: 2020-11-06) of 10 parallel decomposition algorithms, each with their own set of parameters. Some of these parameters are continuous variables, others are integer, and some are categorical, as they are not subject to any meaningful order- ing. Moreover, the optimal choice of algorithms and parameters varies from one model to another. The selection of an appropriate algorithm and adequate parameters was formulated as a blackbox parameter tun- ing problem (Audet and Orban, 2006) and was solved using NOMAD’s categorical variables option (Audet and Dennis, Jr., 2001) to minimize the communication volume between the processors. Compared to the best mono-processor decomposition algorithm, the proposed approach reduced the decomposition time by a factor of 36 for a model of 7 mil- lion cells with 120 partitions.
HQ developed the Simscape Power Systems (SPS) electrical simu- lator to model and simulate electric power systems within the MAT- LAB Simulink environment (Delavari et al., 2018). SPS can estimate electrical parameters of asynchronous machines based on manufacturer specifications (MathWorks, 2018a), which is similar to a model cali- bration problem. HQ decided to replace the MATLAB optimization toolbox by a trust-region approach (Bellavia et al., 2004). Although the new method was fast enough, the proposed default settings were in- appropriate to generate high-quality solutions. This turned out to be a parameter tuning problem and NOMAD was used to adjust the calibra-



tion model parameters. A set of 115 asynchronous machines was used as a test problem. The parameter optimization improved the quality of calibrations by 33%. The resulting implementation is available as MAT-
LAB’s power_AsynchronousMachineParams function since the
R2018a release (MathWorks, 2018b).
Tuning problems do not only arise with computer models and simu- lators, but also with physical control devices such as power system sta- bilizers (PSSs). PSSs are installed on generators to protect them against faults on the network by damping inter-area, inter-plant, and inter- machine oscillations. Damping and gain margins must be specified for each oscillation mode. Their performance can be evaluated by simula- tion, as with SPS, against fault scenarios. NOMAD has been applied for tuning PSSs by considering several generators (Alarie et al., 2015) simultaneously rather than sequentially (Gérin-Lajoie et al., 1999). By using the groups of variables feature (Alarie et al., 2013) (one group per generator), the trajectory of improvements has provided a feasible solu- tion for implementing the new optimal values in the PSSs (the sequence of adjustments to be made without decreasing overall performance at any moment).

Asset management

HQ’s grid infrastructure equipment involved in the production, trans- port, and delivery of electricity is referred to as assets. Optimization problems also arise in grid asset management, i.e., in all the activities carried out to ensure long term proper functioning of the power grid. HQ has set up an important project for its transmission system, named PRIAD, in order to optimize its maintenance and asset management strategies (Komljenovic et al., 2021). To achieve this, models predict- ing asset reliability based on maintenance strategies need to be devel- oped. Such models are built from expert knowledge, but they need to be calibrated using historical failure data, which was accomplished using NOMAD (Côté et al., 2020). In case of inconsistency, the approach identified bias in the data. It also allowed the questioning of experts on some of their previous assessments and to revise them based on calibra- tion results.
Given an asset model, it is possible to feed a reliability simulator with failure rates corresponding to any variant of a given maintenance strategy. Such simulators rely on stochastic Monte Carlo methods, where the output can vary for the same input. This led to new research initia- tives to adapt Mads to stochastic blackboxes (Alarie et al., 2019). Using a reliability simulator called VME (Lonchampt, 2017), developed by the R&D division of Électricité de France (EDF), numerical experiments are conducted on a small problem of determining five investment dates in asset management (Browne et al., 2016). They show that NOMAD with its RobUst-Mads option (Audet et al., 2018a) is too computation- ally expensive. The approach proposed in Alarie et al. (2019) takes into account the standard deviation of the Monte Carlo simulations directly into the internal mechanisms of Mads and reduces the calculation time drastically from several days to a few hours.

Isolated power grids

Most inhabited areas of the province of Québec are connected by a large electricity system that links different power producers to con- sumers. There are however some isolated regions that solely depend on local power grids. HQ owns 21 such isolated power grids, mostly lo- cated in Northern Québec. Using a one-minute time-step isolated grid simulator, NOMAD was employed to minimize diesel consumption by optimizing the set of rules governing when a generator is turned on and off (Barris et al., 2015). The challenge of this problem lies in that there are several types of rules to start and stop the generators; depending on their parameter values, some rules prevail over the others. This intro- duces discontinuities in the solution domain, which can lead to ineffec- tive searches. The use of groups of variables (Alarie et al., 2013) helps
to restore eﬃciency by grouping the parameters by rules. Optimizing of the rules according to their type allows the handling of discontinuities. Using the same simulator, NOMAD was also employed to study the integration of renewable energy sources (wind, solar, storage) to reduce diesel consumption and greenhouse gases in its isolated power grids (Brochu, 2017). The best mix of renewable energies must be iden- tified, including the choice, size, and number of equipment to be in- stalled. Simulations were conducted over a period of 20 years to capture the degradation of batteries, assuming that they are replaced only once
during this time period.

Applications in materials science

During the last decade, the design of materials based on integrated computational materials engineering (ICME) attracted attention consid-
erably in the R&D of several industrial branches. This section presents
examples on how Mads can be used in conjunction with ICME methods
to assist engineers and scientists in materials and industrial processes. The Mads algorithm and the NOMAD software package were suc-
cessfully applied to different fields of materials science to (i) optimize materials performance, (ii) optimize industrial processes, and (iii) de- sign new materials. A goal in alloys design is to determine a set of compositions, temperature, and pressure that optimize a set of func- tions that describes the material properties under certain constraints. These functions depend on the amount, type, and structure of phases. Note that in the thermodynamic context, a phase is a region through- out which all physical properties of a material are uniform; in general a solid phase has a unique crystallographic structure, while a liquid or gas phase are homogeneous mixtures. The material properties (mechanical, thermodynamic, structural, dynamics, thermal transport, surface prop- erties) depend on the phase volume fractions and the temperature. Phase volume fractions depend on both temperature and composition. Closed- form expressions of material properties as functions of composition and temperature are not known. Optimization of industrial processes either involves the determination of an optimal material or optimal process conditions such as temperature, pressure, weight fraction between dif- ferent chemical constituents, etc.
The FactSage software (Bale et al., 2016) consists of a suite of pro- grams and databases to perform chemical equilibrium calculations on isolated closed and open systems by means of Gibbs energy minimiza- tion techniques. The FactSage database contains information on ther- modynamic properties such as functions of temperature, pressure, and composition for over 7000 pure substances (compounds) and hundreds of multi-component solid and liquid solutions for a large variety of ma- terials, including steels, light metals, rare earths, noble metals, oxides, salts, semiconductors, and refractory materials.
Equilibrium calculations in multi-component systems may be used to predict quantities such as phase volume fractions, freezing ranges, segregation of alloying elements, phase formation, accompanying vol- umes, enthalpy changes and the amounts of various precipitates during subsequent annealing. An accurate knowledge of these properties is of critical importance in the understanding and description of mechanical, electrical, and corrosion resistance properties. Aside from equilibrium calculations, FactSage can be used to simulate para-equilibrium and the cooling effect upon the phase composition of solid systems for mi- crostuctures.
Combining the FactSage software and database with NOMAD has
lead to the design of several innovative materials and the optimization of important industrial processes for the production of primary metals, such as iron, aluminum, and copper. This combination also allowed the screening of potential multi-component alloys, searching for composi- tions having desired properties and phase assemblages within a reason- able amount of time. In multi-component systems, an evaluation of a given property by FactSage can be time-consuming, as it ranges from a few seconds up to a few minutes, depending on the system size and the calculation type. Determining optimal alloys under a given set of



constraints by calculating the properties over a grid of compositions is almost impossible for a system with more than four constituents.

Optimizing the performance of materials

From a practical point of view, the design of materials consists of minimizing, maximizing, or targeting specific properties. Targeting val- ues is achieved by minimizing the (square of the) norm of the differ- ence between a property and its target value. Optimization problems with more than two objectives are handled by a sequence of biobjective problems, in which all but two objective functions are treated as con- straints. For some material design problems, this approach is preferable to applying multiobjective optimization (Gheribi et al., 2016).
phase, i.e., compounds (e.g., Fe3C or Al3Ni) or solutions constituting In materials science, the properties depend on the amount of each
the system. However, in multi-component systems, a given phase may be stable in a narrow range of composition, temperature, and pressure. The identification of the range of stability of a given phase assemblage in multi-component systems is one of the most diﬃcult problems to solve in alloy design. FactSage can calculate the phase stability at a spe- cific temperature pressure and composition, but cannot directly deter- mine the range of stability of a given phase. The range of phase stability in systems with up to twelve components is predicted in Gheribi et al. (2012, 2013, 2018) for different problems. This is the most remarkable achievement of NOMAD in terms of alloy design. The robustness of NOMAD in the determination of phase stability in multi-component systems is partially due to using Latin hypercube sampling and Variable Neighborhood Search (Audet et al., 2008b) strategies.

Optimizing industrial processes

The design of many industrial processes involves the design of mate- rials. In general, finding alloys or mixtures with optimal specific proper- ties is highly desirable. For instance, obtaining Pareto-optimal solutions of a biobjective optimization problem, which consists of determining a set of alloy’s compositions that simultaneously minimize the liquidus temperature and target a specific freezing range (region of co-existence between the liquid and solid phases) under constraints on composition, density, thermal expansion, and shrinkage ratio, is highly desirable in many metallurgical applications. But, most importantly, the structure and amount of precipitates (that can be compounds and/or solutions) needs to be optimized in order to control the mechanical thermal, elec- trical, and physical properties.
Case studies (Gheribi et al., 2012; 2013) reported the improvement of the mechanical properties of light metals alloys by maximizing the
volume fraction of several specific aluminum (Al) rare earth (RE = La,
Ce, Pr, Nd, Pm, Sm) intermetallics of type Al𝑛 RE𝑚 (𝑛 > 𝑚) under con-
straints related to liquidus temperature, density, and heat capacity.
Managing the constraints on the liquidus temperature is not trivial. Even though liquidus temperature is a continuous function of composi- tion, the liquidus temperature has no analytically exploitable structure, and it possesses several local minima and saddle points even in a nar- row composition range. Management of the constraints on compositions, heat capacity, and density is simpler. Many alloys have been identified as potential low-cost candidates for the next generation of light metal alloys for lighter automotive applications.
Predicting the global and subsequent local minima on the liquidus temperature hypersurface is a real challenge in several materials science applications. A local minimum upon the liquidus surface is character-
ized by the chemical reaction 𝐿𝑖𝑞𝑢𝑖𝑑 →S1 +S2 + ⋯ +S𝑛 where the S𝑖 are
the solids (compounds and solutions) constituting the systems. In other
words, a local minimum of the liquidus temperature corresponds to a null freezing range.
A phase change material (PCM) is a local minimum of the liquidus surface of critical importance to thermal solar energy (Shukla et al., 2009). In the context of global warming, identifying sustainable and
low-cost PCMs with good performance in terms of heat storage capac- ity is a real challenge. A methodology to determine local minima of the liquidus surface is presented in Gheribi et al. (2011). The tech- nique consists of minimizing the freezing range. When a PCM solution
𝑥0 is identified, an additional constraint ‖𝑥 − 𝑥0‖2 ≥ 𝜖 is added, where
𝜖 > 0 is a small adjustable parameter. Then, the minimization proce-
dure is restarted again including the above constraint. This is repeated
until no additional PCM solutions can be found. This method has be proven to be reliable, as it predicted with considerable accuracy the global minimum of the liquidus temperature in an eight-components salts system, for which the liquidus temperature was measured exper- imentally (Renaud et al., 2011). More recently (Gheribi et al., 2020), the same procedure produced 30 new potential low-cost PCM materials with excellent heat storage capacity.
Finally, NOMAD was applied to optimize energetic eﬃciency and therefore reduce greenhouse gas emissions of key industrial processes for the production of primary metals (Gheribi et al., 2016; Harvey and Gheribi, 2014).

Designing new materials

NOMAD was also applied to design innovative materials. The most notable example is that of so-called high entropy alloys. High entropy alloys have more than five constituents, consisting of a single face cen- tred cubic (FCC) or body centred cubic (BCC) solid solution, or in some cases, a dual FCC-BCC phase solid solution (Miracle and Senkov, 2017). High entropy alloys have remarkable mechanical and corrosion resis- tance properties. The main limiting factor in the large scale industrial production is the relatively high cost of raw materials and the high tem- perature range where the single or dual phases are stable. The main challenge in the identification of entropy alloys is the predictability of the stability range of single or dual phase. A methodology using NO- MAD was proposed in Gheribi et al. (2018) to predict the stability range. According to thermodynamics principles, when the activity of a given phase equals 1, this phase is formed. Thereafter, starting from the composition where the activity is equal to 1, the amount of FCC and/or BCC is maximized until the amount of all other phases is null. For economical and industrial processes issues, constraints on cost and on the temperature stability range of FCC and/or BCC phase are added. The capability of NOMAD to identify high entropy alloys according to this procedure was clearly demonstrated. More than 100 low-cost high entropy alloys with a reasonable temperature stability range have been identified by NOMAD (Gheribi et al., 2018), thereby opening the door to new potential sustainable applications, in particular for the automo- tive industry.
Finally, NOMAD was used for metamaterials in Audet et al. (2013), Diest (2013). More specifically, these works aim to adapt the spectral response and near-field interactions of split ring resonator metamate- rials, by tuning the spectral position of resonant reflection peaks and near-field interactions within the metamaterial over the near-infrared spectrum.

Applications in computational engineering design

Computer-aided engineering has revolutionized the engineering de- sign process: computational models are now used to assess design alter- natives rapidly and enable conducting elaborate optimization studies. A major challenge of this simulation-based design optimization paradigm is that the gradients of the objective and constraint functions evaluated by means of computational models either are not guaranteed to exist theoretically or, when they do exist theoretically, cannot be approxi- mated with reliable accuracy without unreasonably large computational effort (Moré and Wild, 2014). In these cases, DFO and BBO algorithms are the only option (Kokkolaras, 2020). Because of their simplicity, the most popular DFO algorithms in the engineering design community are




Fig. 2. Nested blackbox optimization problem (left) and blackbox response surface for 15 network nodes (right) (Marwaha and Kokkolaras, 2015).


based on heuristics (e.g., genetic algorithms, simulated annealing, par- ticle swarm optimization, etc.) These algorithms are designed to always yield results, which largely explains their popularity. However, the de- sign engineer cannot characterize the optimality (or lack thereof) of the obtained results, as these heuristics are not supported by a useful con- vergence analysis (Audet and Hare, 2017).




First uses of Mads in engineering design

The advent of modern direct search methods has offered an invalu- able toolkit to design engineers for conducting derivative-free optimiza- tion whose results are supported by convergence theory (Kolda et al., 2003). The first engineering design application reported in the litera- ture utilized the direct ancestor of Mads with mixed variable program- ming (Audet and Dennis, Jr., 2001); a thermal insulation system was optimized with respect to categorical variables (number and material type of heat shields), resulting to a 65% improvement in performance relative to the best design known until then (Kokkolaras et al., 2001). An interesting feature of the design optimization problem was that the number of optimization variables was a function of one of the optimiza- tion variables. The analysis models and constraint handling procedure used in Kokkolaras et al. (2001) were enhanced by Abramson (2002, 2004), which led to even larger performance improvements.
A  particularly  challenging  engineering  design  prob- lem (Marwaha and Kokkolaras, 2015) was solved using NOMAD. Three optimization problems corresponding to aircraft sizing, route network configuration, and aircraft allocation were integrated into a blackbox representing an air transportation system of systems, which was then optimized to minimize fleet operation cost. Fig. 2 depicts the nested optimization problem on the left and the response surface of the blackbox on the right; the white “pixels” on the response surface denote areas of the design space where the blackbox did not return a function value. Mads did particularly well handling such so-called hidden constraints. The size and complexity of this mixed variable pro- gramming problem grows rapidly with increasing number of network nodes; previous results from the literature were limited to seven nodes, and NOMAD solved problems up to 15 nodes.
NOMAD was also used to optimize an electro-thermal wing anti- icing system (Pourbagian et al., 2015). Evaluating the performance of the anti-icing system required the numerical solution of a conjugate heat transfer problem between the fluid and solid domains in both running-wet and evaporative regimes, which is computationally expen- sive. Therefore, the authors made use of both quadratic and statisti- cal surrogates based on the work presented in Talgorn et al. (2015). Computationally expensive simulations were also necessary to model sound regimes in order to optimize the design of a trumpet’s bore in or- der to improve intonation. Results were reported in Tournemenne et al. (2017a,b) for unconstrained and constrained problem formulations, re- spectively.
Biomedical applications

The use of numerical optimization has been recently introduced to the field of mathematical oncology with a focus on cancer nanother- apy, where drugs are safely carried to tumors via nanoparticles. The design of these nanoparticles highly influences treatment eﬃcacy, thus creating a need to search throughout large design spaces for the optimal nanoparticle structural variables.
Chamseddine and Kokkolaras (2018) developed a mechanistic model of nanoparticle-mediated drug delivery in a two-dimensional vascular- ized tumor and used NOMAD to determine optimal nanoparticle size and aspect ratio. A biobjective optimization problem was formulated and solved by NOMAD and its implementation of the BiMads algo- rithm (Audet et al., 2008d) to quantify the tradeoff between two com- peting objectives: maximizing nanoparticle vascular binding and maxi- mizing dead tumor area. Based on the findings of that work, the authors developed a dual delivery strategy, in which two different nanoparticle designs formulate one regimen. NOMAD was used to solve a sequen- tial optimization problem, increasing the dead tumor area by 16% with- out the need of additional drugs (Chamseddine and Kokkolaras, 2020). Chamseddine et al. (2018) considered a dynamic model to evaluate tu- mor size after treatment in order to minimize its size while maximizing targeting. The optimization problem was extended to consider the prop- erties of nanoparticle surface binding proteins and exploring new traits of nanoparticle biodistribution. In addition, multiple treatment cycles were simulated, where nanoparticles were re-optimized along the treat- ment in a form of adaptive therapy.
Design  optimization  of  nanoparticles  was  performed in Chamseddine et al. (2020) for a cohort of tumors which vary in size - an important clinical covariate. In this paper, the authors also optimized the drug diffusivity along with the nanoparticle size. The results suggested that integrating the selection of the drug and the nanoparticle size in practice may lead to better treatment outcomes.
Finally, in a recent study published in Nature, NOMAD was used to tune the parameters of a mathematical transmission model to demon- strate the under-detection of covid-19 cases in France (Pullano et al., 2021).
Multidisciplinary design optimization

Mads has been also used in multidisciplinary design optimiza- tion (MDO) and multimodel management. MDO problems include so- called “consistency” constraints, whose violations quantify discrepan- cies among coupled subproblems related to different disciplines. Tal- gorn and Kokkolaras (Talgorn, 2016) developed a user-friendly com- pact implementation of an augmented Lagrangian algorithm for coor- dinating distributed MDO problems (Talgorn and Kokkolaras, 2017). An associated publicly available MATLAB-based software package of- fers Mads as the default optimization algorithm, although the user can link any other algorithm as they see fit (one of the advantages of dis- tributed MDO formulations is that different algorithms can be used for different subproblems depending on their features and properties).



Talgorn et al. (2017) considered both NOMAD and gradient-based al- gorithms to solve the subproblems formulated by an interdisciplinary feasible architecture known as non-hierarchical analytical target cas- cading. Results show that NOMAD yields higher-consistency solutions (i.e., solutions with smaller discrepancies among disciplinary subprob- lems), but with greater variance than the MATLAB implementation of an interior point gradient-based algorithm.
Bayoumy and Kokkolaras (2020a) developed a relative adequacy framework (RAF) for multimodel management in design optimization and implemented their strategy by means of a trust-region management framework that utilizes NOMAD as the optimization solver. The RAF is used to quantify and utilize relative errors among available models to enhance the predictive capability of models associated with lower computational cost, and use them in certain areas of the design space, as the latter is being explored during the optimization process. Specif- ically, the Mads search step is used to solve a surrogate optimization problem. In this problem, surrogates are not built for the optimization functions, but for model errors. The purpose is to mitigate discrepancy among available models to approach the adequacy level of a reference model while favoring the utilization of inexpensive models. In the Mads poll step, models are selected based on trust-region principles.
A pair of papers (Bayoumy and Kokkolaras, 2020b; 2020c) extends the RAF for MDO by utilizing NOMAD for monolithic, distributed, and time-dependent problems. When using the RAF to solve multidis- ciplinary feasible problem formulations, the key arguments for using NOMAD are: (1) Mads is the only algorithm that offers the (optional) search step where surrogate models for relative errors can be trained and/or selected; (2) the optimization process does not stall if a multi- disciplinary analysis fails to return a value. For distributed MDO work- flows, results show that penalizing surrogate errors among available models using trust-region principles in each subproblem contributes to mitigating the computational cost of the MDO process compared with the high-fidelity MDO one while ensuring adequate accuracy.

Other applications in mechanical engineering

Mads and NOMAD have also been used in assembly op- timization problems and remanufacturing-based design strategies. Lupuleac et al. (2020) considered the problem of optimizing temporary fastener patterns in aircraft assembly and compared NOMAD to a lo- cal exhaustive search and simulated annealing for several problems, in- cluding a real Airbus A350-900 wing-to-fuselage assembly. The results indicated that simulated annealing did not provide repeatable results and required large numbers of function evaluations. Both the local ex- haustive search and NOMAD yielded good results; however, the former obviously required many more function evaluations than the latter. Al- Handawi et al. (2020) considered remanufacturing as a strategy to ad- dress changing requirements in design problems. Sets of optimal design solutions, as opposed to single-point designs, are obtained using Mads. Parametric studies are then conducted to obtain optimal solutions for different parameter values, which are used to build a response surface providing a map from the design space to the parameter space. In the parameter space, a manufacturing transition rule is formulated to iden- tify sets of design solutions that are scalable by additive manufacturing. Scalable design solutions are then mapped back to the design space to obtain the corresponding design variable values.
The design of Francis hydraulic turbine runner –moving blades–
plays an important role in the energy production eﬃciency of an hy- draulic dam. NOMAD was used to redesign an existing runner achiev- ing high performance for new operating conditions, using multi-fidelity computational fluid dynamics analyses and a multiobjective approach for optimizing the blades shape (Bahrami et al., 2017; 2016).
Aircraft engine blade geometries are optimized to account for struc- tural contact interactions between the blades and the casing. NOMAD is used to solve a constrained problem where only the three-dimensional properties of the blade are allowed to vary (Lainé et al., 2019). The ob-
jective function is a simplified criteria describing the clearance between the top of the blade and the casing for one of the free-vibration mode of the blade. Contact simulations are conducted on both initial and op- timized blades and show that the vibration level of optimized blades following the contact interaction are significantly reduced.

Other applications of direct search methods

The Mads algorithm and its implementation in NOMAD have also been used in a variety of other applications, as illustrated in Table 2 and Fig. 1. This section summarizes some of them associated with significant amount of publications and patents.

Road design optimization

There has been considerable progress over the last five years in road design optimization. This research addresses the question of finding the shape of a curve describing a road that minimizes the construction cost while satisfying many design specifications. The problem is divided into three related subproblems. First, the horizontal alignment optimization determines the number and position of horizontal intersection points and corresponding curve radii. NOMAD is the recommended solver according to Li et al. (2019, 2016). Second, the vertical alignment op- timization determines vertical position with specified rates of curva- ture and bounded grades. NOMAD is recommended for presetting con- trol points (Li et al., 2017). Finally, the earthwork optimization min- imizes the total cost of hauling, excavation and embankment. Bi-level approaches resulting in potentially millions of dollars of savings are pro- posed in Mondal et al. (2015), Vázquez-Méndez et al. (2018) and multi- fidelity direct search algorithms are studied in Aziz et al. (2020) for problems that take from 20 to 24 h to run.

Cardiovascular geometries

Marsden provides an historical perspective on the develop- ment of simulation-based cardiac surgery and links between en- gineering, medicine, and optimization that facilitated clinical ad- vances (Marsden, 2013). The author also discusses the application of these tools to two clinically relevant examples in pediatric cardiology.
A framework for coupling optimal shape design to time-accurate 3D blood flow simulations in idealized cardiovascular geometries is pre- sented in Marsden et al. (2008). The optimization of a Y-graft design for the Fontan procedure (a surgery used to treat single ventricle heart defects) is conducted in Yang et al. (2010, 2013) under pulsatile rest and exercise flow conditions. Stent implantation for the treatment of coronary artery disease is studied in Gundert et al. (2012a,b). These papers analyse idealized stent geometries using a derivative-free opti- mization algorithm coupled with computational fluid dynamics. Vein graft failure is a prevalent problem in vascular surgeries, due to severe changes in pressure and flow. Models of venous growth and remod- elling are proposed in Drews et al. (2020), Ramachandra et al. (2017), Sankaran et al. (2013), Szafron et al. (2019), and surrogate-based direct search optimization techniques are used to accelerate parameter esti- mation. Shape optimization problems motivated by hemodynamically- driven surgical design are studied in Verma et al. (2020).

Astrophysics

There are numerous applications of direct search methods in astro- physics. In a paper with more than 700 co-authors (Aasi et al., 2013), NOMAD was used for a computationally intensive search for periodic gravitational waves carried out with the Einstein@Home volunteer dis- tributed computing project.
In the context of black hole observation, NOMAD was used to find
the set of parameters of a Monte Carlo model that yields the best fit


Table 3
Patents associated with the Mads algorithm or with the NOMAD software.




to observed kinematics (Mehrgan et al., 2019), and to compute mass distributions (Neureiter et al., 2020).
The first interstellar object within our solar system, now called 1I/‘Oumuamua, was discovered in 2017. Trajectory analyses were con- ducted using NOMAD, revealing characteristics that have never before been observed in a celestial body (Hibberd et al., 2020).
Hall effect thrusters are flown in space missions. They incorporate a magnetic circuit that generate a specific electromagnetic flux distribu- tion inside and near the outlet of a plasma channel. The design of this type of structure requires a specific magnetic topography in the thruster channel with given magnetic field radial component values and a cer- tain inclination of this field lines. NOMAD was used to solve the inverse magnetostatic problem to obtain a new low-erosion magnetic configu- ration (Rossi, 2017; Rossi et al., 2016).
Kinematics analysis of galaxies are performed in Ramakrishnan et al. (2019), revealing various deviations from pure circular rotation in the inner kiloparsec of seven galaxies, including kinematic twists, decoupled and counter-rotating cores. That paper states that the Mads algorithm is becoming quite indispensable in practice.


Patents associated with direct search methods

In addition to research papers, there have been many patents filed related to direct search methods. A query for patents referring to the Mads algorithm or to the NOMAD software package generated the entries listed in Table 3.


Conclusion

This review focused on three particular application domains of black- box optimization. Over the past two decades, direct search methods and algorithms such as Mads evolved through research motivated by a vast variety of applications. Since its introduction in 2006, Mads can now consider continuous and discrete, (including categorical) variables, handle blackbox constraints and multiple objectives, tackle increasingly larger problems (partially through parallelism), and, even solve stochas- tic blackbox problems.
These improvements, along with the availability of greater and bet- ter computing resources, allow practitioners to solve a large variety of problems for which blackbox optimization is the only applicable ap- proach.
A particularly interesting emerging field of artificial intelligence and machine learning applications is the optimization of the hyperparame- ters of deep neural networks, for which Mads and NOMAD are natural candidates.
It can be argued that the variety and number of BBO and DFO ap- plications has not only grown considerably in the past two decades, but will continue to grow in future years.
Declaration of Competing Interest

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgments

The authors would like to thank two anonymous referees for their constructive comments, as well as Martin Beaudoin, Patrice Brunelle, Patrick Jeandroz, Solène Kojtych, Dragan Komljenovic, Louis-Alexandre Leclaire, Marie Minville, Christophe Tribes and Walid Zegal for dis- cussing some applications.
References

Aasi, J., et al., 2013. Einstein@Home all-sky search for periodic gravitational waves in LIGO S5 data. Phys. Rev. D 87, 042001. doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.87.042001.
Abramson, M., 2002. Pattern search algorithms for mixed variable general constrained optimization problems. Department of Computational and Applied Mathematics, Rice University Ph.D. thesis. http://www.caam.rice.edu/caam/trs/tr02.html#TR02-11
Abramson, M., 2004. Mixed variable optimization of a load-bearing thermal insula- tion system using a filter pattern search algorithm. Optim. Eng. 5 (2), 157–177. doi:10.1023/B:OPTE.0000033373.79886.54.
Abramson, M., Asaki, T., Dennis Jr, J.E., Magallanez, Jr, R., Sottile, M., 2012. An ef- ficient class of direct search surrogate methods for solving expensive optimization problems with CPU-time-related functions. Struct. Multidiscip. Optim. 45 (1), 53–64. doi:10.1007/s00158-011-0658-3.
Abramson, M., Audet, C., Chrissis, J., Walston, J., 2009a. Mesh adaptive direct search algorithms for mixed variable optimization. Optim. Lett. 3 (1), 35–47. doi:10.1007/s11590-008-0089-2.
Abramson, M., Audet, C., Dennis Jr, J., Le Digabel, S., 2009b. OrthoMADS: a determin- istic MADS instance with orthogonal directions. SIAM J. Optim. 20 (2), 948–966. doi:10.1137/080716980.
Abramson, M., Booker, A., Cramer, E., Simonis, J., 2017. Search and poll method for solving multifidelity optimization problems. Patent US 2017/0011143 A1, https://lens.org/095-460-083-532-225.
Adjengue, L., Audet, C., Yahia, I.B., 2014. A variance-based method to rank input vari- ables of the mesh adaptive direct search algorithm. Optim. Lett. 8 (5), 1599–1610. doi:10.1007/s11590-013-0688-4.
Al-Handawi, K., Andersson, P., Panarotto, M., Isaksson, O., Kokkolaras, M., 2020. Scalable set-based design optimization and remanufacturing for meeting changing require- ments. ASME J. Mech. Des. 143 (42). doi:10.1115/1.4047908.
Alarie, S., Amaioua, N., Cyr, C., 2015. Global optimization with NOMAD for the simultane- ous tuning of several power system stabilizers. In: Proceedings of the CORS/INFORMS International Conference. Montréal
Alarie, S., Audet, C., Bouchet, P.-Y., Le Digabel, S., 2019. Optimization of noisy  blackboxes  with  adaptive  precision.  Technical  Report,  G-2019-
84. To appear in SIAM Journal on Optimization. Les cahiers du GERAD. http://www.optimization-online.org/DB_HTML/2019/11/7476.html
Alarie, S., Audet, C., Garnier, V., Le Digabel, S., Leclaire, L.-A., 2013. Snow water equivalent estimation using blackbox optimization. Pac. J. Optim. 9 (1), 1–21. http://www.ybook.co.jp/online2/oppjo/vol9/p1.html
Alarie, S., Leclaire, L.-A., 2013. Positionnement de stations GMON avec inversion du mod- èle HUT. Optimization Days. Montréal
Aspentech, Accessed: 2020-11-06. Aspen chemical engineering simulator. https://www.aspentech.com.
Audet, C., 2014. A survey on direct search methods for blackbox optimization and their applications. In: Pardalos, P., Rassias, T. (Eds.), Mathematics Without Bound- aries: Surveys in Interdisciplinary Research. Springer, New York, NY, pp. 31–56. doi:10.1007/978-1-4939-1124-0. Chapter 2
Audet, C., Béchard, V., Chaouki, J., 2008a. Spent potliner treatment process optimization using a MADS algorithm. Optim. Eng. 9 (2), 143–160.



Audet, C., Béchard, V., Le Digabel, S., 2008b. Nonsmooth optimization through mesh adaptive direct search and variable neighborhood search. J. Glob. Optim. 41 (2), 299–
318. doi:10.1007/s10898-007-9234-1.
Audet, C., Caporossi, G., Jacquet, S., 2020a. Binary, unrelaxable and hidden constraints in blackbox optimization. Oper. Res. Lett. 48 (4), 467–471. doi:10.1016/j.orl.2020.05.011.
Audet, C., Côté, P., Poissant, C., Tribes, C., 2020b. Monotonic grey box optimization.
Optim. Lett. 14 (1), 3–18. doi:10.1007/s11590-019-01497-8.
Audet, C., Côté-Massicotte, J., 2019. Dynamic improvements of static sur- rogates in direct search optimization. Optim. Lett. 13 (6), 1433–1447. doi:10.1007/s11590-019-01452-7.
Audet, C., Dennis Jr, J., 2001. Pattern search algorithms for mixed variable programming.
SIAM J. Optim. 11 (3), 573–594. http://link.aip.org/link/?SJE/11/573/1
Audet, C., Dennis Jr, J., 2004. A pattern search filter method for nonlin- ear programming without derivatives. SIAM J. Optim. 14 (4), 980–1010. doi:10.1137/S105262340138983X.
Audet, C., Dennis Jr, J., 2006. Mesh adaptive direct search algorithms for constrained optimization. SIAM J. Optim. 17 (1), 188–217. doi:10.1137/040603371.
Audet, C., Dennis Jr, J., 2009. A progressive barrier for derivative-free nonlinear program- ming. SIAM J. Optim. 20 (1), 445–472. doi:10.1137/070692662.
Audet, C., Dennis Jr, J., Le Digabel, S., 2008c. Parallel space decomposition of the mesh adaptive direct search algorithm. SIAM J. Optim. 19 (3), 1150–1170. doi:10.1137/070707518.
Audet, C., Diest, K., Le Digabel, S., Sweatlock, L., Marthaler, D., 2013. Metamaterial design by mesh adaptive direct search. In: Numerical Methods for Metamaterial Design. In: Topics in Applied Physics, Vol. 127. Springer, Dordrecht, pp. 71–96. doi:10.1007/978-94-007-6664-8_4.
Audet, C., Dzahini, K., Kokkolaras, M., Le Digabel, S., 2021a. Stochastic mesh adaptive direct search for blackbox optimization using probabilistic estimates. Comput. Optim. Appl. 79 (1), 1–34. doi:10.1007/s10589-020-00249-0.
Audet, C., Hare, W., 2017. Derivative-Free and Blackbox Optimization. Springer Se- ries in Operations Research and Financial Engineering. Springer, Cham, Switzerland doi:10.1007/978-3-319-68913-5.
Audet, C., Ianni, A., Le Digabel, S., Tribes, C., 2014. Reducing the number of function evaluations in mesh adaptive direct search algorithms. SIAM J. Optim. 24 (2), 621– 642. doi:10.1137/120895056.
Audet, C., Ihaddadene, A., Le Digabel, S., Tribes, C., 2018a. Robust optimization of noisy blackbox problems using the mesh adaptive direct search algorithm. Optim. Lett. 12 (4), 675–689. doi:10.1007/s11590-017-1226-6.
Audet, C., Kokkolaras, M., Le Digabel, S., Talgorn, B., 2018b. Order-based error for man- aging ensembles of surrogates in mesh adaptive direct search. J. Glob. Optim. 70 (3), 645–675. doi:10.1007/s10898-017-0574-1.
Audet, C., Le Digabel, S., 2012. The mesh adaptive direct search al- gorithm for periodic variables. Pac. J. Optim. 8 (1), 103–119. http://www.ybook.co.jp/online2/oppjo/vol8/p103.html
Audet, C., Le Digabel, S., Peyrega, M., 2015. Linear equalities in blackbox optimization.
Comput. Optim. Appl. 61 (1), 1–23. doi:10.1007/s10589-014-9708-2.
Audet, C., Le Digabel, S., Rochon Montplaisir, V., Tribes, C., 2021b. NOMAD version 4: nonlinear optimization with the MADS al- gorithm. Technical Report, G-2021-23. Les cahiers du GERAD. http://www.optimization-online.org/DB_HTML/2021/04/8351.html
Audet, C., Le Digabel, S., Tribes, C., 2016. Dynamic scaling in the mesh adaptive di- rect search algorithm for blackbox optimization. Optim. Eng. 17 (2), 333–358. doi:10.1007/s11081-015-9283-0.
Audet, C., Le Digabel, S., Tribes, C., 2019. The mesh adaptive direct search algo- rithm for granular and discrete variables. SIAM J. Optim. 29 (2), 1164–1189. doi:10.1137/18M1175872.
Audet, C., Orban, D., 2006. Finding optimal algorithmic parameters using derivative-free optimization. SIAM J. Optim. 17 (3), 642–664. doi:10.1137/040620886.
Audet, C., Savard, G., Zghal, W., 2008d. Multiobjective optimization through a series of single-objective formulations. SIAM J. Optim. 19 (1), 188–210. doi:10.1137/060677513.
Audet, C., Savard, G., Zghal, W., 2010. A mesh adaptive direct search algo- rithm for multiobjective optimization. Eur. J. Oper. Res. 204 (3), 545–556. doi:10.1016/j.ejor.2009.11.010.
Audet, C., Tribes, C., 2018. Mesh-based Nelder-Mead algorithm for inequal- ity constrained optimization. Comput. Optim. Appl. 71 (2), 331–352. doi:10.1007/s10589-018-0016-0.
Aziz, M., Hare, W., Jaberipour, M., Lucet, Y., 2020. Multi-fidelity algorithms for the horizontal alignment problem in road design. Eng. Optim. 52 (11), 1848–1867. doi:10.1080/0305215X.2019.1691547.
Bahrami, S., Khelghatibana, M., Tribes, C., Lo, S., von Fellenberg, S., Trépanier, J.- Y., Guibault, F., 2017. Application of a territorial-based filtering algorithm in turbomachinery blade design optimization. Eng. Optim. 49 (2), 216–234. doi:10.1080/0305215X.2016.1165994.
Bahrami, S., Tribes, C., Devals, C., Vu, T., Guibault, F., 2016. Multi-fidelity shape optimization of hydraulic turbine runner blades using a multi-objective mesh adaptive direct search algorithm. Appl. Math. Model. 40 (2), 1650–1668. doi:10.1016/j.apm.2015.09.008.
Bale, C., Bélisle, E., Chartrand, P., Decterov, S., Eriksson, G., Gheribi, A., Hack, K., Jung, I.-H., Kang, Y.-B., Melançon, J., Pelton, A., Petersen, S., Robelin, C., Sangster, J., Spencer, P., Van Ende, M.-A., 2016. Reprint of: FactSage thermochemical software and databases, 2010-2016. Calphad 55, 1–19. doi:10.1016/j.calphad.2016.07.004.
Barris, N., Alarie, S., Anjos, M., 2015. Simulation-based optimization of the control strategy for isolated power grids via blackbox software. In: Proceedings of the CORS/INFORMS International Conference. Montréal
Bayoumy, A., Kokkolaras, M., 2020a. A relative adequacy framework for multi- model management in design optimization. ASME J. Mech. Des. 1–22. doi:10.1115/1.4044109.
Bayoumy, A., Kokkolaras, M., 2020b. A relative adequacy framework for multimodel man- agement in multidisciplinary design optimization. Struct. Multidiscip. Optim. 62 (4), 1701–1720. doi:10.1007/s00158-020-02591-7.
Bayoumy, A., Kokkolaras, M., 2020c. Multi-model management for time-dependent mul- tidisciplinary design optimization problems. Struct. Multidiscip. Optim. 61 (5), 1821– 1841. doi:10.1007/s00158-020-02572-w.
Beaudoin, M., 2013. Decompose Zoltan: doing domain decomposition in parallel. Proceed- ing of the 8th International OpenFOAM Workshop. Jeju, South Korea
Bellavia, S., Macconi, M., Morini, B., 2004. STRSCNE: a scaled trust-region solver for constrained nonlinear equations. Comput. Optim. Appl. 28, 31–50. doi:10.1023/B:COAP.0000018878.95983.4e.
Bollas, G., Kyle, K. P., Prasad, D., Jacobson, C., Maljanian Jr, J., Poisson, R., Park, Y., 2019. Plate-fin heat exchanger fouling identification. Patent US 10495547 B2, https://lens.org/145-576-524-862-964.
Booker, A., Dennis Jr, J., Frank, P., Serafini, D., Torczon, V., Trosset, M., 1999. A rigorous framework for optimization of expensive functions by surrogates. Struct. Multidiscip. Optim. 17 (1), 1–13. doi:10.1007/BF01197708.
Brochu, J., 2017. Enjeux reliés à l’intégration des énergies renouvelables en réseaux au- tonomes. Atelier Technique d’Automne - Intégration des Énergies Renouvelables Dans Les Micro-réseaux Autonomes. TechnoCentre Éolien, Montréal.
Browne, T., Iooss, B., Gratiet, L.L., Lonchampt, J., Remy, E., 2016. Stochastic simu- lators based optimization by Gaussian process metamodels - application to main- tenance investments planning issues. Qual. Reliab. Eng. Int. 32 (6), 2067–2080. doi:10.1002/qre.2028.
Chamseddine, I., Frieboes, H., Kokkolaras, M., 2018. Design optimization of tumor vasculature-bound nanoparticles. Sci. Rep. 8. doi:10.1038/s41598-018-35675-y.
Chamseddine, I., Frieboes, H., Kokkolaras, M., 2020. Multi-objective optimization of tu- mor response to drug release from vasculature-bound nanoparticles. Sci. Rep. 10. doi:10.1038/s41598-020-65162-2.
Chamseddine, I., Kokkolaras, M., 2018. Nanoparticle optimization for enhanced targeted anticancer drug delivery. ASME J. Biomech. Eng. 140 (4). doi:10.1115/1.4038202.
Chamseddine, I., Kokkolaras, M., 2020. A dual nanoparticle delivery strategy for en- hancing drug distribution in cancerous tissue. ASME J. Biomech. Eng. 142 (12). doi:10.1115/1.4047657.
Characklis, G., Kirsch, B., Ramsey, J., Dillard, K., Kelley, C., 2006. Developing portfolios of water supply transfers. Water Resour. Res. 42 (5). doi:10.1029/2005WR004424.
Chen, X., Kelley, C., Xu, F., Zhang, Z., 2018. A smoothing direct search method for Monte Carlo-based bound constrained composite nonsmooth optimization. SIAM J. Sci. Com- put. 40 (4), A2174–A2199. doi:10.1137/17M1116714.
Choi, T., Eslinger, O., Kelley, C., David, J., Etheridge, M., 2000. Optimization of au- tomotive valve train components with implicit filtering. Optim. Eng. 1 (1), 9–27. doi:10.1023/A:1010071821464.
Choquette, Y., Lavigne, P., Ducharme, P., Houdayer, A., Martin, J.-P., 2010. Apparatus and method for monitoring snow water equivalent and soil moisture content using natural gamma radiation. US Patent No. 7800051 B2.
Clarke, F., 1983. Optimization and Nonsmooth Analysis. John Wiley and Sons, New York. Reissued in 1990 by SIAM Publications, Philadelphia, as Vol. 5 in the series Classics in Applied Mathematics
Conn, A., Le Digabel, S., 2013. Use of quadratic models with mesh-adaptive direct search for constrained black box optimization. Optim. Methods Softw. 28 (1), 139–158. doi:10.1080/10556788.2011.623162.
Conn, A., Scheinberg, K., Vicente, L., 2009. Introduction to Derivative-Free Optimization. MOS-SIAM Series on Optimization. SIAM, Philadelphia doi:10.1137/1.9780898718768.
Côté, A., Blancke, O., Alarie, S., Dems, A., Komljenovic, D., Messaoudi, D., 2020. Combining historical data and domain expert knowledge using optimization to model electrical equipment reliability. In: Proceedings of the International Con- ference on Probabilistic Methods Applied to Power Systems (PMAPS), pp. 1–6. doi:10.1109/PMAPS47429.2020.9183620. Liege, Belgium
Custódio, A., Scheinberg, K., Vicente, L., 2017. Methodologies and software for deriva- tive-free optimization. In: Terlaky, T., Anjos, M., Ahmed, S. (Eds.), Advances and Trends in Optimization with Engineering Applications. SIAM, Philadelphia. MOS-SIAM Book Series on Optimization
Delavari, A., Kamwa, I., Brunelle, P., 2018. Simscape power systems benchmarks for edu- cation and research in power grid dynamics and control. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Canadian Conference on Electrical Computer Engineering (CCECE), pp. 1–5.
Diest, K., 2013. Numerical Methods for Metamaterial Design. Topics in Applied Physics, Vol. 127. Springer, Netherlands doi:10.1007/978-94-007-6664-8.
Drews, J., Pepper, V., Best, C., Szafron, J., Cheatham, J., Yates, A., Hor, K., Zbinden, J., Chang, Y.-C., Mirhaidari, G., Ramachandra, A., Miyamoto, S., Blum, K., Onwuka, E., Zakko, J., Kelly, J., Cheatham, S., King, N., Reinhardt, J., Sugiura, T., Miyachi, H., Matsuzaki, Y., Breuer, J., Heuer, E., West, T., Shoji, T., Berman, D., Boe, B., Asnes, J., Galantowicz, M., Matsumura, G., Hibino, N., Marsden, A., Pober, J., Humphrey, J., Shinoka, T., Breuer, C., 2020. Spontaneous reversal of stenosis in tissue-engineered vascular grafts. Sci. Transl. Med. 12 (537). doi:10.1126/scitranslmed.aax6919.
Drumheller, M., 2010. Constraint-based method of designing a route for a transport ele- ment. Patent US 7647211 B2, https://lens.org/109-649-319-705-23X.
Erignac, C., Drumheller, M., 2010. Adaptive distance field constraint for designing a route for a transport element. Patent US 7668700 B2, https://lens.org/112-901-768-864-121.
Feingesicht, M., Polyakov, A., Kerherve, F., Richard, J.-P., 2018. Device for active control of the readhesion of a flow on a profile. Patent WO 2018/229442 A1, https://lens.org/084-049-298-871-25X.



Fleischman, D., Atwater, H., 2018a. Narrowband light filters. Patent US 2018/0308888 A1, https://lens.org/029-259-096-576-421.
Fleischman, D., Atwater, H., 2018b. Narrowband light filters. Patent WO 2018/200593 A1, https://lens.org/137-184-878-006-724.
Fortin, J.-P., Turcotte, R., Massicotte, S., Moussa, R., Fitzback, J., Villeneuve, J.- P., 2001. Distributed watershed model compatible with remote sens- ing and GIS Data. I: description of model. J. Hydrol. Eng. 6, 91–99. doi:10.1061/(ASCE)1084-0699(2001)6:2(91).
Fortin, V., 1999. Le Modèle Météo-Apport HSAMI: Historique, Théorie et Application. Technical Report, IREQ-1999-0255. Institut de recherche d’Hydro-Québec, Varennes, Qc.
Gérin-Lajoie, L., Lefebvre, D., Racine, M., Soulières, L., Kamwa, I., 1999. Hydro-Québec experience with PSS tuning. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Power Engineering Society Summer Meeting. Conference Proceedings (Cat. No.99CH36364), Vol. 1, pp. 88–95. doi:10.1109/PESS.1999.784329. Edmonton
Gheribi, A., Audet, C., Le Digabel, S., Bélisle, E., Bale, C., Pelton, A., 2012. Calcu- lating optimal conditions for alloy and process design using thermodynamic and properties databases, the FactSage software and the Mesh Adaptive Direct Search algorithm. CALPHAD Comput. Coupling Phase Diagr. Thermochem. 36, 135–143. doi:10.1016/j.calphad.2011.06.003.
Gheribi, A., Harvey, J.-P., Bélisle, E., Robelin, C., Chartrand, P., Pelton, A., Bale, C., Le Digabel, S., 2016. Use of a biobjective direct search algorithm in the process design of material science applications. Optim. Eng. 17 (1), 27–45. doi:10.1007/s11081-015-9301-2.
Gheribi, A., Le Digabel, S., Audet, C., Chartrand, P., 2013. Identifying optimal conditions for magnesium based alloy design using the mesh adaptive direct search algorithm. Thermochim. Acta 559 (0), 107–110. doi:10.1016/j.tca.2013.02.004.
Gheribi, A., Pelton, A., Bélisle, E., Le Digabel, S., Harvey, J.-P., 2018. On the prediction of low-cost high entropy alloys using new thermodynamic multi-objective criteria. Acta Mater. 161, 73–82. doi:10.1016/j.actamat.2018.09.001.
Gheribi, A., Pelton, A., Harvey, J.-P., 2020. Determination of optimal compositions and properties for phase change materials in a solar electric generating station. Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells 210, 110506. doi:10.1016/j.solmat.2020.110506.
Gheribi, A., Robelin, C., Le Digabel, S., Audet, C., Pelton, A., 2011. Calculating all lo- cal minima on liquidus surfaces using the FactSage software and databases and the Mesh Adaptive Direct Search algorithm. J. Chem. Thermodyn. 43 (9), 1323–1330. doi:10.1016/j.jct.2011.03.021.
Griebel, M., Dornseifer, T., Neunhoeffer, T., 1998. Numerical Simulation in Fluid Dynam- ics. Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics doi:10.1137/1.9780898719703. Group, E., Accessed: 2020-11-06. OpenFOAM - the open source CFD toolbox.
https://www.openfoam.com/.
Guay, C., Minville, M., Braun, M., 2015. A global portrait of hydrological changes at the 2050 horizon for the province of Québec. Can. Water Resour. J. Rev. Can. Ressour. Hydr. 40 (3), 285–302. doi:10.1080/07011784.2015.1043583.
Gundert, T., Marsden, A., Yang, W., LaDisaJr, J., 2012a. Optimization of cardiovascu- lar stent design using computational fluid dynamics. J. Biomech. Eng. 134, 011002. doi:10.1115/1.4005542.
Gundert, T., Marsden, A., Yang, W., Marks, D., LaDisaJr, J., 2012b. Identification of hemodynamically optimal coronary stent designs based on vessel caliber. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 59 (7), 1992–2002. doi:10.1109/TBME.2012.2196275.
Harvey, J.P., Gheribi, A., 2014. Process simulation and control optimization of a blast furnace using classical thermodynamics combined to a direct search algorithm. Metall. Mater. Trans. B 45 (1), 307–327. doi:10.1007/s11663-013-0004-9.
Heidari, M., Druckman, M., Nakhjavani, O., 2016. Methods for optimized engine balancing based on flight data. Patent US 9347321 B2, https://lens.org/163-726-408-033-724. Hibberd, A., Hein, A., Eubanks, T., 2020. Project lyra: catching 1I/‘oumuamua
- mission opportunities after 2024. Acta Astronaut. 170, 136–144. doi:10.1016/j.actaastro.2020.01.018.
Huot, P.-L., 2019. Développement d’approches de calage eﬃcaces pour les modèles hy- drologiques coûteux en temps de calcul, au moyen du modèle HYDROTEL. École de Technologie Supérieure Ph.D. thesis.
Huot, P.-L., Poulin, A., Alarie, S., 2014. Assessment of blackbox optimization methods for eﬃcient calibration of computationally intensive hydrological models. In: Proceedings of the 11th International Conference on Hydroinformatics. CUNY Academic Works, New York City.
Huot, P.-L., Poulin, A., Audet, C., Alarie, S., 2019a. A hybrid optimization approach for eﬃcient calibration of computationally intensive hydrological models. Hydrol. Sci. J. 64 (10), 1204–1222. doi:10.1080/02626667.2019.1624922.
Huot, P.-L., Poulin, A., Audet, C., Alarie, S., 2019b. Low-cost and representative surrogate hydrological models. Part I – Construction of surrogates. Technical Report, G-2019-07. Les Cahiers du GERAD.
Huot, P.-L., Poulin, A., Audet, C., Alarie, S., 2019c. Low-cost and representative surrogate hydrological models. Part II – use within calibration frameworks. Technical Report,
-2019-08. Les Cahiers du GERAD.
Hydro-Québec, 2019. Setting new sights with our clean energy, annual report. https://www.hydroquebec.com/about/financial-results/annual-report.html.
Jahn, J., 2007. Introduction to the Theory of Nonlinear Optimization, third Springer.
Kokkolaras, M., 2020. When, why, and how can derivative-free optimization be useful to computational engineering design? ASME J. Mech. Des. 142 (1). doi:10.1115/1.4045043.
Kokkolaras, M., Audet, C., Dennis Jr, J., 2001. Mixed variable optimization of the number and composition of heat intercepts in a thermal insulation system. Optim. Eng. 2 (1), 5–29. doi:10.1023/A:1011860702585.
Kolda, T., Lewis, R., Torczon, V., 2003. Optimization by direct search: new per- spectives on some classical and modern methods. SIAM Rev. 45 (3), 385–482. doi:10.1137/S003614450242889.
Komljenovic, D., Messaoudi, D., Côté, A., Gaha, M., Vouligny, L., Alarie, S., Dems, A., Blancke, O., 2021. Asset management in electrical utilities in the context of business and operational complexity. In: Proceedings of the 14th WCEAM doi:10.1007/978-3-030-64228-0_4.
Laboratories, S. N., Accessed: 2020-11-06. Zoltan: parallel partitioning, load balancing and data-management services. https://cs.sandia.gov/Zoltan/.
Lainé, J., Piollet, E., Nyssen, F., Batailly, A., 2019. Blackbox optimization for air- craft engine blades with contact interfaces. J. Eng. Gas Turb. Power 141 (6). doi:10.1115/1.4042808.
Lakhmiri, D., Le Digabel, S., Tribes, C., 2021. HyperNOMAD: hyperparameter optimization of deep neural networks using mesh adaptive direct search. ACM Trans. Math. Softw. 47 (3). doi:10.1145/3450975.
Larson, J., Menickelly, M., Wild, S., 2019. Derivative-free optimization methods. Acta Numer. 28, 287–404. doi:10.1017/S0962492919000060.
Le Digabel, S., 2011. Algorithm 909: NOMAD: nonlinear optimization with the MADS algo- rithm. ACM Trans. Math. Softw. 37 (4), 44:1–44:15. doi:10.1145/1916461.1916468.
Le Digabel, S., Abramson, M., Audet, C., Dennis Jr, J., 2010. Parallel ver- sions of the MADS algorithm for black-box optimization. Optimization days https://www.gerad.ca/Sebastien.Le.Digabel/talks/2010_JOPT_25mins.pdf. Montréal Leclaire, L.-A., 2015. Massive distribution of black box calculation for model calibration.
In: Proceedings of the CORS/INFORMS International Conference. Montréal
Lewis, R., Torczon, V., Trosset, M., 2000. Direct search methods: then and now. J. Comput.
Appl. Math. 124 (1–2), 191–207.
Li, W., Pu, H., Schonfeld, P., Song, Z., Wang, L., Wang, J., Peng, X., Peng, L., 2019. A method for automatically recreating the horizontal alignment geome- try of existing railways. Comput. Aided Civ. Infrastruct. Eng. 34 (1), 71–94. doi:10.1111/mice.12392.
Li, W., Pu, H., Schonfeld, P., Yang, J., Zhang, H., Wang, L., Xiong, J., 2017. Mountain railway alignment optimization with bidirectional distance transform and genetic algorithm. Comput. Aided Civ. Infrastruct. Eng. 32 (8), 691–709. doi:10.1111/mice.12280.
Li, W., Pu, H., Schonfeld, P., Zhang, H., Zheng, X., 2016. Methodology for optimizing constrained 3-dimensional railway alignments in mountainous terrain. Transp. Res. Part C Emerg. Technol. 68, 549–565. doi:10.1016/j.trc.2016.05.010.
Liang, X., Xie, Y., Zhang, Z., Niu, T., 2020. Method and apparatus for optimizing block- ing grating for cone beam CT image scattering correction. Patent US 10722205 B2, https://lens.org/074-553-279-373-132.
Lonchampt, J., 2017. VME a tool for probabilistic models valuation in engineering asset management. In: Risk, Reliability and Safety: Innovating Theory and Practice – Walls, Revie & Bedford (Eds). CRC Press, Taylor & Francis Group, London, pp. 1158–1164. Proceedings of ESREL 2016 (Glasgow, Scotland, 25-29 September 2016)
Lucidi, S., Piccialli, V., Sciandrone, M., 2005. An algorithm model for mixed variable pro- gramming. SIAM J. Optim. 15 (4), 1057–1084. doi:10.1137/S1052623403429573.
Lupuleac, S., Pogarskaia, T., Churilova, M., Kokkolaras, M., Bonhomme, E., 2020. Opti- mization of fastener pattern in airframe assembly. Assembl. Autom. 40 (5), 723–733. doi:10.1108/AA-03-2019-0040.
Marsden, A., 2013. Simulation based planning of surgical interventions in pediatric car- diology. Phys. Fluids 25 (10), 101303. doi:10.1063/1.4825031.
Marsden, A., Feinstein, J., Taylor, C., 2008. A computational framework for derivative- free optimization of cardiovascular geometries. Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Eng. 197 (21–24), 1890–1905. doi:10.1016/j.cma.2007.12.009.
Marsden, A., Wang, M., Dennis Jr, J., Moin, P., 2007. Trailing-edge noise reduction using derivative-free optimization and large-eddy simulation. J. Fluid Mech. 572, 13–36. doi:10.1017/S0022112006003235.
Marwaha, G., Kokkolaras, M., 2015. System-of-systems approach to air transportation de- sign using nested optimization and direct search. Struct. Multidiscip. Optim. 51 (4), 885–901. doi:10.1007/s00158-014-1180-1.
MathWorks,	2018a.	power_AsynchronousMachineParams. https://www.mathworks.com/help/releases/R2018a/physmod/sps/powersys/ref/ power_asynchronousmachineparams.html.
MathWorks,	2018b.	Simscape	power	systems	release	notes. https://www.mathworks.com/help/releases/R2018a/physmod/sps/release-notes.html.
Mehrgan, K., Thomas, J., Saglia, R., Mazzalay, X., Erwin, P., Bender, R., Kluge, M., Fabricius, M., 2019. A 40 billion solar-mass black hole in the extreme core of holm 15A, the central galaxy of abell 85. Astrophys. J. 887 (2), 195. doi:10.3847/1538-4357/ab5856.
Minville, M., Cartier, D., Guay, C., Leclaire, L.-A., Audet, C., Le Digabel, S., Mer- leau, J., 2014. Improving process representation in conceptual hydrological model calibration using climate simulations. Water Resour. Res. 50, 5044–5073. doi:10.1002/2013WR013857.
Miracle, D., Senkov, O., 2017. A critical review of high entropy alloys and related concepts.
Acta Mater. 122, 448–511. doi:10.1016/j.actamat.2016.08.081.
Mondal, S., Lucet, Y., Hare, W., 2015. Optimizing horizontal alignment of roads in a spec- ified corridor. Comput. Oper. Res. 64, 130–138. doi:10.1016/j.cor.2015.05.018.
Moré, J., Wild, S., 2014. Do you trust derivatives or differences? J. Comput. Phys. 273, 268–277. doi:10.1016/j.jcp.2014.04.056.
Neureiter, B., Thomas, J., Saglia, R., Bender, R., Finozzi, F., Krukau, A., Naab, T., Rantala, A., Frigo, M., 2020. SMART: a new implementation of Schwarzschild’s or- bit Superposition technique for triaxial galaxies and its application to an N-body merger simulation. Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 500 (1), 1437–1465. doi:10.1093/mn- ras/staa3014.
Pourbagian, M., Talgorn, B., Habashi, W., Kokkolaras, M., Le Digabel, S., 2015. Con- strained problem formulations for power optimization of aircraft electro-thermal anti- icing systems. Optim. Eng. 16 (4), 663–693. doi:10.1007/s11081-015-9282-1.



Pullano, G., Domenico, L.D., Sabbatini, C., Valdano, E., Turbelin, C., Debin, M., Guer- risi, C., Kengne-Kuetche, C., Souty, C., Hanslik, T., Blanchon, T., Boëlle, P.-Y., Figoni, J., Vaux, S., Campèse, C., Bernard-Stoecklin, S., V. Colizza, V., 2021. Under- detection of cases of COVID-19 in France threatens epidemic control. Nature 590, 134–139. doi:10.1038/s41586-020-03095-6.
Ramachandra, A., Humphrey, J., Marsden, A., 2017. Gradual loading ameliorates mal- adaptation in computational simulations of vein graft growth and remodelling. J. R. Soc. Interface 14, 20160995. doi:10.1098/rsif.2016.0995.
Ramakrishnan, V., Nagar, N., Finlez, C., Storchi-Bergmann, T., Slater, R., Schnorr- Muller, A., Riffel, R., Mundell, C., Robinson, A., 2019. Nuclear kinematics in nearby AGN - I. An ALMA perspective on the morphology and kinematics of the molecu- lar CO(2-1) emission. Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 487 (1), 444–455. doi:10.1093/mn- ras/stz1244.
Renaud, E., Robelin, C., Gheribi, A., Chartrand, P., 2011. Thermodynamic evaluation and optimization of the Li, Na, K, Mg, Ca, Sr // F, Cl reciprocal system. J. Chem. Thermo- dyn. 43 (8), 1286–1298. doi:10.1016/j.jct.2011.03.015.
Rossi, A., 2017. Développement d’outils d’optimisation dédiés aux circuits magnétiques des propulseurs à effet Hall. Université de Toulouse Ph.D. thesis.
Rossi, A., Messine, F., Henaux, C., 2016. Parametric optimization of a hall effect thruster magnetic circuit. Trans. Jpn. Soc. Aeronaut. Space Sci. Aerosp. Technol. Jpn. 14 (ists30), Pb197–Pb 202. doi:10.2322/tastj.14.Pb_197.
Sankaran, S., Audet, C., Marsden, A., 2010. A method for stochastic constrained optimiza- tion using derivative-free surrogate pattern search and colLocation. J. Comput. Phys. 229 (12), 4664–4682. doi:10.1016/j.jcp.2010.03.005.
Sankaran, S., Humphrey, J., Marsden, A., 2013. An eﬃcient framework for optimization and parameter sensitivity analysis in arterial growth and remodeling computations. Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Eng. 256, 200–210. doi:10.1016/j.cma.2012.12.013.
Selvan, S., Borckmans, P., Chattopadhyay, A., Absil, P.-A., 2013. Spherical mesh adaptive direct search for separating quasi-uncorrelated sources by range- based independent component analysis. Neural Comput. 25 (9), 2486–2522. doi:10.1162/NECO_a_00485.
Shukla, A., Buddhi, D., Sawhney, R., 2009. Solar water heaters with phase change material thermal energy storage medium: a review. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 13 (8), 2119– 2125. doi:10.1016/j.rser.2009.01.024.
Solnik, B., Golovin, D., Kochanski, G., Karro, J., Moitra, S., Sculley, D., 2017. Bayesian op- timization for a better dessert. In: Proceedings of the 2017 NIPS Workshop on Bayesian Optimization. Long Beach, USA
Szafron, J., Ramachandra, A., Breuer, C., Marsden, A., Humphrey, J., 2019. Optimization of tissue engineered vascular graft design using computational modeling. Tissue Eng. Part C Methods 25, 561–570. doi:10.1089/ten.TEC.2019.0086.
Talgorn, B., 2016. NoHiMDO, a non hierarchical solver for MDO problems. https://github. com/bastientalgorn/NoHiMDO, https://github.com/bastientalgorn/NoHiMDO.
Talgorn, B., Audet, C., Kokkolaras, M., Le Digabel, S., 2018. Locally weighted regres- sion models for surrogate-assisted design optimization. Optim. Eng. 19 (1), 213–238. doi:10.1007/s11081-017-9370-5.
Talgorn, B., Kokkolaras, M., 2017. Compact implementation of non-hierarchical analytical target cascading for coordinating distributed multidisciplinary design optimization problems. Struct. Multidiscip. Optim. 56 (6), 1–6. doi:10.1007/s00158-017-1726-0.
Talgorn, B., Kokkolaras, M., DeBlois, A., Piperni, P., 2017. Numerical investigation of non-hierarchical coordination for distributed multidisciplinary design optimiza-
tion with fixed computational budget. Struct. Multidiscip. Optim. 55 (1), 205–220. doi:10.1007/s00158-016-1489-z.
Talgorn, B., Le Digabel, S., Kokkolaras, M., 2015. Statistical surrogate formulations for simulation-based design optimization. J. Mech. Des. 137 (2), 021405–1–021405–18. doi:10.1115/1.4028756.
Temple, B., Armstrong, J., Bueschern, K., Favorite, J., 2015. Radiograph and pas- sive data analysis using mixed variable optimization. Patent US 9047397 B1, https://lens.org/142-391-310-092-570.
Tolson, B., Shoemaker, C., 2007. Dynamically dimensioned search algorithm for com- putationally eﬃcient watershed model calibration. Water Resour. Res. 43 (1). doi:10.1029/2005WR004723.
Torczon, V., 1997. On the convergence of pattern search algorithms. SIAM J. Optim. 7 (1), 1–25. doi:10.1137/S1052623493250780.
Tournemenne, R., Petiot, J.-F., Talgorn, B., Gilbert, J., Kokkolaras, M., 2017a. Optimiza- tion of brass wind instruments based on sound simulations. J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 145 (6), 3795–3804. doi:10.1121/1.5111346.
Tournemenne, R., Petiot, J.-F., Talgorn, B., Kokkolaras, M., Gilbert, J., 2017b. Brass instruments design using physics-based sound simulation models and surrogate- assisted derivative-free optimization. J. Mech. Des. 139 (4), 041401–01–041401–9. doi:10.1115/1.4035503.
Van Dyke, B., Asaki, T., 2013. Using QR decomposition to obtain a new instance of mesh adaptive direct search with uniformly distributed polling directions. J. Optim. Theory Appl. 159 (3), 805–821. doi:10.1007/s10957-013-0356-y.
Vázquez-Méndez, M., Casal, G., Santamarina, D., Castro, A., 2018. A 3D model for opti- mizing infrastructure costs in road design. Comput. Aided Civ. Infrastruct. Eng. 33 (5), 423–439. doi:10.1111/mice.12350.
Verma, A., Wong, K., Marsden, A., 2020. A concurrent implementation of the surrogate management framework with application to cardiovascular shape optimization. Op- tim. Eng. 21 (4), 1487–1536. doi:10.1007/s11081-020-09483-1.
Vicente, L., Custódio, A., 2012. Analysis of direct searches for discontinuous functions.
Math. Program. 133 (1-2), 299–325. doi:10.1007/s10107-010-0429-8.
Vincent, P., Grechy, L., Corbett, R., 2017. A device for maintaining vascular connections.
Patent WO 2017/148836 A1, https://lens.org/049-785-433-011-823.
Xi, M., Sun, W., Chen, J., 2020. Survey of derivative-free optimization. Numer. Algebra Control Optim. 10 (4), 537–555. doi:10.3934/naco.2020050.
Xu, J., Audet, C., DiLiberti, C., Hauck, W., Montague, T., Parr, A., Potvin, D., Schuirmann, D., 2016. Optimal adaptive sequential designs for crossover bioequiv- alence studies. Pharm. Stat. 15 (1), 15–27. doi:10.1002/pst.1721.
Yang, W., Feinstein, J., Marsden, A., 2010. Constrained optimization of an idealized Y- shaped baﬄe for the Fontan surgery at rest and exercise. Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Eng. 199 (33), 2135–2149. doi:10.1016/j.cma.2010.03.012.
Yang, W., Feinstein, J., Shadden, S., Vignon-Clementel, I., Marsden, A., 2013. Optimiza- tion of a Y-graft design for improved hepatic flow distribution in the Fontan circula- tion. J. Biomech. Eng. 135 (1), 011002. doi:10.1115/1.4023089.
Ypma, A., Van Der Schaar, M., Tsirogiannis, G., Karssemeijer, L., Fan, C.-H., 2018. Apparatus and method for inferring parameters of a model of a mea- surement structure for a patterning process. Patent US 2018/0239851 A1, https://lens.org/124-692-152-146-241.
