Currently, there are various research approaches exploring different aspects of membrane computing models, such as their computational universality, computational complexity efficiency, and their potential for modeling biological phenomena.

The fundamental aspect of a model is its rules. In the original paper, the rules were of a rewriting nature, where a collection of objects in a region is replaced by another collection, including indications of whether the objects remain in the same region or move to an adjacent one. It is also possible to focus on communication rules only (e.g., symport/antiport model), and still, the resulting model is highly interesting and powerful.

The rules are applied in a maximally parallel manner, i.e., they are applied in parallel, and a rule can be applied more than once if there are enough objects available. It is also forbidden for a collection of objects to remain inactive during a step if it can trigger a rule. When there are multiple applicable rules, the system chooses nondeterministically. Additionally, the original definition considered priorities among rules, stipulating that a rule cannot be applied if there is another rule of higher priority that is also applicable. Although most current models do not include priorities, there are cases where parallelism is constrained, either at the level of membranes or for the entire system.

One open problem in this area is the p-conjecture, which pertains to the complexity class associated with p systems with active membranes and no electrical charges being exactly p. A partial affirmative answer to this conjecture was found, as well as a partial negative answer, demonstrating the importance of dissolution rules in determining the computational power of polarizationless p systems with division rules for non-elementary membranes.

The critical role of dissolution rules in solving problems in the class of polarizationless p systems with division rules for non-elementary membranes has been highlighted. It remains an open question to investigate the case when only 2-division rules for elementary membranes are allowed, or to redefine different division rules for non-elementary membranes.

This brief overview emphasizes the challenges in conducting formal studies within the unconventional machine-oriented model of membrane computing, particularly in developing standard procedures for formally verifying the solutions to problems within a given family of p systems as there may be multiple computation paths and numerous objects and membranes evolving in a maximally parallel way.
