The proposed convolutional neural network (CNN) algorithm demonstrates robustness to poor receiving conditions and a reduction in image resolution. Its performance is compared with an alternative support vector machines (SVM) technique, and the results show the undeniable superiority of the proposed CNN algorithm over the SVM benchmark.

In this study, raw and complete information from GNSS correlator outputs are synthesized into 2D images, capturing correlation delay and doppler shift ranges to obtain multipath information. This approach differs from standard multipath mitigation techniques that utilize only one-dimensional delay correlation information.

The framework encompasses the generation of image data, the selection of the CNN architecture, its training, and validation. The experiments are fully reproducible, making this work unique in the research community.

In urban environments, GNSS receivers are affected by multiple multipaths, often due to numerous reflectors. Despite potential obstructions, such as high buildings, the assumption in this study is that the direct path is always present and a single multipath will be considered.

A high-end GNSS antenna was installed in a clear view site to avoid multipath contamination, and only signals from high-elevation satellites were considered to be multipath-free. The recording was conducted on February 14, 2000, at 08:05 UTC.

The proposed model integrates I and Q signals, I and Q multipath, and correlated receiver noise. A single multipath contamination is considered, and its contribution is examined.

Convolutional neural networks are recognized as powerful tools for learning information from images due to their computational efficiency and impressive performance in image information processing. They automatically construct and combine abstract features from an image, with the network's first layers composed of convolutional layers that apply filters over input images and create feature maps. These feature maps are then used to extract meaningful information as the depth of the network increases. The network's last layers perform classification tasks, and the weights of the layers are learned through supervised learning based on gradient back-propagation. The structure of convolutional layers provides computational efficiency over fully connected neural networks when processing large image sizes or high resolutions.

CNN architectures include additional components, such as pooling layers to reduce the dimension of feature maps, a flatten layer to transform feature map information into vector-like input, and a dropout mechanism to increase the network's generalization power. The VGG-like architecture, known for its effectiveness in image feature extraction, is widely adopted in practice, despite having fewer parameters to train compared to other complex architectures.

For the GNSS multipath application, a simple instance of a VGG-like network is chosen, consisting of one convolutional block composed of two convolutional layers, as a multi-scale representation is not expected in the signal.