The Erdos-Renyi (ER) random network model creates graphs based on the assumption that a link could exist between two nodes, irrespective of whether or not the two nodes had a common neighbor before the link was established. Consequently, the random network graphs generated under the ER model are characterized by a low clustering coefficient (a measure of the probability for a link to exist between any two neighbors of a node) and low variation in node degrees. As a result, ER model graphs do not closely match graphs representing real-world networks. In this paper, we propose a random network graph model, called the two-hop neighbor preference (THNP) model, which favors the formation of triangles involving three nodes (u, w, and v) with existing links u-w and w-v (i.e., node v is strictly a two-hop neighbor of node u). When node u is seeking to establish a new link with another node x, we consider x along with the two-hop neighbors of u, and we choose one among these nodes as the new neighbor of node u with a probability, denoted as plink. The THNP model generates random graphs with a clustering coefficient that decreases with an increase in node degree, which closely matches several real-world network graphs commonly studied for complex network analysis and citation networks. Consequently, the THNP model-based random network graphs exhibit an inverse relationship between clustering coefficient and node degree and a larger variation in node degree compared to the ER model-based random network graphs. We evaluate the relative similarity of the graphs generated according to the THNP model and the ER model with real-world network graphs using various analytical metrics, and we find that the THNP model-based random network graphs are relatively more similar to the real-world network graphs considered compared to the ER model-based random network graphs.

The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 discusses related work on theoretical models for generating networks with clustering coefficient values and distribution similar to those observed for real-world networks. In Section 3, we present the proposed THNP model for generating random network graphs with a larger clustering coefficient and higher variation in node degree. Section 4 reviews the ER model, presents the real-world network graphs considered in this paper, and illustrates a comparative analysis of the ER model and the THNP model with that of the real-world network graphs with respect to the analytic metrics mentioned above. Section 5 differentiates the proposed THNP model from existing models.

The proposed THNP model differs from existing models in the sense that it considers the two-hop neighbors of a node u and a randomly chosen node v as the candidate list of nodes available for setting up a link for node u. Among the two-hop neighbors, nodes with a larger number of common neighbors are given relatively higher preference, akin to the behavior observed in social networks. Additionally, the THNP model captures the inverse relationship between clustering coefficient and node degree observed in real-world networks, unlike existing models, such as the scale-free random graph model and the power-law-based random graph model, which have certain limitations in capturing the clustering coefficient behavior observed in real-world networks.

In the later sections, the paper discusses the generation of random graphs under the ER and THNP models, and the comparison with real-world networks, such as the US politics books network and the C. elegans neural network. The paper concludes with an evaluation of the proximity of theoretical random graphs under the THNP and ER models with real-world networks using various analytical metrics.