Malaria is a significant global public health issue, with haematological and cytokine alterations being key contributors to its pathological conditions. As a result, this study aimed to investigate the effects of Plasmodium falciparum on T-helper cell type 1 and blood cell parameters by screening the blood and serum of patients attending health centers using enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay and an automatic hematology analyzer.

Malaria remains a life-threatening parasitic disease in many countries, particularly in sub-Saharan Africa where it causes a high percentage of morbidity and mortality. The activities of the erythrocytic asexual stages of P. falciparum and P. vivax in both asymptomatic and symptomatic patients are crucial in the pathogenesis of the disease. Infections in individuals with lower immunity, such as young children and pregnant women, often lead to severe outcomes, causing anemia, thrombocytopenia, leucopenia, and other haematological disorders. The release of malaria pigment (hemozoin) and other toxic factors when infected erythrocytes rupture is responsible for recurrent clinical episodes and incapacitation in infected individuals.

The identification of P. falciparum was carried out using an oil immersion microscope, and the estimation of parasitemia was determined by counting the number of parasites per 200 white blood cells on blood films. Additionally, complete blood cell counts were conducted using an automatic hematology analyzer, and routine differential blood cellular quantification was performed using peripheral blood smears.

Cytokines are considered to play a dual role in the pathogenesis of malaria, particularly in P. falciparum infections. The high levels of innate immune response in malaria infection are driven by malarial pigment (hemozoin, HZ), and glycosylphosphatidylinositols (GPIs) found in circulating monocytes, neutrophils, and resident macrophages. In this study, the plasma concentration of certain cytokines was investigated in relation to their role in mediating stimulation of the macrophage and intestinal iron absorption. This can decrease iron absorption and enhance the release of hepcidin into the circulation, with the increased serum level of hepcidin often being associated with severe malaria anaemia. The development of the T-helper 1 response can be indirectly antagonized by interleukin-10 (IL-10), which inhibits the production of proinflammatory cytokines and induces B-cell proliferation.