In dynamic settings, it is challenging to continually monitor a shifting optimal solution. To address dynamic optimization problems, an enhanced univariate marginal distribution algorithm (IUMDA) is introduced. This approach incorporates a diffusion model, which leverages current population information, and an inertia model, which utilizes historical optimal solution data. Following an environmental change, a detection operator is employed to adjust the strategy and encourage population diversity. An empirical study on the dynamic sphere function was conducted to compare the performance of IUMDA and mutation UMDA. The results demonstrate that IUMDA effectively addresses functions with moving optima and swiftly adapts to dynamic environments.

When facing this issue, the goal is to develop an algorithm capable of tracking a changing optimal solution over time in response to environmental shifts. Thus, an intelligent optimization algorithm is needed to tackle these challenges. Similar to traditional evolutionary algorithms, the evolved version of the univariate marginal distribution algorithm (UMDA) is a type of estimation of distribution algorithms and has been widely applied to various optimization problems.

In dynamic environments, an attractor draws individuals toward the promising region of the optimum. However, when the problem changes in a dynamic environment, the subsequent optimal solution may move away from x*(t) at the end of generation t. In order to find the new optimal solution, the algorithm must increase diversity and explore a new space distinct from the region represented by the current population. Thus, the promising region of the optimum is no longer near x*(t). If the environment changes at the end of generation t for the k-th time, the optimal solution of the current population, denoted by x*(t) (the optimal solution of generation t), is used in the following formula to generate a new individual xnew.

In dynamic environments, it is crucial for the optimization algorithm to continually track the moving optimum over time. In this paper, a novel algorithmic approach is proposed to address dynamic environments. The aim of this approach is to systematically enhance diversity following a change, which can be effective in predicting the new optimal position based on the previous optimal solution in a dynamic environment.