The paper's structure is as follows: Section 2 details user types and their competency questions. Section 3 outlines the key components of the ontology. Section 4 provides answers to the competency questions. Section 5 lists implicit information derived from the ontology. Finally, in Section 6, the paper concludes with a summary of the work and potential future research directions.

The second-level classes in the hierarchy are described using data properties, such as the user's name, last name, gender, and the title and date of a poster. Interoperability aspects related to the implementation of the OAI-PMH protocol and the DC elements are also represented as data properties, linking posters and users to data values from an XML schema datatype or an RDF literal.

In sum, while the ontology simplifies the addition of semantic information to a specific collection of data from an information repository, it effectively represents competency questions and their answers using its own terminology. Before release, all inconsistencies were resolved, and validation of logical consistency was conducted using the Hermit and Pellet reasoners. The ontology can be exported to various semantic web languages, such as RDF or the Ontology Web Language.

The ontology can help identify potential data inconsistencies. For example, cardinality restrictions can be incorporated to specify the minimum, exact, or maximum number of authors for each poster. Such ontologies, as described in this paper, can also represent collaborative work involving other types of documents based on the interests of potential users.

The paper utilized a list of competency questions that are addressed using the ontology's terminology in both natural language and formal answers. Natural language answers are stored as definitions in the RDF language, while formal answers are extracted from the usage dialogs in the Protégé ontology editor. Reasoners use the ontology information to infer new knowledge and identify potential data inconsistencies, thereby adding value to data from information repositories.