According to previous research, it appears that the actions and involvement of students are more significant than the content of the visualization. One effective method of engaging students with a visualization is through presenting them with prediction questions, which has been shown to have positive effects on learning. Building on the engagement taxonomy and the benefits of question answering during algorithm visualization, the authors propose incorporating automatic question generation into a program visualization tool, Jeliot 3. The paper details how this automatic question generation can be integrated into the current design of Jeliot 3, and provides examples of questions that could be automatically generated based on data obtained during the visualization process.

Jeliot 3 is a program visualization system designed to illustrate the execution of Java programs and support the teaching and learning of introductory programming. It visualizes the data and control flow of programs and has been found to benefit mid-performing students in a classroom study.

The authors propose allowing users to select variables or expression types that should generate questions, thereby enabling questions to be focused on specific concepts or parts of the program. Similar to related systems, such as Problets and WadeIn, the question generation, visualizations, and explanations in Jeliot 3 could be adapted based on user performance data. The authors have conducted preliminary work in this direction, which is described further in the paper.

The paper also discusses similarities and differences between the question generation in Jeliot 3 and the system developed by Kumar et al. called Problets, as well as the WadeIn II system. Future work includes implementing proposed question types, studying the usability of these questions, analyzing the effects of question answering on individual and collaborative learning of programming concepts, and testing how different types of questions support understanding of programs and programming learning. Additionally, the authors plan to use the feature in distance education as part of summative evaluation.