The skip-connection structures in rfcn-resnet and rfcn-densenet are predetermined, based on the definitions of resnet and densenet. However, many neural network architectures are manually designed, which may not be optimal for addressing diverse scientific problems. To address this, we propose a new variant called randomly-wired residual fully-connected neural network (rrfcn), which employs neural architecture search (nas) to generate and identify the most suitable residual fully-connected neural architecture for any given genomic profiling problem. With rrfcn, researchers can discover novel rfcn architectures to tackle their scientific challenges.

For densenet, the default block structure is set to [2, 3, 4, 3, 4, 5], while the growth rate of neurons in each block defaults to [8, 16, 32, 64, 128, 256, 512]. The drop-out ratio of the first layer compared with the input layer is selected from [0.6, 0.8, 1.0]. On the other hand, rrfcn employs a fully-connected layer to adapt the input for modeling genomic data. It combines the outputs of different layers through concatenation, with the number of layers fixed at 6 and the number of neurons in the first layer set in the JSON file (defaulting to 2048). The search space includes the number of neurons from the 2nd layer to the last layer (selected from [16, 32, 64, 128, 256, 512, 1024, 2048]) and the connection relationship between different layers.

The field of biomedical research heavily relies on genomic profiling data, and the use of machine learning methods to predict and interpret this data is increasingly prevalent. However, existing methods have limitations, necessitating the development of new neural network architectures that parallel advancements in computer vision, natural language processing, and speech processing. In comparison to the widely used mlp architecture, rfcn offers several advantages, including its capability to train deeper neural networks, improve feature propagation, encourage feature reuse, and generate new rfcn architectures. Autogenome has simplified the utilization of rfcn for researchers in their investigations.