The primary objective of this paper is to introduce a reliable method for integrating two monotone hybrid logics. This work can be seen as an extension of both the topological semantics for hybrid logic by ten Cate and Litak (2007) and the bi-hybrid logic of products of Kripke frames by Sano (2010). Initially, the paper generalizes the concept of the product of topologies (Van Benthem et al., 2006) to monotone neighborhood frames and introduces two types of nominals, denoted as 'i' (e.g., representing a moment of time) and 'a' (e.g., representing a spatial point). Corresponding satisfaction operators '@i' and '@a' are introduced to describe a product of monotone neighborhood frames. Subsequently, five interaction axioms are presented, and a general completeness result called "pure completeness" of bi-hybrid logic of monotone neighborhood frames is established. Building on this, a pure completeness result of bi-hybrid logic of products of topologies is also established.

Additionally, the authors propose a method of combining two topological modal logics based on topological semantics for modal logic as studied by McKinsey and Tarski. Moreover, they demonstrate that the fusion of two s4s is complete concerning the product of two rational lines, while Kremer showed that this fusion is incomplete concerning the product of two real lines. To date, there has been no investigation into the weaker notion of the product of neighborhood frames (for neighborhood semantics of modal logic, the reader can refer to...).

An important aspect of this paper is introducing the idea of naming lines using two types of nominals, as opposed to the conventional approach of naming points in hybrid logic. This concept enables the extension of the pure completeness result to two-dimensional Kripke semantics. The paper retains this key feature for two-dimensional neighborhood or topological semantics and investigates its potential to yield the corresponding general completeness result. Consequently, the authors demonstrate the robustness of the idea of naming lines for achieving completeness.