The use of remote sensing data is closely associated with geochemistry and possesses characteristics of big data, including scalability, automation potential, velocity, and coverage rate. Remote sensing data has already shown utility for various geoscientific tasks. Extracting secondary geochemical data from remote sensing data could imbue the secondary data with similar big data characteristics. However, this is challenging due to complications arising from overburden, variable terrain, the scale of application, and ambiguity of inversion outcomes. Additionally, remote sensing data inversion generally pertains to mineral species rather than elemental composition. To address this, a method was developed by Zhang et al. (2023) that utilized geostatistical data augmentation and machine learning to invert remote sensing data into geochemical data. This was prototyped using data from a tailing storage facility (TSF), demonstrating the ability of various machine learning algorithms to generate usable models.

In this study, we deploy the method developed by Zhang et al. (2023) and demonstrate its applicability across space, leveraging the understanding that Witwatersrand tailings exhibit consistency in mineral composition. By selecting a TSF similar to that in Zhang et al. (2023), we ensure the presence of mineral assemblages and traditional geochemical data. We compare temporal predictions of gold grade with a geostatistical model and showcase the effectiveness of big geochemical data for online resource assessment, environmental monitoring, and other purposes by observing changes in the distribution of gold in the TSF and relating those changes with existing knowledge.

We did not rely on geochemical data from the studied TSF for training purposes, as the erosion of TSFs causes constant dispersal of fine dust, potentially leading to contamination of surrounding areas and spectral signatures associated with the tailing material. Therefore, our analysis is constrained to the area inside the TSF.

To assess the feasibility of our predicted resource concentration maps using remote sensing data and machine learning, we qualitatively and quantitatively compare the predicted maps with a geostatistical model constructed using borehole data only, as grab-sample data were unavailable. This comparision illustrates the effectiveness of our method in generating high-resolution and representative predictions of the TSF condition. We utilize the same supervised learning algorithms as Zhang et al. (2023) in our deployment study, namely the k-nearest neighbours (knn), random forest (rf), and adaptive boosting of decision trees (ab) algorithms.

We observe a depletion pattern in the TSF, attributed to drainage and known extraction activities. The temporal changes in gold grade are visualized using a movie created by linearly interpolating between multiple images, demonstrating the ability of our method to capture surficial changes in the TSF.

The study's most significant contribution lies in demonstrating the utility of big geochemical data for monitoring processes in a TSF, wherein the derived geochemical data surpass the spatial and temporal resolution of traditional geochemical surveys. The response rate of our method depends on the imaging frequency and can identify both natural processes and anthropogenic activities in the TSF.

We extend our gratitude to Sibanye-Stillwater for providing the geochemical data used in training various machine learning algorithms, as well as to Prof. Kunfeng Qiu and Dr. Hua Wang for their valuable contributions to this manuscript.