For the purpose of this presentation, we will assume n=3 throughout the remainder of the paper, although it should be noted that our results can be adapted to any n. In Section 9, we will discuss the computational experiments conducted for games with more than two followers.

We demonstrate that the leader's first action can be disregarded in the game (u4, u f1, u f2) if and only if the game (u1, u2) has a mixed-strategy Nash equilibrium (NE) yielding a utility of m for the players, indicating that determining whether the leader's first action can be discarded is NP-hard. If the leader plays their first action, they receive a utility of 1/4. If the leader plays their second action, the followers play the best NE for the leader, which can be either (i) the pure-strategy NE where both followers play their last action, providing the leader with a utility of 0, or (ii) if it exists, the mixed-strategy NE providing the leader with a utility of 1. For any mixed strategy of the leader, the behavior of the followers remains unchanged compared to the case where the leader plays their second action as a pure strategy. Hence, under an optimistic LFNE, the leader plays a pure strategy: their first action if (u1, u2) does not admit a mixed-strategy NE and their second action if it does. The leader's first action can therefore be safely discarded if and only if (u1, u2) admits a mixed-strategy NE providing the players with a utility of m.

Throughout this section, the results of our experiments are compared in terms of computing time (in seconds) and the (multiplicative) optimality gap for both values. We report the arithmetic average for each game class and value of m and n over the 10 corresponding instances. In all the boxplots presented, the red dash indicates the median, the box extends from the 25th to the 75th percentile, and dotted lines denote the whole sample distribution. Outliers are highlighted with a red mark.

We compare the lower bound (corresponding to the best feasible solution) and the smallest upper bound found by the solver within the time limit. The min operator prevents an unbounded value for lb=0. An optimality gap of 105 indicates that the method fails to produce a useful solution, as any strategy of the leader can achieve, at least, a utility of 0 due to the payoffs being in the range [0, 100].

Our results suggest that the formulation solved most efficiently by each solver is o-nf-lmfm-i with Baron and o-nf-lmfm-iii with SCIP. These findings align with the general computational behavior of Baron and SCIP, as the former tends to exhibit better performance on highly nonlinear and mostly continuous problems, whereas the latter becomes more efficient as the number of integer/binary variables of the problem increases.