The aim of this research was to evaluate the potential protective effects of blackberry juice (BBJ) on neurological disorders and oxidative stress induced by simultaneous exposure to aluminum chloride (AlCl3) and sodium fluoride (NaF) in male albino rats. Administration of either AlCl3 (200 mg/kg bw) or NaF (10 mg/kg bw), or both, resulted in a significant increase in serum and brain lipid levels (tl, tc, tg), as well as serum LDL cholesterol and VLDL cholesterol levels, while serum HDL cholesterol level decreased significantly. Furthermore, levels of brain neurotransmitters (dopamine and 5-hydroxytryptamine), acetylcholinesterase, Na-K ATPase activity, and ATP were significantly decreased, but norepinephrine levels were increased in rats administered Al or F alone or in combination. Additionally, there was a significant increase in brain malondialdehyde (MDA), nitric oxide (NO), hydrogen peroxide (H2O2), and the free radical enzyme xanthine oxidase (XO), with a significant decrease in levels of total antioxidant capacity, superoxide dismutase (SOD), and reduced glutathione (GSH) in AlCl3 or NaF intoxicated rats. Furthermore, the levels of serum sodium, calcium, copper, and zinc were significantly reduced, while the level of potassium was significantly increased. However, AlCl3 seemed to exacerbate the neurotoxic effects caused by NaF. In contrast, the administration of BBJ (1.6 g/kg bw) demonstrated a significant neuroprotective effect against the biochemical abnormalities and oxidative stress induced by co-exposure to AlCl3 and NaF. Thus, it can be concluded that the consumption of BBJ may be beneficial in alleviating neurological disorders and oxidative stress associated with concurrent exposure to AlCl3 and NaF, indicating its free radical scavenging and potent antioxidant activity.

Following a two-week acclimation period, the rats were divided into eight groups, each comprising six rats. Group 1 served as an untreated control. Group 2 received oral BBJ at a dose of 1.6 g/kg bw. Group 3 (AlCl3) received oral AlCl3 dissolved in distilled water at a dose of 200 mg/kg bw. Group 4 (NaF) received oral NaF dissolved in water at a dose of 10 mg/kg bw. The reduced activity of lipoprotein lipase enzymes may be attributed to hepatic dysfunction, which appears to be a critical factor responsible for the increase in serum triglycerides and cholesterol. These enzymes may be inhibited by aluminum or fluoride, for example unspecific esterase, triglyceride lipase, and pyrophosphatase. The abnormalities in the lipoprotein profile may result from the reduced removal of low-density lipoprotein (LDL) and VLDL from circulation, coupled with uncontrolled production of VLDL by the liver. Furthermore, the significant changes in brain catecholamine neurotransmitters (DA, 5-HT, and NE) in the intoxicated rats may be attributed to the

Furthermore, this study revealed that the elevated levels of MDA, H2O2, NO, and XO in the brains of AlCl3 or NaF intoxicated rats indicate high levels of oxidative stress and free radical generation. Additionally, the decreased antioxidant levels of TAC, SOD, and GSH reduced the capacity to scavenge high levels of reactive oxygen species (ROS) in the brain. It is well established that the overproduction of ROS causes the oxidation of macromolecules, resulting in free radical attacks on phospholipids in the membrane, leading to membrane damage through mechanisms such as lipid peroxidation, mitochondrial membrane depolarization, and apoptosis. Furthermore, membrane lipid peroxidation could disrupt the anatomical integrity of the membrane.

Blackberry fruits are known for their high antioxidant capacity and are considered a rich source of polyphenols with potential to improve short-term memory performance in animal studies. Blackberry is considered an important source of metabolites with neuroprotective properties. Metabolites from digested blackberries can protect neuronal cells against oxidative damage, which is a critical mechanism of neurodegeneration, by activating cellular stress response pathways such as GSH modulation, reduction of ROS production, and caspase activation. The observed improvement of most examined biomarkers, including oxidative stress, endogenous antioxidant systems, neurotransmitters, and electrolyte levels, supports this finding. The current anti-peroxidation and antioxidant activity of BBJ may be attributed to its various functional antioxidant constituents, such as flavonoids (anthocyanins), vitamins (A, B complex, E, and C), minerals (Na, K, Ca, Zn, Se, and P), phenolic polymers (ellagic acids), and phenolic acids (ferulic, p-coumaric, caffeic, and gallic). Anthocyanins, the active component in BBJ, and their derivatives employ different mechanisms to protect against a variety of oxidants. They can combat the hydroxyl radical-generating system, a major source of oxidants in the body, and protect cellular membrane lipids from oxidation, as well as membrane-bound enzymes and amino acids such as tyrosine from peroxynitrite, a highly reactive oxidant. Additionally, it is expected that anthocyanins and non-anthocyanin phenolics in blackberries act additively or synergistically to produce the observed beneficial changes via their ability to act as antioxidants and/or pro-oxidants in various biological environments. Moreover, the protective effect of BBJ may be due to the synergistic antioxidant effect of both vitamins E and C in ameliorating oxidative stress and cell degeneration; when vitamin E attacks free radicals, it converts into a vitamin E radical, which then acts as a chelating agent and returns to its antioxidant state using vitamin C.

In conclusion, the administration of blackberry juice during exposure to fluoride and aluminum may be recommended for reverting brain oxidative stress and neurological disorders, as well as modulation of antioxidant defense mechanisms. The observed beneficial effect of BBJ is likely due to the synergistic antioxidant capacity of its various nutritional constituents. However, the fractionation and bioavailability of the main constituents of blackberry responsible for the antioxidant activity will be an important area for future research.