The second category-theoretic expression of universal algebra, using monads, has a more intricate history and is less widely accepted among universal algebraists. Monads typically arise from adjoint pairs of functors. The concept of monad first emerged in algebraic topology for reasons unrelated to universal algebra. In 1965, Eilenberg and Moore observed that when T is the free group monad, the category of T-algebras is equivalent to the category of groups.

One approach to dualizing the theory of Lawvere theories involves defining a comodel of a Lawvere theory L in Set as a model of L in Setop. This line of thinking has proven to be valuable for category theorists, computer scientists, and universal algebraists. The category of comodels induces a comonad and represents the category of coalgebras for the induced comonad on Set, but this approach does not encompass transition systems.

A slight discrepancy exists between the traditions of universal algebra and category theory. Some universal algebraists only consider non-empty models. For instance, a category theorist might view the empty set as the carrier for the structure of a semigroup, whereas some universal algebraists might not. The empty semigroup is significant for a category theorist as it is the initial object in the category of semigroups.

This appears to be the most straightforward generalization of a clone to abstract categories. It closely resembles the definition in universal algebra, except for the fact that the composition under which the clones must be closed is expressed using tuplings. In particular, when C = Set, this definition aligns with the notion of a clone as studied in universal algebra.

The differing levels of generality of the concepts of monads and Lawvere theories extend to the relationship between (generalized) Lawvere theories and monads. Monads can be considered on any category, whereas Lawvere theories correspond to (finitary) monads on Set. Additionally, a monad on a category C only has algebras, i.e., models, in C, while a Lawvere theory naturally has models in any category with products. Therefore, while monad maps between monads on Set correspond directly to maps of Lawvere theories, there is no immediate equivalent in the world of monads to the functoriality of mod(L, C) in C.