Duck virus enteritis (DVE), also known as duck plague (DP), is a severe and highly contagious disease that is highly lethal to birds of all ages from the anseriformes group, including ducks, geese, and swans. Since the initial discovery of DVE in domestic ducks in 1923, numerous outbreaks have been recorded in various countries, posing a significant threat to the global commercial duck industry. The causative agent of DVE is the duck enteritis virus (DEV), a member of the subfamily Alphaherpesvirinae that has not been categorized into any specific genus.

This paper analyzed the codon usage bias in the ul21 gene of DEV and compared it with that of 27 other herpesviruses. Additionally, the codon usage bias of the DEV ul21 gene was compared with that of Escherichia coli, yeast, and humans. These analyses may serve as a reference for future studies of the ul21 gene.

The codon adaptation index (CAI) was used as a measure of the overall synonymous codon usage bias of genes. The CAI value, which ranges from 0 to 1.0, indicates stronger codon usage bias as it approaches 1.0. Genes that are highly expressed typically correspond to high CAI values. The CAI values of the DEV ul21 gene and related herpesviruses ranged from 0.613 to 0.768, with an average value of 0.681, suggesting that the ul21 gene is a lowly expressed gene in the DEV genome. Furthermore, the standard deviation of the CAI value, at 0.0579, indicates minimal variation in codon usage patterns among different herpesvirus ul21 genes.

To determine whether there are differences in the synonymous codon usage bias of the ul21 gene among different strains of DEV, the ul21 gene of DEV strain was compared with that of DEV strain vac and DEV ul21like strain. Interestingly, there was little to no difference in the codon usage bias parameters of the ul21 gene as indicated by effective number of codons (ENC) and coding GC content. This suggests that there is little variation in the codon usage pattern of the ul21 gene among different strains of DEV.

In summary, it can be concluded that the ul21 gene of DEV is lowly expressed and exhibits weak codon usage bias. This work also provides a basic understanding of the evolution of the herpesvirus ul21 gene and predicts an effective expression system for the DEV ul21 gene, which may inform future studies of the ul21 gene.