A product line's scope defines the set of features that are common to all the associated models. Unlike the bottom-up approach of assigning sets of models to the nodes of a product line description, the scope associated with each node can be constructed in a top-down manner. The root node contains features common to all variants of the product line, and any other alternative further includes features associated with alternatives higher in the tree structure of the product line description. Variation points do not aggregate additional features, so their scope is the same as that of their corresponding super-alternatives.

To represent commonalities and differences between alternatives at a diagrammatic level, a separation of concern based on the scopes of alternatives is introduced. The scope of an alternative specifies the features common to all models within that alternative, allowing diagrammatic descriptions to be limited to those features. Additionally, the scopes of a product line description form a semi-lattice congruent with the description's structure, classifying features based on their accessibility, visibility, and invisibility.

Existing approaches either focus solely on modeling variability aspects without integrating domain-specific aspects, or only focus on domain-specific aspects, neglecting variability aspects. In contrast, the proposed approach integrates both aspects into a precisely defined common model, allowing for the direct description of dependencies between variability constraints at the domain level.

Instead of just identifying product lines, the proposed approach introduces a canonical extension of conceptual domain models, incorporating the resulting possibilities for incorporating variability. While similar approaches explicitly link variability and domain concepts, these links are introduced at an informal level or in form of presence conditions, without utilizing an explicit integrated conceptual model or a view-based construction process on the diagrammatic level that supports immediate application of domain-specific consistency conditions.
