In a verification context, it is common to express verification conditions using a many-sorted framework. Recently, the Nelson-Oppen method has been redefined and demonstrated to be accurate in an order-sorted framework. For the sake of simplicity, we will operate within a basic many-sorted framework, utilizing disjoint sorts (i.e., without subsorts).

An i-theory 't' in the union 'l' of disjoint languages 'l1' and 'l2' can be viewed as the amalgamation of two disjoint i-theories: the restrictions 'ti' of 't' to each language 'li', meaning the set of all restrictions to 'li' of interpretations in 't'. However, it is more practical to define the union of i-theories as follows:

Theorem 2.1: Let i-theory '7' in language 'l' be the union of i-theories '71' and '72' in disjoint languages 'l1' and 'l2'. For each sort, either '71' or '72' is adaptable. Let 'l' be a set of literals on 'l', and let ('l1', 'l2') be a separation of 'l' according to 'l1' and 'l2'. Let 'v' be the set of common variables in 'l1' and 'l2'.

The empty first-order theory in a language 'l' defines the i-theory in which every constant, predicate, and function is uninterpreted, and no constraints are imposed on the domains. This i-theory is referred to as the uninterpreted i-theory. Although it is the simplest one, it is nevertheless important as it permits uninterpreted predicates and functions to be added to the language of a decidable i-theory.

There are three obvious sorts: indices (i, j), arrays (a, b), and elements (e), but some sorts may be combined. It is reasonable and cautious to consider that the sort of arrays is distinct from the sorts of elements and indices. However, in numerous practical cases, it may be beneficial to note that the previous theorem does not imply that the i-theory of arrays is incompatible if the array sort is a common sort. It simply indicates that if the array sort is a common sort, then the other i-theory must possess a desirable property to guarantee compatibility. For example, the array sort can be the sort of elements for another array i-theory. Moreover, the i-theory of arrays is compatible with the uninterpreted i-theory, even if both languages contain the sort of arrays.

This new presentation of the Nelson-Oppen combination scheme improves the classical scheme in two ways. Firstly, it deals with i-theories, arbitrary sets of interpretations that do not necessarily correspond to first-order theories. This enhancement allows for direct handling of, for instance, the linear arithmetic i-theories for 'x', with the arithmetic i-theory on 'y', or with i-theories having only finite domains of unbounded size, as used, for example, in proof obligations issued in the context of verification of parameterized systems. Any quantifier-free decidable first-order language with interpreted functions and predicates corresponds to an i-theory that perfectly describes it.

Stably infinite, the second enhancement in this presentation is the combination of non-stably infinite i-theories, following the many-sorted framework, which enables the practical combination of non-stably infinite i-theories with the i-theory corresponding to the empty theory, and with the (i-)theory of arrays.