In this context, it is extremely important for the pilot to develop situational awareness (SA) that is not specific to a particular type of aircraft and mission but can be applied across various types of aircraft systems. Many researchers have recognized the crucial role of attention in SA, for example, Schriver et al. investigated the behavior of pilots with differing experience levels and found results that support the link between increased attention and more effective decision-making in aviation pilots. Carretta recently confirmed that attention is one of the factors consistently associated with flying performance in a study of the pilot candidate selection method (PCSM), while King et al. demonstrated that cognitive functioning tests, which include attention, can predict training outcomes.

Prior work has shown that computerized tests are well-suited for assessing pilot aptitude and, specifically, for measuring attention factors. Despite the availability of various computerized instruments to measure attention, to the best of our knowledge, none of these instruments were specifically designed and tested for aviation pilots with validation results published in the scientific literature. Additionally, commercially available computerized tests for aviation pilots typically measure attention indirectly, for example, via simplified flight maneuver simulations, which involve multiple factors simultaneously and do not provide a specific attentional profile that can highlight a candidate pilot's strengths and weaknesses. However, evidence supports the notion that both attention control and the ability to improve attention management can be developed through training.

Given the limited resources for training (e.g., aircraft or certified simulators), selection processes are of fundamental importance and aim to prefer candidates who show the highest potential for success.

The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the test battery and details the software implementation. Section 3 reports and discusses the experimental results of the empirical validation of the proposed instrument through a trial involving 50 experienced aviation pilots and 50 untrained individuals as a control group. Finally, Section 4 presents the conclusions.

The test of simple reaction measures a purely psycho-physiological attention, providing a useful baseline for the analysis of subsequent tests. It is composed of two parts: the first part (1a) presents the visual stimulus in the central part of the screen, stimulating the use of focused vision, while in the second part (1b), the same stimulus is presented randomly in one of the four corners of the screen to activate far-peripheral vision only.

In the second task, which is the real test of interference, words indicating a color appear filled with a different color (e.g., "red" in blue). The subject should ignore the automatic recognition of the word's meaning and press the button corresponding to the color in which the word is filled (i.e., in this example, blue).

The experimental study was conducted in computer rooms, where the battery was administered to several subjects simultaneously. All subjects were in good health, rested, and comfortably seated in front of a computer monitor at a distance such that the monitor coincided with the peripheral area of their vision. To avoid auditory interference, all subjects wore headsets throughout the test. Before each session, a collective briefing was conducted to address general questions about the test battery.

The paper presents a battery of seven tests specifically designed for assessing the attention factors of aviation pilots. The battery was implemented in computer software and validated through an experimental trial with 50 experienced aviation pilots and 50 untrained individuals as controls. T-test analysis showed the potential of all the tests in the battery to distinguish between untrained individuals and experienced aviation pilots, while discriminant analysis confirmed the validity of the battery as an instrument that can effectively measure all the distinctive attention factors characterizing aviation pilots. Finally, stepwise discriminant analysis identified several attention factors that can be used to assist in selecting candidate aviation pilots and tailor their training.

In practice, the software presented in the paper allows for establishing a benchmark for a distinctive cognitive function of aviation pilots. Candidate pilots can be assessed against this benchmark, and the results, along with other psychoattitudinal tests, can be used to select the most promising candidates. The results demonstrate that the battery of tests addresses all the distinctive attention factors of aviation pilots, as they significantly differ from those of the control group, and are sufficient for efficient discrimination between the two groups. Furthermore, the software generates an attention profile of the candidate, which can be used to train those factors not fully developed at the aviation pilot level. This computer software is currently being used in the evaluation of candidate pilots in several flight schools, where it is integrated with standard selection protocols and employed to develop personalized training programs.