The most appropriate form of description logic with the widest range of applications for any particular domain is considered to be constructive description logic, as discussed. It is sensible to consider versions of constructive description logics from both theoretical and practical perspectives. There are various feasible approaches to defining constructive description logics, whether the motivation is for natural language semantics or legal AI.

Description logics typically come in families of logical systems, depending on the concept constructors allowed in the logic. They originated to strike a balance between expressiveness and tractability of the fragment, thereby resulting in several systems. Among these, the one known as ALC (Attributive Language with Complements) has become the canonical system. The fundamental components of description logics are concepts, roles, and individuals, with concepts similar to unary predicates in first-order logic and roles as binary predicates used to modify concepts. 

In relation to constructive description logics, a compelling system called CALC has been developed by Mendler and Scheele, based on constructive modal logic CK. Alternatively, in this paper, a constructive version of ALC, named IALC, is described based on the framework for constructive modal logics developed by Simpson (system IK) in his PhD thesis. The practical application of this system could be in legal AI, with a view to developing prototypes for legal AI systems, as indicated by Hausler, who is involved in this project.

The use of an intuitionistic logic in legal reasoning is important for expressing partiality and incomplete information, going beyond the standard open world assumption. The constructive version of undefinedness in such a logic permits intrinsic refinement of concepts, which is context dependent. This contrasts with the static assumption of classical description logics, which assumes a binary truth interpretation for concepts. It remains to be seen whether the constructive approach will retain the key features that have made description logics useful so far.

In addition to further investigating the relationship between systems based on IK and CK, especially their semantic counterparts, there is an interest in implementing a framework that allows the construction of proofs in three systems: IALC, IK, and IHL. The primary envisaged application for the system is in knowledge engineering of juridical systems, as Hausler leads a project on this topic. The potential success of the project will only become apparent as it progresses, to verify whether the initial ideas on the simplicity of modeling and ease of implementation are viable.