Effective irrigation management in urban areas of arid and semi-arid environments is crucial, and it relies on accurate estimation of reference evapotranspiration (ETO). When using standard Penman-Monteith methods for ETO estimation, urban areas often lack sufficient measured climatic data. Consequently, smart landscape irrigation controllers commonly utilize temperature-based ETO models for autonomous irrigation scheduling. This research is focused on the development of deep learning temperature-based ETO models and the evaluation of their performance in comparison to widely used empirical temperature-based models, such as FAO Blaney & Criddle (BC) and Hargreaves & Samani (HS). Additionally, a user-friendly tool called DeepET was created for ETO estimation using the most effective deep learning models developed in this study. The study utilized four artificial neural network (ANN) models, including ones using raw weather data and the reconstructed signal obtained from wavelet transform as inputs. Furthermore, long short-term memory (LSTM) recurrent neural network and one-dimensional convolution neural network (CNN) models were developed. The research utilized data from 101 active California Irrigation Management Information System (CIMIS) weather stations, considering the aridity index and geographic data for performance assessment of the models.

The study also explored deep learning models with additional input variables, such as relative humidity (RH) and wind speed (U), to compare their performance. TensorFlow and the Adam optimization algorithm were used to train the deep learning models, leveraging the most effective weights and biases for testing. Among the deep learning models, one model incorporated inputs of daily minimum, maximum, and average temperature, relative humidity, wind speed, and global solar radiation, while the other model utilized only daily minimum, maximum, and average temperature, and global solar radiation.

The HS model was considered a true temperature-based model due to its ability to estimate extraterrestrial solar radiation based on location and time of the year. Nevertheless, daily ETO anomalies were found to be strongly correlated with net radiation anomalies, relative humidity, and cloud cover, as well as less correlated with average daily air temperature. The temperature difference used in the HS model was identified as an indirect measure of cloud cover and relative humidity at a specific location. Overall, the study provides valuable insights into the development and assessment of temperature-based deep learning ETO models for efficient irrigation management in urban landscapes of arid and semi-arid environments.