The radon transform is based on the principles of integrating along straight lines through an object. In the continuous space, the radon projective transformation has an inversion formula that allows for close approximation of the shape of an arbitrary object given a sufficiently representative set of discrete, sampled projections (e.g., x-ray transmission profiles) of that object. The discrete radon transform (DRT) operates on arbitrary objects embedded in a discrete space rather than continuous space. Beylkin developed a general definition for the DRT, including an exact algebraic formalism for the discrete projection and inversion process, and established a connection between the DRT and the discrete Fourier transform. The addition of curved path projections is essential when inverting projections from seismic imaging. Beylkin also anticipated the implementation of filtering and other spatial operations in 2D or higher spaces through computation of these properties in the DRT space. The DRT is closely related to discrete representations of straight lines used for a discretised version of the Hough transform.

The DRT properties are demonstrated in a 2D example. The conventional DRT operates on prime-sized arrays and was developed for projecting the discrete elements (pixels) of digital images. When considering real, discrete atomic systems rather than digital images, the value at each array site may be interpreted in several ways, such as a numeric property of the array at that point (e.g., local electron density), a label denoting the type of atomic species at each site, or a binary value for filled/vacant lattice sites.

The digital image, the digital projection, and the digital projection of the same object are related in a 1:1 and invertible manner. Information about the image is distributed non-uniformly across the set of digital projections. The link between the image and the projection is not unique, but the projection can be made sufficiently representative to closely approximate the original object.

The ym values, as denominators in equations 2 and 4, produce cycles of length mod(ym) in the terms contributing to each d2 value. For instance, the hexagonal solutions for d2= 19 have ym= 2, 3, and 5, resulting in a net periodicity of f(19) as a function of p equal to 30. For p= 408, the 32 values of m contributing to d2= 289= 172 include 16 degenerate pairs of m values corresponding to xm: ym= 17: 17, generated because 17 is a prime factor of 408.