This paper affirms the introduction of directed bigraphs that encompass and extend prior theories. A directed bigraph comprises a place graph and a directed link graph, representing a natural generalization of input-linear and output-linear link graphs. The model provides a construction of RPOs (and IPOs) that extends and unifies previous constructions in the aforementioned models. Notably, the IPO construction for input-linear bigraphs obtained in this manner appears to be the first one, to the best of our knowledge. Furthermore, due to the self-duality of the (pre)category of directed link graphs, the RPO construction can be applied.

Directed link graphs can alternatively be defined as the composition of an input-linear link graph and an output-linear link graph defined on the same support, as proposed by R. Milner. Notably, this requires the partitioning of control ports into two subsets: those utilized in the input-linear link graph and those utilized in the output-linear link graph, thereby assigning a specific direction (upward or downward) to the connections. This approach automatically ensures the constraint that two names of the same interface cannot be linked together.

Concerning the calculation of locally universal hexagons (LUXEs), it is observed that DLGs do not contain all LUXEs, although they do contain RPOs and RPBs. In fact, it is demonstrated that an hexagon whose RPO and RPB do not commute can easily be constructed, as per the result in [5, theorem 1].

Furthermore, an RPO construction in "ILG" can be derived by recognizing that input-linear link graphs correspond to input-linear cospans over a specific adhesive category "LGraph" of hypergraphs. Consequently, the general RPO construction presented in the aforementioned location of citation (and detailed therein) can be applied. For the sake of a more direct comparison with the constructions in "DLG" and "OLG" (and to circumvent the introduction of 2-categorical machinery), a tailored version of this construction is presented in this paper, specifically tailored to the precategory "ILG."

In future work, the authors plan to employ directed bigraphs for representing certain calculi of interest, particularly those involving resources, locations, etc., which can be denoted by edges. It is anticipated that this framework will yield wide transition systems in these cases, offering interesting prospects for further investigation.