The label of a node is formed by combining the label of its parent node with its own label. For any two nodes u and v, node u is considered an ancestor of node v if the label of u is a prefix of the label of v. There are two prefix schemes: one based on integers and another based on binary strings. Wu et al. introduced a novel approach to labeling XML trees using prime numbers, where the label of a node is determined by the product of its parent's label and its own label. For any two nodes u and v, u is considered an ancestor of v if the label of u is divisible by the label of v (i.e., l(u) % l(v) = 0, where % denotes the modulus operator).

Definition 2 (Divisible Property): An integer a is not divisible by another integer b if a has a prime factor that is not a prime factor of b. This property can be applied to graph nodes, such that for any two nodes u and v in a directed acyclic graph (DAG) with labels l(u) and l(v), node u is an ancestor of node v if and only if l(u) is divisible by l(v). Conversely, if l(u) is not divisible by l(v), then u is not an ancestor of v, or there is no reachability.

Proof: If u is not an ancestor of v, then the label l(v) assigned to node v is a factor of the label l(u) assigned to node u. Assuming that u is not an ancestor of v, let pv be the unique prime number associated with node v. Since l(u) % l(v) = 0, we must have l(u) % pv = 0. As pv is unique to v and was not associated with u during the initialization step, pv must have propagated from one of the child nodes v1 of u, and so on. This leads to the conclusion that there must be a path from u to v, thus proving the hypothesis.

In the context of linked XML data, the Internet Movie Database (IMDb) is used as a real-life example. The IMDb dataset consists of a list of movies with unique identifiers, the actors and their roles, directors, and other key contributors. IMDb was chosen due to its highly cyclic nature, which is likely to challenge path-indexing algorithms.

The linked XML documents are generated from a subset of movies selected randomly, with each document containing an xlink to the actors and director associated with the movie. The IMDb data is organized around movie elements and classes of people involved in movie credits, such as actors, directors, and composers. Cyclicity arises due to the relationships between movie elements and individuals who have participated in the movies, resulting in a dataset containing 40,211 nodes and 44,349 edges, with 2718 of these edges being of type idref.
