The work can be adapted to accommodate more general cell-to-cell relationships. Specifically, two general scenarios are considered. First, the varying number of cells at different time points may lead to the need for reusing cells when constructing cell-to-cell lineages, resulting in multiple lineages passing through a single cell at specific time points. Second, cells may exhibit different proliferation rates at the same time points, leading to varying proportions of cell groups across time. To address these general assumptions, the authors present a comprehensive discussion of their generalized methods and experimental results in the supplementary materials.

In simulation datasets for each time point, the authors included five identical cell types. In the simulation setting, the number of cells varied from 200 to 600, and the number of genes in one cell ranged from 100 to 500. Cell alignment and cell-to-cell correspondences were constructed using cellst based solely on the gene expression information of cells at each time point and no additional information.

When comparing the expression of cell fate trajectories with benchmark pathway expression patterns, it was observed that the trajectories illustrated consistent patterns with the benchmark expression of the simulated pathways over time, indicating the unique behaviors of cells over time. The cell fate trajectories were also found to predict the individual cell development behaviors by smoothing the constructed cell lineages to reduce cell-cell variance.

The results demonstrated that the cell fate trajectories and dynamic gene networks in the cellst method can be utilized to identify critical genes in a cell differentiation process. Additionally, the cellst cell fate trajectories were shown to cover different cell lineages, including rare cell types, and reflect unique gene expression patterns as cells develop into different mature cell types.

The findings of this study suggest that the methodologies used in this work can contribute to the understanding of the dynamics and regulators of cell fate decisions, as revealed by pseudotemporal ordering of single cells, as shown in previous works by Trapnell et al. (2014) and Liu et al. (2021).