This paper is organized as follows: Section 2 presents the power consumption and workflow models, formulates the workflow scheduling problem as a single-objective constrained problem. Section 3 introduces the energy-aware intelligent algorithm and Section 4 provides numerical validations of this algorithm. Finally, Section 5 concludes the paper and identifies two research directions for the future.

In this study, a solution is represented by two n-dimensional vectors. The first vector maps tasks to virtual machines, where an index represents a task and its value denotes the virtual machine for task execution. The second vector maps tasks to execution time, where an index represents a task and its value represents the task's execution time.

The energy-aware intelligent scheduling algorithm (EIS) is outlined in Algorithm 1, with inputs including workflow data, candidate resource pool, population size, and the maximum function evaluations as the stop condition. When EIS meets the stop condition, it outputs a scheduling solution with minimal energy consumption.

Two functions are defined to optimize the execution time of each task, which correspond to the second segment of the encoding solutions. These functions are detailed in Algorithm 2 and Algorithm 3, respectively. Based on mappings from workflow tasks to cloud resources and runtime, the proposed algorithm evaluates the energy consumption of each scheduling solution to generate an offspring population (line 7), and updates the number of function evaluations used (line 8).

The main difference between the non-slacktimeassignment (non-sta) variant and EIS is the absence of the function slacktimeassignment() in non-sta. The energy reduction achieved by EIS over non-sta can be attributed to the performance contribution of function slacktimeassignment(). Similarly, the energy reduction of EIS over non-itg corresponds to the performance contribution of function idletimegrab(). Comparison results on four workflows indicate that function slacktimeassignment() contributes more to energy saving. For example, on the workflow montage_100, function slacktimeassignment() leads to significant energy savings.