In fold-3 of the basin, the accuracy rates for predicting susceptibility to gully erosion were 6.05%, while in fold-4, the rates were 7%, 6.975%, and 6.42%. The evaluation of the susceptibility to gully erosion involved the use of receiver operating characteristics (ROC) curves and statistical techniques such as mean absolute error (MAE), root mean square error (RMSE), and the relative gully density area (R-index) methods. The results from these methods indicated that the models for susceptibility to gully erosion exhibited excellent predictive efficiency. The use of machine learning for simulation produced satisfactory results, which could be valuable for forecasting areas vulnerable to gully erosion.

Factors such as soil physical and chemical properties, as well as interactions involving electrical conductivity (EC) and the sodium adsorption ratio (SAR), can increase the sensitivity of soil to gully erosion. Moreover, these factors can impede the growth of vegetation in the soil. Previous studies have assessed gully erosion based on soil physio-chemical factors. However, it is crucial to integrate numerous environmental factors using appropriate methods for gully susceptibility erosion modeling (GESM) to protect the soil and water.

The k-fold cross-validation (CV) approach, including two-fold, three-fold, four-fold, etc., is commonly used for mapping various natural hazards. In this study, a four-fold cross-validation approach was employed. The primary data, such as soil samples and physiochemical properties of the study area, were collected through field surveys and laboratory analysis. Additionally, imagery, particularly high-resolution Google Earth images, was utilized to identify gullies in remote areas. Field surveys were also conducted to verify the locations and measure the dimensions of the gullies.

A random sub-space (RSS) classifier was used in this study, which is a hybrid ensemble and parallel learning algorithm. This approach involved the optimization of subsets through the combination of multiple decisions of the classifier. The classification was based on the four types of classification: true positive (TP), true negative (TN), false positive (FP), and false negative (FN), and the area under the curve of ROC (AUCROC) was calculated. The results showed that a very high susceptibility class for gully erosion was located in the catchment's northwest and middle parts, which was attributed to the concentration of lateritic soil and the presence of barren land.