Recent advancements in deep learning and computer vision have generated considerable interest within the agricultural sector, largely due to their non-destructive and contactless capabilities. These technologies are increasingly being integrated into modern farming systems, including aquaponics, to address the barriers to commercialization and large-scale adoption. Aquaponics, which combines recirculating aquaculture systems with soilless hydroponics agriculture, holds promise in addressing food security issues. To complement current research efforts, this study proposes a methodology for automatically measuring the morphological traits of crops, such as width, length, and area, and estimating the effective plant spacing between grow channels. Plant spacing is a crucial design parameter that depends on the crop type and its morphological traits, and therefore must be monitored to ensure high crop yield and quality. The proposed approach utilizes the mask-rcnn technique to estimate crop sizes and a mathematical model to determine plant spacing for a self-adaptive aquaponics farm. In the case of common little gem romaine lettuce, the growth is estimated with an error of only 2 cm for both length and width. The final model is deployed on a cloud-based application and integrated with an ontology model containing domain knowledge of the aquaponics system. The application functions as a decision support system, paving the way for intelligent system monitoring and control. This study makes a valuable contribution to the research community by proposing a new methodology to determine the morphological traits of lettuce crops in aquaponics facilities and assess plant spacing between grow channels. Furthermore, it employs the state-of-the-art mask-rcnn method for instance segmentation to estimate morphological attributes in the study. Instance segmentation, a computer vision task for detecting and localizing objects in images, is employed to identify boundaries at a detailed pixel level. Following data collection, object detection and instance segmentation are performed on crop images to achieve class, mask, and bounding box values for lettuce foliage. The study uses the mask-rcnn technique, which is a cutting-edge method in the field of object segmentation. By using instance segmentation, the study successfully calculates the foliage area of two lettuce plants by extracting features from their predicted masks. The proposed approach targets the development of a self-adaptive aquaponics system, where grow channels can adjust their positions based on crop morphological attributes to ensure high crop yield and quality by avoiding occlusions and foliage overlapping. The mask-rcnn algorithm is utilized to enable fine-grained detection of lettuce foliage within images and the generation of pixel-wise segmentation masks for each detected instance. These masks distinguish foliage from the background and provide a mechanism to identify non-foliage classes, such as channel and rockwool cubes, by considering their high heterogeneity in form and texture. The study emphasizes the time-consuming and labor-intensive nature of manually measuring morphological traits and hence proposes an automated method to estimate the morphological traits of lettuce foliage that vary in size and shape. Plant spacing, a key feature that impacts crop growth, is automatically measured for each segmented foliage using a mathematical model in the study. The final model, accurate and flexible, is deployed on a cloud-based application and integrated with the ontology model to provide information about crop characteristics and grow bed design parameters for a variety of crops grown in NFT-based aquaponics. The application, functioning as a decision support system, compares the results from the models with relevant knowledge from the ontology model and suggests final actions by sending a control signal to the aquaponics facility for automatically adjusting the grow channels based on the predicted value of plant spacing. This empirical contribution has great significance for the research community, as it promotes the implementation of a self-adaptive aquaponics system that can be continually improved using dynamic data. Furthermore, the methods offered in the study provide opportunities to rely on smart technologies for the application of new concepts, such as research on complex relationships between optimal parameters and detection of nutrient deficiency in crops using computer vision, which will pave the way for the large-scale implementation of aquaponics farming technology.