We introduce a method for analyzing component interfaces and defining a formal notion of implementation, which can be used for substitutability checks. The method is based on a semantics for the timed CSP-OZ language in terms of timed automata, or more precisely, timed transition systems. In situations where there is a finite number of states, timed automata model checkers like Kronos or Uppaal can be employed for verification purposes.

Building on this, we leverage the notion of implementation associated with timed automata for timed CSP-OZ, whereby the implementation relation for timed automata is defined as the inclusion of timed traces (language inclusion for words with time stamps). We define timed simulation conditions and demonstrate their soundness with respect to this relation, paving the way for a stepwise proof of implementation.

We then present an example of a timed CSP-OZ specification and explain its general idea as an illustration of the main results in the subsequent sections. Additionally, we provide a brief introduction to timed automata, define the semantics for timed CSP-OZ specifications in terms of timed automata, and show how to analyze interface specifications in timed CSP-OZ using the timed automata model checker Uppaal.

Moreover, we elaborate on how variables of type clock can be declared as attributes of classes and may appear in predicates within method schemas, and present an abstract specification of the interface of a watchdog component. Following this, we focus on the analysis of such specifications and the definition (as well as the checking) of an implementation relation between specifications, which could be used for substitutability checks. We discuss how our semantics enable the analysis of interface specifications and provide a method for checking language inclusion of timed CSP-OZ specifications.

In conclusion, we propose an extension of CSP-OZ with features for specifying timing constraints on components, which allows for a richer set of modeling facilities than timed automata. We also discuss simulation conditions for implementation relationships and highlight potential directions for future work, such as expanding the approach to the failures-divergences model of CSP and incorporating parallel composition and nondeterminism.