The rest of this paper is structured as follows: Section 2 provides a survey of existing and relevant literature on the authentication of IoT nodes using blockchain. Section 3 delves into the detailed explanation of the proposed framework. Finally, the paper concludes with the presentation of the simulation process and discussions in Section 4, followed by closing remarks.

Meanwhile, the authors have introduced a blockchain model based on hypergraphs. This model aims to minimize storage usage and address additional security concerns. In this model, the hyperedge serves as the organizer of storage nodes and converts the entire networked data storage into part network storage. The authors propose only two levels for the chain, with the application focused on data storage security, without addressing device authentication.

However, the proposed work utilizes existing blockchain technology to store and share public key values. It introduces a blockchain-based trust system to deter malicious data reporting parties in the network. The proposed application uses blockchain solely for data storage. Additionally, the authors present a module to detect and isolate malicious devices in IoT networks. They use the network-capable devices as blockchain clients to determine whether a device complies with the security parameters or not. Blockchain is used as a database to store the status of the IoT devices.

The authors also propose a blockchain-based access control module for medical IoT applications where medical data is shared and managed by smart contracts in a blockchain environment. Similarly, smart contracts in blockchain are used by the authors to authenticate and manage resource allocations within the IoT network. Both works utilize blockchain as a secure decentralized database accessible and managed by single points of access.

The proposed framework adopts a blockchain(nodeid), eliminating the need for a centralized key-generating service and providing anonymity to the nodes in the network. Notably, each node has two parameters - the public key of the node (nodeid) and the public key of the cluster head node (chid), based on the clustering process.

As described in Algorithm 3, the process is repeated for other nodes in other clusters in the network. Moreover, the same procedure is repeated for the chl1 and chl2 nodes in the networks to create a number of blockchains authenticating multiple levels of the network.

The proposed framework consists of two main components: the clustering mechanism to group IoT devices into clusters and the blockchain structure used for authenticating IoT devices in the network. The simulation and testing processes are conducted in two steps.

The hardware used includes two Raspberry Pi 3B+ devices with Broadcom BCM2837B0, Cortex-A53 64-bit SoC @ 1.4 GHz and 1GB of RAM running Raspberry Pi OS, a computer with a 1.8 GHz Intel dual-core CPU with 2GB of RAM running Ubuntu 18.04 LTS, and a laptop with an Intel i7-10510U CPU @ 1.80 GHz up to 2.3 GHz and 16GB of RAM running Windows 11.

Decentralization is a key feature of the proposed framework, utilizing a distributed blockchain branch where each branch operates independently. The authentication decision is based on the consensus of each branch and is distributed via the authentication list, ensuring decentralized authentication management of the nodes in the network.

Additionally, a lightweight and fast consensus algorithm is proposed, whereby nodes are validated based on their public key value and their related cluster head public key value. This new consensus algorithm relies on the direct verification of the devices and the validation of new blocks within each cluster. The proposed method has been proven to be fast and lightweight without compromising the immutability characteristics of the blockchain.