Bicategories have been utilized for many years to represent computational phenomena such as concurrency and binders. The collectivity, or bicat, of bicategories possesses the structure of a tricategory, which has been sporadically addressed explicitly and more frequently implicitly in the programming semantics literature. The concept of weak n-categories in general has been under investigation, as strict n-categories for arbitrary n have been utilized to model concurrency and in connection with rewriting. Therefore, it appears to be only a matter of time until weak n-categories for arbitrary n demonstrate their value in programming semantics as well. This paper explores, enriches, and mildly generalizes a prominent definition by Batanin, as refined by Leinster, along with the surrounding theory. Previous works assumed knowledge of advanced mathematics, overlooked the inherent recursion, and did not consider the concerns of programming semantics.

In this section, we demonstrate that the forgetful functor from the category of strict n-dimensional v-categories to that of n-dimensional v-graphs has a left adjoint. We make the assumption throughout that v is extensive and has finite limits. Consequently, it follows that v-gph and v-cat are also extensive (by propositions 2.5, 2.6, and 2.7). By induction, for each natural number n, the categories v-gph(n) and v-cat(n) are also extensive with finite limits.

For instance, if we let c = n-gph = set-gph(n) and t = t(n) be the free strict n-category monad, then t(n)-operads are known as n-globular operads [16, section 9.3]. The arities form an n-graph t(n)1, whose elements can be seen as a globular pasting scheme.

Another example considers letting c = u-gph(n) for an extensive category u with finite limits and t = t(n) be the free strict n-dimensional u-category monad. In this case, the t(n)-operads constitute an enriched version of n-globular operads, essentially the same as n-globular operads, except that it no longer makes sense to talk about individual n-cells; they now form an object of u.

In this section, we describe the notion of contraction, originally introduced by Leinster, and generalize it to the enriched setting. Following Garner's approach, we define contraction as a selection of certain diagonal fillers. The subsequent definition is an instantiation of the construction described in [11, proposition 3.8].