In the case where edges are not directed, it has been demonstrated that finding the hull number of a graph is an NP-hard problem, even for bipartite graphs. If both directed and undirected arcs are permitted, this result would extend the NP-hardness to the directed case as well. Here, we establish that substituting each edge with an oriented C4 has a similar impact within the category of bipartite graphs.

It is worth noting that any hull set must intersect any co-convex set. Therefore, any hull set must contain at least one vertex from each unsatisfactory cycle. Let us now provide some insight into the vertices that must be part of a hull set for an oriented cactus.

Given a vertex v, we consider a maximal directed path p containing v, such that p exits each cycle as quickly as possible. There are three ways in which p can terminate: it can conclude at an extreme vertex, a trap cycle, or an unsatisfactory cycle of type 2. In the last two cases, there is no way out of the cycle, either because all its other cut-vertices are also receivers or there is only one, and we necessarily traverse all the vertices of the cycle. In any of these cases, we can end the path at a vertex that will be included in any hull set. This is roughly how we establish the following result.

As a result, we can obtain a path between two vertices in any hull set, with v in its interior, but this does not ensure the existence of a geodesic. However, for certain vertices, if a geodesic exists that does not contain v, it would create a block that is not permissible in a cactus graph. We will now present some limitations for these paths.

Theorem 4.5 states that for an oriented cactus graph d, there exists a minimal hull set s composed of the extreme vertices of d and exactly one nonextreme vertex from each unsatisfactory cycle. Furthermore, I[s] contains all vertices that are not in a satisfactory cycle, and I2[s] = V(d).

Type 1: ext(c)={u1, u2}, u1 is a source and u2 is a sink. The (u1, u2)-paths have distinct lengths, with p being the longest. p has a minimum length of three, and one of its internal vertices is a cut-vertex in d. Additionally, all the following statements hold: 

Equivalent results were previously known in the literature [1, 9] for the undirected case. It is believed that the same holds true for the class of chordal graphs. Determining hn(g) and gn(g) are NP-hard problems even when g is chordal [3, 9]. An initial open problem would be: [to be completed as per the original text].