Solid-state technologies are viewed as having the greatest potential for scalability. While superconducting qubits are currently leading the field, semiconductor CMOS spin qubits are emerging as a strong contender due to the ability to harness the integration capabilities of silicon technology. Recent advancements in spin-qubits in Si/Ge heterostructures have led to the development of a quantum processor with up to 6 qubits. Both superconducting and semiconducting qubits operate at very low temperatures, usually below 0.1 K, although recent research has demonstrated that silicon qubits can function even at temperatures above 1 K with minimal loss of fidelity.

In the effort to scale up to larger numbers of qubits, the use of classical cryogenic electronics placed as close to the qubits as possible is widely seen as essential. Various transistor building blocks have been demonstrated at low temperatures to demonstrate their feasibility for this purpose. This includes (de)multiplexers, analog-to-digital and digital-to-analog converters, low-noise amplifiers, RF oscillators, and transimpedance amplifiers. More complex circuits involving RF arbitrary wave generators have been developed for high-fidelity qubit control, operating at 4 K for cooling power reasons. Cryogenic controllers based on CMOS technology operating at 4 K have been reported, enabling high-fidelity operations on silicon electron-spin qubits and on superconducting qubits. Components for qubit readout have also been integrated into the cryogenic circuit. In a strategy involving microwave multiplexing of qubits, these cryogenic controllers can significantly reduce the number of electrical lines running through the host cryostat, thereby limiting the associated heat load.

Measuring the qubit state involves detecting small capacitance variations in the impedance of an LC tank circuit coupled to the qubit, commonly done through RF reflectometry. The inductive element of this tank circuit is typically made up of a surface-mount inductor or a microfabricated superconducting coil. Even for the latter case, the corresponding footprint is relatively large compared to the qubit size and thus not easily compatible with large-scale qubit integration.

The resonator factor is critical for optimizing measurement sensitivity in terms of signal-to-noise ratio. In addition to the performance of the active inductor in terms of noise, power consumption is also an important consideration in evaluating the proposed cryogenic CMOS inductor. The circuit is completed with an RF current source exciting the LC tank containing the capacitor of the device under test (DUT) and an amplifier to read the voltage response of the resonator. The circuit's sensitivity and tunability at 4.2 K were characterized with an addressable capacitor bank, demonstrating its capability to measure capacitances as low as 10 aF. Finally, the proposed approach has enabled in-situ impedancemetry measurements of the capacitance of individually addressed gate-coupled transistors.

The chosen implementation of an active inductance consisting of transistors and capacitors enables a high inductance density, which is significantly higher than that of passive inductances. Active inductances also couple capacitively to each other, allowing for a denser layout in large-scale implementations, in contrast to passive inductances, which couple magnetically over a longer range.

Details of the fabrication process: The impedancemetry chip was designed in a commercial CMOS FD-SOI 28nm technology with low-Vth (LVT) thin-oxides (GO1) for both the circuit transistors and the DUT nanotransistors. The chip is wire-bonded onto a QFN48 package directly soldered on a 4-layer PCB with FR4 substrate.