The presence of concurrent terms in the Concurrency-LF (CLF) language allows for a new way of representing operational semantics compared to Twelf. In Twelf, the methodology is goal-oriented, focusing on proofsearch via backward chaining, similar to logic programming. On the other hand, CLF's canonical representation methodology is context-oriented, employing forward chaining inside the monad. As CLF is a conservative extension to LF, it allows both representation styles to coexist.

The significant question is whether the meta-theory representation and proof representation methodologies known from Twelf can be conservatively extended to accommodate the new CLF representations and how. The CLF extensions over LF include linear and concurrent terms, so a conservative meta-logic for CLF would need to extend Twelf with induction on linear and concurrent terms. This question is vital as it constitutes a major part of the unexplored CLF territory and offers valuable insight into potential directions for further development of CLF.

In Twelf, proofs are by structural induction, given that whatever is represented in Twelf is represented as an inductively defined LF-term, including the proof objects themselves. We expect this meta-level representational methodology to extend to CLF as well, due to its conservative extension at both the object level and the semantic level. However, there are several challenges, and we will focus on how to extend the structural induction known from Twelf to work with terms featuring implicit concurrency.

Since the previous proof only relies on straightforward induction on LF-terms, it should be possible to represent in CLF for any conservative extension of the Twelf meta-theory to CLF. However, this is still speculative, and further discussion on this is provided in Section 4.2.2.

To complete the proof, a stronger induction hypothesis is needed to reason about the continuations that can occur in the linear context. This requires defining normal linear contexts as the relevant linear implications from "return" into a monadic type.

If let-floating must be explicitly addressed in CLF, then it is likely that the concurrent features should be represented explicitly as well, as done in Twelf. To fully benefit from CLF, it seems necessary to develop a let-floating aware coverage-checker to handle let-floating behind the scenes, much like how substitution is handled in Twelf. Specifically, in a trace where "a" and "b" can occur in either order, we want to implicitly assume that, for instance, "a" occurred first.

A conservative approximation of this restriction, which is easy to compute, is to start the proof search semantics by looking for a term of type {1}. The first step after entering the monad involves a nondeterministic choice depending on the signature. If the only option for this choice is to terminate the forward-directed mode and construct 1 directly, then we can be certain that the signature is legal; otherwise, we reject the signature.