In the past, we conducted a systematic investigation into the use of multi-task CNN models for predicting various in vitro clearance endpoints based on molecular image representations. Our study confirmed the success of CNNs in capturing implicit chemical relationships contained in images using several increasingly challenging data splitting strategies. Furthermore, benchmarking our models against conventional ML and DNN methods trained with structure-based representations, as well as graph convolutional neural networks (GCNN), demonstrated comparable or improved accuracy of CNNs with the clear benefit of multi-task learning. Our findings indicated that CNN models built from molecular images could effectively learn multiple clearance parameters. We then sought to expand our research to investigate whether CNN models, as well as methodologically similar GCNN models, could be utilized to elucidate chemical modifications associated with intrinsic metabolic reactions. Understanding the mechanisms of drug metabolic transformations has broad implications for the development of small molecule therapeutics, including drug activity in vivo (pharmacodynamics), distribution and elimination processes (pharmacokinetics), as well as safety liabilities attributed to dosing (potential accumulation effects), off-target pharmacology, or chemical reactivity. We demonstrate the potential of our interpretability models in practice, where we attempt to reconcile the model-derived interpretations with experimentally confirmed products of metabolism obtained through the respective clearance assays. Detailed information regarding the intrinsic clearance data used for building, evaluating, and exploring the interpretability of CNN and GCNN models is described elsewhere. In summary, experimental data for human hepatocyte intrinsic clearance (HH Clint), human liver microsome intrinsic clearance (HLM Clint), rat hepatocyte intrinsic clearance (RH Clint), and dog hepatocyte intrinsic clearance (DH Clint) were extracted and curated from internal sources at AstraZeneca. In total, 139,907 unique compounds were identified for model building and evaluation, with varying numbers of available data points for different clearance parameters. For instance, HLM Clint and RH Clint measurements, as the most commonly measured clearance parameters upon compound synthesis, were available for 101,913 and 79,043 compounds, respectively, while HH Clint and DH Clint were only available for 21,616 and 6,747 compounds, respectively. For the purpose of model evaluation and interpretability, the same random stratified 80/20 training-test set splits were used for both CNN and GCNN models. Liver microsomes and hepatocytes can be used to investigate potential oxidative (microsomes and hepatocytes) and conjugative (only hepatocytes) metabolic routes, which may be observed in humans and different animal species. The identification of metabolic products (metabolic identities or metIDs) via in vitro systems plays a crucial role in validating the use of animal species for screening and synthesis planning, in order to protect metabolic hotspots that are directly relevant to humans. On some occasions, the samples prepared for intrinsic clearance measurements are submitted to qualitative liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) evaluation. For the analysis, both ultraviolet (UV) chromatograms and mass spectra are acquired. The UV chromatograms are used to quantify each peak as a percentage (%) of the run. Considering the chemistry of the compounds, none of the 185 molecules that qualified for the interpretability analysis were singletons, so we could not demonstrate that the interpretations obtained through the studied interpretability frameworks would correlate with their metID experiments. However, since the models were predictive for singleton molecules, it cannot be entirely excluded that derived interpretability models would correctly interpret novel chemistry as well. For example, the experimentally obtained HH Clint metID for compound A shows that 48% of the molecule remained unchanged (i.e., was not subjected to HH Clint metabolism), whereas 41% was metabolically transformed into plausible products, and the remaining 11% could not be chemically characterized by the LC-MS procedure. Major metabolites were derived through successive transformations of oxidation and glucuronidation (22%), only desaturation (8%), only glucuronidation (6%), and a combination of both desaturation and glucuronidation (5%). Both N-glucuronidation and O-glucuronidation reactions were detected, whereas the GCNNs, MCTS algorithm highlights indazole ring as the most contributing substructure to the prediction, which, according to the available metID, was conjugated via N-glucuronidation. However, the carboxylic acid alcohol, suggested by metID to undergo glucuronidation, was not highlighted by the interpretability methods. Additionally, LC-MS does not distinguish between the potential sites of transformation or whether O- or N-glucuronidation takes place. In this example, all three interpretability approaches were complementary to each other, with not a single major contributing feature to the compound B metabolism. However, it cannot be entirely excluded that among the metabolites unidentified by LC-MS occurs a byproduct (or several) generated via these substructures. For HLM Clint, the BM scaffold of this compound was contained in another 29 compounds, 18 of which were part of the training set. The transformation coupling oxidation and glutathione conjugation was noted as well. CAM correctly highlights a large part of the tricyclic ring as the potential site of metabolism, which was confirmed by the metID to undergo oxidation, glucuronidation, and glutathione conjugation. On the other hand, IGS characterizes tricyclic nitrogens with a low propensity for metabolic transformations, whereas the area around the tertiary amine of the tetrahydroisoquinoline ring is highlighted as a region of high metabolic propensity. In the latter, piperidines are particularly vulnerable to oxidative metabolism (as indicated by the metID), which may lead to the formation of highly reactive and toxic iminium ions. Additionally, CAM correctly highlights the benzene ring (oxidation according to the metID), which is only in part detected by IGS. For CAM interpretation, an average pixel intensity is shown for the isobutyl group and the sp2 carbons of the Michael acceptor, all undergoing oxidation. The oxidation of the sp2 carbons was...