For each small category or topos, there exists an isotropy group which captures information about the behavior of automorphisms and serves as an algebraic invariant. This study delves into this invariant in the context of algebraic theories, resulting in a group-theoretic invariant for algebraic theories that encapsulates a notion of inner automorphism relative to the theory. The main technical achievement of this study is a syntactic characterization of the isotropy group of an algebraic theory, with practical examples demonstrating its utility.

The core of a category (if it exists) can be represented by a monoid, informally representing the polymorphic unary operations within that category. In the case of Grothendieck toposes, it has been demonstrated by Freyd that the core always exists. It is further established that the isotropy group is the group of invertible elements of the core, allowing for the interpretation of the isotropy group elements as polymorphic automorphisms within the topos.

This section presents the primary outcome of the paper, namely a syntactic description of the isotropy group associated with an algebraic theory. To achieve this, we first establish terminology and notation concerning term models and indeterminates within an arbitrary but fixed algebraic theory T.

The purely syntactic characterization of the isotropy group given in Theorem 3.8 is used in this section to compute the isotropy groups of several well-known algebraic theories. As anticipated, each of these examples ultimately relies on information regarding the word problem for the theory in question.

Remark 4.14 notes that the aforementioned result can be regarded as a special case of a coproduct of theories. Another special case is that of freely adjoining a function symbol to a theory, for which it can be demonstrated (proofs will be presented in the forthcoming PhD thesis of the second author) that this trivializes isotropy.

While this work has concentrated on algebraic theories, a natural progression is the consideration of other classes of theories, such as quasi-algebraic theories, regular theories, coherent theories, geometric theories, or theories of presheaf type (i.e., geometric theories whose classifying topos is a presheaf topos).