In the cited research, convolutional neural networks (CNN) were employed to estimate the pose of an autonomous ground vehicle (AGV) for the purpose of facilitating the landing of an aerial vehicle (UAV) on the moving AGV. A vision-based landing system was developed for the UAV-AGV system, in which a visual marker placed on the ground vehicle was detected using classical machine vision techniques. The proposed technique was validated through field experiments. Additionally, autonomous landing of the UAV on a static target was experimentally verified. Vision-based techniques were developed for autonomous take-off, tracking, and landing for the UAV-AGV system. The study aims to establish and utilize a kinematic model to devise control techniques, with a focus on applying sliding mode control theory for motion control of the UAV. The system's kinematic model also explains the manipulation of the AGV's position in the camera frame, which can be useful for navigating the AGV in complex environments.

The input velocity vector, which contains parameters such as the apparent velocity of the AGV, depth velocity of the UAV, and velocity of the AGV, is used to calculate the velocity vector for the UAV and AGV and ensure that the kinematic model of the system is satisfied. Sliding mode control theory is chosen for motion control of the UAV, as it offers robustness and simple implementation. Additionally, collaborative motion can be achieved by calculating appropriate acceleration commands for the UAV or AGV to track each other, and a formation control can be developed for the system to facilitate the landing of the UAV over the AGV after completing a collaborative task.

The research also discusses the development of 3-dimensional relative position calculations for the target and moving target, which are used to control the velocity of the UAV along three directions based on the 3-dimensional position of the target. The proposed natural formation mechanism of the system is highlighted as being particularly beneficial for facilitating the landing task and containing the AGV in the field of view (FOV), as well as for navigating the AGV in complex environments.