External plant hormones in enhancing resistance to salt stress in Nigella sativa L. [17,18]. Shu et al.'s research concluded that the application of spermidine could mitigate salt-induced damage in cucumber seedlings by regulating the levels of naturally occurring polyamines, leading to an improvement in the photochemical efficiency of PSII in salt-stressed plants.

The effects of salt stress on plant growth and development are well-documented and are influenced not only by the species but also by the surrounding environmental conditions. It is known that salt stress has harmful effects on plants, leading to a reduction in chlorophyll a, chlorophyll b, carotenoids, and total pigments. Aldesuquy and Gaber found that exposure to 25% seawater led to a significant decrease in both soluble and insoluble photosynthates and the ratio of soluble to insoluble photosynthates during the growth and development of Vicia faba plants. Additionally, a decrease in pigment content under various stressful conditions has been previously observed, such as a reduction in chlorophyll a, chlorophyll b, and carotenoid concentrations in pineapple explants treated with seawater. High salinity-induced reduction in photosynthetic efficiency is often associated with the inhibition of photosystem II (PSII). PSII has been identified as the main site of salt stress-mediated damage to electron transport processes, although the specific damage sites of PSII may vary with the severity and duration of stress as well as the plant species.

Under saline conditions, alterations in chloroplast structure have been observed, including disorganization of chloroplasts, increased number and size of plastoglobuli, and reduced starch content. Furthermore, the chloroplasts of Aster tripolium plants were observed to be partially horseshoe-shaped, with dilations in thylakoid membranes and reduced grana stacks.

In another study, it was observed that grain soaking in either kinetin, spermine, or their combination helped in alleviating the effects of seawater stress on wheat plants. These treatments led to enhanced leaf area, pigment content, photosynthetic activity, and chloroplast ultrastructure in the flag leaf of wheat, mitigating damage induced by seawater stress.

Moreover, exogenously-applied kinetin, spermine, or their interaction resulted in an increase in leaf expansion and pigment content as well as an improvement in the photosynthetic capacity of seawater-stressed wheat plants. Additionally, grain priming with spermine, either alone or in combination with kinetin, appeared to enhance the accumulation of different pigment fractions in seawater-stressed and unstressed wheat plants.

In conclusion, the results suggest that the positive effects of exogenously-applied kinetin and spermine on chloroplast ultrastructure and their numbers are reflected in the increased overall growth and productivity of wheat plants under seawater stress. Additionally, the physiological effects of exogenously-applied spermine on chloroplast structure and function may be involved in regulating endogenous polyamines and enhancing the photosynthetic activity of wheat plants.