The widespread interest in fe3gete2 monolayers has led to the development of numerous 2D materials databases, such as the Computational 2D Materials Database (C2DB), 2D Materials Encyclopedia (2DMP), and Materials Cloud Two-Dimensional Crystals Database (MC2D), which contain hundreds to thousands of samples and provide information on the dynamic and thermodynamic stabilities of 2D materials, as well as their electronic structure. However, these databases encounter challenges in accurately classifying two-dimensional ferromagnetic (2DFM) materials and providing precise guidance for experimental synthesis. To address these issues, a framework combining machine learning (ML) and high-throughput density functional theory (DFT) calculations has been proposed in previous research, but accurately predicting the magnetic and electronic properties of 2D materials remains challenging for ML approaches.

In this study, we present a data-driven ML strategy to investigate the magnetism in 2D materials. Instead of traditional DFT calculations, we focus on establishing correlations between the magnetic structure and material properties, such as crystal structure, composition, and elemental properties. We trained three ML models using DFT calculations and an updated database of 2D materials to classify 2D materials as nonmagnetic, ferromagnetic, or antiferromagnetic, and to predict 2DFMs with strong magnetization. Our strategy involves developing an ML model to distinguish magnetic candidates from nonmagnetic candidates, classifying ferromagnetic and antiferromagnetic materials, and predicting the net magnetic moment of 2DFMs. We aim to expedite the discovery of novel 2DFM materials with strong magnetization using the established ML model.

While the Curie point has been previously calculated, experimental values for the magnetic transition critical temperatures of most 2D materials are not available in the C2DB database. Our goal is to develop novel 2DFM materials with strong magnetization by constructing a two-step ML model to classify 2D materials into magnetic and nonmagnetic groups and predict the net magnetic moment of the unit cell in 2DFMs. Additionally, we report the discovery of novel 2DFM materials, including HF2Br6 with the P-62m space group and Os2Cl6 with the P6/mmm space group.

We used the high-throughput DFT calculations for the screening and training of the ML classification and regression models, which significantly reduced the computational time and accelerated the discovery of new 2DFM materials. Our work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China and the soft science research project of Guangdong Province.