Our research group is currently investigating two high assurance systems: CD, a cryptographic device for use in U.S. Navy systems, and the Fault Protection Engine (FPE), a safety-critical software component of NASA spacecraft. CD is a part of a family of software-based devices designed to provide cryptographic processing of data stored on multiple channels, each associated with a different host system. Due to potential differences in security classifications among the data on these channels, CD must enforce data separation to ensure that data on one channel cannot influence or be influenced by data on a different channel. We are in the process of developing a plan to formally specify and verify the CD software, which uses a separation kernel to mediate access to data and enforce data separation.

The use of tools, such as model checkers, to analyze system specifications for critical properties often reveals violations of these properties. Upon receiving diagnostic information, such as a counterexample from the model checker, developers may uncover flaws in the specification or identify missing assumptions. Alternatively, the formulation of the property itself may be incorrect. In all of these cases, the insights gained from the analysis can be highly valuable. For example, model checking was employed to detect a safety property violation in a contractor's specification of a weapons control system. Recently, some researchers have begun using model checking in similar ways.

A static analysis tool can examine a piece of software without executing it, automatically identifying errors and vulnerabilities such as uninitialized variables, erroneous pointers, and arithmetic and buffer overflows in both source and assembler code. Examples of tools that can detect these types of errors in C code include CodeSurfer and Safer C, which uncover dangerous vulnerabilities in code, as described by Bishop et al. in their work illustrating how static analysis tools can reveal vulnerabilities in the commercial off-the-shelf software used in many safety-critical systems.