The study investigated the protective effects of orally administering Avicenna marina (AM) extract against the oxidative gastric mucosal injury induced by the nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) indomethacin in rats. The aqueous extract of AM was given to the rats three times at 12-hour intervals before administering indomethacin. The study found that indomethacin treatment led to a decrease in the levels of prostaglandin (PGE2) and pH gradient and an increase in acid volume in the gastric mucosa. Additionally, activities of superoxide dismutase (SOD) and catalase (CAT), as well as the content of reduced glutathione (GSH) were significantly reduced in the gastric mucosa of rats treated with indomethacin. However, pre-administration of AM maintained these parameters at levels close to those of the control group, suggesting the effective anti-peroxidative and preventive actions of AM against indomethacin-induced gastric mucosal damage.

The animals were deprived of food for 36 hours before the experiment but had free access to water. Indomethacin was used as the ulcerogenic agent, administered as a single dose of 20 mg/kg of body weight. The rats were divided into four groups, and different treatments were administered to each group. After 6 hours of administering the NSAID, the rats were sacrificed, and their stomachs were examined for histopathological changes. The results suggested that AM extract has a protective effect on the stomach against NSAID-induced gastric ulcers, which may be attributed to its polyphenolic compounds.

The study also proposed that the gastroprotective properties of AM leaf extract may be due to the presence of several compounds such as phenolic-flavonoids, alkaloids, terpenoids, steroids, cardiac glycosides, tannins, flavonoids, and saponins. The major active components of AM are polyphenols, predominantly comprising polymeric tannins (80%), hydrolysable tannins (20%), catechin, chlorogenic acid, gallic acid, and elagic acid, as well as gallotannins, elagitannins, and condensed tannins. These polyphenolic compounds are suggested to have cytoprotective properties and have been associated with antiulcerogenic action in different plants. Tannins, in particular, may counteract ulcer development due to their protein-precipitating and vasoconstricting effects and can help form a protective layer over the ulcer site, thereby hindering gut secretions and protecting the underlying mucosa from toxins and other irritants.