However, the proliferation of the formalism gives rise to unresolved issues regarding the analysis of its concurrent aspects. Let's reconsider the graphical representations for nominal calculi mentioned earlier: while a concurrent semantics for the graph rewriting formalism would offer a concurrent interpretation for process reduction, these encodings unfortunately do not conform to the standard dpo concurrent semantics. Specifically, the matching morphisms (i.e., morphisms identifying the occurrence of the left-hand side of a rule in the graph to be rewritten) are required to be injective. Moreover, the right-hand side of the rules resulting from the encoding is specified by non-injective morphisms, which operationally enforce some node coalescing in the graph to be rewritten. On one hand, these characteristics hinder the development of a satisfactory partial order concurrent semantics of rewrites; on the other hand, they are sufficiently broad to merit further attention.

Next, we will define rewriting systems over e-graphs according to the algebraic double pushout (dpo) approach to rewriting, as outlined in [4, 5]. For technical reasons, it is advantageous to work with typed e-graphs, which are e-graphs labeled over a structure that is itself an e-graph (see, e.g., for the concept of graph typing).

The rules (r1) and (r2) describe the interaction between constrained processes. For instance, consider rule (r2): the process xw is prepared to communicate the (potentially global) name w along the channel x; it then synchronizes with the process x(y), and the bound name y is substituted by w in all occurrences within the residual process p. Consequently, communication has a global impact that affects the process as a whole. Rule (r3) indicates that there is no need to bind a name during a reduction if no substitution is necessary. Rule (r4) eliminates matches that hold true. Lastly, rules (r5) and (r6) simply denote the closure of the reduction relation with respect to the operators of restriction and parallel composition.