Formal expressions often have values that can be computed. For example, the expression 3 + 2 can be computed to give the result 5. An algebra of a monad is an object in which generalized formal expressions can be evaluated to generalized elements.

The diagram (6) encodes the initial three levels of the bar construction, as detailed in [15, section vii.6]. Specifically, the weak pullback condition of proposition 2.12 corresponds to a Kan filler condition, as applied to the bar construction for nerves of categories and more generally, quasicategories. Additionally, the bar construction involves the composition of 1-simplices, which, when defined as in the proof of proposition 2.12, is represented by a 2-simplex that functions as a Kan filler of an inner horn. When t is weakly cartesian, such a filler always exists. When t is cartesian, this filler is also unique, and the resulting simplicial set is even the nerve of a category.

The algebras of the Kantorovich monad are primarily objects of our category, i.e., complete metric spaces. Furthermore, they should be closed with respect to convex combinations, akin to convex regions of a vector space. Closed convex subsets of Banach spaces are identified as suitable candidates: they are complete metric spaces, and they are convex. It can be demonstrated [6, section 5.3] that the p-algebras in cmet correspond precisely to the closed convex subsets of Banach spaces (up to isomorphism), with the structure map provided by the (Bochner) integral.

This paper was initially prepared for the Applied Category Theory 2019 school. The authors express gratitude to the participants of our and other groups for their interest, valuable feedback, and productive collaboration. In addition, the authors extend their thanks to Dirk Hofmann, Joachim Kock, Steve Lack, Rostislav Matveev, Paige Randall North, Sharwin Rezagholi, David Spivak, and Tarmo Uustalu for their insightful discussions and helpful advice. The majority of this paper was written while both authors were affiliated with the Max Planck Institute for Mathematics in the Sciences, and the authors are thankful for the outstanding research environment provided by the institute.