Formal modeling techniques can be utilized to analyze wireless sensor networks (WSNs), and one powerful modeling technique is the use of Coloured Petri Nets (CPNs), which is an extension of Petri Nets. This paper presents a CPN model for the modeling and performance evaluation of a medium access control protocol in WSNs called the Sensor Medium Access Control Protocol (S-MAC). S-MAC is an energy-aware MAC protocol that involves node scheduling.

Instead of simulation, formal modeling and analysis techniques can be employed to perform performance evaluation and model checking. While this approach is commonly used in traditional networks, it presents challenges when applied to advanced WSN algorithms and protocols. CPNs, as an appropriate modeling language, offer graphical notation based on a mathematical definition and various analysis methods, such as simulation, state space analysis, and invariant analysis. Using CPNs provides the advantage of obtaining complete and unambiguous specifications of system behavior.

The remainder of the paper is structured as follows: section 2 provides background information, section 3 introduces related works, section 4 describes the modeling approach used in the case study, and section 5 presents the consequent results. Finally, some concluding remarks are mentioned in section 6.

The extension of CPNs by time allows for describing dynamic properties of a system in the time space by introducing a global clock that represents model time as a discrete value. Each token within a timed color set carries a time value called a time stamp, which describes the earliest model time the token can be used.

Creating large, intricate nets using CPNs can be challenging, but similar to modular programming, the construction of CPNs can be broken into smaller pieces using substitution transitions. Nets with substitution transitions have multiple layers of detail, and replacing transitions of a top-level net with sub-nets allows for bringing more detail into the model.

The paper also discusses the Medium Access Control (MAC) layer's role in the Open System Interconnection (OSI) model, the use of carrier sense, multiple access (CSMA) for collision avoidance, and other works using formal techniques for modeling and analyzing traditional networks.

The proposed CPN model for S-MAC consists of a global model constructed using the hierarchical capabilities of CPNs. This approach allows for the construction of a large model as a set of smaller models connected to each other using well-defined interfaces. The model aims to be detailed by modeling all operations of the MAC layer and scheduling of nodes.

The paper concludes by discussing the modeling of broadcast behavior and the evaluation of performance measures using CPN-tools and its simulation features. The results of this case study are expected to aid in the design process of real networks and demonstrate the capabilities of CPNs for modeling and evaluating wireless sensor and ad-hoc networks, especially when using a hierarchical CPN model to increase flexibility and scalability.