The solid-state drive (SSD) had a significant impact on performance, though as of October 2020, the Raspberry Pi 4 did not have native support for booting from USB 3.0 or faster storage devices such as an SSD. However, certain workarounds could force the Raspberry Pi to run the operating system from an SSD. The official website for MoodleBox estimated that when running on a 32-bit operating system, using Wi-Fi and an SD card, the maximum number of users supported was between 20 and 30.

In this study, we constructed a 3-tier LAMP stack on a 64-bit version of Ubuntu to emulate the environment of MoodleBox, and we labeled it as "rpi64box" for comparison. We executed MoodleBox and rpi64box from both an SD card and an SSD to compare their performance. To our knowledge, this is the first instance of MoodleBox being ported to a 64-bit Ubuntu version of Linux.

To assess the performance of the Raspberry Pi 4, we conducted four distinct tests: a device storage performance test, a comprehensive performance test of the LAMP stack, an evaluation of the overall response time of generated pages, and a monitoring of the server resource usages. All tests were conducted using existing available scripts, as elaborated in sections 3.1 to 3.4.

Disk I/O performance in terms of writing and reading speed was measured using various Unix/Linux shell commands, such as hdparm, dd, fio, and iozone. Additionally, a benchmark script provided a unique score to indicate the performance of the storage media under test. This benchmark script already contained scores for a wide range of disk makes, making it easier to select storage media for the Raspberry Pi 4.

Network latency was evaluated using a benchmarking approach that measured the execution time of specific server areas, such as the processor speed and database performance. The system benchmark tool provided a similar performance check on various components of the 3-tier architecture. While these values are not definitive measures of server performance, they provide an indicative overview of performance in various areas.

The study showed that the Raspberry Pi 4 can support between 50 and 100 users for medium-sized courses with CPU overclocking, but the quality of the Apdex rating would be poor. Experiments demonstrated that the CPU is the scarce resource when pushing the Raspberry Pi 4 hardware to its limits, and optimizing CPU-intensive operations could further improve throughput and response times for 3-tier IoT devices like the Raspberry Pi 4.

The entire web server environment is available as a disk image that can be transferred to a disk and booted from a Raspberry Pi or similar IoT devices. This disk image can be used as a benchmark to evaluate the performance of other Raspberry Pi alternatives as 3-tier web servers compared to the Raspberry Pi 4.