In addition to relational (or Kripke) models, one might consider various ordered structures, such as lattices with operators, as models for the aforementioned logics. An important question arises regarding the simplest method of obtaining a pair of these operators. In the case of a lattice being a boolean algebra with negation, any join-preserving operator immediately yields a meet-preserving one through De Morgan duality. However, in a Heyting algebra where De Morgan duality is lacking, one of the operators may only preserve meets in one direction. In the absence of negation, for instance in a distributive lattice, the categorical notion of adjunction (also known as Galois connection) becomes relevant: any join-preserving endomorphism on a lattice has a Galois right adjoint, which preserves meets by construction. For instance, in the category of sup-lattices with join-preserving maps, every such map is residuated, i.e., has a right adjoint.

These adjoint modalities are interpreted as information and uncertainty and are utilized to encode and demonstrate epistemic properties of the puzzle of muddy children. Owing to the lack of negation, only positive versions of these epistemic properties can be expressed and proven. Nevertheless, the proofs are more straightforward than those of traditional modal logics. In a single proof step, the adjunction is unfolded and the information modality is substituted with the uncertainty modality; subsequently, the assumptions of the scenario are incorporated into the logic using the assumption rule in the next proof step. At this point, the modalities are eliminated, and the proof proceeds in a propositional setting. Since the information modality is not necessarily truthful, more challenging versions of epistemic scenarios can be reasoned about, such as situations involving dishonest agents whose deceitful communications lead to false information. Properties of these more challenging versions have not been proved in traditional modal logic in computer science approaches, as seen in the approach of [citation].