Switched reluctance motors (SRMs) are becoming increasingly attractive as drive units for a wide range of applications, from electric vehicles to high-speed aircraft, due to their simple and rugged construction, potentially low production cost, excellent torque/speed characteristics, high operating efficiency, and inherent fault tolerance. As a result, substantial research efforts have been devoted to various aspects of SRMs, such as speed regulation performance analysis, controller design, and drive application. However, accurately characterizing the parameters of SRMs for control purposes remains challenging due to the motor's highly nonlinear characteristics, which are a result of its doubly salient structure and intentional operation in deep magnetic saturation for higher power density. Additionally, accurately measuring the parameters for in-lab characterization is rarely applicable in engineering, leading to considerable errors between in-lab characterization and field application. These errors stem from manufacturing and material variations, neglect of phase mutual couplings, diverse winding copper and iron losses, and power electronics device chopping losses. Thus, while precise characterization of SRMs has been extensively investigated, there is still a need to develop a rapid approach for characterizing the motors individually.

This paper presents a precise SRM characterization model with an emphasis on defining phase and incremental inductance. Additionally, it describes a commercial-off-the-shelf (COTS) circuitry-based in-situ characterizing approach for the motor and highlights the merits of this measuring method. The paper also illustrates parameter measurement results and characteristics and provides a reliable in-situ cross-validation method. The effectiveness and accuracy of the characterization are validated using a numerical model and experimental recordings, showing agreement between the simulated and measured results. The precise electromagnetics data and established model enable detailed and precise examination of SRM behavior over a wide variety of simulated operating conditions, allowing all electromagnetic parameters to be manipulated under a unified computational framework.

The authors of this paper are Xiao Ling, Liang Gong, Bingchu Li, and Chengling Liu, who contributed to various aspects of the conceptualization, data curation, formal analysis, investigation, methodology, validation, and writing of the original draft, as well as the review and editing of the paper.