Linear bilevel optimization problems are widely known to be strongly NP-hard, and solving these problems often involves employing computational techniques inspired by those used in single-level mixed-integer optimization. Over the years, branch-and-bound methods, cutting planes, and heuristics have been proposed for addressing these challenges. Despite the important role that presolve plays in state-of-the-art mixed-integer optimization solvers, there is a lack of literature on presolving linear bilevel problems. In this study, we apply standard presolve techniques from single-level optimization to bilevel problems and demonstrate the need for caution, as the naive application of well-known techniques may not lead to correctly presolved bilevel models. Our numerical experiments indicate that presolve can be beneficial for bilevel problems but also reveal that the methods have a more varied impact on the solution process compared to single-level optimization. Additionally, the study highlights the need for better and more diverse test instance libraries to advance the field of computational bilevel optimization.

In Section 2, we discuss the theory, and then in Section 3, we introduce several presolve methods for linear bilevel problems by adapting classic presolve ideas from single-level linear and mixed-integer optimization to the context of bilevel problems. We evaluate these methods in a computational study in Section 4, where we find that presolving linear bilevel problems can be beneficial for some instances while being detrimental for others. Furthermore, our test set of over 2500 instances reveals that very few are affected by the presolve methods discussed in this paper. Therefore, we emphasize the urgent need for more realistic and diverse test instance libraries to further advance the field of computational bilevel optimization.

We also delve into the concept of presolve for the original bilevel problem, which is related to the independence of irrelevant constraints (IIC) property. In our work, we focus on the analysis of the effectiveness of bound strengthening and refrain from using other methods to compute these bounds. Moreover, we observe that moving follower bounds to the leader instead of tightening them can result in a smaller single-level reformulation, but caution is required as it may change the optimal solution.

In conclusion, our study systematically explores presolve methods for linear bilevel problems and highlights the careful application of standard presolve methods from single-level optimization due to the absence of the IIC property for bilevel problems in general. Nonetheless, we successfully incorporate bound strengthening, the handling of parallel rows and columns, duality fixing, and a special type of optimality-based presolve into the field of bilevel optimization.
