Most of the feedstock for polyethylene (PE) and polypropylene (PP) comes from naphtha, a product of the secondary distillation of crude oil formed from the organic matter deposition over thousands of years. This means that traditional plastics at the initial stage (t1) do not involve carbon capture. In contrast, carbon dioxide is absorbed by plants used to make polylactic acid (PLA) at the t1 stage, leading to a biological carbon content in PLA. Additionally, the production and disposal of traditional plastic products result in environmental pollution, including the generation of hazardous wastes, destruction of oceans and soils, and emission of air pollutants. Traditional plastics also deplete fossil-fuel resources during manufacturing. Previous life cycle assessments (LCAs) have shown that biodegradable plastics can significantly reduce the depletion of nonrenewable resources when they replace traditional plastics, with reductions ranging between 7% and 70% depending on the polymer, plastic item, and waste management form. Furthermore, the low global recycling rate of traditional plastic products leads to contamination of oceans and soils by waste plastic products, a problem that could be alleviated by biodegradable plastics designed to degrade faster in the natural environment. The biodegradability of biodegradable materials enables the adoption of end-of-life strategies such as composting and anaerobic digestion to prevent direct leakage into the environment. Composting and anaerobic digestion are considered favorable disposal methods for waste biodegradable polymer products, along with fertilizer or methane (CH4) energy recovery in biogas. However, these methods present challenges such as long operating cycles and inefficient recovery of waste biodegradable polymer products. The study by Peng et al. in Bioresource Technology 2022 provides insights regarding the fate of a biobased polymer through high-solid anaerobic co-digestion with food waste and subsequent aerobic treatment, including changes in polymer physicochemical properties and the role of microbial and fungal communities.