The stability of molecules like nucleic acids and proteins allows them to be represented as elementary molecular entities with an interface of interacting sites. These sites can represent functional groups within the molecules, such as binding sites, phosphorylation sites, and methylation sites. The interactions between these sites are facilitated by weak inter-molecular bonds, or links, which together with the agents define site graphs that represent the network-topological structure of molecular complexes.

In rule-based modeling, reactions are replaced by rules that operate on patterns in the sub-structure of chemical species rather than on the species as a whole. However, the existing rule-based languages do not explicitly support the description of the geometric structure of agents and their link structure in three-dimensional space. As a result, the steric effects that govern molecular interactions cannot easily be translated into rule-based languages, and it is uncertain whether this translation is always feasible.

The paper introduces an extension to the kappa language called Geometrically Enhanced Kappa. This extension allows for the annotation of individual agents, sites, and links with radii, positions, and orientations, respectively, which imposes implicit rigidity constraints on the corresponding site graphs. Rewrite rules may include updates to the geometric annotations of a site graph in order to capture conformational changes of a molecular complex.

The extension focuses on the geometric realizability of molecular complexes and does not concern the evolution of their physical embedding in three-dimensional Euclidean space. It assumes a well-stirred mixture and does not track the absolute positions and orientations of agents, and therefore does not explicitly handle diffusion or collision processes.

The paper presents a basic simulation algorithm for Geometrically Enhanced Kappa and its stochastic semantics, and then introduces the notion of locality in Section 3. It concludes with some remarks and outlines for future work.

While the paper provides a way to check the soundness of site graphs, the possible realizations of site graphs are currently inaccessible. Extending the dynamics of the system to take the realization of its state into account might enable the modeling of processes such as diffusion and compartmentalization, which are crucial in certain biochemical processes. There is also a spectrum of possible spatial extensions to kappa, ranging from geometry-less kappa to coarse-grained molecular dynamics approaches.