We propose an extension to the concept of component interfaces with the goal of providing a unified approach to reasoning about the correctness of both closed and open component-based systems. Our approach involves conducting local analyses on finite interaction fragments that naturally represent mobility and coordination aspects. We present a semi-automatic technique that simplifies the verification of security properties of protocols through the verification of correctness in component-based systems.

Interaction patterns describe the behavior of components in terms of their communication capabilities and the communication channels they make available to the environment. These interaction patterns can capture only finite behaviors, and the composition environment is abstracted as a context, which is a multiset of connections. In this context, synchronous input and output actions on communication channels are denoted as in(c, query) and out(c, z) respectively, where query and z represent transmitted data, and (c) denotes the channel that connects the server to other components.

A component can send and receive data (d) over channels (c) through synchronous communication actions (in and out). Similar to the π-calculus, channel names can be exchanged in communications, and the data signature (d) can be complex, allowing for structures for method invocations and encryption mechanisms. The set of names (c) includes the distinguished name "net," which is known by every component in the system. The name "net" models all untrusted communications that may occur over the network and to which every component can participate. The interaction patterns introduce silent action names and open names, and once an open name is connected, it becomes unavailable to the environment. The dynamic interplay of components intending to join a running environment, such as code mobility, is also captured by the connecting mechanisms. The framework allows for the description of finite fragments of component behavior, composition of components in a system, and observation of the resulting system's behavior. It enables the modeling of both static and dynamic systems using closed and open contexts, respectively, each requiring different formulations of correctness properties.

Feasibility of an open context is determined by the existence of an interaction pattern that can join the context and make it both closed and correct. For example, a mobile component should only be accepted inside a site if it does not disrupt its feasibility.

Secure protocols are designed to prevent unauthorized access to or modification of sensitive data. In this context, the security of a protocol is linked to the integrity of communicated data. Determining the data and values whose integrity implies the desired security property is a critical task. For instance, a simple protocol involving the transmission of a key and a nonce encrypted with the key is considered to illustrate this step of the methodology. Communication actions in this protocol encapsulate encryption and decryption mechanisms, with specific restrictions on receiving encrypted data.

We have observed that formal techniques for analyzing security protocols and foundational models that address the problem of component composition have been proposed in recent years. Our approach stands out for its formal mechanisms to locally and uniformly reason about both composition and security in open systems. To the best of our knowledge, only a few existing works have addressed the issue of reasoning about secure component composition.

Our recent work involves extending the framework presented in this paper to handle multiple sessions and authentication protocols, and to generalize the notion of magic instances to allow the specification of arbitrary data and principal instance relations. Security properties are expressed as logic formulae rather than as magic instantiations. Despite its simplicity, the proposed logic permits the expression of other classes of security properties. Our ongoing work focuses on further validating the proposed methodology by applying it to workbench examples.