This study presents the findings of an experiment and analysis conducted on the application of a reinforced self-compacting concrete jacketing technique for the rehabilitation of shear-damaged reinforced concrete beams. The study involved subjecting three shear-dominated beams to monotonic four-point bending loading, initially resulting in damage. The damaged beams were then rehabilitated using self-compacting concrete jackets, which encased the bottom width and vertical sides of the beams, including small diameter steel bars and u-formed stirrups, before being retested. The jackets were designed to enhance the shear capacity of the initially tested beams and modify their failure mode from brittle to ductile. The results indicated that this jacketing technique shows promise as a rehabilitation method, as the strength and overall performance of the jacketed beams improved compared to the initial specimens. The study also presents analytical results regarding the flexural and shear capacity of the tested beams, demonstrating good agreement between test data and predicted strength values.

The use of self-compacting concrete jackets for rehabilitating flexural-damaged reinforced concrete beams has recently been investigated, with test results showing an improvement in the flexural capacity of the jacketed beams compared to the initial specimens. This study extends the application of the self-compacting concrete jacketing technique to shear-dominated beams.

Following the initial loading, shear-damaged beams were rehabilitated using reinforced jackets made of self-compacting concrete with a 25 mm thickness, encasing the bottom width and both vertical sides of the damaged beams (u-formed jacketing). The steel reinforcement of the jackets comprised small-diameter 5 mild steel straight bars and u-formed stirrups with tensile strength at yield of 255 MPa and at ultimate of 357 MPa. After sustaining severe shear damage, including spalling of the concrete cover and intense diagonal cracking, all loose concrete fragments were removed and missing concrete parts were reconstructed by jacketing with self-compacting concrete. L-shaped mild steel dowels with a 5 mm diameter were installed in the vertical sides of the initial beams to support the longitudinal bars of the jacket. The dowels were bonded using injected epoxy resin into 7 mm holes drilled beforehand. Though the amount of dowels provided was relatively low, with 5 dowels per 150 mm for each side bar of the jacket, the steel bars, stirrups, and dowels of the jacketed beams were all welded together.

The self-compacting concrete jacketing examined was seen as an effective rehabilitation technique for shear-damaged reinforced concrete beams, leading to an improved load-bearing capacity and overall structural performance of the jacketed beams compared to the initial specimens. The study also observed a good agreement between predicted results and the test data.