Thus, in 1996, Zhou and Hansen introduced additional atomic formulas to propose a first-order interval logic known as "Neighbourhood Logic" (NL) for specifying liveness and fairness of computing systems and for defining notions of real analysis in terms of expanding modalities. These atomic formulas establish relationships between time intervals and their left and right interval neighbors. In 1997, Roy and Zhou presented a sound and relatively complete duration calculus as an extension of NL, demonstrating that the basic unary interval modalities and the three binary interval modalities of the duration calculus could be defined using the modalities of NL. They provided an embedding of the logics and functions on real numbers, which is independent of time and time intervals. A temporal propositional letter is a truth-valued interval function that depends on time intervals. This use of intervals instead of time points provides the advantage that time points can be modeled as intervals [b, e] with b = e, making intervals more general.

We will use sets of intervals as elements of our algebra, extending NL to formulate expressions and properties for sets of time intervals, not just single intervals. Properties concerning single intervals can be formulated using the singleton set consisting of a single interval. Furthermore, this shift yields the well-known algebraic structure of a semiring.

The domain operator need not exist on every test semiring, but in the case of quantales, and therefore in INT, the domain is guaranteed to exist. Most publications concerning semirings with domain claim another additional axiom. Therefore, our form of domain is sometimes also called "predomain."

After establishing the relationships between detachment and (co)domain, we continue to embed NL. As a first result, we note that at least one of the eight axioms claimed in the literature can be dropped, as it is a theorem in domain semirings. Further simplifications on calculations are given in section 4.1 after introducing a more general framework of neighborhoods.

We refer to a semiring with a complement semiring as a complement bidomain semiring. Note that complement semirings form a larger class than Boolean algebras, even if we define meet by x h y = df x + y. This is because we do not postulate the distributivity laws for join and meet. Therefore, we assume S to be a complement bidomain semiring, allowing us to freely use (co)domain as well as the complement operation.

Since domain and codomain only characterize the starting and ending points in INT, these operations are not able to characterize the remaining relations. In section 3, we used detachments to derive algebraic versions of the neighborhood modalities. As shown there, in INT, detachments cut off parts of intervals, making them useful for characterizing the remaining relations of Allen. We assume S to be a quantale, as there detachments and meet are guaranteed to exist.

In this section, we examine the interpretations of (perfect) neighbors and (perfect) boundaries in other semirings. These interpretations vary from interval properties already shown by Zhou, Hansen, and Roy, over reachability in graphs to an application to hybrid systems, all made possible by abstracting NL from intervals to semirings. Further details about the presented semirings can be found in the literature.

"N R" thereby describes a kind of non-reachability from "S" and guaranteed reachability from "S." All other (perfect) neighbors and boundaries characterize other kinds of reachability. The characterizations of reachability in graphs do not lead to better reachability algorithms. We only aim to show by the above calculations that neighbors also occur in graphs and therefore we can shift knowledge from NL to graphs and vice versa.

We presented an algebra for hybrid systems using lazy semirings that can handle finite as well as infinite trajectories. Thus, we adapted neighbors and boundaries to the framework of lazy semirings, providing a further application for NL in a theory where we can express unlimited processes and, in general, infinite elements. One of our initial results is that neighbors and boundaries occur in an algebraic version of the branching time logic CTL as the existential and universal temporal operator. Future work in this area aims to find more applications for neighbors and boundaries in both settings (full and lazy semirings) and to investigate whether neighbors can be used for properties of safety and liveness in a concrete example of a hybrid system. Additionally, it has to be determined whether our algebraic setting can help address the question of whether NL is decidable, which is still an open question.