In this paper, we examine the potential application of sheaf theory as a semantic foundation for distributed concurrent systems. Specifically, we focus on systems involving interacting objects with hierarchical structures, where objects are composed of other objects and communication occurs through shared subobjects. Our aim is to present a non-technical discussion by providing only a few definitions and using examples to illustrate constructions. Although some category theory is occasionally referenced, we strive to maintain an intuitive level of discussion.

Sheaf theory deals with the transition from local to global properties and can be conceptualized as a system of observations on a topological space, with the crucial property that consistent local observations can be combined to yield a global observation. While these sheaf intuitions are relevant to the study of distributed systems, their application in computer science has been sporadic. An early application of sheaf theory was presented in a paper by Monteiro and Pereira, where it was used to investigate connections between event systems.

We also introduce fundamental definitions and constructs on labelled transition systems as an illustration of the hierarchical approach to object systems that is of interest to us. Additionally, we provide an introduction to sheaves and use transition systems as an example of sheaves. Furthermore, we present another approach to hierarchical systems using hidden algebraic specifications.

Furthermore, we explore the dynamic aspects of systems of interacting objects by outlining constructions that enable the modeling of systems with changing topologies. Research by Colman Reilly at University College Dublin suggests examining systems whose state comprises a graph representing the system's topology. We begin by examining simple examples of these systems and then gradually add more structure, allowing us to consider sheaves of sets, sheaves of transition systems, and sheaves of hidden algebraic specifications.