We have developed a discrete model for concurrent processes based on graphs, where the vertices represent states and the edges represent transitions, directed or undirected. This model is used to describe the execution of two processes, denoted as a and b, either sequentially (a followed by b) or concurrently, as well as intermediate executions. By adding another triangle, a simplicial complex is obtained to represent all possible executions of a and b.

Furthermore, we have explored a more complex construction where the objects are vertices of a simplicial set, and the executions between states are described by a simplicial set, resulting in a simplicial category. This approach allows for the detection of higher order structure that is not visible in the traditional path category. The construction involves considering necklaces of simplices in the simplicial set models.

Simplicial sets and their morphisms form a category, and the geometric realization is a functor from this category to the category of topological spaces. Another way to define simplicial sets is as contravariant functors from the category of finite ordinals and order preserving maps to the category of sets.

We also discuss a category enriched over simplicial sets, where between two objects, instead of a set of morphisms, there is a simplicial set of morphisms. This is referred to as a simplicially enriched category, or a simplicial category.

The simplicial set models in this paper are triangulations of cubical set models. When constructing models of the execution spaces from one state to another, we used (simplicial) necklaces on the simplicial models. Alternatively, cubical necklaces on cubical models could be used. These models would be more efficient in some cases, such as Example 3.13, if considered from a homotopy-theoretic perspective.

The author acknowledges the contributions of David Spivak and the funding provided by the NSF, through the Midwest Topology Network (NSF grant DMS-0844249), as well as the organizers of the Getco 2010 conference, Martin Raussen and Lisbeth Fajstrup, for their role in motivating this work.