Throughout this paper, we focus on undirected, unweighted connected graphs with no loops or multiple edges. A graph G is considered d-regular if every vertex has a degree of d (i.e., each vertex has precisely d incident edges). When discussing any graph G, we let n denote the number of vertices in G, and for d-regular graphs on n vertices, we assume dn to be even to avoid parity issues. We refer the reader to Diestel for other basic graph-theoretical definitions.

In the following section, we provide a description of our algorithm, and in Section 3, we outline the method used for its analysis. Our analysis relies on a theorem of Wormald, which we restate in Section 3. The results of this paper are encapsulated by a theorem, the proof of which is presented in Section 4.

Once no edges remain, the set F becomes an edge dominating set in G. It can be observed that the set F is also an independent-edge dominating set of G, which is also referred to as a maximal matching.

Each operation after the first begins by selecting a vertex w uniformly at random from those vertices of minimum positive current degree in G, and the operation is divided into a series of sub-steps. Each sub-step chooses a neighbor u of w uniformly at random. If the degree of both w and u is 1, this edge is isolated from the rest of the edges in G, and we simply add the edge uw to F, remove the edge from G, and start a new operation.

We consider the degree-greedy algorithm for finding a small edge dominating set as described in Section 2. Here, in the specification of OPR (which first selects a random vertex w of degree r), the set of randomized tasks consists of choosing a neighbor u of w uniformly at random and then, possibly, choosing a different neighbor of u uniformly at random from those vertices of current maximum degree in the set.

The first term in equation (11) denotes the change in the vertex-degree of w from v to 0, and the second term denotes the change in the vertex-degrees of the neighbors of w from i to 0 (one for each of the sub-steps). The remaining terms denote the expected change due to finding v edge dominating set edges and removing the edges incident with their endpoints. The expected change in the size of F per operation is simply v.