The two-phase greedy forwarding (TPGF) protocol, as proposed by previous studies [26,30], involves sending packets to the next-hop node with a shorter distance to the destination in the first phase. If the forwarder-node has no available next-hop node, it sends data back to the sender node and blocks the forwarder-node. In the second phase optimization, the destination sends back labeled packets to the source through the same routing path to optimize the path and reduce the number of hops. TPGF addresses issues with the Greedy Perimeter Stateless Routing for Wireless Networks Routing Protocol (GPSR) and prevents failure in the forwarding mode if the next-hop node cannot be found. However, TPGF has drawbacks such as the occurrence of closed circle data forwarding and a high likelihood of losing the routing path when nodes in the same path are blocked.

Similarly, the Source-Greedy Forwarding Through Energy and Load Balancing (SGFTEM) protocol forwards packets to neighbor nodes with higher throughput and closer proximity to the destination than the forwarding node. Unlike TPGF and AGEM, SGFTEM does not rely on global network status information and instead focuses on higher throughput, leading to reduced end-to-end delay, packet loss, and energy consumption. Compared to TPGF and AGEM, which follow the shortest path and may result in high packet queuing and increased delay, SGFTEM offers lower end-to-end delay. Also, AGEM is slightly more reliable than GPSR as it conducts load balancing of multiple paths. Additionally, SGFTEM minimizes packet loss by selecting paths with low traffic load. Nonetheless, greedy routing protocols, including TPGF and SGFTEM, are susceptible to high packet loss at high network densities and are optimal only for a certain network size, while AODV performs better in high network density scenarios due to its access to global information.

To improve SGFTEM's energy management and load balancing performance, further simulations have been conducted in a homogeneous network, where sensor nodes are deployed based on radio transmitter coverage and the sensor lifetime method in a rectangular sensing field. The simulations involve different sensing area sizes based on the number of sensor nodes, with fixed source and sink nodes located at the edges of the sensing field. The overall aim of this simulation is to assess the performance of SGFTEM in a monitoring use-case, where the source node transmits data to the sink node for external forwarding.

For the construction of the network, the sensing area is divided into grids with specific rib lengths to ensure that the radio range covers the entire network area and allows for continued routing in the event of node shutdowns. These simulations aim to enhance energy conservation and load balancing in SGFTEM.