In addition to its practical flexibility for statistical analysis, the primary advantages of rule-based modeling in our study are its conciseness in describing rules and its ability to refine models to incorporate intricate details. The objective of this paper is to demonstrate that a specific aspect of the evolution of RNA interference (RNAi) can be adequately represented by this succinct modeling to allow for the synthesis of double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) through polymerization. To achieve this, the model is refined in a manner that demonstrates the property obtained in the compact model remains unchanged under certain suitable class of model refinements.

We establish that, with only primer-dependent synthesis, the population of each type of small interfering RNA (siRNA) becomes extinct, leading to the cessation of RNAi. The probability of these extinctions is proven to be 1 based on the concise description of the rules, and this probability is shown to remain unchanged under plausible classes of model refinements, which extend the compact rules by including contextual characteristics of the complexes. Consequently, upon the introduction of primer-independent synthesis, RNAi is demonstrated to become sustainable as the extinction probabilities become less than 1.

In this section, we syntactically model RNA interference using kappa calculus. Within our rule-based modeling of RNAi, each siRNA is treated as a primitive agent, denoted by sk, with the index k (referred to as the type) representing the position inside the dsRNA from which the agent originates. In this context, types are natural numbers 1, 2, ..., m from downstream to upstream (3' to 5' of mRNA), denoted as t. Each primitive agent has three site conditions, where the hydrogen (or ligation) bond must connect to the template mRNA (or to the predecessor of sk). The compactness of this rule is evident by the fact that only the local elements of the rule's domains and ranges are specified, without reference to the contextual siRNA produced thus far (i.e., si with i < k) and the template mRNA.

In primer-dependent synthesis, it is directly observed that no children of type sk with k < n are produced by a parent of type sn, contrasting with primer-independent synthesis where every type of offspring is immediately produced, making this process irreducible. The findings of this paper can be seen as the precision of abstraction utilized by local rule descriptions. A theoretical formulation of these dual notions can characterize the precision of an abstract model in terms of its invariance under appropriate model refinements.