... to address the issue of discrepancies between the syntax and semantics, a solution is proposed in the context of locally cartesian closed categories. In this framework, substitution is typically represented by pullbacks or pseudo-functors, which only capture the concept up to isomorphism unless certain split fibrational assumptions are imposed. However, not all semantics satisfy these assumptions.

These notes are based on a lecture delivered by the second author during a special session celebrating Phil Scott's 60th birthday at MFPS XXIV in Philadelphia in May 2008. The second author expresses gratitude for the knowledge imparted by Phil Scott on the connections between logic, types, and categories, as well as for the enjoyable collaboration. Acknowledgments are also extended to Rick Blute and Andre Scedrov for organizing the special session and inviting the author to contribute.

It should be noted that the definition herein incorporates a form of universe polymorphism. The levels of the two instances of type are implicit and will be determined by the context in which the e-set is utilized. By appropriately selecting the levels, both a notion of "small" e-set and various levels of "large" e-sets can be obtained. It is important to emphasize that the type of e-set must be one level higher in the universe hierarchy than the type of carrier.

The notion of an e-locally cartesian closed category can be defined as an e-category C in which all e-slice categories C/A are e-cccs for all objects A. The objects of the e-slice category C/A are arrows of C with target A, and the arrows of C/A are formalized type-theoretically as commuting triangles, represented by pairs of arrows and proofs that the triangle commutes.

The proposal here advocates for the use of an abstract algebraic characterization of intuitionistic type theory as the initial category with families (CWFS) with extra structure. CWFS are defined up to isomorphism and provide the "minimal algebraization" of intuitionistic type theory, explicitly representing substitution and replacing variables with projections. However, it is important to note that dependent types are not modeled by fibrations as in LCCCs and many other categorical models of dependent types.