Ailsa H. Land passed away on May 16, 2021. A Euro gold medal, according to the guidelines, was awarded to Ailsa Land before May 16, 2021, and not posthumously, despite a slight correction needed in an obituary. An unpublished typewritten manuscript with handwritten annotations by Ailsa Land was typeset anew, and any editorial remarks are provided in footnotes. The publication of this historic document in "EJCO" was authorized by Professor Frank Land, LSE, the widower of Ailsa Land. The editor-in-chief is grateful to Professors Gilbert Laporte and Panagiotis Miliotis for bringing the manuscript to their attention and making a complete version of it readily available.

In the absence of any violated two-matching constraints, the algorithm will use the method of integer forms. However, it has been found most effective to defer this to phase III when all variables that could potentially be part of the optimal tour solution are explicitly present in the LP. Step 14 of the algorithm checks if the program is in phase III. If so, it proceeds to step 18; otherwise, after re-optimization, certain constraints are removed from the record. Constraints of type (4) are not discarded if any of the constraints in the entire set imposed at one time are not candidates for removal.

Every time there is a basis change, the algorithm examines the new value of the determinant. If it exceeds 1,000,000, the computation halts. In the reported problems, the determinant never exceeded 36,192. If the algorithm runs out of new constraints and the solution is still not integer, it will move to trying the MIF constraints if phase III has been reached; otherwise, it will search through the entire set of variables in the global routine to find if any variables from the inactive set violate the dual conditions.

To determine for each new variable whether it was already present, the method used is to organize as many special variables and non-basic variables at their upper bounds into ordered trees. Those variables that cannot fit into a tree are recorded in a separate list. An identifier keeps track of how many times a vertex appears in this list to ensure that the list is only inspected when necessary. The number of these surplus variables never exceeded 50 in the reported problems.

In an earlier version of the algorithm, it sometimes failed after several MIF constraints were applied because the value of the determinant exceeded the limit set by the word size of the computer. However, an alteration in the criterion used to select among possible MIF constraints has proved to be remarkably effective in the TSP case. The cost matrix consists of integer elements in the range of 0 to 141, and only those distances corresponding to variables in the current active set are stored.