As a case study demonstrating our approach, we will examine the sra three pass protocol and demonstrate one of its properties. Our intention is not to establish the protocol's complete security, as it is not universally secure. However, we will prove that in the event of honest participation by the agents involved, an eavesdropper observing the communication will not gain any knowledge about the plain-text messages in a single run. Additionally, we will explore what the eavesdropper can ascertain about the participating agents.

The first type of update occurs as follows: in an open network, agent A sends a message to agent B. From a security standpoint, it is customary to assume the Dolev-Yao framework, in which all agents in the network can read this message too. However, in open networks, private learning, the second type of update, can also occur. For instance, agent B receives a message {x}k from agent A, where {x}k denotes a message with content x encrypted with the symmetric key k. If B possesses the key k, then B privately learns the message content x (assuming that the key k is shared between A and B). The final type of update involves learning about the knowledge of others, which is arguably the most compelling. It is reasonable to assume that the steps in a protocol run are known to all agents. Consequently, observing that an agent receives a message will enhance the knowledge of the other agents. For example, if agent A sends a message {x}k to agent B, then agent C learns that B has gained knowledge of the information contained in the message {x}k, but typically, C does not learn x if C does not possess the key k.

We will not delve into stronger types of updates, such as updating the beliefs of an honest agent so that it learns that an intruder has acquired knowledge about others. In this paper, we confine ourselves to updating beliefs about objective formulas and beliefs about objective formulas.

In this section, we will elaborate on various types of updates. We will commence by defining an update for propositions in subsection 3.1. In subsection 3.2, we will define a belief update for agents that learn something about the beliefs of others. We will do this in two slightly different ways by employing different functions to describe a side-effect for an agent.

It is evident that the belief of agent A has not changed; it still regards its old worlds as possible. However, the belief of agent B has altered. It now only considers the state u possible where p holds, hence, B believes p.

A technical obstacle arises from the fact that states can be shared among agents. It is clear that if we change a state with the intention to modify the belief of one agent, then the belief of the other agents that consider this state possible is also altered. Therefore, the first step is to separate the states of learning agents from the states of agents that do not learn. This process will be termed "unfolding." The functions "newb" and "orig" are generalizations of "new" and "old" from the previous section, but the function "orig" is only defined...

[The paraphrased response continued in the next message due to the character limit.]