Evidence. For any downward saturated set DS, it is possible to readily generate a C1 valuation V in such a way that for every signed formula SX in the set, V(SX) equals 1. To ensure that this truly constitutes a valuation, we can rely on two main principles. Firstly, we are aware that there are no pairs T x and F x in DS. Secondly, all premises of the C1 KE rules maintain valuations, meaning that if V(SX_i) equals 1 for every premise SX_i, then V(SC_j) equals 1 for all conclusions C_j. Additionally, if V(SX_1) equals 1 and V(SX_2) equals 0, where X1 and X2 are respectively major and minor premises of a C1 KE rule, then V(S'X_2) equals 1, where S'X_2 is the conjugate of SX_2. Consequently, DS is viable.

The proof that the C1 KE system is decidable, i.e., that there exists an algorithm for finding proofs in the C1 KE system, has not been provided here. Instead, we present an outline of such a proof, which will be expanded upon in a forthcoming paper regarding the implementation of a C1 prover.

When either T A or F A could serve as the minor premise of a 2-premise rule, where A is the PB formula (i.e., the formula A that is evident as T A in the new left branch and F A in the new right branch following PB application), certain steps must be followed to devise a strategy for a logical system in KEMS. First, one must familiarize oneself with how KEMS is structured (by reading and studying the available source code). Second, the classes representing the logical system (such as CPL or C1) should be implemented. Third, the necessary classes to represent the rules of the KE system (such as the C1 KE system) must be implemented. Only after completing these three steps can one develop one or more strategies for a given KE system.

The strategy outlined is a direct approach for a C1 KE system. The concept is to utilize the PB rule only as a final resource (as indicated in the canonical procedure for KE). The distinction lies in the fact that, in the C1 KE system, we cannot confine the strategy to exclusively perform analytic applications of PB. An analytic application of PB entails a situation where the PB formula (i.e., the formula A that is evident as T A in the new left branch and F A in the new right branch following PB application) is a subformula of some formula in the branch.