Up until now, the prioritization of actions has not been extensively studied in formal modeling frameworks dedicated to systems biology. However, some attempts have been made to address this issue, such as F. Bause's work on priority scheduling in Petri nets, and the introduction of priority relations among transitions by A. K. Wagler et al. This concept is more straightforward in process algebras, as demonstrated by R. Cleaveland.

In this paper, we present a new extension to the semantics of process hitting by categorizing actions into classes of priorities. The main goal is to accurately represent the cooperative behavior of components in the model, which was not achieved with the original semantics. We also develop an efficient method to under-approximate the reachability of component states within this new framework, enabling the computation of efficient static analysis. This under-approximation can also be extended to study the reachability of global states. Furthermore, as the models studied are found to be bisimilar to asynchronous discrete networks, we claim to have developed an efficient approach to compute state reachability and study model behavior.

By incorporating cooperation into process hitting, any Boolean function between cooperating processes can be encoded. Introducing priorities into the framework allows for the creation of cooperations without temporal shifts, by defining actions that update cooperative sorts with the highest priority class. This provides process hitting with the same expressivity as Boolean networks, as explained in subsection 2.2.

To support the scalability and applicability of our under-approximation of reachability, we apply our new approach to analyze a large-scale model of the T-cell receptor (TCR) signaling pathway. This model involves 94 interacting components and is specified as a Boolean network. The under-approximation presented in this paper has been implemented in the existing Pint software 2.

The Boolean network model has been automatically encoded into a process hitting with two priority classes. We verified the reachability for the independent activation of four outputs of the signaling cascade (SRE, AP1, NFkB, NFAT) from all possible input combinations (CD45, CD28, TCRLIB) using our new reachability under-approximation and a previously defined reachability over-approximation. All results were conclusive, and the under-approximation was satisfied in 12 out of 32 cases, demonstrating the satisfiability of the reachability property in the encoded Boolean network (and non-satisfiability in the other cases).

The computation times are in the order of a few hundredths of a second on a 2.4GHz processor with 2GB of RAM. For comparison, we conducted the same experiments using a standard symbolic model-checker, LibDDD, known for its good performance, with the input model being the Boolean network expressed as a Petri net. However, due to the large scale of the model, the program ran out of memory for all the experiments.