Applied Computing and Informatics 14 (2018) 88–97

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Applied Computing and Informatics

j o u r n a l h o m e p a g e : w w w . s c i e n c e d i r e c t . c o m

Original Article

A self-adaptive k-means classiﬁer for business incentive in a fashion
design environment
⇑
, A.S. Makinde, O.S. Salako, O.D. Oluwafemi

O.R. Vincent

Department of Computer Science, Federal University of Agriculture, Abeokuta, Nigeria

a r t i c l e

i n f o

a b s t r a c t

Article history:
Received 18 January 2017
Revised 25 April 2017
Accepted 7 May 2017
Available online 9 May 2017

Keywords:
Data mining
K-means classiﬁcation
Fashion design
Clustering and fashion business

An incentive mechanism to target market for fashion designers is proposed. Recent researches have been
focused on the art, style or the design; while a few were based on traditional practice. In this study, econ-
omy is considered as a major liberation in the fashion world by analyzing six attributes, namely, style,
color, fabric, brand, price and size that could bring about commercial success. Dataset of 1000 customers’
records were used and categorized as original, combined and new designs using self-adaptive k-means
algorithm, which extract common attributes that would foster better business from the dataset. The
results would be useful to designers in knowing the type of designs usually ordered by customers with
the design code, and which combinations of the attributes have high patronage. In addition, customers
would have easy access to the best and current designs invoke from a combination of highest patronized
designs.
(cid:1) 2017 The Authors. Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of King Saud University. This is an
open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

1. Introduction

Design encourages communication by representing ideas usu-
ally through images. In today’s business world, design cuts across
many professions including architectural, interior decoration, foot-
wear, graphics, landscape, furniture, fashion designs, etc. [39,29].
Over the years, the fashion industry has been engaged in different
marketing strategies with traditional cataloguing being made ref-
erenced to on proxy without adequate segmental provisioning
[38]. Thus, fashion industry relies on previous data and mental
intuition on imaginations in order to predict and meet customers’
demands. However, with the recent fast-dynamic fashion trends,
the design market is highly competitive and therefore renders
the present mechanism obsolete and irrelevant [33,13,17].

Traditional brainstorming on designs are time wasting and
reduces productivity. Hence, it is difﬁcult for fashion designers to
place their designs on mannequins due to outdated styles [17].
Very recently, customers’ needs and demands have been analyzed

⇑ Corresponding author.

E-mail
(O.R. Vincent).

addresses:

vincent.rebecca@gmail.com,

vincentor@funaab.edu.ng

Peer review under responsibility of King Saud University.

Production and hosting by Elsevier

using different methods through comments, shares and re-tweets
[6]. Mok et al. [29] proposed an Interactive Genetic Algorithm
(IGA) to customised fashion design to enable customers create
their preferred fashion designs in a user-friendly manner [29].
Unfortunately, busy customers would not have the time to start
creating new designs themselves. In these days of e-payment,
some customers even send money to designers and expect the
fashion designers to deliver appropriately. In another develop-
ment, set-theoretic qualitative comparative analysis (QCA) was
used to discover patterns that hold reliably across some cases
[27,26,15,17].

Other researchers used expert systems, Computer Aided Design
(CAD) and neural networks to focus mainly on creating garments,
targeting garment appearance and ﬁttings without considering
commercial success of the designers and satisfaction of the cus-
tomers [21,36,7,28,37,39]. Consequently, there are no incentive
mechanisms to entice customers to patronize fashion designers
on frequent basis. Jacobs et al. [17] argued that the design art
should be supported with business inclination. The business itself
should be given the same attention as the style. This implies that
the design mechanisms and other fabricates should be done with
the intent of bringing more gains to the designers and greater sat-
isfaction to the customers [16].

This paper proposes an incentive mechanism to target business
success in fashion design using a novel self-adaptive k-means (SAk-
means) by analyzing some attributes that would attract customers.
K-means was used due to its ability to assume a balanced cluster

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.aci.2017.05.002
2210-8327/(cid:1) 2017 The Authors. Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of King Saud University.
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

O.R. Vincent et al. / Applied Computing and Informatics 14 (2018) 88–97

89

size with the dataset. It also assumes that the joint distribution of
features within each clusters is spherical; meaning that the fea-
tures within a cluster have equal variance, and are independent
of each other [14]. Each clusters have similar density. K-means is
faster, because order of time complexity is linear with respect to
the number of data and efﬁcient in terms of computational cost.
It uses unsupervised learning method to resolve known clustering
issues and work well with large datasets [25,44].

Six attributes considered as market incentives include style,
color, fabric type (texture), brand, price and size. We categorized
fashion design in three ways: original, combine and new designs.
A merging by extracting these attributes into signiﬁcant insight
of market strategies was done using the proposed algorithm
[19,31]. Though, k-means has been criticized as a result of its high
storage maintenance requirements and high computational cost,
we argue that the proposed self-adaptive k-means is valuable
and is dynamic by updating new classiﬁed contents and removing
old unclassiﬁed contents from the dataset. By this, the problem of
high storage are resolved.

Business challenges are met

through meaningful analysis
through possible combinations of these attributes. This was done
by ranking design’s databases for hidden patterns, ﬁnding predic-
tive information that experts may miss because it lies outside their
expectations. We used the proposed SAk-means to classify the
original designs and assign new designs from different combina-
tions to a set of predeﬁned classes of the old designs on the basis
of the available training designs. This helps in clustering of hetero-
geneous designs into a number of more homogeneous sub-designs.
New designs either emanated from a combination or modiﬁcation
of the highest patronized designs. With this, the customers would
maximally allocate their resources in the right channel with time
[1]. Hence, the challenge of not getting the proper designs invoke
is addressed by continuous dynamic updating of the dataset of
new creative designs as it unfolds from the system. In this study,
customers are not to design their own clothes or designs as
opposed to the work of Mok et al. [29], rather, the proposed model
ensures automatic creation of new designs from the combinations
of frequently chosen designs, such that the new designs would
automatically replace the old ones.

This paper also builds on the fact that fashion design could not
only be based on the style but commercial success implications.
Jacobs et al. [17] states that fashion companies need to maintain
balance between artistic and economic considerations. In this per-
spective, this paper analyses the attributes that would account for
more and better business gains for designers as it helps designers
to know the type of designs usually ordered for, by customers with
the design code, and which combinations have the highest patron-
age. Our ﬁndings show that in order to attract more customers to
patronize designers, the style, fabric, color combinations are con-
sidered important as these revealed the level of projective creativ-
ity in fashion design. In addition, it also projects the designers as a
creative entrepreneur, balancing business and the art.

The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 brieﬂy
presents the literature overview of data mining and fashion world.
Section 3 considers market incentives for fashion designers using
k-means. In Section 4, implementation and result are presented,
while section 5 discusses the results. Section 6 concludes the paper
and provides pointers for future work.

2. Overview of data mining

Data mining techniques involve decision tree, ensembles, linear
regression, naïve Bayes, k-means, neural networks, logistic regres-
sion, ﬁsher’s linear discriminant, Support Vector Machines (SVM)
and quadratic classiﬁers [18,22,35,30]. These are classiﬁcation

algorithms used for extracting models to predict categorical class
labels; and are often much more accurate than human crafted rules
since it is data driven [20,24,23].

A multiclass Support Vector Machine (SVM) with classiﬁer
based on a type-2 fuzzy C-means algorithm was used for the recog-
nition of control chart patterns due to its generalization capability
[40]. In another perspective, naïve Bayes classiﬁer was used to
develop a prediction model of mutagenicity [34]. Analysis shows
that the prediction performance of naïve Bayes classiﬁer yielded
average overall prediction accuracies [41]. However, there was a
problem of space complexity and risk assessment emanated from
its lack of practical evaluation [9].

Recently, data mining techniques have been applied to creative
industries, namely, entertainment, advertising, architecture, ﬁlm,
ﬁne art, software, data science, music, design and fashion, to men-
tion but a few [32]. One palpable limitation of big data in fashion
design is the difﬁculty encountered in accurate access and uncer-
tainty during classiﬁcation processes. To address the problem,
ensemble methods were proposed [19]. Ensemble has been proven
to be highly effective but require repeated resampling of the train-
ing data, making them inappropriate in a data mining context. Due
to imbalanced in datasets, which is based on oversampling, under
sampling or cost-sensitive classiﬁcation, Bartosz et al. [5] intro-
duced an effective ensemble of cost-sensitive decision trees for
imbalanced classiﬁcation.

Due to the failure encountered in the traditional Linear Regres-
sion Classiﬁcation (LRC) method when the number of data in the
training set is greater than their dimensions, Koç and Barkana
[22] proposed a new form of LRC, which was proven to be balanced
even with low-dimensional excessive number of data. In addition,
linear regression coefﬁcient
another work proposed a global
(GLRC) classiﬁer that uses the test sample vector and whole class
subspaces to calculate the GLRC rather than the use of test sample
and the class subspace to calculate the distance, which is used for
classiﬁcation [12]. Very recently, k-means was introduced to fash-
ion design with a dynamic reduction through homogeneous clus-
ters (dRHC) [31]. Therefore, data mining techniques are evolving
from modiﬁcations of the previous approaches with time.

In this study, constant observations are needed with automatic
upgrade of new fashion design. Therefore, k-means was used to
perform the clustering because it represents an unsupervised
method, which permits the use of real numbers in the values of
the vectors [10]. Though, k-means is a well-known clustering algo-
rithm that is frequently used in clustering of patterns, it was
employed in this study because more recent studies have shown
its usefulness in exploratory stage where information on initial
knowledge of what obtains in the fashion design environment is
necessary [8].

2.1. State of the art: mining fashion design environment

Industrial design is the professional service of creating and
developing concepts and speciﬁcations that optimize the function,
value, appearance of products and systems for the mutual beneﬁt
of both users and manufactures. The roles of industrial designers
are to create and execute design solutions for problem of form,
usability, ergonomics, marketing, brand development and sales.
Fashion design merges sketching and general visual skills with
the power of imaginations. The interest is in knowledge of materi-
als creative designs with lay outs, ordering supervising and bud-
geting [4].

Catalogue, a systematic lists of names, books/pictures/designs,
is a means by which designers keeps records. It is a list of the con-
tents of a design library arranged according to various styles serv-
ing as inventory to the designs’ contents. It involves collecting,
abstracting, and coding of printed written information for future

90

O.R. Vincent et al. / Applied Computing and Informatics 14 (2018) 88–97

purposes with instruction and references. Good decisions on what
design to document, invoking season, styles preferred and process
surrounding cataloguing are important. Therefore, targeting mar-
ket interest involves segmental solutions. It encourages direct mar-
keting and provides focus to all design marketing activities. Data
mining can be used to improve targeting by selecting which people
to contact, ﬁguring out what design, when to offer and to whom it
should be offered.

In today’s competitive business environment, a typical fashion
catalogue contains exploding dataset as shown in Fig. 1. This con-
tains very large image data of designs that requires classiﬁcations.
For proper guidance, categorization of the designs, fabrics, brand
and color combination are needed for better returns in marketing,
investments and in order to enhance business management in
strategizing and delving into other new designs [16].

3. The proposed incentive mechanism to target market in a
fashion design

A typical fashion business environment is considered. The
design consideration requires that a fashion designer should nor-
mally have automated catalogue. Customers’ classiﬁcations were
based on three classes of objects: original, combine and new
designs. There are also the ready or initial designs with the design-
ers, called original in this case. In combined design, two or more
designs from the catalogue can also be coupled to create/obtain
new design. A customer may also come up with his own entirely
new design.

3.1. Data collection

Different fashion dresses were collected from Jumia Nigeria. The
dataset contains 1000 customers’ records. The data comprises of
customer ID, name, gender, preferred color, fabric, style, brand,
and code. Due to some missing attributes from the 1000 data,
938 were used. The dataset was randomly categorized using six
attributes: color, style, brand, fabric type, size and price. The ﬁrst
four are classiﬁed as major while size and price were considered

as minor attributes for effective selection and combination due
to their low impact on design selection and combination.

3.2. Fashion design incentives procedure

We classiﬁed the customers under three categories in Fig. 2 as

users X, Y and Z using the following characteristics:

3.2.1. USER X

Customers in this category chooses dresses from the fashion
designer initial catalogue, negotiate with the fashion designer
and choose from his existing database. The dresses are represented
with a name called ‘original design’ which symbolizes the fashion
designers initial designs. In Fig. 2, a mutual relationship is estab-
lished between this user and the designer.

3.2.2. USER Y

Customers in this category choose from two or more different
original designs to make up entirely new design. They either
choose original top with different original design of skirt and or
combine part of the designs. Any adjustment or addition to the
original design is considered as a combined design by the designer
because a new design product will emerge from the existing
designs.

3.2.3. USER Z

Customers in this category brings in entirely different designs

that the fashion designer does not have in the catalogue.

Fig. 3 shows a fashion design business scenario where three set
of customers are identiﬁed as customers X, Y, and Z. A Designer-
Analyst-Customer relationship is presented where the analyst
stands as the middleman between the designer and the customer.
In some cases, the analyst could also be the designer. An analyst, in
this case, is considered as the vendor who sells dresses and to
whom payments are made. The analyst has an automated docu-
mentation of his stock by categories of designers, styles, color,
brand, size; and as expected, prices are given by these different
cadres. A Customer orders for dress, whether original, combined
or new. He pays for his dress and receives the dress from the ana-

F ASH I ON  W OR L D

Never be the last

HOME

CLOTHS

CATEGORIES

HELP

ACCOUNT

CART

BUY NOW

BUY NOW

BUY NOW

BUY NOW

BUY NOW

BUY NOW

BUY NOW

BUY NOW

BUY NOW

BUY NOW

BUY NOW

BUY NOW

BUY NOW

BUY NOW

BUY NOW

BUY NOW

BUY NOW

BUY NOW

BUY NOW

BUY NOW

BUY NOW

BUY NOW

BUY NOW

BUY NOW

BUY NOW

BUY NOW

BUY NOW

BUY NOW

FASHION

WORLD

Phone: 555-555-5555
Fax: 555-555-5555

E-mail: someone@example.com

Never be the last
Product/Service Information
Tel: 555 555 5555

Fig. 1. A typical fashion catalogue.

O.R. Vincent et al. / Applied Computing and Informatics 14 (2018) 88–97

91

Customer X Customer Y Customer Z

Designer

Analyst/Vendor

originalDesign()

sendDesign()

combinedDesign()

makeDesign()

newDesign()

makeDesign()

interpretDesult()

analysis()
Data mining 
tool

encoding()

Fig. 2. A sequence of marketing strategy in fashion design.

Fig. 3. A fashion design business use case.

lyst. The analyst on the other hand, receives the order, payment
and keeps record of sales. The designers, having supplied the
dresses, received payment from the analyst and update his record.

3.3. Cataloguing of homogeneous clusters using dynamic K-means

K-means is one of the simplest unsupervised learning algo-
rithms that solve the well-known clustering problem, which work
incredibly well in practice. K-means clustering is a method of vec-
tor quantization, originally employed in signal processing, and very
popular for cluster analysis in data mining. In this paper, k-means is
modiﬁed by introducing a novel self-adaptive approach for classi-
ﬁcation of the identiﬁed six fashion attributes. If we let xip be the
ith discrete point of a dress P, and yjp be the ith discrete point of
dress Q , and i ¼ 1; . . . ; k, the classiﬁcation follows that of Euclidian
distance (D) given as

Dði; jÞ ¼

q

ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
j2
jxi1 (cid:2) yj1

j2 þ (cid:3) (cid:3) (cid:3) þ jxip (cid:2) yjp

j2 þ jxi2 (cid:2) yj2

:

ð1Þ

These points represent the same features as measured and
recorded from both P and Q dresses. The set D of Euclidean dis-
tances between dress x and all successive dress y 2 Y is calculated
using Eq. (1). From the distances in the set D, the smallest k dis-
tances are selected [11,43,42]. The veriﬁed designs are classiﬁed
into three: original, combined and new designs by the classiﬁer.
The ﬁnal classiﬁcation are established on the basis of a voting score
so as to reduce the noise, which depends on the number n of neigh-
bors, given as
(cid:3)
(cid:3) (cid:4)
c

(cid:4)1=2

#

"

ð2Þ

n ¼

þ ðc:dÞ

;

2

belonging to any of the three classes [32,3]. The number of data is a
function of the cluster number and the mean vector. For example, if

92

O.R. Vincent et al. / Applied Computing and Informatics 14 (2018) 88–97

the number of data is less than the number of clusters then we
assign each data as the mean vector of the cluster. Therefore, each
mean vector will have a cluster number. However, if the number
of data is bigger than the number of clusters, for each data, we cal-
culate the distance to all mean vector and obtain the minimum dis-
tance. Thus, the data is said to belong to the cluster that has
minimum distance from this data [19,2,31].

Since the location of the mean vector cannot be predicted, the
mean vector is adjusted based on the current updated data. Thus,
we assign all the data to the new mean vector and update the mean
vector using a vector update law given as
P
k
i¼1x1sti
k

P
k
i¼1x2ndi
k

P
k
i¼1x3rdi
k

P
k
i¼1xnthi
k

VPðx1;x2;x3; . . . ; xkÞ ¼

; . . . ;

!

;

;

:

In Eq. (3), x represents the set of data for clustering. The clusters

were then evaluated using the Sum of Squared Error

ð3Þ

XK

SSE ¼

X

dist2ðmi; xÞ:

i¼1

x¼Ci

ð4Þ

For each point, the error accounts for the distance to the nearest
cluster [19,31]. In order to get the SSE, the error is squared and sum
together in Eq. (4). Let the dimension of the matrix X be lðc (cid:4) dÞ as
given by Eq. (2), algorithm 1 describes the generation of new xi.

Algorithm 1 (Dynamic K-means for Fashion Design).

Input: (X; Y)
Output: Y i
1: for i = 1 to k do
2:
3: end for
4: Compute set I containing indices for the k smallest

compute distance DðXi; nÞ

distances DðXi; nÞ

5: Return majority label for {Y i where i 2 I}
6. Newdesign   K-means(X, Y)
7. For xi = 1 to k do
8. Update (X)
8. End for

Algorithm 1 classiﬁes a new design x by searching in the train-
ing set for the k nearest designs called neighbours to x according to
the distance metric in Eq. (1). Then, x is assigned to the most patro-
nised designs (common class) determined by calculating the per-
centage patronage on designs of
the retrieved k nearest
neighbours. Ties are settled using single nearest neighbour of the
color, style, fabric type, and brand noting, the error rates. We place
k points, that is, the initial group centroids, into the space repre-
sented by the objects that are being clustered and assign each
object to the group that has the closest centroid. When all objects
have been assigned, the position of k centroids is re-calculated.
This procedure is repeated until the centroids no longer change
or move. By this, clusters are constructed until all of them contain
items that belong to only a particular class. This resulted in the
separation of the objects into groups from which the metric to be
minimized is calculated. The result is then combined severally
and a dynamic upgrade forming a new dataset of designs is
obtained.

4. Implementation and results

The dataset was categorized into three classes: original, new
and combined designs. The proposed self-adaptive k-means was

developed in Java with every chosen design coded with a unique
identiﬁer. The coding was done to differentiate between the three
designs with x, y, and z for each design of original, combined and
new, respectively using ZeroR as the classiﬁer rule. Euclidean dis-
tance was used for the determination of centroid on which the
clustering was based. Each object was based on minimum Eucli-
dean distance. Out of the six attributes of the dataset, four (color,
style, size and price) were found to be mainly constraints for cate-
gorizing the dataset, while brand and fabric could not be distinc-
tively classiﬁed. Fig. 4 shows the identiﬁed fashion attributes
where a compilation of the six attributes are presented in their
classes showing how size and price changes.

Fig. 5 shows how multiple original styles were combined and
new styles emerged. Dresses were identiﬁed by styles where two
or three styles were combined to form other new styles. The newly
created styles were made to update design catalogue automati-
cally. We classify the original designs and assign new designs from
different combinations to a set of predeﬁned classes of the com-
bined designs on the basis of the available training designs. From
Fig. 5, new designs either originated from a combination or modi-
ﬁcation of predeﬁned designs.

4.1. Experimental evaluation of attributes

This section presents experimental results with four of the six
attributes to demonstrate the effect on customers’ choices. In this
section, we illustrate the behavior of our SAk-means algorithm on
some of the fashion design attributes, which is seen as market
strategy to foster improved economy on the designers, vendor
and the customers.

4.1.1. Color and style as marketing strategies

Color is always a baseline in fashion attraction, which could fos-
ter customer’s interest and fashion design choice making. We
therefore compared how color could be a main factor on price, size
and style of designs. The goal of these experiments is to study the
effects of color and color combinations on customers’ choices of
designs and the impact on sales. Fig. 6 shows a classiﬁer result
when color and prices effect were examined.

Fig. 6 shows what happens when color was compared to price.
Clearly, the increase in price inﬂuences the decision of color by
customers. In Fig. 6, it is shown that color, especially the scarce
ones, is a factor that determines what price a particular dress is
sold. To this end, customers choose dresses with lesser prices even
though it may not be their color of choice. Hence, more customers
chose red, multi-color and black because they are less costly and
probably as a result of easy combination with other colors. This
is depicted in the bottom left corner of Fig. 6 where the clusters
form around lower cost colors.

Fig. 7 shows the relationship between the style, color and size.
In Fig. 7, a distinguished grouping of original, combine and new
designs are shown when style and color were considered. Fig. 7a
shows that customers’ decisions of style clearly inﬂuence their
color of choice. The clumsiness of the clusters at the left hand side
of the graph is an indication that customers prefers to choose style
over color. With respect to the impact of size on color and the deci-
sion of design chosen by the customer, Fig. 7b illustrates cus-
tomers’ choice with respect to size and color. The Figure shows
that choice of color does not depend on size. This implies that no
matter how attractive some colors are, customers would not select
bigger or smaller sizes than the actual choice of size. This is
reﬂected in the disparity of customers’ choices as the clusters are
gathered around some particular sizes regardless of the colors.
We can therefore conclude that color and style are functions that
determined customer choices of dress selection and thereby deter-
mines patronage.

 
O.R. Vincent et al. / Applied Computing and Informatics 14 (2018) 88–97

93

FASH I ON I NCENT I VES

Never be the last

SStyle

Colour

Trendy

Casual

Exotic

Vibrant

Preppy

Blue

Sky Blue

Yellow

Green

Black

Sporty

FASHION

INCENTIVES

Red

Fabric
Type

Cotton 
voile

Cotton 
lawn

Rayon 
challis

Chambray

Brand

Size

Price

Fashion

S, M, L, XL

10,000

15,000

XS, S, M, L, 
XL

S, M, L, XL

5,000

XS, S, M, XL

7,000

DMG

Nice 
forever

Emage

Denim

Poosh

S, M, XL, XXL

10,000

Acelloti

Papaya

S, M, XL

10,000

Phone: 555-555-5555
Fax: 555-555-5555

E-mail: someone@example.com

Never be the last
Product/Service Information
Tel: 555 555 5555

Fig. 4. Mining fashion attributes.

Fig. 5. Styles’ combination.

Fig. 8a shows the impact of size on price for new, combined and
original designs. It can be observed that increase in prices of
dresses increases customers’ interest towards a choice of combined
designs. Observations from Fig. 8a and b also show that combined
designs has the highest number of customers. Fig. 9 shows the
effect of color combinations on fashion. For the color strength,
649 instances were used, out of which 212 were black dress
choices. This implies that black color would always invite highest
patronage in any fashion market. Multi-colors, white and blue
are other colors that show closely related market attractions. How-
ever, when it comes to making dresses to target customers’ choice
of colors such as pale-pink, blue-grey, black-orange, etc. can be
done away with as the market strength shows negligible sales.

4.1.2. Validation of classiﬁer

To validate our classiﬁer, we studied the root mean square
error, the Ignore Class Unknown Instance (ICUI) and the Receiver
Operator Characteristics (ROC) area curve measures. In Table 1,
we illustrate the correlation of colors with price and size; and
the results clearly show that the correlations between the variables
are not signiﬁcant. Due to diverse input variations, correlation for
style, fabric type and brand could not be examined. But when color
and size, color and price were examined, negative relationships
were observed between the variables. While we could not establish
a correlation for brand, style and fabric type, the correlation coef-
ﬁcient of color and price is (cid:2)0.0937 and that of color and size is
(cid:2)0.0467, which show that the degree of
linear dependence

94

O.R. Vincent et al. / Applied Computing and Informatics 14 (2018) 88–97

)
$
(

e
c
i
r

P

325
300

250

225

200

150

125

100

75

50

25

k

Red
Blue-grey
Brown-black
Pale-pink
olor
Blac
Multi-c

hrome
Navy-blue
Orange
Blue-red
Gold
Monoc

Color

Maroon
White
Brow

n

ellow

Y

h
hite
Ars
Red-w

Fig. 6. Effect of customers’ price decision on choice of color.

between the variables are in opposite directions. This reveals that
as color and size change, price increases or decreases. Therefore,
the relationship between color and price, size and price lie on
opposite directions as shown in Fig. 6 and this is clearly seen in
Fig. 7b.

Table 1 shows the error values on color, size, and price. The rel-
ative absolute error (RAE) and root relative squared error (RRSE) is
very high for the three attributes. The root mean squared ratio
(RMSR) measures the average magnitude of the errors. The RMSR
gives a relatively high weight to expensive errors, which makes
the RMSE most useful because of vast errors that are particularly
undesirable. The Mean absolute error (MAE) delineates the direct
score and this implies that individual differences are weighted
similarly on the average. Out of 1000 instances, 62 were ignored,
which implies 938 instances were classiﬁed in all.

Table 2 shows the range, under a Receiver Operator Character-
istics (ROC) curve measures, of the general capacity of the test to

distinguish the effect of style, size, and color on designs’ sales.
The result in Table 2 describes the effect of the three attributes
on sales. The ROC region likewise test for the level of precision
among the three attributes, which shows high performance in rela-
tion to sales.

Next, we evaluate the accuracy of the clustering decision on
fashion design based on new, combine and original design by com-
paring the results achieved by the SAk-means, SVM, and Bayes
methods. Using the optimal parameter values obtained on the
training datasets, the accuracy was examined using independent
test datasets. The experimental results on datasets is given in
Table 3. From the results in Table 3, it can be observed that SAk-
means applied on the dataset improves the accuracy of the cluster-
ing decision-making. Except for the combined design where SAk-
means and Bayes method have no signiﬁcance performance mea-
sure. Regarding the SVM method, results on combined and original
designs showed no signiﬁcance; whereas, better results on cluster-
ing decision are obtained from Bayes and particularly, the pro-
posed SAk-means methods.

Finally, the impact of classiﬁcation time was examined by com-
paring the time used by each method based on the fashion design
dataset. Table 3 presents the total running time based on learning
and testing time using the original, combined and new designs. It
was observed that the running time of the classiﬁers were signiﬁ-
cantly reduced in the experiments. In general, SAk-means is faster
than SVM and Bayes, due to space complexity of SVM method
which is proportional to n (cid:5) Q 2 and Bayes method, which is
OðpqrÞ, where p is the number of features, q is values for each fea-
ture, and r is alternative values for the class.

5. Discussion

Analysis of the attributes that would account for more and bet-
ter business gains for designers was carried out in this paper. Fig. 7
(a) shows the relationship between style and color. It can be clearly
seen that 54% of customers preferred combined designs because
they have full customization control over the design, while 31%
of the customers shows preference for new designs by the fashion
designer, because new designs are produced based on the acquired
data from the original designs. However, 15% of the customers pre-
ferred the original called old designs. This could be attributed to
the obsoleteness of the designs. From Fig. 7, it was found that more
customers’ preferred combined designs than other two designs.

Fig. 7. Effect of (a) customers’ style decision on color and (b) customers designs (new, combine and original) on size and color.

O.R. Vincent et al. / Applied Computing and Informatics 14 (2018) 88–97

95

y

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

e
z
S

i

g

New desi n
Combined desi n
inal desi n
Ori

g

g

g

y

0.8

0.6

e
z
S

i

0.4

0.2

g

New desi n
Combined desi n
inal desi n
Ori

g

g

g

0.0

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

x

0.0

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

x

Price
(a)

Style
(b)

Fig. 8. Self-adaptive clustering of designs. (a) Size against price and (b) size against Style.

212

20

20

h
t
g
n
e
r
t
s

l

r
o
o
C

92

1 1 1

3 2

2

1

1

3 2

e

brown-black
pale-pink
multi-color
black-red
monochrome
blue-grey
navy-ivory
black-grey
white-red
orang
ivory
black-orang

35

30

10

11

16

5

4

8 4

3 4

2 1

3 1 11 1
e
dark-brown
ht-brown
white-grey
navy-blue
white-blue
ht-green
Black
black-green
yellow-green
yellow-brown
Yellow
red-brown
pink
red
maroon
yellow
sky-blue
arsh
ht-purple
beig

lig

lig

lig

Color

58

50

13

17

1

e

green
purple
white
blue

Fig. 9. Customers’ decision on choice of color.

Table 1
Cross validation of classiﬁer output for three attributes.

Attribute

Color
Size
Price

MAE

0.0213
0.0528
3345.8867

RMSR

0.1029
0.1619
5953.124

RAE (%)

96.87
96.56
89.07

RRSE (%)

100
100
100

ICUI

8
0
0

Table 2
Detailed accuracy by attribute under the ROC curve.

Attribute

Style
Size
Color

TP Rate

0.488
0.647
0.684

FP Rate

0.218
0.375
0.428

Precision

0.691
0.633
0.615

Recall

0.488
0.647
0.684

F-measure

ROC area

0.129
0.188
0.085

0.854
0.872
0.736

96

O.R. Vincent et al. / Applied Computing and Informatics 14 (2018) 88–97

Table 3
Accuracy and running time.

Design

New
Combined
Original

Accuracy (%)

SAk-means

0.87
0.90
0.97

Running time (s)

SVM

0.76
0.84
0.84

Bayes

0.81
0.90
0.92

SAk-means (s)

SVM (s)

Bayes (s)

1.2
1.37
0.3

8.7
10.9
5.6

5.77
6.0
3.14

This result is valuable for the fashion designer, enabling him to tar-
get on producing more of the combined design rather than the
other designs.

Fig. 7a also shows that style is a major factor on any color
choices. Consequently, design style should be given a major prior-
ity during fabric consideration. This would address the challenge of
not getting the proper designs invoke by continuous dynamic
updating of the dataset of new creative designs as it unfolds from
the system. From Fig. 8, a fashion designer could deduce what color
and color combinations would attract customers’ interest. Black,
multi colors, blue and white are seen in this case to be of highest
interest. Fig. 8 shows that black color dominates the fashion world
market, hence design should not only be based on the style but
commercial success implications.

6. Conclusions

A mechanism for commercial success in fashion design has been
proposed in this paper. Here, economy was considered as a major
liberation in the fashion world by analyzing six fashion attributes,
which includes style, color, fabric, brand, price and size. The data-
set of 1000 customers’ records used were categorized as original,
combined and new designs using k-means algorithm to extract
common attributes that would foster better business bargains.
The dataset of the designs was ﬁrst ranked for hidden patterns.
Then, SAk-means was used to classify the original designs and
assign new designs from different combinations to a set of prede-
ﬁned classes of the original designs on the basis of the available
training designs. This helps in clustering of heterogeneous designs
into a number of more homogeneous sub-designs categorized with
the six attributes. New designs emanated either from a combina-
tion or modiﬁcation of the highest chosen designs.

The SAk-means is a system of automatic creation of new designs
as a result of the combinations of frequently chosen designs. The
new designs automatically replaced the old original designs. In
addition, this study also builds on the fact that fashion companies
need to maintain balance between artistic and economic consider-
ations. From the study, it was found that in order to get more cus-
tomers patronizing designers, the style and color combinations are
considered important as these revealed the level of projective cre-
ativity in fashion design. Hence, the study revealed that more cus-
tomers would likely patronize fashion designers primarily because
of the style and color combinations as creativity is projected
through these combinations.

During the study, the computations were a little limited with
the number of data analyzed. When the data is increased, the result
is expected to be more precise. However, immediate next research
steps should be to explore other criteria that would foster fashion
business development.

Acknowledgment

The authors acknowledge the anonymous reviewers for their
constructive comments, which has tremendously improved the
quality of the paper. We also acknowledge Dr. U. E. Vincent, Lan-

caster University, United Kingdom for reading through and editing
the manuscript and providing valuable suggestions.

References

[1] M.A. Abebe, A. Angriawan, Organizational and competitive inﬂuences of
exploration and exploitation activities in small ﬁrms, J. Bus. Res. 67 (2014)
339–345.

[2] D.A. Adeniyi, Z. Wei, Y. Yongquan, Automated web usage data mining and
recommendation system using K-Nearest Neighbor (KNN) classiﬁcation
method, Appl. Comput. Inform. 12 (1) (2016) 90–108.

[3] V.M. Aradhya, M.S. Pavithra, A comprehensive of transforms, Gabor ﬁlter and
k-means clustering for text detection in images and video, Appl. Comput.
Inform. 12 (2) (2016) 109–116.

[4] B. Borukhovich, Fashion design: the work of art that is still unrecognized in the

United States, Wake Forest Intell. Prop. LJ 9 (2009) 155–238.

[5] K. Bartosz, W. Michał, S. Gerald, Cost-sensitive decision tree ensembles for
effective imbalanced classiﬁcation, Appl. Soft Comput. 14 (2014) 554–562.
[6] B. Bury, M. Tiggemann, A. Slater, Disclaimer labels on fashion magazine
advertisements: impact on visual attention and relationship with body
dissatisfaction, Body Image 16 (2016) 1–9.

[7] Y. Cho, T. Komatsu, S. Inui, M. Takatera, Y. Shimizu, H. Park, Individual pattern
making using computerized draping method for clothing, Text. Res. J. 76
(2006) 646–654.

[8] M. Capó, A. Pérez, J.A. Lozano, An efﬁcient approximation to the K-means

clustering for massive data, Knowl.-Based Syst. 117 (2017) 56–69.

[9] E.O. Cannon, A. Amini, A. Bender, M.J. Sternberg, S.H. Muggleton, R.C. Glen, J.B.
Mitchell, Support vector inductive logic programming outperforms the naive
Bayes classiﬁer and inductive logic programming for the classiﬁcation of
bioactive chemical compounds, J. Comput. Aided Mol. Des. 21 (5) (2007) 269–
280.

[10] Chévez, P., Barbero, D., Martini, I., Discoli, C., 2017. Application of the k-means
clustering method for the detection and analysis of areas of homogeneous
residential electricity consumption at the Great La Plata region, Buenos Aires,
Argentina. Sustainable Cities and Society.

[11] I. Davidson, S.S. Ravi, M. Ester, Efﬁcient incremental constrained clustering, in:
Proceedings of the 13th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge
Discovery and Data Mining, ACM, 2007, pp. 240–249.

[12] Q. Feng, X. Zhu, J.-S. Pan, Global linear regression coefﬁcient classiﬁer for

recognition, Optik-Int. J. Light Electron Opt. 126 (2015) 3234–3239.

[13] S. Guercini, A. Runfola, How western marketers respond to the new middle
class in emerging market cities: the case of Italian fashion marketers, Int. Bus.
Rev. 25 (2016) 691–702.

[14] I. Guyon, A. Elisseeff, An introduction to variable and feature selection, J. Mach.

Learn. Res. 3 (Mar) (2003) 1157–1182.

[15] D. Heuer, M. Brettel, J. Kemper, Brand competition in fashion e-commerce,

Electron. Commer. Res. Appl. 14 (2015) 514–522.

[16] K. Hjort, B. Lantz, The impact of returns policies on proﬁtability: a fashion e-

commerce case, J. Bus. Res. 69 (11) (2016) 4980–4985.

[17] S. Jacobs, B. Cambré, M. Huysentruyt, A. Schramme, Unraveling Belgian fashion
designers’ high perceived success: a set-theoretic approach, J. Bus. Res. 69
(2016) 1407–1411.

[18] K. Kameshwaran, K. Malarvizhi, Survey on clustering techniques in data

mining, Int. J. Comput. Sci. Inform. Technol. 5 (2014) 2272–2276.

[19] S. Kanj, F. Abdallah, T. Denœux, K. Tout, Editing training data for multi-label
classiﬁcation with the k-nearest neighbor rule, Pattern Anal. Appl. 19 (2016)
145–161.

[20] H. Kim, A. Stumpf, W. Kim, Analysis of an energy efﬁcient building design

through data mining approach, Automat. Constr. 20 (2011) 37–43.

[21] S. Kim, C.K. Park, Parametric body model generation for garment drape

simulation, Fibers Polym. 5 (2004) 12–18.

[22] M. Koç, A. Barkana, Application of Linear Regression Classiﬁcation to low-

dimensional datasets, Neurocomputing 131 (2014) 331–335.

[23] B. Krawczyk, M. Woz´ niak, G. Schaefer, Cost-sensitive decision tree ensembles
for effective imbalanced classiﬁcation, Appl. Soft Comput. 14 (2014) 554–562.
[24] S.H. Liao, P.H. Chu, P.Y. Hsiao, Data mining techniques and applications – a
decade review from 2000 to 2011, Expert Syst. Appl. 39 (2012) 11303–11311.
[25] J. Magidson, J. Vermunt, Latent class models for clustering: a comparison with

K-means, Can. J. Market. Res. 20 (1) (2002) 36–43.

[26] J.G. Martínez, Selling avant-garde: how Antwerp became a fashion capital

(1990–2002), Urban Stud. 44 (2007) 2449–2464.

[27] P. Matthyssens, K. Vandenbempt, L. Berghman, Value innovation in business
markets: breaking the industry recipe, Ind. Mark. Manage. 35 (2006) 751–761.

O.R. Vincent et al. / Applied Computing and Informatics 14 (2018) 88–97

97

[28] Y. Meng, P. Mok, X. Jin, Computer aided clothing pattern design with 3D
editing and pattern alteration, Comput. Aided Des. 44 (2012) 721–734.
[29] P. Mok, J. Xu, X. Wang, J. Fan, Y. Kwok, J.H. Xin, An IGA-based design support
system for realistic and practical fashion designs, Comput. Aided Des. 45
(2013) 1442–1458.

[36] C.C. Wang, Parameterization and parametric design of mannequins, Comput.

Aided Des. 37 (2005) 83–98.

[37] Y. Wu, Development of an Intelligent Patternmaking System for Skirt Design

Doctoral dissertation, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, 2012.

[38] C.L. Yang, R.H. Huang, Key success factors for online auctions: analysis of

[30] S.S. Nikam, A comparative study of classiﬁcation techniques in data mining

auctions of fashion clothing, Expert Syst. Appl. 38 (2011) 7774–7783.

algorithms, Oriental J. Comput. Sci. Technol. 8 (2015) 13–19.

[39] Y. Yu, C.L. Hui, T.M. Choi, An empirical study of intelligent expert systems on

[31] S. Ougiaroglou, G. Evangelidis, RHC: a non-parametric cluster-based data
reduction for efﬁcient K-means classiﬁcation, Pattern Anal. Appl. 19 (2016)
93–109.

[32] P. Porwik, R. Doroz, T. Orczyk, The K-means classiﬁer and self-adaptive
Hotelling data reduction technique in handwritten signatures recognition,
Pattern Anal. Appl. 18 (2015) 983–1001.

[33] F. Roubelat, J. Brassett, M. Mcallum, J. Hoffmann, D. Kera, Probing ephemeral

futures: scenarios as fashion design, Futures 74 (2015) 27–36.
[34] I. Sushko, S. Novotarskyi, R. Körner, A.K. Pandey, A. Cherkasov,

J. Li, P.
Gramatica, K. Hansen, T. Schroeter, K.R. Müller, L. Xi, Applicability domains for
classiﬁcation problems: benchmarking of distance to models for Ames
mutagenicity set, J. Chem. Inf. Model. 50 (12) (2010) 2094–2111.

[35] V. Vagizova, K. Lurie, I.B. Ivasiv, Clustering of Russian banks: business models
of interaction of the banking sector and the real economy, Probl. Perspect.
Manage. 12 (2014) 83–93.

forecasting of fashion color trend, Expert Syst. Appl. 39 (2012) 4383–4389.

[40] A. Khormali, J. Addeh, A novel approach for recognition of control chart
patterns: Type-2 fuzzy clustering optimized support vector machine, ISA
Trans. 63 (2016) 256–264.

[41] H. Zhang, Y.L. Kang, Y.Y. Zhu, K.X. Zhao, J.Y. Liang, L. Ding, T.G. Zhang, J. Zhang,
Novel naïve Bayes classiﬁcation models for predicting the chemical Ames
mutagenicity, Toxicol. In Vitro 41 (2017) 56–63.

[42] N. Zhou, W.M. Gifford, J. Yan, H. Li, End-to-end solution with clustering
in: Services Computing (SCC), 2016 IEEE

method for attrition analysis,
International Conference on, IEEE, 2016, pp. 363–370.

[43] Yan, J., Ren, Z., Zha, H., Chu, S., 2016. A constrained clustering based approach

for matching a collection of feature sets. arXiv:1606.03731.

[44] O. Younis, S. Fahmy, HEED: a hybrid, energy-efﬁcient, distributed clustering
approach for ad hoc sensor networks, IEEE Trans. Mob. Comput. 3 (4) (2004)
366–379.

