Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 

Array 

journal homepage: www.sciencedirect.com/journal/array 

Automatic optimization model of transmission line based on GIS and 
genetic algorithm 

Yuancun Qin a,1, Zhaozheng Li b, 1, Jieyu Ding c, Fei Zhao d,*, Ming Meng d 
a Yunnan Appraisal Center for Ecological and Environmental Engineering, Kunming 650228, China 
b Institute of International Rivers and Eco-Security, Yunnan University, Kunming 650500, China 
c School of Resources and Environmental Science, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430079, China 
d School of Earth Sciences, Yunnan University, Kunming 650500, China   

A R T I C L E  I N F O    

A B S T R A C T    

Keywords: 
Transmission line 
Path optimization 
GIS 
Genetic algorithm 

At present, the planning of transmission lines mainly relies on human decision-making and lacks intelligence. 
This paper combines the advantages of GIS in processing spatial data with the advantages of genetic algorithm to 
explore the optimization method of transmission line planning. The combination of GIS and genetic algorithm 
can minimize the interference of human factors and quickly solve the path planning problem of transmission 
lines. According to the theoretical model of genetic algorithm, this study constructs the transmission line opti-
mization model based on genetic algorithm, and realizes the Add-ins plug-in development of the transmission 
line  planning  model  based  on  genetic  algorithm  with  the  help  of  C  #  language.  Taking  500  kV  overhead 
transmission  line  about  150  km  from  Jiantang  Substation  (starting  point)  in  Shangri-La  County  to  Tai’  an 
Substation (ending point) in Lijiang as an example, two groups of experiments are designed under the conditions 
of  considering  traffic  single  factor  and  comprehensive  multi-factor  respectively.  It  is  obtained  that  the  path 
optimization effect of genetic algorithm is the best under the condition of comprehensive multi-factor, which 
proves the rationality and superiority of the model constructed in this study.   

1. Introduction 

Genetic  algorithm  is  a  method  to  search  the  optimal  solution  by 
simulating  the  natural  evolution  process.  This  algorithm  converts  the 
solving process of the problem into the process of crossover and muta-
tion  of  chromosome  genes  in  similar  biological  evolution,  and  can 
quickly  obtain  better  optimization  results  when  solving  complex 
combinatorial  optimization  problems.  Therefore,  it  is  widely  used  in 
optimal transmission, path planning and other fields. 

The current transmission line planning mainly relies on experienced 
professionals through map data and field survey, which requires a lot of 
time and material costs. GIS can obtain and analyze the data related to 
the  region  such  as  topography,  meteorological  environment  and  land 
use types, which is helpful to solve the problems such as location se-
lection and path optimization [1–6]. But it lacks intelligence and needs 
leadership and decision-making. 

problem of transmission lines. At present, there are few studies on this 
problem  [7–10].  It is  representative that the  improved  ant colony  al-
gorithm is combined with GIS, and the distance unit is taken as the cost 
condition of transmission line construction, which automatically gives 
the reasonable planning of power grid transmission lines in short dis-
tance [11]. The grid value searched by this scheme is converted from the 
cost index, which will change with the change of geographical and time 
conditions, and is uncertain, so there are shortcomings. This study will 
consider  the  geographical  conditions  of  natural  formation  (such  as 
topography, rivers and lakes, nature reserves, floating ice, meteorology, 
seismic belt, etc.) and social conditions of artificial formation (such as 
transportation,  land  use  types,  regional  planning,  etc.).  These  factors 
determine the difficulty of reasonable planning of power grid path and 
the  construction  cost  of  transmission  lines.  The  shortest  path  is  not 
necessarily the most reasonable path, and seeking the most reasonable 
path is the purpose of this study. 

The  combination  of  GIS  and  genetic  algorithm  can  minimize  the 
interference  of  human  factors  and  quickly  solve  the  path  planning 

In this paper, the geographical factors and human factors that affect 
the  transmission  line  planning  are  graded  and  quantified,  and  then 

* Corresponding author. 

E-mail address: vwobai@163.com (F. Zhao).   

1  Yuancun Qin and Zhaozheng Li as co-first authors，These authors contributed equally to this work. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.array.2022.100266 
Received 21 November 2022; Accepted 5 December 2022   

Array17(2023)100266Availableonline7December20222590-0056/©2022TheAuthors.PublishedbyElsevierInc.ThisisanopenaccessarticleundertheCCBYlicense(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).Y. Qin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      

weighted according to the importance, and then transformed into the 
grid  cost  value.  The  genetic  algorithm  is  used  to  construct  the  path 
optimization model that conforms to the characteristics of power grid 
transmission  line  planning.  Combined  with  GIS,  the  Add-ins  plug-in 
module  is  developed  by  C#  and  ArcObjects  components  on  ArcGIS 
platform.  Taking  the  whole  process  of  about  150  km  500  kV  trans-
mission line planning from Jiantang substation in Shangri-La to Tai ’ an 
substation in Lijiang as an example, two groups of conditions and two 
algorithms of power grid line planning experiments are carried out. One 
group only considers the single factor cost of traffic. The other group 
considers  the  comprehensive  cost  after  the  superposition  of  multiple 
influencing factors, and uses the genetic algorithm model constructed in 
this paper and Dijkstra algorithm in ArcGIS to plan the transmission line 
path. It is concluded that the path optimized by genetic algorithm is the 
best when considering various factors. 

2. Transmission line optimization model based on genetic 
algorithm 

The optimization model is divided into two parts (Fig. 1). The first 
part is the establishment of the evaluation index system and the deter-
mination of the weight. Then, the genetic algorithm is used to develop 
the  Add-ins  plug-in  of  the  transmission  line  planning  model,  and  the 
plug-in is used for actual planning. 

2.1. Evaluation index system of transmission line planning 

2.1.1. Establishment of index system 

Transmission  line  path  planning  area  is  divided  into  grids.  In  the 
area, the influence factors involved are transformed into cost to repre-
sent, and the influence degree of each influence factor is determined. 
After superposition, the cost value falls into each grid, so that all grids in 
the planning area have grid values. 

Transmission path planning needs to be fully considered, and strive 
to maximize the economic benefits of the scheme. At the same time, it 
also  needs  to  consider  the  safety  and  stability  of  the  line,  the  conve-
nience of engineering construction and maintenance and the environ-
mental  friendliness.  Therefore,  it  is  necessary  to  comprehensively 
consider  the  topographic  and  geological  conditions,  traffic,  land  use, 
disaster points, mining areas, military areas, important facilities, nature 
reserves, scenic spots and urban planning areas and other factors, and 
classify and quantify the factors and indicators affecting the line plan-
ning. In this paper, 500 kV overhead transmission line planning as an 
example, according to the ⟪100 kV–750 kV overhead transmission line 

Fig. 1. Experiment process.  

design specification⟫ [12], combined with the regional characteristics of 
Yunnan design index system as shown in Table 1. 

2.1.2. Determination of index weights by analytic hierarchy process 

Analytic  Hierarchy  Process  (AHP)  is  a  comprehensive  evaluation 
method combining qualitative and quantitative analysis of influencing 
factors. According to the opinions of power grid experts, the judgment 
matrix  of  each  factor  is  obtained,  and  the  importance  weights  of 
different target schemes or factors are obtained, as shown in Table 2. 

2.2. Transmission line planning model based on genetic algorithm 

Genetic Algorithm (GA) embodies the ’  survival of the fittest, sur-
vival of the fittest ’ evolutionary rules in the algorithm [13], the popu-
lation  iteration  based  on  genetic  selection,  crossover,  mutation 
operation,  from  each  generation  update  to  obtain  better  groups,  and 
finally get the optimal solution to meet the requirements. Transmission 
line planning is to find an optimal path or the closest optimal solution. 
The  optimal  solution  here  is  the  problem  that  requires  solutions  in 
theory or in the equation. Refer to the existing transmission line selec-
tion method [14].The idea is as follows: 

The first step is to encode the path for genetic operation; 
In  the  second  step,  generate  the  path  initial  solution,  each  initial 
solution represents a planning line, get a set of initial population, so that 
the algorithm began to search; 

The third step, combined with the requirements of transmission line 
selection,  considering  its  target  requirements,  scientific  design  fitness 
function; 

The fourth step is to design genetic operators that are convenient for 

solving and optimizing transmission lines; 
The last step, output the optimal path. 

2.2.1. Coding strategy 

The transmission line is simplified as a line segment composed of a 
series of points, which are located on the vertical lines perpendicular to 
the SE of the line segment. The solution required for the transmission 
line planning is a line that knows the optimal starting and ending points. 
Therefore, the coordinates of each point (xS, yS), (X1, Y1), (X2, Y2) … 
(Xn, Yn), (xE, yE) can be used as linear genes. The lines composed of 
these  genes  are  chromosomes  or  individuals  to  be  solved.  Due  to  the 
complex conditions and large amount of calculation involved in solving 
transmission  lines,  the  genetic  operator  will  be  designed  by  a 
knowledge-based  operator.  The  operator  is  not  only  a  numerical 
expression  but  also  carries  spatial  and  attribute  information,  so  the 
floating-point  coding  method  is  used  to  encode  genes.  Floating-point 
coding is easy to design knowledge-based genetic operators for special 
problems,  and  can  deal  with  decision  variables  with  complex  con-
straints. It can represent a larger number, obtain higher precision values, 
and improve the efficiency of the algorithm. 

2.2.2. Generation of initial populations 

When the genetic algorithm is applied to the optimization of trans-
mission lines, it is first necessary to construct individuals with alleles, so 
as to construct the plane linear model of transmission lines suitable for 
solving (Fig. 2). 

The  study  area  is  divided  by  a  regular  grid  of  a  certain  size.  It  is 
assumed that point S (XS, YS) is the starting point of the line and point E 
(XE, YE) is the end point of the line. It is assumed that the generation of 
the line does not produce a backturning curve. Connect the line segment 
SE, and divide the line segment SE into N equal parts at a certain dis-
tance, (x1, y1). (x2, y2), …, (xn, yn) are equally spaced points on the 
line.  Make  the  vertical  lines  L1、L2  ….Ln  of  SE  through  the  equally 
spaced points. Thus, the line optimization process of the transmission 
line is transformed into finding the location of the intersection points 
with the line on each vertical line. For example, randomly select points 
(X1, Y1), (X2, Y2) …, (Xn, Yn), connect these points successively from 

Array17(2023)1002662Y. Qin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      

Table 1 
500 kV transmission line path selection index system.  

500 kV transmission 

line selection 
index system 

Avoid factors 
The indicator 
system of non- 
avoidance factor 

habitation, adverse geological zone, disaster hotspots, mining area, protected areas, scenic spot and so on 
influence 
factor 
terrain 

Indicator factor grading score 
1 
1000–1500 m 

3 
3500m–5000 m 

2 
1500m–3500 m 

index factor 

4 
>5000 m  

Elevation (1/ 
3) 
altitude 
difference 
(1/3) 
Slope (1/3) 

land use 

land-use type 

Traffic 

Icing 

Filthy 

seismic 
intensity 

Distance 
from road 
Icing hazard 
level 

Pollution 
hazard level 
Seismic 
intensity 
grade 

0–20 m 

20–150 m 

More than 150 m   

◦

0–5

◦
5–15

15–25

◦

◦
25–35

Unused 
wasteland 
40–3000 m 

Slightly ice- 
covered areas 
(0–3 mm) 
I 

grassland, garden 

woodland 

3000–6000 m 

6000–9000 m 

Lightly ice- 
covered areas 
(3–6 mm) 
II 

Moderately ice 
covered areas (6–9 
mm) 
III 

≤VI 

VII 

VIII 

residential land, 
cultivated land 
9000–12000 m 

Heavy icing 
areas (>9 mm)  

IV  

≥IX  

Note: The score is 0 when the icing danger level is free icing areas (0 mm). 

Table 2 
Impact factor weight judgment matrix.  

Factor 

tearrain 

land use 

Traffic 

Filthy 

Icing 

seismic intensity 

Terrain 
land use 
Traffic 
Filthy 
Icing 
seismic intensity 

1 
1/3 
1 
1/3 
1/3 
1/3 

3 
1 
4 
2 
1/3 
2 

1 
1/4 
1 
1/4 
1/3 
1/3 

3 
1/2 
4 
1 
1 
2 

3 
3 
3 
1 
1 
2 

3 
1/2 
3 
1/2 
1/2 
1 

n ∈ [1, 2, ⋯, n], m ∈ [1, 2, ⋯, m]

5 

◦

More than 
35
water area 

≤40 m or 
≥12000 m 

weight 

0.291 
0.088 
0.320 
0.092 
0.072 
0.137  

(1) 

The  selection  of  random  points  on  the  vertical  line  is  the  key  to 
generate lines. According to the basic requirements of transmission line 
selection, this model is not in the avoidance area, as shown in Fig. 3 (a). 
The initial line generation method is as follows: Firstly, connect the stop 
point S and E to generate the line segment SE between the two points, 
and take the equidistant point set (x1, y1), (x2, y2), …, (xn, yn) on the 
line  segment  according  to  a  certain  distance  dm,  then  generate  the 
vertical line L1, L2, …, Ln of the line segment through the equidistant 
point, and finally take any point in the value range of the vertical line, 
which cannot be in the avoidance zone. The value range of the vertical 
line segment can be determined by the research range or by setting the 
corridor range of a certain distance. Combining the point sets and the 
starting and ending points on each vertical line is an initial individual 
λ1=(XS, YS), (X11, Y11), (X21, Y21), …, (Xn1, Yn1), (XE, YE). Similarly, 
an initial population P(0) is generated according to this process which 
composed of m individuals λ1,λ2, …,λm. 

2.2.3. Construction of fitness function 

The fitness function plays a decisive role in the evolution of genetic 
algorithm and finding the optimal solution. Theoretically, it is consid-
ered that the shortest line segment between two points is the optimal, as 
shown in the SE line segment in Fig. 3. However, the planning and se-
lection of transmission lines cannot only consider the goal of the shortest 
line,  because  the  complex  terrain  makes  it  difficult  to  construct  and 
maintain the lines between two points, and it is also possible to cross the 
terrain  of  ecologically  sensitive  areas,  lakes  or  cliffs.  In  this  way,  the 
planned lines will be more expensive or impossible to construct in terms 
of  construction  and  maintenance.  The  optimization  problem  in  this 
study is to find the optimal transmission line. Since the line is composed 
of points, the points can be regarded as the set of the best points found on 

Fig. 2. Transmission line plane model.  

the starting point (xS, yS) to the end point (xE, yE) to form an initial line. 
Initial population is composed of a series of initial routes, let λ be a 
route composed of a set of points, P(0) is the initial population, n is the 
number  of  equally  spaced  points,  m  is  the  population  size,  then  the 
initial population can be expressed as 

P(0) = (λ1, λ, ⋯, λm)

⎧
⎪⎪⎨

⎪⎪⎩

=

[(xS, yS), (x11, y11), (x21, y21), ⋯, (xn1, yn1), (xE, yE)],
[(xS, yS), (x12, y12), (x22, y22), ⋯, (xn2, yn2), (xE, yE)],
⋯,
[(xS, yS), (x1m, y1m), (x2m, y2m), ⋯, (xnm, ynm), (xE, yE)],

⎫
⎪⎪⎬

⎪⎪⎭

Array17(2023)1002663Y. Qin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      

Fig. 3. Genetic model,(a) Initial line generation,(b) Parent individuals before crossover,(c) Subbands generated after a sigle crossover,(d) Parent individuals before 
mutation,(e) Subbands generated after a sigle mutation,(f) Generate new individuals after improving mutation. 

the L1, L2, …, Ln vertical lines passing through the equidistant points on 
SE. The optimization problem of transmission line planning is regarded 
as the problem of minimizing the total cost of the line, and the influence 
factors involved are transformed into cost to represent. The cost value is 
dropped into each grid, and the points along the line are selected ac-
cording to a certain accuracy (the model is selected according to the grid 
size of the layer) to obtain the cost value of the grid corresponding to the 
point. The grid cost value carried by these points is the grid cost passed 
by the line, and the sum of points is the total cost of the line. The lower 
the total cost of the line, the better the target. According to the principle 
of the lowest total line cost, the fitness function is defined as: 

/

F = 1

∑N

(cid:0)

value

)

xg, yg

1

(2) 

In the formula, N = [l/D], g∈[1,2 … N], l is the length of λ of the 
transmission line, D is the size of the grid, and N is the number of points 
along the route. Value (xg,yg) is the raster cost value corresponding to 
the point taken along the road. 

2.2.4. Genetic operator design  

(1)  Selection 

In this paper, the selection strategy of random competition is adop-
ted. A pair of individuals are randomly selected at each time, and then 
the two individuals are allowed to compete. The better individuals enter 
the next generation, and the inferior individuals are directly eliminated. 
This not only ensures that the better individual can be inherited, but also 
retains the diversity of the population, and it is easier to evolve to the 
optimal solution. In this model, the individual fitness value F is used for 
random competitive selection. The operation is to randomly select two 

lines λi, λj in the group, and compare their fitness values. The higher 
fitness value F is retained and then the subsequent genetic operation is 
carried out, and the lower is directly eliminated.  

(2)  Cross 

The  design  of  the  crossover  operator  is  similar  to  that  in  binary 
coding, The superior genes are retained to the offspring through cross-
over.  In  transmission  line  planning,  that  is  to  say,  the  lines  passing 
through the low cost segments are retained while the high cost regional 
segments  are  abandoned.  The  operation  of  single-point  crossing  is 
shown in Fig. 3(b) and (c). Randomly select two linear individuals in the 
population λi and λj to obtain the coding of their linear point sets, 

λi = [(xS, yS), (X1i, Y1i), (X2i, Y2i)…(Xni, Yni), (xE, yE)]

[
(xS, yS),

(cid:0)

λj =

X1j, Y1j

(cid:0)

)
,

X2j, Y2j

(cid:0)

)
…

Xnj, Ynj

)
]
, (xE, yE)

(3) 

Random  generation  of  a  mutation  point  k  = random[1,n],  Genes 
from the two fathers are then swapped at the point of mutation to create 
a new individual: 

[

λ

′

i =

(xS,yS),(X1i,Y1i),(X2i,Y2i)…(Xki,Yki),

(cid:0)

X(k+1)j,Y(k+1)j

(cid:0)

)
…

Xnj,Ynj

]
)
,(xE,yE)

[

′

j =
λ

(cid:0)

(xS, yS),
]
(xE, yE)

X1j, Y1j

(cid:0)

)
,

X2j, Y2j

(cid:0)
)
…

(cid:0)

)
,

Xkj, Ykj

X(k+1)i, Y(k+1)i

)
…(Xni, Yni),

(4)    

(3)  Variation 

Mutation operation is to change the value of the gene site. The mu-

Array17(2023)1002664Y. Qin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      

tation operator design of transmission line profile is similar to binary 
code mutation, which regards the point set that constitutes the profile as 
gene, and the mutation operation is to carry out mutation on these point 
sets. Mutation not only increases the diversity of the population, but also 
evolves to produce individuals that avoid high cost zones. Fig. 3 (d)–(c) 
is the schematic of linear single-point variation. The idea is to randomly 
select a parent individual in the population and randomly generate a 
point k = random[1,n] with a mutation location on the individual. On 
the  vertical  line  Lk  that  the  random  point  k(xk,yk)  passes  through,  a 
point (x’ki,y’ki) that is not in the avoidance area is randomly generated. 
Then  change  the  point  (xki,yki)  on  the  original  mutation  site  to  the 
changed point (x’ki,y’ki). Thus the mutation operation is completed to 
obtain a new individual: 

[

(cid:0)
(xS, yS), (X1i, Y1i), (X2i, Y2i)…

λ

′

i =

′

′

X

ki, Y
ki

)
]
…(Xni, Yni), (xE, yE)

(5) 

However, the mutation of a single point is often unable to generate a 
new individual line that completely bypasses the high-cost region, and 
the mutation position is very abrupt, which makes it difficult for genetic 
operation to search for the optimal solution. Therefore, in order to make 
the  algorithm  converge  to  the  optimal  solution  better,  this  paper  im-
proves  the  mutation  operation,  as  shown  in  Fig.  3  (f).  The  improved 
mutation  operator  design  is  to  randomly  generate  two  points  S  =
random[k-r,k] and E = random[k,k + r] on both sides of the mutation bit 
k with a certain step size in the range of r (the points here are calculated 
as equally spaced points). If the starting and ending points S and E are in 
the range of the inclusion of R value, then S = random[1,k], E = random 
[k,k + d]; Connect the point (Xsi,Ysi) on the vertical line Ls over S to the 
point  (X’ki,Y’ki)  after  mutation,  A  new  individual  λ′
i  is  formed  by 
connecting the constructed line point (Xei,Yei) on the vertical line Le 
over the point e and the mutated point (X’ki,Y’ki), 

[

λ

′

i =

(xS, yS), (X1i, Y1i), (X2i, Y2i), ⋯, (Xsi, Ysi),

X

(

(cid:0)

X

⋯,

′

′

ki, Y
ki

)

(

, ⋯,

X

′

(e(cid:0) 1)i, Y

′
(e(cid:0) 1)i

)

, (Xei, Yei), ⋯, (Xni, Yni)(xE, yE)

(6) 

′

(s+1)i, Y

′
(s+1)i

)

,

]

The line formed in this way is relatively flat, and can better avoid the 

high cost area. 

3. Example experiment analysis 

3.1. Overview of the study area 

The study area is concentrated in the northwest of Yunnan Province, 
which shows the terrain characteristics of Yunnan Province. The area is 
less suitable for planning ultra-high voltage transmission lines and has 
typical  characteristics.  The  planning  object  is  about  150  km  500  kV 
overhead transmission line from Jiantang substation (starting point) to 
Taian substation (ending point) in Shangri-La county. 

3.2. The implementation of the model algorithm 

In this study, the ArcGIS desktop application program of ESRI Cor-
poration was adopted as the host program of the plug-in, combined with 
its  ArcObjects  object-oriented  component  library,  using  C#  as  the 
development  language,  and  developed  the  Add-Ins  plug-in  of  the 
transmission line path planning model of genetic algorithm under the 
Windows operating system. 

3.3. Data preprocessing 

The main work of data preprocessing includes: raster data correction, 
thematic  electronic  map  data  and  satellite  image  data  preparation, 
unified coordinate system, etc. According to Table 1, the impact factors 
were reclassified and assigned according to scores of 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5. 
Fig.  4  series  is  the  grid  layer  of  500  kV  transmission  line  path 

influence factor obtained after preprocessing. According to the existing 
research, when the DEM resolution is 150 m, the calculation time effi-
ciency is higher and the loss of terrain information is less [15]. There-
fore, the grid resolution of each layer is set to 150 m. 

3.4. Experiment and analysis of transmission line path optimization based 
on genetic algorithm 

In  order  to  explore  the  robustness  of  the  genetic  algorithm  model 
constructed in this paper, as well as the selection and optimization of the 
overhead transmission line path, two algorithms are selected for path 
optimization experiments under different conditions. The starting point 
of  the  experimental  line  is  Jiantang  substation,  and  the  end  point  is 
Tai’an substation. The genetic algorithm and Dijkstra algorithm are used 
to  carry  out  two  groups  of  experiments  considering  the  single  factor 
influence and multi-factor comprehensive influence of traffic. ArcGIS is 
10.2 version. 

3.4.1. Experiment 1: consider only traffic path optimization  

①  Optimization of transmission line path by genetic algorithm. 

When  only  the  traffic  factor  is  considered,  the  pre-processed  road 
score needs to be processed again. The avoidance area in the road score 
map is assigned as “9999
to facilitate genetic operation. The probability 
of crossover and mutation is set by referring to literature [16], and the 
parameter setting is shown in Table 3.  

′′

②  Dijkstra algorithm is used to optimize the path of transmission 

lines. 

The path  analysis function  of ArcGIS  is  realized based on  Dijkstra 
algorithm.  Therefore,  referring  to  the  technical  route  of  existing 
research  literature  [17,18],  we  can  directly  optimize  the  cost  path 
analysis in ArcGIS. 

3.4.2. Experiment 2: path optimization considering synthesis factors 

On the basis of Table 1, the weight value of each influencing factor is 
obtained by analytic hierarchy process, and the path optimization under 
the comprehensive factor is carried out after the comprehensive cost is 
calculated by grid superposition.  

①  The path optimization of the genetic algorithm takes into account 
the comprehensive cost, and the parameters are set according to 
Table 4. 

② Dijkstra  algorithm  considers  the  path  optimization  of  compre-
hensive cost, which is consistent with the method ② in Experi-
ment  1,  and  finally  obtains 
the  optimization  path  of 
comprehensive cost. 

After considering the comprehensive cost, the transmission line path 
optimized by the two algorithms is shown in Fig. 5. From the graph, it 
can be seen that the two paths bypass the avoidance area and distribute 
in the low cost area. It shows that the designed genetic algorithm model 
is reasonable and feasible and has robustness. 

3.5. Result analysis of optimization path 

3.5.1. Results and data analysis 

Fig. 6 shows the comparison between the four optimized paths and 
the established lines. Set the constructed path as scheme I, the optimized 
path  of  the  genetic  algorithm  and  Dijkstra  algorithm  considering  the 
comprehensive cost are respectively the II and the III, and the optimized 
path  of  the  genetic  algorithm  and  Dijkstra  algorithm  considering  the 
traffic factor are respectively the IV and the V. 

Comparison results of the five schemes are shown in Table 5. The 

Array17(2023)1002665Y. Qin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      

Fig. 4. Study area impact factor rating value map (1) Elevation value map,(2) High difference value map,(3) Slope value map,(4) Topographic features value map,(5) 
Landuse value map,(6) Road value map,(7) Seismic intensity value map,(8) Ice value map,(9) Pullution rating value map,(10) Avoidance area distribution map. 

Table 3 
Parameter setting for genetic algorithm operation considering traffic factor.  

Cost grid 

Corridor width (m) 

Interval (m) 

Number of lines 

Genetic algebra 

Crossover probability 

Mutation probability 

Mutation step (m) 

Road score chart.Tif 

10000 

500 

200 

100 

0.5 

0.1 

30  

Table 4 
Parameter setting for genetic algorithm operation considering integrated cost.  

Cost grid 

Corridor width (m) 

Interval (m) 

Number of lines 

Genetic algebra 

Crossover probability 

Mutation probability 

Mutation step (m) 

cost.Tif 

10000 

500 

200 

100 

0.5 

0.1 

30  

“line comprehensive cost value”  refers to the total cost value (dimen-
sionless) obtained from starting point to end point by summing up the 
line length of each scheme in ArcGIS10.2 according to the program of 
“element to raster” → “raster to point” → “value extraction to point” on 
the comprehensive cost layer. This value is used to uniformly measure 
the cost value of each line in the comprehensive cost. The function of 
“Comprehensive  cost  value  of  the  line  after  removing  the  contained 
collision avoidance zone grid”  is to remove the large-value grid value 
with  the  collision  avoidance  zone  grid  value  set  as  “9999
,  so  as  to 
facilitate the comparison of the comprehensive cost difference of the line 
without the collision avoidance zone. 

′′

According to the result table of the path scheme in Table 5, it can be 

seen that:  

1)  Comparing the total length of each path: II < IV < V < III < I, it can 
be  seen  that  the  path  length  optimized  by  the  two  algorithms  is 
shorter than that of the built line, and the path length obtained by 
Scheme II is the shortest.  

2)  Comparing the comprehensive cost value of the line: III < IV < II < V 
< I,  it  can  be  seen  that  after  the  algorithm  optimization,  the 
comprehensive cost value of the path decreases significantly, which 
is far lower than the initial cost value.  

3)  By comparing the number of grids in the avoidance area (one): III <
IV < II < V < I, it shows that the existing path is unreasonable in 
planning.  After  genetic  algorithm  optimization,  the  path  can  well 
bypass the avoidance area, while the optimization results of Dijkstra 
algorithm have certain defects and cannot well bypass the avoidance 
area.  

4)  The comprehensive cost values of the lines after removing the grid of 
the avoidance zone in the lines are compared: III < V < IV < II < I. 
Except  III,  the  comprehensive  cost  values  of  other  schemes  are 
similar, indicating that the genetic algorithm is intelligent. 

In summary, we can make the following judgments: 

Array17(2023)1002666Y. Qin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      

Fig. 5. Optimization path considering comprehensive cost.  

Fig. 6. Comparison diagram of test results and built path.  

1)  There are some unreasonable places in the planning of the built lines, 
such  as  passing  through  more  shelter  zones,  which  will  affect  the 
surrounding  environment;  the  path  length  and  cost  are  too  high, 
resulting in unnecessary waste.  

2)  When  the  genetic  algorithm  constructed  in  this  study  is  used  to 
optimize  the  transmission  line  path,  it  can  effectively  bypass  the 
shelter  areas  such  as  residential  areas,  disaster  points,  nature  re-
serves,  scenic  spots  and  ecologically  sensitive  areas,  making  the 
power grid path more reasonable, reducing the impact on human life 
and ecological environment, and helping people and nature coexist 
harmoniously. However, the Dijkstra algorithm cannot achieve the 
above results.  

3)  The  optimization  of  genetic  algorithm  can  shorten  the  length  of 
power  grid  path,  reduce  the  comprehensive  cost,  improve  the 
economy  and  practicability  of  transmission  lines,  and  reduce  un-
necessary waste of human and material resources. 

4) When only the single factor of traffic is considered, the results ob-
tained by either genetic algorithm or Dijkstra algorithm are not ideal. 
Therefore,  we  need  to  establish  a  comprehensive  and  objective 
evaluation system. Under the premise of synthesizing many factors, 
the algorithm is applied to optimize, so as to obtain the reasonable 
results as far as possible. 

3.5.2. Combined image analysis  

1)  The overall trend of the four optimized lines is similar to that of the 
existing lines, and the differences are mainly concentrated in local 
areas, such as ①② area in Fig. 6.  

Table 5 
Comparison table of path plan results.  

Comparative 

I 

II 

III 

IV 

V 

length (m) 
Cost 
Number of avoidance 

zones 

147904 
251790 
25 

143112 
31736 
3 

147930 
11429 
1 

143382 
21694 
2 

144645 
121662 
12 

Cost (no-avoidance zone) 

1815 

1739 

1430 

1696 

1674  

2)  It can be seen from the ① area that the path optimized by genetic 
algorithm  (scheme  II)  chooses  to  cross  the  mountain,  completely 
bypassing the urban area and considering the development trend of 
the town; as far as possible to avoid human activity areas, the impact 
on  the  lives  of  local  residents  will  be  minimized  and  planning  is 
reasonable;  III  basically  bypasses  the  town,  but  the  planning  path 
through the flat area, waste a lot of land for development, unfavor-
able for the future development of the town, the lack of long-term 
vision; both programmes IV and V chose to cross directly through 
urban areas, which affected the daily lives of the local population 
and resulted in unnecessary cost increases and lack of rationality.  
3)  It can be seen from region ② that the main difference between the 
four  optimized  lines  and  the  built  lines  is  the  selection  of  river 
crossing points (Jinsha River). The lines optimized by genetic algo-
rithm cross the river near Tai ‘an substation (which is reasonable in 
theory). The river crossing point of Dijkstra optimization path is in 
the north of II, and the river crossing point of the built line is the 
furthest from Tai ‘an substation. The selection of river crossing points 
needs  to  consider  the  river  width  and  certain  engineering 

Array17(2023)1002667Y. Qin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      

construction  requirements.  According  to  the  actual  situation,  the 
river crossing point of I is reasonable. 

Projects [grant number 202001BB050030]. 

References 

[1] Sun Hong. Path optimization of ultra-high voltage transmission lines based on GIS 

technologys. Hohhot: Inner Mongolia Normal University; 2010. 

[2] Singh S, Behera SN. Development of GIS-based optimization method for selection 
of transportation routes in municipal solid waste management. Adv Waste Manag 
2019 pp 319–331. 

[3] Du P, Hu H. Optimization of tourism route planning algo-rithm for forest wetland 

based on GIS. J Discrete Math Sci Cryptogr 2018;21(2):283–8. 

[4] Yuan Shaoxiong, Huang Guangqing, Chen Wenyin, et al. Site-scale constructed 

wetland site selection based on GIS spatial analysis. Geospat Inf 2018;105(5). 9,54- 
57,66. 

[5] Liu Xiaolin, Wen Chengjie, Zhang Jiangshui. Analysis of spatial location selection 

using GIS. Geomat Spatial Inf Technol 2010;33(4):19–21. 

[6] Yang Jia. Research on road route optimization system based on GIS platform. 

Chongqing: Chongqing Jiaotong University; 2008. 

[7] Xu Ting, Sheng Ming, Lou Cairong. Logistics distribution center’s allocation based 

on GIS and ant colony algorithm. Sci Surv Mapp 2010;33(4):19–21. 

[8] Li Xiaobao, Yang Kuo, Hu Mengjin. Evaluation of transmission line path scheme 
based on GIS and fuzzy analytic hierarchy process. Electr Eng Abstr 2017;(3):26–9. 

[9] Torre TDL, Feltes JW, Roman TGS, et al. De-regulation, privatization, and 

competition: transmission planning under uncertainty. IEEE Trans Power Syst 
2002;14(2):460–5. 

[10] Ye Yali. Research and development of highway intelligent line selection and 

decision support system. Xian: Chang’an University; 2010. 

[11] Su Haifeng, Yang Kuo, Liang Zhirui. Automatic route planning of transmission lines 
based on improved ant colony algorithm. Electr Power Automat Equipm 2016;36 
(12):109–14. 

[12] Code for design of 110kV~750kV overhead transmission line: GB50545-2010. 

Beijing: China Planning Press; 2010. 

[13] Aventze T. Intelligent GIS: location decisions and strategic planning. J Retailing 

Consum Serv 1998;50(5):257–8. 

[14] Chen Zhongwei, Peng Kangbo, Huang Lai, Wang Yichao, Wu Xiaozhong, Xie Jiang, 

Hou Yiling, Xiao Zhenfeng, Civilization transmission line selection methods and 
systems [P].Beijing : CN107480373B, 2020-11-06. 

[15] Xie Fei. Research on the relationship between integrated terrain complexity and 

grid resolution based on DEM. Kuming: Yunnan University; 2017. 

[16] Dijk SV, Thierens D, Berg MD. Using genetic algorithms for solving hard problems 

in GIS. GeoInformatica 2002;6(4):381–413. 

[17] Zhou Qinfang. Research on the selection of 500kV transmission line path based on 

GIS-Tuoba hydropower station to Taian substation as example. Kuming: Yunnan 
University; 2012. 

[18] Zhang Chao, Li Xin, Zhao Xiangwei. Transmission line path planning based on 
improved Dijkstra algorithm [J].Power Surv Design, 2022 (02): 1-5.DOI : 
10.13500/j.dlkcsj.issn1671-9913.2022.02.001.  

Yuancun Qin received a M.S. degree from Yunnan University, 
Kunming,  China,  in  2018.  She  is  currently  an  engineer  in 
Yunnan  Appraisal  Center  for  Ecological  and  Environmental 
Engineering,  Kunming,  China.  Her  main  research  interests 
include  geospatial  information  applications  and  intelligent 
GIS. Email: qycynkm@163.com  

Zhaozheng Li received a B.S. degree from Yunnan University, 
Kunming,  China,  in  2021.  He  is  currently  pursuing  an  M.S. 
degree  at  School  of  International  Institute  of  River  and 
Ecological Security, Yunnan University, Kunming, China. His 
main  research  interests  include  spatial  data  matching  and 
pattern recognition. Email: a769268749@163.com  

According  to  the  comprehensive  calculation  data  results  and  the 
image analysis of the path, the path chosen by this experiment scheme II 
is the optimal one in theory, it can effectively bypass the avoidance zone, 
can search a path with the shortest length and can weigh the factors that 
have an impact on the transmission line planning, and it is relatively 
scientific and reasonable. 

4. Conclusion 

In order to realize automatic power grid path optimization, this study 
combines genetic algorithm with GIS, and designs a transmission line 
optimization  model  based  on  genetic  algorithm  by  analyzing  the 
application of GIS and artificial intelligence in the field of power grid 
path optimization. At the same time, the Add-ins plug-in development of 
transmission line planning model based on genetic algorithm is realized 
by C # language. Taking 500 kV overhead transmission line about 150 
km  from  Jiantang  Substation  (starting  point)  to  Tai  ’an  Substation 
(ending point) in Shangri-La County as the planning object, the model is 
verified and discussed, and the rationality and superiority of the model 
are finally proved. 

Due to the lack of knowledge about power grid erection, there may 
be omissions in considering the cost problem, so the evaluation index 
system of transmission lines can be further discussed. At the same time, 
because the analytic hierarchy process depends on expert opinions to 
determine  the  weight,  the  next  step  can  refer  to  the  idea  of  multi- 
objective  genetic  algorithm  to  optimize,  reduce  the  influence  of 
human subjectivity on the experiment, improve intelligence. 

Finally, the following results are obtained: 

(1) The  transmission  line  optimization  model  based  on  genetic  al-
gorithm is designed. According to the structural characteristics of 
genetic  algorithm,  the  floating-point  coding  method  is  used  to 
design  the  appropriate  genetic  operator,  and  the  planar  linear 
model  of  transmission  line  is  constructed  after  considering  the 
generation  mode  of  initial  population  and  the  fitness  function. 
Develop the Add-ins plug-in. With the help of C # language, a 
plug-in that can realize the optimization function of genetic al-
gorithm is developed. 

(2) The superiority of genetic algorithm in power grid path optimi-
zation  is  discussed  with  examples.  Taking  500  kV  overhead 
transmission line about 150 km from Jiantang Substation (start-
ing  point)  in  Shangri-La  County  to  Tai’  an  Substation  (ending 
point) in Lijiang as an example, two groups of experiments are 
designed under the conditions of considering traffic single factor 
and comprehensive multi-factor respectively. It is obtained that 
the path optimization effect of genetic algorithm is the best under 
the  condition  of  comprehensive  multi-factor,  which  proves  the 
rationality and superiority of the model constructed in this study. 

Declaration of competing interest 

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence 
the work reported in this paper. 

Data availability 

Data will be made available on request. 

Acknowledgements 

This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation 
of China [grant number 51467022], the Yunnan Fundamental Research 

Array17(2023)1002668Y. Qin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      

JieYu  Ding  received  a  B.S.  degree  from  Yunnan  University, 
Kunming,  China,  in  2020.  She  is  currently  pursuing  an  M.S. 
degree  in  cartography  and  geography  information  system  at 
Wuhan  University,  Wuhan,  China.  Her  research  interests 
information  visualization.  Email: 
include  geographic 
jadeding@whu.edu.cn  

Ming Meng is currently a professor in the School of Earth Sci-
ences, Yunnan University, Kunming, China. His main research 
interests include spatial information visualization, intelligent 
geographic  information  system  and  intelligent  map.  E-mail: 
mengming586@sina.com 

Fei  Zhao  received  a  Ph.D.  from  Wuhan  University,  Wuhan, 
China, in 2012.  He is currently an associate professor in the 
School of Earth Sciences, Yunnan University, Kunming, China. 
His  main  research  interests  include  cartography  and  spatial 
analysis. Email: vwobai@163.com  

Array17(2023)1002669