Applied Computing and Informatics (2016) 12, 117–127

Saudi Computer Society, King Saud University

Applied Computing and Informatics

(http://computer.org.sa)
www.ksu.edu.sa
www.sciencedirect.com

ORIGINAL ARTICLE

Multi Filtration Feature Selection (MFFS) to
improve discriminatory ability in clinical data set

S. Sasikala a,*, S. Appavu alias Balamurugan b, S. Geetha c

a Anna University, Tamil Nadu, India
b K.L.N. College of Information Technology, Tamil Nadu, India
c Thiagarajar College of Engineering, Tamil Nadu, India

Received 13 June 2013; revised 21 March 2014; accepted 29 March 2014
Available online 5 April 2014

KEYWORDS

Medical data mining;
Biomedical classiﬁcation;
Variance coverage factor;
Principal Component
Analysis;
Multi Filtration Feature
Selection

Abstract Selection of optimal features is an important area of research in medical data mining
systems. In this paper we introduce an efﬁcient four-stage procedure – feature extraction, feature
subset selection, feature ranking and classiﬁcation, called as Multi-Filtration Feature Selection
(MFFS), for an investigation on the improvement of detection accuracy and optimal feature subset
selection. The proposed method adjusts a parameter named ‘‘variance coverage’’ and builds the
model with the value at which maximum classiﬁcation accuracy is obtained. This facilitates the
selection of a compact set of superior features, remarkably at a very low cost. An extensive exper-
imental comparison of the proposed method and other methods using four different classiﬁers
(Naı¨ ve Bayes (NB), Support Vector Machine (SVM), multi layer perceptron (MLP) and J48 deci-
sion tree) and 22 different medical data sets conﬁrm that the proposed MFFS strategy yields
promising results on feature selection and classiﬁcation accuracy for medical data mining ﬁeld of
research.

ª 2014 King Saud University. Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article
under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/3.0/).

1. Introduction

Data mining application in medicine has proved to be a
successful strategy in the areas of medical services including

* Corresponding author. Tel.: +91 9443831534.
E-mail addresses: nithilannsasikala@yahoo.co.in (S. Sasikala), app_s@
yahoo.com (S. Appavu alias Balamurugan), sgeetha@tce.edu (S. Geetha).
Peer review under responsibility of King Saud University.

Production and hosting by Elsevier

prediction of usefulness of surgical procedures, clinical tests,
medication procedures, and the discovery of associations
among clinical and diagnosis data [37]. The applicability of
data mining for healthcare applications is increasingly gaining
importance. The availability of diverse-natured medical data
for diagnosis and prognosis and of pervasive data mining tech-
niques to process these data offers medical data mining a dis-
tinctive place to truly assist and impact patient care.

Due to proliferation of synergized information from enor-
mous patient repositories, there is a paradigm shift in the
insight of patients, clinicians and payers from qualitative anal-
ysis of clinical data to demanding a better quantitative visual-
ization of information based on all supporting medical data.

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.aci.2014.03.002
2210-8327 ª 2014 King Saud University. Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V.
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/3.0/).

118

S. Sasikala et al.

For instance, the physicians can evaluate the diagnostic infor-
mation of many patients with identical conditions. In the same
way, they can verify their ﬁndings too, with the conformity of
peer physicians working on similar cases in other parts of the
world. The patterns that are discovered denote valuable
knowledge that helps medical discoveries, for example discov-
ering that a certain combination of features may help in better,
and more accurate diagnosis of a particular disease. Accurate
diagnosis of diseases and subsequently, providing efﬁcient
treatment, form an important part of valuable medical services
given for patients in a health-care system.

The unique characteristics of medical databases that pose
challenges for data mining are the privacy-sensitive, heteroge-
neous, and voluminous data. These data may have valuable
information which awaits extraction. The required knowledge
is found to be encapsulated in/as various regularities and pat-
terns that may not be apparent in the raw data. Extracting
such knowledge has proved to be priceless for future medical
decision making. Feature selection is crucial for analysing
various dimensional bio-medical data. It is difﬁcult for the
biologists or doctors to examine the whole feature-space
obtained through clinical laboratories at one time. In machine
learning, all the computational algorithms recommend only
few signiﬁcant features for disease diagnosis. Then these rec-
ommended signiﬁcant features may help doctors or experts
to understand the biomedical mechanism better with a deeper
knowledge about the cause of disease and provide the fastest
diagnosis for recovering the infected patients as early as
possible.

Feature selection methods [12] tend to identify the features
most relevant for classiﬁcation and can be broadly categorized
as either subset selection methods or ranking methods. The
former type returns a subset of the original set of features
which are considered to be the most important for classiﬁca-
tion. Ranking methods sort the features according to their use-
fulness in the classiﬁcation task. Most of
the classiﬁers,
irrespective of
the application domain, uses the ranking
strategy to select the ﬁnal feature subset, in an ad hoc manner.
Feature selection, as a pre-processing step to machine learning,
is prominent and effective in dimensionality reduction, by
removing irrelevant and redundant data, increasing learning
accuracy, and improving result comprehensibility. Feature
selection algorithms generally fall into two broad categories,
the ﬁlter model and the wrapper model [37].The ﬁlter model
depends on general characteristics of the training data to select
some features without involving any learning algorithm. The
ﬁlter model assesses the relevance of features from data alone,
independent of classiﬁers, using measures like distance, infor-
mation, dependency (correlation), and consistency. The ﬁlter
method is further classiﬁed into Feature Subset Selection
(FSS) and Feature Ranking (FR) methods. The wrapper
model needs one predetermined learning algorithm in feature
selection and uses its performance to evaluate and determine
which features are selected. For each of the generated new sub-
set of features, the wrapper model is supposed to learn the
hypothesis of a classiﬁer. It has a propensity to ﬁnd features
better suited to the predetermined learning algorithm resulting
in superior learning performance, but it also tends to take
more computation time and is economically more expensive
than the ﬁlter model [37]. Whenever dealing with a large num-
ber of features, the ﬁlter model is usually chosen due to its high
accuracy [9]. The hybrid model takes the advantages of the two

previous models, and uses an independent measure to identify
the best subsets for a given cardinality and applies a mining
algorithm to select the best subset among all best subsets
across different cardinalities. However, the ensemble of a ﬁlter
based model with another ﬁlter based model, once for subset
selection and again for ranking proves to be a promising
approach, for medical data mining. The ensemble is brought
about in a fashion so as to reduce the number of features
and also to enhance the classiﬁcation accuracy.

The objective of this research work is aimed at showing that
the selection of more signiﬁcant features from the available
raw medical dataset helps the physician to arrive at an accurate
diagnosis. The primary focus is on aggressive dimensionality
reduction so as to end up with increase in the prediction accu-
racy. The features are subjected to a double ﬁltration process,
at the end of which, only the features that increase the accu-
racy, and form the subset with the lowest cardinality, with
their corresponding rank, are obtained. The method employs
an efﬁcient strategy of ensemble feature correlation with rank-
ing method. The empirical results show that the proposed
Multi Filtration Feature Selection (MFFS) embedded classiﬁer
model achieves remarkable dimensionality reduction in the 22
medical datasets obtained from the UCI Machine Learning
repository [10] and Kentridge repository [13].

2. Related work

Numerous works have been carried out in the ﬁeld of dimen-
sionality reduction for medical diagnosis. The following
section presents the summary of those works, highlighting
the strengths and weaknesses of each method.

It could be observed that the naive Sequential Forward
Feature Selection (SFFS) (pure wrapper approach) [5]
is
impractical for feature subset selection from a large number
of samples of high-dimensional features. Hence Gan et al. [4]
proposed the Filter-Dominating Hybrid Sequential Forward
Feature Selection (FDHSFFS) algorithm for high dimensional
feature subset selection. This method proved to be fast but
demanded huge computational complexity. Another variant
of the SFFS method called improved F-score and Sequential
Forward Search (IFSFS) was proposed by Xie and Wang
[36] for feature selection to diagnose erythemato-squamous
disease. This method was designed so as to improve the
F-score and measured the discrimination between more than
two sets of real numbers instead of measuring between only
two sets of real numbers. The method’s applicability to other
medical data sets was not reported and hence it was a very
the diagnosis of erythemato-
speciﬁc system targeted at
squamous disease only.

Another category of feature selection methods used Mutual
Information score. Vinh et al. [32] proposed a novel feature
selection method based on the normalization of this well-
information measurement and utilized the
known mutual
information measurement to estimate the potential of the
features. The method could not eclipse the strongly correlated
features
impact on the classiﬁcation results. Correlated
features may be accounted for redundancy and hence a single
representative feature from that subset may be selected for
further processing.
An incremental

learning algorithm in which the most
informative features are learnt at each step, is proposed by

MFFS

119

Ruckstieb et al. [26] and is called as Sequential Online Feature
Selection (SOFS). Another Scatter Search-based approach
coupled with Decision Trees (SS+DT) is proposed by Lin
and Chen [17]. The method acquired optimal parameter set-
tings and selected the beneﬁcial subset of features that resulted
in better classiﬁcation results. In [16] Koprinska empirically
evaluated feature selection methods
for classiﬁcation of
Brain–Computer Interface (BCI) data. A new feature selection
method based on rough set theory has been proposed by Paul
and Maji [23]. The proposed method identiﬁed discriminative
and signiﬁcant genes from high-dimensional microarray gene
expression data sets.

Correlation Based Filter [3,18] is another strategy for fea-
ture selection. Ensemble methods have also been proposed.
Raymer et al. [25] proposed a hybrid algorithm that coupled
a genetic algorithm with k-nearest-neighbour classiﬁer and
applied it for protein–water binding from X-ray crystallo-
graphic protein structure data. MonirulKabi et al. [20] pre-
sented a new Hybrid Genetic Algorithm (HGA) for Feature
Selection (FS), called as HGAFS. It employed a new local
search operation that is devised and embedded in HGA to
ﬁne-tune the search in feature selection process. The search
process is guided in such a way that the less correlated (dis-
tinct) features consisting of general and special characteristics
of a given data set are generated in subsequent iterations.

that

A new approach called Redundancy Demoting (RD) has
been proposed by Osl et al. [22]. It takes an arbitrary feature
ranking as input, and performs improvement in ranking by
identifying redundant features and demoting them to positions
in the ranking in which they are not redundant. Hybrid
combine wrapper-based and ﬁlter-based
schemes
approaches are also in the literature [2,11,30] are such schemes
where the features are ranked and then selected so as to offer
superior classiﬁcation accuracy. In the ﬁrst stage, the ﬁlter
model is used to rank the features by the relief algorithm
and then the highest relevant features are chosen to the classes
with the help of the threshold. In the second stage, they used
shapely values to evaluate the contribution of features to the
classiﬁcation task in the ranked feature subset. Tanwani
et al. [31] gave a study on comprehensive evaluation of a set
of diverse machine learning schemes on a number of biomed-
ical datasets. Sanchez-Monedero et al. [27] studied and pro-
posed the suitability of Extreme Learning Machines (ELM)
for resolving bio-informatics and biomedical classiﬁcation
problems.

After reviewing the works on feature selection for medical
dataset [29] it is observed that most of the existing methods
suffer from the following problems: (1) depending on the com-
plexity of the search method, the iterations of evaluations are
too large; (2) they rely on a univariate ranking that does not
take into account interaction between the variables already
included in the selected subset and the remaining ones. More-
over, a method that produces the best accuracy employs more
number of features and hence more running time is involved in
the construction of the respective classiﬁers. Contrarily, a
method that outputs the fewest number of features produces
inferior detection accuracy. A holistic and universal method
that achieves the best classiﬁcation accuracy with fewest
features possible is still an open research problem. This paper
makes an attempt to design such a feature selection sequence
and it
‘‘Multi Filtration Feature Selection
(MFFS)’’.

is called as

This paper is organized as follows: Section 3 describes the
proposed method with the suitable algorithm. Experimental
results and discussions are presented in Section 4. The paper
is concluded with a mention on the future scope of this work.

3. Proposed system

The proposed method involves four stages. The entire system
ﬂow of the proposed model is shown in Fig. 1. The individual
stages are described in the following text.

3.1. System ﬂow of the proposed method

3.1.1. Stage 1 – Relevant Feature Generation Phase (RFGP)

A representative of unsupervised dimensionality reduction
method is Principal Component Analysis (PCA) [14,39] which
aims at identifying a lower-dimensional space maximizing the
variance among data [38]. PCA is a very effective approach
of extracting features [6,21].

Let us denote the multi-dimensional dataset in the form of a
matrix, A. The dimensions actually represent directions along
which the data vary. The feature generation process, which
removes the irrelevant features and redundant features, mainly
ﬁnds an approximate ‘‘basis’’ to the set of directions. Only the
crucial dimensions that serve as the corner stone upon which
other dimensions are dependent are generated from the given
dataset. The redundant-duplicate dimensions are ﬁnally elimi-
nated with the sense that they can be reconstructed easily from
the available set of basis dimensions. This is equivalent to ﬁnd-
ing the dimensions with maximal variance, since the points are
found to be constant approximately along other dimensions.
Variance factor is an important measure that denotes the
degree of data spread in a multi-dimensional dataset. Thus
dimensionality reduction is effectively contributed from this
ﬁrst step of ﬁltration by choosing appropriate variance factor
at which the system yields the minimum number of features
with maximum accuracy.

Medical 
Dataset

MFFS
Engine

Stage 1

Relevant Feature Generation 
Phase (RFGP)

Stage 2

Feature Ranking Phase (FRP)

Stage 3

Feature Re-Ranking Phase 
(FRRP)

Stage 4

Classifier Evaluation: NB, SVM, J48, MLP

Expert’s 
Decision

# of Features

Running Time

Accuracy

Fig. 1

System ﬂow of the proposed MFFS model.

120

S. Sasikala et al.

The basic theoretical idea behind PCA is ﬁnding the princi-
pal components of the dataset that correspond to the compo-
nents along which the variation is the most. This is achieved by
ﬁnding the covariance matrix, i.e., we ﬁnd the principal com-
ponents of the data, which correspond to the components
along which there is the most variation. This can be done using
the covariance matrix, AAT for our input matrix A, as follows.
Let the eigen values be represented as ki for the covariance
matrix. Then, the corresponding diagonal matrix is given in
Eq. (1) as:
2

3

7
7
7
7
5

ð1Þ

L ¼

6
6
6
6
4

k1
0

0

0 . . . 0
k2 . . . 0
.
..
0 . . . kn

The eigenvectors vi of the matrix should satisfy AAT as given
in Eq. (2) as

AATvi¼ kivi

ð2Þ

xij ¼

q

On rewriting eigenvectors of the dataset as the rows of a
matrix P, the system becomes

AATP ¼ LP

ð3Þ

It is apparent from Eq. (3) that the columns of this matrix P
represents the principal components of the original matrix
and hence conﬁnes to the directions of most variance [39,38].
PCA employs the entire features and it acquires a set of
projection vectors to extract global feature from given training
samples. The approach mainly consists of
three primary
processes such distinction process, binary session and pattern
generation [29]. All these ﬂavours make PCA [21] more suit-
able for applying on medical datasets, which typically have
these characteristics. The variance coverage factor is playing
a signiﬁcant role in deciding the important features and hence
this parameter is tuned so as to capture the classiﬁer model
with the best results.

3.1.2. Stage 2 – Feature Ranking Phase (FRP)

The correlation between each feature and the class and
between two features can be measured and best-ﬁrst search
can be exploited in searching for a feature subset of maximum
overall correlation to the class and minimum correlation
among selected features. This is realized in the Correlation-
based Feature Selection (CFS) method [7]. Correlation based
Feature Selection is an algorithm that couples this evaluation
formula with an appropriate correlation measure and a heuris-
tic search strategy. CFS quickly identiﬁes and screens irrele-
vant, redundant, and noisy features, and identiﬁes relevant
features as long as their relevance does not strongly depend
on other features. CFS is a fully automatic algorithm––it does
not require the user to specify any thresholds or the number of
features to be selected, although both are simple to incorporate
if desired. CFS operates on the original (albeit discretized) fea-
ture space, meaning that any knowledge induced by a learning
algorithm, using features selected by CFS, can be interpreted
in terms of the original features, not in terms of a transformed
space. Most importantly, CFS is a ﬁlter, and, as such, does not
incur the high computational cost associated with repeatedly
invoking a learning algorithm.

The suggestion used by the CFS is on the basis that always
features strongly correlated with the predicted class form the
good feature subset than the features correlated with each
other. The feature subset created by the CFS is computed by
the merit of the feature subset ‘S’ containing ‘k’ features as
in Eq. (4).

The following equation provides the merit of the feature

subset ‘S’.

Merits ¼

kxcf
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
k þ kðk (cid:2) 1Þxff

p

ð4Þ

where Merits is the evaluating hypothesis of a feature subset ‘S’
containing ‘k’ features, xfc is the average value of feature–class
correlation, and xff
is the average value of feature–feature
inter correlation.

The correlation between two entities ‘i’ and ‘j’, xij is calcu-

lated as in Eq. (5)

Pði (cid:2) iÞðj (cid:2) jÞ
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
(cid:3)½P ðj (cid:2) jÞ
½P ði (cid:2) iÞ
2
2
(cid:3)

:

ð5Þ

where ‘i’ is the record’s value of the independent variable and
‘j’ is record’s value of the dependent variable which may be
either feature or class label. (cid:2)i and (cid:2)j are the means of the values
of the independent and dependent variables, respectively.

3.1.3. Stage 3 – Feature Re-Ranking Phase (FRRP)

In spite of feature extraction and selection, a problem is persis-
tent namely the classiﬁer may be biased towards the attributes
with more values. Hence this biased nature has to be elimi-
nated for which we employ Symmetrical Uncertainty (SU). It
overcomes the problem of bias towards attributes with more
values, by dividing information gain by the sum of the entro-
pies of feature subsets Si and Sj.

Symmetry is a desired property for a measure of correla-
tions between features. However, information gain is biased
in favour of features with more values. Furthermore, the val-
ues have to be normalized to ensure they are comparable
and have the same inﬂuence. Therefore, we choose symmetri-
cal uncertainty. It compensates for information gain’s bias
towards features with more values and normalizes its values
to the range [0; 1] with value 1 indicating that knowledge of
the value of either one completely predicts the value of the
other and value 0 indicating that X and Y are independent.
In addition, it still treats a pair of features symmetrically.
Entropy-based measures require nominal features, but they
can be applied to measure correlations between continuous
features as well,
if the values are discretized properly in
advance. Therefore, we use symmetrical uncertainty in this
work.

As CFS uses the best-ﬁrst strategy search method to calcu-
late the merit of the feature subset, however there is a necessity
to ﬁx the stopping criteria. Due to this strictly needed
constrain correlation between features is computed using
Symmetrical Uncertainty (SU) as speciﬁed in Eq. (6).

SU ¼ 2:0 (cid:4)

(cid:4)
(cid:3)
HðSjÞ þ HðSiÞ (cid:2) HðSi; SjÞ
HðSjÞ þ HðSiÞ

ð6Þ

where H(Sj) and H(Si, Sj) are deﬁned as in Eqs. (7) and
(8) as:

MFFS

121

n
Input   :Training set with '
' features and '

m

m,n
Output : Best Feature Subset,MaxAccuracy,MinError,respectiveVariance Coverage Factor(δ)

1,n, 1

1,2

1,1

'  samples - {(x ,x ,...,x y )......(x

,x
m,1 m,2

,...,x

,y )}
m

/

/Initialization
←

1.δ

0.45,BestFeatureSubset

←

{},S

← ∅

Phase I - Relevant Feature Generation Phase:

       2.By forward feature selection strategy, populate features into S, where S is the feature subset. 

    3. For each FeatureSubset S,

       4.ExtractedData = evaluatePCA(S,δ)
       5.if (ExtractedData>BestFeatureSubset) then

       6.BestFeatureSubset=ExtractedData
       7.δ=δ+0.05

       8.Repeat step

s 2 to 7 until δ=0.95; Record the δ value and the respective BestFeatureSubset that gives maximum accuracy.

Phase II - Feature Ranking Phase:

       9.Perform Correlation-based heuristic evaluation  on 

BestFeatureSubset using

                  Merit =

S

cf

kω
(
)
k+k k-1ω

ff

       10.Arrange the BestFeatureSubset in the decreasing order of the Merit score.

Phase III - Feature Re-Ranking Phase:

       11.Rank[]=Cr

eate a Rank for BestFeatureSubset by usign Ranking-based heuristic of symmetrical uncertainty using

                SU=2.0×S

⎡
⎢
⎢
⎣

H(S )+H(S )-H(S ,S )
j
i
j
H(S )+H(S )
i

j

i

⎤
⎥
⎥
⎦

       12.Return the re-ranked BestFea

tureSubset 

Phase IV - Classifier Evaluation Phase:

       13.Run a 10-fold CrossValidation on the Original feature set and BestFeaturesubset 
            using the Naive Bayes,SVM, J48,MLP classifier models.

       14.Record the model that yields the maximum accuracy and minimum error.
       15.Return BestFeatureSubset,MaxAccuracy,MinError,respectiveVariance Coverage Factor(δ)

Fig. 2 Algorithm of the proposed MFFS model.

HðSjÞ ¼ (cid:2)

X

fseFSj

pðSjÞlog2ðpðSjÞÞ

ð7Þ

be obtained. Hence the proposed scheme is designed with
Multi Filtration Feature Selection (MFFS) as the central logic.

where a realistic model of a feature Sj can be formed by
evaluating the training data, considering the individual’s
probability values of Sj. A new feature subset Si can be worked
out by partitioning the previously existing feature subset Sj,
then the relationship between subsets Si and Sj is given by:

HðSi; SjÞ ¼ (cid:2)

X

PðSiÞ

X

PðSi=SjÞlog2PðSi=SjÞ

ð8Þ

xeX

yeY

The algorithm is better explained by the Fig. 2.

3.1.4. Stage 4 – Classiﬁer Evaluation

The proposed system is validated against standard successful
classiﬁer models [35]. Classiﬁers are constructed with the ﬁnal
subset of features obtained after subjecting the datasets to
RFGP, FRP and FRRP steps sequentially. A detailed insight
into various classiﬁers is presented in Section 4.4.

It consists of the following steps:

4. Test results and discussion

4.1. Test scenario

Empirical study with the synthetic datasets has been executed,
to investigate the performance of the proposed algorithm in
the following perspectives:

1. Classiﬁcation accuracy
2. Number of features selected
3. Average running time

Datasets, test set-up, procedure and objectives for the tests
necessary for the evaluation of these goals are described below.

3.2. Algorithm for the proposed MFFS model

4.2. Datasets

Traditional ﬁlter approaches usually select the top ranked fea-
tures or eliminate the irrelevant features by using a threshold
criterion. Since prediction is made after the single ﬁltering
phenomenon, they report feeble accuracy. Alternatively, when
ﬁltering is done, more than once, an improved accuracy may

The proposed approach has been evaluated by experiments on
22 biomedical datasets from the UCI machine learning repos-
itory [10] and Kentridge repository [13]. The 22 biomedical
datasets used to test the proposed approach are summarized
in Table 1. The last column in Table 1 indicates the ‘‘imbalance

122

S. Sasikala et al.

ratio’’ present in each dataset. It is the ratio between the
cardinality of the class with the maximum instance to the
cardinality of the class with the minimum instance.

4.3. Test set-up

The tests are carried out in a system with Intel i5, 8 GB RAM,
DDR3, 500 GB hard drive on a Windows XP operating
system. The proposed algorithm is implemented using Weka
[34]. WEKA is acknowledged as a landmark system in the ﬁeld
of machine learning and data mining. It has attained wide-
spread acceptance among the academia and industry spheres,
and has become a widely used tool for data mining research.
Another ﬂavour that is highly encouraging is its ‘‘Open
Source’’ nature. The free access given to the source code has
enabled us to develop and customize the modules matching
our work. The stepwise approach is as follows. The input to
the system is given in the Attribute-Relation File Format
(ARFF). The proposed algorithm is executed and the features
in the ranked order are obtained as the output. A result is
created in Weka using the name speciﬁed in n@relation’’.
The attributes speciﬁed under n@attribute’’ and instances
speciﬁed under n@data’’ are retrieved from the ARFF ﬁle
and then they are added to the created table. 10-fold cross
validation is performed for all classiﬁers [8]. Fifty runs were
done for each classiﬁcation algorithm on each dataset with
features selected by MFFS method. In each run, a dataset
was split into training and testing set, randomly. The results
obtained are shown in Tables 2–9.

4.4. Classiﬁcation Models

4.4.1. Model M1 – Naı¨ve Bayes (NB)

Naı¨ ve Bayesian Classiﬁer is a simple probabilistic classiﬁer [35]
with an assumption of conditional independence among the
features, i.e., the presence (or absence) of a particular feature
of a class is unrelated to the presence (or absence) of any other
feature. It only requires a small amount of training data to
estimate the parameters necessary for classiﬁcation. Many
experiments have demonstrated that NB classiﬁer has worked
quite well in various complex real-world situations and outper-
forms many other classiﬁers. Kernel estimation has been used
in cases of datasets with numerical attributes. Also supervised
discretization is done for converting numerical attributes to
nominal ones.

4.4.2. Model M2 – Support Vector Machine (SVM)

SVM [13,19] ﬁnds the hyper plane with maximum margin in
between two classes. The Support Vector Machine (SVM) is
actually based on learning with kernels some of which form
the support vectors. A great advantage of this technique is that
it can use large input data and feature sets. Thus, it is easy to
test the inﬂuence of the number of features on classiﬁcation
accuracy. We implemented SVM classiﬁcation [28] for two
types of kernels: polynomial kernel and Gaussian kernel
(Radial Basis Function – RBF). The SVM model with com-
plexity parameter C as 1.0, epsilon as 1.0E(cid:2)12, normalized
training data, RBF kernel with gamma as 0.0.1, and tolerance
parameters as 0.0010 produced the best results.

4.4.3. Model M3 – Decision Tree (DT)

A decision tree [1,33] is a predictive machine-learning model
that decides the target value (dependent variable) of a new
sample based on various attribute values of the available data.
Decision tree’s internal node represents different attributes; the
branches between the nodes tell us the possible values that
these attributes can have in the observed samples, while the
end nodes are the target class labels. The J48 decision tree clas-
siﬁer [24] operates on the basis of constructing a tree and
branching it based on the attribute with the highest informa-
tion gain. The J48 tree with binary split allowed a conﬁdence
factor of 0.25 and reduced error pruning is employed.

4.4.4. Model M4 – Multilayer perceptron (MLP)

An MLP [15] can be viewed as a logistic regression, where the
input is ﬁrst transformed using a learnt non-linear transforma-
tion. The purpose of this transformation is to project the input
data into a linearly separable space. This intermediate layer is
referred to as a hidden layer. We have employed a back-
propagation network with 0.3 as learning rate and 0.02 as
momentum. The attributes are normalized in the range of
(0.1, 0.9). The training was carried out for 500 epochs.

4.5. Test procedure

For realizing dimension reduction via PCA, the orthogonal
base components are obtained out of the datasets through lin-
ear transformation. For the evaluation the PCA variance cov-
erage parameter d is varied in the range of (0.45, 0.95). In
preliminary test d values outside this range did not lead to
useful results for the analysis. So we tested in this range. The
proposed MFFS calculates the correlations of feature-class
and feature–feature using CFS and the feature subset space
is searched. The subset with the highest merit is subjected to
analysis. Then the resulting subset is re-ranked using symmet-
rical uncertainty principle. For performance analysis, the mod-
els M1-M4, generated according to the earlier discussion are
applied to the optimal feature subset, returned after MFFS
steps. The best accuracy in percentage along with the respec-
tive variance coverage and the number of features involved
to achieve it are returned.

4.6. Test objectives

From the goals stated above, the following objectives are
established:

O1 – enhancing the detection accuracy for the classiﬁer
model, which is measured using the detection accuracy met-
ric expressed in percentage.
O2 – reducing the number of features so as to achieve the
best accuracy in each classiﬁer model.
O3 – reducing the running time for model generation which
is measured in seconds.
O4 – determining the inﬂuence of the variance coverage of
the PCA feature
extraction model on the MFFS
performance.

Test objectives O1 and O2 are the obvious test goals within
the focus of this work. High detection accuracy with the least

MFFS

123

number of features, which are shown in Tables 2–9 are proving
the usefulness of applying the proposed MFFS scheme to
feature selection.

Test objectives O3 is aimed at determining the overall
quality of our feature selection approach. Test objective O4
is formulated to address the impact of the variance coverage
of the PCA on the MFFS performance over each model.

To facilitate a logical sequence for the presentation of our
research results, the test objectives framed based on the goals
are ordered in a way to glide from the most speciﬁc to a more
general case. Tables 2–9 summarize the evaluation of test
objectives O1–O4.

4.7. Test results and discussion

In Table 2, the average classiﬁcation accuracy of the chosen
algorithms over unprocessed datasets is provided. Tables 3–8
show the best average classiﬁcation accuracy with the four
classiﬁers on each dataset and the best accuracy in each case
is highlighted in bold typeface. Table 9 shows the average

running time in seconds taken by the proposed system.
Figs 3–11 show the performance of the proposed system.

It can be seen from Tables 2–8, that the classiﬁcation accu-
racy based on the selected subsets by the proposed MFFS
scheme is better than that based on the original feature set.
This indicates that the selected feature subsets are representa-
tive and informative and, thus, can be used instead of the com-
plete data for pattern classiﬁcation. The list of such selected
features is shown in Table 7.

From the empirical results obtained so far,

it is worth
noting that each method has its strengths and limitations. In
particular, CFS obtains good classiﬁcation accuracy in the
least amount of running time but at the expense of selecting
many more features; PCA selects the least number of features
but suffers in terms of classiﬁcation accuracy and also requires
more running time than others; MFFS attains the best accu-
racy and robustness in a reasonable time with lowest number
of features. Considering all these factors, the proposed MFFS
scheme shows overall better performance than other methods.
Tables 10 and 11 summarize and compare characteristics of

Accuracy on Unprocessed Datasets

100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

y
c
a
r
u
c
c
A
r
e
i
f
i
s
s
a
l
C

Bio Medical Datasets

Naïve Bayes (NB)
Support Vector Machine (SVM)
J48
Multi layer Percetron (MLP)

Fig. 3

Performance comparison of different classiﬁers on unprocessed biomedical data sets.

e
l
a
c
s

0
1
g
o
l
n
i

s
i
e
r
u
t
a
e
f

f
o
.
o
N

8000

400

20

1

Bio-Medical Datasets

Fig. 4 Number of features selected by the existing systems and proposed MFFS (in log10 scale for uniform scaling) with Naı¨ ve Bayes
classiﬁer.

 
 
 
 
 
 
124

S. Sasikala et al.

%
n
i
y
c
a
r
u
c
c
A

100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

Bio-Medical Datasets

Fig. 5 Classiﬁcation accuracy obtained for existing and the proposed MFFS by Naı¨ ve Bayes classiﬁer.

e
l
a
c
s

0
1
g
o
l
n
i

s
i
e
r
u
t
a
e
f

f
o
.
o
N

8000

400

20

1

Bio-Medical datasets

Fig. 6 Number of features selected by the existing systems and the proposed MFFS (in log10 scale for uniform scaling) with SVM
classiﬁer.

%
n
i
y
c
a
r
u
c
c
A

100

80

60

40

20

0

Fig. 7 Classiﬁcation accuracy obtained for the existing systems and the proposed MFFS by SVM classiﬁer.

Bio-Medical Datasets

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MFFS

125

e
l
a
c
s

0
1
g
o
l
n
i

s
i
e
r
u
t
a
e
f

f
o
.
o
N

8000

400

20

1

Fig. 8 Number of features selected by the existing systems and the proposed MFFS (in log10 scale for uniform scaling) with J48 classiﬁer.

Bio-Medical Datasets

%
n
i
y
c
a
r
u
c
c
A

100

80

60

40

20

0

Fig. 9 Classiﬁcation accuracy obtained for the existing systems and the proposed MFFS by J48 classiﬁer.

Bio-Medical Datasets

e
l
a
c
s
0
1
g
o
l
n
i

s
i
e
r
u
t
a
e
f

f
o
.
o
N

8000

400

20

1

Bio-Medical Datasets

Fig. 10 Number of features selected by the existing systems and the proposed MFFS (in log10 scale for uniform scaling) with MLP
classiﬁer.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
126

S. Sasikala et al.

%
n
i
y
c
a
r
u
c
c
A

100

80

60

40

20

0

Bio-Medical Datasets

Fig. 11 Classiﬁcation accuracy obtained for the existing systems and the proposed MFFS by MLP classiﬁer.

our proposed method for selective 6 datasets with those of
other previous works in the literature.

5. Conclusion

In this paper, we have proposed an efﬁcient Multi Filtration
Feature Selection (MFFS) method applicable to medical data
mining. Empirical study on 6 synthetic medical datasets sug-
gests that MFFS gives better over-all performance than the
existing counterparts in terms of all three evaluation criteria,
i.e., number of selected features, classiﬁcation accuracy, and
computational time. The comparison to other methods in the
literature also suggests MFFS has competitive performance.
MFFS is capable of eliminating irrelevant and redundant fea-
tures based on both feature subset selection and ranking mod-
els effectively, thus providing a small set of reliable features for
the physicians to prescribe further medications.

For simplicity, several key points are collected as follows.

(1) It seems that the classiﬁcation performance is necessarily
proportional to the removal of redundant features,
heavily dependent on the inclusion of relevant features
and the ‘‘Accuracy’’ metric is observed maximum with
minimum number of features.

(2) The proposed MFFS algorithm operates invariably well
on any type of classiﬁer model. This shows the general-
ization ability and applicability of the proposed system.
(3) Our training and test database collects the popular and
benchmark medical datasets. However, the proposed
method can be tested and applied on real-world dataset
too.

(4) The best accuracy rate achieved by our proposed system

is superior to the existing schemes.

To make our system more practical, future work could

include the following.

(a) Fitting the proposed system to classify any other real-

world dataset.

(b) Applying the proposed method for a multi-label
dataset, where a record may belong to many classes
simultaneously.

(c) Ensemble with some optimization strategies like Particle
Swarm Optimization (PSO), Ant Colony Optimization
(ACO), and Genetic Algorithm (GA) etc.

Summarily, MFFS can be expected to serve as an excellent
alternative for feature selection in the ﬁeld of medical data
mining.

Acknowledgment

This work is supported in part by the University Grant Com-
mission (UGC), New Delhi, INDIA – Major Research Project
under Grant No. F.No.:39-899/2010 (SR).

Appendix A. Supplementary data

Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in
the online version,at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.aci.2014.03.002.

References

[1] I.S.I. Abuhaiba, Efﬁcient OCR using simple features and
decision trees with backtracking, Arabian J. Sci. Eng. 31 (2B)
(2006) 223–244.

[2] P. Bermejo, L.D.L. Ossa, J.A. Gamez, J.M. Puerta, Fast
wrapper feature subset selection in high-dimensional datasets
by means of ﬁlter re-ranking, Knowl.-Based Syst. 25 (1) (2012)
35–44.

[3] Y. Chen, S. Yu, Selection of effective features for ECG beat
recognition based on nonlinear correlations, Artif. Intell. Med.
54 (1) (2012) 43–52.

[4] J.Q. Gan, B.A.S. Hasan, C.S.L. Tsui, A ﬁlter-dominating hybrid
sequential forward ﬂoating search method for feature subset
selection in high-dimensional space, Int. J. Mach. Learn.
Cybern. 3 (4) (2012) 1–8.

[5] A.I. Guyon, A. Elisseeff, An introduction to variable and
feature selection, J. Mach. Learn Res. 3 (1) (2003) 1157–1182.
[6] H.U. Guz, A hybrid system based on information gain and
principal
classiﬁcation of
transcranial Doppler signals, Comput. Methods Programs
Biomed. 107 (3) (2011) 598–609.

component

analysis

the

for

[7] M.A. Hall, Correlation Based Feature Selection for Machine
Learning (PhD Dissertation), Dept. of Comp. Science, Univ. of
Waikato, Hamilton, New Zealand, 1998.

 
 
MFFS

127

[8] J.W. Han, M. Kamber, Data Mining: Concepts and Techniques,

Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, 2006.

[9] Y. Han, L. Yu, A variance reduction framework for stable
in: G.I. Webb, B. Liu, C. Zhang, D.
feature selection,
Gunopulos, X. Wu (Eds.), Data Mining, IEEE Computer
Society, Sydney, Australia, 2010, pp. 206–215.

[10] S. Hettich, C. Blake, C. Merz, UCI Repository of Machine
Learning Databases, 1998 <http://www.ics.uci.edu/mlearn/
MLRepository.html> (accessed 10 June 2013).

[11] B. Hualonga, X. Jing, Hybrid feature selection mechanism based
high dimensional datasets reduction, Energy Procedia (2011)
30–38.
[12] M.M.

selection based
veriﬁcation/identiﬁcation system using ﬁngerprints and palm
print, Arabian J. Sci. Eng. 38 (4) (2013) 849–857.

Jazzar, G. Muhammad, Feature

[13] L. Jinyan, L. Huiqing, Kentridge Bio-Medical Data Set
Repository, 2002 <http://datam.i2r.a-star.edu.sg/datasets/krbd/>
(accessed 10 June 2013).

[14] I.T. Jolliffe, Principal Component Analysis, Springer-Verlag,

New York, NY, 1986.

[15] G. Kim, Y. Kim, H. Lim, H. Kim, An MLP-based feature
subset selection for HIV-1 protease cleavage site analysis, J.
Artif. Intell. Med. 48 (2) (2010) 83–89.

[16] I. Koprinska, Feature selection for brain–computer interfaces,
in: T. Theeramunkong et al. (Eds.), Paciﬁc Asia Conference on
Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining PAKDD’09, Springer-
Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2010, pp. 100–111.

[17] S. Lin, S. Chen, Parameter determination and feature selection
for C4.5 algorithm using scatter search approach, Int. J. Soft
Comput. 16 (1) (2011) 63–75.

[18] X. Lu, X. Peng, P. Liu, Y. Deng, B. Feng, B. Liao, A novel
feature selection method based on CFS in cancer recognition, in:
L. Chen, X. Zhang, L. Wu, Y. Wang (Eds.), Systems Biology,
IEEE Computer Society, China, 2012, pp. 226–231.

[19] S.A. Mahmoud, S.M. Awaida, Recognition of off-line
handwritten Arabic
(Indian) Numerals using multi-scale
features and support vector machines vs. hidden Markov
models, Arabian J. Sci. Eng. 34 (2B) (2009) 429–444.

[20] M.d. MonirulKabi, M.d. Shahjahan, Murase Kazuyuki, A new
local search based hybrid genetic algorithm for feature selection,
Int. J. Neurocomput. 74 (17) (2011) 2914–2928.

[21] K. Moutselos, I. Maglogiannis, A. Chatziioannou, Integration
of high-volume molecular and imaging data for composite
biomarker discovery in the study of melanoma, Biomed. Res.
Int. (2014), http://dx.doi.org/10.1155/2014/145243.

[22] M. Osl, S. Dreiseit, F. Cerqueira, M. Netzer, B. Pfeifer, C.
Baumgartner, Demoting redundant features to improve the
discriminatory ability in cancer data, J. Biomed. Inform. 42 (4)
(2009) 721–725.

[23] S. Paul, P. Maji, Rough set based gene selection algorithm for
microarray sample classiﬁcation, in: Methods and Models in
Computer Science, IEEE Computer Society, 2010, pp. 7–13.
[24] R. Quinlan, C4.5: Programs for Machine Learning, Morgan

Kaufmann Publishers, San Mateo, CA, USA, 1993.

[25] M.L. Raymer, T.E. Doom, L.A. Kuhn, W.F. Punch,
Knowledge discovery in medical and biological datasets using
a hybrid Bayes classiﬁer/evolutionary algorithm, IEEE Trans.
Syst. Man Cybern. 33 (5) (2003) 802–813.

[26] T. Ruckstieb, C. Osendorfer, P.V.D. Smagt, Minimizing data
consumption with sequential online feature selection, Int. J.
Mach. Learn. Cybern. 4 (3) (2012) 235–243.

[27] J. Sanchez-Monedero, M. Cruz-Ramrez, F. Fernandez Navarro,
J.C. Fernandez, P.A. Gutierrez, C. Hervas-Martnez, On the
suitability of extreme learning machine for gene classiﬁcation
using feature selection, in: A.E. Hassanien, A. Abraham, F.
Marcelloni, H. Hagras, M. Antonelli, T. Hong (Eds.), Intelligent
Systems Design and Applications, 2010, pp. 507–512.

[28] A. Shawkat, K.A. Smith Miles, A meta learning approach to
support vector machines,

automatic kernel
Neurocomputing 70 (1-3) (2006) 173–186.

selection for

[29] Q. Shen, R. Diao, P. Su, Feature selection ensemble, in: A.
Voronkov (Ed.), Computing, Springer-Verlag, 2011, pp. 289–
306.

[30] P. Smialowski, D. Frishman, S. Kramer, Pitfalls of supervised

feature selection, Bioinformatics 26 (3) (2010) 440–443.

learning scheme

[31] A.K. Tanwani, J.M. Afridi, M.Z. Shaﬁq, M. Farooq, Guidelines
classiﬁcation of
for
to select machine
in: C. Pizzuti, M.D. Ritchie, M.
biomedical datasets,
Giacobini
(Eds.), European Conference on Evolutionary
Computation, Machine Learning and Data Mining in
Bioinformatics, Springer-Verlag, Berlin Heidelberg, 2009, pp.
128–139.

[32] L.T. Vinh, S. Lee, Y. Park, B.J. Auriol, A novel feature selection
method based on normalized mutual information, Int. J. Appl.
Intell 37 (1) (2011) 100–120.

[33] L.M. Wang, S.M. Yuan, L. Li, H.J. Li, Improving the
Performance of Decision Tree: A Hybrid Approach.
Conceptual modeling. Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
vol. 3288, Springer, 2004, pp. 327–335.

[34] Weka 3: Machine Learning Software in Java, 2013. The
University of Waikato Software Documentation <http://www.
cs.waikato.ac.nz/_ml/weka> (accessed 10 June).

[35] H.I. Witten, E. Frank, Data Mining: Practical Machine
Learning Tools and Techniques with Java Implementations,
Morgan Kaufmann, San Francisco, CA, USA, 2000.

[36] J. Xie, C. Wang, Using support vector machines with a novel
hybrid feature selection method for diagnosis of erythemato-
squamous diseases, Expert Syst. Appl. 38 (5) (2011) 5809–5815.
[37] E. Xing, M. Jordan, R. Karp, Feature selection for high-
dimensional genomic microarray data, in: C.E. Brodely, A.P.
Danyluk (Eds.), Machine Learning, Morgan Kaufmann
Publishers Inc., San Francisco, CA, USA, 2001, pp. 601–608.

[38] S. Yazdani, J. Shanbehzadeh, Mohammad Taghi Manzuri
Shalmani, RPCA: a novel pre-processing method for PCA,
Adv. Artif. Intell. 2012 (1) (2012) 1–7.

[39] M. Zahedi, A.G. Sorkhi,

classiﬁcation
performance using PCA and recall-precision criteria, Arabian
J. Sci. Eng. 38 (8) (2013) 2095–2102.

Improving text

