this event in a defined geographic area. The data contained in DENM messages are event management information, generation time, validity period, etc., and of course information about the event itself. The most important difference between CAM and DENM is that DENMs are broadcast to vehicles within the event area, and can be extended further by re-broadcasting the message in a multi-hop transmission, while, a CAM is broad-

Bogus Messages: Here a V-UE broadcasts false messages to affect the behaviour of other V-UEs. For instance, a malicious V-UE could report false information about bad traffic conditions to its neighbors, forcing them to take alternate path, while the malicious V-UE frees the path for itself. Also, a malicious V-UE may broadcast harmful messages in order to mislead receiving vehicles regarding the current road condition and cause them to take a wrong decision or action.

Identity Impersonation: Typically, in V2V scenarios, the receiver does not care about the actual identity of sender, but to filter-out bogus messages, will want to know that the sender is trustworthy/ authorised to send such messages. To counter this, a malicious V-UE may assume the identity of one or more legitimate V-UE in order to broad-cast erroneous messages. Similar messages received appar- ently from multiple senders could make the information contained in the messages more credible. A malicious V-UE may also want to communication at the application layer of the ITS reference architec- ture. These solutions have similar working principles and protect mes- sages using the same security procedures, with minor difference in terms of the number of functional entities and structure. They are both based on the concept of public key cryptography and the use of VPKI to pro- vision and manage security credentials of the vehicles. In a public key cryptosystem, each party has a pair of keys, one that must be kept secret, and the other that is made public. If an agent uses its private key to sign a

such situations, the CA in-validates the certificate, adding it to a cer- tificate revocation list (CRL) that is made available to all participating nodes. All receivers check the CRL for each received message prior to verification. Messages that are signed using revoked certificates are discarded.

In [53], the authors used a computationally efficient two-way anonymous authentication scheme based on the anony-mous certifi- cates and signatures to verify the message source and integrity in V2V. Furthermore [54], proposed an enhanced dual authentication and key management scheme for VANETs using the elliptic curve cryptography (ECC) and the Diffie-Hellman key exchange protocol. The works of [55] proposed a two-way authentication scheme in which an anonymous identity was generated by a vehicle and verified by the trust authority to reduce the pressure on key management. Also [56], addresses the delay the key used to calculate the HMAC is shared only between non- revoked vehicles. However, vehicles must still verify the validity of certificate and signature because it still uses a trusted authority (TA) for generating and distributing secret keys and certificates to all vehicles. Certificate revocation is triggered by the TA which involves revoking the current secret key and se curely distributing a new secret key to all non- revoked vehicles. Similarly, the secure privacy-preserving protocol

in order to reduce the time spent for single message verification at the receiving vehicles. Similarly [46], proposed a cooperative message-authentication scheme. In this scheme, vehicles work together to verify only defined sets of received message signatures according to a selection algo rithm, and then share their results to each other. As ve- hicles do not verify every single received message, which the compu- tational overhead is reduced as compared to single message verification schemes.

Furthermore, the works of [68,69] designed a scheme which employed cooperative message authentication techniques along with batch group signature verification and hash MAC (HMAC). The works of [70,71] presented a message authentication protocol for vehicular net- works that employs a cooperative message authentication scheme and a short group signature technique. In this scheme, some vehicles act as signature verifiers for received messages, whereas other vehicles within the vicinity only receive verified messages from verifier vehicles. A DoS resilient cooperative message verification scheme for V2V communica- cooperating vehicles to verify signatures of received messages and then share the verification results with their neighbors. This significantly reduces the computation overhead of verifying each received message by a vehicles, and decreases waiting time of messages in queue before verification. The study in Ref. [73] present a cluster-based algorithm for se-curing emergency messages in V2V. In their scheme, vehicles form clusters  and  the  cluster-heads  are  responsible  for  intra-cluster

Group and cooperative-based schemes significantly reduce message verification delay. However, the drawback of group-based signature verification schemes is that it is difficult to form groups of vehicles due to the high relative speed and short connection time between moving vehicles. For instance in high-way scenarios, proximity-based group of vehicles may have an irregular distribution, with members joining and leaving constantly, which makes determining group boundaries a bottle- neck. Also, there is a need to establish a trust relationship be-tween those vehicles selected to verify the messages and those receiving the results. All of these contribute to signalling cost, which may lead to excessive delay.

computational cost of the chosen prediction algorithms. Similarly [81], designed a broadcast message authentication protocol based on TESLA for V2I networks. This scheme focuses on providing efficient message authentication when vehicles communicate with road-side sensors. In Ref. [82], the authors propose a hybrid authentication mechanism that combines ECDSA with TESLA++. In this scheme, a sender generates both MACs and ECDSA sig-natures for each message to be broadcast. A

from an unknown vehicle, the receiver broadcasts its own commitment key along with a list of vehicles (including the sender) whose commit- ment keys it needs. This approach may result in vehicles being over- whelmed with many copies of messages containing commitment keys that they already possess. It.

The works of bib79[47,79,80] addresses the delayed message veri- fication of TESLA using a prediction-based approach in or-der to make it effective in V2V. They exploit the ability of a sending vehicle to predict its own future position by observing its movement pattern between two consecutive positions. The sender constructs a Merkle Hash Tree (MHT) to generate a prediction outcome. This is sent to the receiver in advance to enable instant message verification. Performance evaluation shows that as vehicles future positions are correctly predicted and verified, a considerable number of messages can be verified immediately even in congested environment. How-ever, this depends on the accuracy and

Although 3GPP presently concedes security to the upper layers of the ITS stack (i.e. application layer), however application layer tech- niques incur higher latency, computational intensive and adds considerable overheads. Thus having a security solution at the access layer is conceivably preferable in order to ensure system compati- bility and reduce deployment cost.

3GPP also defines autonomous operation (also referred to as Mode 4) for the PC5-based V2V communication. In here, vehicles in close prox- imity self-assign radio resources from a pre-defined resource pool, use other source of time synchronization, and independently scheduled communication between themselves without any network assistance. In the near future, this mode of operation will attract much interest in order to realize the full benefits of intelligent transport systems. More- over, in situations where there is no network availability e.g. high-way or rural roads, vehicles shall solely rely on the direct PC5 link for both data exchange and control signaling. To this end, there is need to extend the security solution to cater for such a distributed and independent setup.

that belongs to different operators is an issue. In roaming situations, vehicles needs to obtain certificates from their respective home network V2X Control Function (VCF) and at the same time, use the certificates to verify messages exchanged between them-selves. How different VCFs for different operators coordinate certificate distribution and management is a challenge. There is need for the security scheme to offer a universal method that can support V2V secure communications, even during roaming and across multiple operators.

