sensor was placed above the average crop-weed height difference within the field and is customizable based on the crop conditions. The time of flight is sensed for interference and signal is transmitted to a mi- croprocessor (ATmega 2560). Fuzzy logic algorithm developed in the microprocessor environment calculates the actuation parameters based on sensor response, soil, forward speed and plantation conditions. Actuation signal is then transmitted to the motor controller (HB-25, Par- allax Inc., Rocklin, CA, USA). The controller then actuates the DC motor (WORMDRV-G200-12, Parramatta, NSW, Australia) through pulse width modulation (PWM) for lateral shift of the rotary arm for the time, estimated from algorithm.

Mumbai, India) were also integrated within the system for position sensing. First proximity sensor (P1) was mounted on a ground wheel to calculate the forward translation speed of the system. This dynamic parameter is used as an input to the control algorithm. Rest two

The developed prototype was tested in the instrumented soil bin under varied operating conditions. Firstly, the effect of operating condi- tions on electronic control parameters was evaluated. Secondly, the sys- tem behavioral parameters such as torque employed during weeding ring operation in soil, draft force encountered during lateral shift of con- trol shaft were observed. Lastly, the effect of system and operating con- ditions was observed on the plant damage.

The developed prototype was mounted on externally controlled me- chanical trolley provisioned for a varied range of forward speeds and depth arrangements. A torque transducer of 200 Nm capacity (T20WN, Hottinger Baldwin Mesurements, Darmstadt, Germany) was also installed between the DC motor and final drive mechanism to de- termine the torque employed during the weeding ring operation in the soil. Two load cells (L1 and L2) of 12 kN capacity (F 214, Novatech Measurements Limited, East Sussex, England) were installed between the implement trolley and prototype to measure the draft force encoun- tered during the operation. An additional load cell (L3) was installed be- tween the DC motor and control shaft to measure the force encountered during the lateral shifting. All the transducers were connected to a data logger (1-MX840-PAKEASY, Hottinger Baldwin Mesurements, Darm- stadt, Germany) that was interfaced to a remote computer for real time data recording. A liquid crystal display (LCD) was installed with the control system inboard the developed prototype to display the lat- eral shift speed(SRPM), AT, TRT and DT.

fuzzy logic algorithm was analyzed using stepwise multiple regression analysis as a function of independent operating parameters and their in- teractions. Similarly, the DP was also analyzed using stepwise multiple regression. Lastly, the effect of SRPM on DP was also analyzed. Fitness of resultant regression models were assessed using ANOVA. A two- sample t-test was used to compare the weeding efficiencies and plant damages for field evaluations.

roots of the tomato crop could have also resulted in the excess crop damage. This suggests for crop specific feature additions in the operat- ing fuzzy algorithm for intra-row shaft shifting. Further detailed analy- sis on the agronomic causal factors for resultant plant damage and weeding efficiency was out of the scope of this study. A uniform soil bed preparation with uniform plantation will be critical for efficient op- eration of the intra-row weeding systems. Future scope will include in- corporation of an automated provision to measure the soil compaction levels in real time for real time adjustments of the SRPM. Overall, suffi- cient weeding efficiency and plant damage avoidance was achieved by the developed system. The unique four bar linkage actuated weeding shaft can be integrated to various other sensor networks for effective eradication of the weeds in the intra-row region. Our future studies will also include assessment of the soil properties in various sections of the field and their impact on intra row weeding operation. Moreover, the impact of the tractor wheel slippage on weeding efficiency and plant damage would also be assessed. These parameters will be considered for further refinement of the system as per the crop and field dynamics.

The fuzzy logic algorithm based on time of flight and positions sen- sors provided significant inputs for electronic control of the four-bar linkage mechanism. Pertinent actuation response timings and lateral shift speed (SRPM) parameters were found to be significantly depen- dent on forward operation speed, system and soil parameters. The crop plant damage was found to be significantly affected by the forward operation speeds and plantation spacing and was considerably high for higher forward speeds (higher SRPM) and lower plant spacing. Prelim- inary field evaluations showed this system to be effective for intra-row weed (N65%) and plant damage control (b25%) at optimum operational parameters. However, challenges pertinent to dynamic synchronization of the electronic control, mechanical actuations and plantation charac- teristics may be consistently explored and optimized for effective intra-row weeding in row crops.

This study was funded by the All India Coordinated Research Project (AICRP) on Farm Implements and Machinery, Indian Council of Agricul- tural Research, Govt. of India, New Delhi. Authors are also thankful to Mr. Utpal Ekka, Mr. Gajendra Singh, Mr. Chaitanya Pareek, Mr. Naveen Kumar and Miss. Sneha Jha for their assistance in conducting this study.

Van Dooren, H.J., 1994. Onderzoek in suikerbieten naar de invloed van berijden tijdens de verzorgingsfase: effecten op grond en gewas (The Influence of Post-drilling Field Traffic for Weed Control on Soil and Sugar Beet Crop). M.Sc. thesis, Tillage Laboratory, Wageningen Agric. Univ., 33 pp.

