With the breakthrough improvements in computer systems and immense inter-connectivity of Internet-of-Things (IoT) devices, comput- ing systems, especially mobile and embedded systems, have become the main storing space to keep sensitive data (e.g., financial data, personal information, etc.). Unfortunately, this creates opportunities for attackers to steal secret data by exploiting side-channel signals from these computing devices. In that respect, an extensive research is performed on cryptographic devices and their vulnerability against side channels [1,2]. They prove that side-channel attacks can circum- vent the existing defense mechanisms and has to be considered while designing systems.

To avoid these problems, recent work in [44,45] proposed a program-level communication model including insertions and deviation in signaling time while transmitting signals. Furthermore, leakage capacity bounds were defined for only EM covert channels under the assumption that signaling time deviation can be modeled by changing the position of the pulses and by keeping the pulse width fixed. However, the scope of these papers is limited to EM based covert channels, ignores the losses due to deletions, fixes the pulse width while modeling the channel, and provides capacity bounds instead of actual capacity values. Moreover, these papers consider only the scenario where the signal is silent while transmitting a zero bit, and the signaling time distribution has zero mean and the same standard deviation irrespective of the bit. Interestingly, as we experimentally illustrate in this paper, for different covert channels these assumptions are too optimistic because the bit signals are generated by running different parts of a program or completely different benchmarks [46]. To address these issues, in this paper, we propose a generalized communication model for various covert channels, which considers insertions, deletions and their asynchronous nature, to calculate actual leakage capacity. The main contributions of the paper can be listed as

The rest of the paper is organized as follows: In Section 2, we in- troduce the model for transmitted signal, receiver, and communication channel. Section 3 provides the derivation of effective channel noise and leakage capacity. Section 4 demonstrates how the proposed model can be used for various types of covert channels. Section 5 provides experimental setup and results, and Section 6 provides concluding remarks.

In this section, we first describe the proposed model for the trans- mitter of a covert channel considering its asynchronous nature and the variation in signaling time. Then, we explain the underlying reasons to model the receiver as a pulse-shape filter. This is followed by deriving effective channel noise which is a combination of additive and jitter noise caused by the variation in signaling time. Finally, we propose dis- crete memoryless channel model by considering the effective channel noise, insertions, and deletions.

Transmitted Signal: Since transmitted signal models are well-studied in conventional communication theory, a natural approach to model the signals in covert channels is to establish a connection between covert and conventional communication systems. In that respect, we first investigate different modulation schemes (e.g., pulse amplitude- width modulation, pulse width modulation, and pulse amplitude mod- ulation) and their suitability for covert channels. However, employing such modulation schemes with various width and amplitude choices are not practical for covert channels since the width and amplitude of the transmitted signals deviate due to other program activities [50]. To avoid these difficulties, the general practice in covert channel community is to employ modulation schemes that can only transmit zeros and ones [4,45,51]. Therefore, we follow the assumptions and notations below for the model of the transmitted signal: does not reflect the variation in the width of the transmitted signal. Therefore, the first goal is to combine the channel noise and the noise due to signal timing variation called jitter noise. First we consider the noiseless scenario given in (3). If we define the ideally received sampled

The connection between covert channels based on Simple Power Analysis (SPA) and the proposed model can be established explicitly be- cause power covert channel attacks utilize total power consumption of the system. For example, they exploit variation in power consumption while executing bits for signing operation in crypto-systems [18,54]. The main goal is to measure the total power, and to estimate whether the signed bit is zero or one, therefore, the system can be represented by OOK modulation.

Considering the same arguments with power based covert channels, we can see that the proposed model can explain the leakage in the worst-case scenario for a given design. To achieve our goal, the critical step is to obtain the variable values for deletion, insertion, , and the distribution of the effective variation. Once we obtain these parameters, the proposed methodology can be used to assess the resilience of a system against EM-based covert channels.

These covert channels are generated by exploiting power manage- ment units (PMU) and voltage regulator module (VRM) of modern computers. PMU is responsible for power alteration to optimize the power consumption of a system. Since the priority of system designers is to minimize the consumption of power, they do not put enough effort on the security aspect of their design to covert/side-channel attacks.

This covert channel is created by exploiting the recently intro- duced backscattering side-channel. It exploits circuits as a semi-passive RFID and relies on switching activities on the level of transistor gates (between low and high states). The switching activities change the impedance of circuits, hence, the circuit behaves as an RFID tag. For cryptosystems are broken [5,9]. We need to note here that the recall time can be used not only for evil purposes. For example, a methodology is proposed in [59] to profile the memory access that does not cause any overhead on the system. The method exploits emanated EM signals for performance analysis, and provides statistical information on the recall time of the system.

For the experiments, the devices we consider are an Altera NIOS-II processor with a commercial Terassic DE1 SoC board [60], an Olin- uXino board [61] which has a modern Cortex A8 ARM core with two levels of caches, 4 MB main memory that is commonly used in factory lines, etc., and a Dell Precision 7730 laptop [62]. The antennas to collect emanated signals are a high-gain custom-made disk-array based antenna [63], near EM field probes [64], a power rail probe [65], a horn antenna [66] and a lab-made near field probe. We record the signals using a spectrum analyzer (Agilent MXA N9020 A) [67].

and bit-1 are transmitted, respectively. Since the performance of these covert channels, in terms of bandwidth, noise characteristics, etc., are different from each other, we choose different transmission time for more reliable results. For example, in the literature, the reported trans- mission rates for various covert channel attacks vary from 5 bit/s to a

Another interesting observation here is that although all but cache- based covert channels achieve almost the maximum gain in terms of Bit/Channel-Use for high SNR, the cache-based covert channel con- verges to 0.6 Bit/Channel-Use. The reason is higher signaling time deviation when a cache-miss occurs. This introduces powerful jitter noise to the system, which could not be alleviated even the attacker

Then, SNR vs. leakage capacity analysis can be done by solving the optimization problem given in Section 3. If the leakage is zero or very close to zero at the targeted SNR, they can conclude their system is secure enough. Otherwise, they need to modify their design to protect privacy of their customer.

Genkin D, Pachmanov L, Pipman I, Tromer E. Stealing keys from PCs using a radio: Cheap electromagnetic attacks on windowed exponentiation. In: Cryp- tographic hardware and embedded systems - ches 2015 - 17th international workshop, saint-malo, france, september 13-16, 2015, proceedings. 2015, p.

