In signature recognition, it is a significant step to segment a text line into characters. And the unsupervised clustering is a commonly used remedy for this task. However, due to the strong overlapping and touch among characters, the separation boundaries between two characters are usually nonlinear, which leads to the failure of the widely used clustering methods. To tackle this problem, this paper proposes a new signature segmentation method, which can effectively segment nonlinearly separable characters. In the proposed approach, we first segment the entire signature into strokes, the similarity matrix of which is computed according to stroke gravities. Then, the nonlinear clustering method termed Normalized cut (Ncut) is performed on this similarity matrix to obtain cluster labels for these strokes, through which the strokes are combined into characters. Experiments on four databases are conducted to demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method.

Signature recognition plays an important role in the fields such as forensic [1], historic document analysis [2], archaeology [3],etc. Segmentation is an indispensable step in signature recognition. However, off-line segmentation is not an easy task for two reasons. First, the number of characters is quite huge (e.g., there are

Some methods have been proposed recently. Tseng and Lee [4] presented a recognition-based signature segmentation method for handwritten Chinese, This method firstly initializes several possible nonlinear segmentation paths by using a probabilistic Viterbi algorithm. A segmentation graph is constructed using these candidate paths with the shortest path finally detected as the segmentation path. In [5], the strokes are used to build stroke bounding boxes (SBB), which are merged by some knowledge-based merging operations, and a dynamic programming approach is used to find the best segmentation boundaries.

In this paper, we propose a new signature segmentation algorithm based on nonlinear clustering. The proposed approach first factorizes each text line into strokes, the similarity matrix of which is computed. Then the nonlinear Normalized cut (Ncut) [8] clustering method is applied on this similarity matrix to obtain cluster labels for these strokes. The segmented characters can be finally achieved by combining strokes according to their cluster labels and positions.

The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces the preliminary knowledge of this work. In section 3, we describe in detail the proposed method. Experimental results are reported in section 4. We conclude our paper in section 5.

One efficient remedy for selecting correct segmentation paths from candidates is clustering. The basic idea is to over-segment one text line into many strokes, forming a stroke set. Then a clustering method is performed on this stroke set to generate cluster labels for these strokes. Finally, these strokes are combined as characters according to their cluster labels. For instance, Wang and Fan [9] proposed to use the classic k- means algorithm [10] to cluster strokes. However,it can only deal with linearly separable characters due to the linear limitation of k-means.

We compare the proposed method with five well-known methods including Viterbi algorithm (Viterbi) proposed in [4], Stroke Bounding Boxes method (SBB) proposed in [5], Connected Components Algorithm (CCA) proposed in [7], Project Profile Histogram (PPH) proposed in [6] and k-means proposed in [9]. Each of the compared methods is well-adjusted/trained to generate the best results.Both the correct rate and average segmentation time per character are reported and compared.

In this paper, we present a new handwritten signature segmentation method, which can effectively segment nonlinearly separable characters. In the proposed approach, we first segment the entire text line into strokes, Then, the nonlinear Normalized cut (Ncut) clustering method is performed on this similarity matrix to obtain cluster labels for these strokes, through which the strokes are combined. Comparative results with some well- known methods on four testing databases demonstrate the effectiveness and efficiency of our approach.

