The foliar color pattern under the stress of nitrogen deficiency varies usually in a uniformly distributed way, so it seems reasonable to fabricate a detection index directly using the averaged value or any of the relative form of its color components. However, these color components are linearly correlated with each other, and the mineral contents don't have a precise metric description themselves, which makes the color modeling a very tough task. In this paper, a novel foliar color model of rubber trees is proposed to approach the detection index by combining the relative components with the absolute ones, taking full considerations of vagueness of nutritious description, for which a slope angle as a metric to evaluate the fitness of the color model is proposed. Our experimental results have substantiated this supposition.

Since the relationship between the foliar color and the nitrogen content was established with the help SPAD devices as stated in [3], there are a lot of literatures published to tackle with this issue. Unfortunately, these results seem not as accurate as to help make up an adaptive fertilizer recipe for prevention from nitrogen deficiency of rubber trees. Therefore, in this paper, we further our work from our previous results to derive a novel and more sophisticated foliar color model for this nutritious diagnosis.

What expression made of color components can be used as an index to locate the range the nitrogen may be in? There have been lots of endeavors to aim at the purpose. One direct way is to fabricate the color model using color components. Zhang et al [4] studied the linear regressive nitrogen content model of canola leaf color features, G/R-G/B or G/R, and found that the deviation error of the predicted value is less than 9% of the measured ones. Liu et al [5] tested and have shown that in different times, different color features have different correlation significance with cotton nitrogen content, and pointed out that R, G, G/B, R/B, G/(R+B), B/(R+G) may be used to predict the cotton nutrition status. However, the results are not satisfactory.

In addition, other factors such as shape distortion and color distortion due to imaging systematic errors are considered. Many researchers have proposed the calibration methods. Noh et al in 2005 proposed a calibration method for real-time crop nitrogen deficiency detection on the sprayer during fertilization operations [8]. They use four flat paints with colors of Flagstone, Dover Gray, Knight's Armors and Black Magic to obtain four levels of known reflectance. The calibration is completed with a linear regression model of which the parameters can be computed dynamically.

Since the nitrogen status itself can't be described accurately with a linear index, it's reasonable to find an index of some kind that can be stated vaguely, which will then be measured with another index to sketch the relationship between the color model and the nitrogen status. Here and now, in this paper, we find out that the slope angle of the distribution regions can be used for this measurement whether the color model is appropriate for the nitrogen content diagnosis. The experimental results have shown that with this measurement some better color model can be recognized very conveniently, so is our newly proposed color model.

