cluster has a single mean. However, these methods need a graph where vertices in the same cluster are connected by edges of large weights. To achieve this goal, many studies have proposed graph reduction methods with parameters. Unfortunately, these parameters have to be tuned for every dataset. We introduce

The problem of detecting clusters of non-convex geometric shape, has been long studied in the literature of pattern recognition. The solu- tions of this problem could be broadly classified into two categories: kernel- and graph-based methods. Kernel-based methods attempt to map the points into a space where they can be separated. The em- computations by reducing the graph vertices and/or edges. However, the need for a memory efficient graph creates another problem related to the number of parameters associated with the process of graph construction. Deciding the number of reduced vertices and how the edges are eliminated would create several parameters that need careful tuning.

The problem of detecting non-convex clusters has led to the develop- ment of numerous clustering methods. These methods have abandoned the assumption that a cluster has a single mean. Instead, they rely on pairwise similarities to detect clusters. Graph-based clustering involves two steps: (1) reducing the graph, and (2) partitioning the graph. The proposed method in this paper falls under graph construction methods.

its projection was binarized and it is assigned to the closest cluster based on the minimum Hamming distance between its projection and encoding vectors. Levin et al. [26] proposed a linear least squares OOSE, which was very close to Bengio et al. [23] approach. They also proposed a maximum-likelihood OOSE that produces a binary vector

lists overlap, a metric known in the literature as shared nearest neigh- bor similarity [20]. A graph sparsification method based on effective resistance was proposed by Spielman and Srivastava [21,22]. Their method was theoretically solid, but the definition of effective resistance breaks the cluster structure of the graph. Vertices with more short paths have low effective resistance and the method disconnects them.

Our graph filtering method can be seamlessly integrated to the newly proposed spectral clustering using deep neural networks (Spec- tralNet) [4]. SpectralNet uses Siamese nets [30] to learn affinities between data points. Siamese nets expect the user to label which pairs are positive and which are negative. An unsupervised pairing uses the

Dr. Mashaan Alshammari is an assistant professor at University of Hail. His research interests include unsupervised learning and image analysis. Mashaan holds a MSc in computer science from King Fahd University of Petroleum and Minerals (KFUPM), Saudi Arabia, and a PhD from the University of Sydney, Australia.

