Number of documents considered for generating summary, can classify the summarization problem as single document or multi- document summarization [10,11]. When a document is condensed into a shorter version, it is called single document summarization, whereas condensing a set of documents into a summary is called multi-document summarization. Therefore, summarization of multiple documents can be considered as an extension of summa- rization of single document [12]. In multi-document summariza- tion, search space is larger compared to single document summarization, which makes it more challenging for extracting important sentences. In that context, multi-document summariza- tion can be considered as an optimization problem with the objec- tive  of  producing  optimal  summary  containing  informative

The structure of paper is organized as follows. Section 2 briefly describes the related works on text summarization problem using global optimization techniques. Section 3 introduces the proposed extractive summarization model. Section 4 presents Cuckoo search based summarizer for solving summarization problem. Next, Sec- tion 5 details the numeric calculation for objective function, Sec- tion 6 elaborates on experiments and result analysis and finally Section 7 addresses the conclusions.

algorithm. The CS algorithm shows a significant improvement result than other algorithms. A new biodiesel engine have devel- oped by Wong et al. [16] to achieve fewer emissions, low fuel cost and wide operating range of engine using Cuckoo search algorithm. The CS algorithm is compared with PSO algorithm and the result shows that CS is similar to PSO bur with less user defend parameters.

Though various optimization algorithms were proposed in past, but application of Cuckoo search algorithm for developing summa- rizer is very few in the area of text summarization. Mirshojaei and Masoomi [35] has already addressed summarization problem using Cuckoo search algorithm. But it is applied only for single doc- ument summarization. Here, summarization result of Cuckoo search algorithm is compared with the summarization result of particle swarm optimization algorithm, bacterial foraging opti- mization algorithm and word summarizer in terms of F-score. Among all cases, the F-score of Cuckoo search algorithm is showing comparatively better than the other results.

rization system is multiple documents such as D1, D2, .. ., DN. The documents are initially preprocessed, and the result is gone through input representation and summary representation to extract final summary. The detail of summarization process is dis- cussed in the following subsections.

For implementation point of view, CS algorithm can use the simplest form where each nest has only a single egg. In this case there is no distinction between egg, nest or Cuckoo, as each nest corresponds to one egg which also represents one Cuckoo. The algorithm can be extended to more complicated cases in which each nest has multiple eggs representing a set of solutions.

Step 1: Collect a set of multiple documents M, where M = {D1, D2,.. ., DN}. Each Di represents individual document of set M. Length of each Di is represented in terms of number of sentences, which vary from document to document.

Step14: Compute the fitness function for the new nests obtained. Step15. Based on the fitness values, record the best performing nests in the current population set. Which are then compared with the best nest obtained until current generation, and replace current best by previous best nest.

coverage, cohesion and readability of the summary. The first term evaluates content coverage of the summary. A summary contains a set of relevant sentences, which covers the main content of docu- ment set. The main content of document is reflected by the highest weighted sentence or center of the each document. Therefore the content coverage of summary is represented as:

This section conduct experiments to test proposed summarization system empirically. The MDSCSA is compared with CSOS and PSOS multi-document summarizer with respect to two years of DUC data- sets. All the summarizer models are implemented in MATLAB Version 2014a) in a system with Window 7 operating system. After obtaining the simulation result, the analysis of summary result has been carried out using ROUGE tool in terms of ROUGE score.

Controlling of evolutionary algorithm parameters are purely data dependent in the experiment of any application. As Cuckoo search algorithm is an evolutionary approach, thus the limitation of this approach is its controlling parameters. Therefore more sys- tematic approach of parameter setting will be explored in our future work. The performance of this approach can also be exam- ined using other competent nature inspired algorithms.

