There is a rapid increase in the acceptance and use of e-commerce by both traditional businesses trying to develop new online channels and new businesses that originate from the inter- net [12]. This development is primarily attributed to the benefits ascribed to e-commerce, especially in the business to consumer segment. However, issues of e-commerce trust have been a major constraint to its adoption and use by many consumers around the world [18,26]. There are recent clamor and research attention to resolve the e-commerce trust concerns from an Islamic view point which is guided by Sharia law [1,3,14,20]. It is therefore important to ensure that e-commerce trust from the Sharia perspective is developed in order to induce and cater the need of over 1.8 billion Muslim around the globe [3,5,20].

Contextually, an e-commerce offer is considered to be the initial proposal made by either party (buyer or seller) in a contract and the acceptance refers to the consent of the other party expressing his or her agreement to the terms of the offer. Traditionally, offer and acceptance is done verbally but Muslim scholars also acknowl- edge its validity through writing or through an electronic medium as applicable in e-commerce [17,20,22,31]. However, the process of offer and acceptance must be connected, clear and consistent throughout the transaction session. Muhammad & Muhammad means to increase or a practice of lending money at a fixed interest [11,17]. Riba is a fundamentally prohibited element that is clearly forbidden by Islam [3,20,24,31]. Therefore, it is forbidden to utilize any riba credit card or any other interest-bearing medium of pay- ment for both offline and online use.

and processes of a web vendor. It is carried out based on certain principles and criteria regarding the assurance offered. The third- party assurance provides an endorsement of e-commerce vendors through seals of approval, trust marks, directories of trusted sites, trust intermediaries and label bureaus [1]. Islamic religious author- ities can also serve as a third-party assurance body to certify the Sharia compliance status of e-commerce systems is advocated [3,20]. Therefore, we propose third-party assurance to encompass assurances on Sharia compliance, process, and technology which will ensure privacy for customers, security of transactions, and SCE-C trust.

E-commerce trustworthiness is a factor of integrity, compe- tence, benevolence and web quality inherent in an e-commerce system [1,15,28,27]. McKnight et al. [16] validated integrity, com- petence, and benevolence as factors that influence e-commerce trust. Basically, trust reveals a trustee to whom trust is focused on, the confidence that trust will be upheld and the disposition to act on that basis [7]. Therefore, the perception of e-commerce trustworthiness is moderated by the religious commitment and trust propensity of consumers and the third-party assurances of an e-commerce site on SCE-C trust. E-commerce trustworthiness of a site has a positive effect on SCE-C trust which is positively influenced by Sharia compliance, integrity, competence, benevo- lence and SCE-C website quality.

Benevolence is the general belief of extending goodwill to others. It is seen as the concern and motivation of a trustee to act in the interest of the trustor [15]. Therefore, benevolence is the deliberate effort by an e-commerce vendor to serve the best interest of his or her customers without any prejudice of their knowledge. The extent of benevolence will reflect on the level of trust a consumer has in a vendor [1]. Thus, the perception of e-commerce vendor benevolence is positively related to SCE-C trust.

