A vast amount of growth has taken place in the field of biometrics and in the healthcare industry. Biometrics provides the ability to identify individuals based on their physical and behavioral characteristics. The fusion of biometrics and information systems in the healthcare environment has provided a new approach to determine the identity of patients. In this paper, we investigate the biometric system and the authentication process using periocular biometrics specifically. We integrate this approach with the healthcare system to provide an advanced method to identify the patients securely. We propose a new technique that fuses the use of periocular biometrics and the electronic master patient index in healthcare information systems to identify humans in the healthcare environment. A comparative analysis of different periocular biometric recognition methods is conducted and assessed against various traditional and deep learning-based methods in our research study.

situations, where the individual is unconscious or unresponsive and without any form of identification, the medical professional will identify the person as Jane Doe or John Doe until their identity is established. In this situation, having a biometric system that can identify an individual based on the periocular region of their face would enable medical prac- titioners to identify the unconscious individual more rapidly. In smart- phone technology, additional sensors and security features have been incorporated in the device to effectively authenticate an individual. This allows the individual to have access to their smartphone without a password or personal identification number (PIN).

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In the next sec- tion, an overview of a biometric system is presented, and an analysis of periocular biometrics is given indicating the advantages for this type of biometrics. Section 3 discusses biometric system functionality pertaining to the system modes and modules. It also includes the biometric system performance in terms of True Positive Rate (TPR), False Positive Rate (FPR), False Acceptance Rate (FAR) and False Rejection Rate (FRR). The overview of the healthcare system is discussed in Section 4. This section also gives the explanation of the master plan index (MPI) and the EMPI as they relate to the Health Information Management System (HIMS). In- formation pertaining to the patient arrival and registration process is assessed, and the functionality of HIMS is presented in Section 4 also. Section 5 presents the literature review which provides information about biometrics, healthcare systems, and security concerns. Section 6 explores our proposed approach for the healthcare system with the integration of biometrics. Lastly, Section 7 concludes with the summa- rization of our research and provides insights for our future work.

Seven factors have been identified for assessing the suitability of any trait/characteristic for biometric authentication. Four of the factors are related to the human physiological characteristics and the remaining three are for constructing a biometric system based on human charac- teristics. The factors include universality, uniqueness, permanence, measurability, performance, acceptability, and circumvention [6]. Jain et al. explains these characteristics as follows [6]:

We assess periocular biometrics for identification in this research. The authors are aware of the integration of biometric features in smartphone technology as they are used to assist with the identification of an indi- vidual. In the next section, an overview of periocular biometrics is introduced.

The aim of a healthcare system is to take care of the health of the population in all possible ways considering the available resources and competing needs. Healthcare systems are described as combining orga- nizational and financial work delivered to people. Concerns include problems of access (for whom and to which services), expenses, and re- sources. Hospitals, clinics, and all other health organizations can differ in various environments. Healthcare systems are complex and there are many types of operations that exist in the healthcare environment that we need to know related to healthcare systems and their providers. An examination of healthcare systems includes the consideration of the ways in which a system addresses commonly held values. From a technical perspective, indexes have been created in the information system to track information for patients using the MPIs and EMPIs. The next section will provide an overview of the health information management system.

The focus of a hospital information system (HIS) is the integration of various capabilities and benefits. A HIS is also called the clinical data framework, which is intended to deal with the clinical, authoritative, and money related parts of a medical facility. Once a patient is enrolled in the HIS, all the information of that patient goes to the HIS database, which supplies information for the Patient Management System (PMS). A HIS provides the ability to manage clinical information thus allowing the professional staff to better manage appointments and billing for the

The research in Ref. [26] implemented a HIMS, called CareMed, which utilizes two-factor authentication practices, specifically password and/or PIN and fingerprint biometrics. The security is incorporated in the system to secure patient health records that are contained within the system as it is used by healthcare providers. The authors of [27] devel- oped Gellos HMS, which is an HMS using Unified Modeling Language (UML), Visual Basic.Net, and a Microsoft Access database. Gellos HMS provides access to the administrator, patient registration process, the doctor, and the nurse modules. Multi-factor authentication is incorpo- rated into the system, where fingerprint biometrics and passwords and/or PINs are used.

In [28], the authors focused on how to preserve patient records with biometrics identification in health management systems. The main functionalities of the design and implementation of the system were achieved with UML and Visual Basic.Net. The client application provides access to patient records implemented with Microsoft Access. A dual authentication technique using a PIN and biometrics was utilized for the

In [30], the authors reviewed the different biometric techniques used in healthcare systems such as palm vein scanning, fingerprint identifi- cation systems, proximity authentication, right patient model and bio key. As more hospitals and healthcare systems migrate to computerized physician order entry and electronic health records, and more HIEs are built to coordinate care across networks, there is a great need to effec- tively manage data integrity to ensure it is kept free from corruption, modification, or unauthorized access [31]. Healthcare can only be effective if the right care is provided to the right patient, using the right patient information [32].

The performance of combining the use of online signature and voice biometrics in order to perform robust user authentication is analyzed in Ref. [33]. Signatures are verified using the dynamic programming technique of string matching. Voice is verified using a commercial off the shelf, software development kit. In order to improve the authentication performance, they combine information from both the online signature

In [34], the authors propose a template protection scheme as random rectangular hashing to strengthen the multimodal biometric system. The performance of the proposed template protection scheme is measured using the fingerprint FVC2004 and PolyU palmprint databases. A bio- metric system automatically recognizes the person based on his/her physiological or behavior characteristics [35].

Some additional security concerns are that a biometric sensor could be fooled and the accuracy of the sensor. If the biometric data of a bio- metric system is compromised, it is not possible to reverse the damage that has been done. Some vital privacy concerns are present when considering biometrics as a form of identification. In Refs. [43] several privacy concerns are identified as 1) any collection of data could even- tually get hacked; 2) biometrics may become so commonplace that people become complacent; 3) the data stored in a biometric database may be more vulnerable than any other kind of data; 4) some pieces of your physical identity can be duplicated; 5) laws governing biometrics

Biometric authentication systems incorporate classification tech- niques to distinguish the real person from imposters. Deep learning techniques have played a pivotal role in biometric-based authentication systems recently [44]. In this paper, we propose a deep learning-based method to classify the biometric data generated by the patients enrolled in the healthcare authentication system. During the enrollment process, biometric information from the patient is collected through sensors and image capturing tools installed by the hospital. The enrolled image samples will then be trained using a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) [44]. Through the use of a CNN, a pre-trained neural network can be deployed, which can reduce the amount of training and processing time.

This research applies the multiclass CNNs for identification of each individual, and their successive validation and testing. We applied the modified AlexNet on the BIPLab MICHE-I [46] periocular dataset for experimental evaluation. The modified AlexNet is lighter in its layer structure and is much faster than the traditional AlexNet, as proposed in Refs. [45]. The training pattern of the CNNs varies depending on the time and the memory availability of the CPUs/GPUs. To conduct a realistic experiment, we ran our CNN architecture on the BIPLab MICHE-I data- sets [46] for multiple times, observed the performances and minute variations, and recorded the results.

This work is partially supported by NSF under the grant CNS 1900187 and partially supported by the U. S. Department of Education under the Title III Historically Black Graduate Institutions Grant. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of NSF and the U. S. Department of Education.

