The proposed review paper has been prepared after reviewing more than seven hundred papers and citing more than 150 papers for review work. In this work, we have presented a systematic review of AI tech- niques over various agricultural phases, including the path planning of agriculture robots. The paper highlights the major areas where AI is im- plemented most commonly, and it also highlights the areas where the application of AI is very much needed. The paper identifies the areas of agriculture where the improvement of the existing process may be enhanced using various available techniques. The proposed work shows the applications of various AI techniques and algorithms, which have been used widely, and identifies the techniques used as a hybrid model. Here, the analysis of AI is studied based on simulation work, experimen- tal work, application as a hybrid approach, and application for solving problems in agriculture. The detailed tabular analysis and graphical con- clusion are presented year-wise to make the review more understand- able. Using the in-depth proposed review, one should be able to dif- ferentiate the phases, such as cultivation and harvesting, that are still practiced traditionally. Most of the AI implementation is done in the monitoring phase only. The AI techniques such as fuzzy logic (FL), ar- tificial neural network (ANN), genetic algorithm (GA), particle swarm optimization (PSO), artificial potential field (APF), simulated anneal- ing (SA), ant colony optimization (ACO), artificial bee colony algorithm (ABC), harmony search algorithm (HS), bat algorithm (BA), cell decom- position (CD) and firefly algorithm (FA) have been proposed for rigorous analysis.

FL has many advantages over traditional decision sets. FL is a set of rules that solve problems with nonlinearity, complexity, and uncer- tainty. It was first introduced by L. Zadeh in 1965 [8]. The FL is the logical approach that gives a precise decision about the ongoing condi- tion with the value called degrees of truth. Like other traditional sets, FL does not give true or false results. FL, as an AI technique, helps the con- troller understand the correct changes with the time of the system in the real world to take the precise steps to act upon with time. The develop- ment of FL in the last few years has evolved the decision power of con- trollers. Nowadays, the FL technique is widely used in the agricultural domain in various processes such as agricultural UAV navigation, aerial imaging, crop-cutting robot, farm monitoring, harvesting, and many more.

[37] have developed a soil fertilizer recommendation system using FL. The common fertilizer level data are used as the input to the system, and then the system will recommend the fertilizer needed. Likewise, Alfin et al. [38] have presented recommendations system using FL and vari- ous soil parameters to keep track of sugarcane plant needs. The system provided the perfect recommendation of water and fertilizer to use. As a control of action, Puspaningrum et al. [39] have presented FL-based Irrigation forecasting systems. The system controls the valve opening as per the forecasted needs of a crop.

the human brain, which acts emergently with the perfect action on the change by analyzing the effects. ANN is broadly used to solve dynamic complex problems because it works on the input, hidden, and output layers. These layers are perfectly organized as per the complexity of the problem. This layer is formed by an activation function called nodes. These nodes have different information and data sets used to analyze new input characteristics. The input layer continuously recognizes the set of input characteristics with pre-learn data sets. Afterward, these sets of characteristics are diagnosed with the help of hidden layers to give the highest matching solution from the data sets to the output layer. At last, the output layer provides a final solution.

Many researchers in agriculture have practiced the implementation of the vision system with ANN. Cho et al. [15], Zhao et al. [47], Tang et al. [48], and Dorrer et al. [49] have used standalone ANN to provide vision intelligence in precision farming. Weed monitoring and control is a much-needed task in agriculture. The available classification system [58] have presented a diagnosis support system implemented on a robotics system for plant disease diagnosis using CNN. The deep learn- ing algorithm has performed out of the box with a 98% classification rate. Furthermore, to keep a close eye on healthy crops, Sharmila et al.

A GA is a met heuristic (evolutionary) algorithm used as an optimiza- tion tool in AI. It was introduced by John Holland[66] in 1960. The GA is the AI technique inspired by genetic principles and the steps of the natu- ral section to give us an optimal solution for complex problems. The GA is used in many industrial applications for the optimization of various processes. The genetic evaluation can be stated in every new genera- tion that is evaluated by crossover and mutation from old individuals. It will always have a new and mixed approach with strong species of in- dividuals as compared to old-generation individuals. Here some species [83] have provided the optimal sizing and economic analysis of the PV- Wind Hybrid power system for water irrigation using GA. The spraying of water or pesticides is a very time-consuming task, and hence automa- tion of such a task is very much needed. Cho et al. [32] have devel- oped an improved GA-fuzzy controller with GPS for spaying operation. Recognition systems in agriculture have been playing an important role nowadays. Tao et al. [84] have demonstrated the perfect recognition system using GA. In the presented work, automatic apple recognition and its picking are done using the combination of fusion of color and

models. Mythili et al. [94] have presented the modified DNN and PSO for crop recommendations in the cultivation phase. They used climate data and past crop production data in this work. The PSO-MDNN model was very effective in recommending an appropriate crop. The compar- ison of an approach based on PSO and GA presented by Mahmud et al.

in the greenhouse. One more work on UAVs using the PSO-FL-NN hy- brid approach for monitoring the rice farm is presented by Camci et al. [34]. In their work, the whole mechanism is dedicated to analyzing the quality inspection of rice crops. Chaudhary et al. [95] have presented a new PSO algorithm named Ensemble PSO for crop disease identifi- cation. The results of Ensemble PSO are very impressive. The applica- tion of PSO as an optimization tool helps in decision-making. Ji et al.

The APF method is used in a real-time application for the better and easiest way for planning to resolve problems. The APF method is in- spired by electric charge field generation. The Potential Field method was introduced by Khatib[101] in 1985. He considered that a point in the workspace is affected by the field generation from obstacles and the goal. As per his research, the obstacle has high potential. They behave like a positive charge repeals the attractive point (robot), which is con- sidered a positive charge, and the targeted position has low potential. They behave like negative charges to attract. The use of this method is observed to a more considerable for the path planning of the agriculture robot.

Longo et al. [102] have presented their work on the navigation of agriculture robots in vineyards. To achieve this, APF and a laser range finder, and GPS are implemented on a robot. Similar to this work, other authors such as Harik et al. [103] and Hou et al. [104] also used the autonomous vehicle by using APF for farmland work. Cheng et al.

Musical notes inspire the HS algorithm, and it was introduced by Geem et al. [137] in 2001. The HS algorithm is a metaheuristic al- gorithm based on audio processing with a set of rules for optimizing the effects of errors for better decision output. Audio processing deals with pitch level control for one specific harmony as output. The perfect audio pitch is stored, and the experience is used to create perfect har- mony in the coming time. The algorithm selects the perfect solutions from all the available information and experience for the ideal problem optimization.

It is one of the oldest methods especially used for the path planning of automated devices. The process of cell formation inspires it. The method takes a free area and allots a cell to that free area in the workspace. These allotted cells then form a path to reach the destination, which is represented by a contacting graph. If there are any obstacles, those cells are further divided into two sub-free compartments in that area, which again get added to all free cells to reach a goal in minimum time. CD is very effective with a modern algorithm for optimizing the problems, especially for the vehicles used in agriculture.

Longo D, Pennisi A, Bonsignore R, Muscato G, Schillaci G. A multifunctional tracked vehicle able to operate in vineyards using GPS and laser range-finder technology. International Conference Ragusa SHWA2010-September 16-18 2010 Ragusa Ibla Campus-Italy" Work safety and risk prevention in agro-food and forest systems; 2010.

