Scope and approach: This review summarizes the application of e-nose and e-tongue in determining the quality-related properties of foods. The working principles, applications, and limitations of the sensors employed by electronic noses and electronic tongues were introduced and compared. Widely employed pattern recognition algorithms, including artificial neural network (ANN), convolutional neural network (CNN), principal component analysis (PCA), partial least square regression (PLS), and support vector machine (SVM), were introduced and compared in this review.

In daily life, the human nose is a useful analytical tool to evaluate the quality of foods before consuming and identifying potentially hazardous gas in the environment. In many industries, the quality of drinks, food, perfumes, cosmetic, and volatile chemical products are accessed by sen- sory panels, which are groups of trained or untrained peoples who fill out evaluation questionnaires based on the smells of the products. It has been reported that the human nose has around 400 scent receptors and can detect at least one trillion odors (Bushdid et al., 2014). Although the human nose can rate a smell, individuals' judgments may be bias, and human nose cannot be used to sense toxic gases. In addition, human nose has detection limits for difference gases. Those limitations prevent the human nose from being a universal tool for all smell-related discrimination and classification.

CP (also called intrinsically conducting polymer, ICP) composites consist of conducting particles such as polypyrrole, polyaniline, and polythiophene interspersed in an insulating polymer matrix (Megha et al., 2018). According to a previous study, CP gas sensors might be the second widely used gas sensor after MOS sensors (Dey, 2018). When the sensing materials are exposed to chemical vapors, the reac- tions between the sensing materials and the chemical vapors introduce impunity into the sensing materials (doping). The doping level in CPs transfers electrons to or from the analytes, causing a change in

CP gas sensors can operate without extra heating; thus, they exhibit a considerably lower power consumption than metal-oxide gas sensors. In addition to that, conducting polymers are easily synthesized through chemical or electrochemical processes. The structure of CP molecular chains can be modified by copolymerization or structural derivations. Furthermore, CPs have good mechanical properties, which make them more durable and easier to be shipped (Megha et al., 2018).

PCA is a widely used basic classification technique, which had been successfully used gas sensor applications. It is a linear and unsupervised pattern-recognition method. Data collected by e-noses are typically in high-dimensional space due to the relatively high number of employed gas sensors and multiple extracted signal characters. PCA reduces the dimension of high-dimensional data to lower-dimensional space (Hong et al., 2018).

In earlier studies on ANN-electronic nose, ANNs trained by backpropagation errors were often used to determine the beer quality (Gonzalez Viejo et al., 2020), the sensory attributes of foods (Zhong, 2019), aging of rice (Rahimzadeh et al., 2019), types of French cheese (Ghasemi-Varnamkhasti et al., 2019), and the presence of foodborne pathogens in foods (Bonah et al., 2019). In more recent studies, diversi- fied training methods were employed, and multiple classifiers were combined with ANN to process data obtained by e-noses. Quadratic polynomial step regression (QPSR) and multiple linear regression (MLR) were used to determine the firmness of fruits based on e-nose data as a comparison of using backpropagation ANN (Zhang et al., 2008). ANN, combined with PCA, was used to determine the freshness of chicken meat (Timsorn et al., 2014) and the roasting degree of cocoa beans (Tan and Kerr, 2018b). PCA reduces the dimension of the data before an ANN was trained, which significantly decreases the num- ber of inputs (Ordukaya and Karlik, 2017). In another study, a probabilistic neural network (PNN) was trained to classify the quality of Orange, Lemon, Sweet Lime, and Tomato (Narendra and Govardhan Hegde, 2019). The general regression neural network (GRNN) is an- other type of ANN that had been used to determine food authenticity based on e-nose (Peris and Escuder-Gilabert, 2016).

CNN is a type of deep learning neural network that has been widely used for image recognition. Briefly, the image data (e.g., intensity and RGB value) is passed through a series of convolutional layer contains fil- ters (or neuron, or core), pooling layers, and fully connected layers, and then generates the output. A schematic diagram of a basic form of CNN

A decision tree is a tree structure classifier consists of layers of inter- nal and external nodes connected by branches. Each internal node has a selected decision function, which determines which node to be trans- ferred to (Cho and Kurup, 2011). External nodes indicate the output cor- responding to an input vector.

The ID3 (by Quinlan) algorithm is the most used training algorithm for a decision tree. The ID3 algorithm builds the decision tree using a top-to-bottom and greedy approach. In the first step, it selects one attri- bute, N, as the first node. N has the most information gain, which indicates how well the attribute classifies the data. In the next step, it creates a new descendant of the node for each N. After that, ID3 sorts the training samples to the appropriate descendant node leaf. If all the training samples were successfully classified, then iteration is termi- nated. Otherwise, the iteration continues until other termination criteria met.

The human sense of taste consists of five basic tastes, including sweetness, sourness, bitterness, saltiness, and umami. Human sensory panel (trained or untrained) has been employed to conduct taste evalu- ations on many food products (Jiang et al., 2018). However, running and training a sensory panel is relatively time-consuming and expensive. In some cases, sensory panels may introduce biases if the panelists were not well-trained. Therefore, e-tongue, a rapid-sensing, unbiased, and in- expensive alternative for the human tongue were employed by many researchers (Schlossareck and Ross, 2019).

The chemical sensors commonly employed for an e-tongue include electrochemical sensors, biosensors, and optical mass sensors (Jiang et al., 2018). Similar to gas sensors of e-nose, the chemical sensors employed by e-tongue react with analytes, creating reversible changes of electrical properties. Measurable electrical signals are then being used to do pattern recognition and classification.

Potentiometric electronic tongues have been used for classifying olive oils obtained from single olive cultivars (Dias et al., 2014), differen- tiating honey produced from different states in the United States (Escriche et al., 2012), discriminating different commercial beers and wines (Nery and Kubota, 2016), and quantifying sugar content in solu- tions (Arca et al., 2019). Those studies have shown good accuracies, comparing to standard analytical methods.

Sweeteners and acids are important ingredients for foods, which providing sweetness and sourness to the products. The voltammetric bioelectric sensors are typically employed to deter- mine sweeteners such as glucose, lactate, sucrose, or acids such as lactic acid, acetic acid, and sialic acid. In previous studies, glucose was determined based on glucose oxidase, which consumed oxygen and produced hydrogen peroxide. The quantity of the hydrogen

Sucrose and galactose were determined by quantifying the glucose obtained from the enzymatic hydrolysis of sucrose and galactose. The enzymes used to hydrolyze sucrose and galactose were invertase and galactosidase, respectively. Similar working principles were also employed to enzymatically determine citric acid, lactic acid, malic acid, ascorbic acid, and acetic acid (Monosik et al., 2012).

where R and XC is the components resistance and the capacitive reac- tance, respectively. The biomaterials commonly used to immobilize analytes on the surface of the electrode include antibodies, nucleic acids, bacteriophages, and lectins. Therefore, impedimetric biosensors were generally classified into four categories, including antibody-based sen- sors, nucleic acid-based sensors, bacteriophage-based sensors, and lectin-based sensors.

are also widely used to detect microbial growth through direct binding of the target bacteria or immobilizing the conductive metabolites of the target microorganisms (Rengaraj et al., 2018). In previous studies, food pathogens, including E. coli O157: H7 (Lin et al., 2019), Salmonella Typhimurium (Sheikhzadeh et al., 2016), Staphylococcus aureus, and Ba- cillus cereus (Reich et al., 2017).

