To accurately assess the impact of agricultural practices on the C se- questration and emissions mitigation potential of paddy ecosystems, un- derstanding the C and N cycle of paddy ecosystems is crucial. Much basic data has been accumulated through field observation and simulation ex- periments for understanding the scientific process of the C and N cycle in terrestrial ecosystems. With the continuous improvement of science and technology as well as the deepening awareness of the C and N cycle's mechanisms, scientists have begun to develop models to quantify and predict the substance flow of ecosystems. Among them, the process- oriented model, based on the biogeochemical process of C and N dynamic migration, collects the key processes and their control factors in the agri- cultural ecosystem. The process-based model can effectively expand the scope of analysis from limited site experiments to unlimited scales in time and space and also provide a practical method for quantitative mea- surements of the C and N cycle in the agricultural ecosystem.

At present, a series of process models are recommended in IPCC guidelines for national GHG inventories, including the Century, RothC, CH4MOD, and DNDC-Rice (originating from the DNDC model) models. The DNDC model, developed by Li et al. (1992), has been used in various countries and regions to simulate the C and N cycle in agricultural, wet- land, forest, and grassland ecosystems. In a paddy ecosystem, the DNDC model is mainly used to evaluate soil C and N dynamics and GHG emis- sions. After years of development, the DNDC model can perform simula- tions effectively and its efficacy has been recognized by numerous researchers.

DNDC model can be used to simulate the gas from soil, such as CO2, CH4, N2O, NH3, etc. The formation of CO2, CH4, and N2O in soil is mainly the result of soil microbial activities, which are impacted by soil envi- ronment. Therefore, correct simulations of soil climate, including soil temperature, moisture, pH, and electrical potential (Eh) and related substrate concentration, are critical for tracking GHG emissions.

accurately simulate the GHG emissions of paddy fields in India, Pathak et al. (2005) increased the leakage rate of certain reaction substrates in soil in the model, such as dissolved organic carbon (DOC) and nitrate. The results of the optimized model greatly reduced CH4 emissions at the high leakage point but had no effect on those at the low or medium leakage point.

rates. The decomposition process is affected by many factors, such as or- ganic matter type and soil texture (Li, 2016). The DNDC model can accu- rately simulate SOC and its dynamic change under specific climates (R2 = 0.96) and can also complete long-term estimation (Zhang and Shao, 2017; Ku et al., 2019).

and H2 and DOC are used as electron donors to more effectively track the change of soil Eh, determine the reaction rate of each oxidation/re- duction reaction, and calculate the generation and consumption of CH4 and N2O (Fumoto et al., 2008; Katayanagi et al., 2012).

CH4 is produced by methanogenic bacteria using soil humus, rice root exudates, soil microbial residues, and organic materials as sub- strates. In the root exudation area (around the root) or soil micro- oxidation area, some CH4 is oxidized to CO2 and H2O by methanotrophic bacteria, and some CH4 that is not oxidized is discharged into the atmo- sphere through rice plants, bubbles, and liquid diffusion. The model builds a module based on an anaerobic balloon, which can effectively implement and stimulate CH4 and N2O emissions in flooded paddy fields.

In addition, the DNDC model can define numerous water manage- ment modes. This enables the simulation analysis of GHG emission sce- narios under various types of water management to effectively predict their emissions mitigation potential in time and space scales. After pa- rameterizing two rice varieties, namely M206 (a high-yield and semi- dwarf variety) and Koshihikari (a traditional variety), Simmonds et al. (2015) simulated the grain yield and CH4 and N2O emissions of rice under different N loads and water management types with water- seeding and dry-seeding cultivation. The results indicated that DNDC could distinguish the rice yield of the two varieties and reproduce the CH4 emission dynamics under different management scenarios. Water-saving irrigation management, such as controlled irrigation and

Based on DNDC model, the simulated value of crop yield was fitted the measured value well in rice-wheat rotation system under different N application, which reflected the relationship between crop yield and N application; when N fertilizer application reached 60% of the conven- tional amount, the increase in N no longer promoted a significant in- crease in crop yield, whereas the comprehensive greenhouse effect decreased by 43% compared with the conventional practice (Li, 2012). After the rice varieties were parameterized by Simmonds et al. (2015), the model could reproduce the CH4 emission dynamics under different amounts of N fertilizer and different flooding times. The results of DNDC estimation indicated that GHG emissions could be reduced without af- fecting the crop yield through reducing the amount of N applied based on the current amount. At present, a large potential exists for reducing the use of chemical N fertilizer in China. The paddy yield will be stabi- lized when the amount of N fertilizer is reduced by 0.88 Tg per year. In the main rice growing regions of China, such as Jiangsu, Yunnan, Gui- zhou, and Hubei provinces, GHG emissions can be reduced by as much as 40% through N fertilizer reduction (Chen et al., 2016).

The reasonable addition of exogenous C can affect CH4 emissions in paddy fields. Numerous studies have shown that all types of exogenous C, such as straw, green manure, and organic manure, provide rich sub- strates for methanogens and can significantly promote CH4 emissions from rice fields (Wang et al., 2012b; Zhou et al., 2020). Compared with no exogenous carbon addition, manure input and straw incorpora- tion enhanced CH4 emission per unit of rice yield significantly, with 54% and 107% increase respectively (Zhao et al., 2019b). Straw return or ma- nure application can suddenly increase the content of soil organic mat- ter, but it will be gradually decomposed by soil microorganisms, providing a rich substrate for methanogens and other microorganisms. The model constructed the effect of environmental conditions on

The application of plastic mulching cultivation technology can solve the problem of winter irrigation of paddy rice in northwest China, and it is also a crucial form of agricultural management for CH4 emission mit- igation. Compared with continuous flooding, plastic mulching could sig- nificantly reduce CH4 emissions by 86% while maintaining rice yield (Zhang et al., 2013). Moreover, compared with a field without mulching, the soil climate of a field with mulching was significantly dif- ferent, mainly with respect to field evapotranspiration, heat exchange, and soil aeration, which affected the soil temperature and moisture, mi- crobial activity, and gas diffusion emissions. Many studies have modi- fied and optimized the mulching submodule of the DNDC model (Han et al., 2014; Zhang et al., 2019a; Zhou et al., 2019). The model can sim- ulate the soil temperature and moisture accurately under different mulching density scenarios. However, few studies have been conducted on GHG emissions simulation under the condition of paddy field mulching.

With the aggravation of environmental problems and the improve- ment of agricultural practices, expectations for the prediction function of the model are increasing. In the future, it will be necessary to evaluate the comprehensive effects of various farmland measures on SOC change, GHG emissions, food security, and ecological environments. How to make more effective use of the DNDC model to serve the low- C production of rice from the point to regional scale as well as how to establish a reliable prediction and evaluation system under agricultural practices and climate scenarios are the development trends for the model's application.

