The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we present an overview of the K computer, including the file I/O sub- systems and electric power-related metrics. Correlation analysis using job stats log is then reported in Section 3, followed by a prediction model discussion based on an ML approach in Section 4. We then discuss related work in Section 5 before finally concluding the paper and discussing our future work plans in Section 6.

computer, the local file system (LFS) was a scratch high-performance storage space dedicated to file I/O operations during computations, while the global file system (GFS) was used to store programs and data with high redundancy. An enhanced Lustre file system named Fujitsu Exabyte File System (FEFS) [8] that was based on Lustre version 1.8 was used to build both of the K computer file systems. When combined with asynchronous file staging scheme [9], this two-level file system improved job scheduling efficiency and mitigated I/O interference.

The disk utilization ratio relative to the allocated disk space pro- vides another insight into the file I/O status of each job and its associated activities. In general, CPU and memory device utilization, both of which are tightly associated with electric power consumption, tend to decrease with an increase in I/O operation workload and vice versa. Additionally, the same or similar job scripts are likely to be used repeatedly in HPC jobs [11]. This indicates that investigating I/O activities from past job stats log data can be expected to yield insights about the electric power levels of each job. The results of such analyses, when combined with job stats log data collected from the K computer, can be expected to provide useful information towards ensuring more power-aware HPC system operations in Fugaku.

computing activities. As mentioned previously, higher file I/O activities in an HPC job tend to indicate lower electric power levels. In contrast, higher computing activities in an HPC job tend to result in increased electric power. For these correlation coefficient evaluations, we utilized a Python module; and to eliminate the dependency of individual corre- lation functions, we utilized the following three correlation functions provided by the SciPy [13] package:

X_train and y_train are training datasets for jobs with lower and higher electric power levels, respectively, while X_test and y_test are testing datasets for jobs with lower and higher electric power levels, respectively. Note that since the stratify specification implies the same y distribution characteristics for both training and testing, we used the same datasets every time we performed examinations with the same distribution characteristics. It should be also noted that 75% of the data were assigned to the training dataset, and the remainder were assigned to the testing dataset.

The RFC achieved the highest values of about 0.945, 0.832, and 0.944 in the cases of 1D, 3D(malleable), and All, respectively. In the 3D(same) case, the KNC achieved the highest score of 0.942 but the RFC achieved a comparable score of 0.929. In [24], the authors

Since most jobs are 1D, we can see almost the same scores in All. However, some degradation in the scores occurred if the number of jobs in 3D(malleable) and 3D(same) increased when considering the scores in the two cases mentioned above. This indicates that it might be better to perform job classification separately in each node-layout.

Furthermore, in the classification at 30 W, that model achieved high scores of up to 0.945, 0.832, and 0.944 among the evaluated models in the three node-layout cases of 1D, 3D with layout changes, and all node-layout cases, respectively. Although the KNC model achieved the highest score (0.944) in the 3D node-layout without layout changes, the RFC model achieved a comparable score. Classifying the jobs at 50 W or 40 W did not show good scores except the compute node layout of 3D with layout changes because of difficulty in classifying jobs at those threshold levels among mixed jobs about electric power levels per compute node. Overall, we determined that the RFC was the best model for use in our HPC job classifications in terms of electric power levels per compute node if we adopted appropriate threshold level such as 60 W or 30 W.

