It is a challenge for policy makers and practitioners to effectively determine potential threats as early as possible. Hence, when cyber strategies (http:// belfercenter.ksg.harvard.edu/events/6230/intelligence_in_the_private_sector.html, 2014; Bernardo and Chua, 2013) are examined, there is an ideal opportunity to observe the means through which organizations, governments in particular, become challenged in adjusting to the expectations of their stakeholders under the conditions of alliances, cooperativeness, socio-demographic values, and other practical influences.

Attaining viable strategies to address cyber threats and attacks remains a chal- lenge (http://belfercenter.ksg.harvard.edu/events/6230/intelligence_in_the_priva te_sector.html, 2014; Bernardo and Chua, 2013) due to lack of concentration on tailoring approaches to address appropriate actions to cyber threats: (a) key but uninformed practitioners are too conservative in meeting their agenda to carry out their own strategies on dealing with cyber threats; (b) another is the slowness of legitimate governments to move beyond mere identification of cyber threats by introducing enforceable regulation and actions, and viable solutions to curb and address them, and to fully recognize the importance of alliances with industries and other governments to have unified and effective approaches to combat cyber threats.

Statements of interventive and actions of retaliatory approaches must contain explicit predictions of the relationship between the inputs (processes), tactical courses of action and the desired outcomes (e.g., minimization of threats and val- idations of enforced mechanisms, and introduction of strike back mechanisms).

The central focus in this work is concerned where existing efforts appropriately address the different needs for effective practice, and the analysis in this work is guided by the goal set in the preceding sections. Existing works and practices par- ticularly in major industries (e.g., telecommunications, transportation and electric- ity), though limited, have been analyzed to assess the relative emphasis on cyber security research, which can contribute to the community of practice on the effec- tiveness of both approaches and the relationship between replicability of these approaches. With some countries or organizations lacking cybersecurity prepared- ness and guidelines, this work focuses on available roadmaps and collected data sets available, instead of government-restricted classified information.

It is important to select industries (e.g., academe, governments, and private finan- cial sectors) and provide an assessment period to reasonably represent the primary current thrusts of cybersecurity research. The practices are focused on organiza- tions across the US, UK, Asia Pacific (especially on those recently targeted by cyber attacks, such as Philippines, South Korea, Vietnam, the US, and Australia). This work builds on initially collected data from 3 identified organizations (Bernardo, 2012, 2013; Bernardo and Chua, 2013) with regional presence in the UK, US and Asia, and focuses on one recently completed survey on risks and threats on cloud computing. The choice of the work specifically on cloud comput- ing in this sample can be considered more opportunistic rather than monolithic. Given the recent popularity of cloud computing across governments and industries and due its identified risks, the choice has been alluded to the benefits of under- standing the current trends and of further underscoring the importance of cyber threats across many infrastructures.

To observe a situation where cyber threats are suspected to be taking place, it is important to define that central to the interaction where these occur is the signif- icant process of identifying and differentiating cyber attacks from the other attacks (i.e., localized) that occur on a certain period; considering the impact of these attacks into account; and responding by acting according to the existing courses of action.

The initial observation of the recent cases is the discovery of lack of effective strategies, technologies, and resources to carry out effective cybersecurity. This observation is made as a result of static, one-way observation on incidents that reportedly occurred. One-way observation means observing circumstances with limited interaction (e.g., lack of active data gathering, of active participation of those involved, and of consistent monitoring and review, to name a few). Dealing with reports of cyber attacks must therefore involve a dynamic multi-way complex process of interactions and intelligence sharing between those who are tasked to take courses of action and those who are directly affected by them and those who defined governance and compliance (e.g., emergency response group, govern- ment funded groups, and industry).

Trends in the development of conceptual framework to detect cyber threats have paralleled those in specific regions (Bernardo et al., 2009; Bernardo and Smith, 1994) where threats have occurred and/or are continuing. In recent years, the problem of cyber threats has become an identifiable issue for many organizations that can be addressed by the appropriate intervention.

These questions are best conducted in longitudinal studies across industries. A periodic analysis of trends may assist in creating methods that raise awareness and address concerns on how cyber threats can be quickly identified, validated, and resolved. Nonetheless, securing cyber-infrastructure remains a challenge to many, especially in an era of cyber threats.

The trends of alliances encourage participation and interaction that provide greater access to many experts and tools. Awareness of the issue, of course, can be achieved and raised through tailored approaches. Some organizations, how- ever, have limited opportunities to forge alliances that encourage participation, but engaging with other communities is an important step to developing interac- tion that can result in feasible approaches.

