This paper presents a clinical decision support system using Artificial Neural Networks (ANN). The system uses Multilayer Perceptron (MLP) feed forward neural network to predict the risk of developing Venous Thromboembolism (VTE) in hospitalized patients. The developed system classifies the risk of VTE into five risk levels ranging from low to high. The input layer of the system consists of 35 input variables grouped into six categories representing the risk factors of VTE according to Caprini model. The output layer con- sists of one node indicating a value representing the level of VTE risk. The number of hidden nodes and layers is determined through an iterative process. The system is trained using Resilient Backpropagation algorithm (Rprop). The dataset used for training and testing the system consists of 150 medical records obtained from Jordan University Hospital (JUH). Stratified ten-fold cross validation scheme is applied to assess the generalization of the proposed system. The results of the experiment show that the accuracy of the system is 81%.

The proposed system uses Multilayer Perceptron (MLP) feed forward neural network using Resilient Backpropagation algorithm (Rprop) to train the system. The system receives as inputs all of the 35 risk factors identified by Caprini model [8]. The MLP network is trained using 150 medical records collected from Jordan University Hospital (JUH) with the consent of the patients.

To implement the system, an experimental study was per- formed to choose the best structure of the neural network used in the proposed decision support system. The network was then trained, tested, and validated. Stratified ten-fold cross validation scheme was applied to assess the generalization of the proposed system. The results of the experiment showed that the accuracy of the system was 81%.

the specification and architecture of the system. Section 4 presents the experiment study which was conducted to train different neu- ral network designs in order to choose the best performing model. In addition, it presents and discusses the results obtained when applying ten-fold cross validation on the selected network design. Finally, Section 5 provides the conclusion and future work.

Venous Thromboembolism (VTE) is a major cause of morbidity and mortality and it is a serious health issue which often compli- cates the course of hospitalized medical patients. It results when a thrombus forms in a vessel and obstructs the blood flow. Many risk factors for VTE have been well recognized [1] and a review of 1231 consecutive patients treated for VTE, showed that 96% of the patients had at least one recognized risk factor [9,10].

Backpropagation is the common training algorithm used in MLPs. The concept of the algorithm it to calculate the error in the output (the difference between the output result obtained by the network and the desired output), and pass it backwards to the network so that the weights of the inputs are updated in order to minimize the error. Resilient backpropagation, Rprop, is an enhanced algorithm overcoming some of the major issues with the standard Backpropagation algorithm [15].

Finally, to estimate the performance of a prediction model, e.g. MLP, in terms of its accuracy, and in order to improve its general- ization, cross-validation is commonly applied. A common practice is to divide the data set into three sets: training set, validation set and testing set [16]. The training dataset is used to train the net- work by adjusting the input weights for neurons in the neural net- work. The validation dataset is used to minimize overfitting, ensuring that any increase in accuracy over the training dataset actually yields an increase in accuracy over a dataset that the net- work has not seen previously. Finally, the testing dataset is used when the model design is iterated many times. In this case, after selecting the model having the best performance on the validation set, the training set is used to assess the generalization of the selected model on unseen data.

Ho et al. [20] compared between three prediction models to predict disease-free survival in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) patients who have received hepatic resection. The three prediction models considered were artificial neural networks (ANN), logistic regression (LR), and decision tree (DT). They concluded that ANN model gave the best prediction accuracy.

Zecchin et al. [21] found that ANN improved the accuracy of short time prediction of glucose concentration. They proposed an approach for short time glucose prediction using past CGM sensor readings and information on carbohydrate intake. The approach combined a neural network (NN) model and first-order polynomial

The confusion matrix helps visualizing the performance of the model within each class of VTE risk by looking at the actual versus the predicted class of risk for each class. The rows represent the predicted classes for the sample cases from a specific class of risk. For example, the first row shows that out of 30 actual low risk cases, the model correctly predicted 27 cases within the low risk class, while it incorrectly classified the remaining three low risk cases as lower-mild risk class. The columns show the actual classi- fication of the cases that were predicted within a specific class of risk. For example, the first column show that the model predicted a total of 31 low risk cases, while actually only 27 out of them were actually low risk cases, and the other 4 were incorrectly classified as low risk while they were actually lower-mild risk cases. Conse- quently, the rate 27/30 shows the measure of the procedure accu- racy of the classification for the low risk class (which is also called the Recall measure), while the rate 27/31 shows the user accuracy of the classification model for low risk class (which is also called the Precision measure).

Stratified ten-fold cross validation was applied, and it showed that the system had an overall user accuracy of 81.2% and an over- all procedure accuracy of 80.7%. It is worth noting that the system accuracy is very high for both extreme classes of risk: low risk and high risk. For the high risk class, the user accuracy obtained from the experiment is 100% and the procedure accuracy is 90%. For the low risk class, the user accuracy is 87.5% while the procedure accuracy is 90%. When misclassification occur, the system usually misclassifies a case in either the class directly below the actual classification class or the one directly above it.

Abdullah A. Awidi, M.R.C.P. (UK), FRCP, is a Professor of Medicine, Hematology and Oncology in the Faculty of Medicine, in Jordan University. He is the founder, pres- ident and director of Cell Therapy Center (CTC) in Jordan University. He received several research wards. He has well-established published research in several regional and top international journals.

