COVID-19, a worldwide pandemic that has affected many people and thousands of individuals have died due to COVID-19, during the last two years. Due to the benefits of Artificial Intelligence (AI) in X-ray image interpre- tation, sound analysis, diagnosis, patient monitoring, and CT image identification, it has been further researched in the area of medical science during the period of COVID-19. This study has assessed the performance and investigated different machine learning (ML), deep learning (DL), and combinations of various ML, DL, and AI approaches that have been employed in recent studies with diverse data formats to combat the problems that have arisen due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Finally, this study shows the comparison among the stand-alone ML and DL-based research works regarding the COVID-19 issues with the combinations of ML, DL, and AI-based research works. After in-depth analysis and comparison, this study responds to the proposed research ques- tions and presents the future research directions in this context. This review work will guide different research groups to develop viable applications based on ML, DL, and AI models, and will also guide healthcare institutes, researchers, and governments by showing them how these techniques can ease the process of tackling the COVID- 19.

prevalent signs for COVID-19 are lack of flavor and aroma [10]. Gov- ernments and regulatory organizations throughout the world have implemented a no-compromise lockdown to preserve social isolation and so limit the epidemic as daily notifications of new breakouts have been flooding in at an unprecedented rate. The most impacted nations have closed their borders to transit and travel to stop the spread of COVID-19. In this global health emergency, the health sector is actively searching for new technology and strategies to monitor and manage the spread of the coronavirus epidemic. AI is currently one of the most effective technology since it can monitor the spread of the Coronavirus, assess its danger and severity, and measure its development rate.

AI is a vast field with several sub-fields that may be used to address difficult issues in our daily lives. Learning, planning, representing in- formation, and seeking are some of these sub-areas. The RT-PCR is currently most widely utilized approaches for COVID-19 detection. Using various data types with different AI-based methods, multiple ap- plications have been developed that can now be used as a replacement for traditional RT-PCR tests. Utilizing different AI-based applications, patient management is becoming more effective, as these applications

The organization of the remaining sections is as follows: the review methodology used to conduct the study is discussed in section 2. Section 3 of this study presents the analysis and findings. Section 4 of this study presents finding and analysis of the proposed research questions. Section 5 discusses the challenges and the potential scopes for future research to combat COVID-19. Finally, the study is concluded in section 6.

In this step, the primary relevant works were selected based on the search strategy discussed earlier. By applying the aforementioned search strategy, 600 studies were identified and selected initially. The duplicate records or studies were then removed in the next phase. After removing the duplicate studies, a total of 512 works remained. 382 studies were excluded during the screening process. Abstract analysis, dataset anal- ysis, and inclusion and exclusion criteria were used to filter the studies. A total of 130 research works became eligible for full-text analysis through the screening process. Later, these 130 research works were reviewed, and 26 of them were eliminated. In the last stage, a total of 104 studies remained to be checked for their methodological qualities. Among those studies, a total of 16 studies were then excluded based on the methodological quality. After completing all these procedures, only

poses of the studies. The third and the fourth attributes describe the data types used in the studies and the sample size of the studies, respectively. The fifth attribute specifies the major techniques applied in the studies. Finally, the last attribute mentions the best performing model with its performance.

and reviewed the studies related to the uses of AI and ML mechanisms in the context of various COVID-19-related tasks. In that review study, various studies related to COVID-19 transmission prediction, diagnosis, and detection, and drug/vaccine development have been analyzed, and six predefined questions have been explored. However, the entire context of the COVID-19 pandemic and the application of DL techniques have not been explored in the study.

The application of various models has been reviewed and summarized. Furthermore, six research opportunities have been identified and sum- marized in the study. However, other objectives (sentiment analysis, vaccine development, etc.) and the application of DL techniques have not been explored.

A comprehensive review of the role of AI, drones, blockchain, and 5G to manage the COVID-19 pandemic has been performed by Chamola et al. [14]. The study explored the use of current technologies to combat the epidemic as well as its effect on the global economy. The role of Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs), blockchain, AI, and 5G, among others, in mitigating the effects of the COVID-19 outbreak has been explored and discussed in the studies.

Alballa et al. [15] reviewed recent reports on ML algorithms used in relation to the COVID-19 pandemic. In the study, the applications of ML for diagnosis and predicting patient mortality risk and severity were analyzed. The review includes studies published between January 2020 and January 2021. By assessing the studies, a small number of real-time E2E systems and a selection bias due to imbalanced data were identified. Despite analyzing the ML models for diagnosis and prediction, other COVID-19-related objectives such as detection, epidemic forecasting, etc. have not been considered.

Alafif et al. [16] review the studies conducted on the uses of ML and DL towards COVID-19 diagnosis and treatment. The review study pro- vides a summary of the AI-based ML and DL procedures, the available datasets, performance, and currently available tools. By performing a comprehensive analysis of the current ML and DL approaches used to diagnose COVID-19, obstacles to conducting the studies have been highlighted. In addition, the study made some directions for future work. Although the study analyzed the uses of ML and DL approaches only for the diagnosis and treatment of COVID-19, other perspectives on the probable combination of ML, DL, and the COVID-19 pandemic were not covered.

Although various studies have been conducted to review the works related to the use of ML, DL, and AI-based techniques for COVID-19 management. Very few studies have explored the uses of the possible combination of ML, DL, and AI mechanisms. Moreover, this study explored diverse perspectives on the COVID-19 pandemic, utilizing a variety of data types and combinations of data types. In addition, most recent studies conducted on ML, DL, and the combination of ML, DL, and AI-based mechanisms have been included, as well as some earlier rele- vant studies.

ML is the area of AI that mainly focuses on building systems that are capable of learning without explicit programming to do so. At the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic, ML algorithms were primarily utilized. Initially, these algorithms were utilized exclusively for geographical and area-wise COVID-19 spread analysis. These algorithms are now being used for various purposes in combating COVID-19. Currently, ML approaches not only can predict COVID-19 by using clinical and laboratory data but also can be used to derive much more complicated aspects of COVID-19. ML approaches show significant performance in the diagnostic process of COVID-19 by utilizing diverse data such as blood images, X-rays, ECG, CT scans, etc. Due to the usage of ML methods for extracting features from images, signals, and audio

The combinations of ML, DL, and AI-based techniques are crucial in better understanding and dealing with the COVID-19 situation. The combinations of these methods are rapidly being used since these ap- proaches can open up new avenues for various forms of diagnosis, sentiment analysis, public surveillance, and illness prevention. Several COVID-19 diagnostic approaches based on images aided by DL and AI- based techniques have been developed, and their association with RT- PCR has been evaluated. Image and non-image types of data are inte- grated by the combination of ML, DL, and AI-based methods to inves- tigate several new alternatives to combat COVID-19.

In this section, the predefined research questions have been dis- cussed. For each of the research questions, we have discussed the sig- nificance of the question as well as the findings based on the question that has been explored via the analysis of the studies. In addition, we have provided directions and some precautions for the researchers who aspire to conduct COVID-19 pandemic-related studies.

potentiality of those mechanisms. Among the mechanisms, various AI techniques, SVM (ML model), custom models, diverse but not widely used DL models, CNN (DL model), and RF (ML model) are some of the widely applied mechanisms in the studies. Analyzing the studies and the best model, it can be found that the majority of the studies employed Al methods with ML or DL models and emphasize increasing the performance.

As COVID-19 is a global pandemic, many governments and NGOs have released open-access COVID-19 datasets, which mostly involve vaccination-related and spread-related datasets. But to identify the COVID-19 virus in the human body, an image type dataset is needed. Due to various constraints, there is a shortage of publicly available image datasets at the beginning of the period. Now there are some in- dividual studies that have given open access to their dataset. But most of the individual datasets have some limitations, such as being imbalanced, dataset, which can be used to reevaluate studies applying model per- formance. Furthermore, there is a lack of standard datasets related to sound and audio types of data for the COVID-19 disease. Also, there are very limited open-access sound-related standard datasets.

RQ 3: RT-PCR is the traditional method used to detect COVID-19 disease in the human body. Patients must physically visit a hospital to give samples for testing the suspected COVID-19 present in their bodies while using the traditional testing method. However, between the waves of the COVID-19 pandemic, visiting the hospital is a risky step. Because visiting the hospital in the middle of the COVID-19 wave can affect healthy people, who can further act as hosts and further spread the disease. Therefore, it is important to find some End-to-End solution based on AI, which can remotely and effectively diagnose COVID-19 in a suspected person.

Therefore, the E2ES hardly solves the problem of remote E2ES systems. Some studies have considered using sound and audio data to build E2ES for the COVID-19 diagnosis system, which can diagnose COVID-19 remotely. However, low sound-quality recording devices and environ- mental noise can downgrade the quality of captured audio and sound data, which may affect the performance of the application. Furthermore, these studies and applications have some certain circumscribed. Therefore, there is still a lack of standard and reliable E2ES for the diagnosis of COVID-19.

removing the issues that users encounter when using the E2E system and improve quality (noise reduction, low-quality images handling). The system should be available and compatible with the maximum possible number of devices and platforms. In addition, researchers must promote campaign of the E2E system so that the wider populace can utilize the resource.

RQ 5: For combating the COVID-19 pandemic, many studies have been conducted for various purposes and using various mechanisms. Various domains of AI have been used with diverse modifications and combinations. Furthermore, various types of data and a mixture of data types have been used to perform studies. Therefore, there is a need to evaluate the studies with a standard form of evaluationmetrics. Addi- tionally, there is a need to identify the criteria that have been used in those studies to evaluate the trustworthiness of the studies. Most of the studies have used some of the evaluation metrics such as accuracy,

As COVID-19 is a pandemic and can transmit from person to person very rapidly, the top priority is to stop the spread. Therefore, it is crucial not to misidentify an infected person rather than misidentify a healthy person. Therefore, the researchers should prioritize the True Positive Rate or recall value rather than accuracy, as recall value focuses on capturing all true positives, even if it increases false positive rate.

RQ 6: Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, there have been instanced number of research works conducted to manage and to combat the pandemic by the use of ML, DL, and combinations of ML, DL, and AI- based techniques. Those research works have been analyzed and iden- tified various factors and purposes associated with COVID-19 using ML, DL, and combinations of ML, DL, and AI-based techniques. However, from those studies, some common challenges and limitations can be outlined. Identifying those challenges can be beneficial for the re- searchers who are planning to do research by applying the ML, DL, and AI methods as they can study those challenges to overcome in their study or can make their study particularly based on finding the solution to those challenges.

Selection of an effective model from the variety of models available from various domains of ML, DL, and AI is a challenging and time- consuming task. Some traditional ML, DL, and AI methods have already been extensively researched. However, there is still scope for improvements, but it will be challenging. Additionally, finding an effective combination of ML, DL, and AI is a challenging task that re- quires a significant amount of time and expertise. The scarcity of stan- dards and enough sample data is one of the fundamental challenges when it comes to working with COVID-19. These are the two most fundamental challenges for researchers who intend to conduct research using ML, DL, or combinations of ML, DL, and AI-based techniques.

already been exposed to the virus. Therefore, a remote COVID-19 End-to End diagnosis solution must be established in order to resolve the problem. In the future, it will be necessary to examine the problem by overcoming constraints and developing reliable and accurate End-to- End diagnosis solutions.

of 88 studies has been made. Among these studies, 25 studies employed ML techniques, 25 studies employed DL techniques, and the rest 38 studies utilized the combination of ML, DL, and AI-based methods. This study has analyzed the prior research works by summarizing the applied methods in those works, comparing the performance of different models used and identifying the purpose of those works.

The significant information discovered, investigated, and reported in this study are contemporary and up-to-date regarding COVID-19. For the appropriate content, we utilized precise keywords. These search terms yielded valuable results to achieve the aim of this study, though there is a chance we may have missed significant resources that are not shown by these terms. Some data might have been missed during the extraction of data from the selected studies.

