The local minima problem in the APF algorithms can be solved by estimating obstacles to be cylinders and then calculating fluid stream only around these cylinders using specific potential functions [15]. The downside in this solution is that complex obstacles are approximated to be cylinders and it may not be a valid approximation in some cases. Another solution is also introduced in [16]. Machine learning techniques

This research introduces another layer of efficiency improvement for the case of the mentioned kinematic environments. In the next section, the mathematical model and the fundamental SFN approach are explained while section 3 shows how a path can be dynamically updated to avoid stream re-calculations in special cases. Section 4 show the re- sults and time improvement of the introduced approach.

always generate a path from the start point qs to the goal point qg as long as a path exists. This property is guaranteed as the underlaying physical model ensures the conservation of momentum and mass. In other words, it guarantees that if there is mass flowing inside the system, there will be mass flowing outside.

There are generally two approaches when dealing with the variable field problem, the online approach (The local approach) or the offline approach (The global approach). A robotic system using the former approach updates the path while navigating the environment and while the robot is moving to its target. As for the latter approach, the path is re- calculated from the beginning before the robot takes any more actions. In case of an upcoming collision, the local field planner processes the

The experiment is executed 100 times in each field to obtain empirical statistical results of execution times. For each field, the results are expressed as the mean (average) execution time and the standard deviation of the execution times of the 100 runs. The standard deviation is included in the results as the mean by itself is not an effective statis- tical measure for execution times [31].

Egypt, the M.Sc. degree in Electrical Engineering from Ain Shams University, Egypt, and the Ph.D. degree in Neural net- works for speech recognition Engineering from Ain Shams University, Egypt in 1998. During his academic study years, He worked with Siemens, Department of Systems Engineering and Automation. From 2006 to present; Dr. Hisham is working at the German University in Cairo as a head of Industrial Auto- mation Department. He is also director of Robotics and Autonomous Systems (RAS) research group at German Uni- versity in Cairo. He worked as a Senior Research Scientist at

Vestec, Inc and AI Consultant at Menya Solutions Inc., a Robotics & Automation Consul- tant at InnoVision Systems, and Head of Robotics at Sypron Solutions. Dr. Hisham is also a Member in the IEEE, and chair of IEEE Robotics and Automation Society (RAS) Egypt Chapter (recipient of the 2015 IEEE RAS Chapter of the Year Award and 2012 Chapter of the Year Award in IEEE Region 8). Reviewer and Session Chair of 2020 6th International Conference on Mechatronics and Robotics Engineering.

and Egypt, in the field of lightweight and degradable materials in biological applications and lightning of ancient buildings. His research interests include applied hybrid mathe- matics for industrial applications. He is an author of numerous papers and books aiming at practical applications in industrial environments. He was a Reviewer and a Committee Member with DAAD and in different international journals, he is actively participating in new developments in science and engineering. He is a member of SIAM and AMS, USA. He was the recipient of different awards from the Hans Voith Foundation, an award of The Baden- Wuerttemberg Employers Association of the Metal Industry e. V., Germany, an award of the University Association Ulm, a Scholar Grant by Wolfram Research, USA, and the Merckle Research Award, Germany.

