Deep Learning techniques have significant advantages for mass spectral classification, such as parallelized signal correction and feature extraction. Deep Metric Learning models combine Metric Learning to determine the degree of similarity or difference between a set of mass spectra with the generalization power of Deep Learning to improve feature extraction even further. The two most popular of these models combine multiple neural networks with identical architectures and are commonly called Siamese (SNN) and Triplet Neural Networks (TNN). Herein, using both SNNs and TNNs, we intended to taxonomically categorize two sets of previously-validated mass spectra that corresponded to 30 species of Neotropical arthropods in the Culicidae and Ixodidae families, some of which are disease vectors. The effectiveness of SNNs and TNNs to correctly classify 826 spectra from 12 mosquito species and 310 spectra from 18 species of hard ticks was highly effective, with both algorithms performing with minimal average loss during cross-validation. SNNs produced accuracy rates for ticks and mosquitoes of 91.22% and 94.46%, respectively, while accuracy rates of 93% and 99% were obtained with TNNs. Our results indicate that Deep Metric Learning is a practical machine learning tool for quickly and precisely classifying MALDI-TOF- generated mass spectra of Neotropical and public-health-relevant arthropod species.

Several vector-borne pathogens present in Panama, including mosquito-transmitted Plasmodium (e.g., malaria) and tick-transmitted pathogenic Rickettsia (e.g., Rocky Mountain spotted fever), are only mitigated by the elimination and monitoring of vector populations [3,4]. However, most studies on arthropod species in Panama have concentrated on a few species, and the vast majority of species re-

A typical MALDI-TOF mass fingerprint experiment generates a large number of spectral signals that must be pre-processed before machine learning algorithms can automatically classify and identify arthropod species [19,20]. Mass spectral features allow for the identification of distinct biomarkers that characterize different biological species. For in- stance, MALDI-TOF has been previously used in Panama by our team, for species identification in two of the most important taxonomic families of arthropods that contain vectors of disease: Culicidae (i.e., mosquitoes) [2,16,21] and Ixodidae (i.e., hard ticks) [7].

Another branch of machine learning that shows promise for mass spectra analysis and classification is Deep Learning, which comprises all the techniques and algorithms related to Artificial Neural Networks (ANN). The inception of these algorithms was inspired by the function- ing of neurons in the human brain. These models carry out an adaptive learning process through multiple nonlinear mathematical transforma- tions based on multivariable calculus and tensor algebra [25].

To understand the differences between Deep Metric Learning and Deep Learning-based methods, one may consider the analogy of a person (i.e., an intelligent model) learning to discriminate between different ob- jects in a given data set. One approach to this task is for the person to carefully study the defining characteristics of each class of objects (i.e., Deep Learning). Alternatively, the person learns to determine the simi- larities between objects regardless of their predetermined label. Further- more, one can illustrate both methodologies by describing how a ma-

Some mass fingerprinting applications related to Deep Learning in- clude the work of Rakotonirina et al. [28], which employed Convolu- tional Neural Network (CNN) models to detect the presence of the Wol- bachia bacteria in the mosquito Aedes aegypti. The study featured a vot- ing scheme in which the MALDI spectra dataset was partitioned into 15 parts, each of which was modelled by a similar neural network, and the final inference was computed by considering each model predic- tion. Moreover, computer vision has been used to test the effectiveness of Transfer Learning models to improve the identification of triatomine bugs that transmit Chagas disease to humans across the Americas [29]. In recent years with the advent of machine learning oriented frameworks utilizing Deep Learning [30] models, new approaches have been imple- mented in the context of arthropod detection and classification using CNN [31]. However, to our knowledge no previous studies have applied Deep Metric Learning for the rapid identification of arthropods from the biodiverse Neotropical region. In the work presented here, advanced feature extraction techniques based on Deep Learning and CNN, pur- posely designed to work with mass spectra without any pre-processing, were used to improve the classification tasks of Neotropical mosquito and tick species, some of which are important disease vectors.

CNN have been the most commonly employed architectures in recent years for image recognition, classification, and detection tasks. This class of neural networks has three main types of layers that perform the oper- ations of convolution, pooling (for feature extraction) and classification by means of an ANN. These architectures are made up of modules or blocks that are stacked one after the other depending on the complexity of the model [30].

This structure is similar to that of the binary cross-entropy loss func- tion, which is commonly used in binary classification problems [40]. The main advantage of this loss function is that it allows for a multi- class problem to be translated into a binary classification problem. This enables the model to perform flexible comparisons, such as comparing one class to many by making pairs consisting of one species and many others. This flexibility is particularly useful in problems where there are many classes and comparisons between classes are important for the analysis, such as in the case of arthropod species.

There are some additional limitations to this work that need to be discussed. The data sets used in this work come from biological sam- ples that were gathered from the field as opposed to being reared in the laboratory. Besides foreign contaminants that are hard to control in field-collected specimens (i.e., host blood, sap, pathogens), which al- ready present an important challenge to the classification, the data sets also allowed us to test the reliability of the algorithms regarding sam- ple storage. Fresh mosquito specimens had been stored dry-frozen as opposed to ticks that had been stored in ethanol and frozen for several years prior to protein extraction and sample processing with the MALDI- TOF. Ethanol is a well-known protein denaturing agent and we know

Financial support for this work was provided by SENACYT through the research grant GRID15-002 to JRL, JSG, and RAG. INDICASAT-AIP, UTP and STRI provided additional economic and logistic support. The SNI supports research activities by JRL, JSG, FM and RAG. RAG is also supported by SENACYT grants FID14-066, ITE15-016. The funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript.

