One of the greatest challenges of predicting MHC class II molecules relates to their inherently diverse nature, which makes it impractical to quantify the interactions with each existing MHC variant. They are encoded in 3 extremely polymorphic Human Leukocyte Antigen loci (HLA-DR, DP, DQ [23]) with 9182 HLA Class II alleles as of May 2022 [https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ipd/imgt/hla/stats.html ].

Promiscuous T+: As of this writing, the csv file output by the IEDB search does not contain the HLAs associated with each epitope, but it is possible to use the IEDB epitope ID to search for this informa- tion. We automated a script to search and exclude the epitopes with unknown associated HLAs and those associated with fewer than two HLAs, thus ensuring a set of verified promiscuous epitopes. As this process resulted in a small number of peptides, we added the im- munogenic peptides used by Dhanda [25].

curacy is the proportion of correct predictions among all predictions (TP+TN)/(P+N). The receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve plots the TPR against the false positive rate (FP/(FP+TN)) for every possible decision rule cutoff between 0 and 1 for a model. It is common to measure the performance of a prediction method by the area under the ROC curve (AUC), where 1 represents perfect a separation of the two classes while 0.5 is a random classifier. All metrics were calculated with the aid of the Sklearn library of the Python language.

Deep learning methods are increasingly common due to their high performance. To test if they are indeed superior to simpler methods in this problem, we compared Deepitope to four other algorithms: ran- dom forest, decision tree, gradient boost, and support vector machines using only 15-mers. In all tests, the residues of 15-mers were one-hot encoded and supplied to the methods implemented on Python v3.10.4 using Scikit v1.0.2-1.

We ran 1000 simulations using the T+ set against 1000 different versions of the human set. There is virtually no difference among the results, as the highest standard deviation obtained for any of the per- formance metrics is 0.06. The standard deviation for AUC and accuracy were 0.02 and 0.01, respectively. Additionally, none of the human sets differ from the distribution of amino acids expected in humans, and they all have high p-values, meaning the null hypothesis cannot be rejected

Because the results are no better than random guessing, we did not test them any further or attempted to examine how they learn the po- sitional preferences of each residue in human-derived peptides or T+. Each algorithm could arguably be tweaked for better performance, but given the poor initial results, we think this was not worth investigating. The CNN-LSTM employed by Deepitope does not contain any complex- ities that deviate from a basic CNN-LSTM and achieved considerably superior results. This suggests the need for more complex algorithms that are able to capture higher-order interactions and, for each position, model the interplay of forces encoded in neighboring residues.

While lack of information of the related HLAs grants only a crude classification of each peptide as immunogenic or not, HLA-independent models can be useful to detect some underlying pattern of what makes an epitope beyond the specificity of each HLA. This may help to better establish a set of fundamental signatures that ideally spans the human population as broadly as possible. What must be inquired is whether it is feasible to generalize patterns from a set of epitopes for which the associated HLA remains to be determined. Because not all epitopes in the IEDB have known associated HLAs, we ran a separate test using T+ epitopes that bind to more than one HLA. The results obtained using

The comparison with CD4episcore predictions shows CD4episcore only classifies a few peptides of the data set as epitopes. Nevertheless, it shows a good recall (TPR) and AUC, and effectively captures the charac- teristics of most T+ epitopes. However, it classifies too many peptides rich in positively-charged amino acids as immunogenic. Taken together, these results illustrate the effects of smaller, unrepresentative input data that may effectively bias the predictions and reinforces the need for ex- panding and diversifying the database. The use of broader databases in combination with deep learning methods may open the way for new insights into several elemental aspects of immunogenic peptides.

In this work, we trained a CNN-LSTM model to appraise peptides for their alikeness to immunogenic/non-immunogenic categories using MHC-II mediated T-cell epitopes. We propose HLA-independent linear T- cell epitope mapping tools are advantageous to find immunogenic pep- tides due to the existence of underlying non-HLA-specific immunogenic patterns. Therefore, HLA-specificity was dismissed and the model was trained solely to predict whether a query peptide is best classified as immunogenic or non-immunogenic.

