In the energy recovery system, the waste gas with high temperature [3], acting in a state of potential energy in the cylinder, after the steam exhaust the Condenser condensate to the formation of the condensed water. Then, condensed water through the circulation pipeline into the air cooling tower segments for cooling, after cooling, the water return to the condenser, the top of the water by the fan section through the spray pressure head under pressure [4], again vaporized. After cooling of the circulating water backwater returned from the top of the to Condenser entrance process, there is a considerable height of the gap, in order to make full use of this part of the potential energy, the turbine used for power generation is installed in the return pipeline, to recycle energy reserved of waste gas and liquid.

regulation systems. The method can complete the adjustment of the input signal in accordance with the procedures set by the user accurately and automatically, it is indicated, as long as the certain procedures to be set up from the beginning, the related algorithms is also determined at the same time. The judgment and operation will be made by the PCC governor in accordance with the procedures.

First, three independent measuring points are chose to increase accurately and reliability of speed measurement system. At the same time, the "3 take 2" overspeed protection function is also set to prevent "coaster". When any two speeds of the three measuring points reach to alarm value, the program [9] will be issued a turbine overspeed instruction, and then the alarm system would take protective action to avoid the damage caused by maloperation of the system. That can effectively avoid unsafe incident, and increase the reliability of the protective action.

Computer simulation is often adopted in Comprehensive analysis of turbine regulating system. However the workload of simulation calculation preparation and debug program is very big still, meanwhile the portability of the simulation program is poor, it is difficult to adapt to the hydropower personality characteristics, and the lack of strong graphics output support. MATLAB is now international fashion system simulation software; it is able to overcome the above difficulties.

Single neuron adaptive PID control method is modelled on neurons workflow to adjust the speed of the turbine speed control adjustment [12]. When there is a difference between the rate of the turbine with the given target value, the control system automatically do the difference calculation, if the difference is within the safe range, the system will be determined as the normal system, work safety, regulator not action. But the difference between the two is large, which exceeds the safe range, the system will be maintained need action at this moment ,then the system start regulating aspects[13]. After the single neuron adaptive controller self- organizing, self-correcting action, self-regulating, adaptive, and ultimately, the system to find the optimal working condition, and then, after computing, control servomotor opening adjustment the operation, so that the turbine to maintain the rate, and stability in the best working condition, an adjustment process is over.

The speed control and regulation of hydroturbine is very important for the modern industry. A comprehensive turbine governing system is designed in this paper. On the basis of the introduction and analysis of the entire regulatory system, corresponding simulation is established. The simulation result proves that the integrated system could make the hydroturbine work stably in the optimal operation condition and avoid the great volatility and vibration, which means that the comprehensive system can provide great help to the energy recovery and the realization of low-carbon production.

