between adjacent cameras' field of view is calculated. Based on the relations of cameras view obtained and tracked data of each single camera,a homography based target handover procedure is done for long-term multi-camera tracking.After that, we fully implemented the tracking system on the embedded smart cameras developed by our group.Finally, to combat the huge computational complexity, a novel hierarchical optimization method is proposed. Experimental results demonstrate the robustness and real-time efficiency in dynamic real-life environments and the computationalburden is significantly optimized by 98.84% which is low enough for further biometrics tasks such as recognition.

The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In section 2, we provide the proposedmulti-camera tracking system. Section 3 presents the proposed hierarchicaloptimization methodology. Section 4 presents the experiments and results and finally the conclusions are presented in section 5.

In multi-camera network surveillance, single-camera tracking is the fundamental module to obtain the information of the moving targets such as position, motion trajectory, shape, etc. Therefore, in our system, we utilized the tracking paradigm in [5]. Specifically, Gaussian Mixture Models (GMM) is employed to compute the background images of the surveillance scenes. Then, foreground objects (Blob) extraction is done to gain the bounding boxes and centroids of the moving targets. Finally, object tracking is performed based on Mean- shift and Kalman filter to analyze the motion history and trajectories.

To achieve the real time performance of the embedded DSP system, in this paper, a hierarchical optimization method is proposed based on DM6446 are used. According to the performance evaluation done by Code Composer Studio (CCS)profiling module, main performance bottlenecks are found, which areGaussian Mixture Model(GMM) for background reconstruction and moving object(Blob) extraction, respectively.Therefore, the proposed hierarchical optimization method isprimarilyconcentrated in these two modulesusing project-level optimization, algorithm-level optimization and code-level optimization.

Since the detailed information of moving target such as texture, shape, etc. is not significantly essential for GMM and blob extraction, therefore before these two procedures, input video signal can be down-sampled to a smaller resolution for computational complexity reduction. So in our system, we resized the input video from D1 (720 576) to CIF (360 288) using resizer module in Video Processing Subsystem (VPSS) which is a standalone peripheral device on DM6446 for resizing video without any computational cost in DSP. Then, the resized video is analysed by GMM and blob extraction to obtain the positions and bounding boxes of the moving objects. After that, the gainedpositions arere-mapped to D1 coordinate for the on-going procedures such as tracking, classification and recognition. Furthermore, for the purpose of better pipelining the algorithm to achieve higher performance, we divide the GMM function into three stages include backgroundmodel initialization, updatingand comparison, and performed separately. According to the profiling, the performance is greatly enhanced because the software pipeline is generated successfully.

In this paper, we represented the multi-camera tracking algorithm and implemented on the embedded platformTI dual-core TMS320DM6446 (ARM+DSP). In our proposed system, a traditional tracking paradigm for singlecamera tracking based on GMM, Mean-shift and Kalman filter is utilized to detect and track multiple targets. Then, when the surveillance objects enter the overlapping area between adjacent cameras, a homography based target hand-off procedure is perform for long-term multi-camera tracking. However, the computation complexity for multi-camera system is huge especially for embedded processor based system. Therefore, to conquer the challenging problems in low-cost, reliable and efficient way, we designed embedded integrated smart camera by utilizing the hardware structure of TI TMS320DM6446 based on which our proposed multi-camera tracking algorithm is implemented, and optimized reaching real-time performance by our proposedhierarchical optimization method. The overall experimental results have fully verified the effectiveness and robustness of our proposed algorithm and the stability of the embedded platform.

