established models to determine the feeding endpoint by detecting the residual feeds using different cameras. Residual feed detection- based feeding depends heavily on high-quality detection instruments and the breeding environment. In view of this, novel intelligent feeding methods that characterize the variation of dissolved oxygen (DO) and temperature in the water during feeding have been developed (Wu et al., 2015; Zhao et al., 2019). Although this kind of feeding revealed better performance compared to traditional feeding, it does not apply to increasingly industrialized aquaculture (such as recirculating aqua- culture systems (RAS)) to a great extent as the DO and temperature are stably maintained in this setting.

In contrast to the methods above, fish appetite quantification in real production using the characteristics of fish feeding behavior is more fea- sible. With the rapid development of artificial intelligence and technol- ogy, feeding according to fish feeding behavior has been a trending area of research in aquaculture (Sun et al., 2016; Zhou et al., 2017). Chang et al. (2005) constructed a feedback control system, which could

The intelligent feeding methods above could improve production and reduce costs to a large extent (Zhou et al., 2018a), however, whether these intelligent methods are beneficial to fish welfare in aqua- culture remains little unknown. Therefore, to understand the effects of the intelligent feeding method on fish growth more comprehensively, an adaptive feeder based on a practical and typical intelligent feeding method (Zhao et al., 2017) was designed. Fish welfare was evaluated by measuring the corresponding growth and biochemical and immune indexes throughout a 47-day production experiment.

where X(i) and Ek(i) are the i-th feeding quantity and i-th appetite as- sessment result, respectively. Note that the first two feeding amounts were set to 10% TFA. The feeding amount decreased over the feeding time. When X(i) decreased to a certain extent (set to 3% TFA), the min- imum feed amount (i.e., 3% TFA) was implemented.

The two treatment groups in this experiment were the same except for the feeding method. The fish were fed 3 times a day (08:30, 16:00, 19:30) with the same commercial feed during the experiment and weighed every 15 days. The feeding amount in the traditional group was adjusted according to the weight change of the fish. The uneaten feed remaining on the water surface was collected and weighted 15 min after feeding of each group separately to prevent the residual feed produced in the experiment from contaminating the water.

W1, W2 and W0 are the total weight (g) of the fish at the beginning of the trial, the end of the trial and the dead individuals during the test, re- spectively. F is the amount of feed intake in each pond, N1 is the initial total number of fish, and N2 is the number of fish at the end of the trial. WB is the fish weight (g), L is the fish length (cm), WL is the fresh liver weight (g), and t is the breeding time.

As shown above, fish fed with the adaptive feeder showed a higher WGR and SGR. The higher FCR in the traditional group may be due to in- sufficient feeding, which would decrease the proportion of food energy used for growth. In addition, food wastage during a lower appetite pe- riod could also increase FCR (Juell et al., 1993). In other words, the lower FCR of the intelligent group indicates that the intelligent feeding method can effectively reduce the cost of feed and improve feed effi- ciency. Therefore, the intelligent feeding method showed benefits, such that all fish growth parameters (especially the FCR) in the intelli- gent group were improved to a certain extent compared to the tradi- tional group.

Cortisol, extracted from the adrenal cortex, is an adrenocortical hor- mone that plays a key role in carbohydrate metabolism and is usually used to assess the fish stress response (Brijs et al., 2018; Ellis et al., 2012; Fevolden et al., 1994; Hoseini et al., 2020; Santurtun et al., 2018). A short-term increase in the cortisol level can promote the breakdown of body proteins while accelerating sugar synthesis and fat oxidation and enhancing non-specific immunity (Demers and Bayne, 1997), however, if the cortisol level remains high, it will result in re- duced fat synthesis, bodyweight loss, growth stagnation and innate im- munosuppression (Demers and Bayne, 1997; Gregory and Wood,

Lysozyme, an alkaline enzyme that can hydrolyze mucopolysaccha- rides of pathogenic bacteria, has anti-inflammatory, antibacterial and antiviral effects on the body (Rauta et al., 2012). In the intelligent group, multiple feeding stimulations resulted in depressed lysozyme levels, however, previous studies have shown that cortisol plays a medi- ating role in the process of environmental impact on immune organs. Demers and Bayne (1997) also emphasized that lysozyme may be a rather small component of innate resistance, whereas cortisol may have rather widespread negative effects on resistance mechanisms. For the intelligent group, the phenomenon of higher cortisol but lower lysozyme levels indicates that a higher susceptibility to pathogens can lead to a negative effect on the health and welfare of the fish.

The antioxidant capacity of the immune system is also closely re- lated to fish health (Dawood et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2020). The SOD and MDA activities can indirectly reflect the fish antioxidant capacity (Viarengo et al., 1995). In this study, the SOD activity in the intelligent group was lower than the traditional group, but the MDA activity in the intelligent group was higher than in the traditional group. The intel- ligent group, which was subjected to multiple stimulations during the feeding process, may have an increased consumption of metabolism generation of oxygen free radicals and increase the MDA activity in the intelligent group. Although no significant differences in the SOD and MDA activities were observed, the generation of oxygen free radi- cals slightly increased the MDA activity in the intelligent group compared to the traditional group. The intelligent group, however, demonstrated lower SOD activity.

method, intelligent feeding can greatly weaken the size differentiation of fish school and improve fish growth but may also result in stress and suppress innate immunity. At present, although intelligent feeding has been an active area in aquaculture research, few studies have fo- cused on how to combine the appropriate feeding strategy with an in- telligent feeding algorithm. This deficiency may underlie the stress and innate immune suppression observed during intelligent feeding. Moreover, fish feeding and appetite vary from species to species and are susceptible to a variety of external factors, including the environ- ment and management practices. Therefore, intelligent feeding in the future should target specific breeds, not only combining feeding strate- gies but also adapting to changes in the environment.

To explore whether the intelligent feeding methods that have been proposed so far would impair fish welfare in real production, an adap- tive feeder based on a practical intelligent feeding method was de- signed. In contrast to traditional feeding, the intelligent feeding method was more conducive to improving fish growth performance and reducing feed cost in aquaculture, however, intelligent feeding would eventually result in a higher cortisol level and lower lysozyme level, which is harmful to the fish immune system and general welfare. In the future, with the development of multi-functional, high-precision sensors, the improved or potential methods will be proposed to provide more and more intelligent solutions to address as many feeding prob- lems as possible, and these methods could potentially improve breeding efficiency and fish welfare.

This research was financially supported by the Key Program of Science and Technology of Zhejiang Province (2019C02084, 2019C02082), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 31772900), the China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (2018M640560), and the Technology Program of Department of Agriculture and Rural areas of Zhejiang Province (2020XTTGSC01). Any opinions, findings, and conclu- sions expressed in this publication are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of Zhejiang University.

