The Hindu Kush-Pamir region (HKPR) is characterized by complex ongoing deformation, unique slab geometry, and intermediate seismic activity. The availability of extensive seismological data in recent decades has prompted the use of deep learning algorithms to extract valuable insights. In this study, we present a fully automated approach for augmenting earthquake catalogue within the HKPR. Our method leverages an attention mechanism-based deep learning architecture to simultaneously detect events, perform phase picking, and esti- oriented faults in the western Pamir, as well as the Vakhsh Thrust System and the Darvaz Karakul Fault. These findings underscore potential sources of future seismic hazards. Furthermore, our expanded earthquake catalogue facilitates a deeper understanding of the interplay between crustal and intermediate seismic activity in the HKPR, shedding light on the deformation and active faulting resulting from Eurasian-Indian plate interactions.

connected (Sippl et al., 2013). In the past two decades, there has been an enormous increase in recorded waveform data with many continuous seismic station networks distributed throughout the region, but many of the low magnitude and low signal-to-noise ratio earthquakes are still undetected. Hence, detecting and locating these undetected earthquakes can significantly improve the understanding of the regional tectonics and the peculiar geometry of the HKPR.

detection differs from that of picking. The main goal of detection is minimizing false negatives and false positives, while phase picking fo- cuses on the temporal accuracy of the arrival time. The network first learns to distinguish the earthquake signal within the time series. These outputs are then sent to local attention to focus on the smaller section within the earthquake waveform to make the P and S phase picking. So,

STEAD dataset, which contains only local earthquakes, and secondly because at a farther distance, there may be refracted phase arrival for shallow crustal events, which our model may falsely pick as P Phase. Furthermore, we located only those events that were detected at a minimum of five different P and S picks after applying all these criteria. This is primarily to account for linear dependability of our picks. We used both the P and S phases for locating earthquakes.

To train our networks, we used the Stanford Earthquake Dataset (STEAD). STEAD is a global dataset of earthquakes and non-earthquake signals that has been labelled at a large scale (Mousavi et al., 2019a). The earthquake data consists of approximately 1,050,000 three-component seismograms, each lasting 1 min. These seismograms are linked to around 450,000 earthquakes that occurred between January 1984 and August 2018. The earthquakes were captured by a network of 2613 seismometers situated worldwide, all located within 350 km of the seismic events. In addition to the seismic recordings, the earthquake data includes a wide array of information about each event.

This includes details such as the origin time of the earthquake, the arrival times of the P and S phases, magnitude, magnitude type, its epicentral location, depth, focal mechanism. It also provides estimates of errors and measures the signal-to-noise ratio for each seismogram component (Mousavi et al., 2019a). Furthermore, it notes the end of the proximity of 110 km from the earthquake source. Most of these earth- quakes are relatively shallow, with depths less than 50 km. While the dataset encompasses earthquakes of various sizes, it predominantly in- cludes smaller earthquakes with magnitudes less than 2.5. Magnitude information is reported in 23 different scales, with local (ML) and duration (Md) magnitudes being the most prevalent (Mousavi et al., 2019a). For the purpose of training magnitude estimation models, the dataset primarily utilizes data that includes information on the local ML magnitude.

oriented active faults, indicating that the deformation is new. Ruleman et al. (2007) have identified these northwest-trending strike-slip faults as structures with a mild expression in the landscape or with limited or poor representation in quaternary deposits, which may be a source of seismic hazards using satellite photography. The deformation pattern along these poorly mapped sinistral strike-slip faults along the northeast strike or conjugate plane and the normal fault along the north-south trend indicate north-south shortening and east-west extension. This

dextral shear, the Pamir Frontal Thrust has the highest differential ve- locity and hence the most seismicity (Ischuk et al., 2013; Metzger et al., 2021). The Vakhsh thrust system, which is an active thrust front in the Pamir thrust system, continues further into the dextral-reverse lateral ramp of the Illiac fault zone and borders the thrust-fold belt of the Tajik

geometry best fits the scenario of a north-dipping Indian lithospheric slab beneath the Hindu Kush, with its focused seismicity and unam- biguous dip direction. Earthquakes (deeper than 150 km) lying in the central and eastern Hindu Kush may be due to this slab stretching going on beneath (Zhan and Kanamori, 2016; Kufner et al., 2021). As the deeper part of subducts is faster than the shallow, there may be a pos- sibility of stretching, which may result in thinning, producing a higher strain rate and hence such intermediate-depth earthquakes. The hy- pothesized start of slab breakoff at mantle depths coincides spatially with the transition from assumed upper plate coupling to decoupling (sparsity of crustal earthquakes).

western extrusion of Pamir rocks due to the collision of the Pamir Plateau in the Tajik Depression. This earthquake may be a source of future seismic hazard as it is poorly mapped and studied due to its high altitude and widespread glaciation. The intermediate seismicity of the region was studied using these located events, showing two distinct zones with different dip directions. The deep intermediate earthquake

