methods (Goncalves et al., 1995), have been applied to well-log data to assist in lithofacies prediction since the 1980s (Busch et al., 1987). However, in multi-lithology sections well-log data typically displays non-linear relationships with lithofacies, making such methods unreli- able and relatively inaccurate. Various artificial-neural-network models, particularly multi-layer perceptrons (MLP), are extensively used to pre- dict facies classes from well-log data (Rogers et al., 1992; Puskarczyk, 2019; Hossein et al., 2020). One attraction of MLP is that for complex

bilistic (e.g., Bayesian classification) and fuzzy classifier methods in lithofacies classification tasks using multiple well-log curves (Dubois et al., 2007; Agrawal et al., 2022). Neural networks have also been usefully hybridized with a Markov transition matrix (Feng et al., 2018; Feng, 2020) to form Bayesian neural networks (Feng, 2021) for lith- ofacies classification using well-log data.

abrupt between other intervals (e.g., the contact at the top of the Som- erset Halite with the overlying dolomitic mudstone). One of the advan- tages of extracting and using the GR-attributes from the GR recorded data is that they are better able to characterize the gradational transition zones between lithofacies than the recorded GR data on its own.

The 5-fold cross-validation procedure randomly divides the dataset (8911 data records) into five compartments. Four of those compartments are assigned to the training subset (7168 data records) and one to the testing subset (1743 data records). The assignments are repeated five time so that each of the compartments serves as the testing subset in one case. This means that there are five cases evaluated for each run ensuring that each data record is treated as both a training record and a testing record considering all five cases. In this study the 5-fold procedure has been repeated three times, generating results for 15 cases in all. This comprehensive sampling of the dataset provides meaningful statistical assessments (mean and standard deviation of all 15 cases) of the facies class prediction performance of each model evaluated. These 5-fold

always preferable, including mineralogy, various core analysis, fossil and fauna characterization, as well as multiple recorded well logs. Despite, such inputs being desirable, there are many wellbores for which such data is not available due to both cost and technical constraints. In such instances, the GR log plus attributes could offer the best alternative available to provide reliable basic lithofacies characterization with the assistance of an ensemble of ML models.

The ML models evaluated in this study all, to a degree, lack trans- parency when it comes to revealing exactly how the facies class pre- dictions are generated for each data record. For many applications this is not a major disadvantage. However, for outlier analysis and detailed data mining more transparent algorithms can provide advantages by revealing specific relationships between certain groups of data records. The transparent open box (TOB) ML algorithm (Wood, 2018) has demon- strated its ability to both predict and data mine lithofacies datasets (Wood, 2019). Future studies are planned to apply TOB lithofacies models to provide more details of how the GR attributes are used in specific lithofacies predictions.

Gamma ray (GR) log attributes offer useful features for improving lithofacies predictions from well logs in boreholes penetrating multiple lithologies but with limited well-log variables recorded. Many wellbores fall into this category, such as development wells for which the sections drilled above the reservoir target typically have minimal well logs recorded (e.g., GR logs only in many cases). Derivative and volatility GR attributes are of particular value because they extract shape character- istics from GR curves that are not captured by the recorded log values. The first and second derivatives plus a moving average of the first de- rivative calculated over a relevant depth interval complement the recorded GR data. Similarly, the instantaneous volatility, the standard deviation of that volatility plus a moving average volatility over a rele- vant depth interval also provide distinctive complementary features related to the changes in GR curve shape with depth.

