Artificial intelligence (AI) and machine learning are increasingly used for prediction in agriculture (Benos et al., 2021; Liakos et al., 2018). They often outperform conventional statistical parametric models like generalized linear models in predictive performance (Breiman, 2001a). A general linear regression, for example, needs the variables to follow normality and linearity; therefore, data transforma- tion is often needed. Meanwhile, random forests and artificial neural networks do not need such transformation procedures. In addition, ma- chine learning algorithms can automatically discover nonlinearity and variable interactions (Ryo and Rillig, 2017). These tools are now easy to learn because various online courses are nowadays available, lower- ing the hurdle for students and researchers to start using machine learn- ing in their projects.

algorithms that achieve a higher predictive performance tend to be more complex, like random forests, gradient boosting, and artificial neu- ral networks (Breiman, 2001a). Increasing model complexity (with reg- ularization) is key to enhancing predictability. However, the most accurate model is often too complex for human beings to interpret the logic behind a prediction, the so-called black box. We cannot explain what the model learned from the data, why it predicts a certain value for a given instance, and when it tends to make a mistake. In general, there is a trade-off between the accuracy and interpretability of statisti- cal models (Breiman, 2001a).

I use the global dataset for crop production under conventional till- age and no-tillage systems, which are openly available from Su et al. (2021). The dataset contains paired yield observations comparing con- ventional tillage and no-tillage conditions for eight major staple crops in 50 countries. The dataset reports crop yield, crop growing season, management practices, soil characteristics, and key climate parameters throughout the experimental year.

= 0.25; note that the extreme values of 97.5th percentile or higher were removed), indicating that whether no-tillage increases or decreases crop yield compared to conventional tillage is quite contro- versial. With machine learning modeling, I explored under which condi- tions the effect tends to be positive.

degrade because permutation destroys the relationship between the variable and the response variable (Breiman, 2001b). The larger the loss in model performance, the larger its importance. The importance measure is based on the difference between a baseline performance measure (R2 in this study) and the same performance measure obtained after permuting the values of a particular variable in the training data. To account for random variability due to permutation, I calculated permutation-based importance thirty times and took an average.

Testing causality is necessary for understanding the mechanism regardless of the strength of a discovered pattern because machine learning methods can only explore correlation but not causation (Ryo et al., 2021). Correlation can emerge without causation, and causation can also emerge without correlation. Correlation should be carefully interpreted with the potential existence of any confounding factor. A strong correlation is useful for prediction as a proxy for any underlying mechanisms, but caution is needed because this approach is invalid when the underlying mechanisms change over time (Dormann et al., 2013).

