Cable is an important part of electricity system. In the substation, cable is the connection of various electricity device, and links to the control room. It usually lays in cable bridge, cable tunnel, cable interlayer, cable ditch and cable shaft. The plenty of cables, long route, complicated trend and compact arrange.

In the double layer tube structure, the main function of the outer tube is conducting temperature and eliminating the external stress strain impact on Bragg wavelength offset. As a result of the external stress strain impact, the outer tube longitudinal strain induced grating wavelength value offset is within, we can assume that the grating offset value is very small, and is within the allowable error range, it has little impact on the temperature induced Bragg wavelength offset. The temperature is uniformly transferred to the inner tube. Due to the temperature effect of grating in the inner tube, Bragg wavelength offset value changes, we can get the wavelength offset value by optical fiber AFC port to the spectrum analyzer.

The system is used in 220/110/35kV substation cable trench and cable pits of Yunnan power network of Zhaotong Power Supply Bureau. When the power cable is installed on the cable trench and cable pits, it is difficult to measure the temperature by manual inspection, so temperature detection system based on the traditional telecommunication transmission can not meet the needs of application. Fiber Bragg grating real- time temperature monitoring is a distributed monitoring system, the position and quantity of measuring point can be laid at needs, it holds high precision, fast response, far transmission distance, convenient installation, free of maintenance, harsh environment resistance, electromagnetic interference resistance, intrinsically safe and explosion-proof, has an obvious technical superiority.

The cable temperature rise test has been done in the laboratory, to determine the initial temperature change and temperature distribution of the cable heat fault. Make site design site visits of transformer substation cable trench, cable pits According to a temperature measurement of a 4 core and 30 meters cable, the positioning accuracy is 1m, temperature resolution is 0.1  , the effective measurement distance is up to 4 km. Following the 0.5 M per branch principles, we need 60 metal armored fiber optic Bragg grating temperature sensors in all.

This article is about the armored optical fiber Bragg grating metal temperature sensor used in Zhaotong substation in cable trench, able Cable pit, real-time online monitoring the operation situation of high voltage cables. Through the comparative analysis and monitoring of Zhaotong environment within 24 hours and 479 days of temperature data change curves: cable surface temperature and environmental temperature change trend are consistent; the minimum of the average daily temperature range of 60 sensors is 21.24  ,detected at number 9 trench 1, The maximum is 37.43  ,detected at number 4 trench 2, which reached its maximum temperature 43.41  on July 3, 2010, and the minimum temperature is 4.37  on January 17, 2011,number 13 trench 1. Metal armored fiber Bragg grating temperature sensor temperature changes influenced by seasons; The temperature change has no abnormalities, mutation, the change extent of the maximum and minimum value of temperature of cable trench and cable pit shows they are in normal working condition.

