The performance of the above NN-FL system largely depends on those rules and different weights such as V1, V2, V3, V4, V5, V6, V7 and W1. The NNFL system will have variable structure only when rule base of the FLC is optimized i.e., some rules are deleted. There exist a large number of literatures for developing an optimal NNFL system. In the present study two different approaches have been adopted. Both these two approaches have been explained below in brief.

In this approach, RB is kept unaltered during its training. Only the weights V1, V2, V3, V4, V5, V6, V7 and W1 are optimized using BP algorithm [32]. It is usually implemented through the mini- mization of Mean Squared Error (E) in prediction, as given below.

Approach 1 suffers from the local minima problem. Also, in Approach 1, only the weights are optimized. Therefore, in Approach 2, optimization of both DB and RB is attempted using a GA. GA with 4454-bits long string is used for this purpose. Data base is represented by first 80 bits (10 bits for each variable). Rest 4374-bits are used to express the rule base (two bits to represent a rule: 00 for medium, 01 and 10 for moderate and 11 for severe). A string will look like the following.

Let us suppose that nij denotes the number of times that the jth linguistic term (j = 1 for mild, j = 2 for moderate and j = 3 for sev- ere) for the ith input condition (i.e., corresponding to different input values) is fired during training. In this way, total numbers of fired rules are represented by N. Thus, the probability of occurrence of the jth linguistic term for the ith input condition may be given as to eliminate them from the rule base. However, identification of redundant rules is difficult. In this paper, we have planned to iden- tify them using the concept of importance factor. Rules having rel- atively low importance factors are called as redundant and may be deleted from the rule base. It is to be done in such a way so that non-firing of rules does not occur.

