Pyrolysis of biomass to hydrogen rich gas in molten alkali media has been conducted in a stainless steel tank reactor. Molten alkali was used as thermal pyrolysis media. Six kinds of biomass were selected as feedstock. The experiments were carried out under atmospheric pressure and 350-550  . The pyrolysis gas was analyzed by gas chromatograph. The effects of the type of biomass, addition of additives and reaction conditions, including temperature and N2 flow rate, on hydrogen content in pyrolysis gas and yield of hydrogen were investigated. This paper reports the feasibility for producing hydrogen rich gas through the pyrolysis of biomass in molten salt media.

The inter-related problems of energy and environment are one of biggest challenges facing the world recently, especially for energy sustainability and carbon emissions from the utilization of fossil fuels. Many engineers and scientists agree that the solution to these problems would be to replace the existing fossil system by the hydrogen energy system [1, 2]. There are several established and developing technologies to produce hydrogen from various sources. Hydrogen production can be environmentally friendly only if the resource used to extract hydrogen would be rather biomass than fossil fuel, such as coal, petroleum and natural gas.

There are two main routes for biomass-based hydrogen production, namely thermo-chemical and bio-chemical. Thermo-chemical routes can produce hydrogen from continuous feed biomass rapidly. Thermo-chemical routes are gasification [3], pyrolysis of bio-oils [4], steam reforming of biomass derived higher alkanes and alcohols [5], and aqueous phase reforming of oxygenated hydrocarbons [6].

In our previous work [7], molten salts (ZnCl2-KCl) were used as media to produce bio-oil from biomass. In this work, pyrolysis of biomass in molten alkali media to produce hydrogen rich gas was carried out. Six kinds of biomass were selected as biomass samples. Molten NaOH was employed as media. The effects of the biomass samples type, reaction conditions, and additives on yield of gas product and content of hydrogen in gas product were investigated.

In this work, agricultural and forestry wasters, including fir sawdust, birch sawdust, redwood sawdust, rice stalk, cole stalk and rice husk were used as biomass feed. The birch sawdust was from Northeast China and other biomass samples were from East China. The element (C, H, O, N and S) content in biomass materials was analyzed by a Vario elemental analyzer. The biomass sample was sieved and the fraction saved for the pyrolysis experiments was 60-100 mesh. The biomass sample was dried at 105  prior to the experiments.

The following conclusions can be drawn from the experimental results of biomass pyrolysis in molten NaOH to produce hydrogen rich gas. Biomass sample type, reaction temperature, and additive addition have significant influence on the H2 yield. Higher temperature contributes to higher H2 yield. The introduction of additives, especially NiCl, leads to increasing of H2 yield.

