The world's population is assumed to be nearly 10 billion by 2050, boosting agricultural order-in a situation of humble financial devel- opment by somewhere in the range of 50% contrasted with 2013 (FAO, 2017). At present, about 37.7% of total land surface is used for crop production. From employment generation to contribution to National Income, agriculture is important. It is contributing a sig- nificant portion in the economic prosperity of the developed nations and is playing an active part in the economy of the developing coun- tries as well. The augmentation of agriculture has resulted in a signif- icant increase in the per-capita income of the rural community. Thus, placing a greater emphasis on agricultural sector will be rational and apposite. For countries, like India, the agricultural sector accounts for 18% of GDP and provides employment to 50% of the country's work- force. Development in the agricultural sector will boost the rural de- velopment, further leading toward rural transformation and eventually resulting in the structural transformation (Mogili and Deepak, 2018; Shah et al., 2019).

ANN is a processing algorithm or a hardware whose functioning is inspired by the design and functioning of a human brain (Shah et al., 2020a, 2020b). Neural networks have a remarkable ability of self- organization, and adaptive learning. It has replaced many traditional methods in numerous fields like Computer Science, Mathematics, Phys- ics, Engineering image/signal processing, Economic/ Finance, Philoso- phy, Linguistics, Neurology. ANN undergoes the process of learning. Learning is the process of adapting the change in itself as and when there is a change in environment. There are two learning techniques, su- pervised learning and unsupervised learning. The work of Jha et al., 2019, encloses the connected relations between the various embedded systems and the AI technology coherent with the agricultural field, it gave a brief about the various applications of neural networks, ML in this sector for precision farming (Yang et al., 2007).

The technologies which are AI-based help to improve efficiency in all the fields and also manage the challenges faced by various industries in- cluding the various fields in the agricultural sector like the crop yield, ir- rigation, soil content sensing, crop- monitoring, weeding, crop establishment (Kim et al., 2008). Agricultural robots are built in order to deliver high valued application of AI in the mentioned sector. With the global population soaring, the agricultural sector is facing a crisis, but AI has the potential to deliver much-needed solution. AI- based technological solutions has enabled the farmers to produce more output with less input and even improved the quality of output, also ensuring faster go-to- market for the yielded crops. By 2020, farmers will be using 75 million connected devices. By 2050, the average farm is ex- pected to generate an average of 4.1 million data pointsevery day. The various ways in which AI has contributed in the agricultural sector are as follows:

Lee et al. (2017) said that in recent years, an increasing interest has been seen in autonomous UAVs and their applications including recog- nition and surveillance, human body detection and geolocalization, search and rescue, forest fire detection (Bhaskaranand and Gibson, 2011; Doherty and Rudol, 2007; Tomic et al., 2012; Merino et al., 2006). Because of their versatility as well as amazing imaging technol- ogy which covers from delivery to photography, the ability to be piloted with a remote controller and the devices being dexterous in air which enables us to do a lot with these devices, drones or UAVs are becoming increasingly popular to reach great heights and distances and carrying out several applications.

Panpatte (2018) said that artificial intelligence makes it possible for farmers to assemble large amount of data from government as well as public websites, analyze all of it and provide farmers with solutions to many ambiguous issues as well as it provides us with a smarter way of irrigation which results in higher yield to the farmers. Due to artificial intelligence, farming will be found to be a mix of technological as well as biological skills in the near future which will not only serve as a better outcome in the matter of quality for all the farmers but also minimize their losses and workloads. UN states that, by 2050, 2/3rd of world's population will be living in urban areas which arises a need to lessen the burden on the farmers. AI in agriculture can be applied which would automate several processes, reduce risks and provide farmers with a comparatively easy and efficient farming.

Ferguson et al. (1991) said in his wok that Variety selection and seed quality set the maximum performance level for all plants. The emerging technologies have helped the best selection of the crops and even have improved the selection of hybrid seed choices which are best suited for farmer's needs. It has implemented by understanding how the seeds react to various weather conditions, different soil types. By collecting this information, the chances of plant diseases are reduced. Now we are able to meet the market trends, yearly outcomes, consumer needs, thus farmers are efficiently able to maximize the return on crops.

The agriculture sector consumes 85% of the available freshwater re- sources across the world. And this percentage is increasing rapidly with the population growth and with the increase in food demand. This leaves us with the need to come up with more efficient technologies in order to ensure proper use of water resources in irrigation. The man- ual irrigation which was based on soil water measurement was replaced by automatic irrigation scheduling techniques. The plant evapotranspi- ration which was dependent on various atmospheric parameters such as humidity, the wind speed, solar radiations and even the crop factors such as the stage of growth, plant density, the soil properties, and pest was taken into consideration while implementing autonomous irriga- tion machines.

Kumar (2014) discusses about the different irrigation methods with the primary motive of developing a system with reduced resource usage and increased efficiency. Devices like fertility meter and PH meter are set up on the field to determine the fertility of the soil by detecting the percentage of the primary ingredients of the soil like potassium, phosphorous, nitrogen. Automatic plant irrigators are planted on the field through wireless technology for drip irrigation. This method en- sures the fertility of the soil and ensures the effective use of water resource.

Another system for automated irrigation was given by Varatharajalu and Ramprabu (2018). In this approach different sensors were built for different purposes like the soil moisture sensor to detect the moisture content in the soil, the temperature sensor to detect the temperature, the pressure regulator sensor to maintain pressure and the molecular sensor for better crop growth. The installation of digital cameras. The output of all these devices is converted to digital signal and it is sent to the multiplexer through wireless network such as Zigbee and hotspot.

The moisture in the soil is calculated by the sensors which basically evaluate the moisture content in the soil based on the dielectric con- stant (soil mass permittivity) of the soil. The amount of irrigation needed can also be determined on the basis of the dielectric constant (Gebregiorgis and Savage, 2006). Kuyper and Balendonck (2001) pro- poses an automated system that uses dielectric soil moisture sensors for real time irrigation control. The measurement method based on the dielectric properties is considered to be the most potential one (Zhen et al., 2010). Hanson et al. (2000) gave the information regarding how soil types affect the accuracy to dielectric moisture sensors. The

Before developing a weed control automated system we need to dif- ferentiate between the crop seedlings and the weeds (Bhagyalaxmi et al., 2016; Chang and Lin, 2018). A method was applied for recognition of carrot seedlings from those of ryegrass. Aitkenhead et al. (2003) im- plemented this method by the simple morphological characteristic measurement of leaf shape. This method has varying effectiveness mostly between 52 and 75% for discriminating between the plants and weeds, by determining the variation in size of the leaf. Another method for weeding was implemented using digital imaging. This idea involved a self-organizing neural network. But this method did not give appropri- ate results which were expected for commercial purposes, it was found that a NN based technology already existed which allows one to find the differences between species with an accuracy exceeding 75%.

Xue et al. (2016) built up an unmanned airborne vehicle based pro- grammed flying praying framework. The framework utilized a pro- foundly coordinated and ultra-low power MSP430 single-chip miniaturized scale PC with a free practical module. This permitted course was programmed to coordinate the UAV for spraying at the extend. As the beads framed are very little the structure a fog or haze which results in uniform inclusion and better contact with the bug or ill- ness. In spite of the fact that, if the beads are little, they will in general vanish immediately when the mugginess is low and probably won't ar- rive at the objective. A water driven sprayer contains the accompanying parts: tank, siphon with instigator, weight measure, controlling valve, help valve, control valves, funneling and spouts, control source and bol- ster outline.

In Gaseous Energy Sprayer a blower produces a high speed air stream. This air stream is coordinated through the pipe toward the fin- ish of which spray liquid will be available which will be permitted to be streamed by the activity of gravity through a diffuser plate. A fluid or residue is sustained into air stream to be conveyed to the objective.

The Centrifugal Energy Sprayer consists of a fast turning devise, for example, level, a concave or a convex plate, a wire mesh cage or a bucket, a puncture strainer or chamber or a brush. At the focal point of this gadget, the shower liquid is nourished under low weight which is additionally atomized by diffusive power as it leaves the outskirts of the atomizer. The droplets are conveyed by the air stream created by the blower of the sprayer or by the common breeze, if the sprayer isn't furnished with a fan.

Reinecke and Prinsloo (2017a, 2017b) studied the benefits of drones in agriculture, and their limitations, illustrating from examples how drones operate on farms. They discussed different features of deones and specifically how they assist farmers in maximizing their harvest by detecting problems early, and managing the crops by using specific cameras to detect pests and water shortages. (S. Nema et al., 2018) per- formed a detailed study on Spatial Crop Mapping and Accuracy Assess- ment Using Remote Sensing and GIS in Tawa Command. They did special crop mapping using satellite Landsat * data for Hoshangabad dis- trict of Madhya Pradesh and also carried out a Satellite data classifica- tion accuracy which resulted in overall accuracy as 87.60%.

With the utilization of a Geographic Information System (GIS) pro- gramming, the yield determined at each field area can be shown. The raw log document, contains focuses which are recorded during turns and as the grain move through a consolidate is a deferred process (un- less ongoing amendment is connected), the sensor estimations neglect to compare to the careful gather areas. To dispense with these conspic- uous mistakes, the crude information is moved to make up for the join- ing delay. Increasingly finished, the focuses which compare to the header up position are evacuated. Settings for grain stream postpone- ment are join and some of the time even harvest explicit, yet run of the mill esteems for grain yields extend from around 10 to 12 s.

Typically a couple of focuses toward the start and toward the finish of a pass ought to be expelled too. These focuses are alluded to as begin and end-pass delays. Begin pass postponements happen when the grain stream has not balanced out in light of the fact that the lift is bit by bit topping off yet the consolidate begins gathering the yield. Thus, end-pass deferrals happen when the join moves out of the yield and grain stream progressively decreases to zero when the lift is totally exhausted. Moving of raw information to address for grain stream

All the authors make substantial contribution in this manuscript. TT, DS NP HY and MS participated in drafting the manuscript. TT, DS, NP and HY wrote the main manuscript, all the authors discussed the results and implication on the manuscript at all stages.

