fat, and high amounts of vitamins and minerals (Bureau et al., 2002). Ac- cording to reports by FAO (2018), total fisheries and aquaculture pro- duction was about 171 million tons in 2016. The shares of fisheries and aquaculture were about 47% (80 million tons) and 53% (91 million tons), respectively. Additionally, FAO (2018) reported Iran as the largest producer of trout fish species, producing 167,830 tons of rainbow trout (Onchorhynchus mykiss). In Iran, about 40% of rainbow trout fish has been produced in Chaharmahal and Bakhtiari (22,803 tons), Lorestan (22,106 tons) and Kohgiluyeh-o-Boyer-Ahmad (19,500 tons) provinces (Anonymous, 2018).

Limitations in fishing and lack of access to the some potential water resources resulted in the maximum utilization of available resources in aquaculture (Aubin et al., 2006). However, higher utilization of non- renewable resources could reduce energy efficiency and lead to further environmental problems. Any measure for managing and reducing en- ergy consumption of inputs such as chemical fertilizers, agricultural ma- chineries, labor, water, electricity and other inputs to improve energy efficiency is the energy saving which is one of the easiest and the most cost-effective methods to prevent climate change. Also, improve- ment of the energy efficiency by energy saving would lead to a reduc- tion in production costs which is very important to consumers. For these reasons, improvement of energy efficiency has been included in the strategy of production (Schnapp, 2012).

Energy indices help to assess the status of a system according to the total energy input and the yield (or energy output). However, it cannot help to find out how the system would be improved. For instance, En- ergy Ratio (ER) of a system could be improved by 2 times more yield and 1.5 times more energy input. In spite of more ER, more energy

Emissions from nutrients to local environments associated with fish growth were estimated by using nutrient-balance modeling (Cho and Kaushik, 1990). This method has been adapted and validated for model- ing rainbow trout (Bureau et al., 2002), and it has been previously used for establishing an emissions inventory of rainbow trout (Papatryphon et al., 2004). The N, P and solids emissions was calculated based on the difference between the amount of nutrients provided to trout and the amount assimilated as fish weight-gain. Solid and dissolved frac- tions of emitted N and P was calculated based on digestibility of the nu- trients, fish body-composition, and the non-ingested part of the provided feed (estimated at 5% based on the expert opinion). The nutri- ents release and theoretical oxygen demand (calculated using the chemical oxygen demand of protein, carbohydrates, lipids, ash and fiber emitted) per ton of trout is shown in section of the results.

categorized in the different environmental impact categories (ISO 14040, 2006). There are different methods to define the environmental impact categories. In this study, CML2 baseline 2000 was considered for categorizing. Ten impact categories based on CML2 baseline 2000 in- clude Abiotic Depletion (AD), Acidification (AC), Global Warming (GW), Eutrophication (EU), Ozone Layer Depletion (OLD), Human Tox- icity (HT), Freshwater Aquatic Ecotoxicity (FAE), Marine Aquatic Ecotoxicity (MAE), Terrestrial Ecotoxicity (TE) and Photochemical Oxi- dation (PhO). (Anonymous, 2003). These categories have different units and it is impossible to compare them to each other. Therefore, nor- malization was used to make the categories non-dimensional (Mousavi-Avval et al., 2017). For this purpose, SimaPro software which has the coefficients for normalization was used.

In DEA model, an inefficient DMU can become efficient through reducing the quantities of the inputs without a reduction in the out- put (input-based model), or through increase in the quantity of out- put while the quantities of the inputs is kept the same as before (output-based model) (Mousavi-Avval et al., 2011a). Considering that the quantities of the inputs are controlled by trout producers and different factors affecting the output, input-based model was se- lected for this study. DEA based on constant returns to scale (CRS) and variable returns to scale (VRS) models is expressed by technical efficiency (TEf), pure technical efficiency (PTE) and scale efficiency (SEf).

Moreover, PTE is desired efficiency and SEf is the ratio between ac- tual efficiency and desired efficiency. TEf is a combination of both SEf and PTE. In brief, it can be said that SEf is the ratio between the efficiency in CRS and VRS models.

should be mentioned that 13 DMUs difference between TEf and PTE could be attributed to inappropriate production scale. Also, it worth to mention that TEf scores of 46 DMUs and PTE scores of 33 DMUs were in the range of 0.4 to 0.99.

and OLD, respectively, while in Lordegan region, fish oil had the share of 80, 73% and 62% on the HT, FAE and OLD, respectively. Also, in Ardal re- gion, wheat gluten and rapeseed meal had the share of 37% and 43% of total contribution to TE, respectively, while in Lordegan region, these two inputs had the share of 16% and 36% of total contribution to TE, re- spectively. Finally, In Lordegan region, the direct emissions from feed consumption, diesel fuel, natural gas and labor had the share of 24% of total contribution to PhO.

