Particle filter algorithm is poor at consistently maintaining the multi-modality problem and remains particle degeneracy phenomenon. This shortcoming can be addressed through using Mixture Particle Filter (MPF) to model the target distribution as a non-parametric mixture model. According to computational complexity of the particle filter algorithm, Gaussian Particle Filter (GPF) is used. The particle set is obtained by sampling of Gaussian density function instead of re-sampling to improve the computing speed of particle filter algorithm. In this paper, combined with the advantages of GPF and MPF, GM-MPF algorithm is proposed to improve the real-time of MPF. The experimental results show that GM-MPF algorithm can effectively solve the problem of multi-modality, particle degradation and achieve real-time multi-target tracking.

GPF algorithm reduces the complexity but remains particle degeneracy phenomenon. In previous experiments, we learned that PF can not solve multi-modality problem. The corresponding experiment result is shown in the experimental section. During multi-target tracking process, particles will transfer to one object, so PF algorithm can not be achieved multi-target tracking and MPF is proposed.

Multi-target tracking is realized via combining the Gaussian distribution with MPF in this paper. MPF algorithm is applied in tracking m objects with N particles, so Each object ,m independent filter, is allocated M = N/m particles, Particles are divided into m intervals in this paper. The posterior distribution of each interval is approximately estimated by Gaussian distribution to realize multi-target tracking. The concrete realization is as follows:

Particle filter algorithm is poor at consistently maintaining the multi-modality problem and remains particle degeneracy phenomenon. This shortcoming can be addressed through using the component of Mixture Particle Filter (MPF) to express independent particle filter. Neff of improved particle filter and the mixture particle filter is used to describe the particle degradation. Gaussian Particle Filter (GPF) is used to reduce computational complexity of particle filter algorithm. The particle set is obtained by sampling of gaussian density function instead of re-sampling to improve the computing speed of particle filter algorithm and to obtain more accurate estimation performance. Combined with the advantages of GPF and MPF, GM-MPF algorithm is proposed. Meanwhile, comparing to the processing time of PF, GPF, MPF, GM-MPF, the experimental results are shown that the improved algorithm enhances the real-time and system estimate accuracy of the MPF during multi-targets tracking.

