Flat-fan and air-induction hydraulic nozzles, mounted on spray booms, are the primary tools used to deliver agrochemicals to their tar- get location. Nozzles are mounted on delivery booms for both ground and aerial delivery systems. Pesticide mixtures being sprayed leave the nozzle and begin as a liquid sheet which fans outward from the noz- zle and eventually breaks up into liquid drops. Instabilities decompose the sheet into droplets by a variety of likely mechanisms, a phenome- non known as spray atomization (Dorman (1952)).

Agrochemical spray drift is an increasingly important field of study due to increased environment stewardship, legal liabilities, and the in- direct costs of off-target effects (Palardy and Centner, 2017; Moeller, 2018; Viera et al., 2019). The resulting drop size greatly influences how well the sprayed chemical is delivered to the target. The ultimate size of the drops dictates both efficacy and potential off target

Experimental observations for spray patterns for multiphase emul- sions are also reported (Li et al., 2020; Altieri et al., 2014) and used for comparison and training in unsupervised learning techniques. Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) models are used in this analysis which differ from deep learning approaches and constitute a generative statistical model that allows sets of observations to be explained by unobserved groups that elucidate why parts of the data are similar.

Deep learning models using the same dataset are reported in Li et al. (2020). Better overall performance is anticipated when using averaging methods if models are uncorrelated. Latent Dirichlet Allocation Models differ from deep learning approaches, constituting a generative statisti- cal model that allows sets of observations to be explained by unob- served groups that elucidate why some part of the data are similar. LDA was first introduced for natural language processing by Blei et al.

image data. For example, in natural scenes, there is likely to be stones, mountains, sky, sun, trees, and so on. These objects are characterized as visual words, and they form the vocabulary of natural scenes. Fei- Fei and Perona (2005) sample local regions from images by several methods (including evenly grid sampling) and use a k-means algorithm to cluster these local regions to get the vocabulary. In this way, a local region of an image corresponds to a word, and an image, which is a col- lection of words, becomes a document. Other approaches employ the use of super-pixels to over-segment images in regions of related pixels (Chen et al., 2017; Qiaojin et al., 2011).

features from low-resolution images. We fit other k-means to these higher-level patches, and learn a new codebook, where the vocabulary size is selected as 50. These 50 words and the previous 200 words con- sists of the complete vocabulary of size 250. Every frame is turned into a bag of these visual words. Each word is counted to construct the document-word matrix.

Latent Dirichlet Allocation discovers the topic distribution which de- fine classes in an unsupervised fashion. Each class has a unique topic proportion. Supervised models can be built if topic proportions are taken as a feature vector that describes each class. Linear Discriminant Analysis is chosen to perform classification using topic distributions. There is a total of 10,461 video segments, 83 videos, 44 classes for the spray atomization videos. Video segments originating from the same

For further insights into generalizability of these features, the dataset is then split into train and test set by videos. There are 31 classes con- taining two or more different videos. For those classes, video segments coming from one video are in train set, and video segments coming from another video are in test set. This approach results in 5742 video seg- ments in train set and 4719 video segments in test set. Again, a Linear Discriminant Analysis model is used to classify these video segments, and it achieved 85.9% accuracy.

Feature vectors are also used to do regression in addition to classifi- cation. Only 75 of the 83 videos utilized for Latent Dirichlet Allocation had atomization drop size distributions summarized for three measure- ments (i.e., D10, D50, and D90 values representing drop size particle di- ameter corresponding to 10, 50 and 90% cumulative), leaving 9621 video segments (75 videos) for the regression task. The independent

R-squared value is 99.5% for a 3-fold cross validation. We also list the re- sult of a deep learning regression model that uses the same videos and D10, D50, D90 data reported earlier for comparison (Li et al., 2020). The train-test split ratio is 2:1 for both models.

In addition, similar to video segment classification, the dataset is also split into train and test sets by videos, where video segments com- ing from the same video are either in train set or test set. This ap- proach results in 5550 video segments in train set and 4071 video segments in test set. A polynomial regression with degree 2 is used, mean squared error of test set is 361.2, and R-squared value of test set is 96.3%.

Hongfei Li was a principle author involved in all aspects of this work. She was a Master's Student in Statistics at the University of Il- linois Urbana Champaign at the time of this work. Hongfei was su- pervised by Lipi Acharya and Steven Cryer of Corteva Agriscience (Data Science and Informatics) when she was finishing her Master's degree at UIUC. Dr. Acharya and Dr. Cryer provided the necessary ideas, support, feedback, guidance, and interactions for this work. Dr. John Raymond of Corteva Agriscience also provided technical guidance.

Dr. Navin Elango provided critical review and feedback of this man- uscript. Hongfei Li was a master's student at the University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign (UIUC) working with Corteva Agriscience as an in- tern at the time this work was undertaken. All research was funded by Corteva Agriscience.

J.       Fluid       Mech.       666,       358. Blei, D.M., Jordan, M.I., 2003. Modeling annotated data. Proceedings of the 26th annual in-

Cloeter, M.D., Qin, K., Patil, P., Smith, B., 2010. Planar Laser Induced Fluorescence (PLIF) flow visualization applied to agricultural spray nozzles with sheet disintegration; In- fluence of an oil-in-water emulsion. ILASS Americas 22nd Annual Conference on Liq- uid Atomisation and Spray Systems, Cincinnati, OH, May 2010.

