This paper is concerned with the optimal control of inventory-production system subject to Gumbel distributed deterioration items with applications to optimal control theory. We successfully formulated the model as a linear optimal control problem and obtained an explicit solution using Pontryagin maximum principle. The optimality conditions are derived in this case. It is then illustrated with the help of examples.

We are concerned in this paper with inventory-production control problem that can be represented as an optimal control problem with one state variable (inventory level) and one control variable (rate of manufacturing) subject to time of deterioration. In inventory-production models, two factors of the problem have been of growing interest to the researchers, one being the deterioration of items and the other being the variation in the demand rate with time. In the early stage of the study, most of the deterioration rates in the models are constant, such as Padmanabhana and Vratb (1995), Bhunia and Maiti (1999), Al-khedhairi and Tadj (2007) and Baten and Kamil (2009. We are especially interested in the application of optimal control theory to the production planning problem with Gumbel distribution deterioration items. The optimal control theory has been applied to different inventory-production control problems where researchers are involved to analyze the effect of deterioration and the variations in the demand rate with time in logistics. Various authors attacked their research in the application of optimal control theory to the production planning problem. Some

We developed an optimal control model in inventory-production system with generalized Gumbel distribution deteriorating items. This paper derived the explicit solution of the optimal control models of an inventory- production system under a continuous review-policy using Pontryagin maximum principle. However, we gave numerical illustrative examples for this optimal control of a production-inventory system with Gumbel distribution deteriorating items. However, particular emphasis can be made also with extreme value (e.g. Gumbel) distribution for assessing landslides hazards, earthquake hazards. Near-surface groundwater levels can be treated the same extreme-value distribution context as river floods, wind gusts, earthquakes, and other naturally occurring temporal phenomena.

