performance of CNN models could be further improved, especially for reconstructing seismic data with detailed features. The multi-layer wavelet convolutional neural network (MWCNN) has been proposed to address the above issues (Liu et al., 2018). MWCNN adopts discrete wavelet transform (DWT) and inverse discrete wavelet transform (IWT) in U-Net to avoid the information loss caused by the pooling operations. It should be noted that MWCNN uses U-Net as the backbone, which introduces a large number of feature channels in the upsampling part and allows the network to propagate the context information to the high resolution layers (Liu et al., 2022b).

feature maps, i.e., the expanding subnetwork. Here, IWT is adopted to reconstruct the high resolution feature maps. CNNs typically expand the receptive field at the expense of the computational cost. Although the dilated filtering solves the problem of the high computational cost of CNNs, it suffers from the grid effects and the computed receptive field is only a sparse sampling of the input image with the checkerboard patterns. MWCNN is able to achieve the sizeable receptive fields with the limited computational constraints. Moreover, MWCNN can also be interpreted as a generalization of the dilation filtering and the subsampling, which is beneficial for image restoration tasks.

dimensions. CBAM re-calibrates the feature maps by learning a set of weights. The channel attention and spatial attention are also applied to the multi-scale seismic data information obtained by using the DWT and IWT. Thus, the accuracy and effectiveness of irregularly missing seismic data reconstruction can be effectively promoted.

To examine the availability of W-CBADL, we first apply it on syn- thetic data and implement a case, i.e., irregularly sampled seismic data, which randomly exclude 70% of traces in each patch. Furthermore, we provide qualitative and quantitative comparisons and explanations with state-of-the-art U-Net and MWCNN models.

the version of 2.4.0. All computations are implemented on a graphics processing unit, i.e., NVIDIA GTX 3090 (24 GB GPU memory). These models are all trained with a batch size of 40 and a maximum of 500 epochs to make a trade-off between training efficiency and convergence

We propose and train a wavelet-based convolutional block attention deep learning network (W-CBADL) to interpolate irregularly sampled seismic data. First, W-CBADL combines the wavelet transform with tra- ditional CNNs. On one hand, the multi-scale characteristic of DWT and IWT boosts the accuracy of W-CBADL for seismic data reconstruction. On the other hand, W-CBADL can restore the target image nonde- structively by utilizing the orthogonality of wavelet transform. Next, W-CBADL further introduces a convolutional block attention module (CBAM). We utilize the CBAM to distinguish which feature maps have stronger feedback capabilities in both channel and spatial dimensions. Then, we prepare training data sets which are consisted of synthetic and field seismic data. Finally, the comparison results demonstrate that W-CBADL outperforms U-Net and MWCNN both quantitatively and qualitatively. Moreover, we verify the feasibility, effectiveness, and superiority of the proposed W-CBADL on irregularly sampled seismic data reconstruction, especially for irregularly sampled parts with big gaps and weak reflections.

This research was supported by the National Natural Science Foun- dation of China under Grant 42274144 and under Grant 41974137. The authors express their gratitude to the Sandia National Laboratory and Mobil Oil Company for the open data. The authors deeply appre- ciate the valuable comments from Associate Editor and another three anonymous reviewers.

