The process of recognizing the same vehicle in different scenes is called vehicle re-identification. However, due to the different locations of the surveillance cameras, there may be obstacles in the captured vehicle pictures and multiple viewpoints may make the same vehicle look different. In order to effectively reduce the interference of obstacle occlusion, multiple viewpoints, and other factors on vehicle re-identification, in this paper, we propose a multi-fine-grained feature extraction network. While retaining the global information of vehicles, we extract the finegrained features of vehicles precisely by segmenting the vehicle feature map. In addition, we introduce a new evaluation metric mean Inverse Negative Penalty (mINP) to evaluate the vehicle re-identification model more comprehensively. Our method achieves superior accuracy over the state-of-the-art methods on the challenging vehicle datasets: VeRi-776, VehicleID, and VRIC.

Vehicle re-identification (re-id) aims to identify the same vehicle from different scenes, and belongs to the subtask of image retrieval. With the promotion of deep learning technology, vehicle re- identification has become a hot topic in the field of computer vision. However, due to the production of vehicle database from different sur- veillance cameras in the real world, the captured vehicle images have interference factors such as motion blur, dark background, low resolu- tion, obstacle occlusion, multi-viewpoint, and so on. Hence, how to weaken the adverse factors and improve the accuracy of vehicle re- identification has become a key research direction in this field.

further expands the differences between similar instances. Khorram- shahi et al. [14] adopted the idea of feature extraction from rough to fine. In the first stage, the proposed adaptive key point selection module was used to select the key points with the largest amount of information from the initial layer of the global feature extraction network to roughly extract local features around the selected key points. In the second stage, the vehicle features of the first stage are refined through the two-layer hourglass network with jump connections, and the relatively fine vehicle features obtained are used for vehicle feature matching. There- fore, using local feature information for vehicle re-identification can make the network model extract more refined vehicle features, and combine with the global features of vehicles, can significantly improve

annual inspection signs, body decoration, etc.). On the other hand, it can effectively reduce the influence of obstacles and other adverse factors in the original image on vehicle feature learning. In addition, we also introduce channel attention mechanism to further strengthen the net-

The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 introduces the specific process of vehicle re-identification and provides an overview of multi-fine-grained feature extraction network and loss function. Section 3 introduces the new evaluation metric: mINP. Section 4 presents the experimental results and analysis, and Section 5 draws concluding remarks.

obtained. Then the model is put into the testing set (Query set and Gallery set) to calculate the Euclidean distance between the target vehicle in Query set and the vehicle to be retrieved in Gallery set, and the similarity between the vehicles is calculated and ranked by the distance. The higher the ranking, the higher the similarity. Finally, the retrieval results are printed by line. The green border shows a correct retrieval and the red border shows an incorrect retrieval.

During the testing stage, the protocol proposed in Refs. [8,16] is followed. We compute the Cumulative Matching Characteristic (CMC) curves for three datasets, and further compute the mean Average Pre- cision (mAP) and Rank1. Moreover, we also calculate a new evaluation metric mINP on the three datasets. In this way, we can evaluate our model more objectively.

During the training stage on VRIC, the learning rate is decreased by a factor of 0.1 after the 15th and 30th epoch, till the end 40th epoch. And the batch-size of training and testing are both 32. The training loss of

In our work, we mainly use feature map segmentation combined with channel attention mechanism to extract multiple fine-grained features of vehicles to improve the accuracy of vehicle re-id. Differ from what we think [24,28,29], adopt feature alignment to adjust the image to the same scale, which is conducive to similar feature matching. Finally, these methods enhance the performance of re-id model.

This paper presents an effective multi-fine-grained feature extraction network for vehicle re-identification. Using the proposed MFG-Net, the fine-grained features of the vehicle can be fully utilized, which provides robustness against vehicle obstructions. Our experiments show that the proposed MFG-Net is superior to multiple state-of-the-art vehicle re- identification methods on VeRi-776, VehicleID and VRIC datasets. In addition, we introduce a new evaluation metric: mINP. The experi- mental verification not only confirms the retrieval ability of our model, but also verifies the effectiveness of the new metric.

