Secondly, undergraduate students and inexperienced designers face the unavailability of consolidated resources to learn and develop good designs. This is even more pronounced in the case of aircraft design, where the intertwined relationships of multiple disciplines are pro- found. Commercial tools act as a proponent in such a case as they do not provide the user with the freedom to learn and customize accordingly. Open-source tools and the development of custom li- braries/components help in learning from scratch, and the leverage to create and use such tools has never been greater than before.

Finally, a complete end-to-end solution, from conceptual design to autopilot testing, is rarely completed in academic environments due to a lack of funding or constrained timelines for publishing research. A complete document addressing the various challenges while design- ing, developing, and testing a swarm-capable UAV can benefit the emerging field of unmanned aerial systems and swarm robotics. This paper recognizes the above challenges and attempts to alleviate them by developing a sound methodology spread across various entirely free tools and in-house code. Our research is aimed primarily to help students and upcoming researchers develop feasible designs for student competitions or learning aircraft design. Formally, the rationale of our research is centered around the following outcomes: in C++ for continuum mechanics problems in computational fluid dynamics [9]. It has a powerful file-based API and pre- processing utilities like Snappy-Hex-Mesh. The library is also distributed with ParaView: a versatile post-processing software to visualize the computed fields. OpenFOAM is well-regarded in the research community and has been linked with several applications to further its development [10,11]

The high degree of interrelation between disciplines in aircraft design makes it difficult to dodge locally optimal designs developed by intuition. Multidisciplinary Design Optimization (MDO) has become a necessary part of the toolbox of aerospace designers. The approach used in the following sections is not a full-scale MDO solution by any means but a novel, low-fidelity attempt at design exploration. A human is kept in the loop at all stages to guide the design and perform validation checks. Further methods pertaining to the same are explained in the following sections.

25 m/s without sacrificing its VTOL functionality. The aircraft will keep a standard mission profile with vertical take-off, cruised flight, surveillance and target detection, payload delivery, and vertical land- ing. It is also kept in mind that multiple similar UAVs may be used in a collaborative swarm which is advantageous in many applications. A concept of operations for the entire mission profile was also envisioned and a video of the same has been included in the supplementary material (S2).

As trends dictates, we must have a minimum thrust to weight ratio (T/W) of 1.5 for a hovering craft for sufficient thrust during maneuvers. Further, existing aircraft design trends show a T/W of 0.75 to be sufficient during cruise. This allows us to arrive at an initial thrust was necessary to ensure that the forward motors operate at their peak optimum during cruise. The rear motor, only operational during hover segments, is optimized for the same, and its thrust is finalized only after calculating the safe thrust for the front motors during cruise. This is primarily done because the cruise segment dominates the mission profile.

Observing modern trends in electric propulsion, Lithium-Ion battery packs prove to be the best energy density as they can hold more amperage than their Lithium Polymer counterparts. Lithium-Ion battery packs do have their drawbacks of limited current discharge. To confirm before selecting, the current draw was evaluated for all flight segments and was found low enough to use Li-ion batteries.

