Modern data analytic frameworks often operate in highly dynamic and uncertain environments. Therefore, providing security for such frameworks is a huge challenge since in a networked environment, the risks to valuable and sensitive data are greater than ever before [1]. Understanding and leveraging the inter play of these security areas di- mensions can help design more secure systems with more effective policies. This paper focuses on how to improve the security of the evolutionary development of a high-performance big data analytic framework by introducing some security mechanisms and techniques. The ultimate goal is to systematically design a secure data analytic framework that is capable of providing guaranteed security to its users store these various data formats in the MongoDB database for further analysis of the TTU EXPOSOME Project data. Four main areas are addressed in this project in order to protect the data and provide un- impaired access to the authenticated researchers. These four areas include database security (Server with LXCs), network security, web application security, and physical security. As mentioned earlier, the ultimate goal is to provide a secure analytic framework. This research, therefore, investigates ways in which protected data and access to the EXPOSOME data can be secured while avoiding performance degrada- tion during access [3] even when insecure tools may be used.

Initially the paper discusses in brief the background with the related work. Next, it presents the methodology of security mechanism imple- mentations one by one for authentication, authorization, privacy pre- serving data handling, and encryption. Thereafter, paper presents results related to authentication, authorization, privacy preserving data handling, and encryption in detail. Finally, the paper concludes with the power of the current system and some future suggestions to improve the current system security, such as block-chain based security [7,8] and how human behaviors will affect the system security.

We In this section, we introduce a security model for the stored data in the MongoDB database server within Singularity Linux containers. During transmission, security mechanisms are used to authenticate, authorize, and encrypt data while data-at-rest is used to prevent vul- nerabilities. Furthermore, a mechanism is proposed and implemented for privacy preserving data extractions, transmissions, and loadings, by converting the actual data format to numerical data representation.

Since MongoDB does not enable access control by default, the authorization mechanism decides the database resources and operations accessible to the verified users [19,20]. After installation, nine control roles defined by the system are available with MongoDB. This research specifies the basic database policy, which guides the steps of access control implementation. The initial focus is on one regular user and the system administrator who has full permission. Complying with the principal of minimal authority in setting roles that determine the amount of access per user, the other users have lesser permission levels.

Daniel Huluka et al. [36] identified eleven root causes of session management and seven causes of broken authentication vulnerabilities in their investigation on the possibility of using Root Cause Analysis (RCA) to improve web application security. Their investigation and re- view of vulnerabilities paved the way for developing ways to prevent recurrent attacks on web applications.

identifies the nature of information systems as much more than a technical matter. Furthermore, the paper stresses the need to consider different perspectives during the security protocol implementation and highlights several significant root causes of vulnerabilities of the investigated software system. The comprehensive analysis of the related literature provides a number of information system vulnerabilities and the strategies to reduce attack surfaces.

Zhiqiang Lin et al. [38] introduce AutoPag, a solution they have developed for the out-of-bound vulnerability that contains buffer over- flows and general boundary condition errors. AutoPag is designed for time-efficient software patch generation, and it has the ability to analyze the program source code through data flow analysis automatically. This eases the access of sensitive patient information for all relevant parties across platforms and geographical locations. The system gathers all scattered information of each patient and creates an Electronic Health Record in cloud storage. In order to facilitate efficient decision-making, the system sorts out and provides only the necessary, relevant data for the involved parties, instead of letting all parties access all the infor- mation in the cloud or in clinical information groups. The proposed system includes a data security model that uses encryption algorithms (AES, RCA), authentication techniques (OTP/One Time Password), Two Factor Authentication (2FA), and clinician authorization to prevent data theft or unauthorized data usage.

Chakravorty, Wlodarczyk, and Rong [41] have developed a data analytics framework aimed at maintaining security and preserving the privacy for analysis of sensor data in smart homes. The heuristic-based, k-anonymization algorithms used in the framework provide security and protect the privacy of the data throughout the data lifecycle. In order to prevent the access of certain users while allowing some other users to access the data, the framework proposes to re-identify data processing results through a separately encrypted identifier dictionary with hashed values and actual values of all unique sets of identifiers.

complementary metrics to provide an accurate evaluation in the process of determining the level of security of a network that oversees the se- curity system status during current and potential future threats. The project considers security as a multidimensional aspect and uses a sto- chastic modeling technique with attack graphs. Meanwhile, the frame- work ensures a better understanding, along with a thorough system analysis through the use of Absorbing Markov Chains and the Common Vulnerability Scoring System (CVSS) framework.

problems in a particular domain and how to resolve them. This research investigates a general approach to prevent most of the attacks due to 1. Week authentication, 2. No authorization policy or mechanism, 3. No encryption mechanism, and 4. No mechanism to foster data privacy. Moreover, this research proposes a generic security model for any container-based virtual application that helps satisfy its security re- quirements and protects the application against various malicious behaviors.

process. Mongoose is an Object Data Modeling library for MongoDB and Express. js. It manages relationships between data, provides schema validation, and is used to translate between objects in code and the representation of those objects in MongoDB [45]. Express. js, which is another form of the JavaScript runtime based upon the Node. js plat- form. This enables us to execute javascript code when interacting with our MongoDB application [46]. Finally, bcrypt is used in order to protect the password information within our database, such that bcrypt is a password hashing function based on the Blowfish cipher [47]. This se- curity mechanism involves following three steps to gain access to a database.

This section shows how to add different privilege levels to different types of users by using access control roles. To add a user, MongoDB provides the db. createUser() method. When adding a user, roles may be assigned roles to the user in order to grant privileges, such as root, admin, and normal user. The first user created in the database should be a user administrator who has privileges to manage other users.

overall security of a software system is a shared responsibility of the technical experts as well as its users/clients. Especially, the vulnerabil- ities that may arise through the users play a crucial role, because the security of the system can be compromised if the authenticated users are misguided to exploit the vulnerabilities of the system. Therefore, it is important to bear in mind that the root causes of system vulnerabilities may not always be due to the technical aspects of the security mechanism.

Akalanka Mailewa Dissanayaka, Susan Mengel, Lisa Gittner, and Hafiz Khan. Vulnerability prioritization, root cause analysis, and mitigation of secure data analytic framework implemented with MongoDB on singularity Linux containers. In The 4th International Conference on Compute and Data Analysis -2020 (ICCDA- 2020). [San Jose, CA].

fications such as MCP, MCTS, MCSA, MCITP, and MCSE-Security while he has followed RHCT and CCNA courses. In addition, he is a Palo-Alto Networks Authorized Cybersecurity Academy Instructor with CIC and CPC certifications. His research interest includes Big- data security, IoT security, cryptography, ethical hacking, penetration testing, and soft- ware test automation. On his research area, he has published several scientific research journal articles and conference proceedings by presenting in several well-known confer- ences. Also, he is serving as editorial board member and reviewer of several journals and conferences. In addition, he has received fellowships, awards, and travel grants from various institutes. Overall, about 15 years of teaching experiences in higher education, he is currently working as a tenure-track assistant professor in the department of computer science and information technology at Saint Cloud State University, Saint Cloud, Minne- sota, USA.

Dr. Susan Mengel received her Ph.D. from Texas A&M Uni- versity in 1990. She is an Associate professor at Texas Tech University. She has played strategic leadership roles in numerous transdisciplinary projects involving the delivery of innovative software and data models in sleep management, student retention and advising, computer education, nutrition, speech therapy, cardiovascular disease, and cybersecurity. She has been funded by the National Science Foundation and has over 60 papers including reports, journal publications, con- ference papers, and chapters. She helped to establish the

Faculty Senate, served on the Steering Committee of the ACM/ IEEE Computing Curriculum, served as an Associate Editor for Computing for the IEEE Transactions on Education, served on the IEEE Computer Society Board of Governors, and served as the Outreach Chair FY19 of the SWE Outreach Committee. She became one of the inaugural E-Learning Faculty Fellows for Texas Tech University eLearning & Academic Partnerships in 2022. She is on the Texas Tech Institutional Review Board for the Pro- tection of Human Subjects and is a faculty co-advisor for the TTU Collegiate Chapter of SWE.

