The burgeoning of fake news is an evident side effect of this phe- nomenon. The US presidential election campaign in 2016, notably, is one of the numerous incidents which have been plagued with this menace in recent times. According to The Telegraph, fake news is now seen as one of the greatest threats to democracy, free debate and the Western order. News reporting, which functions on the ideals of objectivity, needs to be restored to its principled and lucid past.

Media has the power to influence opinions of masses which in turn conditions and influences their day-to-day activities. In recent years, a lot of controversy has risen over the credibility of media outlets in reporting news. This calls for a need to detect bias in everyday news and to develop a platform so that people can receive balanced and safe news.

This research relies on Twitter (one of the most prominent social networking medium present today) for its analysis. Tweets by media outlets are indicative of the type of news they report. This study targets some popular media outlets and journalists in India, and analyzes their tweets. It analyzes how biased opinions are channeled and propagated via social media into a network of people following/consuming it. The research and the proposed model can, however, be extended to other social media and be analyzed for a bigger social network.

The study is performed in three stages. In stage one, subjectivity versus objectivity in news is investigated. Ideally, media outlets should report neutral and objective news to its consumers. However, in- vestigations reveal that a large fraction of the them report subjective news to its consumers, thereby injecting opiniated information into the network. This subjective news can be referred to as biased opinion.

The task of sentiment analysis is central to all the three stages of this work. It forms the basis to classify and quantify the polarity of tweets in the dataset. Therefore, this task needs to be carried out in the most efficient manner.

VADER, in its comparison to lexicons which provide a binary classi- fication of words like LIWC and GI, showed better performance in the social media domain due to better capturing of social media specific lexical features and a tendency to account for the sentiment intensity of words rather than just their binary nature. It even outperformed lexicons consisting of a sentiment intensity value mapping like ANEW and Sen- tiWordNet, due to lexical feature capturing for the social media domain, and being less noisy due to its gold standard i.e. human curation.

Gerber and Karlan and Bergan [10] explored the effects on political views and behavior of media bias by conducting a natural field experi- ment. Individuals were randomly assigned to either receive a free sub- scription to the Washington Post, Washington Times, or to a control group which did not receive any newspaper. Door-to-door polling models were used followed by probabilistic analysis. A public opinion survey was conducted after the 2005 Virginia gubernatorial election to find that irrespective of the media slant, people who received newspapers had a greater tendency to vote Democrat. Also, a long-term increase in the voter turnout was observed in the 2006 election, possibly, due to re-subscription of these newspapers. Finally, it was inferred that not only media slant, but even media exposure, can cause an evocation in public opinions.

Chiang and Knight [11] also investigated the influence of media on voting in the context of newspaper endorsements by developing a sta- tistical econometric model in which voters chose candidates by resolving their uncertainty over the quality of candidates by relying on endorse- ments from newspapers. The degree of influence was found to be dependent on the credibility of the endorsement. This observation led to an interesting side-effect of the influence phenomenon where voters were found to be sophisticated enough to filter out evident biases in media, while still retaining some orientation with endorsements published in credible newspapers.

This proposed work introduces an approach to determine if news consumers have been conditioned, by comparing the current sentiment value of the consumer with its previous average sentiment value. This difference is then compared against a threshold to determine the extent and nature of conditioning. If considerable change is noted, the news consumer is said to have been conditioned, either positively or negatively.

Groseclose and Milyo [12] provided an objective measure of the slant of news and a comparative measure against other political actors. Americans for Democratic Action (ADA) scores, which categorize user sentiment in the range 0 (strongly conservative) to 100 (strongly liberal) were estimated for all major media outlets in the US by counting the number of times a media outlet cited various think tanks. These citation patterns were compared with the number of times the Congress cited the same think tanks in their speeches on the floor of the House and Senate. The estimation was also dependent on the pre-existing adjusted ADA scores of the parliamentarians making these speeches. Finally, ADA scores were calculated for each media outlet on 2 granularity levels: sentence level, and citation level.

Lin and Bagrow and Lazer [13] proposed measures to quantify the extent and dynamics of blog and mainstream media bias by focusing on stories about the 111th US Congress. A networked data model was created using different node sets for mainstream media, blog media and legislators. The observed coverage of the Members of Congress was then compared against a null model of unbiased coverage and biases with respect to political parties, popular front runners, regions of the country, gender and ideology were investigated. Media slant was also observed in the content of the coverage by examining links used in the text along with sentiment analysis on the textual content.

determined on a one-dimensional space by considering its distances to other media sources. The distance was calculated by observing the common subscriber patterns. The final co-ordinate was calculated as an ADA score on the basis of its distance to some landmark media outlets, whose coordinates were already known with a high degree of confidence as calculated by Groseclose and Milyo [12]; which was then plotted on the one-dimensional space.

It is the responsibility of media outlets to report day to day events in an unbiased and neutral manner. However, bias in selecting what to report and concomitantly choosing a slant on a particular report plagues the current system. This study specifically focuses on Indian media out- lets, relying on Twitter datasets to represent biased reporting and pro- poses an approach to detect it.

Journalists with a large following tend to be quite influential, with their opinions getting propagated to the masses. They can strongly affect public opinions with their influence having a strong correlation with the subjectivity of their tweets. This may lead to a precarious situation where mass opinion is dependent on the whims and personal orientations of few journalists and can therefore alter the political state of the country. It is therefore imperative to identify such journalists to restore the concept of free will in society.

The study first validates the assumption that media outlets provide the news consumers with opinionated news. Instead of providing fair, neutral - objective news, it is shown how various media outlets and journalists provide subjective news. To do so, the tweets by popular media outlets and journalists are analyzed and checked for news subjectivity versus objectivity. It is found that a large fraction of the tweets are subjective instead of the ideal objective nature.

Twitter is a popular social networking and microblogging service that allows users to post real time messages, called tweets. Tweets are short messages, restricted to 140 characters in length at the time of the study). With the rise of social media in India, there has been an increase in the number of people using Twitter. Almost all media outlets and jour- nalists have verified Twitter handles, which they use periodically to tweet information about various day to day happenings and events in the

Sentiment scores for the tweets are determined by analyzing the tweets collected using VADER. NLTK- VADER is a popular tool for sentiment analysis of social media texts. It comprises of an underlying implementation of a rule-based model (Hutto and Gilbert, 2014). Written in Python, the library is one of the most commonly used tools for determining the polarity or sentiment score for given text in natural language. The sentiment scores obtained by VADER are used for deter- mining the polarity of text.

As shown by means of the aforementioned investigation, media out- lets and journalists present news consumers with polarized opinions. This guidance and conditioning through subjective news articles can be asserted as the cause for news consumers to become biased towards a particular issue. This section of the study proves this assertion and ana- lyzes the conditioning of opinions by media outlets.

Note that an influence can be both positive and negative. An event E which causes a consumer C to be induced with a polarity change in line with that of the tweet in E is said to have had a positive influence on C. Similarly, an event E which causes the consumers C to be induced with a polarity change opposite to that of the tweet in E is said to have had a negative influence on C.

Next, a model is proposed to detect and measure these biases. The bias short term impact assessment tool discussed in this section is an integral component needed to build a platform for safe and objective news. It implements a unique bias score calculation mechanism consid- ering a diverse set of factors followed by comparison with a neutral baseline.

The overall tweet dataset used previously in Section 3.1 is extended by using the tweet permalinks and user profile pages to extract other useful information about each tweet. This information includes the number of followers of the user, the number of times the media outlet is mentioned on Twitter, the number of likes, replies, retweets of the tweet, the activity time of tweet, user-details of the users replying to the tweet and text-content of the tweet. These fields are used for determining the short term impact of bias as described below.

For experimentation, some major political subjects were identified for the Indian context. This included the Bharatiya Janta Party (BJP) (Cur- rent Ruling Party at the Centre of the Indian Government), the Indian National Congress (INC) (Leading Opposition Party at the Centre) and the Aam Aadmi Party (AAP) (Current Ruling Party in the Delhi Legislative Assembly) and their prominent leaders. The subjects/features were hand- annotated and grouped into discrete sets called target sets.

This is followed by rudimentary checks to identify the subject for each tweet. It is observed that most tweets belong to just one target set. This implies that complex methods like dependency graph representations to identify the subject and target sets can be safely avoided. Presence of unique target sets allow simpler methods to be implemented.

+0.33) is assumed to be subjective or biased as mentioned in Section 3.2. However, not every subjective news will have the same impact. The impact of subjective news reporting, depends on various other parame- ters like the number of people who view the news, number of people who like/favor it, and the time for which the news is active in the user newsfeed. Depending on these parameters, the Bias Short term Impact Score (BSIS) is determined for each news report (using a formula explained further in Section 5.3.3).

Direct Followers (F): The number of users who follow the media outlet represents the number of news consumers. It is an approxi- mation for the audience that will view the tweet. It is extracted with help of the Twitter API [16].

Replies: User replies may either agree or disagree with the media outlet. The agreement/disagreement is determined by sentiment score comparison of the tweet and reply. The subject identification methodology, as suggested in Section 5.2, is also used as a parameter for this decision. An agreement is defined as the case when polarity of the tweet and reply are the same (for the same target subject). Similarly, a disagreement is classified as the case when polar nature of the tweet and reply conflict with each other.

Tweet Activity Time: The time interval for which a tweet is active is a measure of its short term impact. If a tweet by a media outlet re- mains active for a long duration, it implies that the tweet elicited a good response from the target audience and hence the impact of the news bias was sizeable. The tweet activity time is measured by finding the time difference between the time of tweet and the last reply on the tweet. The Twitter API [16] is used to obtain the timestamp of a tweet.

Note: Due to lack of labelled datasets and highly subjective nature of biases, supervised approaches cannot be applied for this use case. These formulations use a statistical approach where the value of constants (parameter weights) and operators used in the formulations are based on theoretical investigations. The formulae may be improved in the future by taking various other factors which might not have been included presently into account.

Influence Factor (IF) of a media outlet: A measure of how influ- ential a particular media outlet is. It is a function of the direct fol- lowers and number of mentions of the media outlet in the Twittersphere. Let F be the number of followers and M be the number of overall mentions of a media outlet. These two parameters together determine the popularity of the media outlet. The value of F directly measures the audience viewing a tweet by the media outlet, and M measures how actively people engage the media outlet in their dis- cussions. IF is given by: dm: Disagreements do not promote the bias shown by the tweet. However, they still increase the reach of the tweet. They are therefore inferred to show influence, but lesser than the baseline i.e. fav leading to a weight assignment of 0.6.

4. Persistence (P) of a media outlet: Denotes the resolute of the media outlet. It captures how consistent a media outlet is about its opinion. The persistence of a media outlet is measured by observing its pre- vious tweets and their polarity scores in relation to the latest tweet released by the media outlet, i.e. P is a function of the polarity of past tweets and the latest tweet of the media outlet.

The value of a is chosen to be 0.3 to provide fair weightage to both the last tweet and the series of previously made tweets. It was observed that choosing values of a > 0.3 masked the effect of the historical tweets and

A BIS timeline is also constructed for a neutral media outlet, which serves as a null model. This study chooses DD-News to serve as the neutral outlet. DD-News is a government-funded media outlet with a reputation of providing the most objective news to viewers. This justifies its selection as the null model to calculate the threshold value for checking bias.

The maximum value of the absolute BSIS values on the BSIS-time plot of the media outlet (DD in our case) as obtained from the graph is noted as Neutral Limit (NL). The neutral outlet is said to tweet within the po- larity threshold of NL. It is used as a parameter for calculating the polarity threshold value for a media outlet from its BSIS plot.

The observations made also reveal that most media outlets are far more biased on live TV than in print and social media. Bias detection in Television media could therefore be an important extension to the model. A naive solution is to convert Live TV stream to Natural Language in text and then apply a similar model to detect biases. Also, media biases in terms of panel representation, think-tank citations and selective news coverage should be dealt with.

attempt to condition the news-consumers in making them believing a falsified report. Tech giants like Google and Facebook have recently started working in this direction. This research aims to address a small fragment of this larger problem of subjective news and its short term impact on the society in large.

