to intensify self-preparation of students in subjects developing algorithmic thinking is introduced and its benefit discussed. Animations useful to be used as an introductory complement to lectures are introduced as well. At the end advantages of the professional virtual learning environment containing such study material are mentioned.

buildings. We do not use any programming language in the subject, students write algorithms on paper in Czech meta-language. The used Czech meta-language is nothing more than the Pascal programming language basic commands. (Remark: Pascal programming language was created by Nicklaus Wirth especially for edu- cational purposes, see Wirth, 1989.)

We explain and students practise all algorithmic structures, at first only those which use single variables. After the thorough practising structures on problems using single variables we proceed further and explain the data structure of one- dimensional and two-dimensional array. Using these data structures all previous matter is repeated together with a careful attention to the work with array indices. During lessons students apply the acquired knowledge to a variety of tasks.

They work in groups of two or three and each group is responsible for solving one of the given tasks. After some time when students prepare their solutions on a piece of paper, each task is illustrated and presented by two students (or three, depending on the number of groups, each group responsible for the task- solution deputes one student) on the blackboard and their solutions are compared and discussed by all students. On the one hand this means that students are led to try and find more solutions to the given task, on the other hand when incorrect solutions occur among the presented solutions the teacher has an opportunity to discuss with students where the problem is.

Discussion: Using this tool, students have the opportunity to discuss their ques- tions and problems concerning the appropriate subject with other students. The tool is displayed in our ALGDS course mainly as a means of communication among students. Thanks to the lectures and lessons, the Discussion tool is only seldom used by teachers.

