Natural products are attractive for drug discovery applications because of their distinctive chemical structures, such as an overall large fraction of sp3 carbon atoms, chiral centers (both features associated with structural complexity), large chemical scaffolds, and diversity of functional groups. Furthermore, natural products are used in de novo design and have inspired the development of pseudo-natural products using generative models. Public databases such as the Collection of Open NatUral ProdUcTs and the Universal Natural Product database (UNPD) are rich sources of structures to be used in generative models and other applications. In this work, we report the selection and characterization of the most diverse compounds of natural products from the UNPD using the MaxMin algorithm. The subsets generated with 14,994, 7,497, and 4,998 compounds are publicly available at https://github.com/DIFACQUIM/Natural-products-subsets-generation. We anticipate that the subsets will be particularly useful in building generative models based on natural products by research groups, particularly those with limited access to extensive supercomputer resources.

The Collection of Open NatUral ProdUcTs (COCONUT) and the Universal Natural Product Database (UNPD) are two large compound databases. COCONUT [5] is arguably the most extensive public natu- ral product database, with 389,184 unique structures. UNPD [6], with 153,375 natural products, is the second-largest public natural prod- uct database. A distinctive feature of UNPD compared to COCONUT is that compounds in UNPD contain chirality information. In Latin Amer- ica, several public natural products databases compile the compounds isolated and characterized from the country of origin. Examples are

For this study, different types of databases with compounds from var- ious origins were used including three data sets of natural products, and a data set focused on a specific molecular target of pharmaceutical rele- vance. Natural product databases from different sources were employed to compare the NPL score of the UNPD subsets (described in the Natu- ral product-likeness section). The data set focused on a specific molecu- lar target and the natural products from different sources were used to evaluate and compare the molecular diversity of UNPD subsets. Using a focused database gives a value of low structural diversity, which serves as a reference to compare the structural diversity of the UNPD subsets. Likewise, the chemical structures from other natural product databases served as reference compound collections to evaluate the diversity of the data sets newly generated. Each type of data set and its contents are described below.

Three data sets of natural products were used, namely, COCONUT, UNPD, and BIOFACQUIM. COCONUT [5] had 389,184 unique struc- tures, not including chirality information. UNPD [6] with 153,372 natural products, encoding their chirality. BIOFACQUIM [14,15] is a database with 531 natural products isolated and characterized in Mex- ico, and the chirality of the compounds is included. A data set with 715 compounds focused on DNA methyltransferase 1 (DNMT1) inhibitors. DNMT1 is an epigenetic target relevant to drug discovery [28,29]. The data set of DNMT1 inhibitors was obtained from the ChEMBL database, release 31 [30,31].

[33] and MolVS [34]. Compounds with valence errors or any chemi- cal element other than H, B, C, N, O, F, Si, P, S, Cl, Se, Br, and I, were removed. Stereochemistry information, when available, was retained. Compounds with multiple components were split, and the largest com- ponent was retained. The remaining compounds were neutralized and reionized to generate the corresponding canonical tautomer.

The t-SNE generates plots that organize compounds. Similar com- pounds form clusters and dissimilar compounds are distant from each other. TMAP allows visualizing of many chemical compounds through the distance between clusters. Local Sensitive Hashing (LSH) allows each compound to be grouped hierarchically according to common substruc- tures using molecular fingerprints. The number of nearest neighbors,

We report the selection and characterization of the three subsets with the most diverse compounds from UNPD using the MaxMin algo- rithm. Three subsets with 14,994, 7497, and 4998 compounds selected from the UNPD contain the most structurally diverse natural products. Unlike compounds in the COCONUT database, molecules in UNPD are annotated with chirality. The structural diversity of compounds is not affected by the number of subsets derived from the original database from which a new database is generated, and an analysis of the chem- ical multiverse supports that UNPD subsets contain the most diverse molecules. During the study, we also concluded that the visualization of the chemical space described with ECFP6 is more accurate to de- scribe the structural diversity of compounds compared with ECFP4 and MACCS keys (166 bits). The natural product subsets had a large diversity of chemical compounds with different structural features and properties of pharmaceutical relevance. The NPL score supports that the chemical structures of natural products are very different and diverse as defined by the threshold of the NPL score, and as expected, natural products (COCONUT, UNPD, and BIOFACQUIM) had NPL scores values close to 5.

