In tundish, the flow state of top dross layer not only influences the oxidation of the molten steel, but also is directly related to the floating and adsorption of inclusions, and is concerned with the entrainment of steel to micro-inclusions. In this study, with the VOF method, the charging and normal casting processes are numerical simulated, two structural models of tundish being created. The results demonstrate that the flow control has significant effect on the stability of dross layer and the probability of dross entrainment. The improved structural model can effectively stabilize the dross layer and reduce the risk of entrainment. It plays an important role on the removal of inclusions, and enhances the cleanliness of molten steel.

In recent years, on many steel sheets surface, some inclusions are detected, whose composition is the same as the protecting dross in tundish [1]. Some researches [2] have also shown that 60% surface defects in the ultra-low carbon steel are caused by the protecting dross entrainment. It is visible that the slab defects are greatly due to the entrainment. Therefore, in order to improve the purity of steel and optimize the floating process of inclusion, it is necessary to clear about the flow states of molten steel and protecting dross in

By numerical simulation, Guo Junyu, Zhang Jieyu et al [3] have researched systematically the influences of the height of dam, the depth of weir and the distance between dam and weir on fluctuation of molten steel in tundish. Yue Lifang et al [4] have studied the changes of the free surface and the velocity field during the emptying and filling of the tundish. In this paper, using the VOF method, the state of top dross layer and the flow of molten steel in tundish are simulated during the charging and continuous casting processes, two structural models of tundish being created. The purpose is to research the distribution and flow state in the interface. This paper provides reference on construction of tundish for the production of high purity steel.

The volume of fluid (VOF) method is presented by American scholars Hirt & Nichols et al [5], on the basis of the MAC method. It is a fixed grid technique designed for two or more immiscible fluids. In the VOF model, the volume fraction of each of the fluids in each computational cell is tracked throughout the domain. To facilitate study, the following assumptions are applied: the cooling and solidifying of the dross layer are ignored, and the dross is considered always in the flow state.

q to phase p).  is common variable, and can denote an unknown variable u, v, w, etc.  is the generalized diffusion coefficient. S is the generalized source term. Gk represents the generation of turbulent kinetic energy due to the mean velocity gradients. Gb is the generation of kinetic energy due to buoyancy.

In order to adjust to Fluent software, the Gambit software is used for modeling and meshing. To obtain precise numerical results, Model scale is 1:1. The dimensions of tundish are as follows. At upper side, length is 9036mm, width is 1668mm, and at lower side, length is 8648mm, width is 854mm. The tundish is shown a trough, with 1100mm high. The teeming nozzle diameter is 118mm, and the one of submerged nozzle is 82mm. Due to symmetry of construction and for saving computing resources, half of tundish is as simulation object.

Solid wall is seen to be no-slip. The near-wall boundary layer uses the standard wall function. The entrance is defined molten steel inlet. Assumed that the velocity is uniform distribution in cross section, the inlet velocity is 1.406m/s at the teeming nozzle, calculated from the casting speed and slab dimensions. At the top of model is set to pressure outlet, and reflux is set as air phase.

n the dross layer is very small. A potential flow core can even be formed, with zero relative velocity between molten steel and dross layer, and becomes gathering center for floating inclusions. The dross layer is very steady, and conducive to the adsorption of inclusions.

The simulation results indicate in model-1 (commonly used in two-strand slab continuous casting tundish), due to the control flow of retaining wall and dam, in vertical direction a turbulence and its pulse are generated. This brings about a strong impact to the dross. It is unfavorable to the adsorption of the floating inclusions, or even dross is partly entrained along with the filling opening.

In Model 2, the conventional diversion is altered, and the flow forms a rotational motion in horizontal direction. This follows the rotating separation principle of mechanics, and facilitates the separation of inclusions. Meanwhile, the rotational motion will not impact the top dross, maintaining the stability of the dross layer. With zero relative velocity between molten steel and dross layer, it is very conducive for dross to adsorb the floating inclusions. This model is very significant for the production of high purity steel.

