The spatial arrangement of peptide substrates is important to pre- dict potential interactions with their molecular targets [1]. The research on molecular docking of peptides has contributed to overcome, in part, the challenge of predicting bound conformations of these highly flex- ible molecular entities [2,3]. In this sense, multiple approaches have been published to tackle this computational problem [4]. Among them, methods using docking strategies where the peptide is grown step-by- step can help to solve the flexibility issues, while maintaining the ca- pability of predicting energy-favorable conformations associated with potential biological activities [5,6]. These complexes can be sampled using techniques such as molecular dynamics (MD), where amino acid force field parameters can be implemented to study peptides and their interactions [7,8]. Other tools can be useful to predict beforehand the probable structural conformation of the peptides in comparison to ex- perimental techniques [9,10].

Nowadays, the combination of physics-based approaches with ma- chine learning models is useful to reduce the computational cost of run- ning exhaustive simulations and improve the prediction performance of classical methods with available curated data [18]. This is the case of novel methods to accelerate quantum chemical calculations using mod- els trained with pre-calculated parameters [19]. In the context of MD, initiatives are reported to extract descriptors from the trajectories and combine them with additional chemical data from the molecular enti- ties. This is the case of the Molecular Dynamics Fingerprints package (MDFP) [20], where a set of molecular fingerprints can be computed by obtaining average energy terms and observables from the MD sim- ulations such as the solvent accessible surface area, dipole moments, radius of gyration and evolution of the hydrogen bonds. The latest have been applied to predict free energies of solvation for small molecules [21], and for binding studies involving proteins [22]. The protocol can be adapted to include peptides as ligands for virtual screening studies

Two scripts, one using bash command lines, and a second written in Python are included in the main code to extract these descriptors. The vectors per complex are stored as pickled objects in a folder, which can be read later by machine learning models. An example of a protein- peptide MD trajectory is provided in the code repository to reproduce the results.

