In order to achieve maximum transparency and comparability, we use guide-target pairs from the crisprSQL dataset [16] curated by our group. It is a collection of 17 base-pair resolved off-target cleavage stud- ies on Sp-Cas9, comprising 25,632 data points and is larger than most datasets used to train prediction algorithms to date. It contains data on various cell lines, mainly U2OS, HEK293 and K562. We have chosen to use version 26/05/2020 of the database which does not include T-cell data from Lazzarotto et al. [17] in order to avoid introducing a consider- able cell line imbalance. Furthermore, the evaluation of our modelling on-target datasets is beyond the scope of this work due to their different underlying experimental techniques and cleavage quantification mea- sures.

off-target detection method has not detected cleavage at a locus within the genome that satisfies these criteria, we deem the cleavage activity at this point to be zero. This yielded 310,142 total guide-target pairs, making the complete data set highly imbalanced. Sticking with the con- vention in literature, we refer to this process of extending the number of data points as data augmentation. For this work, we concentrated on the 251,854 data points originating from a human cell line or synthetic human DNA.

We further envision to replace the epigenetic information of the guide, which so far only copies the epigenetic information of the tar- get DNA. This is clearly an unphysical choice. Given that a synthetic sgRNA does by design not carry epigenetic markers, a one-hot encoded dot-bracket representation of the sgRNA folding would be a more suit- able choice to capture its informative properties.

This research was funded in whole or in part by the Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council (BBSRC) [BB/M011224/1, BB/S507593/1]. For the purpose of Open Access, the author has applied a CC BY public copyright licence to any Author Ac- cepted Manuscript (AAM) version arising from this submission. Some of the presented results have been obtained using the Uni- versity of Oxford Advanced Research Computing (ARC) facility (https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.22558). The authors declare no con- flict of interest.

