In this paper, a novel position estimation method of prism was proposed for single-lens stereovision system. The prism with multi faces was considered as a single optical system composed of some refractive planes. A transformation matrix which can express the relationship between an object point and its image by the refraction of prism was derived based on geometrical optics, and a mathematical model was introduced which can denote the position of prism with arbitrary faces only by 7 parameters. This model can extend the application of single-lens stereovision system using prism to a more widely area. Experimentation results are presented to prove the effectiveness and robustness of our proposed model.

Stereo vision is an important branch of computer vision. It aims to recover the depth information of the object and environment from two or more image taken from different viewpoints[1]. The stereo process can be summarized by the following steps: 1) camera calibration, which determines the value of internal and external parameters of the vision system; 2) corresponding of features between the images under certain geometric and other constraints; and 3) reconstruction[2-4]].

the cost and eliminate the multi-camera synchronization problem automatically [9,10]. It can also decrease the size of the whole system so that it can be used in narrow space. These advantages enable this system with a good potential application and it develops rapidly in recent decade [11-14]..

We are given n 3D object points and m inclined plane of prism. There should be n*m points in image plane. Assume that the image points are corrupted by independent and identically distributed noise. The maximum likelihood estimation of prism position can be obtained by minimizing the following functional:

In this paper, we introduced a new method for position estimation of stereovision system using prism. The parameters of multi-ocular prism were reduced to only 7 extrinsic parameters which could express the position of the prism and 3 intrinsic parameters which could denote the shape of the prism. Our method is based on optical geometry, and could be used in stereovision system with any coordinate. The experiments with both three prisms show that the method is efficient, robust and has good property of convergence and small reprojection errors.

