In many geoscience applications, the response variable's observations often arise below or above the instrument's detection limit (DL). These observations are referred to as censored observations (left-censored, right-censored, or interval-censored). Censoring refers to a condition in which the value of a measurement or observation is only partially known. Left censoring denotes that an observation is below a certain value but it is unknown by how much. Right censoring means that an observation is above a certain value but it is unknown by how much. Interval censoring indicates that an observation is somewhere on an interval between two values. Censored data are a well-known problem when dealing, for through randomized quadratic programming, which allows sampling new principal component coefficients and then reconstructing regression tree predictors that exactly honor the response variable's observations (uncensored and censored) at sampling locations. The response variable's spatial prediction is then obtained by averaging the reconstructed regression tree predictors ensemble. The resulting response variable's spatial prediction effectively honors the response variable's observations (uncensored and censored) at sampling locations. As a byproduct, the response variable's prediction uncertainty is provided. The proposed machine learning method for spatial prediction of a censored response variable is illustrated and compared to ad hoc methods on simulated and real-world data.

The proposed machine learning method's ability to spatially predict a censored response variable is illustrated using simulated and real-world data. The prediction performance is assessed using some well-known prediction accuracy statistics: mean absolute error (MAE), root mean square error (RMSE), and Lin's concordance correlation coefficient (CCC). The lower are MAE and RMSE, the better is the prediction method. The closer is CCC to 1, the better is the prediction technique. A prediction performance comparison of the proposed method with two ad hoc methods is carried out.

simulation is performing using the turning bands method in the R package RGeostats (Renard et al., 2020). This simulated data example for which the ground truth is available everywhere within the study domain refers to a situation where there is a non-linear relationship between the response variable and predictor variables with some interactions be- tween predictor variables. Also, the response variable shows some spatial auto-correlation, and its distribution is non- Gaussian.

In this application example, the response variable is Scandium (Sc) geochemical concentration observed at 568 sampling locations across the study region in southwest England (Kirkwood et al., 2016b). The response variable is subject to a lower detection limit of 3 mg/kg (left-- censoring). The response variable's censored observations represent ~ 6% of total observations. The observations are divided into a training set (~ 75%) and a testing set (~ 25%). As we are more interested in the added-value of censored observations, the testing set consists of

Simulated data example - predictive performance statistics in the testing dataset containing 625 observations that are below the lower detection limit (220.86) and 625 observations that are above the upper detection limit (442.40), under the ad hoc methods 1 and 2, and the proposed method.

The proposed machine learning method has the advantage of natu- rally incorporating the response variable's censored observations compared to ad hoc methods (e.g., deletion and substitution methods). There is no substitution, imputation, or discarding of censored observa- tions, as with ad hoc methods. It can perfectly honor the response few observations (uncensored and censored) are added. Only the last part of the proposed method, i.e., the randomized quadratic programming, should be performed. The proposed machine learning method is easy to implement since it combines well-known existing machine learning, Monte Carlo sampling, and optimization techniques. It handles any

