Over the past decades, imaging and spectroscopy techniques have been developed rapidly with widespread ap- plications in non-destructive agro-food quality determination. Seeds are one of the most fundamental elements of agriculture and forestry. Seed viability is of great significance in seed quality characteristics reflecting potential seed germination, and there is a great need for a quick and effective method to determine the germination con- dition and viability of seeds prior to cultivate, sale and plant. Some researches based on spectra and/or image pro- cessing and analysis have been explored in terms of the external and internal quality of a variety of seeds. Many attempts have been made in image segmentation and spectra correction methods to predict seed quality using various traditional and novel methods. This review focuses on the comparative introduction, development and applications of emerging techniques in the analysis of seed viability, in particular, near infrared spectroscopy, hyperspectral and multispectral imaging, Raman spectroscopy, infrared thermography, and soft X-ray imaging methods. The basic theories, principle components, relative chemometric processing, analytical methods and prediction accuracies are reported and compared. Additionally, on the foundation of the observed applications, the technical challenges and future outlook for these emerging techniques are also discussed.

In fact, seed vigor is an interaction of characteristics and many fac- tors are involved in the composition and manifestation of seed vigor, such as genetic constitution, environment during seed development, and storage (Rahman and Cho, 2016), hindering the establishment of a precise definition of seed vigor (Sun et al., 2007). Therefore, most re- searchers focused on the detection of seed viability instead of seed vigor based on emerging non-destructive techniques, such as near infra- red (NIR) spectroscopy, hyperspectral imaging (HSI) or multispectral imaging (MSI), Raman spectroscopy (RS), infrared thermography (IRT), and soft X-ray imaging. Hence, the applications and trends of these techniques in seed viability detection were reviewed in this paper.

However, the fundamental vibrations of these bonds yield absorp- tion peaks in the visible and near infrared (Vis/NIR) regions that are broad and overlapping, making the Vis/NIR spectra with complex mix- tures hard to interpret. In addition, NIR spectra are 10 to 100 times weaker than their corresponding fundamental mid-infrared absorption bands (Fu and Ying, 2016). Therefore, the analytical information contained in NIR spectra is hard to explain and select because of its mul- tivariate nature, and it is impossible to distinguish the very slight spec- tral differences between samples. In order to extract useful information from vast amounts of spectral data speedily and efficiently, advanced chemometric algorithms are needed to extract information by not only data preprocessing but also quantitative or qualitative analysis as expected.

predictors to fit a MLR model (Naes et al., 2002). Partial least squares (PLS) regression is the most widely used regression method compared to other multivariate methods. Unlike MLR, PLS can be used to analyze data with strongly collinear (correlated), noisy and redundant variables (Cozzolino et al., 2009). As one of the nonlinear regression techniques, support vectors regression (SVR) has been demonstrated with a very good performance mainly due to its great immunity to the presence of outliers and tolerance to spectral noise in NIR data sets. Artificial neural networks (ANN), least squares-support vector machines (LS-SVM) can be also employed to deal with non-linear relationships between vari- ables. Regarding the development of classification and identification methods based on NIR spectroscopy, spectral data have been mostly processed by many well-known qualitative multivariate methods, such as K-nearest neighbor (KNN), linear discriminant analysis (LDA), soft independent modeling of class analogy (SIMCA), partial least squares-discriminant analysis (PLS-DA), support vector machine (SVM), etc.

niques were compared to identify the seed viability of Norway spruce (Dumont et al., 2015) and corn (Ambrose et al., 2016a). The results in- dicated that the Vis/NIR range was not as informative as NIR range with respect to seed viability sorting.

achieve observations within the seed color classes and maximize the differences between classes, the multispectral images were transformed using normalized canonical discriminant analysis (nCDA). A specified feature (Region MSI mean) combined with nCDA, which can calculate a trimmed mean of MSI transformed pixel values within each single seed, was employed and viable seeds were distinguished from dead seeds with accuracy of 92%. This model resulted in 96% correct classifi- cation of seeds for validation set.

derivative preprocessing methods showed the highest accuracy (100%) in the calibration model, but a significant number of seeds were overlapping when using PCA (Ambrose et al., 2016b). In a word, RS is useful and promising to be utilized for classification of viable and non-viable seeds instead of the traditional invasive seed quality detec- tion and evaluation methods.

technique, the results showed that the time-dependent thermal signal decay characteristics, along with the decay amplitude and delay time images, could be used to distinguish aged lettuce seeds from normal seeds easily (Kim et al., 2013). The viability of pepper (Capsicum annuum) seeds was also estimated using IRT and photothermal signal and image reconstruction techniques, pixel-based regression analysis was used to investigate the photothermal signal from seed and seed groups was distinguished by the reconstructed images of regression co- efficients. Results showed that time-resolved photothermal characteris- tic, along with the regression coefficient images, can be used to discriminate the aged or dead pepper seeds from the healthy ones (Kim et al., 2014). Therefore, IRT can definitely be one of the promising methods in the existing destructive and labor-intensive seed-sorting situations.

imaging are absorption physics (related to 2D projection images) and reconstruction mathematics (relevant to the generation of a 3D volume from a series of 2D images) (Schoeman et al., 2016). Nevertheless, char- acterization analysis of seed morphology based on an X-ray CT system is very limited.

information was used to construct the training and validation data set. After that, the LDA classifier could result in more promising results, with the accuracy of 98.9% for 10-fold cross-validation using eighteen selected features. The findings indicate that CT imaging is a potential tool for the classification of seeds based on the characterization of inter- nal morphologically.

Optical-based and/or image-based non-destructive evaluation sys- tems have been gradually investigated and employed in the external and internal quality inspecting of seeds in recent years. Seed viability is of great importance in seed quality characteristics reflecting potential seed germination. This review summarizes emerging technologies and their major applications in seed viability detection. These noninvasive techniques are rapid, accurate, reliable and simple tools for evaluating seed viability. The reasons why they might encounter problems in prac- tical application are discussed. On the basis of the observed trends, the technical challenges and potential future trends for these emerging techniques are also presented.

