Bird strike is the collision of aircraft with birds when flying at high speed. This sudden and multiple accidents cause serious damage to the aircraft structure, and a direct threat to flight safety. With the development of the aviation industry, anti-bird impact design factors are introduced in the aircraft design phase. Through simulation analysis, aircraft structure optimization experiments costs can be greatly reduced and the design cycle can be shortened.

The leading edge skins, front and rear beams, walls and ribs of the aircraft tail are variable thickness composite. And the leading edge skins uses honeycomb sandwich materials for strengthen. The beam connector uses titanium alloy materials. The connection between the components is rivet.

According to standards HB7084-94 for the anti-bird impact of the tail structure, bird selects 3.6Kg, with both ends hemisphere, the intermediate cylindrical simplified model, diameter 18cm. it hits the vertical tail leading edge with the speed 114m/s. Bird strike process usually take millisecond, so it is set 10ms for the calculation time.

Contact is a mathematical model of the bird and the associated structure in time marching, and therefore it needs to define the contact between bird and the vertical tail leading edge. The bird uses SPH model, while the tail structure belongs to the traditional Lagrange unit. So in PAM-CRASH asymmetric contact is defined. Bird is the slave contact part and the leading edge master part.

The calculation results show that, in the pre-impact process, the bird is much softer than the structure, so large deformation and fragmentation occurs, and the bird body is divided into three parts by the leading edge, and the main weight concentrates in the middle part. Due to inertia, the middle part continues to fly into the wing box, contacts the front beam and crash on it. During the impact, the leading edge caves under the strong pressure of the bird, and pits the 3rd diaphragm, results the failure of the diaphragm. A hollow is formed is the middle of the leading edge. The bird penetrates the leading edge.

It should be noted that the failure mode of the leading edge skin and the diaphragm is not the same. For the leading edge skin and the front beam, the main load is extrusion and bending which is perpendicular to the surface due to the bird. So the damage mode is bending shear injury. For the 3rd diaphragm and the 3rd rib, the major loads are passed from the leading edge skin and the front beam, results in pressure instability failure.

The thickened leading edge is partly broken during the impact. But majority of the bird residual weight is dispersed into the surrounding space, which prevents further damage to the front beam. The thickness of the leading edge after the optimization is 3.653mm. Compared to the original design, optimized design weight cost is 2.957Kg.

Composite vertical tail leading edge and the strengthening honeycomb material breakdown during bird impact. Because of the absorption by the deformation of leading edge and honeycomb material, the kinetic energy of the bird is reduced. The broken bird speed drops from 114m/s to 90m/s.

