parameters, the distance between the point under examination and the earthquake source, and the magnitude of the earthquake. The ground motion parameters of interest are: MCS intensity, peak ground acceler- ation, peak ground velocity, spectral acceleration at 0.3s, 1.0s and 3.0s, and their relative uncertainties. These six parameters are calculated by ShakeMap and were chosen because they give a comprehensive overview of shaking. In particular, these three spectral acceleration are chosen to display the amount of shaking experienced by structures sensitive to low periods, intermediate periods, and long periods.

In light of these developments, we have created a single data collec- tion that merges information about the damage and the characteristics of the individual buildings, with the associated ground shaking parameters inferred at the individual points provided by Da.D.O.. Combining these data and applications has allowed the construction of an extensive data collection, the first of its kind for Italy. Its application allows the impact of earthquakes to be addressed through new strategies, such as through the training of machine learning models.

moderate damage (e.g., fall of large pieces of plaster); grade DS3 re- fers to heavy damage (e.g., large and extensive cracks in walls); grade DS4 refers to very heavy damage (e.g., serious failure of walls) and grade DS5 refers to destruction, the total collapse).

shaking, especially in the near field. This work has decided to select the input data for the ShakeMap calculation from a single database (ESM). In this way, we have aligned ourselves with the choice made in ESM for the extended fault associated with the earthquake.

Michelini et al. (2020) describe the adopted ground motion models and the new map of VS30 for the site effects. The software implemented is the ShakeMap version 4.0 (Worden et al., 2020). Below we describe the main features of the earthquakes we have considered and show the most relevant ShakeMaps that have been calculated.

Learning, which is an emerging field in seismic hazard and risk assess- ment, see for example Xie et al. (2020); Riedel et al. (2015). The ShakeDaDO data collection, derived from the information in the Da.D.O. database, will be distributed within the Da.D.O. GIS platform.

This paper was made utilizing the LandScan (2015) High Resolution Global Population Data Set copyrighted by UT-Battelle, LLC, operator of Oak  Ridge  National  Laboratory  under  Contract  No. DE-AC05-00OR22725 with the United States Department of Energy. The United States Government has certain rights in this Data Set. Neither UT-BATTELLE, LLC NOR THE UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF EN- ERGY, NOR ANY OF THEIR EMPLOYEES, MAKES ANY WARRANTY, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, OR ASSUMES ANY LEGAL LIABILITY OR RE- SPONSIBILITY FOR THE ACCURACY, COMPLETENESS, OR USEFUL- NESS OF THE DATA SET.

