The loess plateau of the Ordos Basin in northwest China is one of the main target regions for oil and gas exploration, especially the shale oil in China. The topography and landform of the loess plateau are complex and its surface layer contains too thick Quaternary loess, which results in serious noises in the collected 3D field data. Several types of incoherence (random) noises have a bad influence on the successive seismic signal processing and interpretation (Gu et al., 2021; Qu et al., 2021; Li et al., 2021). Therefore, how to improve the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) of the collected field data is one of the main research contents for the loess plateau area in China.

This paper is organized as follows. We first give a brief introduction of sparse theory. Then, we propose a random noise reduction model called SRNA-SPL-MN and then an effective split Bregman-based optimization algorithm is applied to obtain accurate filtered results. Next, synthetic and post-stacked field data examples are used on our proposed workflow, respectively. Finally, the conclusion is given.

The above definition gives an easy understanding for the SPL. The condition 2 demonstrates that the SPL can first select easy samples. The condition 3 indicates that when the age parameter becomes larger, the SPL may include more complex samples into training. Compared with the CL, the SPL can automatically select the easy or complex samples by

Due to the introduction of three regularization terms in the proposed model, the proposed method should take more experimental to set the regularization parameters. Although the proposed method boosts the performance of seismic data denoising, it is a significant task to improve the parameters selection scheme. Furthermore, the proposed model is only focus on the seismic random noise reduction in this paper, which can be extended to solve seismic data reconstruction and seismic random noise reduction simultaneously. Another topic of the future work could be to remove the seismic coherent noise.

