In recent years the wine industry has evolved in a way to introduce as many new technologies as possible to improve production proce- dures: one of its main focuses is to obtain grapes for wine production in an environmentally friendly manner, without destroying them in the process and choosing them according to quality features. The tradi- tional approach relies on laboratorial analysis to assess some select oe- nological parameters which, alongside destroying the grapes used for analysis, is a cost and time-heavy method. The logical next step was to find some sort of imaging technique that allowed to obtain clean infor- mation about the grapes, and hyperspectral imaging found the most success in this task.

hyperspectral imaging procedure, with an in-depth look into our exper- imental setup and to the way we perform the reflectance measurements to construct the training sets; Sub-Section 2.2 provides a brief theoreti- cal background of the dimensionality reduction methods applied; Sub-Section 2.3 introduces the algorithm chosen to perform regression, the Support Vector Regression (SVR) technique; in Sub-Section 2.4 we discuss our approach to avoid over-fitting and achieve maximum gener- alization capacity via the usage of a cross-validation technique; in Sub-Section 2.5 we give insights about the grape sampling procedure and provide the data sets description to give a better understanding of the data and its high variability; Section 3 presents the results obtained for the prediction of the oenological parameters for each dimensionality reduction technique and for each oenological parameter, alongside a discussion of said results and how they fare when compared to other state-of-the-art publications; Section 4 summarizes our findings and concludes about the work, while also denoting future guidelines for improvement.

An evaluation of the performance of t-SNE and Kernel t-SNE tech- niques for dimensionality reduction was carried out in real-world data of hyperspectral images of wine grape berries. Our study combined these techniques with a machine learning regressor (Support Vector Re- gression) to predict sugar content and pH index values in different vin- tages of wine grape berries, a highly complex problem due to high variability in samples across different vintages and varieties of wine grapes. Our results show that not only t-SNE is a technique suited for di- mensionality reduction tasks (it is normally used for visualization pur- poses only), but it even surpasses the results obtained by PCA for almost every single case study, a very rare achievement since most re- cent dimensionality reduction techniques introduced showcase a strong performance on artificial data sets but fail to replicate it in real-world data, usually falling short of the performance obtained by PCA. Addition- ally, Kernel t-SNE also showed a strong performance, opening the possi- bility of using a t-SNE extension for dimensionality reduction tasks in streaming data or online scenarios.

Gomes, V., Fernandes, A., Faia, A., Melo-Pinto, P., 2014a. Comparison of different approaches for the Prediction of Sugar Content in Whole Port Wine Grape Berries using Hyperspectral Imaging. ENBIS 14: 14th Annual Conference of the European Network for Business and Industrial Statistics, p. 1.

