With the rapid development of electronic communication tech- nologies, it has become easy to access and share information, and as a result, online piracy has spread. Textual information is the most widely used in comparison to images, audio and video. It rep- resents the easiest way to translate speech. It is the main compo- nent of publications and contributes greatly to the educational process. Text-images are no less important than electronic text. They are still in use in official transactions and some authors pub- lish their books as a text-image. However, text-images face some issues related to the protection of intellectual rights and unautho- rized use. Watermarking technology is used to solve these issues.

Text-image watermarking has many challenges and difficulties. The text-image has a little information redundancy for watermark embedding compared to general images. Normal or general images contain a lot of details that can be exploited for watermark inser- tion without notice by the human eye. However, text images have a difference or contrast between the background and the typed text. Simple changes in a text-image can be noticed because it has a clear separation between foreground and background [3].

The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 discusses the related methods towards text-image watermarking. Section 3 presents an overview of the used transforms in the proposed watermarking method. The proposed method is discussed in Sec- tion 4 with its embedding and extraction processes. Section 5 pre- sents the experimental setup. Section 6 reports the experimental results in terms of imperceptibility and robustness. Section 7 con- cludes the paper and highlights the future work.

This window takes three characters each time along the line. The word space is the inter character space which is larger than the maximum space between two characters. This method achieved a high degree of transparency and improved the capacity com- pared to line shifting and word shifting. However, it is not robust against image attacks.

A new word shifting method based on word classification was developed in Ref. [10]. The words are classified depending on its width. A group of adjacent words composes a segment, the seg- ments are classified based on word class information within each segment. The words are shifted left or right to encode the water- mark data. This method has higher imperceptibly than traditional word shifting, since it shifts a small amount using the statistics. However, it consumes more time for calculations.

Kim and Oh [3] inserted the watermark in grayscale text- images using edge direction histograms. They divide the image into sub-blocks, the first three blocks considered as mother blocks. The watermarking is done in the remaining blocks. Each block is used to encode one watermarking bit. The length of diagonal edge directions is modified and then compared to the lengths in mother blocks to extract the watermark. This algorithm is not robust against binarization attack.

A watermarking method for sensitive text-image based on DCT is proposed in Ref. [22]. Linear interpolation of the watermark image and the original image is used to generate the watermarked image. This method uses a scaling parameter to specify the degree of visibility of the watermark. It is robust against compression and noise but weak against geometric attacks except rotation with 45.

The researchers in Ref. [23] proposed watermarking Technique of sensitive text-images based on SVD. The original image is decomposed into three components using SVD. The second compo- nent is interpolated with the watermark image in the watermark embedding process using linear interpolation. This method has good robustness and security. However, the inverse of SVD can result in information loss unlike to the inverse of DCT [22].

The embedding and extraction processes of the proposed method are simple. IWT is applied to the cover image. Then, DCT is performed to the LL sub-band. The watermark image is embed- ded in the low to medium DCT coefficients. Inverse DCT followed by Inverse IWT to get the watermarked image.

For the extraction process, IWT is applied to the cover and watermarked images. Then, DCT is performed to the LL sub-band of both the cover and watermarked images. The watermark image is extracted by comparing the DCT coefficients from the cover and watermarked images.

The proposed method overcomes DWT-DFT [20] and DWT-DCT [21]. As known watermarking in DCT domain withstands compres- sion attack. DCT [22] has a very good robustness against compres- sion, but our proposed method improved the robustness against noise. The proposed method compared to SVD [23] has a higher robustness against compression and noise. But the main drawback is in case of rotation attack.

