Previously applied to natural images and microscopy data among others, in this paper we investigate the adaptation of the N2V workflow to handle the highly oscillatory nature of seismic signal and pseudo- random noise. Through an extensive hyper-parameter analysis, we further identify the optimum hyper-parameters for the seismic denoising scenario considering both immediate improvements in the image domain and those observed for down-the-line tasks, such as seismic inversion. The paper concludes by illustrating the potential of N2V through an application to a field dataset.

times the preferred choice for seismic deep learning applications. In Appendix 1, we provide a mathematical formulation that explains under which circumstances MSE and MAE should be used, respectively. Finally, we also highlight that no theoretical guarantee can be provided in the case of correlated noise. Therefore, we decided to experiment with both loss functions in the following numerical examples.

in the acoustic impedance domain (bottom row) moderately increases. Finally, the batch size is shown to have a limited influence in com- parison to the other hyper-parameters. The optimum hyper-parameter combination is a sum of the ranking of each combination across all three scoring criteria.

training dataset, the clean image will definitely not contain any noise residual. However, generating synthetic data that accurately represent field data is a well-known challenge (Birnie et al., 2020). Therefore, whilst certain steps can be taken to reduce the synthetic-field data gap for DL applications (Alkhalifah et al., 2021), there is no guarantee that a synthetically trained network will be as effective when applied to field data. Recently, Laine et al. (2019) proposed the first blind-spot network procedure that was shown to perform on-par with, and sometimes outperform, supervised denoising approaches for natural images contaminated by independent and identically distributed additive Gaussian noise. Future studies will consider circumstances under which self-supervised networks, of varying architectures and training proced- ures, can outperform supervised networks trained on synthetic seismic data, and vice versa.

The authors thank A. Krull, T.-O. Buchholz, and F. Jug for open- sourcing their TensorFlow implementation of Noise2Void. For com- puter time, this research used the resources of the Supercomputing Laboratory at King Abdullah University of Science Technology (KAUST) in Thuwal, Saudi Arabia.

