Abstract This article describes the basic directions of state policy in the use and implementation of cloud computing. It answers the question about the applica- bility of foreign cloud services for the processing of personal data of citizens of Russia. It describes the systematization of cloud services in Russia and the EU. It defines some specific measures to ensure the protection of personal data using the standards of the EU and Russia.

Of course, the cross-border transfer of data is associated with problems of trans- mission security and the processing of personal data. Experts in the technical sphere claim that it is impossible to ensure the absolute safety of these technologies [2]. Noriswadi Ismail has also written about these problems [18].

Providers of cloud services must address the questions of data security. The technological complexity of security in the cloud means that a virus-infected file from one client can infect other connected and inactive clients. In connection with this, there is the danger of compromised data being stored in the cloud. The responsibility for protection lies with the provider. Users of cloud services need to be sure that the provider uses security tools. The provider of cloud services should allow the user to check the level of protection and should record the actions of all clients who have access to the cloud.

The adoption of this bill should enable a definition of the scope of legal rela- tions, rules and regulations applicable to the parties involved in such relationships. However, it has not yet been introduced into the State Duma for consideration. This is a serious impediment to the further development of relationships in connec- tion with cloud computing in the Russian Federation.

Internet interview with the head of the department of information technologies, communication and information security of the Ministry of Internal Affairs of the Russian Federation, Lieut-Gen of internal service Tyurkin M.L. Development and introduction of modern information technologies in system of the Ministry of Internal Affairs of Russia, The system GARANT Legislation with comments.

