By taking the spindle system of high speed and high precision machining center as the research object, the finite element method is used to make the thermal analysis and the thermal-structure coupling analysis. In this paper, the heat dissipating capability of cooling system of spindle system is simulated and the thermal deformation is predicted. The result of simulation can provide reference for the solid design of spindle system.

The machine tool is affected by many kinds of heat sources in working process and the heat is transferred to the machine tool by different ways. In working process, the heat resources which affect the processing precision can be divided in two categories, the first is internal heat resources and the other is outside heat resources [1, 2]. The practice shows that the internal heat resources are the main reasons which cause the thermal deformation, which include cutting heat and the heat which is caused by internal friction.

The forced convection heat transfer is mainly considered heat transfer type in this paper. The law and effect of heat transfer of different flow pattern of fluid is different, the different empirical formulae are used to calculate the heat transfer coefficient. The Reynolds number (Re) is calculated to judge the flow pattern, then, the empirical formula is selected. Re is regarded as the criterion which can judge the fluid is laminar or turbulence, and it is dimensionless. Re of coolant in sleeve is calculated by as follows [3,4]:

The data acquisition experimental of temperature field and thermal deformation is carried to better understand the change of temperature field and the thermal deformation of spindle in practical situation and verify the reliability of analysis result. The spindle is free running on the rotational speed of 8000r/min and the sampling period is 5 minutes at room temperature. References are cited in the text just by square brackets [7].

In this paper, a high speed and high precision machining center is taken as the research object. The finite element analysis method is adopted to make the thermal analysis and the distribution of temperature field and the thermal deformation are predicted effectively. In the experimental, the data of temperature field and axial error are captured according to the actual processing situation. The results prove the reliability of the finite element analysis which can provide reference for design of spindle system and thermal error compensation.

