disease-prone world, for non-contact biometric authentication devices to aid hygiene and safety, and mitigate the spread of contagious in- fections [1]. Fingerprint biometrics is one of the most widely used forms of recognition for the purposes of identification and authentication due to its convenience, reliability and accuracy but it is also one of the most susceptible agents of transmission for contagious infections [43]. This drawback is especially accentuated, now, in the wake of the recent emergence of the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) [3].

the guides. This was of no concern previously as the focus was to create higher-resolution scanners. With the occurrence of the COVID-19 pandemic, however, the need for well-resolved, robust contactless fingerprint scanners is more germane and urgent in order to, amongst others, help in containing the spread of SARS-CoV-2 without compro- mising on security and safety.

Herein, we outline various efforts implemented towards enhancing the correlation factor of the contactless fingerprint scanner whilst reducing its false positive errors. In addition, the developed device is compared with relevant existing technologies to highlight its unique and innovative features. The major contributions of the proposed method include achieving actual contactless fingerprint scans with precision, enhanced correlation factors; derived from the high-precision finger- print acquisition process, and an effective, efficient and convenient fingerprinting architectural technique.

identify the different fingers, just like the traditional fingerprint scan- ners. The images were stored and processed using image recognition algorithms similar to the ones used in face recognition. Each image file was converted into a binary file, which was then analyzed pixel by pixel. Whenever a finger is scanned, the system searches the database for a match. The more the samples of a particular fingerprint stored, the better and more robust the results of the scan.

Cognizant of the reports that white light and other longer wave- length radiations are absorbed by the epidermal layer of the skin [40, 41], white light was substituted with blue light (500 nm), which is less absorbed by the skin, and its impact on correlation factor was assessed. A corollary is that the blue illuminating light enhanced the correlation factors of the fingerprint images, with the highest value at 97.51%. The

The high-precision contactless fingerprint biometric scanner devel- oped in this project overcomes the challenge of positioning the target finger at a fixed point during scanning, without contact. Previous technologies implemented finger placement guides to achieve the alignment of the target finger at a fixed position but with the possibility of the finger touching the placement guides, leading to the spread of contagious infections. Other unconstrained acquisition setups are faced with problems of motion blur and inconstant fingerprint image resolu- tions [37,38]. Herein, two infrared-proximity sensors have been deployed with an electronic logic-controlled microcontroller to achieve the non-touch alignment of the target finger in a fixed constant position away from the camera.

