For providing the government with effective monitoring of the trends of the economic variables in the future and good reference for developing a reasonable policy, in this paper, we establish a time series model on China's Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) by using wavelet analysis and intervention analysis and time series analysis and predict the trend of FDI in the next several years. This model eliminates the interference of noise for predicting by using wavelet analysis, and describes the autocorrelation and time-varying volatility of the financial time series by using ARIMA- GARCH-M model. The simulation results show that this model explains the dynamic structure of China's FDI trends well.

important way to acquire advanced technology and knowledge. The government can not only make the problems of insufficient funds in the economic construction slow down, but also bring technology and talent flow and promote that our national economy develop sustaining, rapidly and healthily through the introduction of FDI benignly. Therefore, it has important reference value and practical significance to study the FDI quantitative rule, predict accurately, calculation and control the risk, to achieve the maximum benefit.

Jing Ma, Guoqing Zhao,2009 find that there is not chaotic attractors in China's FDI by logistic model[1], then China's FDI is not a certain chaos system. Chunlin Li, Huiyan Wang ,2011consider the financial crisis in Asia effects on Hebei province, they set up the Intervention-ARIMA model[2].Since the data of FDI is very small, it's difficult to identify ARCH effect. The study of FDI nonlinear model is very difficult. On the basis of the previous linear research[3]-[7],we can study the nonlinear and time-varying of fluctuation for forecasting the development of FDI in the future.

Based on the deeply study of ARIMA-ARCH model, intervention model and wavelet theory, we can eliminate the interference of random fluctuations and noise for prediction by the advantages of wavelet analysis in eliminating the noise. We can eliminate the interference of emergencies for prediction by using intervention model. In order to test the effectiveness of improved algorithm, we establish a dynamic model on China's FDI. We demonstrate the effectiveness of the model by analyzing the example of China's FDI trends.

Select the data of China's FDI from1985 to 1997, wavelet threshold de-noising method is used for decomposition and reconstruction of the signal with noise. To eliminate the noise, we limit the threshold for the wavelet coefficients after decomposition. Specific steps include wavelet decomposition, threshold processing and the reconstruction technology for the signal.

Because of the time limit, this paper only analyzes the actual changes of FDI. In fact, a lot of series may be changed by other series. FDI is influenced by the foreign trade structure and so on. If we can put them into the research scope, then we can predict the trend of FDI more accurately. So the research focus is multivariate time series analysis in future.

