cooperative migration, and fatality. The effectiveness of WGA for finding the global optimal solutions of high- dimensional optimization problems is compared with that of other methods reported in the previous literature. Experimental results show that the proposed WGA has an efficient performance in solving a range of large-scale optimization problems, making it highly competitive among other large-scale optimization algorithms despite its simpler structure and easier implementation. The source code of the proposed WGA algorithm is publicly available at github.com/ebrahimakbary/WGA.

test functions and dispersion of its results are less than those of the other algorithms. The comparison between WGA and DECC-D algorithm shows that WGA performs better for 18 out of 20 functions. Nonetheless, for functions F2 and F20, it gives a worse result compared to that of DECC-D. For function F2, the average value of WGA is very close to that obtained from DECC-D algorithm. Furthermore, DECC-D algorithm does not pro- vide a good quality solution for different test functions, for example for

Although DECC-DML algorithm outperforms WGA for five test functions, it has the worst solution for six functions. CBCC1-DG and CBCC2-DG algorithms are more successful than WGA for two and three functions, respectively; however, CBCC1-DG gives the best result for none of the functions and CBCC2-DG yields the best result for only function. DECC- DG algorithm performs better than WGA for 2 out of 20 test functions; however, it gives the worst solution for 4 test functions among all algorithms.

CBCC2-DG, CBCC1-DG and DECC-DG algorithms based on the func- tions of CEC 2008 and CEC 2010. One of the advantages of WGA is that it has only one control parameter, Cr. It is experimentally shown that WGA has better competitive results with respect to other mentioned algo- rithms, and outperforms all other algorithms for most of the test func- tions. Furthermore, WGA is a simple and basic algorithm for large-scale optimization which can be used for various real-world optimization problems. In recent years, numerous studies have been carried out in the area of high-dimension optimization, the most of which focused on cooperative co-evolution technique. In future, WGA may be embedded into the frameworks of different CC methods with various categories in order to improve its performance. Furthermore, WGA can be used for solving other real-world large-scale optimization problems.

