Continuous increase in the world population together with the sub- stantial environmental issues, namely undesirable weather conditions caused by climate change, have led to a global concern to secure food re- sources such as crops (Godfray et al., 2010). The prediction of crop yield has a direct impact on national and international economies and plays a crucial role in food management all around the world. Therefore, it is very important to assist farmers and food industries with accurate models to predict crop productivity. This will help them to assess their current situation in terms of productivity and efficiency, and identify possible enhancements such as improving soil quality or choosing high-performance crop breeds. Furthermore, managers can utilize such prediction models in their decision making process related to agronomy and crop choice policies to minimize losses when undesir- able environmental conditions like drought and pest problems occur (Aubry et al., 1998).

Withadvancementsincomputational technologyand data collection, an essential need of developing novel models for yield prediction has emerged. To this end, researchers have presented various yield predic- tion modelsincludingtraditionalmachinelearningalgorithms, datamin- ing methods and deep neural network models (Liakos et al., 2018; Chlingaryan et al., 2018; Vlontzos and Pardalos, 2017; Mucherino et al., 2009; Papajorgji et al., 2006). In recent years, deep-learning based models have been widely used in crop yield prediction. These techniques can model complex inputs with complicated interactions. You et al. (2017) introduced a deep Gaussian process framework to predict crop yield based on remote sensing data. In this study, relevant features from rawdatawere effectivelyextracted usinga novel dimensionalityre- duction method. Elavarasan and Vincent (2020) proposed a recurrent neural network deep learning algorithm over the Q-learning reinforce- ment learning algorithm to predict yield. Based on their experiments, this approach can predict yield with an accuracy of 93.7% using environ- mental, soil, water and crop parameters. In another study, a deep convolutional neural network model was developed to extract key fea- tures from normalized difference vegetation index (NDVI) and RGB data to predict yield (Nevavuori et al., 2019).

Corn hybrids and their performance evaluation have also been a topic of interest in this field. During the last few decades corn (also called maize) has become an important product among crops (Burchfield and Schumacher, 2020). Besides the diverse usage of corn in the food industry, it is also used for making animal food, bio-fuel and other industrial products (Chavas and Mitchell, 2018). Due to the increasing demand of corn, farmers are seeking new ways to improve their productivity. Hybrids are new seeds created by crossing two par- ents together in order to obtain a potentially stronger and more produc- tive seed (Crow, 1998) which might lead to higher corn yield. They are shown to incorporate favorable qualitative traits and be adapted to dif- ferent conditions. An important feature of hybrids is their higher toler- ance to drought compared to natural breeds (Crow, 1998). Identifying the hybrids with maximum predicted yield has always been a challeng- ing problem in agriculture. Several empirical breeding programs were developed to explore the impact of the breeding on crop yield and resistance to diseases and environmental factors like temperature and water loss (Duvick et al., 2004). In these programs, outstanding hybrids from inbred lines are selected. Results obtained from breeding programs can provide farmers and managers options to manage crops and pick the best strategy for planting schedules (Cooper et al., 2014). In breed- ing programs, hybrid performance is evaluated from extensive yield tri- als that are costly and time consuming (Lanza et al., 1997). While this process traditionally used to be done only by trial and error, breeders are now exploiting data analysis techniques to predict hybrids yield ac- curately prior to field evaluation. Therefore, there is a remarkable de- mand for new approaches to predict the performance of hybrids.

dict crop yield for new corn hybrids using the data provided by 2020 Syngenta crop challenge. In this challenge, participants were provided a dataset containing the yield for 199,476 combinations of inbred and tes- ters which are grown in 280 different locations within years 2016 to 2018. We first perform a data processing on the provided dataset to do feature selection. We then apply different algorithms including deci- sion tree (Safavian and Landgrebe, 1991), gradient boosting machine (GBM) (Friedman, 2002), random forest (Svetnik et al., 2003; Breiman, 2001), adaptive boosting (Adaboost) (Freund and Schapire, 1997), extreme gradient boosting (XGBoost) (Chen and Guestrin, 2016) and neural network (Liu et al., 2017; Sze et al., 2017) on the data and evaluate their performance. We select the best model among them and utilize it to predict yield for new combinations.

This study was performed as a part of the 2020 Syngenta Crop Chal- lenge, which focuses on estimating yield performance of the cross be- tween inbred and tester combinations to identify the best parent combinations. The participants were given a dataset containing the ob- served yield for 199,476 corn hybrids tested across 280 environments between 2016 and 2018. These hybrids are created through crossing of 593 unique inbreds and 496 unique testers.

We randomly picked 80% of the data as the training and the left 20% as the testing set. This splitting has been repeated 5 times using 5 differ- ent seeds to avoid overfitting. We ran multiple machine learning models including Adaboost, decision tree, random forest, neural network, XGBoost and GBM on the training set and evaluated the models using the testing set. This procedure was performed on 5 different sets of training and testing sets randomly chosen using five different seeds.

After preprocessing the data, we encoded all the data to convert the categorical variables into numbers to have better understanding by ma- chine learning algorithms. In order to find the best encoding method, we performed three methods on the data including one hot encoding, integer encoding and feature hashing encoding (Potdar et al., 2017; Fitkov-Norris et al., 2012; Seger, 2018). In integer encoding, we convert the categorical data into integers. Data encoded using one hot encoding has a binary variable for each category and in feature hashing encoding, a hash function is applied on the data to map them into small finite set of values. The encoding methods were assessed using root mean square error (RMSE) obtained in the testing phase. Yield performance is unitless based on its definition. Therefore, RMSE of the models is unitless, as well. Then, we ran the models on the testing data and picked the one that gave us the lowest RMSE. In the training phase, parameters for the models were tuned to minimize RMSE. The final model was picked based on the lowest RMSE obtained in the testing phase.

that the same cluster would produce higher yield when it is the inbred in a hybrid like clusters 2, 3 and 11 compared to the hybrids where we have these clusters as tester. Clusters 9 and 14 were only used as inbreds in this dataset. This information can give decision makers a rough idea on how to maximize yield by choosing which clusters to play the role of inbred and which cluster to be selected as tester in a hybrid.

In this study, advanced machine learning techniques were applied to create a yield estimation model for corn hybrids. Our proposed ap- proach is unique from other previous prediction models in that encoding step before training the model. Depending on what encoding method is applied, the performance of models can be improved. As shown in the results section, XGBoost model with one-hot encoded data outperformed the other models.

due to the regularization used in XGBoost model, this algorithm can control overfitting which leads to higher performance (Nielsen, 2016). This model has been widely used in different fields such as agriculture, healthcare and finance (Ogunleye and Wang, 2019; Torlay et al., 2017; Nobre and Neves, 2019). In our study XGBoost has shown to have the best performance compared to other models. Same result was obtained in several studies. Qin et al. (2018) proposed an XGBoost model to pre- dict corn economic optimal nitrogen rate and this model outperformed ridge regression and LASSO in specific time windows of their study. In another study, XGBoost algorithm exhibited higher accuracy compared to random forest in predicting soybean yield using data acquired by un- named aircraft system (UAS) (Herrero-Huerta et al., 2020).

The proposed model can be used by managers or farmers to maxi- mize yield by selecting the best hybrid. This machine learning tool can be beneficial to the decision makers in two ways. First, since we only used 4% of the possible hybrids to develop the model, it will help them to lower cost by decreasing the number of hybrid breeding trials. Second, the whole breeding process is not time-consuming anymore because there is no need to wait for the results from field trials. This in- formation can be obtained from the model in seconds.

For the future work, we firstly suggest to define a new criterion for inbreds and testers clustering. In the current study, inbreds and testers were merely clustered based on the genetic features. Thus, further re- search could address novel clustering approaches that might be more informative for yield prediction. Secondly, to attain a more accurate pre- diction model, we could include new features in the dataset. Crop pro- duction environment consists of numerous factors such as pests, diseases and human activities which can cause substantial variations in the crop yield. Although we showed that the variables year and loca- tion do not have any significant impact on the yield performance, this conclusion might have been obtained because of the counteraction be- tween some factors which are not provided in the dataset. Therefore, in- cluding further factors to the study could improve the performance of the models.

This paper presents an application of machine learning algorithms in agricultural data analysis. We implemented various methods on the dataset provided in the 2020 Syngenta crop challenge in order to esti- mate the performance of new corn hybrids using available tested hy- brids. The results in the testing phase implied that XGBoost algorithm has a superior performance among all implemented techniques. We next predicted the yield performance of the new combinations of in- breds and testers using our proposed XGBoost model and presented the summary of results. The results demonstrated that more than one third of the new hybrids had indeed a higher yield performance com- pared to the benchmark in the corresponding environment. These hy- brids are identified as potentially more productive seeds. Therefor, our proposed approach can be utilized by decision makers in breeding pro- grams to select outstanding hybrids from inbred lines only by using a sample of tested hybrids. Using machine learning tools such as the model developed in this study can lead to higher yield and lower cost in agricultural industry.

