Array 14 (2022) 100170










5G radio access networks: A survey
Vuyo S. Pana, Oluwaseyi P. Babalola ∗, Vipin Balyan
Department of Electrical, Electronics and Computer Science Engineering, Cape Peninsula University of Technology, Bellville, 7537, South Africa


A R T I C L E  I N F O	A B S T R A C T

	

Keywords:
5G CRAN FRAN HCRAN
The fifth generation (5G) technology improves the user experience and creates new possibilities for a variety of applications, including transportation, device-to-device communication, agriculture, and manufacturing. These new use-cases significantly increase the number of users, volume of traffic, throughput, and latency. Hence, there is a need to modify the radio access network (RAN) for the 5G system. This study investigates the various RAN architectures such as cloud-RAN (CRAN), heterogeneous cloud-RAN (HCRAN), and fog-RAN (FRAN). The architectures are examined in a variety of contexts, including system efficiency, spectrum and energy efficiency, fronthaul capacity, latency, resource sharing and allocation, and so on. Also, current issues with these architectures are highlighted, as well as some existing remedies.





Introduction

The COVID-19 pandemic has produced a significant influence on the global digital landscape. To halt the virus from spreading, some mea- sures such as social isolation and lockdown have been implemented, emphasizing the necessity of an effective and inclusive digital economy, facilitated by increasing access to reliable, and suitable broadband for socioeconomic well-being. The fifth generation (5G) technology is a major component of the Fourth Industrial Revolution (4IR), which supports the use of integrated spectrum with traditional technologies. Unlike past generations of mobile networks, 5G aims at delivering enhanced mobile broadband (eMBB), massive machine-type commu- nication (mMTC), and ultra-reliable and low-latency communication (uRLLC). Hence, 5G can be used for a variety of applications, including healthcare, automotive, entertainment, internet of things (IoT), and industrial internet of things (IIoT) applications that require ultra-low latency for maximum performance.
Moreover, the demand for internet resources increases at an ex- ponential rate and thus, poses resource constraints and management challenges for the 5G networks. For instance, the industry revenue for
IoT between 2017 and 2019 has increased from 100 to 212 billion
dollars, with growth expected to reach 1.6 trillion dollars by 2025 [1].
According to IDC [2], about 50 billion of connected devices would be in use globally by 2030, yielding a vast network of linked devices en- compassing anything from vehicles to smartphones, home appliances, and so on. Therefore, different designs and technological advances have been suggested in the literature, particularly in the area of Radio Access Network (RAN) for 5G networks. These designs are to meet the growing capacity needs, reduce Capital Expenditure (CAPEX) and
Operational Expenditure (OPEX) networks, provide ultra low latency and higher bandwidth to multiple end-users, and integrate the existing technologies.
Cloud radio access network (CRAN) is an architecture that utilizes cloud computing to achieve the 5G objectives [3]. Moreover, issues such as security, and fronthaul and a centralized baseband unit (BBU) pool constraint reduce the CRAN capabilities. The centralized BBU processing is required to have fronthaul links with high bandwidth and ultra low latency in CRAN. However, the capacity of a link is usually limited and time-delayed in real-time applications. Thus, reducing the spectral and energy efficiency of the CRAN.
A heterogeneous CRAN (HCRAN), which separates the user plane is separated from the control plane was introduced in [4] to resolve the CRAN fronthaul issues. Uninterrupted coverage and other control plane duties are offered by high power nodes (HPNs), which are linked to the BBU pool through the backhaul to manage interference. On the other hand, user plane high-speed data transmission are provided using remote radio heads (RRHs). Nevertheless, real-time implementation of HCRANs remains an issue. The fronthaul links connecting RRHs and the centralized BBU pool increases, having several redundant traffic data due to the increased use of location-aware social applications and thus, the fronthaul burden of HCRAN increases. Edge devices such as RRHs and intelligent user equipments (UEs) that are capable of data storage and processing can be used to minimize the BBU pool and fronthaul link limitations. However, the edge devices are inadequately utilized during low-traffic periods, leading to a rise in the CAPEX/OPEX costs. Fog radio access networks (FRAN) is one of the recent technologies that has swiftly emerged in short time. The technology offers opportu- nities for low-latency service in 5G by bring computing resources from

∗ Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: vuyopana@gmail.com (V.S. Pana), seyi852002@gmail.com (O.P. Babalola), vipin.balyan@rediffmail.com (V. Balyan).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.array.2022.100170 Received 7 April 2022; Accepted 19 April 2022
Available online 26 April 2022
2590-0056/© 2022 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by- nc-nd/4.0/).



BBU pool to the edge of the network. The FRAN handles the limitations of Cloud radio access network (CRAN) and Heterogeneous Cloud radio access network (HCRAN) with distinctive features of high mobility, enhanced radio resource allocation, enhanced service quality, and low latency [5]. However, there are still challenges with implementing the FRAN architecture in 5G networks, such as optimal resource alloca- tion, ultra-low-latency, spectrum and energy efficiency, among others. Hence, a need to develop an enhanced resource management scheme for 5G Fog-RANs (5G FRAN). This is to minimize the IoT devices challenges while satisfying the industrial requirements.
In this article, an extensive comparative study of the different 5G- RAN architectures, that is, CRAN, HCRAN, and FRAN is presented. The survey aims at studying these RAN architectures from various perspectives such as energy and spectrum usage, CAPEX/OPEX, system level performance, and so on to provide enhanced user’s quality of experience (QoE) and satisfy vertical industrial requirements.
The rest of this article is structured as follows. Section 2 introduces the basics of the 5G system, key milestones and Standard Development Organisations (SDOs). Section 3 discusses the 5G radio access network (5G RAN) architectures and limitations. Finally, Section 4 concludes with the key contributions and future work.

5G mobile communication

The 5G mobile communications has created a significant impact on the society and industry. 5G allows for significant higher peak data rates, available almost anywhere and at any time, compared to previous cellular generations. Although, mobile broadband services are widely available today, 5G enables the next level of human connectivity and human to everything interaction, such as widespread use of virtual or augmented reality, free viewpoint video, and telepresence [6–8].
To enhance the 5G capabilities three major service types; eMBB, mMTC, and uRLLC, were proposed in the Mobile and wireless com- munications Enablers for Twenty-twenty (2020) Information Society (METIS) project [9]. The eMBB utilizes 5G as a progression from 4G LTE mobile broadband service, with faster connections, higher throughput, and more capacity. Thus, benefitting areas with high traffic such as cities, stadiums, and so on. On the other hand, uRLLC is considered as using the network for mission critical applications, that is, services that require uninterrupted and robust data transfer. In this case, short packet data transmission is used to satisfy the reliable and latency wireless communication networks. Moreover, mMTC is expected to be used for connecting many devices, especially the numerous connected IoT devices. These applications were further endorsed by Interna- tional Telecommunication Union Radiocommunication Sector (ITU-R) Working Party 5D (WP5D) such that only eMBB was deployed in 2020. Recently, ITU-R produced a new recommendation known as Interna- tional Mobile Telecommunications (IMT) ‘‘IMT Vision Framework and overall objectives of future development for 2020 and beyond’’ [10, 11]. Subsequently, standardization organizations such as 3rd Genera- tion Partnership Project (3GPP), Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE), and others transformed the ITU’s objective to 5G stan- dards. Moreover, other Standards Developing Organizations (SDOs) and industrial forums continue to develop competitive or complementary technologies to the 3GPP standards such as Broadband Forum (BBF), Open Radio Access Network (O-RAN), Small Cell Forum, etc. [12–15].
5G radio access network architecture

Radio access network (RAN) is the most critical component of a mobile network. This is evident during the deployment phase, which is followed by the operational complexity, and cost. The RAN is a collection of interconnected base stations that are linked to the core network and provide coverage in a specific area based on radio access technologies (RATs). The traditional mobile networks depend on a distributed RAN architecture such that a single RRH is linked to a
single and specific baseband unit (BBU). For instance, the RRH located on the tower’s pole is linked to the BBU located at the tower’s base using a common public radio interface (CPRI) or coax cable link. This one-to-one RRH-BBU design is neither cost nor energy-efficient. Thus, a need to evolve traditional RANs for diverse service requirements for the exponential growth in the number of connected devices and increasing data rates for the 5G standards. Despite improvements on the conventional distributed RANs, the architecture could not satisfy the requirements of 5G; therefore, the disruptive concept of a cloud RAN (CRAN) was presented in [16–18].

Cloud radio access network (CRAN)

The CRAN is a 5G mobile architecture that emerged from existing traffic patterns and technological developments. CRAN is based on centralized processing, collaborative radio, and real-time cloud infras- tructure, that is, splitting the BBU pool and RRHs of the base stations (BS) to create a centralized pool as shown in Fig. 1. The centralized BBU has enhanced computation through virtualization and cloud computing technologies. The CRAN design aims to minimize the number of BS and reduce energy consumption in the network. More so, the CRAN utilizes collaboration and virtualization technology to enable dynamic resource allocation, enhanced spectrum efficiency, high bandwidth utilization, flexibility in design and operational efficiency.
The key concept of CRAN splitting the BS into BBU and RRH. The BBUs are responsible for intensive baseband signal processing activities, while RRHs are responsible for light computational tasks such as signal modulation and amplification [19]. This also disrupts the direct link between BBU and RRH, so that each RRH is dynamically allocated to the BBU pool. In [20], RRH sends and receives signals using a virtual BBU, while the virtual BS’s processing capacity was enhanced based on the allocated processors in the real-time virtual allocation BBU pool.

Benefits of CRAN
Some important benefits of CRAN over the conventional RAN are discussed as follow.
Enhanced Energy and Spectral Efficiency
Unlike the traditional RAN, CRAN utilizes less numbers of BBUs, yielding significant reduction in power consumption [21,22]. Also, radio modules do not require a lot of site supporting equip- ments such as air conditioning since the RRHs can be naturally cooled by hanging on mast or building walls. Additionally, CRAN enables computational offloading of energy consuming data com- putations from UEs and BSs to a nearby cloud; thus saving their energy. Besides, the introduction of cooperative radio technol- ogy helps to reduce the distance between RRHs and UE, which minimizes interference among RRHs while decreasing compu- tation of energy in 5G network. As part of the related studies on increasing spectrum efficiency by deploying the CRAN, [23] considered the advantages and disadvantages of using licensed and unlicensed spectrum of different technologies for the fron- thaul of 5G-CRAN. More so, a coordinated and cooperative trans- mission technique for improved SE, such as enhanced inter-cell interference coordinated (eICIC) and coordinated multiple point transmission (CoIMP) over the RRHs, connected to the same cloud was investigated by [20,24].
Reduced CAPEX/OPEX
Mobile network operators (MNOs) can reduce CAPEX and OPEX of 5G-CRAN by virtualizing baseband processes in the cloud platform. The CRAN architecture requires low cost RRH spatial- time deployment, installation, and operation. In [25], the cost of deploying BSs, transport networks, and data center was examined based on several processes in the spatial domain. The analysis showed that CRANs can reduce CAPEX up to 15% based on the costs of BSs and the combination of backhaul methods for




/ig. 1. 5G CRAN Architecture.


linking BSs with data centers. Likewise, a two-phase framework that finds optimal BS clustering scheme in CRAN was proposed in [26]. The framework exhibited a 12.88% reduction in the cost
Table 1
5G CRAN benefits.


Benefits	Achievements	References



of deployment. In [27], the cost for BBU hotelling strategies: BBU stacking, BBU pooling, and CRAN BBU was modeled and the performance were compared. In [28], a network planning and provisioning framework was proposed to optimize the cost of deployment in CRAN. The framework utilized a mixed inte- ger quadratic constrained programming (MIQCP) method, which maximizes the cost of deploying a virtualized 5G service chain.
Enhanced Mobility Management
An important benefit of BBU pooling is that it allows for dynamic allocation of BBU resources to RRHs for load balancing mobile traffic between the BBU pools. The load balancing capacity in the distributed BBU pool makes CRAN appropriate for dynamic distributed traffic. Despite that the serving RRH changes contin- ually with respect to UE movement, the serving BBU remains in
Enhanced energy and spectral efficiency

Reduced CAPEX/OPEX

High flexibility and performance

Enhanced mobility management
BBU pool reduces the number of physical equipment. No cooling needed. Use of licensed and unlicensed bands.
BBU pool reduces the numbers of site locations. RRU reduces site footprints. Low maintenance cost.
Improvement in the Backhaul transmission (fiber or high capacity microwave)
BBU pool enhances handover coordination
[20–24]




[25–28]



[31,32]



[29,30]

the same pool since the BBU’s coverage is greater than that of a typical BS. As a result, UE-generated non-uniformly dispersed traffic can be routed through a virtual BS within the same BBU pool; thus, aiding the MNOs with mobility management. In [29], location based algorithms were presented for tower clustering, and BBU cluster categorization using mobility and traffic patterns prediction in the CRAN. There are several other benefits that the CRAN offers to 5G mobile communication system, which are discussed in detail in [30].
Table 1 summarizes some major benefits of CRAN in the 5G systems.

Challenges of CRAN
Apart from the benefits that CRAN contributes to 5G systems, there are still some limitations, which include:
Security
CRAN security issue has attracted concern since cyber-attacks are constantly on the rise. In addition to common security threats of traditional wireless networks such as primary user emulation attack (PUEA), CRAN faces more security threats, such as eaves- dropping and jamming, media access control (MAC) spoofing,
IP spoofing and hijacking, transmission control protocol (TCP) flooding attacks, and file transfer protocol (FTP) attacks [33]. CRAN security threats and mitigations have been investigated in studies such as [3,33–35].
/ronthaul Link Capacity
As the BBUs of multiple BSs are migrated to the cloud, it is possi- ble that if the cloud fails, the entire network will be rendered in- operative. Fronthaul links provide a seamless connection between RRHs and BBU pool (centralized pool), while backhaul links offer a connection between BBUs and the core mobile network. Despite the benefits of CRAN, it still has performance due to fronthaul and backhaul link capacity constraints. Several studies on fronthaul compression have been conducted to address fronthaul issues relating to capacity for downlink and uplink CRAN [36–50]. The techniques aim at effective transmission on the fronthaul links. Two major transmission techniques; data sharing and compres- sion techniques. These techniques depend on whether the joint encoding and precoding of information intended for mobile users is performed at individual BSs (data-sharing technique) or at the centralized BBU (compression technique). Generated signals



from the later are quantized and compressed before being sent to the RRH through fronthaul links [37]. A general form of compression technique was proposed for downlink CRAN in [36]. A finite-capacity fronthaul was developed to connect the BSs to a centralized processor. This method allows the centralized processor to centrally encode signals that will be broadcast by the BSs using the fronthaul links in a cooperative manner. In [37], a combined data-sharing and compression solution for downlink CRAN was introduced, allowing for better control over fron- thaul/backhaul capacity usage. Moreover, the issue of jointly optimizing digital baseband beamforming and fronthaul com- pression techniques at the BBU alongside RF beamforming at the RRHs was studied in [39]. This joint design of fronthauling and hybrid beamforming ensures that the weighted downlink sum-rate and network energy efficiency of the CRAN system is maximized. A standard point-to-point fronthaul compression method was studied in [47], while several multivariate fronthaul was investigated in [48,49].
For uplink CRAN, [40,41] considered a joint fronthaul compres- sion and transmit beamforming design for multi-antenna users. The users communicated with the centralized processor using multi-antenna BSs. The BSs were connected to the central proces- sor through limited capacity digital fronthaul links. The authors in [40] investigated two different fronthaul compression tech- niques; single-user compression (point-to-point compression) and Wyner–Ziv coding for CRAN. They further proposed an opti- mization strategy for noise covariance matrix quantization. Each BS utilizes vector quantization to compress the received sig- nals across different BSs in single-user compression. However, Wyner–Ziv coding fully uses the correlation of the received signals to achieve enhanced compression efficiency; thus, obtaining an improved overall performance. The joint design of CRAN with wireless fronthaul link and OFDMA access link was investigated in [44,50]. Moreover, the wireless fronthaul link used to com- municate between multi-antenna RRHs and multi-antenna BBU pool was enhanced based on Intelligent reflecting surface in [41]. Each received signal at individual RRH was compressed using Wyner–Ziv coding. An adaptive compression method was pro- posed in [42] to minimize the fronthaul transmission rate; thus, maximizing the compression efficiency. Further in [43], fronthaul compression was performed at the RRH to transmit baseband signal over the fronthaul link to the centralized unit. The algo- rithm utilized the Charnes–Cooper transformation and Difference of Convex approach to optimize the power spectral density of quantization noise at the RRHs.

Heterogeneous Cloud Radio Access Network (HCRAN)

The need for dense 5G RANs has led to the concept of Heteroge- neous Cloud RAN (HCRAN). The HCRAN is a cost efficient solution that utilizes the combination of heterogeneous networks (HetNets) and cloud computing as shown in Fig. 2. The HCRAN design in [4,51] incorporated different cells such as macro BSs, that is, the HPNs, micro BSs and RRHs. The macro BSs provide network control, mobility man- agement, and system performance enhancement. On the other hand, micro BSs and RRHs improve capacity of the system and lower the power of transmission. The RRHs enable signal processing and radio frequency functions, whereas the BBU pool incorporates other physical processing functions of the baseband that are associated with the upper layers. Also, all physical and network layer functions are available in the HPNs. The HPNs send system broadcasting data and control signaling to the UEs, resulting to an improved fronthaul link capacity and reduced time delay in the HCRAN. Some benefits of HCRAN in 5G systems are discussed as follows.
Benefits of HCRAN
Several studies have been conducted on HCRAN presenting diverse perspectives such as energy efficiency, spectrum efficiency, resource al- location, cost management and load balancing, mobility management, performance enhancement and so on. This is because HCRAN exploits full advantage of the HetNets and cloud computing capabilities in the 5G system.
Enhanced Energy and Spectral Efficiency
The integration of HetNets with CRANs allows for the imple- mentation of novel strategies for efficient energy and spectrum utilization. The cloud computing-based coordinated multipoint (CC CoMP) system described in [52] is an example of coordinated transmission and reception. This CC-CoMP enabled HCRAN is similar to a large distributed MIMO system in which femto, pico, and macro cells are essentially RRHs connected to a centralized baseband processing center where signals are combined. The joint processing in HCRANs becomes possible and economically practical by removing the rigorous backhaul and synchronization requirements among dispersed cells. The use of joint transmission coordinated multipoint (CoMP) transmission to mitigate inter- cell-interference was adopted in [53] to enhance spectral effi- ciency for cell edge users in NOMA based network. Moreover, in [4], the coverage area for HCRAN was carefully designed to enhance spectral efficiency by significantly shortening the com- municating distance between serving RRH and desired mobile terminals.
Resource Sharing and Allocation
Resource sharing for HCRANs has been classified to three cate- gories: spectrum sharing [54,55], infrastructure sharing [56,57], and network sharing [58,59]. The spectrum and infrastructure resources can be further divided to sharing entities, network slices, and logical connections [60]. A sharing entity represents a collection of accessible resources, such as a base station, a network of interconnected base stations, or a component of a base station. The allocation of available resources among two or more sharing entities is known as network slices. Whereas, at the network level, the HCRAN’s spectrum and infrastructure are categorized to network slices based on parameters such as throughput and processing. In HCRAN, each of these steps allow for resource sharing benefits such as a dynamic pool of spectral resources, improved infrastructure coverage, and virtual networks suited to a certain service class.
Enhanced Mobility Management
The separate plane design of HCRAN enhances user mobility in 5G systems. Therefore, a cell outage management (COM) technique for HetNets with separated management and data BS layers was presented in [61]. The management BSs were used for control information transmission and user mobility while the data BSs were used to manage user data. Moreover, a cooperative cell outage detection (COD) approach for pico cells in conventional HetNet was proposed in [62]. Also, [63] adopted the COD and cell outage compensation (COC) algorithms for microcell and macro- cell failures identification and mitigation in HetNet respectively. In highly densed HCRAN, the authors in [64] proposed a scheme for user equipments to directly select the cell with the highest priority in terms of cell features, mobile equipment, mobility features, and application features.
Enhanced Performance
System performance in HCRAN has been enhanced due to the central cloud computing controlling functionality, where various node entities interface. The HCRAN design in [4,51] separated the control and user planes to increase CRAN’s functionality and ef- ficiency. As a result, the spectrum and energy efficiency of CRAN may be considerably improved under HCRAN design. In [52], two separate HCRAN architectures with different sizes of cell




/ig. 2. HCRAN Architecture.


Table 2
5G HCRAN benefits.
Benefits	Achievements	References
of the system. Moreover, a radio resource management scheme based on non-orthogonal multiple access (NOMA) was presented to maximize the energy efficiency of HCRAN in [66]. The authors

Enhanced energy and spectral efficiency

Resource sharing and allocation


Enhanced mobility management
Mitigates against
inter-cell-interference and enhances spectral efficiency for cell edge users
Enables network slices and dynamic pool of spectral resources. Improves infrastructure coverage
Flexible design allows for easy handover management.
[4,52,53]




[54–60]




[61–64]
designed the network energy efficiency maximization problem as a mixed integer non-linear programming problem (MLNLP). In the approach, users accessed the network services using non- orthogonal resources, which improves the system’s overall energy usage. Additionally, a pre-coding method was introduced to en- hance energy usage of the HCRAN network in [67]. The scheme explored a macro/femto HetNet such that a high remote radio head (HRRH) represented the macro base stations (MBSs) while a low remote radio head (LRRH) represented the femto BS. As com- pared to the conventional HetNet without CRAN, the approach exhibited an increased throughput while utilizing low energy.
Backhaul Load Balancing

was introduced. For a single cloud, wireless or optical backhaul links were used to connect the cloud to BSs from different layers. On the other hand, multiple clouds were connected using hybrid backhauling to a group of BSs. Moreover, a design that separates the HCRAN operation into unique layers; infrastructure, control, and application layers was proposed in [65]. The design incorpo- rates massive MIMO (mMIMO) to enable broadband transmission. This method improves the scalability and flexibility of the system since RRHs become smaller and complex computations could be performed and managed by the BBU pool obtained by the mMIMO.
Table 2 summarizes some major benefits of HCRAN in 5G systems.

Challenges of HCRAN
Despite the above-mentioned advantages of heterogeneous net- works and cloud computing in 5G systems, HCRAN has several limi- tations, which are detailed below and summarized in Table 3.
Energy Consumption
In HCRAN, ultra dense deployment of RRHs and micro BSs had been deployed to improve capacity while increasing energy usage
As cellular communication networks evolve to dense and dynamic HetNets, an increasing high volume of data transmission on the backhaul links between the BBU pool and RRHs is a major setback for the adoption of HCRAN’s centralization [68]. The RRHs are unable to fully exploit existing radio resources in the HCRAN system due to inadequate backhaul capacity. Hence, there is a need to reduce and effectively balance transmission load on the backhaul links. Data compression approaches in the time and frequency domains have been well-studied to solve the HCRAN transmission backhaul issues. These methods enhance the effi- ciency of data compression but increase the complexity of the system. In [69], backhaul workload balancing was suggested as a solution to relieve HCRANs’ backhaul data transmission demand. This approach requires collecting the number of active RRHs in a specific region and designing the area that each RRH is required to service as an optimization problem. However, there still exists the challenge of allocating data transmission among several users to either a macro BS or a RRH. Meanwhile, integrating HCRAN with CoMP transmission in ultra-dense heterogeneous cellular networks has been studied as a viable solution for challenges such as inadequate fronthaul bandwidth and excessive noise. Note



that some literature assumed lossless fronthaul links with infinite capacity, which is unrealistic for real-world capacity-constrained fronthaul links. Consequently, distributed compression techniques
Table 3
5G HCRAN challenges and solutions.


Challenges	Solutions	References



such as distributed Wyner–Ziv compression [70] with joint de- compression and decoding [71] are generally used to enable transmission across capacity-constrained fronthaul links.
Latency
As earlier mentioned, one of the key aim of the 5G system is
Energy consumption

Backhaul load balancing
NOMA based radio resource management scheme. Pre-coding approach
Data compression approach. Integrated HCRAN-CoMP scheme. Distribution compression method
[66,67]



[68–71]

to provide uRLLC services. Given the introduction of HCRANs
to improve network management, resource management, and enhance throughput, other challenges such as achieving com- plete self-organization for ultra-low-latency networks still exist. In [72], end-to-end latency performance was enhanced using re- source scheduling methods. This technique decreases data trans- mission delays at the system’s air interface. Also, an access control policy that improves HCRAN system performance by reducing
Latency	Resource scheduling method.
Access control policy.
Delay-aware centric scheme. Systematic design with open-loop radio access and
information-based resource optimization approach. Dynamic stochastic resource optimization model.
[72–76]

latency in backhaul of wired and wireless networks was intro- duced in [73]. Nevertheless, there still exits considerable delay in data transmission caused by signaling overheads in the air interface. Consequently, a delay-aware centric technique that avoids signaling overhead and enhances latency performance was suggested in [74]. The method utilizes a preemptive network, which combines devices of intelligent mobile machines (IMMs) that use CoMP. The approach was effective since the HCRAN de- sign contains numerous access points (APs) for coverage and high power nodes (HPNs) for broader coverage. Furthermore, [75] discussed a design that lowers three forms of latency: air interface latency, radio resource optimization latency, and routing/paging
Interference mitigation
Interference-conscious user association strategy based on cell sleeping approach. Joint transmission CoMP clustering approach. User weighted probability strategy.
Contract-based interference coordination framework.
Collaborative processing and cooperative radio resource allocation (CRRA) scheme.
[77–81]

procedures latency. The authors utilized a systematic design with unique open-loop radio access to reduce air interface latency. Likewise, an information-based resource optimization was imple- mented to reduce radio resource optimization delay while a social data cache-based routing/paging strategy was used to eliminate the latter type of latency. However, this design is not applicable for heterogeneous carrier communications over the HCRAN and remains as an open issue since the latency performance can be negatively affected by unreliable communication.
Additionally, [76] introduced a dynamic stochastic resource op- timization model to obtain a tradeoff between energy efficiency and queue latency limitation. The approach utilized a simple Lyapunov optimization strategy based on local information at the transmitter. This method addressed the issues of energy efficiency optimization, power consumption of RRHs, and interference lim- itations to achieve near-optimal system stability by minimizing traffic congestion using a weighted minimal mean square er- ror (WMMSE) technique. Thus, yielding a balance between time averaged energy efficiency and queue backlogs.
Interference Mitigation
Interference control is intended to be more efficient in HCRANs compared to a typical HetNets since the centralized operation of CRAN allows collaborative signal processing across the networks and supports coordination between BSs. Moreover, controlling interference in HCRANs may be challenging due to the exten- sive heterogeneity of BSs, network size, and fronthaul/backhaul limitations. As a result, a number of studies have been car- ried out to address the HCRAN interference problem. In [77], an interference-conscious user association strategy based on cell sleeping approach was investigated such that a cloud computing unit was used to manage the operation status of the BSs. A sub- optimal user association problem was introduced to optimize the aggregate user utility as such, a distributed heuristic algorithm was presented as a solution to the problem.
Moreover, a cooperative method that mitigates interference of cell edge users based on joint transmission CoMP clustering approach was introduced in [78]. The authors utilized a pseudo-dynamic clustering method to obtain two clusters of RRHs: measurement
RRHs and coordinated RRHs. The former stores measured RRH data such as the received signal strength indicator (RSSI) and channel state information (CSI), while the latter collects and preprocesses user data. Similarly, [79] described a cooperative interference mitigation system between RRHs and MBSs based on a user weighted probability strategy for separating the spectrum into shared and dedicated portions. The strategy aids in the allocation of individual BS into appropriate spectrum portions based on QoS requirements, as well as the optimization of overall throughput for users at every tier.
Additionally, a contract-based interference coordination frame- work that mitigates inter-tier interference was presented in [80]. The approach categorized the period of downlink transmission into three stages: RRH with all UEs, RRH with individual UEs, RRH-MBS with separate UEs, according to three scheduling meth- ods. The MBS, which acts as a decision agent, receives a contract request from the BBU pool of all RRHs (principal) and decides to accept or reject the contract based on a logical constraint. Given that both the principal and the agent have perfect CSI, an optimal contract design for rate-based utility maximization was implemented. Also, the study considered optimizing the contract for partial CSI. In [81], a collaborative processing and cooperative radio resource allocation (CRRA) technique was introduced for HCRAN inter-tier interference suppression. The method utilizes interference collaboration (IC) and beamforming (BF) schemes to mitigate inter-tier interference. CRRA optimization models was further developed for the IC and BF schemes to maximize the sum rates of users accessing RRHs based on power allocation.


Fog radio access network (FRAN)

To solve the HCRAN difficulties and provide an enhanced QoS to the users, a new RAN design focusing on fog computing was recently studied in the literature. Based on the benefits of the CRAN and fog computing, fog computing-based RAN (FRAN) design aims to address the issue of rising traffic demands while also improving QoS for end- users. Given the current global demand for IoT end-user solutions,




/ig. 3. 5G FRAN Architecture.


cloud computing is among the most suitable solutions, wherein data generated by IoT devices is stored, processed, managed, and analyzed by remote servers hosted on the internet. It allows organizations to concentrate on their main activities rather than planning, deploying, and maintaining network infrastructure [82]. However, the cloud stor- age approach is faced with issues such as long end-to-end delays, traffic congestion, huge data processing, and connectivity costs. As a result, [83] proposed a fog computing approach to replace the func- tionalities of the remote servers. This approach is used to expand cloud computing to the network edge, allowing for the allocation of a vast amount of computation, storage, communication, control, configura- tion, measurement, and management functions at the mobile network’s edge.
Unlike CRAN that utilizes a centralized content storage architec- ture, [84] classified FRAN to distributed and centralized networks. Some of the BBU’s task, including computing, caching, and resource management, are delegated to the RRHs and UEs in the distributed FRAN. On the other hand, the centralized FRAN makes use of software defined networking (SDN) and network virtualization to support logical centralized control planes, provide improved resource management, and simplified resource sharing.
Several studies [83,85–88] have examined the FRAN architecture and the consequences of major enabling techniques on the network. Fig. 3 shows a typical FRAN system architecture [86]. The FRAN architecture in [86] consists of three layers; terminal, access, and cloud computing layers. Specifically, the fog computing layer contains the fog UEs (F-UEs) and fog access points (F-APs) in the terminal layer and network layer respectively. Nearby F-UEs can interface with one another in the terminal layer using the D2D mode or mobile relay mode. Also, the F-UEs can access high power nodes (HPNs) to receive system signal information. Moreover, the HPNs and F-APs are found in the network access layer. The F-APs process the data received from F-UEs and send it to the cloud computing layer through fronthaul links. On the other hand, the HPNs connect to the BBU pool through the backhaul links. The BBU pool, which are suitable with the HCRAN’s BBU pool and centralized caching are situated in the cloud computing layer. Note that allocating a huge proportion of collaboration radio signal processing (CRSP) and cooperative radio resource management (CRRM) functions to the F-APs and F-UEs reduces the fronthaul and BBU pool load constraints.

Benefits of FRAN
The FRAN technology for 5G mobile communication systems was examined from different contexts in the literature, including system
level efficiency, energy usage, radio resource allocation, caching, ser- vice admission control and so on. An up-to-date survey of the FRAN’s solutions in various contexts are discussed as follows with Table 4 summarizing the benefits.
System Level Efficiency
Several studies have been conducted on the efficiency of the FRAN system. Considering FRAN system with ultra-low applica- tions such as IoT application, a tradeoff between system perfor- mance, computing, and communication costs in the FRAN system was discussed in [87]. The study demonstrates how critical it is to carefully choose these parameters to provide ultra-low latency services. In [89], a hierarchical content caching approach for FRANs was introduced to reduce constraints on the fronthaul capacity and transmit latency. To maximize the use of the central and edge caches in the approach, RRH clusters were created at the BBU pool based on a common centralized cloud, while local content was provided by F-APs. The system’s ergodic rate was derived using stochastic geometry. Moreover, the waiting time and transmit latency were modeled using queueing theory. A system control technique for FRAN was developed utilizing the embedded game model in [90]. To maximize system effi- ciency, the approach considered a cooperative design of spectrum allocation, cache placement, and service admission algorithms. Furthermore, [91] suggested a hybrid cloud and edge processing method to reduce FRAN downlink latency, while channel encod- ing and fronthaul compression methods were employed to reduce fronthaul content delivery delay from the BBU to the requesting UEs. Similarly, in [92], a superposition coding approach that uses the fronthaul links in both hard and soft transfer modes was suggested for the delivery phase design of an arbitrary prefetching scheme. This design was used to generate caches of an enhanced RRH (eRRH) in [93]. In [94], the Markov chain was used to model and identify the impact of mobile social networks on the efficiency of FRAN edge caching. A combined distributed computing and content sharing approach was introduced in [95] to achieve ultra low latency by reducing fronthaul connectivity problems. Moreover, [96] proposed a dynamic resource balancing approach to enhance system reliability in the FRAN.
Spectrum and Energy Efficiency
The FRAN has been proposed in numerous publications as a solution to the CRAN issues and to improve spectral and energy efficiency of the 5G networks. Generally, allowing a single UE to access a specific group of nearby RRHs improves the spectral efficiency of CRANS. These group of surrounding RRHs are often



established using a disjoint clustering method or a user-centric clustering approach such that the cluster generation is dependent on the received power threshold of the reference signal. Although
Table 4
FRAN benefits.


Benefits	Achievements	References



a disjoint clustering approach can reduce inter-cell interference, edge users may experience significant interference from surround- ing clusters. Using the user-centric approach reduces interference between clusters since there are no edge users. Thus, CRAN performs power allocation and dynamical scheduling in addition to the massive CRSP to improve spectrum efficiency. Unlike the CRAN, users can easily access F-APs which with content caching capabilities. In the FRAN system, the distributing cluster is usually decided by the users’ desired cached content and the received power of the reference signal from the F-AP to the UE. Thereafter, the spectral efficiency is improved based on user scheduling and power allocation.
In FRAN, the goal of recent research has been to create a tradeoff
System level efficiency

Spectrum and energy efficiency

Resources allocation
Improved system performance, computing, and communication costs
Improved spectrum and energy performance based on user scheduling and power allocation
Reduced energy costs and enhanced computational resource allocation for a range of user equipment (UE). Minimized transmission power.
[85,96,103]



[87–89,93,94,99,104]



[99–102]

between fronthaul capacity and transmit power. This is because increasing spectral efficiency might put a lot of strain on the fronthaul, having limited data traffic capacity. Therefore, the study in [84] investigated a combined resource allocation and coordinated offloading scheme in a centralized FRAN. The aim was to use the least amount of energy possible to offload all of the UE’s computational activities, taking into account each UE’s delay tolerance, fronthaul and backhaul capacity, and avail- able resource. An energy-saving method was proposed in [85], which considered maximum delay tolerance as well as fronthaul and backhaul capacity limits. For numerous UEs, the method resulted in improved computing resource allocation and effec- tive transmission power allocation. In [97], an evaluation of the multicast FRAN downlink design was performed. In particular, information compression-based (soft) and information-sharing- based (hard) fronthauling were discussed. A storage module with unique bounded signal processing capabilities was assigned to each RRH. As a result, storing in-demand data during non-peak hours improved latency while lowering network energy usage. The challenges and performance of mmWave based FRAN access and fronthaul links were studied in [98]. The study examined energy-efficient power distribution in an orthogonal frequency- division multiple access network to manage interference. The op- timization issue was presented as a nonlinear programming prob- lem to improve the system’s energy efficiency. To find the best solution for energy-efficient power allocation, a gradient-based iteration technique was proposed.
Resources Allocation
The following studies [99–102] have looked on resource alloca- tion for FRAN in a 5G system. In [99], a shared resource alloca- tion and structured computation offloading scheme was proposed to reduce energy costs and enhance computational resource al- location for a range of user equipment (UE). Also, the approach aimed at minimizing the amount of transmission power and the splitting factor delivered to each UE. Furthermore, off-loading options and computational resource allocation were combined to increase the likelihood of UE relocation in [100]. The prob- lem was solved using a mixed integer nonlinear programming (MINLP) approach while a Gini coefficient-based FCNs selec- tion algorithm (GCFSA) was developed to provide a sub-optimal off-loading strategy. In addition, the authors employed a dis- tributed resource optimization approach based on genetic al- gorithm (ROAGA) to solve the computing resource allocation problem. The authors in [101] developed a system control strat- egy and dynamic mode selection for the FRAN system using an embedded game model. Cache placement, spectrum allocation, and service admission algorithms were jointly designed to in- crease the system’s performance. Similarly, [102] presented a joint mode selection and resource allocation approach for device- to-device (D2D) communication. The method improved energy efficiency while considering time and resource reuse constraints.
Challenges of FRAN
The FRAN, like other 5G RAN architectures, is still faced with some major research issues. Edge caching enhances FRAN performance by minimizing traffic congestion at the cloud server and enabling F-UEs to access and acquire content faster. Contrary to centralized caching schemes, the caching capacity of individual F-AP and F-UE is limited in FRAN. Edge caching strategies such as determining which content to cache and when to deliver caches in different edge devices need to be optimized to enhance overall caching performance in FRAN. More so, conventional rules for caching such as least recently and least frequently used, first-in-first-out should be improved to enhance the FRAN cache hit ratio.
Network functions virtualization (NFV) helps to virtualize the SDN controller to host a cloud server in FRAN. Thus, the server may be moved to other positions depending on the network’s demands. Nev- ertheless, virtualizing the SDN controller in 5G F-RAN system remains uncertain. This is because of the characteristic of distribution in edge devices. Furthermore, security and privacy, computational complex- ity, scalability, core operational and maintenance compatibility with existing RAN designs, among other issues, remain unsolved research issues.

Conclusion

5G necessitates a complete rethinking of mobile network design, particularly the RAN architecture, because to the rapidly growing subscriber population, huge connectivity, massive data, and new expec- tations for extremely low latency and higher data rates. A evaluation of the current RAN designs for 5G mobile networks, especially CRAN, HCRAN, and FRAN, was undertaken as a response. The goal was to explore the benefits of CRAN and HCRAN while not disregarding the challenges that each network design encounters. Consequently, current CRAN and HCRAN solutions were investigated. For energy efficiency, fronthaul capacity, latency, and other factors, detailed summaries were supplied in tabular style. In the case of FRAN, a different method was followed, with the focus being on resource categories within the design layers and then an analysis of resource management system.

Declaration of competing interest

The authors declare that they have no known competing finan- cial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

References

Vailshery L. Internet of things (IoT) connected devices worldwide in 2019 and 2030, by technology. Statista Research Department; 2021.
MacGillivray C, Crooka S, Torchia M, Chinta K, Kotagi S, Leung J, et al. Worldwide internet of things forecast update, 2020–2024. IDC Corporate; 2021.
Wu J, Zhang Z, Hong Y, Wen Y. Cloud radio access network (C-RAN): a primer. IEEE Netw 2015;29(1):35–41. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/MNET.2015.7018201.



Peng M, Li Y, Jiang J, Li J, Wang C. Heterogeneous cloud radio access networks: a new perspective for enhancing spectral and energy efficiencies. IEEE Wirel Commun 2014;21(6):126–35. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/MWC.2014.7000980.
Zhang H, Qiu Y, Chu X, Long K. Fog radio access networks: Mobility manage- ment, interference mitigation and resource optimization. IEEE Wirel Commun 2017;24.
Huawei Technologies Co. Virtual reality/augmented reality. 2017, China Academy of Information and Communications Technology (CAICT) URL.
Jang J, Ko Y, Shin WS, Han I. Augmented reality and virtual reality for learning: An examination using an extended technology acceptance model. IEEE Access 2021;9:6798–809.
Doumanoglou A, Griffin D, Serrano J, Zioulis N, Phan TK, Jiménez D, et al. Quality of experience for 3-D immersive media streaming. IEEE Trans Broadcast 2018;64(2):379–91.
Katsutoshi K, Mikael F. Updated scenarios, requirements and KPIs for 5G mobile and wireless system with recommendations for future investigations. Technical report ICT-317669-METIS/D1.5, 2015.
International Telecommunication Union. IMT vision – framework and overall objectives of the future development of IMT for 2020 and beyond M series, mobile, radiodetermination, amateur and related satellite services. Technical report ITU-R M.2083-0, Geneva; 2015.
International Telecommunication Union. Guidelines for evaluation of radio interface technologies for IMT-2020 M series, mobile, radiodetermination, am- ateur and related satellite services. Technical report ITU-R M.2412-0, Geneva; 2017.
Broadband Forum. Cloud central office reference architectural framework. Technical report TR-384 Issue 1, 2018.
Alimi IA, Teixeira AL, Monteiro PP. Toward an efficient C-RAN optical fronthaul for the future networks: A tutorial on technologies, requirements, challenges, and solutions. IEEE Commun Surv Tutor 2018;20(1):708–69.
Association G. 5G implementation guidelines: NSA option 3. 2020, GSM Future Networks.
The Fifth Generation Mobile Communications Promotion Forum. 5GMF white paper ‘‘5G mobile communications systems for 2020 and beyond. 2017, Ver.1.1.
Khatibi S, Caeiro L, Ferreira L, Correia L, Nikaein N. Modelling and implemen- tation of virtual radio resources management for 5G cloud RAN. EURASIP J Wireless Commun Networking 2017;2017. http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/s13638- 017-0908-1.
Pliatsios D, Sarigiannidis P, Goudos S, Karagiannidis G. Realizing 5G vision through cloud RAN: technologies, challenges, and trends. EURASIP J Wireless Commun Networking 2018;2018. http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/s13638-018-1142-
1.
Taleb T, Ksentini A, Sericola B. On service resilience in cloud-native 5G mobile systems. IEEE J Sel Areas Commun 2016;34(3):483–96. http://dx.doi.org/10. 1109/JSAC.2016.2525342.
Awais M, Ahmed A, Ali SA, Naeem M, Ejaz W, Anpalagan A. Resource management in multicloud IoT radio access network. IEEE Internet Things J 2019;6(2):3014–23. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/JIOT.2018.2878511.
Zhang Y, Chen M. Cloud based 5G wireless networks. 2016, http://dx.doi.org/ 10.1007/978-3-319-47343-7.
Khan M, Alhumaima R, Al-raweshidy H. Component and parameterised power model for cloud radio access network. IET Commun 2016;10. http://dx.doi.org/ 10.1049/iet-com.2015.0752.
Bassoli R, Di Renzo M, Granelli F. Analytical energy-efficient planning of 5G cloud radio access network. In: 2017 IEEE international conference on communications. 2017, p. 1–4. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ICC.2017.7996871.
Zhang H, Dong Y, Cheng J, Hossain MJ, Leung VCM. Fronthauling for 5G LTE-U ultra dense cloud small cell networks. IEEE Wirel Commun 2016;23(6):48–53. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/MWC.2016.1600066WC.
Simeone O, Maeder A, Peng M, Sahin O, Yu W. Cloud radio access network: Virtualizing wireless access for dense heterogeneous systems. J Commun Netw 2016;18(2):135–49. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/JCN.2016.000023.
Suryaprakash V, Rost P, Fettweis G. Are heterogeneous cloud-based radio access networks cost effective? IEEE J Sel Areas Commun 2015;33(10):2239–51. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/JSAC.2015.2435275.
Chen L, Liu L, Fan X, Li J, Wang C, Pan G, et al. Complementary base station clustering for cost-effective and energy-efficient cloud-RAN. In: 2017 IEEE smartworld, ubiquitous intelligence computing, advanced trusted computed, scalable computing communications, cloud big data computing, internet of people and smart city innovation. 2017, p. 1–7. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/UIC- ATC.2017.8397526.
De Andrade M, Tornatore M, Pattavina A, Hamidian A, Grobe K. Cost models for BaseBand unit (BBU) hotelling: From local to cloud. In: 2015 IEEE 4th international conference on cloud networking. 2015, p. 201–4. http://dx.doi. org/10.1109/CloudNet.2015.7335306.
Arouk O, Turletti T, Nikaein N, Obraczka K. Cost optimization of cloud- RAN planning and provisioning for 5G networks. In: 2018 IEEE international conference on communications. 2018, p. 1–6. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ICC. 2018.8422744.
Karneyenka U, Mohta K, Moh M. Location and mobility aware resource man- agement for 5G cloud radio access networks. In: 2017 International conference on high performance computing simulation. 2017, p. 168–75. http://dx.doi.org/ 10.1109/HPCS.2017.35.
Kardaras G, Lanzani C. Advanced multimode radio for wireless amp; mobile broadband communication. In: 2009 European wireless technology conference. 2009, p. 132–5.
Niu H, Li C, Papathanassiou A, Wu G. RAN architecture options and perfor- mance for 5G network evolution. In: 2014 IEEE wireless communications and networking conference workshops. 2014, p. 294–8. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ WCNCW.2014.6934902.
Khan FA, He H, Xue J, Ratnarajah T. Performance analysis of cloud ra- dio access networks with distributed multiple antenna remote radio heads. IEEE Trans Signal Process 2015;63(18):4784–99. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ TSP.2015.2446440.
Tian F, Zhang P, Yan Z. A survey on C-RAN security. IEEE Access 2017;5:13372–86. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2017.2717852.
You J, Zhong Z, Wang G, Ai B. Security and reliability performance analysis for cloud radio access networks with channel estimation errors. IEEE Access 2014;2:1348–58. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2014.2370391.
Niu B, Zhou Y, Shah-Mansouri H, Wong VWS. A dynamic resource sharing mechanism for cloud radio access networks. IEEE Trans Wireless Commun 2016;15(12):8325–38. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TWC.2016.2613896.
Patil P, Yu W. Generalized compression strategy for the downlink cloud radio access network. IEEE Trans Inform Theory 2019;65(10):6766–80. http://dx.doi. org/10.1109/TIT.2019.2930568.
Patil P, Dai B, Yu W. Hybrid data-sharing and compression strat- egy for downlink cloud radio access network. IEEE Trans Commun 2018;66(11):5370–84.
Ahn S, Park S-I, Lee J-Y, Hur N, Kang J. Fronthaul compression and precoding optimization for NOMA-based joint transmission of broadcast and unicast services in C-RAN. IEEE Trans Broadcast 2020;66(4):786–99. http://dx.doi.org/ 10.1109/TBC.2019.2960929.
Kim J, Park S-H, Simeone O, Lee I, Shamai Shitz S. Joint design of fronthauling and hybrid beamforming for downlink C-RAN systems. IEEE Trans Commun 2019;67(6):4423–34. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TCOMM.2019.2903142.
Zhou Y, Yu W. Fronthaul compression and transmit beamforming op- timization for multi-antenna uplink C-RAN. IEEE Trans Signal Process 2016;64(16):4138–51.
Zhang Y, He X, Zhong C, Meng L, Zhang Z. Fronthaul compression and beamforming optimization for uplink C-RAN with intelligent reflecting surface-enhanced wireless fronthauling. IEEE Commun Lett 2021.
Vu TX, Nguyen HD, Quek TQ, Sun S. Fronthaul compression and optimization for cloud radio access networks. In: 2016 IEEE international conference on communications. IEEE; 2016, p. 1–6.
Heo E, Simeone O, Park H. Optimal fronthaul compression for synchronization in the uplink of cloud radio access networks. EURASIP J Wireless Commun Networking 2017;2017(1):1–11.
Taghizadeh O, Yang T, Mathar R. Private uplink communication in C-RAN with untrusted radios. IEEE Trans Veh Technol 2020;69(7):8034–9.
Liu L, Bi S, Zhang R. Joint power control and fronthaul rate allocation for throughput maximization in OFDMA-based cloud radio access network. IEEE Trans Commun 2015;63(11):4097–110.
Yu H, Joung J. Optimization of frame structure and fronthaul compression for uplink C-RAN under time-varying channels. IEEE Trans Wireless Commun 2020;20(2):1278–92.
Simeone O, Somekh O, Poor HV, Shamai S. Downlink multicell processing with limited-backhaul capacity. EURASIP J Adv Sig Proc 2009;2009. http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1155/2009/840814.
Park S-H, Simeone O, Sahin O, Shamai S. Joint precoding and multivari- ate backhaul compression for the downlink of cloud radio access networks. IEEE Trans Signal Process 2013;61(22):5646–58. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ TSP.2013.2280111.
Park S-H, Simeone O, Sahin O, Shamai Shitz S. Fronthaul compression for cloud radio access networks: Signal processing advances inspired by network information theory. IEEE Signal Process Mag 2014;31(6):69–79. http://dx.doi. org/10.1109/MSP.2014.2330031.
Stephen RG, Zhang R. Joint millimeter-wave fronthaul and OFDMA resource allocation in ultra-dense CRAN. IEEE Trans Commun 2017;65(3):1411–23. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TCOMM.2017.2649519.
Li Y, Jiang T, Luo K, Mao S. Green heterogeneous cloud radio access networks: Potential techniques, performance trade-offs, and challenges. IEEE Commun Mag 2017;55(11):33–9. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/MCOM.2017.1600807.
Dahrouj H, Douik A, Dhifallah O, Al-Naffouri TY, Alouini M-S. Resource allo- cation in heterogeneous cloud radio access networks: advances and challenges. IEEE Wirel Commun 2015;22(3):66–73. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/MWC.2015. 7143328.
Elhattab M, Arfaoui M-A, Assi C. CoMP transmission in downlink NOMA- based heterogeneous cloud radio access networks. IEEE Trans Commun 2020;68(12):7779–94. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TCOMM.2020.3021145.



Matinmikko M, Okkonen H, Palola M, Yrjölä S, Ahokangas P, Mustonen M. Spectrum sharing using licensed shared access: the concept and its workflow for LTE-advanced networks. IEEE Wirel Commun 2014;21:72–9.
Learned RE, Johnston SE, Kaminski NJ. Cognitive coexistence: A throughput study of MUD-enhanced opportunistic spectrum access. In: 2013 Asilomar conference on signals, systems and computers. 2013, p. 1455–62. http://dx. doi.org/10.1109/ACSSC.2013.6810537.
Liang C, Yu FR. Wireless network virtualization: A survey, some research issues and challenges. IEEE Commun Surv Tutor 2015;17(1):358–80. http://dx.doi. org/10.1109/COMST.2014.2352118.
Costa-Perez X, Swetina J, Guo T, Mahindra R, Rangarajan S. Radio access network virtualization for future mobile carrier networks. IEEE Commun Mag 2013;51(7):27–35. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/MCOM.2013.6553675.
Demestichas P, Georgakopoulos A, Karvounas D, Tsagkaris K, Stavroulaki V, Lu J, et al. 5G on the horizon: Key challenges for the radio-access network. IEEE Veh Technol Mag 2013;8(3):47–53. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/MVT.2013. 2269187.
Bernardos CJ, de la Oliva A, Serrano P, Banchs A, Contreras LM, Jin H, et al. An architecture for software defined wireless networking. IEEE Wirel Commun 2014;21(3):52–61. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/MWC.2014.6845049.
Marotta MA, Kaminski N, Gomez-Miguelez I, Granville LZ, Rochol J, DaSilva L, et al. Resource sharing in heterogeneous cloud radio access networks. IEEE Wirel Commun 2015;22(3):74–82. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/MWC.2015. 7143329.
Onireti O, Zoha A, Moysen J, Imran A, Giupponi L, Ali Imran M, et al. A cell outage management framework for dense heterogeneous networks. IEEE Trans Veh Technol 2016;65(4):2097–113. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TVT.2015. 2431371.
Wang W, Zhang J, Zhang Q. Cooperative cell outage detection in self-organizing femtocell networks. In: 2013 Proceedings IEEE INFOCOM. 2013, p. 782–90. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/INFCOM.2013.6566865.
Xue W, Zhang H, Li Y, Liang D, Peng M. Cell outage detection and compensation in two-tier heterogeneous networks. Int J Antennas Propag 2014;2014:1–9. http://dx.doi.org/10.1155/2014/624858.
Wang L. Priority-based cell selection for mobile equipments in heterogeneous cloud radio access networks. 2015.
Chen N, Rong B, Zhang X, Kadoch M. Scalable and flexible massive MIMO precoding for 5G H-CRAN. IEEE Wirel Commun 2017;24(1):46–52. http://dx. doi.org/10.1109/MWC.2017.1600139WC.
Liu Q, Han T, Ansari N, Wu G. On designing energy-efficient hetero- geneous cloud radio access networks. IEEE Trans Green Commun Netw 2018;2(3):721–34.
Chen L, Jin H, Li H, Seo J-B, Guo Q, Leung V. An energy efficient implementa- tion of C-RAN in HetNet. In: 2014 IEEE 80th vehicular technology conference. 2014, p. 1–5. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/VTCFall.2014.6965870.
Andrews JG, Singh S, Ye Q, Lin X, Dhillon HS. An overview of load balancing in hetnets: old myths and open problems. IEEE Wirel Commun 2014;21(2):18–25.
Ran C, Wang S, Wang C. Balancing backhaul load in heterogeneous cloud radio access networks. IEEE Wirel Commun 2015;22(3):42–8.
Gastpar M. The wyner-ziv problem with multiple sources. IEEE Trans Inform Theory 2004;50(11):2762–8.
Qi Y, Shakir MZ, Imran MA, Quddus A, Tafazolli R. How to solve the fronthaul traffic congestion problem in H-cran? In: 2016 IEEE international conference on communications workshops. 2016, p. 240–5.
Balakrishnan R, Canberk B. Traffic-aware QoS provisioning and admis- sion control in OFDMA hybrid small cells. IEEE Trans Veh Technol 2014;63(2):802–10.
Chen DC, Quek TQS, Kountouris M. Backhauling in heterogeneous cel- lular networks: Modeling and tradeoffs. IEEE Trans Wireless Commun 2015;14(6):3194–206.
Hung S-C, Hsu H, Cheng S-M, Cui Q, Chen K-C. Delay guaranteed network association for mobile machines in heterogeneous cloud radio access network. IEEE Trans Mob Comput 2018;17(12):2744–60.
Lien S-Y, Hung S-C, Chen K-C, Liang Y-C. Ultra-low-latency ubiquitous con- nections in heterogeneous cloud radio access networks. IEEE Wirel Commun 2015;22(3):22–31.
Xiang H, Yu Y, Zhao Z, Li Y, Peng M. Tradeoff between energy efficiency and queues delay in heterogeneous cloud radio access networks. In: 2015 IEEE international conference on communication workshop. 2015, p. 2727–31.
Qi Y, Wang H. Interference-aware user association under cell sleep- ing for heterogeneous cloud cellular networks. IEEE Wirel Commun Lett 2017;6(2):242–5.
Zhang H, Jiang C, Cheng J, Leung VCM. Cooperative interference mitigation and handover management for heterogeneous cloud small cell networks. IEEE Wirel Commun 2015;22(3):92–9.
Al-Samman I, Almesaeed R, Doufexi A, Beach M, Nix A. User weighted probability algorithm for heterogeneous C-RAN interference mitigation. In: 2017 IEEE international conference on communications. 2017, p. 1–7.
Peng M, Xie X, Hu Q, Zhang J, Poor HV. Contract-based interference coordina- tion in heterogeneous cloud radio access networks. IEEE J Sel Areas Commun 2015;33(6):1140–53.
Peng M, Xiang H, Cheng Y, Yan S, Poor HV. Inter-tier interference suppression in heterogeneous cloud radio access networks. IEEE Access 2015;3:2441–55.
Consortium O. OpenFog reference architecture for fog computing. 2017, OpenFog Consortium Architecture Working Group URL https:
//www.OpenFogConsortium.org.
Mouradian C, Naboulsi D, Yangui S, Glitho RH, Morrow MJ, Polakos PA. A com- prehensive survey on fog computing: State-of-the-art and research challenges. IEEE Commun Surv Tutor 2018;20(1):416–64.
Qi L, Yameng S, Fuchang L, Bin F. Joint resource allocation and coordi- nated computation offloading for fog radio access networks. China Commun 2016;13:131–9.
Liang K, Zhao L, Chu X, Chen H-H. An integrated architecture for software defined and virtualized radio access networks with fog computing. IEEE Netw 2017;31(1):80–7. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/MNET.2017.1600027NM.
Peng M, Yan S, Zhang K, Wang C. Fog computing based radio access networks: Issues and challenges. IEEE Netw 2016;30. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/MNET. 2016.7513863.
Shih Y-Y, Chung W-H, Pang A-C, Chiu T-C, Wei H-Y. Enabling low-latency applications in fog-radio access networks. IEEE Netw 2016;31(1):52–8.
Ku Y-J, Lin D-Y, Lee C-F, Hsieh P-J, Wei H-Y, Chou C-T, et al. 5G radio access network design with the fog paradigm: Confluence of communications and computing. IEEE Commun Mag 2017;55(4):46–52.
Jia S, Ai Y, Zhao Z, Peng M, Hu C. Hierarchical content caching in fog radio access networks: ergodic rate and transmit latency. China Commun 2016;13(12):1–14. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/CC.2016.7897534.
Kim S. Fog radio access network system control scheme based on the embedded game model. EURASIP J Wireless Commun Networking 2017;2017. http://dx. doi.org/10.1186/s13638-017-0900-9.
Park S-H, Simeone O, Shamai S. Joint cloud and edge processing for latency minimization in fog radio access networks. In: 2016 IEEE 17th international workshop on signal processing advances in wireless communications. 2016, p. 1–5. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/SPAWC.2016.7536737.
Park S-H, Simeone O, Shamai S. Joint optimization of cloud and edge pro- cessing for fog radio access networks. In: 2016 IEEE international symposium on information theory. 2016, p. 315–9. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ISIT.2016. 7541312.
Park S-H, Simeone O, Shamai Shitz S. Joint optimization of cloud and edge processing for fog radio access networks. IEEE Trans Wireless Commun 2016;15(11):7621–32. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TWC.2016.2605104.
Wang X, Leng S, Yang K. Social-aware edge caching in fog radio access networks. IEEE Access 2017;5:8492–501. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS. 2017.2693440.
Rahman GMS, Peng M, Zhang K, Chen S. Radio resource allocation for achieving ultra-low latency in fog radio access networks. IEEE Access 2018;6:17442–54. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2018.2805303.
Dao N-N, Lee J, Vu D-N, Paek J, Kim J, Cho S, et al. Adaptive resource balancing for serviceability maximization in fog radio access networks. IEEE Access 2017;5:14548–59. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2017.2712138.
Chen D, Al-Shatri H, Mahn T, Klein A, Kuehn V. Energy efficient robust F-RAN downlink design for hard and soft fronthauling. In: 2018 IEEE 87th vehicular technology conference. 2018, p. 1–5. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/VTCSpring.
2018.8417561.
Qiu Y, Zhang H, Long K, Huang Y, Song X, Leung VCM. Energy-efficient power allocation with interference mitigation in mmwave-based fog radio access networks. IEEE Wirel Commun 2018;25(4):25–31. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ MWC.2018.1700409.
Kim S. Fog radio access network system control scheme based on the embedded game model. EURASIP J Wireless Commun Networking 2017;2017. http://dx. doi.org/10.1186/s13638-017-0900-9.
Wang D, Liu Z, Wang X, Lan Y. Mobility-aware task offloading and migration schemes in fog computing networks. IEEE Access 2019;7:43356–68. http://dx. doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2908263.
Yan S, Peng M, Abana MA, Wang W. An evolutionary game for user access mode selection in fog radio access networks. IEEE Access 2017;5:2200–10. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2017.2654266.
Xiang H, Peng M, Cheng Y, Chen H-H. Joint mode selection and resource allocation for downlink fog radio access networks supported D2D. In: 2015 11th International conference on heterogeneous networking for quality, reliability, security and robustness. 2015, p. 177–82.
Peng M, Zhang K. Recent advances in fog radio access networks: Performance analysis and radio resource allocation. IEEE Access 2016;4:5003–9. http://dx. doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2016.2603996.
Liang K, Zhao L, Zhao X, Wang Y, Ou S. Joint resource allocation and coor- dinated computation offloading for fog radio access networks. China Commun 2016;13(Supplement2):131–9. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/CC.2016.7833467.
