

ORIGINAL ARTICLE

A machine learning system for automated	 whole-brain seizure detection
P. Fergus a,*, A. Hussain a, David Hignett a, D. Al-Jumeily a,
Khaled Abdel-Aziz b, Hani Hamdan c
a Applied Computing Research Group, Liverpool John Moores University, Byrom Street, Liverpool L3 3AF,
United Kingdom
b The Walton Centre NHS Foundation Trust, Lower Lane, Fazakerley, Liverpool L9 7LJ, United Kingdom
c Supelec, Department of Signal Processing and Electronic Systems, Plateau de Moulon, 3 rue Joliiot-Curie, 91192 Gif-sur-Yvette Cedex, France

Received 13 October 2014; revised 27 January 2015; accepted 27 January 2015
Available online 9 February 2015

Abstract Epilepsy is a chronic neurological condition that affects approximate- ly 70 million people worldwide. Characterised by sudden bursts of excess elec- tricity in the brain, manifesting as seizures, epilepsy is still not well understood when compared with other neurological disorders. Seizures often happen unex- pectedly and attempting to predict them has been a research topic for the last 30 years. Electroencephalograms have been integral to these studies, as the recordings that they produce can capture the brain’s electrical signals. The diag- nosis of epilepsy is usually made by a neurologist, but can be difficult to make in the early stages. Supporting para-clinical evidence obtained from magnetic reso- nance imaging and electroencephalography may enable clinicians to make a diagnosis of epilepsy and instigate treatment earlier. However, electroencephalo- gram capture and interpretation is time consuming and can be expensive due to the need for trained specialists to perform the interpretation. Automated

* Corresponding author. Tel.: +44 (0)151 231 2629.
E-mail addresses: P.Fergus@ljmu.ac.uk (P. Fergus), Khaled.abdel-aziz@thewaltoncentre.nhs.uk (K. Abdel-A- ziz), Hani.Hamdan@supelec.fr (H. Hamdan).
Peer review under responsibility of King Saud University.

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.aci.2015.01.001
2210-8327 ª 2015 The Authors. Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of King Saud University. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

detection of correlates of seizure activity generalised across different regions of the brain and across multiple subjects may be a solution. This paper explores this idea further and presents a supervised machine learning approach that classifies seizure and non-seizure records using an open dataset containing 342 records (171 seizures and 171 non-seizures). Our approach posits a new method for generalis- ing seizure detection across different subjects without prior knowledge about the focal point of seizures. Our results show an improvement on existing studies with 88% for sensitivity, 88% for specificity and 93% for the area under the curve, with a 12% global error, using the k-NN classifier.
ª 2015 The Authors. Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of King Saud University. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).


Introduction

Epilepsy is a chronic condition of the brain, and causes repeated seizures, com- monly referred to as fits. Epilepsy is said to affect 70 million people worldwide [19]. The risk of developing epilepsy is greatest at the extremes of life with inci- dences more common in the elderly than the young [18] and is the cause of prema- ture mortality for those suffering with the condition [19].
Seizures can be focal (partial) and exist in one part of the brain only, or they can be general and affect both halves of the brain. During a focal seizure, the person may be conscious and unaware that a seizure is taking place, or they may have uncontrollable movements or unusual feelings and sensations. A diagnosis of epilepsy is made with the help of an electroencephalogram (EEG). EEG recordings are commonly visualised as charts of electrical energy produced by the brain and plotted against time [16].
The majority of previous works on seizure detection and prediction have focused on patient-specific predictors, where a classifier is trained on one person and tested on the same person [13,10,25,26,63,9]. In this paper, the emphasis is on using EEG classification to generalise detection across all regions of the brain using multiple subject records.
A whole-brain seizure detection approach supports para-clinical evidence obtained from magnetic resonance imaging and EEG to make a diagnosis of epilepsy and instigate treatment earlier. It helps to mitigate the difficulties associ- ated with the capture and interpretation of electroencephalogram by neurologists. In this paper, a robust data processing methodology is adopted and several clas- sifiers are trained and evaluated, using 342 EEG segments extracted from the EEG records of 24 patients suffering with epilepsy.
The structure, of the remainder, of this paper is as follows. Section 2 describes the underlying principles of EEG and the type of features extracted from EEG sig- nals. Section 3 discusses machine learning and its use in seizure and non-seizure classification, while Section 4 describes the evaluation. The results are discussed in Section 5 before the paper is concluded in Section 6.

Seizure detection and classification

Gotman is one of the pioneers of seizure detection whose research in the area dates back to 1979. In Gotman et al. [22], he proposed a system for automatic recogni- tion of inter-ictal epileptic activity in prolonged EEG recordings using a spike and sharp wave recognition method. Extensions to this work are presented in Koffler and Gotman [29], Gotman [21], Gotman [23], Qu and Gotman [51], while recent works have focussed on the use of functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) and the correlation between cerebral hemodynamic changes and epileptic seizure events visible in EEG [36]. More recently, he has looked at automatic seizure detection in sEEG using high frequency activities in the wavelet domain [10].
In other studies, the most common classifier used to distinguish between seizure and non-seizure events has been the support vector machine (SVM). Using the CHB-MIT database and a patient-specific prediction methodology, the study in Shoeb [55] used a SVM classifier on EEG recordings from 24 subjects. The results show that a classification accuracy of 96% for sensitivity was produced, with a false-positive rate of 0.08 per hour. In a similar study five records from the CHB-MIT dataset (containing 65 seizures) were evaluated using a linear dis- criminant analysis classifier [28]. The overall accuracy reported was 91.8%, 83.6% for sensitivity, and 100% for specificity. For similar SVM studies using other datasets the reader is referred to [55,28,44,62].
Acharya et al. focused on using entropies for EEG seizure detection and seven different classifiers [6]. The best-performing classifier was the Fuzzy Sugeno clas- sifier, which achieved 99.4% for sensitivity, 100% for specificity, and 98.1% for overall accuracy. The worst performing classifier was the Naı¨ve Bayes Classifier, which achieved 94.4% for sensitivity, 97.8% for specificity, and 88.1% for accura- cy. Nasehi and Pourghassem [43] used the same CHB-MIT dataset with a Particle Swarm Optimisation Neural Network (PSONN) which produced 98% for sensi- tivity and a false-positive rate of 0.125 per hour. Using the FRE1 dataset Yuan et al. presented a patient-specific seizure detection system and an extreme machine-learning algorithm to train a neural network [65]. Twenty-one seizure records were used to train the classifier and 65 for testing. The results show that the system achieved an average of 91.92% for sensitivity, 94.89% for specificity and 94.9% for overall accuracy.
Patel et al. [49] proposed a low power, real-time classification algorithm, for detecting seizures in ambulatory EEG. The study compared linear discriminant analysis (LDA), quadratic discriminant analysis (QDA), Mahalanobis dis- criminant analysis (MDA), and SVM classifiers on 13 subjects from the FRE data- set. The results show that the LDA gave the best results when trained and tested on a single patient, with 94.2% for sensitivity, 77.9% for specificity, and 87.7% for overall accuracy. When generalised across all subjects, the results show 90.9% for sensitivity, 59.5% for specificity, and 76.5% for overall accuracy.

1  https://epilepsy.uni-freiburg.de/.

Electroencephalography and feature extraction

Electroencephalography is the term given to the recording of electrical activity resulting from ionic current flows generated by neurons in the brain and is mainly used to evaluate seizures and epilepsy. In order to retrieve EEG signals, electrodes are placed on the scalp where odd numbered electrodes are placed on the left side of the scalp and even numbered electrodes on the right. Electrode locations and names are specified by the International 10–20 system [55].
The collection of raw EEG signals is always temporal. However, for analysis and feature extraction purposes, translation, into other domains, is possible and often required. These include frequency representations, via Fourier Transform [42,37,24,12] and wavelet transform [12,32,40,17,14,39]. The advantage of frequen- cy-related parameters is that they are less susceptible to signal quality variations, due to electrode placement or the physical characteristics of subjects [38].
In order to obtain frequency parameters, several studies have used Power Spec- tral Density (PSD). Within PSD, Peak Frequency is one of the features considered in many studies. It describes the frequency of the highest peak in the PSD. During a seizure, EEG signals tend to contain a major cyclic component, which shows itself as a dominant peak in the frequency domain. In one example, Aarabi et al. used Peak Frequency, along with sample entropy and other amplitude features, to detect epileptic seizures and achieved a sensitivity of 98.7% and a false detection rate of 0.27 per hour [3].
Meanwhile, Ning and Lyu [45] found that Median Frequency displayed sig- nificant differences between seizure and non-seizure patients. By segmenting the EEG signal into five separate frequency bands for delta (d: 0.5 6 f 6 4 Hz), theta (h: 4 6 f 6 8 Hz), alpha (a: 8 6 f 6 12 Hz): beta (b: 12 6 f 6 25 Hz), and gamma (c: 25 6 f), it was possible to predict 79 of 83 seizures, with a sensitivity value of 95.2%.
Root mean square (RMS) has also been considered a useful feature for distin- guishing between seizure and non-seizure events. RMS measures the magnitude of the varying quantity and is a good signal strength estimator in EEG frequency bands [5]. In a study on neonatal seizure detection [50], 21 features for seizure clas- sification were compared, which saw RMS achieves an overall accuracy of 77.71%. The study showed that RMS outperformed all the other features used.
Entropy has been used as a measure of the complexity, or uncertainty, of an EEG signal, where the more chaotic the signal is, the higher the entropy. There are two kinds of entropy estimators: spectral entropies, which use the amplitude of the power spectrum; and signal entropies, which use the time series directly [27]. Many authors agree that during a seizure, the brain activity is more pre- dictable than during a normal, non-seizure, phase and this is reflected by a sudden drop in the entropy value [46,47,61,66].
Energy is a measure of the EEG signal strength. Rather than looking at the
energy of the whole EEG signal, the energy distribution across frequency bands

has been used in seizure detection [46]. The study found that delta and theta fre- quency bands saw a much larger distribution of energy during a seizure compared to normal EEG, whereas the alpha, beta and gamma frequency bands saw a lower energy distribution during a seizure. Using the energy distribution, per frequency band, as a feature achieved an overall accuracy of 94%.
Correlation dimension has been investigated as a correlation measure in several studies, which is a nonlinear univariate, widely used to measure fractal dimension. Fractal dimension measures the complexity of the EEG signal, in other words, the regularity and divergence of the signal [33,7]. In [1] correlation dimension and five other features for seizure prediction of focal neocortical epilepsy produced reason- ably good results with 90.2% for sensitivity and 97% for specificity. However, when looking specifically at the correlation dimension they found the results dropped in 44.9% of seizures and increased in the pre-ictal phase in 44.9% of sei- zures. They also found that there were stronger dimension changes in the remote channels compared with those near the seizure onset.
In [8] correlation dimension and the largest Lyapunov exponent were studied to determine their ability to detect seizures. The study showed that neither measure on its own was useful for the task, but did work better, when they were used together. They also noted that correlation dimension was only useful when applied to the frequency sub-bands (delta, theta, alpha, beta, and gamma), and not on the entire 0–60 Hz frequency spectrum that was used in the study. The authors con- cluded that changes in dynamics are not spread out across the entire spectrum, but are limited to certain frequency bands.
Skewness is a third-order statistical moment, and kurtosis is the fourth. Along with the first and second order moments, mean and variance, respectively, the four statistical moments provide information on the amplitude distribution of a time series. Specifically, skewness and kurtosis give an indication of the shape of the dis- tribution [4]. Khan et al. use skewness and kurtosis, along with normalised coeffi- cient of variation, for seizure detection in paediatric patients. They managed to detect all 55 seizures from a subset of 10 patients, achieving 100% sensitivity, with a false detection rate of 1.1 per hour.

Automated whole-brain seizure detection

The aim of most studies, in EEG detection, has been to detect patient-specific focal seizures, rather than predicting general seizures across a much bigger population. As Shoeb [55] explains, a seizure EEG pattern is specific to a particular patient. The main reason for this is that focal seizures can occur in any part of the brain, and therefore, can only be detected in the EEG on specific channels. A classifier trained on a patient who experiences focal seizures in the occipital lobes, for exam- ple, would no doubt be trained on features from channels, including electrodes O1, and O2 (electrodes to monitor electrical activity in the occipital lobe), as these

would be the channels from the area of the seizure and therefore, best at detecting the seizure.
For this reason, and due to the configuration of the dataset, this study focuses on discriminating between seizure and non-seizure EEGs across a group of 24 sub- jects. The classifiers are trained on all patient records and therefore, classification is generalised across all subjects using features from channels that capture the EEG in all parts of the brain.
The approach utilises machine learning algorithms embedded in-line with exist- ing clinical systems to enhance clinical practices in epilepsy diagnostics. The pro- posed algorithms support para-clinical evidence obtained from magnetic resonance imaging and electroencephalography to alleviate the capture and inter- pretation of electroencephalogram and help reduce costs, by minimising the need for trained specialists to perform the interpretation. The approach provides auto- mated detection of correlates of seizure activity generalised across different regions of the brain and across multiple subjects.

Methodology

The CHB-MIT dataset is a publicly available database from physionet.org that contains 686 scalp EEG recordings from 23 patients treated at the Children’s Hospital in Boston. The subjects had anti-seizure medication withdrawn, and EEG recordings were taken for up to several days after.
The EEG recordings are divided among 24 cases (one patient has two sets of EEG recordings 1.5 years apart). The patients range between 1.5 and 22 years of age, and there are 5 males and 17 females. Case 24 was added after the original dataset was collected and has no patient data.
Most of the recordings are one hour long, although those belonging to case 10 are two hours and those belonging to cases 4, 6, 7, 9, and 23 are four hours long. Records that contain at least one seizure are classed as seizure records and those that contain no seizures as non-seizure records. Of the 686 records, 198 contain seizures.
Although the description supplied with the dataset states that recordings were captured using the international 10–20 system of EEG electrode positions and nomenclature, it was found that 17 of the files that contained seizures had different channel montages to the rest of the seizure files. Therefore, these 17 records have been excluded from this study, leaving 181 seizure files. A further 10 records were removed from the dataset due to a large number of missing data.
The final dataset used in this study was constructed from 60-s data blocks (mean ictal length across the 171 seizure records), comprising the ictal data (sei- zure), which were extracted from 171 seizure files. Table 1 provides a summary of the ictal data with the 171 ictal blocks.
The results show that 25% of the data blocks (42.75 blocks) contain less than or equal to 23 s of ictal data, which means that 75% of our data blocks (128.25

blocks) contain 23 s or more of ictal data, with the average block containing 45 s if we consider the median. However, the data contain outliers, i.e. the Max value is 752. To get a more representative summary the first 60 s of ictal data is used from each seizure record that lasts longer than 60 s. Table 2 provides a summary of the data.
The average block now contains 45 s if we consider the median, 40.52% if we consider the mean. More importantly, the majority of the data blocks (64%) of the 171 ictal blocks contain 30 s or more of icta data. In a real-world scenario, it is unlikely that, whatever window size we select, data blocks will contain only ictal data. The more realistic case is that it will contain both ictal and non-ictal data. By having 60-s blocks with different ictal and non-ictal data splits, this allows us to determine the performance of the classifiers under conditions more aligned with a real-world situation. However, future work will explore optimal window sizes. To balance the dataset, 171 data blocks randomly extracted from non-seizure files were also added to the dataset.
Fig. 1 shows the processes used in the methodology to process the data, that include filtering, feature extraction, feature selection, classification and finally validation.
Each of these processes is discussed in more detail below. Fig. 1 shows a data science methodology that produces a robust data analytics based solution.
Data pre-processing

In the CHB-MIT database, each record was sampled at 256 Hz, with 16-bit resolu- tion. Signals were recorded simultaneously through twenty-three different chan- nels, via 19 electrodes and a ground attached to the surface of the scalp.
A bandpass filter was applied to each of the 342 EEG segments (171 seizures, 171 non-seizures) to extract the EEG data in each of the frequency blocks. Second order butterworth filters were used as they offer good transition band character- istics at low coefficient orders; thus, they can be implemented efficiently. This results in five columns of additional data; the complete bandwidth (0.5–30 Hz), delta (d: 0.5 6 f 6 4 Hz), theta (h: 4 6 f 6 8 Hz), alpha (a: 8 6 f 6 12 Hz): and beta






Figure 1	Methodology data processes.

(b: 12 6 f 6 25 Hz). In other words, each block contains 115 columns of data for each of the 23 EEG channels in the original data (N = 23 * (complete bandwidth + delta + theta + alpha + beta) = 23 * 5 = 115).
Feature selection

The feature vectors in this paper are generated from the 171 seizure files and 171 non-seizure blocks, obtained from 23 patients, using Peak Frequency, Median Fre- quency, variance, root mean squares, sample entropy, skewness and kurtosis. These features were extracted from each of the 115 columns in an EEG block (N = 7 fea- tures * 115 columns = 805). The literature reports that Median Frequency, sample entropy and root mean square have the most potential to discriminate between sei- zure and non-seizure records. To validate these findings, the discriminant capa- bilities of each feature are determined using several measures: statistical significance (p and q-values), principal component analysis (PCA) – Principle Com- ponent one (PC1) and Principle Component two (PC2), linear discriminant analysis independent search (LDAi), linear discriminant analysis forward search (LDAf), lin- ear discriminant analysis backward search (LDAb) and gram-schmidt (GS) analysis. Using these measures, the top 20 uncorrelated features were extracted from all regions of the EEG scalp readings (region-by-region feature extraction is consid- ered later in the paper). For example, in the case of p-values we select the top 20 uncorrelated features (from the 805 features that we have) that have the highest p- values and use these features with all our classifiers. The tttest2 function in Matlab can be used to extract p-values and they can be ranked using the sort function.

These features are then used to determine which classifier performs the best. The same approach is used for the q-values. The mafdr function in Matlab can be used to determine the q-values and again, they can be ranked using the sort function. In the case of Principle Component one (PC1), the top 20 uncorrelated features that comprise the most variance in PC1 were selected and evaluated against all classi- fiers. The same approach was used for PC2. In the case of linear discriminant ana- lysis feature selection, the featseli, featself, and featselb provided by the Matlab pattern recognition toolbox PRTools is used to provide an ordered ranking of fea- tures. In a similar way, the Gram-Schmidt ranks and orders each feature by importance.
Table 3 shows that the best results were obtained from the linear discriminant analysis backward search technique with an area under the curve (AUC) of 91%. This was followed closely by statistical p and q-values with AUC values of 90% and 89% respectively.
Fig. 2 shows (using PCA) that several RMS and Median Frequency features, from different channels and frequency bands, appear along the principal compo- nent. This is consistent with the findings in Ning and Lyu [45], Abdul-latif et al. [5], Paivinen et al. [47]. The vertical axis shows that CH12_48_Var, CH9_48_Var, and CH3_0530_MFreq features align closest with the second principal component. Again, these results are consistent with the findings in Ning and Lyu [45], Abdul-latif et al. [5], Paivinen et al. [47].
This study also extracts the top five uncorrelated features from each of the five regions covered by the EEG scalp electrodes as shown in Table 4. This ensures that each region is represented without the bias from all other regions, and allows clas- sifiers to detect focal seizures in different parts of the brain. The features extracted, using the generalised and region-by-region approach, are used to evaluate the capabilities of several classifiers considered in this study and are the top five fea- tures per region selected based on their rank determined by the linear discriminant backward search technique, creating five feature sets containing five features each. The top 20 uncorrelated features and the 25 region-by-region features are com- pared in the evaluation.






A machine learning system for automated whole-brain seizure detection	79




















Figure 2	PCA for Median Frequency and RMS feature discrimination.

Classification

Following an analysis of the literature, the study in this paper adopts simple, yet powerful algorithms. These include the linear discriminant classifier (LDC), quadratic discriminant classifier (QDC), uncorrelated normal density based classifier (UDC), polynomial classifier (POLYC), logistic classifier (LOGLC), k-nearest neighbour (KNNC), decision tree (TREEC), parzen classifier (PARZENC) and the support vector machine (SVC) [61].
Validation methods

In order to determine the overall accuracy of each of the classifiers several valida- tion techniques have been considered. These include Holdout Cross-Validation, Sensitivities, Specificities, Receiver Operating Curve (ROC) and area under the curve (AUC). The Holdout Cross-Validation technique uses 80 per cent of ran- domly selected observations (N = 19.2) to train the algorithms and 20 per cent of randomly selected test cases to test the algorithms (N = 3.8).

Evaluation
Results using top twenty uncorrelated features ranked using LDA backward search feature selection

In the first evaluation, the top twenty uncorrelated features, extracted from each of the frequency bands within each of the EEG channels, and nine classifiers are used. The performance for each classifier is evaluated using the sensitivity, specificity, mean error, standard deviation and AUC values with 100 simulations and randomly selected training and testing sets for each simulation. In this study,


high sensitivities are important to ensure that seizures can be detected within an alarm system. High specificities are considered equally important as high false alarm rates (more than 1 per hour) will deter doctors from using it.
Classifier performance

The first evaluation uses all the seizure and non-seizure blocks from all subjects in the CHB-MIT dataset (171 seizures and 171 non-seizures). The simulations use 80% for training and 20% for testing. Table 5, shows the mean averages obtained over 100 simulations for the sensitivity, specificity, and AUC.
As shown in Table 5, the sensitivities (seizure), in this initial test, are low for all classifiers. This is interesting given that the dataset is balanced between seizure and non-seizure blocks. One possible reason for this is that the ictal length across the 171 records was 60 s. However, in the CHB-MIT records ictal periods ranged between 2 and 752 (cut down to 60 s) seconds. It is possible that some ictal blocks resemble non-seizure records resulting in misclassification (particularly blocks that contain 2 s of ictal data). However, given that 64% of the ictal blocks contain more than 30 s of icta data, this is appropriate for training. Furthermore, it is a decision that is supported by the relatively high sensitivity, specificity and AUC


values. Nonetheless, further investigation is required. Table 6 shows the error and standard deviations obtained over 100 iterations.
The results show that all techniques are able to achieve a classification error, lower than the base-rate error of 50% (i.e. 171/342).
Model selection

The receiver operator characteristic (ROC) curve shows the cut-off values for the false negative and false-positive rates. Fig. 3 indicates that several of the classifiers performed reasonably well. The AUC values in Table 4 support these findings with good accuracy values for the LOGLC and KNNC classifiers.

Results using top five uncorrelated features ranked using lda backward search feature selection from five head regions
In the second evaluation, the top five uncorrelated features, extracted from five main regions across the head, are used to determine whether the detection of sei- zures can be improved. Again, the performance for each classifier is evaluated using the sensitivity, specificity, mean error, standard deviation and AUC values with 100 simulations and randomly selected training and testing sets for each simulation.



Figure 3	Received operator curve for top 20 uncorrelated features.
Classifier performance

The simulations use 80% for training and 20% for testing. As shown in Table 7, the sensitivities (seizure), for most of the algorithms have improved, including the specificities values. The AUC results also show improvements for several of the classifiers, with 93% achieved by the KNNC classifier. From the previous results, we find a 4% increase in sensitivities, a 3% increase in specificities and a 2% increase in the performance of the KNNC classifier, with other classifiers improv- ing by similar values.
Again, the results in Table 8 show that the mean error has decreased by 3% using the holdout technique. This indicates that using a region-by-region approach is better at discriminating between seizure and non-seizure events.
Overall, the mean errors produced, using all of the validation techniques, are significantly lower than the expected error, which is 171/342, i.e. 50%.
Model selection

Again, the ROC curve shows the cut-off values for the false-negative and false- positive rates. Fig. 4 indicates that the performance of several classifiers improved. The AUC values in Table 7 support these findings with the KNNC classifier show- ing a 2% increase in performance.




Figure 4	Received operator curve for top five uncorrelated features from five head regions.
Discussion

The study has focused on discriminating between seizure and non-seizure EEG records across a group of 23 subjects, rather than a single individual. The classi- fiers are trained using all 24 cases, and therefore, classification is generalised across the whole population contained in the CHB-MIT database. To achieve this, fea- tures from all the channels that capture the EEG in all parts of the brain were used. In the initial classification results, the top 20 uncorrelated features from the whole of the head (not region-by-region) were extracted from 805 possible fea- tures. This was determined using the linear discriminant analysis backward search technique to rank features. This approach achieved reasonably good results, using the KNNC classifier, with 84% for sensitivity, 85% for specificity, 91% for the AUC, with a global error of 15%.
Interestingly, the features used in this initial evaluation, involved channels from the four lobes of the brain, occipital, parietal, frontal, and temporal, but not the channels spread across the centre of the head. This implied that rather than having generalised seizures across the whole of the brain, a majority of focal seizures occurred in each of the lobes. Unlike studies that used the BONN dataset, which only contains one channel, or the FRE dataset, that contains six channels and

identifies focal and extra focal channels, the CHB-MIT database used in this study contains 23 channels with no information on the seizure type or location.
Using the top five uncorrelated features from EEG channels specific to the five main regions of the head improved the sensitivities and specificities, while produc- ing high AUC values. The best classification algorithm was again the KNNC clas- sifier, which achieved 88% for sensitivity, 88% for specificity, and an AUC value of 93% with a 12% global error. This was followed closely by the SVC classifier, which achieved 85% for sensitivity, 86% for specificity, and an AUC value of 90% with a 14% global error.
Comparing our results with other studies, we find that Shoeb [55] produced a better sensitivity value (96%) than those reported in this study. However, their approach utilised a SVM classifier trained and tested on an individual patient and was not concerned with the generalisation of seizures across a bigger popula- tion group. Consequently, the 88% sensitivity value produced in this paper appears to be extremely good given that our classifiers were trained and tested on data from 23 different patients, not just one. In a similar study, Nasehi and Pourghassem [43] used a neural network and reported a sensitivity value of 98%, which again is higher than the results reported in this study. However, as with the work of Shoeb, the classifiers were trained and tested on specific patients. In comparison with other studies that adopted a similar approach to our study, our approach produced better overall results. For instance, Khan et al. [28] report a 83.6% specificity value, while Patel et al. [49] report 94% for sensitivity, 77.9% for specificity, and 87.7% for overall accuracy. Yuan et al. [66] report 91.72% for sensitivity, 94.89% for specificity, and 94.9% for accuracy, while Aarabi et al. [2],
Kannathal et al. [27], report similar results. The results found in this paper can be compared in more detail with the papers listed in Table 9.
This work has potential future clinical applications in the investigation of patients with suspected seizure disorders and may be useful in the assessment of patients with non-epileptic attack disorder (NEAD). Introducing automated sei- zure detection technologies could help increase capacity within healthcare systems such as the UKs National Health Service (NHS), which currently suffers from a chronic shortage of trained clinical neurophysiologists to interpret EEGs. Tele- EEG reporting has previously been suggested as a solution and more recently online systems [20,41], which are interesting approaches, but carry increased costs and concerns over data security. Nonetheless, these, including automated seizure detection may be viable solutions, following further work aimed at improving accuracy further.

Conclusions and future work

Within a supervised-learning paradigm, this study has addressed this challenge by utilising EEG signals to classify seizure and non-seizure records. Our approach posits a new method for generalising seizure detection across different subjects





without prior knowledge about the focal point of seizures. Our results show an improvement on existing studies with 88% for sensitivity, 88% for specificity and 93% for the area under the curve, with a 12% global error, using the k- NN classifier.
The results suggest that the algorithms in-situ with existing clinical systems and practices may enable clinicians to make a diagnosis of epilepsy and instigate treat- ment earlier. It can help to reduce costs by limiting the number of trained special- ists required to perform the interpretation by automating the detection of correlates of seizure activity generalised across different regions of the brain and across multiple subjects.
There are a large number of features reported in the literature, which have not been considered in this paper. In particular our future work will consider the set of features described in Logesparan et al. [34], Logesparan et al. [35]. Furthermore, our future work will investigate the use of more advanced machine learning algo- rithms, despite the good performance of the classifiers considered in this paper. In particular, we will investigate the use of convolutional neural networks [53] and SVM with different kernels [54].
Window sizes will also be considered to determine whether further improve- ments on accuracies can be made. Future development will also utilise regression analysis and a larger number of observations. This may help to define the charac- teristics of the pre-ictal phase. In addition, more advanced classification algo- rithms, and techniques, will be considered, including advanced artificial neural network architectures (higher order and spiking neural networks). The investiga- tion and comparison, of features, such as fractal dimension and cepstrum analysis, autocorrelation zero crossing and correlation dimension, have also not been per- formed. These techniques should be investigated in a head-to-head comparison, with linear methods.
The paper has investigated the use of classic yet powerful machine learning algorithms and evaluated their ability to detect correlates of seizure activity. While the results are convincing the paper does not address how the system can be gen- eralised for normal use. Furthermore, it does not address real-time concerns where performance will degraded significantly. The approach evaluates the algorithms using offline data; however, this is not a good indicator of the system’s ability as the signals that are used to train and test the algorithms are processed and cleaned and appropriate features extracted. This is a major concern and our future work will look to implement the methodology pipeline using real-time signals, using advances in the Internet of Things and Big Data community that currently utilise data processing technologies, such as Apache Spark.
Finally, there are concerns regarding the verification of the results produced using the CHB-MIT dataset against other datasets. Our future work will investi- gate the use of a bigger dataset, using patients provided by our co-author from The Walton Centre NHS Foundation Trust, and other datasets that permit access to verify the findings in this paper.

Overall, the study demonstrates that classification algorithms provide an inter- esting line of enquiry, when separating seizure and non-seizure records.

References
A. Aarabi, B. He, A rule-based seizure prediction method for focal neocortical epilepsy, Clin. Neurophysiol. 123 (6) (2012) 1111–1122.
A. Aarabi, F. Wallois, R. Grebe, Automated neonatal seizure detection: a multistage classification system through feature selection based on relevance and redundancy analysis, Clin. Neurophysiol. 117 (2) (2006) 328–340.
A. Aarabi, Fazel-Rezai, Y. Aghakhani, A fuzzy rule-based system for epileptic seizure detection in intracranial EEG, Clin. Neurophysiol. 120 (9) (2009) 1648–1657.
A. Aarabi, R. Fazel-Rezai, Y. Aghakhani, EEG seizure prediction: measures and challenges, in: Annual International Conference of the IEEE in Engineering in Medicine and Biology, 2009, pp. 1864–1867.
A.A. Abdul-latif, I. Cosic, D.K. Kimar, B. Polus, Power changes of EEG signals associated with muscle fatigue: the root mean square analysis of EEG bands, in: IEEE Proceedings of Intelligent Sensors, Sensor Networks and Information Processing Conference, 2004, pp. 531–534.
U.R. Acharya, F. Molinari, S.V. Sree, S. Chattopadhyay, K.H. Ng, J.S. Suri, Automated diagnosis of epileptic EEG using entropies, Biomed. Signal Process. Control 7 (2012) 401–408.
U.R. Acharya, S.V. Stee, G. Swapna, R.J. Martis, J.S. Suri, Automated EEG analysis of epilepsy: a review, Knowledge-Based Syst. 45 (2013) 147–165.
H. Adeli, S. Ghosh-Dastidar, N. Dadmehr, A wavelet-chaos methodology for analysis of EEGs and EEG subbands to detect seizure and epilepsy, IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 54 (2) (2007) 205–211.
M.A.B. Altaf, J. Tilak, Y. Kifle, J. Yoo, A 1.83 lJ/classification nonlinear support-vector-machine-based patient-specific seizure classification SoC, in: IEEE International Solid-State Circuits Conference, 2013, pp. 100–102.
L. Ayoubian, H. Lacoma, J. Gotman, Automatic seizure detection in SEEG using high frequency activities in
wavelet domain, Med. Eng. Phys. 35 (3) (2013) 319–328.
F.S. Bao, D.Y.C. Lie, Y. Zhang, A new approach to automated epileptic diagnosis using EEG and probabilisitic neural network, in: 20th IEEE International Conference on Tools with Artificial Intelligence, 2008.
C. Buhimschi, M.B. Boyle, G.R. Saade, R.E. Garfield, Uterine activity during pregnancy and labor assessed by simultaneous recordings from the myometrium and abdominal surface in the rat, Am. J. Obstet. Gynecol. 178 (4) (1998) 811–822.
P.R. Carney, S. Myers, J.D. Deyer, Seizure prediction: methods, Epilepsy Behav. 22 (2011) S94–S101.
P. Carre, H. Leman, C. Fernandez, C. Marque, Denoising of the uterine EHG by an undecimated wavelet transform, IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 45 (9) (1998) 1104–1113.
S. Chandaka, A. Chatterjee, S. Munshi, Cross-correlation aided support vector machine classifier for classification, Expert Syst. Appl. 36 (2009) 1329–1336.
W.A. Chaovalitwongse, R.S. Pottenger, W. Shouyi, F. Ya-Ju, L.D. Iasemidis, Pattern- and network-based classification techniques for multichannel medical data signals to improve brain diagnosis, IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cybern. 41 (5) (2011) 977–988.
M.O. Diab, A. El-Merhie, N. El-Halabi, L. Khoder, Classification of uterine EMG signals using supervised classification method, Biomed. Sci. Eng. 3 (9) (2010) 837–842.
J. Engel, Seizures and Epilepsy, 2013, p. 736.
S. Fazel, A. Wolf, N. Langstrom, C.R. Newton, P. Lichtenstein, Premature mortality in epilepsy and the role
of psychiatric comorbidity: a total population study, Lancet 382 (9905) (2013) 1646–1654.
F. Furbass, P. Ossenblok, M. Hartmann, H. Perko, A.M. Skupch, G. Lindinger, L. Elezi, E. Pataraia, Prospective multi-center study of an automatic online seizure detection system for epilepsy monitoring units. Clin. Neurophysiol., 2014 (in press).
J. Gotman, Automatic recognition of epileptic seizures in the EEG, Electroencephalogr. Clin. Neurophysiol. 54 (5) (1982) 530–540.
J. Gotman, J.R. Ives, P. Gloor, Automatic recognition of inter-ictal epileptic activity in prolonged EEG recordings, Electroencephalogr. Clin. Neurophysiol. 46 (5) (1979) 510–520.
J. Gotman, Automatic detection of seizures and spikes, J. Clin. Neurophysiol. 16(2) 130–140 (199AD).

M. Hassan, J. Terrien, C. Marque, B. Karlsson, Comparison between approximate entropy, correntropy and time reversibility: application to uterine electromyogram signals, Med. Eng. Phys. 33 (8) (2011) 980–986.
R. Hopfengartner, B.S. Kasper, W. Graf, S. Gollwitzer, G. Kreiselmeyer, H. Stefan, H. Hamer, Automatic seizure detection in long-term scalp EEG using an adaptive thresholding technique: a validation study for clinical routine, J. Int. Fed. Clin. Neurophysiol. 125 (7) (2014) 1346–1352.
B. Hunyadi, M. Signoretto, W. Van Paesschen, J. Suykens, S. Van Huffel, M. De Vos, Incorporating structural information from the multichannel EEG improves patient-specific seizure detection, Clin. Neurophysiol. 123 (12) (2012) 2352–2361.
N. Kannathal, M.L. Choo, U.R. Acharya, P.K. Sadasivan, Entropies for detection of epilepsy in EEG, Comput. Methods Programs Biomed. 81 (2) (2005) 187–194.
Y.U. Khan, N. Rafiuddin, O. Farooq, Automated seizure detection in scalp EEG using multiple wavelet scales, in: IEEE International Conference on Signal Processing, Computing and Control, 2012, pp. 1–5.
D.J. Koffler, J. Gotman, Automatic detection of spike and wave bursts in ambulatory EEG recordings, Electroencephalogr. Clin. Neurophysiol. 61 (2) (1985) 165–180 (85AD).
S.P. Kumar, N. Sriraam, P.G. Benakop, B.C. Jinaga, Entropies based detection of epileptic seizures with artificial neural network classifiers, Expert Syst. Appl. 37 (4) (2010) 3284–3291.
R.S.S. Kumari, P. Jose, Seizure detection in EEG using time frequency analysis and SVM, in International Conference on Emerging Trends in Electrical and Computer Technology, 2011, pp. 626–630.
H. Leman, C. Marque, J. Gondry, Use of the electrohysterogram signal for characterization of contractions during pregnancy, IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 46 (10) (1999) 1222–1229.
B. Litt, J. Echauz, Prediction of epileptic seizures, Lancet Neurol. 1 (1) (2002) 22–30.
L. Logesparan, A.J. Casson, E. Rodriquez-Villegas, Optimal features for online seizure detection, Med. Biol. Eng. Comput. 50 (7) (2012) 659–669.
L. Logesparan, A.J. Casson, S.A. Imtiaz, Rodriquez-Villegas, Discriminating between best performing features for seizure detection and data selection, in: The 35th IEEE Annual International Conference on Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society, 2013, pp. 1692–1695.
R. Lopes, J.M. Lina, F. Fahoum, J. Gotman, Detection of epileptic activity in fMRI without recording the EEG, NuroImage 60 (3) (2012) 1867–1879.
W.L. Maner, R.E. Garfield, Identification of human term and preterm labor using artificial neural networks on uterine electromyography data, Ann. Biomed. Eng. 35 (3) (2007) 465–473.
W.L. Maner, R.E. Garfield, H. Maul, G. Olson, G. Saade, Predicting term and preterm delivery with transabdominal uterine electromyography, Obstet. Gynecol. 101 (6) (2003) 1254–1260.
W.L. Maner, L.B. MacKay, G.R. Saade, R.E. Garfield, Characterization of abdominally acquired uterine electrical signals in humans, using a non-linear analytic method, Med. Biol. Eng. Comput. 44 (1–2) (2006) 117–123.
C.K. Marque, J. Terrien, S. Rihana, G. Germain, Preterm labour detection by use of a biophysical marker: the uterine electrical activity, BMC Pregnancy Childbirth 7 (Suppl 1) (2007) S5.
R. Meier, H. Dittrich, A. Schulze-Bonhage, A. Aertsen, Detecting epileptic seizures in long-term human EEG: a new approach to automatic online and real-time detection and classification of polymorphic seizure patterns, Clin. Neurophysiol. 25 (3) (2008) 119–131.
B. Moslem, B. Karlsson, M.O. Diab, M. Khalil, C. Marque, Classification performance of the frequency- related parameters derived from uterine EMG signals, in: International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society, 2011, pp. 3371–4.
S. Nasehi, H. Pourghassem, Patient specific epileptic seizure onset detection algorithm based on spectral features and IPSONN classifier, in International Conference on Communication Systems and Network Technologies (CSNT), 2013, pp. 186–190.
N. Nicalaou, J. Georgiou, Detection of epileptic electroencephalogram based on permutation entropy and support vector machines, Expert Syst. Appl. 39 (2012) 202–209.
W. Ning, M.R. Lyu, Exploration of instantaneous amplitude and frequency features for epileptic seizure prediction, in: 12th IEEE International Conference on Bioinformatics and Bioengineering, 2012, pp. 292– 297.
I. Omerhodzic, S. Avdakovic, A. Nuhanovic, K. Dizdarevic, Energy distribution of EEG signals: EEG signal wavelet-neural network classifier, World Acad. Sci. Eng. Technol. 37 (2010) 1240–1245.
N. Paivinen, S. Lammi, A. Pitkanen, J. Nissinen, M. Penttonen, T. Gronfors, Epileptic seizure detection: a nonlinear viewpoint, Comput. Methods Programs Biomed. 79 (2) (2005) 151–159.

Y. Park, L. Luo, K.K. Parhi, T. Netoff, Seizure prediction with spectral power of EEG using cost-sensitive support vector machines, Epilepsia 52 (2011) 1761–1770.
K. Patel, C. Chem-Pin, S. Fau, C.J. Bleakley, Low power real-time seizure detection for ambulatory EEG, in: 3rd International Conference on Pervasive Computing Technologies for Healthcare, 2009, pp. 1–7.
L.M. Patnaik, O.K. Manyam, Epileptic EEG detection using neural networks and post-classification, Comput. Methods Programs Biomed. 91 (2008) 100–109.
H. Qu, J. Gotman, Improvement in seizure detection performance by automatic adaptation to the EEG of each patient, Clin. Neurophysiol. 86 (2) (1993) 79–87.
J. Rasekhi, M.R.K. Mollaei, M. Bandarabadi, C.A. Teixeira, A. Dourado, Preprocessing effects of 22 linear univariate features on the performance of seizure prediction methods, J. Neurosci. Methods 217 (2013) 9–16.
Y. Ren, Y. Wu, Convolutional deep belief networks for feature extraction of EEG signal, in: International Joint Conference on Neural Networks, 2014, pp. 2850–2853.
C.H. Seng, R. Demirli, L. Khuon, D. Bolger, Seizure detection in EEG signals using support vector machines, in: The 28th IEEE Annual Northeast Bioengineering Conference, 2012, pp. 231–232.
A.H. Shoeb, Application of Machine Learning to Epileptic Seizure Onset and Treatment, 2009.
Y. Song, P. Lio, A new approach for epileptic seizure detection: sample entropy based feature extraction and extreme learning machine, J. Biomed. Sci. Eng. 3 (2010) 556.
T.L. Sorensen, U.L. Olsen, I. Conradsen, J. Hendriksen, T.W. Kjaer, C.E. Thomsen, H.B.D. Sorensen, Automatic epileptic seizure onset detection using matching pursuit: a case study, in: International Conference on Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society, 2010, pp. 3277–3280.
A. Subasi, Automatic detection of epileptic seizure using dynamic fuzzy neural networks, Expert Syst. Appl. 31 (2006) 320–328.
A. Subasi, EEG signal classification using wavelet feature extraction and a mixture of expert model, Expert Syst. Appl. 32 (2007) 1084–1093.
A. Subasi, M.I. Gursoy, EEG signal classification using PCA, ICA, LDA and support vector machines, Expert Syst. Appl. 37 (2010) 8659–8666.
F. van der Heijde, R.P.W. Duin, D. de Ridder, D.M.J. Tax, Classification, Parameter Estimation and State Estimation, 2005, p. 440.
J.R. Williamson, D.W. Bliss, D.W. Browne, Epileptic seizure prediction using the spatiotemporal correlation structure of intracranial EEG, in: International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing, 2011, pp. 665–668.
J. Yoo, L. Yan, D. El-Demak, M. Altaf, A.H. Shoeb, A.P. Chandrakasan, An 8-channel scalable EEG acquisition SoC with fully integrated patient-specific seizure classification and recorder processor, IEEE J. Solid State Circ. 49 (9) (2013) 214–228.
Q. Yuan, W. Zhou, S. Li, D. Cai, Epileptic EEG classification based on extreme learning machine and nonlinear features, Epilepsy Res. 96 (1–2) (2011) 29–38.
Q. Yuan, W. Zhou, Y. Liu, J. Wang, Epileptic EEG detection with linear and nonlinear features, Epilepsy Behav. 24 (2012) 415–421.
Q. Yuan, W. Zhou, Y. Liu, J. Wang, Epileptic seizure detection with linear and nonlinear features, Epilepsy Behav. 24 (4) (2012) 415–421.
Z.G. Zheng, Y. Liutao, F. Yuwei, H. Zhuyi, C. Lisheng, Z. Shouwen, W. Dahui, H. Zhangang, Seizure prediction model based on method of common spatial patterns and support vector machine, in: International Conference on Information Science and Technology, 2012, pp. 29–34.
