Artificial Intelligence in Agriculture 6 (2022) 111–128











Examining the interplay between artificial intelligence and the agri-food industry
Abderahman Rejeb a,⁎, Karim Rejeb b, Suhaiza Zailani c, John G. Keogh d, Andrea Appolloni a
a Department of Management and Law, Faculty of Economics, University of Rome Tor Vergata, Via Columbia, 2, Rome 00133, Italy
b Faculty of Sciences of Bizerte, University of Carthage, Tunis, Tunisia
c Department of Management, Faculty of Business and Economics, University Malaya, Kuala Lumpur, 50203, Malaysia
d Henley Business School, University of Reading, Greenlands, Henley-on-Thames RG9 3AU, UK



a r t i c l e	i n f o


Article history:
Received 11 September 2021
Received in revised form 18 August 2022 Accepted 20 August 2022
Available online 24 August 2022


Keywords:
Artificial intelligence Agriculture
Farming
Machine learning Deep learning Bibliometric analysis Resource-based view







Contents
a b s t r a c t

Artificial intelligence (AI) has advanced at an astounding rate and transformed numerous economic sectors. Nevertheless, a comprehensive understanding of how AI can improve the agri-food industry is lacking. In addition, there is a notable dearth of research on AI that investigates the influence of AI on agri-food resources and educates practitioners on the significance of knowledge-based and smart agriculture. We utilised bibliomet- ric analysis to investigate the present state of the art and emerging trends in the relationship between AI and the agri-food industry. The research identified three distinct growth phases and the most prevalent AI strategies in the industry. In addition, we analysed key trends and offered researchers and practitioners insightful recommen- dations for future research. Using resource-based view (RBV) as the theoretical lens, this study established a framework emphasising the long-term effects of AI on various agri-food resources and proposed several research propositions. In addition, AI-related obstacles have been identified and categorised into four major categories. Lastly, the originality of the article lies in its numerous research suggestions and recommendations for advancing the AI field in the agri-food industry.
© 2022 The Authors. Publishing services by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of KeAi Communications Co., Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

Introduction	112
Bibliometric method	113
Results from the bibliometric analysis	113
Annual distribution of publications	113
Top 20 most relevant journals	114
Top 20 most cited nations	114
Top 20 most cited publications	114
Keywords analysis: Authors versus keywords plus	115
Treemap based on abstracts	115
Trend topics	116
Cluster analysis	116
Discussion	118
Theoretical contributions	118
What are the research dynamics on the interplay between AI and the Agri-food sector?	118
How is AI being used in the Agri-food sector?	119
What are the trend topics pertaining to AI and the Agri-food sector?	119
What are the main challenges of AI in the Agri-food sector?	119
Theoretical implications	120
* Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: rjbbrh01@uniroma2.it (A. Rejeb), karim.rejeb@fsb.ucar.tn (K. Rejeb), shmz@um.edu.my (S. Zailani), john@shantalla.org (J.G. Keogh), andrea.appolloni@uniroma2.it (A. Appolloni).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aiia.2022.08.002
2589-7217/© 2022 The Authors. Publishing services by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of KeAi Communications Co., Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http:// creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

From framework to research propositions	120
Agenda for future research	122
Practical implication	124
Study limitations	124
Conclusion	124
References	124





Introduction

The agri-food industry constitutes one of the key contributors to any nation's economy and is vital for the well-being of nations' citizens (Abdollahi et al., 2021; Mithun Ali et al., 2019; Rejeb et al., 2022a). Moreover, the agri-food sector is of growing importance to developing and developed countries due to its role in supporting more sustainable production and consumption patterns, environmental protection, busi- ness competitiveness, social welfare, and economic growth (Del Borghi et al., 2014). Despite its importance, this sector faces several challenges driven by climate change, unprecedented technological innovation, and increased calls for sustainability, traceability, and transparency (Fait et al., 2019; Goodarzian et al., 2021). The notion of sustainability is be- coming critically important in the agri-food industry due to increasing needs for food quality and safety, the effective utilisation and consump- tion of natural resources, and the balanced economic, ecological and societal performance of agri-food businesses (Mangla et al., 2018).
Agri-food businesses must eliminate supply chain inefficiencies and develop a more sustainable ecosystem (Rejeb et al., 2021a). One way to revolutionise the agri-food sector and increase sustainability is to lever- age artificial intelligence (AI) applications. According to Holt (1978), AI is the science of programming computers to mimic the tasks of human behaviour that necessitate intelligence, judgement, and experience. Coupled with high-performance computing and big data technologies, AI techniques like deep learning, machine learning, and artificial neural networks present significant potential for data-intensive science in agri- culture (Kamilaris and Prenafeta-Boldú, 2018; Liakos et al., 2018a; Rohit Sharma et al., 2020). For example, Patrício and Rieder (2018) investigate the combination of computer vision solutions and AI algorithms in pre- cision agriculture and highlight several benefits of these technologies, including task automation, profitability, and increased food quality and safety.
Khoshnevisan et al. (2015) note that AI can assist greenhouse oper- ators concerned with ecological performance in predicting the environ- mental effects of their cultivation systems and justifying claims about their products. Similarly, Pantazi et al. (2016) posit that AI can be ap- plied to understand yield response to soil variables, identify the factors responsible for yield and quality variation, and determine target yields. AI pushes the conventional agricultural practices and methods toward smart farming, a sustainable approach that helps to reduce the waste of resources (e.g., fertilisers, pesticides) and achieves sustainable devel- opment (Fan et al., 2018). Pydipati et al. (2006) highlight that combin- ing AI and machine vision helps achieve smart farming. These technologies facilitate the early detection of plant diseases, proper plant control, and minimise losses. Several AI models can process data generated from agriculture internet of things (IoT) and sensors to pro- vide accurate and precise farming for soil fertility, diseases, irrigation, and pest regulations (Lin et al., 2019). AI also makes robots well equipped to optimise productivity (Brogårdh, 2007), improve work ef- ficiency, and enhance the quality of fresh produce (Bechar and Vigneault, 2016). The use of data can enhance farming practices and op- erations as agri-food businesses can create value from it, relying on the ability of AI to manage data sharing and access control (Spanaki et al., 2021). Therefore, AI can address the knowledge needs of farming busi- nesses and increase their ability to identify diseases, monitor irrigation, reduce human efforts, and maximise yield production.




Many academics have extensively studied the use of AI in agricul- tural activities in recent years. Research content involves various as- pects, such as the state-of-the-art of AI, its applications, and promises for agri-food businesses. For example, Kollia et al. (2021) review AI-enabled food supply chains. They find that AI methodologies predict plant growth and yield, optimise energy consumption across an exten- sive network of food refrigeration systems, and automate the inspection of retail packaged food. Liakos et al. (2018a) thoroughly review the pos- sibilities of machine learning and reveal that this AI technique supports crop management and the reliable analysis of data generated from IoT sensors. According to the authors, machine learning has been employed mainly in some crops and animals, including maise, wheat, cattle, and sheep. Moreover, Saleem et al. (2019) summarise the literature sur- rounding the use of automation in agriculture through machine and deep learning tools and argue that these technologies bring human- level precision in diverse agriculture applications such as plant recogni- tion, fruit counting, plant disease detection and classification, land cover classification, and weed/crop discrimination. Shine and Murphy (2022) conduct a mapping study to aggregate and evaluate journal articles and conference papers, which employ machine learning algorithms in farming-related issues to detect patterns in the geographical sources of data, algorithms, features, assessment metrics, and methodologies applied. Hassoun et al. (2022) review the most critical food Industry
4.0 technologies, including AI, the IoT, big data analytics, and blockchain. Chen and Yu (2021) summarise the recent developments in reliable, precise, and cost-effective remote tools in the food industry, such as AI-based techniques, image processing systems, and sensors for quality evaluation. According to the authors, image processing systems and AI can be utilized for different objectives such as product classification based on shape and size, detection of product defects and microbes, and food quality grading. Qazi et al. (2022) review the literature pertaining to the applications, challenges, and future trends of IoT tech- nologies and AI techniques in smart agriculture. Finally, Tripodi et al. (2022) study the contributions of AI and machine learning to data anal- ysis and their use in next-generation breeding.
While these studies provide valuable insights into AI applications in the agri-food sector, a bibliometric analysis is still needed to analyse the interplay between AI and the agri-food sector and consolidate the liter- ature. In general, when a research field observes a significant rise in the number of published works, as in AI research (Ruchika Sharma et al., 2022; Singh et al., 2021), there is a need for organised and systematic re- views that employ quantitative methodologies to study the knowledge landscape and structure of the AI field in the agri-food industry (Rejeb et al., 2020; Rejeb et al., 2022b). Although traditional reviews mainly aim to summarise the current literature based on authors' opinions and judgments, which may be prone to numerous forms of biases (A. A. Qazi and Appolloni, 2022), bibliometric analyses add rigour thanks to their quantitative and structured literature investigations. Indeed, this rigour can be viewed as the fundamental contribution of the technique (Piwowar-Sulej et al., 2021). Moreover, the main advan- tage of bibliometrics, compared to conventional traditional review methodologies, is that it facilitates the construction of objective, reliable, detailed, and comprehensive knowledge visualisations (Rejeb et al., 2022d,e). Such visualisations constitute analytical representations of linkages between scientific entities (L. Zhang et al., 2019). The merits of scientific mapping also include studying large datasets and



generating memorable, rich, and interpretable visuals. Consequently, applying bibliometrics provides timely, unbiased, and visual techniques to trace the growth of scholarly activities and evaluate the intellectual structure of a particular research field (Rejeb et al., 2022e). It enables understanding of the historical development of a discipline and allows identifying research trends and hotspots from micro and macro per- spectives (Rejeb et al., 2021b).
Therefore, we argue that the increasing body of knowledge related to AI requires a bibliometric approach to comprehend the knowledge structure of this field. Since AI research matures and becomes increas- ingly complex, it is crucial to provide a retrospective evaluation of the publications accumulated to reveal new contributions, capture research trends, and identify prospective areas for future investigation. Overall, the aims of the study are driven by the four research questions below:
What are the research trends on the nexus of AI and the agri-food sector?
How is AI being utilised in the agri-food sector?
What are the important research hotspots in AI and the agri-food sector?
What are the key challenges to AI application in the agri-food sector?

The findings of the bibliometric analysis show a significant rise in the scholarly works examining the potential of AI for the agri-food industry. Several bibliometric indicators, including the most relevant journals, the most cited countries, and the most publications, are also identified. The keyword analysis demonstrates the prevalence of some AI techniques in the agri-food context, including deep learning, convolutional neural network, and artificial neural networks. Furthermore, the trend topics analysis shows an earlier focus on using AI-powered robots in agricul- ture and an emerging tendency toward different technologies and AI techniques, including big data, the IoT, deep learning, machine learning, and fuzzy logic. The keyword co-occurrence network analysis aids in unravelling the research hotspots of AI, suggesting that AI techniques contribute to food safety and the development of smart farming prac- tices (e.g., smart crop, soil, water, and livestock management). However, AI's benefits cannot be realised unless the technology's social, technical, ethical, and organisational issues are addressed. The overall findings of the review have been integrated into a unified and sound theoretical framework to underscore the long-term impact of AI on various agri- food resources and advance future studies on the technology. In terms of contributions, no prior bibliometric analysis of AI research in the agri-food context is as extensive, systematic, and timely as ours. By doing a bibliometric study of this subject, we offer in-depth understand- ing and enrich the knowledge field by highlighting key AI applications employed in the agri-food industry and the potential and constraints of AI for agri-food businesses. Moreover, intriguing research possibilities are offered for researchers, professionals, and policymakers wishing to understand AI and its role in attaining sustainability in the agri-food in- dustry. Furthermore, this study's novelty resides in the useful concep- tual framework for practitioners and researchers who want to grasp AI's influence on agri-food resources. Further, various research proposi- tions developed from the framework may be experimentally confirmed by academics in the future.
After the introduction, we describe the bibliometric technique and
research procedure employed. Next, we analyse the main results, in- cluding the yearly distribution of publications, the most productive journals and nations, the most influential publications, and the research hotspots. In Section 4, we discuss the findings and highlight research contributions, research agenda, and shortcomings. In Section 5, the study finishes with short reflections and conclusions.

Bibliometric method

Multiple indicators can be utilised in a bibliometric study to analyse a specific academic subject (Kapoor et al., 2018; Mishra et al., 2017;
Rejeb et al., 2020; Rejeb et al., 2021a). We utilised best practices and rec- ommendations to conduct a dependable and insightful bibliometric analysis (Beydoun et al., 2019; Fahimnia et al., 2015; Mostafa, 2020) of the interplay between AI and the agri-food sector. As a first step, we consulted one of the leading and trustworthy scientific databases, Web of Science (WoS) (Caulfield et al., 2012; da Silva et al., 2017; Treiblmaier et al., 2020). While a few scholars have utilised Scopus to conduct similar analyses (Faruk et al., 2021; Herrera-Franco et al., 2020; Mishra et al., 2021), recent works have identified that the bulk of bibliometric studies use the WoS databases (Alnajem et al., 2021; Escamilla-Fajardo et al., 2020; González-Serrano et al., 2019; B. Wang et al., 2014). Bartol and Mackiewicz-Talarczyk (2015) argue that, unlike other scientific databases, the records extracted from the WoS database are more standardised and consistent. WoS enables the straightforward retrieval of publications, author names, sources, and cited references. Moreover, WoS represents the most renowned database and has been internationally utilised to assess academic performances (L. Zhang et al., 2019). The search strategy applied to extract the data on AI re- search in the agri-food context is as follows. Following Fosso Wamba and Queiroz (2021), “artificial intelligence” OR “machine learning” OR “deep learning” OR “robot” were used and combined with “food” OR “agriculture*” OR “agri-food” OR “agro-food” in the title, abstract, and keywords fields to extract the publications (see Fig. 1). WoS Core Collection, including Science Citation Index Expanded (Sci-Expanded), Social Sciences Citation Index (SSCI), Arts & Humanities Citation Index (A&HCI), and Emerging Sources Citation Index (ESCI), was used to conduct the research. Even though there were no restrictions on the time span, the first two papers selected were published in 1992. Non-English language publications and publications with incomplete bibliographic data (e.g., keywords) were excluded. The initial search query returned 4869 documents. The returned publications were evalu- ated against the inclusion criteria, assuring publications were English- language speaking, with complete bibliographic data, and relevant to the research topic. Moreover, two reviewers were involved in the care- ful reading of the titles and abstracts of the returned documents to min- imise bias and guarantee the validity and reliability of the findings (Thomé et al., 2016). The application of these filters and the manual screening of the documents led to the exclusion of 708 documents, ei- ther non-English documents with incomplete bibliographic data or ir- relevant. To analyse the findings, we used the visualisation tool VOSviewer (Rejeb et al., 2022c; van Eck and Waltman, 2011, 2014) and the statistical software package Biblioshiny (Shonhe, 2020). These software tools are specialised in data mining and quantitative analysis. Finally, the publications were coded according to the publication year, most productive journals, most cited countries, and influential publica- tions. Keywords analysis, abstract analysis, trend topic analysis, and keyword co-occurrence analysis were also conducted to depict the dynamics, trends, and avenues for future research opportunities in the AI field.

Results from the bibliometric analysis

Our analysis did not restrict the time period and noted that the first two extracted publications appeared in 1992 (see Table 1). 589 of the 4750 papers retrieved contain insufficient data for bibliometric analysis. Consequently, we evaluated 4161 papers written by 14,779 authors. A single author wrote only 4.49% (187 out of 4161 total papers). Moreover, the authors employed a large number (12375) of keywords.

Annual distribution of publications

Fig. 2 depicts the evolution of AI research in the context of the agri- food industry based on the annual distribution of a sample of papers. There are three distinct growth stages visible. In the first phase, from 1992 to 2000, the maximum number of papers published per year was fifteen (in 1997); in the second phase, from 2001 to 2010, the




Fig. 1. The review protocol.


maximum was thirty. We can observe slow and inconsistent growth, surpassing thirty published documents in 2010. The last three years have witnessed unprecedented growth in the third phase (2011 to 2020). During this period, AI applications in the agri-food industry re- ceived great attention, as evidenced by the sharp increase in publica- tions. In 2020, scholarly output more than doubled from 2019, surpassing 1700 documents, suggesting that the proliferation and prev- alence of various AI approaches and applications in the agri-food indus- try can explain this dramatic increase.

Top 20 most relevant journals

Regarding the most relevant journals based on the number of arti- cles published, Table 2 lists the top 20 and reveals that Computers and Electronics in Agriculture is the only outlet to surpass 300 publications. In addition, we can see that information technology and environmental science journals dominate the list. Surprisingly, no business, manage- ment, or operations research journals were ranked among the top 20.

Table 1
Main information regarding data collection.

This suggests that the dominant journals focus on the technical aspects of AI research in the agri-food sector, necessitating knowledge from var- ious disciplines and sources.

Top 20 most cited nations

Table 3 lists the top 20 countries by total citations regarding the most cited nations. Only the United States and China received over nine thousand citations. Followed by Spain (3219), the United Kingdom (3010), and Australia (2771). Consequently, the average num- ber of citations per article in China was lower than in all countries listed. This result may suggest that Chinese researchers need to improve the calibre of their published work. In addition, most cited articles origi- nated from developed nations, reflecting the technological advance- ments made in the AI field and the availability of advanced research labs. Although the United States dominated the list, Europe, Asia (China, India, Japan, and Korea), and Oceania (Australia) are well repre- sented. Latin American and African nations did not appear in the rank- ing, except Brazil. Switzerland ranked first (44.92 average citations per article), followed by Ireland (39.85), Greece (34.52), Sweden (31.14),
and the Netherlands (24.79).

Top 20 most cited publications

Table 4 includes the authors, titles, sources, citations, and citations per year for the most cited publications. We can see that two of the top 20 papers were published in 2012. The most cited articles incorpo- rate AI techniques into the agri-food industry. Algorithms (regression) and deep learning are the most frequently used AI techniques in the top five AI-related publications. Overall, regression, deep learning, ma- chine learning, and optimisation applications in the agri-food industry received considerable attention. Recent articles by Kamilaris and Prenafeta-Boldú (2018), Bioucas-Dias et al. (2012), and Wolfert et al. (2017) were the three most cited according to the total citations per year (TCY). The authors of the most-cited paper examined applications of deep learning in agriculture and received a significant number of cita- tions per year (153.75). In the second most-cited paper, AI algorithms were useful for supporting hyperspectral cameras and facilitating sev- eral agri-food activities, including remote sensing of farms and food safety. The third most-cited paper examined big data applications in smart agriculture and how their deployment can provide new opportu- nities for data-intensive science in the agri-food industry. Other cited




Fig. 2. The annual distribution of publications.


publications from 2018 emphasise the significance of AI techniques for agriculture and farming. Lastly, we observe that Huaizhi Wang is the primary author of two papers and that computer science journals are the leaders in AI research in the agri-food industry Table 4.

Keywords analysis: Authors versus keywords plus

We extracted both the authors and keywords plus from WoS to ex- amine keywords dynamics (see Table 5). The former set of keywords is provided by the authors themselves, while the second is generated re- gardless of the title or author keywords, reflecting the paper's contents with profound depth and variety (Garfield, 1990; Rejeb et al., 2022d). The analysis of author keywords and keywords plus could overcome lim- itations like the uncomplete meaning and the small number of author keywords. Since the keywords used in the search query were “artificial intelligence”, “machine learning”, “deep learning”, “food”, and “agricul- ture*”, it is evident that they appeared in the first ranks on the authors' keywords' side. Nevertheless, it should be mentioned that the keyword “machine learning” exceeded four times the occurrences of “artificial in- telligence”. Moreover, we can see the high frequency of other AI tech- niques such as deep learning, convolutional neural networks, and artificial neural networks. Other keywords also held a high position, such as “remote sensing”, “computer vision”, “image processing”, “big data”, and “internet of things”. These technologies constitute enablers for precision agriculture strategies. They can optimise crop production,
reduce the environmental impacts of agricultural activities, and ensure reliable sensing of different variables (e.g., soil properties, water manage- ment, weather, topography) for large crop fields. As per the keywords plus, terms such as “classification”, “system”, “model”, “prediction”, and “identification” appeared in the top 10, thus informing the keywords sup- plied by the authors. In addition, some other essential topics emerge from the keywords plus list, including “regression”, “optimisation”, and “seg- mentation”. In this vein, this collection of keywords has an important as- sociation with AI approaches since they reflect some AI capabilities in agri-food management, among other things, prediction and optimisation of crop yield, plant segmentation, and forecasting of environmental vari- ables. Therefore, keywords plus advocate the potential of AI for the real- isation of increased value within the agri-food sector.

Treemap based on abstracts
To supplement the analysis of the keyword's dynamics, we ex- tracted the most frequent terms from abstracts. In Fig. 3, the rectangle size reflects the occurrence of the term. On the left side, we can see that the popular terms are “data”, “learning”, “machine”, “model”, “system”, "food“, and “accuracy“. Besides, there is a clear appearance of main AI tasks such as “classification”, “analysis”, “prediction”, and “detection”. As a result, this bolsters the argument that AI is a game- changing technology that can contribute to the sustainability of the agri-food sector by enhancing current agricultural systems and food value chains.



Table 2
Top 20 most relevant journals.


Table 3
Top 20 most cited countries.

Rank Sources	Articles		


Table 4
Most globally cited articles.

Note: AU = Authors; T = Title; SO = Source; TC = Total of citations; TCY = Total of citations per year.


Trend topics

To identify emerging topics at the intersection of AI and the agri- food industry, we generated Fig. 4, which depicts research hotspots and log-frequency-based research trends. Accordingly, the organisation of AI topics reveals that robots, algorithms (i.e., the Kalmar filter),



Table 5
Top 20 most frequent keywords (authors keywords vs. keywords plus).

Rank Authors keywords	Occurrences Keywords plus  Occurrences
machine learning	1025	classification	406
deep learning	514	system	296
network
5	precision agriculture	197	identification	157
automation, and expert systems were popularised and revitalised in the early years of the field (2002–2006). The dominant themes between 2007 and 2016 were the integration of AI-powered robots and agricul- tural mechanisation. Emerging topics such as “mobile robot,” “autono- mous vehicle,” “agriculture vehicles,” and “parallel robot” could be supported by AI capabilities to automate human tasks, optimise opera- tional efficiency, and increase output. Commonly, these robots employ AI to enhance their situational awareness and sensing capabilities dur- ing agricultural tasks. Since 2017, the focus has been on various technol- ogies and AI techniques, including big data, the IoT, convolutional neural networks, deep learning, machine learning, and fuzzy logic. Combining these innovations is essential for the transition to precision agriculture, which provides agri-food companies with options to optimise their pro- duction, reduce resource consumption, and improve the quality of agri- cultural products. In conclusion, the results indicate that, at the time this analysis was conducted, precision agriculture and AI techniques were key concepts and current trends.

Cluster analysis

To better understand the research hotspots, we conducted a keyword co-occurrence network to identify topics with common features (Kapoor et al., 2018; Rejeb et al., 2020). As a result, we set the parameters mentioned in Table 6. According to Fig. 5, four clusters were generated for the keywords supplied during the study period (1992–2020). The first cluster (red) is the most significant, consisting of terms like “Machine Learning”, “Random Forest”, “Support Vector Machine”, “Remote Sensing”, and “Classification”. Besides, the keyword “Food Security” belongs to this cluster, and it represents a critical driver for AI implementation and further technological innovations. As a




Fig. 3. Treemap based on abstracts.


solution for food security issues, AI techniques help create smart farm- ing, promote sustainable agriculture, and transform subsistence farming into competitive and profitable agri-food businesses. In the second clus- ter (green), other AI techniques were highlighted, such as “Deep
Learning”, “Convolutional Neural Networks”, “Image Classification”, and “Recurrent Neural Network”. Another keyword that received in- creasing attention is “UAV” (unmanned aerial vehicles), which implies that this technology also supports the rise of digitalisation in agriculture




Fig. 4. Trend topics.



Table 6
Keyword clustering parameters.

Type of analysis	Keyword co-occurrence


Unit of analysis	Author keywords
Counting method	Full counting
Minimum number of a keyword	20
Threshold	88
Number of clusters	4
due to its ability in spraying, crop monitoring, field surveying, identi- fication of drought spots and harmful weeds, and surveillance. The next cluster (blue) was predominated by keywords like “Agriculture”, “Agricultural Robot”, “Internet of Things”, and “Robotics”. Combined with AI, these technologies can inform more intelligent agri-food decisions by controlling crop behaviour, monitoring livestock, crop growth, and supporting the efficient use of manpower. Therefore, these technological advancements play a critical role in developing a more data-driven and knowledge-intensive agri-food sector. In the last cluster (yellow), we see the predominance of “Artificial intelli- gence”, “Artificial Neural Networks”, “Modelling”, “Genetic Algorithm”, and “Optimisation”- all are innovative and reliable solutions for current agri-food challenges.
In general, the findings from the keyword co-occurrence clustering suggest that AI techniques such as machine learning, deep learning, and artificial neural networks were the most common approaches in agri-food systems and thus, accelerated the sector's digitalisation. Addi- tionally, robots, the IoT, wireless sensor networks, and UAVs are popular technologies integrated with AI to modernise farming practices. Never- theless, other adjacent technologies like blockchain, 3D printing, aug- mented reality, and virtual reality did not appear in the visualisation.
This finding suggests a lack of studies examining the fusion of these emerging technologies and AI to support precision agriculture, increase the integrity of the agri-food value chain, and achieve sustainability.

Discussion

In this paper, we analysed the relationship between AI and the agri- food industry and AI's role in accelerating the shift to precision and cog- nitive agriculture. In contrast to previous reviews on AI and agri-food systems (e.g., Jha et al., 2019; Patrício and Rieder, 2018), our findings are novel and insightful because this is one of the few investigations to use a comprehensive sample of research papers that were published over nearly three decades. Consequently, the following sections provide an in-depth examination of AI and agri-food industry developments (Liakos et al., 2018b; Sharma et al., 2020).

Theoretical contributions

What are the research dynamics on the interplay between AI and the Agri-food sector?
By addressing the first research question, our bibliometric review analyses the key productivity measures of the field. According to the sam- ple we analysed, the earliest publications were published in 1992. In ad- dition, the analysis depicted the dynamics of scholarly production throughout three major stages. The initial period of publication ran from 1992 to 2000, and during this period, only a few publications were pro- duced annually. In the second stage, between 2001 and 2010, the field grew steadily, reaching 40 publications for the first time in 2010. This was due to the unprecedented advances in computer science during this period. In the third stage, between 2011 and 2020, AI techniques




Fig. 5. Keyword co-occurrence network.



exhibited phenomenal performance due to their large data storage capacity and high computational power. The number of publications has reached its peak, surpassing 1700 papers for the first time in 2020.
In addition, our research identified the most pertinent sources. Com- puters and Electronics in Agriculture, a leading journal, dominate the AI literature in the agri-food industry in this regard. On the one hand, com- puter science and engineering journals were the most prolific and ranked highly. In contrast, this ranking did not include business, man- agement, operations research, and decision science-focused publica- tions. According to the number of citations received, the United States dominated the list, while European and Asian countries occupied signif- icant positions. In the top 20 most influential nations, no contributions from Latin America and Africa were relevant. This suggests that the sci- entific outcome on a global scale was more concentrated and predomi- nantly represented by developed nations.
The current academic literature describes the role of AI in the mod- ernisation of agriculture and the transition from unsustainable farming practices to more data-driven precision agriculture. Several thought- provoking issues arise in this vein. For instance, almost all the literature on integrating AI techniques in the agri-food industry was published within the last five years (2015–2020). This expansion coincides with the transition to agriculture 4.0, in which precision agriculture is sup- ported by AI techniques, the IoT, robots, and smart food systems. In in- formation technology-related journals, applications of AI in the agri- food industry dominated the discussion. It is expected that the flagship journals of AI research will accommodate the evolving nature of the AI field by incorporating this crucial topic into their editorial strategies. Finally, it is suggested that academic institutions from underdeveloped regions of the world engage in AI research by forming partnerships with research labs, universities, and governments in developed nations..

How is AI being used in the Agri-food sector?
Based on the results, our study can draw several important conclu- sions about how agri-food systems use AI to facilitate agricultural oper- ations (Liakos et al., 2018b; Mohanty et al., 2016; Pantazi et al., 2016). From this perspective, we identified the publications with the highest global citations (see Table 4). According to these publications, AI algo- rithms, deep learning, and machine learning are advancing the creation of a sustainable agri-food industry and promoting precision agriculture. AI techniques attracted a great deal of interest. They gained momentum due to their capacity to enhance farmers' awareness of potentially haz- ardous weather conditions, crop health conditions, and resource utilisation, which would otherwise be difficult to detect. Utilising robots to automate field operations, increase agricultural productivity, im- prove food safety and quality, reduce fuel consumption, and promote sustainability is another intriguing strategy (Bechar and Vigneault, 2016; Wolfert et al., 2017; X. Zhang et al., 2020; Zhao et al., 2016). As a result, these technologies provide solutions that reduce the reliance on human labour, increase the global competitiveness of agri-food busi- nesses, and increase their overall profitability (Lenain et al., 2006; Slaughter et al., 2008; Valente et al., 2011; Wolfert et al., 2017; Xiong et al., 2017).
Moreover, by analysing the keyword dynamics, our study revealed that “machine learning” and “deep learning” are among the most inves- tigated AI techniques in agriculture. Artificial and convolutional neural networks are crucial enablers for precision agriculture due to their ca- pacity to analyse produce images and determine its condition (damaged or healthy), support decision making, and predict climate (Deo and Şahin, 2015). Big data, robots, and the IoT are key drivers of developing smarter and more autonomous agri-food value chain practices, which are advantageous to farmers and consumers. In addition to “remote sensing,” “classification,” “image processing,” and “transfer learning,” there are several other noteworthy topics. According to the keywords provided in the abstracts, the most popular research topics are “data”, “learning”, “models”, “classification”, “robot”, “prediction”, “detection”, and “neural”. In addition to reflecting the breadth and velocity of digital
transformations, these topics demonstrate that the agri-food industry is increasingly seeking AI implementations. Despite the abundance of re- search on AI, it is essential to emphasise the paucity of research examin- ing the combination of AI and other emerging technologies, such as 5G telecommunications, 3D printing, blockchain, and bioinformatics, in the development of sustainable agri-food supply chains. Integrating these technologies enables farmers to work more creatively and effectively; however, the real question lies in comprehending the adverse side ef- fects of AI-assisted agriculture. Consequently, our findings emphasise the urgent need for more research on how responsible AI can redefine farming practices and achieve holistic sustainability in the agri-food sector (Abdella et al., 2020; Camaréna, 2020).


What are the trend topics pertaining to AI and the Agri-food sector? We can observe that machine learning, deep learning, artificial neu- ral networks, fuzzy logic, genetic algorithms, and expert systems are the most popular AI approaches supporting the agri-food industry in major trend topics. Moreover, emerging technologies such as AI-assisted ro- bots, the IoT, and big data are linked to the digitalisation of agriculture and precision farming, which is expected to become one of the most prominent trends in the agri-food industry (Kamilaris and Prenafeta-
Boldú, 2018; Wolfert et al., 2017).
By examining the activities that AI techniques can facilitate, it be- comes clear that they can be applied to various fields, including crop performance analysis, livestock monitoring, disease detection, yield prediction, and production optimisation, among others. In addition, AI affords additional opportunities in other agri-food activities, such as au- tomatic recognition, remote sensing, plant classification, smart irriga- tion, soil management, cultivation, phenotyping, yield mapping, field scouting, and weed management.


What are the main challenges of AI in the Agri-food sector?
To respond to this question, four categories of obstacles were high- lighted. First, AI in the agri-food industry exacerbates social concerns, such as replacing human labour with automation and machines (Lezoche et al., 2020). Despite requiring expensive specialised equip- ment and labour, Bechar and Vigneault (2016) note that investments in robotics and automation can be profitable because the required workforce typically decreases enough to offset the high investment costs. As a result, minimising human intervention will pose a major problem for employment standards. The second class relates to the technological constraints of AI, such as connectivity, power supply, bandwidth, security, data validation and integrity, network latency, re- sponse time, flexibility, and the need for big data in training AI models (Eli-Chukwu, 2019; Guillén et al., 2021; Wolfert et al., 2017). The third class relates to privacy and ethical issues, such as the absence of privacy norms in AI-based agri-food systems, liability for decisions made by AI, and regulations regarding data processing and analysis (Beydoun et al., 2019; Camaréna, 2020; Udendhran and Balamurugan, 2021; Villa- Henriksen et al., 2020). Ethical considerations, fairness, accessibility, and transparency are a few trade-offs and repercussions raised by AI that require urgent discussion (Camaréna, 2020). The fourth category relates to organisational barriers to AI adoption, such as reluctance to adopt new technologies (Fountas et al., 2020), cultural and bureaucratic issues (Chatterjee and Hussain, 2021), upgrade of organisational pro- cesses, skill and knowledge requirements (Balducci et al., 2018; Lezoche et al., 2020), investment cost (Wolfert et al., 2017), and organisational uncertainty. Therefore, these findings suggest that agri- food companies should work diligently to overcome the obstacles to AI integration and employee adaptability to the new AI-based business model (Bar et al., 2016). Businesses in the agri-food industry should develop the organisational capabilities required to reconfigure and integrate existing resources and adapt to the changing conditions of AI-enabled agri-food processes.



Theoretical implications

Fig. 6 presents a categorisation framework comprising four main el- ements considering the significant findings regarding AI applications in the agri-food industry. AI techniques and related technologies, applica- tion areas, AI benefits, and adoption barriers are discussed.
Machine learning, deep learning, and artificial neural networks are the most studied approaches to AI techniques and other technologies (Balducci et al., 2018; Kamilaris and Prenafeta-Boldú, 2018). Various ag- ricultural activities, such as crop cultivation, livestock farming, disease diagnosis, crop image classification, plant identification and segmenta- tion, and resource (e.g., soil, water) management, could employ these AI techniques. In addition, we discovered that crop yield prediction, irri- gation, consumer behaviour analysis, disaster (e.g., drought, flood) pre- diction, and food traceability are the most prevalent AI applications in the agri-food industry. The benefits of automation of farming practices, increased accuracy and rapidity of plant diagnosis (Sharma et al., 2020; Shendryk et al., 2021), cost savings, efficient energy consumption, and improved product quality are the results of utilising AI technologies (Smetana et al., 2021). In addition, AI techniques can enhance agricul- tural production, reduce greenhouse gas emissions, ensure animal wel- fare, improve field navigation, and boost the performance of agricultural robots (Afonso et al., 2020; Hemming et al., 2020; Kamilaris and Prenafeta-Boldú, 2018; Sharma et al., 2020).
To achieve more beneficial and responsible AI implementations in
the agri-food sector, it is necessary to overcome several obstacles. For example, the literature acknowledges social issues of AI, such as robots replacing humans in the workforce and unemployment (Ampatzidis et al., 2017; Rose and Chilvers, 2018). AI is hampered by lack of connec- tivity, security attacks, limited computation resources, and low network bandwidth (Liu et al., 2018). Therefore, effective AI algorithms and systems must be designed and developed to improve their task perfor- mance (Liu et al., 2018). Other concerns include data privacy and ethics; as a result, agri-food businesses are required to implement and enforce stringent measures and policies to safeguard their data and comply with the applicable regulations. In addition, organisational barriers, such as resistance to change, the need for new skills and capabilities, and prohibitive investment costs, create uncertainty about the value of AI in the agri-food industry.



Fig. 7. RBV-based framework for the interplay between AI and agri-food resources.



From framework to research propositions
Considering the proposed categorisation framework, a set of re- search propositions are derived using the Resource-Based View (RBV) to provide a foundation for future research on AI applications in the agri-food industry. RBV is based on the idea that a company's competi- tive position is determined by its unique resources and capabilities and their interrelationships (Barney, 1991; Farooq and O’Brien, 2015). In this context, the interaction between AI and the agri-food industry must be rooted in resources, including raw materials, water, soil, energy, human resources, technology, and relationships (see Fig. 7). For each resource, we provide several insightful and recommended research propositions.




Fig. 6. The framework of the study findings.



Raw materials. In the agri-food sector, raw materials are vital for product quality and safety. They include seeds, nutrients, fertilisers, and chemicals. By deploying AI techniques, farmers could understand several agricultural-related issues such as seed identification, herbicide use, classification, and identification of raw materials quality (Kamilaris and Prenafeta-Boldú, 2018). Furthermore, AI technologies enable farmers to understand their crops at a micro-scale, enabling the early detection of diseases in seeds (Patrício and Rieder, 2018) and maintain- ing precise fertigation (Bechar and Vigneault, 2016). Therefore, the fol- lowing research propositions emerge:
RP1–1: AI enables agri-food businesses to improve their production processes and deliver high-quality products because of its ability to control the quality of raw materials used.
RP1–2: AI aids in protecting seed and crop damage from herbicides,
viruses, and insects.
RP1–3: AI aids agricultural raw materials tolerance to environmental stresses like floods and drought and plays a role in improved taste and nutrition benefits.

Water. Since water represents the vital resource consumed by agri-food businesses, there is a need to reduce the pressure on this resource and reinforce water stewardship in the agri-food sector. AI can save the excess use of water and support the development of adequate water and agricultural policies (Sánchez et al., 2020). The big data generated by smart farming sensors can be processed using machine learning to improve the management of smart farm- ing, gain crop insights, elevate productivity, and optimise water re- sources (Freeman et al., 2019; Navarro et al., 2020). Based on this, we suggest that:
RP2–1: AI facilitates the use and processing of large datasets to control crop status and optimise sustainable water use.
RP2–2: AI aids in reducing water consumption in agriculture while maintaining product quality and yield.

Soil. Soil is an essential non-renewable resource in the agri-food industry, and its preservation is crucial. Because destruction and erosion pose a threat to soil, there is an opportunity to unlock the value of AI and ensure the preservation of this precious resource. For example, machine learning can help predict and identify soil properties such as drying, temperature, and moisture content (Liakos et al., 2018b). AI tools auto- mate the acquisition of knowledge and the analysis of large data sets concerning soil health, condition, and hydrology (Benke et al., 2020; Kuzmanovski et al., 2015). Consequently, we derive the following re- search propositions:
RP3–1: AI provides more insights into soil properties, temperature, and moisture, increasing farmers' understanding of ecosystem dy- namics and impingements in the agri-food sector.
RP3–2: AI aids the selection of the most optimal soil characteristics
utilised in crop yield prediction.
RP3–3: AI positively impacts soil fertility and productivity.

Energy. Arguably, an enormous amount of energy is imperative for the production, storage, and distribution of food products (Paulikienė et al., 2020). To ensure more efficient energy use, farmers could leverage AI to reduce energy consumption and cost through pre- dictive process parameter optimisation (Smetana et al., 2021). Further- more, machine learning could develop models for the effective management of energy systems in the agri-food sector (Cubric, 2020). Therefore, AI supports energy conservation and ultimately reduces en- ergy waste thanks to its ability to forecast energy demand based on op- erational usage, historical demands, or current weather (Bokade et al., 2021). In light of this, we propose that:
RP4–1: AI aids in optimising energy consumption during planting, irrigation, harvesting, processing, packaging, transportation, and distribution of food products.
RP4–2: AI aids the use of renewable energies to power agricultural
operations.
RP4–3: AI facilitates the recycling of food waste and the development of more sustainable energy options such as bio-refinery products (e.g., biofuels).

Human resources. Innovation in human resources represents a primary source of improved sustainable performance in the agri-food sector (Brofman Epelbaum and Garcia Martinez, 2014). Human re- sources are vital for agri-food businesses, requiring significant attention due to their impact on production, financial, marketing, and manage- ment decisions (Alreshidi, 2019). To optimise their utilisation, agri- food businesses can integrate AI to develop more skilful and flexible workers. With the support of AI-assisted robots, agricultural workers would no longer need to perform manual tasks (e.g., hand weeding of organic crops), thus avoiding several health risks such as musculoskele- tal disorders and chronic diseases (Pérez-Ruíz et al., 2014). The synergy between AI and human workers can improve the applicability of several agricultural activities such as harvesting (Zhao et al., 2016) and create a safer and less stressful working environment. However, agri-food busi- nesses must reskill and upskill their human resources to be a source of differentiation and better adapt to changing industrial requirements. The scarcity of human resources with analytical skills may negatively in- fluence the adoption of AI techniques. Therefore, organisations are incentivised to develop skill-building programs for farmers and other actors in the agri-food supply chain (Sharma et al., 2020). Therefore, we present the following research propositions:
RP5–1: AI augments the analytical capabilities of human resources in the agri-food sector.
RP5–2: AI aids the safety and convenience of the working environ- ment in the agri-food sector.
RP5–3: AI increases the flexibility, agility, adaptability, responsive- ness, and resilience of farmers.
RP5.4: How human resources are managed in AI-assisted agriculture impacts agri-food businesses' performance.

Technology. Technological progress contributes to the automa- tion of agri-food activities, agricultural productivity, efficiency, reliabil- ity, and precision (Bechar and Vigneault, 2016). The smart reform of agri-food systems necessitates the implementation of innovative prac- tices and technology-driven processes. This calls for agri-food organisa- tions to adopt AI to fortify their technological infrastructure. As such, the combination of AI and other technologies like the IoT, edge computing, blockchain, and augmented reality is considered a promising solution for pest identification, safety traceability of agricultural products, and environmental pollution caused by the use of fertilisers and pesticides (Zhang et al., 2020). Furthermore, AI augments the utility of data analyt- ics to improve crop production and assist farmers in selecting the best breed according to their location and climate (Lova Raju and Vijayaraghavan, 2020), monitoring livestock in real-time (Taneja et al., 2020), and predicting frost events (Diedrichs et al., 2018). Therefore, the following research propositions can be investigated:
RP6–1: The fusion of AI techniques and other technologies (e.g., the IoT, computing technologies, blockchain, big data analytics, robotics, virtual/augmented reality) ushers in an interconnected digital ecosys- tem that turns existing farming practices into knowledge-based agriculture and maximises production levels and product quality.
RP6–2: The integration of AI and other advanced technologies
brings significant economic, environmental, and social benefits to the agri-food sector.



RP6–3: Through AI and data analytics, agri-food firms would be able to develop sustainable and responsible business models and build synergies and collaboration with other agri-food ecosystems.
RP6–4: AI techniques, in combination with other technologies, can
help improve agri-food product packaging, handling optimisation, customisation, and to mitigate the risk of food fraud and other opportunistic behaviour.

Relationships. Closer strategic relationships with customers and suppliers are crucial for business learning and adaptation (Lezoche et al., 2020). AI provides a cooperative mechanism that improves collab- orative activities and value co-creation with the agri-food sector stake- holders to empower relationships. For example, machine learning algorithms can ensure the optimal use of resources through the agri- food supply chain and create a novel dimension of symbiosis in this sec- tor (Sharma et al., 2020). AI techniques can aid farmers in identifying the most demanded food products, shortage and supply, and most suit- able suppliers. AI can turn customer data into actionable insights and in- sightful knowledge that can be leveraged to strengthen customer relationship management and gain a significant business value (Fiore et al., 2017). The use of AI can lead to more precise prediction of future demand and accurate targeting of potential customers, thereby maximising the profitability of agri-food businesses. However, a major issue of AI applications and related technologies is that they necessitate collaboration between multiple stakeholders playing different roles in the agri-food value chain (Wolfert et al., 2017). As a result, new organisational connections and modes of collaboration need to be developed in the supply chain to accelerate the transition toward AI-assisted agriculture and farming. Therefore, AI can create more robust and closer linkages with suppliers and customers, achieving higher levels of trust and loyalty. Based on the prior discussion, the following research propositions are suggested:
RP7–1: The use of AI stimulates collaboration, coordination, and value co-creation among the agri-food sector stakeholders.
RP7–2: The impact of AI-enabled collaborative relationships on the performance of agri-food businesses.
RP7–3: AI helps to coordinate the pace of information sharing, prevent excess inventory, and reduce inefficiencies.

Agenda for future research
As a critical resource for the growth of plants (Zakir et al., 2021), soil can significantly benefit from AI implementations. As such, AI and machine learning applications can assist farmers in understanding soil conditions, including PH level, nitrogen, nutrients, and moisture con- tent. Farmers can leverage AI techniques to predict soil water content and select the most suitable crops to maximise yields (Yu et al., 2021). As a result, the real-time prediction of soil parameters can contribute to more sustained land resource management and irrigation practices. Future research can investigate the utility and performance of different AI techniques to ensure accurate estimations of soil conditions (Ge et al., 2018). Since the modelling of soil water content is a challenging task due to plant growth dynamics, climate changes, and soil content varia- tions, there is a need for efficient, reliable, and accurate AI algorithms to facilitate the processing and analysis of soil water data. This is crucial as it helps design an adequate watering schedule and lessening the effect of drought situations (Adeyemi et al., 2018).
The agri-food industry represents the major consumer of water on a worldwide scale since crops largely depend on water availability. Con- sidering the significant depletion rate of water resources, there is a need for effective water management to conserve this resource and es- tablish sustainable agricultural production. The effective use of water can be conducive to significant improvements in water quality and a de- crease in health issues and pollution (Neupane and Guo, 2019). In this vein, recent research on AI demonstrates the technology's ability to
improve water management by monitoring water levels, scheduling water runs, and regulating water amounts needed by individual crops. Even though AI offers several tangible advantages to water manage- ment, Kamarudin et al. (2021) state that AI applications in plant water assessments are still under-studied. Future research should examine how AI techniques can increase water productivity and enhance water management practices in low water productivity areas (Virnodkar et al., 2020). Other opportunities for future studies include exploring AI's role in water erosion assessment (Kamilaris and Prenafeta-Boldú, 2018) and supporting precision agriculture systems to ensure water re- sources' stability (Ganeshkumar et al., 2021).
The deployment of AI in farming activities can improve energy man- agement (Cubric, 2020). AI allows for the modelling of energy needed in farming activities, thus contributing to energy saving and the delivery of green and clean agricultural products (Bolandnazar et al., 2020). The adoption of AI and the shift to smart agriculture can motivate more farmers to utilise green energy sources (Ragazou et al., 2022). AI plays a critical role in mitigating the carbon footprints caused by agriculture, farming, and food production. The agri-food industry can capitalise on AI to optimise energy consumption and produce more with fewer en- ergy resources (Mor et al., 2021). Related to this theme, future research should attempt to develop efficient AI models to predict the optimal amount of energy necessary for agricultural activities (Nabavi- Pelesaraei et al., 2018). In addition, researchers are recommended to as- sess the energy efficiency achieved by AI use at different levels of the agri-food supply chain. Another topic of interest is examining the sup- port of AI to agricultural activities, which are based on sustainable ener- gies such as wind energy, solar energy, biomass, and geothermal energy (Escamilla-García et al., 2020). The development of new AI-enabled systems to minimise the energy use of greenhouses is also an intriguing research direction that needs further attention since AI can offer automated, data-driven, and actionable insights to reshape greenhouse crop farming.
Increasing agricultural production at least costs while protecting the environment represents one of the main objectives of the agri-food in- dustry. Timely detection and control of issues related to crop manage- ment can help boost production and profits. In recent years, AI is utilised to increase crop output and productivity from effective agricul- tural resource utilisation based on remote sensing of field-based infor- mation (Zhou et al., 2021). Farmers can connect with applications and respond to fast change requests for processes and raw materials such as inputs, seed stock, soil moisture, temperature and light for crops, and crop growth components. As a result, plants can easily be controlled to meet requirements (Manogaran et al., 2021). In this regard, Chlingaryan et al. (2018) argue that machine learning techniques have helped achieve precise yield predictions for different crops, quantify ni- trogen status, and model expert knowledge for crop management. AI can establish in-season crop management systems that make real- time decisions regarding the amount, location, and timing to apply optimal inputs and optimise profitability in agriculture production (Weiss et al., 2020). Other beneficial AI applications in agriculture also include rapid plant disease detection, plant phenotyping, efficient use of agrochemicals, and support for workers with location-relevant agro- nomic advice (Tzachor et al., 2022). Like crop management, AI offers ac- curate and reliable estimation and prediction of farming parameters to maximise the production of livestock systems and achieve substantial economic benefits (Liakos et al., 2018a). For example, weight forecast- ing systems can anticipate the future weights of cattle before slaughter, enabling farmers to change feeds and livestock conditions accordingly. Similarly, AI techniques and models can be used to estimate the growth of animals, forecast their yield, assess their water needs, and prevent diseases from occurring based on past observations (Kamilaris and Prenafeta-Boldú, 2018). Overall, future crop and livestock management studies may involve questions about how AI can support farmers in predicting crop varieties and their performance in different environ- ments, thereby increasing food safety (Kugler, 2022). Of additional



interest is an exploration of the role of AI in identifying crop yield objec- tives to be reached according to resources available and climate condi- tions (Le Bars and Attonaty, 2001). The development of AI-powered spray systems to analyse plants' colour, shape, and size and deliver ac- curate amounts of herbicides is recommended to facilitate precision targeting, prevent collateral damage to plants, and support precision ag- riculture. To advance the understanding of AI applications in livestock management, future studies are required to examine how AI can con- tribute to reducing greenhouse emissions caused by livestock farming. Research may also provide further insights into AI's role in genomics and how this can support farmers' understanding of animals' metabo- lisms and facilitate selective breeding (Eastwood et al., 2021). Finally, AI applications like facial recognition for animals and image classifica- tion should be investigated in detail to allow the individual monitoring of animals and their behaviour (Jung et al., 2021; Xu et al., 2021).
With the support of AI, farmers can reduce manual labour and in- crease task accuracy and performance. Bechar and Vigneault (2016) state that the problems associated with workforce shortage can be mit- igated with the incorporation of AI since the technology helps increase agricultural productivity and compensate for the higher investment cost due to the significant decline in the required workforce. Moreover, AI-powered robots can perform risky tasks and farming operations under harsh conditions (Bechar and Vigneault, 2016), thus contributing to workers' safety and job satisfaction. This can also allow farmworkers to save time and energy for more strategic farming activities requiring
human intelligence. Nevertheless, the convenience brought by AI can yield the substitution of farmworkers with robots, resulting in job losses. Therefore, future studies need to examine how AI influences rural and farming communities. In addition, researchers must look into the positive and negative impacts of AI on human resources management from the perspective of ethics, social sustainability, and equality (Wolfert et al., 2017). Related to sustainable business relation- ships, it is expected that AI will provide suppliers and customers with the information required to make more informed decisions about agricultural products and foods. By integrating AI into agricultural activ- ities, farmers can meet consumers' needs for sustainable agricultural products since AI allows compliance with increasing pesticide use regulations (Slaughter et al., 2008). Accordingly, a contribution oppor- tunity from future research would be to examine how AI can help agri- cultural producers establish new markets and effectively satisfy the desires of their existing customers. Despite the abundance of AI applica- tions, there is still a paucity of studies examining AI's potential for sup- plier selection in the agri-food industry (Zavala-Alcívar et al., 2020). Collaborative approaches between the agri-food industry stakeholders (e.g., farmers, suppliers, buyers, and regulators) using AI are another promising research area that should be explored in the future.
Since consumers are increasingly becoming aware of sustainability, food authenticity, production methods, and labour exploitation, there is a need to achieve greater traceability of agricultural products along the agri-food supply chain (Lillford and Hermansson, 2021). In the era



Table 7
Agenda for future research on AI applications in the agri-food sector.

Main topics	Directions for future research	Related literature


AI for sustainable soil management


AI for sustainable water management



AI for sustainable energy management

AI for sustainable crop management

AI for sustainable livestock management


AI for sustainable human resources management



AI for sustainable business relationships



AI for sustainable traceability

AI for sustainable waste management



AI for sustainable business models
Exploration of AI techniques to improve soil fertility, salinity, texture, moisture, and productivity
Investigation of AI techniques for soil segmentation from remotely sensed data
Examination of the role of AI in countering the challenges caused by water scarcity and extreme climatic conditions
Use of AI techniques in irrigation scheduling and waste management
The importance of AI in achieving water self-sufficiency and resilience in harsh environments
Exploration of the role of AI in reducing the negative impacts of energy consumption on the environment and ensuring food security
Identification of the benefits and limitations of AI in supporting the use of renewable energy sources in the agri-food sector
Exploring how AI can facilitate precision crop management
Utilisation of AI in robotics to account for crop requirements
Investigation of AI capabilities to protect crops and predict pest's behaviour
The contribution of AI to animal welfare
Investigation of AI to reduce the carbon footprint of livestock management
Potential of AI techniques for improving the farming conditions of livestock and facilitating the interaction of farmers with the animals
Investigation of the main ergonomics need for users of AI in the agri-food sector
The role of AI in developing a safe and ethical workforce for agriculture and farming
Exploration of AI in supporting several human resources activities in the
agri-food sector, including recruiting, training, and job performance evaluation
The impact of AI on customer satisfaction
The role of AI in supplier selection, supplier development, and supplier integration
Examination of the potential of AI for agri-food supply chain coordination, customer and supplier involvement, and reduction of transaction costs in the sector
Investigation of AI techniques' ability to ensure end-to-end supply chain traceability
The role of AI to prevent food fraud, product recalls and provide effective enhancements for traceability performance in food processing
Exploration of how AI techniques support behavioural changes in food waste
Role of AI to foster eco-efficiency, reduce food waste and food miles
The opportunities of AI to manage waste in circular agri-food supply chains
The role of AI to develop more sustainable and socially responsible business models in the agri-food sector
Investigation of AI-enabled business models to achieve optimal consumption and production levels in farming and agriculture
The use of AI in the formation of innovative bio-based business models and social innovation


(Dong et al., 2019; Heggemann et al., 2017; Ünal, 2020)




(Cavazza et al., 2020; Jimenez et al., 2020; Xavier et al., 2020)




(Benites-Lazaro et al., 2018; Díaz et al., 2020; Khoshnevisan et al., 2015; Syed Ahmed Kabir et al., 2020)

(Balducci et al., 2018; Kamilaris and Prenafeta-Boldú, 2018; Kollia et al., 2021; Lezoche et al., 2020; Rohit Sharma et al., 2020)

(García et al., 2020; Kamilaris and Prenafeta-Boldú, 2018; Kling-Eveillard et al., 2020; Marvin et al., 2020)



(Bar et al., 2016; Kling-Eveillard et al., 2020; Pérez-Ruíz et al., 2014; Sharma et al., 2020; Slaughter et al., 2008)




(Abdella et al., 2020; Lezoche et al., 2020; Saggi and Jain, 2018; Sharma et al., 2020)



(Alfian et al., 2020; Milan et al., 2019; Qian et al., 2020; Yingjie et al., 2018; X. Zhang et al., 2020)


(Barrett and Rose, 2020; Camaréna, 2020; Navarro et al., 2020)




(Govindan and Al-Ansari, 2019; Rose and Chilvers, 2018; Sharma et al., 2020; Tsolakis et al., 2019)





of traceability and precision agriculture, future research must scrutinise how AI techniques for agricultural production can offer practical solu- tions in developing end-to-end agri-food supply chain traceability. Inte- grating AI with other emerging technologies such as the IoT, blockchain, and augmented reality should be explored to find out how AI can bring increased visibility and transparency to all stages of the agri-food supply chain and prevent social non-compliances. Additionally, future studies should investigate the role of AI techniques to integrate all the agri- food stakeholders and reinforce commitments for traceable and sustain- able food products. As AI can provide access to sophisticated analytical tools, farmers must improve farming operations and minimise waste in food production while reducing the negative impacts on the environ- ment. Future studies need to explore how AI can be leveraged in land suitability analyses to reduce fertiliser and water consumption (Xiong et al., 2017). Furthermore, AI applications for transforming organic ma- terials and wastes and biomass energy generation are another promis- ing avenue for future research (Senocak and Guner Goren, 2022). By restoring to AI-based machines, there is an increased interest in exam- ining the potential of AI to increase environmental sustainability, reduce carbon footprint, and achieve systematic waste management (Wiangkham et al., 2022). Finally, the investigation of how AI tools can introduce novel disruptive business models in the agri-food indus- try is encouraged in future studies. The automated information process- ing and extraction through AI are expected to promote smart business models. Given the paucity of agriculture research on business models, it is recommended to study the impacts of AI-enabled agricultural sys- tems on sustainability's economic, environmental, and social dimen- sions. The shift from current agricultural practices to AI-enabled agriculture is far from easy; hence, the implementation of AI and the re- lated technologies and routines are expected to bring more complexity and other challenges, which need to be explored in future research. Overall, Table 7 presents the proposed agenda to guide and advance AI research in the agri-food sector.

Practical implication

The bibliometric analysis in this study resulted in several conclu- sions. We identified the most prevalent AI techniques and related tech- nologies (e.g., robots, the IoT, big data, UAVs) and their applications in the agri-food industry. This may assist practitioners in determining which AI-supporting methodologies to employ. Second, utilising RBV theory, we developed a framework to assist practitioners in deter- mining which AI deployments may impact agri-food resources. When applying AI to agri-food activities, the seven resource categories (raw materials, water, soil, energy, human resources, technology, and relationships) must be evaluated. In addition, practitioners should care- fully consider the economic and technical viability of incorporating AI while emphasising the technology's ethical and socially responsible dimensions.

Study limitations

Our study has limitations. This review began by performing a key- word search against a single database, Web of Science-WoS. Conse- quently, relevant publications may be omitted, especially those not indexed in the WoS database. The authors' keywords may also intro- duce bias into the analysis. To circumvent these issues, future studies may utilise multiple databases (e.g., Scopus, Google Scholar), include additional keywords, and employ additional analysis methods (e.g., meta-analysis, main path analysis).

Conclusion

This paper conducted a bibliometric analysis to examine the rela- tionship between AI and the agri-food industry. We evaluated the papers by addressing four research issues: the dynamics underlying
the relationship between AI and agri-food systems, how farmers use AI techniques to modernise agriculture, the major trends in AI integra- tion in agri-food businesses, and the challenges and concerns associated with leveraging AI in the digitalisation of agriculture and farming activ- ities. AI has the potential to be an indispensable tool at every level of the intricate agri-food supply ecosystem. In addition to physical product ecosystems, its role can extend from primary production to processing, distribution, and retail, encompassing agricultural assurance and logistics service ecosystems.
In terms of scholarly output, we identified three distinct phases of AI in the agriculture and food industry. We observed that exponential growth began in 2015 due to advances in computational sciences and the emergence of innovative technologies. Unsurprisingly, AI research is published in computer science journals. The United States, China, and Spain were the top three most influential nations in terms of citations per country. Latin American and African nations contribute negligibly to AI research in the agri-food industry. In addition, robotics, the IoT, and unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) were identified as signif- icant technologies that could benefit from AI techniques such as ma- chine learning, deep learning, artificial neural networks, convolutional neural networks, and fuzzy logic. In addition, we identified machine learning and deep learning as recent trending topics. On the other hand, integrating AI with blockchain technology, virtual and augmented reality, 3D printing, and bioinformatics have received little attention. Therefore, future research should concentrate on how AI can enhance these technologies' capacity to manage soil, water, energy, crops, and livestock. In addition, the barriers to AI adoption were analysed and categorised into four broad groups: social concerns, technical concerns, privacy and ethical concerns, and organisational concerns.
Our research contributes to the expanding body of knowledge re-
garding AI applications in the agri-food industry. The primary findings, along with the RBV-based framework and research propositions, are in- structive for scholars and practitioners interested in the AI potential of the agri-food industry. AI will be useful for forecasting weather and other agricultural conditions, and accurate forecasting will alleviate the concerns of many farmers. The future of agriculture depends on cre- ating a resilient and sustainable farming system. Consequently, the rec- ommendations for future research may motivate scholars to pursue additional AI research projects and contribute to the consolidation of this body of knowledge. Most propositions are valid and empirically testable. In addition, the research agenda outlined in this paper contrib- utes to the current body of knowledge regarding AI applications in sev- eral agri-food industry domains. In conclusion, the key takeaways from this research suggest that practitioners and actors in the agri-food in- dustry should closely monitor the effect of AI on their performance. Practitioners can use the proposed framework, which provides a com- prehensive perspective for assessing the impact of AI on agri-food sus- tainability, as a point of reference. However, AI's potential can only be realised if practitioners work to overcome the obstacles preventing its integration into the industry. We identified several obstacles that must be addressed when integrating AI into the agri-food industry, in- cluding unemployment, ethics, and privacy. Lastly, our research aimed to bridge the gap between theory and practice regarding AI applications in the agri-food industry.

Declaration of Competing Interest

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influ- ence the work reported in this paper.

References

Abdella, G.M., Kucukvar, M., Onat, N.C., Al-Yafay, H.M., Bulak, M.E., 2020. Sustainability as- sessment and modeling based on supervised machine learning techniques: the case for food consumption. J. Clean. Prod. 251, 119661. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro. 2019.119661.



Abdollahi, A., Rejeb, K., Rejeb, A., Mostafa, M.M., Zailani, S., 2021. Wireless sensor net- works in agriculture: insights from Bibliometric analysis. Sustainability 13 (21), 12011. https://doi.org/10.3390/su132112011.
Adeyemi, O., Grove, I., Peets, S., Domun, Y., Norton, T., 2018. Dynamic neural network modelling of soil moisture content for predictive irrigation scheduling. Sensors 18 (10), 3408. https://doi.org/10.3390/s18103408.
Afonso, M., Fonteijn, H., Fiorentin, F.S., Lensink, D., Mooij, M., Faber, N., Polder, G., Wehrens, R., 2020. Tomato Fruit Detection and Counting in Greenhouses Using Deep Learning. Front. Plant Sci. 11.
Alfian, G., Syafrudin, M., Farooq, U., Ma’arif, M.R., Syaekhoni, M.A., Fitriyani, N.L., et al., 2020. Improving efficiency of RFID-based traceability system for perishable food by utilizing IoT sensors and machine learning model. Food Control 110, 107016. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodcont.2019.107016.
Alnajem, M., Mostafa, M.M., ElMelegy, A.R., 2021. Mapping the first decade of circular economy research: a bibliometric network analysis. J. Ind. Prod. Eng. 38 (1), 29–50. https://doi.org/10.1080/21681015.2020.1838632.
Alreshidi, E., 2019. Smart sustainable agriculture (SSA) solution underpinned by internet of things (IoT) and artificial intelligence (AI). arXiv e-prints, arXiv:1906.03106.
Ampatzidis, Y., De Bellis, L., Luvisi, A., 2017. iPathology: Robotic Applications and Manage- ment of Plants and Plant Diseases. Sustainability 9, 1010. https://doi.org/10.3390/ su9061010.
Antcheva, I., Ballintijn, M., Bellenot, B., Biskup, M., Brun, R., Buncic, N., et al., 2009. ROOT — A C++ framework for petabyte data storage, statistical analysis and visualization. Comput. Phys. Commun. 180 (12), 2499–2512. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cpc.2009.
08.005.
Balducci, F., Impedovo, D., Pirlo, G., 2018. Machine learning applications on agricultural datasets for smart farm enhancement. Machines 6 (3), 38. https://doi.org/10.3390/ machines6030038.
Bar, E., Mathiassen, J.R., Eilertsen, A., Mugaas, T., Misimi, E., Linnerud, Å.S., et al., 2016. To- wards robotic post-trimming of salmon fillets. Industr. Rob. Int. J. 43 (4), 421–428. https://doi.org/10.1108/IR-11-2015-0205.
Barney, J., 1991. Firm Resources and Sustained Competitive Advantage. J. Manag. 17, 99–120. https://doi.org/10.1177/014920639101700108.
Barrett, H., Rose, D.C., 2020. Perceptions of the Fourth Agricultural Revolution: What’s in, What’s out, and What Consequences are Anticipated? Sociologia Ruralis. https://doi. org/10.1111/soru.12324.
Bartol, T., Mackiewicz-Talarczyk, M., 2015. Bibliometric analysis of publishing trends in Fiber crops in Google scholar, Scopus, and web of science. J. Nat. Fibers 12 (6), 531–541. https://doi.org/10.1080/15440478.2014.972000.
Bechar, A., Vigneault, C., 2016. Agricultural robots for field operations: concepts and com- ponents. Biosyst. Eng. 149, 94–111. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biosystemseng.2016.06.
014.
Bell, J.E., McMullen, P.R., 2004. Ant colony optimization techniques for the vehicle routing problem. Adv. Eng. Inform. 18 (1), 41–48. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aei.2004.07.001.
Benites-Lazaro, L.L., Giatti, L., Giarolla, A., 2018. Topic modeling method for analyzing so- cial actor discourses on climate change, energy and food security. Energy Res. Soc. Sci. 45, 318–330. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.erss.2018.07.031.
Benke, K.K., Norng, S., Robinson, N.J., Chia, K., Rees, D.B., Hopley, J., 2020. Development of pedotransfer functions by machine learning for prediction of soil electrical conductiv- ity and organic carbon content. Geoderma 366, 114210. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. geoderma.2020.114210.
Beydoun, G., Abedin, B., Merigó, J.M., Vera, M., 2019. Twenty years of information systems Frontiers. Inf. Syst. Front. 21 (2), 485–494. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10796-019- 09925-x.
Bioucas-Dias, J.M., Plaza, A., Dobigeon, N., Parente, M., Du, Q., Gader, P., Chanussot, J., 2012. Hyperspectral Unmixing overview: geometrical, statistical, and sparse regression- based approaches. IEEE J. Select. Top. Appl. Earth Observ. Remote Sens. 5 (2), 354–379. https://doi.org/10.1109/JSTARS.2012.2194696.
Bokade, R., Navato, A., Ouyang, R., Jin, X., Chou, C.-A., Ostadabbas, S., Mueller, A.V., 2021. A cross-disciplinary comparison of multimodal data fusion approaches and applica- tions: accelerating learning through trans-disciplinary information sharing. Expert Syst. Appl. 165, 113885. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2020.113885.
Bolandnazar, E., Rohani, A., Taki, M., 2020. Energy consumption forecasting in agriculture by artificial intelligence and mathematical models. Energy Sourc. Part A Recov. Utiliz. Environ. Effects 42 (13), 1618–1632. https://doi.org/10.1080/15567036.2019.
1604872.
Brofman Epelbaum, F.M., Garcia Martinez, M., 2014. The technological evolution of food traceability systems and their impact on firm sustainable performance: A RBV ap- proach. Int. J. Prod. Econ. 150, 215–224. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpe.2014.01.007.
Brogårdh, T., 2007. Present and future robot control development—an industrial perspec- tive. Annu. Rev. Control. 31 (1), 69–79. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.arcontrol.2007.
01.002.
Camaréna, S., 2020. Artificial intelligence in the design of the transitions to sustainable food systems. J. Clean. Prod. 271, 122574. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2020. 122574.
Caulfield, T., Rachul, C., Zarzeczny, A., 2012. The evolution of policy issues in stem cell re- search: an international survey. Stem Cell Rev. Rep. 8 (4), 1037–1042. https://doi.org/ 10.1007/s12015-012-9404-5.
Cavazza, F., Galioto, F., Raggi, M., Viaggi, D., 2020. Digital irrigated agriculture: towards a framework for comprehensive analysis of decision processes under uncertainty. Future Intern. 12 (11), 181. https://doi.org/10.3390/fi12110181.
Chatterjee, S., N.S., S., Hussain, Z., 2021. Evolution of artificial intelligence and its impact on human rights: from sociolegal perspective. Int. J. Law Manag. 64, 184–205. https://doi.org/10.1108/IJLMA-06-2021-0156
Chen, T.-C., Yu, S.-Y., 2021. The review of food safety inspection system based on artificial intelligence, image processing, and robotic. Food Sci. Technol. 42. https://doi.org/10. 1590/fst.35421.
Chlingaryan, A., Sukkarieh, S., Whelan, B., 2018. Machine learning approaches for crop yield prediction and nitrogen status estimation in precision agriculture: A review. Comput. Electron. Agric. 151, 61–69. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compag.2018.05.012.
Cubric, M., 2020. Drivers, barriers and social considerations for AI adoption in business and management: A tertiary study. Technol. Soc. 62, 101257. https://doi.org/10. 1016/j.techsoc.2020.101257.
da Silva, S.V., Antonio, N., de Carvalho, J.C., 2017. Analysis of the service dominant logic network, authors, and articles. Serv. Ind. J. 37 (2), 125–152. https://doi.org/10.1080/ 02642069.2017.1297801.
Del Borghi, A., Gallo, M., Strazza, C., Del Borghi, M., 2014. An evaluation of environmental sustainability in the food industry through life cycle assessment: the case study of to- mato products supply chain. J. Clean. Prod. 78, 121–130. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. jclepro.2014.04.083.
Deo, R.C., Şahin, M., 2015. Application of the extreme learning machine algorithm for the prediction of monthly Effective Drought Index in eastern Australia. Atmospheric Res 153, 512–525. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.atmosres.2014.10.016.
Díaz, S., Carta, J.A., Castañeda, A., 2020. Influence of the variation of meteorological and operational parameters on estimation of the power output of a wind farm with active power control. Renew. Energy 159, 812–826. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.renene.2020. 05.187.
Diedrichs, A.L., Bromberg, F., Dujovne, D., Brun-Laguna, K., Watteyne, T., 2018. Prediction of frost events using machine learning and IoT sensing devices. IEEE Internet Things J. 5 (6), 4589–4597. https://doi.org/10.1109/JIOT.2018.2867333.
Dong, W., Wu, T., Luo, J., Sun, Y., Xia, L., 2019. Land parcel-based digital soil mapping of soil nutrient properties in an alluvial-diluvia plain agricultural area in China. Geoderma 340, 234–248. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.geoderma.2019.01.018.
Du, C.-J., Sun, D.-W., 2006. Learning techniques used in computer vision for food quality evaluation: a review. J. Food Eng. 72 (1), 39–55. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfoodeng. 2004.11.017.
Duro, D.C., Franklin, S.E., Dubé, M.G., 2012. A comparison of pixel-based and object-based image analysis with selected machine learning algorithms for the classification of ag- ricultural landscapes using SPOT-5 HRG imagery. Remote Sens. Environ. 118, 259–272. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rse.2011.11.020.
Eastwood, C.R., Edwards, J.P., Turner, J.A., 2021. Review: anticipating alternative trajecto- ries for responsible agriculture 4.0 innovation in livestock systems. Animal 15, 100296. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.animal.2021.100296.
Eli-Chukwu, N.C., 2019. Applications of Artificial Intelligence in Agriculture: A Review.
Eng. Technol. Appl. Sci. Res. 9, 4377–4383. https://doi.org/10.48084/etasr.2756.
Escamilla-Fajardo, P., Núñez-Pomar, J.M., Ratten, V., Crespo, J., 2020. Entrepreneurship and innovation in soccer: web of science Bibliometric analysis. Sustainability 12 (11), 4499. https://doi.org/10.3390/su12114499.
Escamilla-García, A., Soto-Zarazúa, G.M., Toledano-Ayala, M., Rivas-Araiza, E., Gastélum- Barrios, A., 2020. Applications of artificial neural networks in greenhouse technology and overview for smart agriculture development. Appl. Sci. 10 (11), 3835. https://doi. org/10.3390/app10113835.
Fahimnia, B., Sarkis, J., Davarzani, H., 2015. Green supply chain management: A review and bibliometric analysis. Int. J. Prod. Econ. 162, 101–114. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. ijpe.2015.01.003.
Fait, M., Scorrano, P., Mastroleo, G., Cillo, V., Scuotto, V., 2019. A novel view on knowledge sharing in the Agri-food sector. J. Knowl. Manag. 23 (5), 953–974. https://doi.org/10. 1108/JKM-09-2018-0572.
Fan, Y.V., Varbanov, P.S., Klemeš, J.J., Nemet, A., 2018. Process efficiency optimisation and integration for cleaner production. J. Clean. Prod. 174, 177–183. https://doi.org/10. 1016/j.jclepro.2017.10.325.
Farooq, S., O’Brien, C., 2015. An action research methodology for manufacturing technol- ogy selection: a supply chain perspective. Prod. Plan. Control 26, 467–488. https:// doi.org/10.1080/09537287.2014.924599.
Faruk, M., Rahman, M., Hasan, S., 2021. How digital marketing evolved over time: A bib- liometric analysis on scopus database. Heliyon 7 (12), e08603. https://doi.org/10. 1016/j.heliyon.2021.e08603.
Fiore, M., Gallo, C., Tsoukatos, E., La Sala, P., 2017. Predicting consumer healthy choices re- garding type 1 wheat flour. Br. Food J. 119 (11), 2388–2405. https://doi.org/10.1108/ BFJ-04-2017-0200.
Foley, A.M., Leahy, P.G., Marvuglia, A., McKeogh, E.J., 2012. Current methods and advances in forecasting of wind power generation. Renew. Energy 37 (1), 1–8. https://doi.org/ 10.1016/j.renene.2011.05.033.
Fosso Wamba, S., Queiroz, M.M., 2021. Responsible artificial intelligence as a secret ingre- dient for digital health: Bibliometric analysis, insights, and research directions. Inf. Syst. Front. 1–16. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10796-021-10142-8.
Fountas, S., Mylonas, N., Malounas, I., Rodias, E., Hellmann Santos, C., Pekkeriet, E., 2020. Agricultural Robotics for Field Operations. Sensors 20, E2672. https://doi.org/ 10.3390/s20092672.
Freeman, D., Gupta, S., Smith, D.H., Maja, J.M., Robbins, J., Owen, J.S., et al., 2019. Watson on the farm: using cloud-based artificial intelligence to identify early indicators of water stress. Remote Sens. 11 (22), 2645. https://doi.org/10.3390/rs11222645.
Ganeshkumar, C., Jena, S.K., Sivakumar, A., Nambirajan, T., 2021. Artificial intelligence in agricultural value chain: review and future directions. J. Agribusin. Dev. Emerg. Econ. https://doi.org/10.1108/JADEE-07-2020-0140 ahead-of-print(ahead-of-print).
García, R., Aguilar, J., Toro, M., Pinto, A., Rodríguez, P., 2020. A systematic literature review on the use of machine learning in precision livestock farming. Comput. Electron. Agric. 179, 105826. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compag.2020.105826.
Garfield, E., 1990. KeyWords plus-ISI’s breakthrough retrieval method. 1. Expanding your searching power on current-contents on diskette. Curr. Cont. 32, 5–9.



Ge, L., Hang, R., Liu, Y., Liu, Q., 2018. Comparing the performance of neural network and deep convolutional neural network in estimating soil moisture from satellite obser- vations. Remote Sens. 10 (9), 1327. https://doi.org/10.3390/rs10091327.
González-Serrano, M.H., Jones, P., Llanos-Contrera, O., 2019. An overview of sport entre- preneurship field: a bibliometric analysis of the articles published in the web of sci- ence. Sport Soc. https://doi.org/10.1080/17430437.2019.1607307 Accessed 8 May 2022.
Goodarzian, F., Shishebori, D., Bahrami, F., Abraham, A., & Appolloni, A. (2021). Hybrid meta-heuristic algorithms for optimising a sustainable agricultural supply chain net- work considering CO2 emissions and water consumption. Int. J. Syst. Sci. Operat. Logist., 0(0), 1–30. doi: https://doi.org/10.1080/23302674.2021.2009932.
Govindan, R., Al-Ansari, T., 2019. Computational decision framework for enhancing resil- ience of the energy, water and food nexus in risky environments. Renew. Sust. Energ. Rev. 112, 653–668. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2019.06.015.
Guillén, M.A., Llanes, A., Imbernón, B., Martínez-España, R., Bueno-Crespo, A., Cano, J.-C., Cecilia, J.M., 2021. Performance evaluation of edge-computing platforms for the pre- diction of low temperatures in agriculture using deep learning. J. Supercomput. 77, 818–840. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11227-020-03288-w.
Hassoun, A., Aït-Kaddour, A., Abu-Mahfouz, A.M., Rathod, N.B., Bader, F., Barba, F.J., et al., 2022. The fourth industrial revolution in the food industry—Part I: Industry 4.0 tech- nologies. Crit. Rev. Food Sci. Nutr., 1–17. https://doi.org/10.1080/10408398.2022. 2034735.
Heggemann, T., Welp, G., Amelung, W., Angst, G., Franz, S.O., Koszinski, S., et al., 2017. Proximal gamma-ray spectrometry for site-independent in situ prediction of soil tex- ture on ten heterogeneous fields in Germany using support vector machines. Soil Till- age Res. 168, 99–109. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.still.2016.10.008.
Hemming, S., Righini, I., de Zwart, F., Elings, A., 2020. Remote control of greenhouse cu- cumber production with artificial intelligence – results from the first international autonomous greenhouse challenge. Acta Hortic, 987–996. https://doi.org/10.17660/ ActaHortic.2020.1296.125.
Herrera-Franco, G., Montalván-Burbano, N., Carrión-Mero, P., Apolo-Masache, B., Jaya-Montalvo, M., 2020. Research trends in Geotourism: A bibliometric analysis using the Scopus database. Geosciences 10 (10), 379. https://doi.org/10.3390/ geosciences10100379.
Holt, D., 1978. Potentials for Artificial Intelligence and Supercomputers in Soil Science. Future Developments in Soil Science Research. John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, pp. 459–468 https://doi.org/10.2136/1987.futuredevelopmentssoil.c49.
Jha, K., Doshi, A., Patel, P., Shah, M., 2019. A comprehensive review on automation in agriculture using artificial intelligence. Artif. Intell. Agric. 2, 1–12. https://doi.org/ 10.1016/j.aiia.2019.05.004.
Jimenez, A.-F., Cardenas, P.-F., Jimenez, F., Ruiz-Canales, A., López, A., 2020. A cyber- physical intelligent agent for irrigation scheduling in horticultural crops. Comput. Electron. Agric. 178, 105777. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compag.2020.105777.
Jung, D.-H., Kim, N.Y., Moon, S.H., Jhin, C., Kim, H.-J., Yang, J.-S., et al., 2021. Deep learning- based cattle vocal classification model and real-time livestock monitoring system with noise filtering. Animals 11 (2), 357. https://doi.org/10.3390/ani11020357.
Kamarudin, M.H., Ismail, Z.H., Saidi, N.B., 2021. Deep learning sensor fusion in plant water stress assessment: A comprehensive review. Appl. Sci. 11 (4), 1403. https://doi.org/ 10.3390/app11041403.
Kamilaris, A., Prenafeta-Boldú, F.X., 2018. Deep learning in agriculture: A survey. Comput.
Electron. Agric. 147, 70–90. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compag.2018.02.016.
Kapoor, K.K., Tamilmani, K., Rana, N.P., Patil, P., Dwivedi, Y.K., Nerur, S., 2018. Advances in social media research: past, present and future. Inf. Syst. Front. 20 (3), 531–558. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10796-017-9810-y.
Khoshnevisan, B., Rafiee, S., Omid, M., Mousazadeh, H., Shamshirband, S., Hamid, S.H.A., 2015. Developing a fuzzy clustering model for better energy use in farm management systems. Renew. Sust. Energ. Rev. 48, 27–34. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2015.03. 029.
Kling-Eveillard, F., Allain, C., Boivin, X., Courboulay, V., Créach, P., Philibert, A., et al., 2020. Farmers’ representations of the effects of precision livestock farming on human- animal relationships. Livest. Sci. 238, 104057. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.livsci.2020. 104057.
Kollia, I., Stevenson, J., Kollias, S., 2021. AI-enabled efficient and safe food supply chain.
Electronics 10 (11), 1223. https://doi.org/10.3390/electronics10111223.
Kugler, L., 2022. Artificial intelligence, machine learning, and the fight against world hun- ger. Commun. ACM 65 (2), 17–19.
Kussul, N., Lavreniuk, M., Skakun, S., Shelestov, A., 2017. Deep learning classification of land cover and crop types using remote sensing data. IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Lett. 14 (5), 778–782. https://doi.org/10.1109/LGRS.2017.2681128.
Kuzmanovski, V., Trajanov, A., Leprince, F., Džeroski, S., Debeljak, M., 2015. Modeling water outflow from tile-drained agricultural fields. Sci. Total Environ. 505, 390–401. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2014.10.009.
Le Bars, M., Attonaty, J.M., 2001. A multi-agent system to the common management of a renewable resource: application to water sharing. Proceedings 13th IEEE Interna- tional Conference on Tools with Artificial Intelligence. ICTAI 2001 , pp. 42–49 Pre- sented at the Proceedings 13th IEEE International Conference on Tools with Artificial Intelligence. ICTAI 2001. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICTAI.2001.974447.
Lenain, R., Thuilot, B., Cariou, C., Martinet, P., 2006. High accuracy path tracking for vehi- cles in presence of sliding: Application to farm vehicle automatic guidance for agri- cultural tasks. Auton. Robots 21, 79–97. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10514-006-7806-4. Lezoche, M., Hernandez, J.E., del Alemany Díaz, M.M.E., Panetto, H., Kacprzyk, J., 2020. Agri-food 4.0: A survey of the supply chains and technologies for the future agricul-
ture. Comput. Ind. 117, 103187. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compind.2020.103187.
Liakos, K.G., Busato, P., Moshou, D., Pearson, S., Bochtis, D., 2018a. Machine learning in agriculture: a review. Sensors 18 (8), 2674. https://doi.org/10.3390/s18082674.
Liakos, K.G., Busato, P., Moshou, D., Pearson, S., Bochtis, D., 2018b. Machine learning in ag- riculture: a review. Sensors 18 (8), 2674. https://doi.org/10.3390/s18082674.
Lillford, P., Hermansson, A.-M., 2021. Global missions and the critical needs of food sci- ence and technology. Trends Food Sci. Technol. 111, 800–811. https://doi.org/10. 1016/j.tifs.2020.04.009.
Lin, Y.-B., Lin, Y.-W., Lin, J.-Y., Hung, H.-N., 2019. SensorTalk: an IoT device failure detec- tion and calibration mechanism for smart farming. Sensors 19 (21), 4788. https:// doi.org/10.3390/s19214788.
Liu, C., Cao, Y., Luo, Y., Chen, G., Vokkarane, V., Yunsheng, M., et al., 2018. A new deep learning-based food recognition system for dietary assessment on an edge computing service infrastructure. IEEE Trans. Serv. Comput. 11 (2), 249–261. https://doi.org/10. 1109/TSC.2017.2662008.
Lova Raju, K., Vijayaraghavan, V., 2020. IoT technologies in agricultural environment: a survey. Wirel. Pers. Commun. 113 (4), 2415–2446. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11277- 020-07334-x.
Ma, L., Li, M., Ma, X., Cheng, L., Du, P., Liu, Y., 2017. A review of supervised object-based land-cover image classification. ISPRS J. Photogramm. Remote Sens. 130, 277–293. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.isprsjprs.2017.06.001.
Mangla, S.K., Luthra, S., Rich, N., Kumar, D., Rana, N.P., Dwivedi, Y.K., 2018. Enablers to im- plement sustainable initiatives in Agri-food supply chains. Int. J. Prod. Econ. 203, 379–393. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpe.2018.07.012.
Manogaran, G., Alazab, M., Muhammad, K., de Albuquerque, V.H.C., 2021. Smart sensing based functional control for reducing uncertainties in agricultural farm data analysis. IEEE Sensors Journal, 21(16), 17469–17478. Presented at the IEEE Sensors Journal https://doi.org/10.1109/JSEN.2021.3054561.
Marvin, H.J.P., van Asselt, E., Kleter, G., Meijer, N., Lorentzen, G., Johansen, L.-H., et al., 2020. Expert-driven methodology to assess and predict the effects of drivers of change on vulnerabilities in a food supply chain: aquaculture of Atlantic salmon in Norway as a showcase. Trends Food Sci. Technol. 103, 49–56. https://doi.org/10. 1016/j.tifs.2020.06.022.
Milan, M., Maroso, F., Dalla Rovere, G., Carraro, L., Ferraresso, S., Patarnello, T., et al., 2019. Tracing seafood at high spatial resolution using NGS-generated data and machine learning: comparing microbiome versus SNPs. Food Chem. 286, 413–420. https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.foodchem.2019.02.037.
Mishra, D., Luo, Z., Jiang, S., Papadopoulos, T., Dubey, R., 2017. A bibliographic study on big data: concepts, trends and challenges. Bus. Process. Manag. J. 23 (3), 555–573. https://doi.org/10.1108/BPMJ-10-2015-0149.
Mishra, M., Sudarsan, D., Santos, C.A.G., Mishra, S.K., Kar, D., Baral, K., Pattnaik, N., 2021. An overview of research on natural resources and indigenous communities: a bibliomet- ric analysis based on Scopus database (1979–2020). Environ. Monit. Assess. 193 (2),
59. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10661-020-08793-2.
Mitchell, T.M., Hutchinson, R., Niculescu, R.S., Pereira, F., Wang, X., Just, M., Newman, S., 2004. Learning to decode cognitive states from brain images. Mach. Learn. 57 (1), 145–175. https://doi.org/10.1023/B:MACH.0000035475.85309.1b.
Mithun Ali, S., Moktadir, Md.A., Kabir, G., Chakma, J., Rumi, Md.J.U., Islam, Md.T., 2019. Framework for evaluating risks in food supply chain: implications in food wastage re- duction. J. Clean. Prod. 228, 786–800. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2019.04.322.
Mohanty, S.P., Hughes, D.P., Salathé, M., 2016. Using deep learning for image-based plant disease detection. Front. Plant Sci. 7. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpls.2016.01419.
Mor, S., Madan, S., Prasad, K.D., 2021. Artificial intelligence and carbon footprints: roadmap for Indian agriculture. Strateg. Chang. 30 (3), 269–280. https://doi.org/10. 1002/jsc.2409.
Mostafa, M.M., 2020. A knowledge domain visualization review of thirty years of halal food research: themes, trends and knowledge structure. Trends Food Sci. Technol. 99, 660–677. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tifs.2020.03.022.
Nabavi-Pelesaraei, A., Rafiee, S., Mohtasebi, S.S., Hosseinzadeh-Bandbafha, H., Chau, K., 2018. Integration of artificial intelligence methods and life cycle assessment to pre- dict energy output and environmental impacts of paddy production. Sci. Total Envi- ron. 631–632, 1279–1294. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2018.03.088.
Navarro, E., Costa, N., Pereira, A., 2020. A systematic review of IoT solutions for smart farming. Sensors 20 (15), 4231. https://doi.org/10.3390/s20154231.
Neupane, J., Guo, W., 2019. Agronomic basis and strategies for precision water manage- ment: a review. Agronomy 9 (2), 87. https://doi.org/10.3390/agronomy9020087.
Pantazi, X.E., Moshou, D., Alexandridis, T., Whetton, R.L., Mouazen, A.M., 2016. Wheat yield prediction using machine learning and advanced sensing techniques. Comput. Electron. Agric. C(121), 57–65. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compag.2015.11.018.
Patrício, D.I., Rieder, R., 2018. Computer vision and artificial intelligence in precision agri- culture for grain crops: a systematic review. Comput. Electron. Agric. 153, 69–81. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compag.2018.08.001.
Paulikienė, S., Venslauskas, K., Raila, A., Žvirdauskienė, R., Naujokienė, V., 2020. The influ- ence of ozone technology on reduction of carrot loss and environmental IMPACT.
J. Clean. Prod. 244, 118734. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2019.118734.
Pérez-Ruíz, M., Slaughter, D.C., Fathallah, F.A., Gliever, C.J., Miller, B.J., 2014. Co-robotic intra-row weed control system. Biosyst. Eng. 126, 45–55. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. biosystemseng.2014.07.009.
Piwowar-Sulej, K., Krzywonos, M., Kwil, I., 2021. Environmental entrepreneurship – Bib- liometric and content analysis of the subject literature based on H-Core. J. Clean. Prod. 295, 126277. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2021.126277.
Pydipati, R., Burks, T.F., Lee, W.S., 2006. Identification of citrus disease using color texture features and discriminant analysis. Comput. Electron. Agric. 52 (1), 49–59. https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.compag.2006.01.004.
Qazi, A.A., Appolloni, A., 2022. A systematic review on barriers and enablers toward circu- lar procurement management. Sustain. Product. Consumpt. 33, 343–359. https://doi. org/10.1016/j.spc.2022.07.013.
Qazi, S., Khawaja, B.A., Farooq, Q.U., 2022. IoT-equipped and AI-enabled next generation smart agriculture: a critical review, current challenges and future trends. IEEE Access,



10, 21219–21235. Presented at the IEEE Access. https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS. 2022.3152544.
Qian, J., Dai, B., Wang, B., Zha, Y., Song, Q., 2020. Traceability in food processing: problems, methods, and performance evaluations—a review. Crit. Rev. Food Sci. Nutr., 1–14 https://doi.org/10.1080/10408398.2020.1825925.
Ragazou, K., Garefalakis, A., Zafeiriou, E., Passas, I., 2022. Agriculture 5.0: a new strategic management mode for a cut cost and an energy efficient agriculture sector. Energies 15 (9), 3113. https://doi.org/10.3390/en15093113.
Rejeb, A., Simske, S., Rejeb, K., Treiblmaier, H., Zailani, S., 2020. Internet of things research in supply chain management and logistics: a Bibliometric analysis. Intern. Things 12 (2020), 100318. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.iot.2020.100318.
Rejeb, A., Rejeb, K., Zailani, S., Treiblmaier, H., Hand, K.J., 2021a. Integrating the internet of things in the halal food supply chain: a systematic literature review and research agenda. Intern. Things 13, 100361. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.iot.2021.100361.
Rejeb, A., Treiblmaier, H., Rejeb, K., Zailani, S., 2021b. Blockchain research in healthcare: a bibliometric review and current research trends. J. Data Inform. Manag. https://doi. org/10.1007/s42488-021-00046-2.
Rejeb, A., Abdollahi, A., Rejeb, K., Treiblmaier, H., 2022a. Drones in agriculture: a review and bibliometric analysis. Comput. Electron. Agric. 198, 107017. https://doi.org/10. 1016/j.compag.2022.107017.
Rejeb, A., Keogh, J.G., Rejeb, K., 2022b. Big data in the food supply chain: a literature re- view. J. Data Inform. Manag. 4 (1), 33–47. https://doi.org/10.1007/s42488-021-
00064-0.
Rejeb, A., Rejeb, K., Abdollahi, A., Al-Turjman, F., Treiblmaier, H., 2022c. The interplay be- tween the internet of things and agriculture: a bibliometric analysis and research agenda. Intern. Things 19, 100580. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.iot.2022.100580.
Rejeb, A., Rejeb, K., Abdollahi, A., Treiblmaier, H., 2022d. The big picture on Instagram re- search: insights from a bibliometric analysis. Telematics Inform. 73, 101876. https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.tele.2022.101876.
Rejeb, A., Rejeb, K., Simske, S., Treiblmaier, H., Zailani, S., 2022e. The big picture on the in- ternet of things and the smart city: a review of what we know and what we need to know. Intern. Things 19, 100565. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.iot.2022.100565.
Rose, D.C., Chilvers, J., 2018. Agriculture 4.0: broadening responsible innovation in an era of smart farming. Front. Sustain. Food Syst. 2. https://doi.org/10.3389/fsufs.2018. 00087.
Saggi, M.K., Jain, S., 2018. A survey towards an integration of big data analytics to big in- sights for value-creation. Inf. Process. Manag. 54 (5), 758–790. https://doi.org/10. 1016/j.ipm.2018.01.010.
Saleem, M.H., Potgieter, J., Arif, K.M., 2019. Plant disease detection and classification by deep learning. Plants 8 (11), 468. https://doi.org/10.3390/plants8110468.
Sánchez, J.M., Rodríguez, J.P., Espitia, H.E., 2020. Review of artificial intelligence applied in decision-making processes in agricultural public policy. Processes 8 (11), 1374. https://doi.org/10.3390/pr8111374.
Scott, S.M., James, D., Ali, Z., 2006. Data analysis for electronic nose systems. Microchim.
Acta 156 (3), 183–207. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00604-006-0623-9.
Senocak, A.A., Guner Goren, H., 2022. Forecasting the biomass-based energy potential using artificial intelligence and geographic information systems: a case study. Eng. Sci. Technol. Intern. J. 26, 100992. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jestch.2021.04.011.
Sharma, Rohit, Kamble, S.S., Gunasekaran, A., Kumar, V., Kumar, A., 2020. A systematic lit- erature review on machine learning applications for sustainable agriculture supply chain performance. Comput. Oper. Res. 119, 104926. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cor. 2020.104926.
Sharma, Ruchika, Kumar, N., Sharma, B.B., 2022. Applications of artificial intelligence in smart agriculture: a review. In: Singh, P.K., Singh, Y., Kolekar, M.H., Kar, A.K., Gonçalves, P.J.S. (Eds.), Recent Innovations in Computing. Springer, Singapore,
pp. 135–142. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-16-8248-3_11.
Shendryk, Y., Davy, R., Thorburn, P., 2021. Integrating satellite imagery and environmental data to predict field-level cane and sugar yields in Australia using machine learning. Field Crops Res 260, 107984. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fcr.2020.107984.
Shine, P., Murphy, M.D., 2022. Over 20 years of machine learning applications on dairy farms: a comprehensive mapping study. Sensors 22 (1), 52. https://doi.org/10. 3390/s22010052.
Shonhe, L., 2020. Continuous professional development (CPD) of librarians: a bibliometric analysis of research productivity viewed through WoS. J. Acad. Librariansh. 46 (2), 102106. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.acalib.2019.102106.
Sideratos, G., Hatziargyriou, N.D., 2007. An advanced statistical method for wind power forecasting. IEEE Trans. Power Syst. 22 (1), 258–265. https://doi.org/10.1109/ TPWRS.2006.889078.
Singh, R., Gehlot, A., Prajapat, M.K., Singh, B., 2021. Artificial Intelligence in Agriculture.
CRC Press, London. https://doi.org/10.1201/9781003245759.
Slaughter, D.C., Giles, D.K., Downey, D., 2008. Autonomous robotic weed control systems: a review. Comput. Electron. Agric. 61 (1), 63–78. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compag.
2007.05.008.
Smetana, S., Aganovic, K., Heinz, V., 2021. Food supply chains as cyber-physical systems: a path for more sustainable personalized nutrition. Food Eng. Rev. 13 (1), 92–103. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12393-020-09243-y.
Spanaki, K., Karafili, E., Despoudi, S., 2021. AI applications of data sharing in agriculture 4.0: a framework for role-based data access control. Int. J. Inf. Manag. 59, 102350. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2021.102350.
Syed Ahmed Kabir, I.F., Safiyullah, F., Ng, E.Y.K., Tam, V.W.Y., 2020. New analytical wake models based on artificial intelligence and rivalling the benchmark full-rotor CFD predictions under both uniform and ABL inflows. Energy 193, 116761. https://doi. org/10.1016/j.energy.2019.116761.
Taneja, M., Byabazaire, J., Jalodia, N., Davy, A., Olariu, C., Malone, P., 2020. Machine learn- ing based fog computing assisted data-driven approach for early lameness detection
in dairy cattle. Comput. Electron. Agric. 171, 105286. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. compag.2020.105286.
Thomé, A.M.T., Scavarda, L.F., Scavarda, A.J., 2016. Conducting systematic literature review in operations management. Prod. Plan. Control 27 (5), 408–420. https://doi.org/10. 1080/09537287.2015.1129464.
Treiblmaier, H., Rejeb, A., Strebinger, A., 2020. Blockchain as a driver for Smart City devel- opment: application fields and a comprehensive research agenda. Smart Cities 3 (3), 853–872. https://doi.org/10.3390/smartcities3030044.
Tripodi, P., Nicastro, N., Pane, C., Cammarano, D., Tripodi, P., Nicastro, N., et al., 2022. Dig- ital applications and artificial intelligence in agriculture toward next-generation plant phenotyping. Crop Past. Sci. https://doi.org/10.1071/CP21387.
Tsolakis, N., Bechtsis, D., Bochtis, D., 2019. AgROS: a robot operating system based emula- tion tool for agricultural robotics. Agronomy 9 (7), 403. https://doi.org/10.3390/ agronomy9070403.
Tzachor, A., Devare, M., King, B., Avin, S., Ó hÉigeartaigh, S., 2022. Responsible artificial in- telligence in agriculture requires systemic understanding of risks and externalities. Nat. Mach. Intellig. 4 (2), 104–109. https://doi.org/10.1038/s42256-022-00440-4.
Udendhran, R., Balamurugan, M., 2021. Towards secure deep learning architecture for smart farming-based applications. Complex Intell. Syst. 7, 659–666. https://doi.org/ 10.1007/s40747-020-00225-5.
Ünal, Z., 2020. Smart farming becomes even smarter with deep learning—A bibliograph- ical analysis. IEEE Access 8, 105587–105609. https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2020. 3000175.
Valente, J., Sanz Muñoz, D., Cerro Giner, J. del, Rossi, C., Garzón Oviedo, M.A., Hernández Vega, J.D., Barrientos Cruz, A., 2011. Techniques for Area Discretization and Coverage in Aerial Photography for Precision Agriculture employing mini quad-rotors, in: Proceedings of RHEA-2011 | RHEA-2011 | 09/09/2011 - 09/09/2011 | Montpellier, France. Presented at the RHEA-2011, E.T.S.I. Industriales (UPM), Montpellier, France, pp. 85–97.
van Eck, N.J., Waltman, L., 2011. Text mining and visualization using VOSviewer. arXiv e-prints, 1109, arXiv:1109.2058.
van Eck, N.J., Waltman, L., 2014. Visualizing bibliometric networks. In: Ding, Y., Rousseau, R., Wolfram, D. (Eds.), Measuring Scholarly Impact: Methods and Practice. Springer International Publishing, Cham, pp. 285–320. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319- 10377-8_13.
Villa-Henriksen, A., Edwards, G.T.C., Pesonen, L.A., Green, O., Sørensen, C.A.G., 2020. Inter- net of Things in arable farming: Implementation, applications, challenges and poten- tial. Biosyst. Eng. 191, 60–84. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biosystemseng.2019.12.013.
Virnodkar, S.S., Pachghare, V.K., Patil, V.C., Jha, S.K., 2020. Remote sensing and machine learning for crop water stress determination in various crops: a critical review. Precis. Agric. 21 (5), 1121–1155. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11119-020-09711-9.
Wang, B., Pan, S.-Y., Ke, R.-Y., Wang, K., Wei, Y.-M., 2014. An overview of climate change vulnerability: a bibliometric analysis based on web of science database. Nat. Hazards 74 (3), 1649–1666. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11069-014-1260-y.
Wang, H.Z., Wang, G.B., Li, G.Q., Peng, J.C., Liu, Y.T., 2016. Deep belief network based deter- ministic and probabilistic wind speed forecasting approach. Appl. Energy 182, 80–93. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2016.08.108.
Wang, H., Li, G., Wang, G., Peng, J., Jiang, H., Liu, Y., 2017. Deep learning based ensemble approach for probabilistic wind power forecasting. Appl. Energy 188, 56–70. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2016.11.111.
Weiss, M., Jacob, F., Duveiller, G., 2020. Remote sensing for agricultural applications: a meta-review. Remote S Environ. 236, 111402. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rse. 2019.111402.
Wiangkham, A., Ariyarit, A., Aengchuan, P., 2022. Prediction of the influence of loading rate and sugarcane leaves concentration on fracture toughness of sugarcane leaves and epoxy composite using artificial intelligence. Theor. Appl. Fract. Mech. 117, 103188. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tafmec.2021.103188.
Wolfert, S., Ge, L., Verdouw, C., Bogaardt, M.-J., 2017. Big data in smart farming – a review.
Agric. Syst. 153, 69–80. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.agsy.2017.01.023.
Xavier, L.C.P., da Silva, S.M.O., Carvalho, T.M.N., Pontes Filho, J.D., de Souza Filho, F.A., 2020. Use of machine learning in evaluation of drought perception in irrigated agriculture: the case of an irrigated perimeter in Brazil. Water 12 (6), 1546. https://doi.org/10. 3390/w12061546.
Xiong, J., Thenkabail, P.S., Gumma, M.K., Teluguntla, P., Poehnelt, J., Congalton, R.G., et al., 2017. Automated cropland mapping of continental Africa using Google Earth engine cloud computing. ISPRS J. Photogramm. Remote Sens. 126, 225–244. https://doi.org/ 10.1016/j.isprsjprs.2017.01.019.
Xu, B., Wang, W., Guo, L., Chen, G., Wang, Y., Zhang, W., Li, Y., 2021. Evaluation of deep learning for automatic multi-view face detection in cattle. Agriculture 11 (11), 1062. https://doi.org/10.3390/agriculture11111062.
Yingjie, S., Cuicui, L., Junxian, L., 2018. Quality and safety traceability system of agricultural products based on multi-agent. J. Intell. Fuzzy Syst. 35 (3), 2731–2740. https://doi. org/10.3233/JIFS-169625.
Yu, J., Zhang, X., Xu, L., Dong, J., Zhangzhong, L., 2021. A hybrid CNN-GRU model for predicting soil moisture in maize root zone. Agric. Water Manag. 245, 106649. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.agwat.2020.106649.
Zakir, A.Q., Singhal, A., Singh, G., Pandey, P., Sankaranarayanan, S., 2021. Soil utilisation prediction for farmers using machine learning. Int. J. Sustain. Agric. Manag. Inform. 7 (1), 67–75.
Zavala-Alcívar, A., Verdecho, M.-J., Alfaro-Saiz, J.-J., 2020. Assessing and selecting sustain- able and resilient suppliers in agri-food supply chains using artificial intelligence: a short review. In: Camarinha-Matos, L.M., Afsarmanesh, H., Ortiz, A. (Eds.), Boosting Collaborative Networks 4.0. Springer International Publishing, Cham, pp. 501–510 https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-62412-5_41.
Zhang, L., Zhong, Y., Geng, Y., 2019. A bibliometric and visual study on urban mining.
J. Clean. Prod. 239, 118067. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2019.118067.



Zhang, X., Cao, Z., Dong, W., 2020. Overview of edge computing in the agricultural inter- net of things: key technologies, applications, challenges. IEEE Access 8, 141748–141761. https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2020.3013005.
Zhao, Y., Gong, L., Huang, Y., Liu, C., 2016. A review of key techniques of vision-based con- trol for harvesting robot. Comput. Electron. Agric. 127, 311–323. https://doi.org/10. 1016/j.compag.2016.06.022.
Zhong, Z., Li, J., Luo, Z., Chapman, M., 2018. Spectral–spatial residual network for hyperspectral image classification: a 3-D deep learning framework. IEEE
Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens. 56 (2), 847–858. https://doi.org/10.1109/TGRS.
2017.2755542.
Zhou, Y., Xia, Q., Zhang, Z., Quan, M., Li, H., 2021. Artificial intelligence and machine learning for the green development of agriculture in the emerging manufactur- ing industry in the IoT platform. Acta Agriculturae Scandinavica, Section B — Soil & Plant Science https://doi.org/10.1080/09064710.2021.2008482 Accessed 8 May 2022.
