Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
ScienceDirect

AASRI Procedia 4 (2013) 1


2013 AASRI Conference on Intelligent Systems and Control (ISC 2013)

Preface

A system is a set of interacting or interdependent components forming an integrated whole or a set of elements and relationships which are different from relationships of the set or its elements to other elements or sets.

Fields that study the general properties of systems include Systems science, systems theory, cybernetics, dynamical systems, thermodynamics, and complex systems. They investigate the abstract properties of systems' matter and organization, looking for concepts and principles that are independent of domain, substance, type, or temporal scale.

The term system may also refer to a set of rules that governs structure and/or behavior. Alternatively, and usually in the context of complex social systems, the term institution is used to describe the set of rules that govern structure and/or behavior.

Intelligent control is a class of control techniques that use various AI computing approaches like neural networks, Bayesian probability, fuzzy logic, machine learning, evolutionary computation and genetic algorithms.

The 2013 AASRI Conference on Intelligent Systems and Control (ISC 2013) will be held on April 17-18, 2013, Vancouver,Canada.The goal of this conference is to bring together the researchers from academia and industry as well

as practitioners to share ideas, problems and solutions relating t Control.
the multifaceted aspects of Intelligent Systems and


ISC 2013 will be the most comprehensive conference focused on the various aspects of advances in Intelligent Systems and Control. Our conference provides a chance for academic and industry professionals to discuss recent progress in the area of Intelligent Systems and Control. The selected, peer reviewed paper from ICMST 2013 focus on

five topics: (1) Intelligent Systems
and Applications, (2)
Signal and
Image Processing: Applications, (3)

Communication, Embedded and Automated Systems, (4) Networks and Security, (5) Data Mining, Soft Computing, Pattern Recognition. We expect that the conference and its publications will be a trigger for further related research and technology improvements in this importance subject.

We really appreciate the participants of the conference and the support from AASRI and ELSEVIER. It’s you make our conference a success.

Wei Deng















2212-6716 © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license. Selection and/or peer review under responsibility of American Applied Science Research Institute doi:10.1016/j.aasri.2013.10.001
