the remainder of this article is planned as follows: section 2 gives a brief explanation of the related work that was carried out on collaborative recommendation systems and clustering-based collaborative recommendation. the proposed approach called as a k-mean-cuckoo approach for movie recommender system is explained in section 3. in section 4, experiment results performed on movielens dataset are described, and finally summarization of this article with future work are highlighted in section 5.



the number of clusters from 4 to 68. when the number of clusters is 4, the mae is 0.825169 and it drops to 15% as the number of clusters is increased by 64. thus, we can say that mae decreases with increase in the number of clusters. the possible description for such behavior is that as we increase the clusters, the closeness between the objects going into the cluster increases. close elements remain in the same cluster and prediction becomes more and more accurate. as the number of clusters increase, each user gets more choice to be assigned to a cluster, and each cluster may get less number of users assigned to it as the number of clusters increase since the number of users is fixed. the closeness of the user with the cluster assigned to it increases as the number of clusters increase. hence, the difference between the calculated value and the actual value decrease that decrease the mean absolute error.



and then summed n times. n divides the result and then raised to power half. the rmse of a model prediction on the estimated variable xmodel is defined as the square root of the mean squared error. where xobs has detected values and xmodel is modeled values at time i.



posed approach are that if the initial partition does not turn out to work well then, efficiency may decrease. for future work use of various other nature inspired algorithms in place of cuckoo search algorithm can be used. the greatest promising method is the one in which the algorithms used in clustering and optimization provide the best presentation regarding accuracy and speed.



