the majority of human activities are the primary cause of the continuous loss of vegetation cover on the earth's surface. the decrease in vegetation was a contributing factor to the increase in land surface temperature(lst). song et al.(2021) highlights that vegetation is the main influencing factors that driven lst. the lst is one of the crucial indicators of ecological functioning of the environment. the lst is indicates the temperature of the earth's skin, which is an important component in regional and global land surface processing studies. the lst is increasing at global level due to land use land cover conversion. studies conducted in different parts of ethiopia confirmed that there is a substantial increasing trend of lst. similar to lst, the atmospheric temperature is significantly increasing as a results of land use land cover change.



to quantitatively describe degraded land, the normalized difference barren index(ndbai) and the modified normalized difference water index(mndwi) were used. the lst were compared to the normalized difference vegetation index(ndvi), ndbai, and mndwi to provide ambient environmental condition for living things. vegetation based indices can indicates the existence and abundancies of vegetation cover.



analysis of spatial flexibility of the ndvi, lst, ndbai, and mndwi are tremendously crucial for decision making and natural resources monitoring in natural and environmental investigations. in addition, ndvi has been used to confirm the importance for represent distribution of green space(yuan and bauer, 2007). furthermore, several scholars raised that, remote sensing indices like ndvi



although these indices have been used to model lst in previous study, only a few of them have compared index results from different years to monitor surface temperature. even though, agricultural expansion is the main causes that aggravated climate change particularly lst in western parts of ethiopia. no research has been conducted around gida kiremu, limu, and amuru district. it is obvious that the lst has increased over time due to a decline in vegetation cover for agricultural expansion. in addition, wetland degradation and the increment of barren land were other causes for the rising of lst. therefore, this study attempted to analyze lst based on remote sensing indices such as ndvi, ndbai, and mndwi in western ethiopia. this paper is organized as follows: the first section introduces the general introduction on lst and its correlation with different indices; section two describes materials and methods which includes the study area descriptions, data types and sources, and method of data analysis; section three presents' results and discussions and the final section concludes the findings of the study.



the average monthly rainfall of the current study area is ranged between 14.32 and 338 mm/year. the study area receive high rainfall during summer that starts in june and ends in september and short rain season is in, spring, which encompass march, april, and may.



