symbolic model checking has become a successful technique for verifying large finite state systems up to more than 1020 states. the key idea of this method is that extremely large sets can often be efficiently represented with propositional formulas. most tools implement these formulas by means of binary decision diagrams(bdds), which have therefore become a key data structure in modern vlsi cad systems.



single pieces, known as men, move forward only, one square at a time in diagonal direction. they can capture any opposing checker on a diagonally adjacent square by jumping over it to a free square immediately beyond. jumping continues as part of the same move as long as there are adjacent opposing pieces with a free square beyond them. men may not jump over pieces of their own colour.



we still need a copy of each variable to represent the current state and the next states in the transition relation of the kripke structure. hence, the total number of binary variables is twice the number of variables used to represent the states of the game. we moreover immediately see that there are at most 23(n2+1)+1 possible game situations.



each state in the kripke structure corresponds to one of the possible value assignments to the set of variables. this allows us to define the state set of the kripke structure as the set of all possible value assignments that can be made to the chosen set of variables; we do not list all of those combinations explicitly, since this is clearly impracticable. the variable assignments corresponding to the initial state reflect the starting position of the game with m telling that black has to play.



on a more intuitive remark, it is not unusual in symbolic model checking that problems with some kind of regular structure are best encoded with some kind of regular variable ordering. this situation seems to prevail in the case of american checkers as well. specifically, the game has a regular structure in the sense that the board is regular and in the sense that only a small number of adjacent squares are directly involved in each individual move, where the rules governing this move are always the same up to the possible promotion of a man to a king. then, the diagonal variable ordering is obviously regular too.



