since the 1970s, chaotic dynamics has attracted a great deal of attention within the theory of dynamical systems(see, e.g.,), and much effort has been put into giving the notion of chaos a precise mathematical definition. in this regard, several concepts of chaos have been established, and there is an extensive literature dealing with the interconnections between all the different approaches. for a detailed exposition of this issue we refer to[9,14].



in the notion of strong chaos is explored in the slightly more specific but still wide-ranging context of topological groups. among other things it is shown there that a locally compact hausdorff topological group admits a faithful strongly chaotic continuous action on some hausdorff space if and only if it is strongly syndetically separated and non-compact. in the case where the acting group is discrete this result specializes to a characterization of infinite residually finite groups in terms of topological dynamics, which is due to. as one might expect from this, the concept of chaos developed in, which has been discussed by several authors, particularly from a group-theoretic point of view, e.g. in[5,15,16], is closely related to the one established in(see section 4 of this paper).



the paper is organized as follows. in section 2 we address certain rather general issues concerning continuous group actions. afterwards, in section 3, we introduce some terminology regarding compactifications of topological groups and a closely related kind of separation property. in section 4 we establish the desired notions of periodicity and chaos relative to a fixed class of group compactifications and illustrate how these generalize the corresponding concepts discussed in[17,18]. in section 5, we provide a geometric characterization of those classes of compactifications of a fixed locally compact hausdorff topological group g for which g admits a faithful respectively chaotic continuous action on some(compact) hausdorff space(see theorem 5.5). as a special instance of this parametrized result, we obtain a novel description of non-compact, maximally almost periodic, locally compact hausdorff topological groups by means of topological dynamics(see corollary 5.6).



as established by lemma 2.2 and proposition 4.6, if g is a topological group and d is a non-empty subclass of c(g) such that g admits a faithful d-chaotic continuous action on some hausdorff space, then g is non-compact and d separates compact subsets in g. in this section we prove that the converse is valid for locally compact hausdorff topological groups.



