plants of genus haloxylon bunge are psammophytic shrubs or small trees, belonging to amaranthaceae(formerly chenopodiaceae) of flowering plants[1-3]. about 13 species have been reported in haloxylon in the world. in china, there are two haloxylon species with a distribution in the deserts of northwest china, namely h. persicum(white saxoul) and h. ammodendron(saxoul)[2, 3]. they are designated the king of psammophytic plants and play an important role in sand fixation, wind control and water conservation in the deserts. distribution of these two species is sympatric in china. h. persicum grows mostly at the top of sand dunes, while h. ammodendron is widely distributed on sand dunes, clayed deserts, saline or alkaline deserts and gobi deserts.



rapd and issr analyses revealed that a high level of genetic diversity existed within/among natural populations of h. ammodendron in xinjiang, china[5-7]. other studies based on dna issr markers demonstrated that there existed genetic diversity and gene flow within/among populations of either h. ammodendron or h. persicum in xinjiang, china[8, 9]. using its1 region of nrdna, pollen of h. ammodendron was detected in surface soil in the centre of junggar desert basin, xinjiang, china, and the ecological relationship between vegetation characteristics and pollen in the surface soil was discussed. analysis with 14 issr primers did not find genetic difference between individual plants of h. ammodendron parasitized and non-parasitized by desertl cistanche(cistanche deserticola) in the alxa desert, inner under the following parameters: 2, 7, 7=weights for match, mismatch and indels used in the smithwaterman local alignment(i.e., match, mismatch, delta); 80, 10= matching and indel probability(i.e., pm, pi); 50= minimum alignment score(minscore); 500= maximum size of the repeat unit(max period).



tall fescue(festuca arundinacea schreb.) to seven grass species was found to be nearly 92%. the transferability(1.8%) of the ssr markers from the other related genera to genus haloxylon was considerably low, suggesting a larger genetic divergence between them.



