i.e. nodes can join and leave the network, as well as fail, over time. in particular, their size may change drastically in a short time period. manets, as in common ad hoc groups, can be characterized by a not-hierarchical structure, such that their nodes are autonomous peers. due to their ability to provide a wide range of services, their use can be appealing for both military and civilian applications. further, they are expected to be employed for providing pervasive services, playing a crucial role in any aspect of everyday life, impacting the way people work, and interact with each other, and the way business, education, entertainment, and health-care are operating, depicting the vision of anytime ubiquitous computing.



in order to distribute a signature service, two tools are necessary: one for generating the<sk, pk> pair, and one for distributing, among a set of distinct individuals, the ability to sign messages under sk. in the following, we assume the manet to have associated an rsa key pair<sk, pk>. current solutions, for distributing the signing ability to a group of individuals, are based on standard threshold schemes, in which sk is divided into a given number of shares that are distributed to as many cosigners.



we propose a novel secret sharing scheme that additively shares sk among all the current members of the network, so that limited subgroups of them, provided with different shares, can act on behalf of the group, and collectively issue a signature. the scheme is basically a(t,t)-threshold scheme in which shares are replicated, and the value of the threshold t can be enlarged, in order to increase the robustness of the signature scheme. each member belonging to the subgroup, separately and independently issues a partial signature, and all the partial signatures are combined afterwards by the applicant, in order to have a standard signature. further, the dimension of the produced signature does not depend on the size of the subgroup, and it is possible to easily verify the signature correctness. finally, it is possible to detect cosigners attempting to cheat.



in this section we present the protocols executed by the nodes of the network in order to issue a signature, and to increase the threshold. we make standard assumptions: each member dx of the group has a unique nonzero identifier x, such as a mac address; dx is connected via a broadcast communication channel to the neighbors in its transmission range; dx can fail, dynamically join or leave the network, and has a source of randomness. moreover, we assume that there is a routing layer for reliable message delivery. messages are exchanged through secure channels.



{0,..., k}, otherwise it is assigned to ct+k. note that, as long as the selection of the share to split is performed with a round robin policy, and the original threshold is known by all the members, it is always possible to determine the class that a given member fell into at a given time, by determining how many executions of the protocol have been performed up to that time.



