to do so, we define a class of petri nets, called petri nets with counters(pnz). they are place/transition(p/t) petri nets enriched with data in a global vector of integer variables, manipulated through linear transformations. the places, arcs and tokens in pnz are like in p/t nets, while each transition carry an annotation encoding the linear transformation to perform at each firing. a pnz can be understood as coding the control state in its places and the data state in its variables. it may also be seen as a special case of coloured petri nets, that implement the integer variables as integer marked places. its semantics usually leads to produce infinite reachability graphs.



a more compact state graph construction is defined next. this is made possible by detecting executions that change the data state but not the control one, and executing them as a meta-transition. the result is a compact graph in which each state possibly encodes a huge or infinite number of reachable markings.



represented as a(possibly infinite) reachability graph which is the directed graph whose nodes are all reachable markings and where each arc represents a transition and a binding producing one marking from another. in this context, the reachability graph can be considered as a compact representation of trace(n, m0). in particular, it may remain finite(i.e., have a finite number of reachable markings) even if it admits infinite traces.



we have produced a prototype implementation that computes a compacted state graph for a pnz. the sets of integer vectors are stored using the ndd structure defined in and implemented in the library lash. in some cases, our implementation ends up with an error, when a transformation cannot be iterated by lash(as explained in the introduction, this approach is not complete). moreover, we cannot guarantee that it will terminate as this is a problem that is undecidable in general. however, sufficient conditions for the termination have been given in and it is left as a future work to study how they could be applied in our setting.



