in this paper we confine our attention to digital spaces that model subsets ofthe euclidean plane and other surfaces, and give an axiomatic definition of a very general class ofsuch spaces, which includes spaces corresponding to all of the good pairs of adjacency relations that have been used in the literature on 2d digital topology(both in the plane and on boundary surfaces). a space that satisfies our axiomatic definition is called a gads. as will be seen in section 2.5, a substantial part of the mathematical framework used in our definition ofa gads has previously been used by the third author[4,5].



as first steps in the development of digital topology for these spaces, we define the intersection number of two paths on a gads, and outline a proof that the number is invariant under homotopic deformation of the two paths. this is mostly a generalization, to arbitrary gads, ofdefinitions and theorems given by the first author and malgouyres in[1,2,3]. we also give a(discrete) definition of planar gads, which model subsets of the euclidean plane, and present a jordan curve theorem for such gads. in contrast to some earlier work by the second author(e.g.,[7,8,9]), this paper does not use any arguments that are based on polyhedral continuous analogs ofdigital spaces, but uses only discrete arguments.



a vertex x of g is said to be a singularity of g if the set of all loops of g that contain x is not strongly connected. vertices that are not singularities are said to be nonsingular. again, whether or not x is a singularity of g depends only on the underlying complex of g.



even a strongly connected pgads may have a singularity. for example, the pgads obtained from the torus-like pgads ofexample 2.9 above by identifying the vertices a, b and c has a singularity at a= b= c but is strongly connected.



some results that have been established in the literature for certain specific digital spaces have been generalized to gads(e.g., a homotopy invariance theorem for intersection numbers of digital paths, and a digital jordan curve theorem). there are many other results of digital topology for which this could be done, such as results about simple points and boundary tracking. the problem ofdeveloping a 3d version ofthis theory seems more challenging.



