the product modeling design is effective expression of semantic to some extent, and product form characteristics plays a key role in the product semantics communication. products are perceived by users through its shape information and produce short-term memory which matches the experience and knowledge of long time memory in the process of intuition, so as to form the individual perceptual intention of the product by users. user's perceptual intention of the product is usually with some fuzziness and can hardly be quantitative analysised, so we introduce language as a variable to its description based on fuzzy theory method, and make this fuzzy language information into numerical value which make the quantitative analysis of user's perceptual intention information possiable.



the experiment's common degrees form's output results is shown in the chart 2."initial" stands for initial common degrees of each variable quantity, all this value are 1."extraction" is regeneration common degrees after extraction of factors. it shows information ratio of each factor are extracted. it can be seen from this one, all variables's information ratio been extracted is more than 0.5, and there are eight variables's extracted information ratio is above 0.7 or very close to



the load value of the principal component is called correlation coefficient in factor component matrix,if they are greater than 0.5,it means the relevance is higher and what original variables the composite indicator better represents. we can know what variables the aggregative indicator 1 and 2 respectively better represent according to this principle. using the principle that the variables which two axes representatives could not repeat, we can label the horizontal axis in negative direction for fine, soft, simple, user-friendly, the horizontal axis in the positive direction for the rough, rigid, complex, mechanical; label longitudinal axis in the positive direction for the public, friendly, quiet, traditional, rustic, longitudinal axis in the negative direction of the personality, apathy, dynamic, modern and luxurious.



secondly, analyzing from the distribution direction of the dot, the endpoint in the negative direction of the horizontal axis is the volkswagen beetle, this period represented by variables are adelicate, soft, simple, user-friendly. prototype of beetle is designed by german designer porsche in 1930s, we can see it from the location of the imagery maps that the car is one of the personalized models recognized of public. the endpoint in the positive direction of the horizontal axis is the general motors cadillac cts, this endpoint represented by the variables are the rough, cold, complex, mechanical. this body waist is



automobile product appearance modelling had attracted more and more attention in our country,but there still exist some problems in design process when designers work on the appearance of automobile. they don't form the scientific and systematic analysis to users' demand but depands on their feelings, which calls for hidden trouble of the elimination. this paper gets perceptual image profile based on the morphology of the car through statistics, psychology, social studies of science research theory and research methods, and buildes user's mental models. with putting forward scientific and effective product value data analysis method, provides a basis for future automobile appearance design.



