noise may be generated during acquisition, processing, and transmission of an image. for instance, if the imaging sensor contains damaged pixels on its surface, random spots(noises) with varied intensities will be introduced into the acquired image because such locations cannot register the incident light. examples of noise in images include salt& pepper, gaussian[15,16], poisson, shot, and speckle[2,19], typically modeled as either additive(noise added to the original image) or multiplicative(noise multiplied to the original image).



anisotropic diffusion has been widely used to address the ill-posed nature of inverse problems. despite its effectiveness in image denoising, a paucity of studies exist to analyze the impact of anisotropic diffusion in other image processing techniques, such as compression, segmentation, inpainting, and tomographic image reconstruction. another possible research avenue can be the application of anisotropic diffusion in neural networks for learning a priori information.



despite the well-established knowledge that diffusion leads to scalespace solutions, the fundamental question remains to determine the mathematical relationship of the signal features at different scales. in essence, after the convolution by a given kernel(e.g., gaussian), how do these features relate mathematically? the relationship may enhance our understanding on how the diffusion process works. for example, we will understand how and why pixels diffuse across image regions to reduce noise and spurious features. furthermore, inverse operations may be established to reconstruct the original(noisy) signal after diffusion.



was selected. the former metric gives the signal strength relative to the noise content in the image. higher psnr values are preferred for quality images. despite its wide application, psnr lacks human perceptual qualities. ssim, which ranges between 0 and 1, addresses this weakness by emulating the human visual system. quality images give higher values of ssim.



60. next, the methods by monteil and beghdadi, tebini et al., gupta et al., rezgui et al., and ours were applied to restore the original image. in all experiments, we applied psnr and ssim to gauge quality of the denoised images. implementation codes have been shared for researchers to reproduce our results.4



