power grid reasoning expert system is a complex system. to solve knowledge sharing of knowledge base in expert system, we abstract and analyze the power grid security investigation procedure by using ontology technology. with ontology-based power grid knowledge base, we establish associated relationship of procedure vocabularies. in this paper, we introduce and analyze of semantic reasoning tools such as jena. the reasoner mechanism and inference rules of grammar has been included and explained. at last we give a specific application of security investigation procedure ontology and reasoning.



class(concept)/ instance relationship reasoning. given knowledge base k; c is a class k(concept); i is individual k. available on the relationship of the following classes and instances reasoning: to determine whether an individual is an instance of c; judgment in all instances of the k of c; judgment which instance of the class k in individual i; relationship between two instances of judgment or judgment of an instance of a specific instance.



jena is an api for rdf and owl, owl and rdf inference the jena core only provides limited query primitives. reasoning jena itself is a rule-based inference engine to achieve, by the rules of owl reasoning are very complete, not all owl-dl reasoning functions support, jena storage of the knowledge base and even persistent support(the knowledge base can be directly present in a relational database). the new version of the jena 2.2 has begun to support the integrated use dig interface reasoner. according to actual needs, take advantage of jena development kit inference ontology model application. the jena reasoning machine system and ontology subsystem basic core architecture, its specific structure mainly includes:



as illustrated the inference machinery is actually implemented at the level of the graph spi, so that any of the different model interfaces can be constructed around an inference graph. in particular, the ontology provides convenient ways to link appropriate reasoners into the ontmodels that it constructs. as part of the general rdf api we also provide an infmodel, this is an extension to the normal model interface that provides additional control and access to an underlying inference graph.



as open resources project which developed by hp labs, jena is a powerful tool to achieve semantic reasoning, research and one of the basic tools for semantic retrieval. learning and jena, not only help to deepen the understanding and awareness of the ontology knowledge, but also can improve the retrieval efficiency. therefore, jena as a support tool for semantic reasoning later ontology research process has a very important role.



