currently, researches on mechanical joints are mostly focused on the performance of metal mechanical joints for conventional machine tools. for example, shoukry studied the contact stiffness of mechanical joints and developed a corresponding mathematical model. he also found that mechanical joints have a constant tangential-normal contact stiffness ratio. archenti studied the proportion of the mechanical joints errors to the total error of the machine. he found that the accuracy of the machine tools is largely affected by the mechanical joints. zhao deduced the elastic modulus and shear modulus of the mechanical joints based on the fractal contact theory. chen investigated the effect of friction on the contact stiffness of mechanical joints and developed a model for the contact stiffness considering the effect of friction. it can be seen that very little research has been carried out on the performance of oil medium steel-bmc mechanical joints.



this paper investigates the thermal characteristics of oil medium steel-bmc mechanical joints. a new discrete analytical method for the actual contact proportion of oil medium steelbmc mechanical joints considering contact weight was developed. the variation pattern of the actual contact proportion with preload and roughness is analysed. a model of the thermal parameters of the oil medium steel-bmc mechanical joints was developed. the virtual material-simulation analysis method of oil medium steelbmc mechanical joints was established theoretically, and the accuracy of the theoretical model and simulation analysis method was verified through experiments and simulations. taking certain type of bmc bed foundation as an example, the influence of oil medium steel-bmc mechanical joints on thermal performance and thermal mechanical coupling characteristics of bmc bed foundation was studied. the important influence of thermal properties and thermal mechanical coupling characteristics of oil medium steel-bmc mechanical joints is proved.



analyze the cause of thermal performance changes of oil medium steel-bmc mechanical joints. the actual solid contact proportion of the mechanical joints grows as the roughness falls or as the preload grows. the thermal properties of mechanical joints tend to be the properties of solid material(bmc and steel) with the increase of the actual solid contact proportion. the thermal conductivity and density of solid materials(steel and bmc) is much greater than that of lubricants oil, so the relevant performance where, eo is the elastic modulus of lubricating oil, 1.5gpa. vo is the volume of lubricating oil in the mechanical joints. dpo is the change pressure on the lubricating oil. dvo is the change volume of lubricating oil after pressure. df is the normal support force provided by the lubricating oil. dd is the change of oil film thickness after the mechanical joints is compressed.



