the class of circular-arc graphs, as well as its helly, normal, and proper subclasses, has been extensively studied in the literature. circular-arc bigraphs, a bipartite variation on circular-arc graphs, remains a relatively new field, with only a few studies on the class and its proper and unit subclasses existing. in this paper, we introduce a helly subclass for circular-arc bigraphs, based on the concept of bipartite-helly families, and provide a polynomial-time recognition algorithm for it. we also introduce an alternative proper circular-arc bigraph subclass to the one in the literature, as well as two different normal circular-arc bigraph subclasses based on the definition of normal circular-arc graphs. we present containment relations between the different proper and normal classes.



circular-arc bigraphs arise as a bipartite variation of circular-arc graphs. a bipartite graph is said to be a circular-arc bigraph if there exists a one-to-one correspondence between its vertices and a family of arcs on a circle such that, for every pair of vertices in different parts, they are neighbors precisely if their corrsesponding arcs intersect. the class is not very widely studied, although matrix-based characterizations of the class and its unit and proper subclasses exist, as well as a polynomial-time recognition algorithm for the proper subclass. currently no mention of a helly or normal subclass of circular-arc bigraphs exists in the literature.



in this paper, we consider all arcs to be open unless otherwise stated. if a is an arc ona circle, we use s(a) and t(a) to denote its counter-clockwise and clockwise endpoints, respectively. to simplify notation, we call counter-clockwise endpoints s-endpoints, and clockwise endpoints t-endpoints. for any arc a in circle c, we



we then define helly interval bigraphs as graphs that admit a bi-interval model(e, f) that verifies the bipartite-helly property. it is easy to verify that a bipartite graph is a helly interval bigraph if and only if its square is an interval graph. we introduce a similar result for helly circular-arc bigraphs in lemma 3.2.



