schemas and integrity constraints play an important role with respect to data manipulation, reasoning and optimization. this of course applies to semistructured data and xml documents. it is also widely recognized that, being able to model schemas, constraints and queries within the same formalism(logic as a matter of fact) is a key issue to investigate problems like subtyping, constraint implication and satisfiability, query correctness etc.



the modal logic approach to model semistructured data is naturally motivated by the fact that semistructured data, hence xml documents, are commonly viewed as edge labeled graphs thus as kripke models. this approach has been investigated in different ways to tackle different problems: schemas subsumption[1,14], path constraints, query languages, xpath queries...



specifying the types of the referenced elements in a document. the notion of schema capturing well-typed references provided in, called ref-schema, is very general and extends the one previously introduced in, called normalized ref-schema. another contribution of[7,8] has been to show that ref-schema can be expressed in hybrid modal logic(hml). although modal logic is a simple formalism for working with graphs, it has no mechanism for referring to and reasoning about the individual nodes in such structures. hml increases the effectiveness of modal logic by allowing one to grasp the nodes via formulas. hml provides a unique formalism to express sophisticated schemas, constraints and navigational queries a la xpath.



simeon and fan propose an extension of dtd able to model classical relational and object oriented referential constraints. so the focus is on problems related to key constraints and foreign-key constraints. these constraints can be used to capture reference enforcement. it seems that this approach and that of xml are closely related. rather negative results concerning decidability for key and foreign-key constraints have been showed in.



the main contribution of[8,7] is to introduce a notion of xml schema which provides a simple and well-founded notion of reference typing. references are then first class citizen. the notion of schema introduced in is fully general whether the notion of schema in, called here normalized ref-schema 6 is restricted. moreover, in, we show how to translate a general schema into a normalized one. this allows us here, for the purpose of testing constraint satisfiability in presence of schema, to restrict the presentation to normalized ref-schema without loss of generality.



