... to solve a difficulty arising from a mismatch between syntax and semantics: in locally cartesian closed categories, substitution is modelled by pullbacks(more generally pseudo-functors), that is, only up to isomorphism, unless split fibrational hypotheses are imposed. but not all semantics do satify them, and in particular



these notes are based on a lecture given by the second author in the special session to honour phil scott on the occasion of his 60th birthday year. it was held in conjunction with mfps xxiv in philadelphia in may 2008. the second author is grateful for the many things phil scott has taught him about the connections between logic, types, and categories, and for very enjoyable collaboration. he would also like to thank rick blute and andre scedrov for organizing the special session and for inviting him to contribute to it.



we would like to remark that this definition uses a form of universe polymorphism. the level of the two instances of type is implicit and will be determined by the context in which the e-set is used. by choosing the levels appropriately we can both get a notion of"small" e-set and various levels of"large" e-sets. note that the type of eset must be one level higher in the universe hierarchy than the type of carrier.



we can now define the notion of an e-locally cartesian closed category as an e-category c such that all e-slice categories c/a are e-cccs for all objects a. the objects of the e-slice category c/a are arrows of c with target a. the arrows of c/a are commuting triangles, formalized type-theoretically as pairs of arrows and proofs that the triangle commutes.



we here propose to use an abstract algebraic characterization of intuitionistic type theory as the initial category with families(cwfs) with extra structure[6,8,3,1]. this is a notion defined up to isomorphism. cwfs provide the"minimal algebraization" of intuitionistic type theory: substitution is made explicit and variables are replaced by projections. however, dependent types are not modelled by fibrations as in lcccs and many other categorical notions of model of dependent types.



