this article introduced an accurate to ascertain the size of fine grinding medium. comparative grinding tests are done by using cast iron segment steel ball. grinding test results showed that mill capacity and grinding efficiency of cast iron segment could be really superior to steel ball. grinding and flotation indexes have gotten obvious improvement when applying optimized fine grinding medium for industrial experiment.



in fine grinding, steel ball size is very important. if steel ball over size, crushing force becomes strong, this will lead to penetrability crushing and make ore over crush. if steel ball under size, hitting force becomes lighter, this will make ore less fine. fine grinding medium is determined exactly, the aim is to form accurate crushing force to grind ore and improve fine grinding efficiency. however, most concentrators generally there is the problem of fine grinding medium over sized. this problem has become more and more serious[5-8].



after the industrial test, the yield of p2o5 concentrate growing by 2.29 percent more than before the industrial test, the recovery of p2o5 concentrate growing by 2.39 percent. the improvement of the yield and the recovery of the p2o5 concentrate depend largely on the improvement of the grinding product size composition characteristic and the enhance of the mineral liberation degree after optimize the fineness grinding medium. the application of the selective grinding new process improve the grinding process and the flotation index process overall.



steel ball is the traditional fine grinding medium. but it is not the best fine grinding medium. frist, its grinding area is small and has big hitting power. on geometrical shape analyzes the cast iron segment has a big grinding area and a good turn function, the effect of fine grinding is superior to the steel ball. the fine grinding process mainly on grinding and support by a slight shock, so grinding medium is made of cast iron material which has wear-resisting and low cost, it can avoid weaknesses.



