duction and diffusion has also been extensively studied[32,38], and collaborations can facilitate the improvement of research quality, resulting in more effective scientific production. many studies are concerned on the co-author networks, co-citation networks, coword networks, international collaborations[21,37,38], and crossinstitution collaborations, in publications(e.g. papers and journals), which adopt the social network analysis(sna) to study the relationships involved in the networks. however, to our knowledge, there is no bibliometric and collaboration network analysis based on patents in this inter-disciplinary research field.



patent authorities. key elements of records include patent number(s), priority application information, dmcs, titles, designated states, application details, inventor(s), assignee(s), patent details, ipc classification number, cited patents, cited articles. each of these patent family records is showed as a single patent. after manually removing duplicates, 3610 items of single patent information are acquired. the data of assignees and patent quantity information is cleaned, grouped, and rearranged in an excel spreadsheet.



regarding the quantities of partners and co-owned patent applications, the french public health agent of assisance publique-hopitaux de paris(ap-hp) holds the first place, of which the patents contain claims for the biomarkers combination for the prognosis of hepatic fibrosis or hepatitis c virus treatment. the ap-hp possesses 31 co-ownership patents with 10 co-assignees. the deeply multilateral cooperation of aphp might be in connection with its international strategy that develops larger-scale cooperation projects with other institutions, for the benefit of global health.



trends, e.g. g06t-g06k(ai in medical image recognition), g06n-g06k(ai in medical diagnostic system), g16b-c12q(prediction of enzyme activity), etc. the results suggest that the application of ai technologies in the medical field mainly focuses on medical image recognition, computer-aided diagnosis, disease monitoring, disease prediction, bioinformatics, and drug development, etc.



