truck scale is an important weighing instrument. the truck parking cheating method is one of the truck scales cheating method and can lead to large economic losses to the enterprise. a new truck parking cheating detection method based on the voltage waveform analysis is brought out in this paper. according to the output voltage signal waveform of the weighing transducer, if the turning point number of the output voltage is different with the truck axles, the truck parking cheating method exists. based on the principle, the truck parking cheating detection system is designed. the instrument is using 8031 as the mcu and can be transmitted the voltage signal to the control computer. experimental data show that the detection system can on-time detects the truck parking cheating method.



the four weighing transducers are installed under the weighing platform. under the action of the truck force, the deformation of the weighing transducers is generated and the mv signal which is proportional to the truck weight is output. the voltage signal is amplified by the signal amplification and transmitted to the scm. the information of the truck data can be transmitted to the upper computer. the goods weight is the difference between the full loaded weight and the empty weight of the truck.



while the truck wheels are not on the platform entirely, the waveform curve of the transducer output voltage is different from the normal condition. if the front wheels drive off the weighing station, the pressure of the weighing transducer is smaller than the pressure while the truck is on the weighing entirely and the output voltage signal is also smaller. so the voltage signal curve appears the additional downward inflection point before weighing. that is to say the third inflection point appears in the voltage curve.



while the front or back wheel of the other truck is driving on the platform while the truck weighing, the pressure of the weighing sensor is bigger than the pressure while only one truck is on the weighing station and the output voltage signal is also bigger. so the voltage signal curve appears the additional rising inflection point before weighing. that is to say the third inflection point appears in the voltage curve.



this paper proposes a new truck parking cheating detection method of the truck scale based on the output voltage signal waveform of the weighing sensor. the experiment is carried out in the truck scale weighing platform in a factory. the experimental data show that the truck parking cheating detection system of the truck scale based on this method can real-time detects the truck parking cheating method and provides an effective method for real-time detects the truck scale cheating methods.



