this study is aiming to assess the primary energy consumption, and the energy-related carbon dioxide(co2) emissions in vehicle cycle for a china passenger car powered by internal combustion engine. meanwhile, this analysis concerns about the share of coal demand in the total primary energy use. the results show that the vehicle cycle energy consumption and co2 emissions of a china passenger car are about 91.13 gj and 11.13 ton per vehicle, respectively. and coal accounting for about 84.5% of the vehicle cycle primary energy consumption is the key contributor to the co2 emissions in china. the processes of material production and vehicle assembly account for most of the vehicle cycle energy use and co2 emissions. there are four ways to reduce vehicle cycle environmental impacts: use clean energy, lower the weight of the vehicle under the condition of ensuring vehicle performance, adopt low energy-intensive and low emission-intensive materials in vehicle, and develop advanced vehicle propulsion systems.



the world energy-related carbon dioxide(co2) emissions will increase from 30.2 billion metric tons in 2008 to 35.2 billion metric tons in 2020(eia, 2011). much of the growth is attributed to non-oecd nations that depend heavily on fossil fuels to meet fast-paced growth in energy demand. coal is the largest contributor to emissions growth in the non-oecd economies, and accounts for 54% of the projected non-oecd increase in total energy-related emissions. china's emissions account for more than two-thirds of the total increase in non-oecd asia's emissions. china is one of the world's top three nations of coal-related emission.



the assembly process accounts for about 29% of the vehicle cycle primary energy consumption, while the emissions of this stage accounts for about 49.7% of the total co2 emissions. it is very clear that the vehicle assembly line is emission-intensive, caused by painting process. coal which accounts for about 84.5% of this stage energy demand is still the main contributor to the carbon dioxide emissions.



the material production consumes 63.2 gj of energy about 70% of total primary energy consumption and releases over 50% of the total energy-related co2 emissions. the vehicle assembly stage accounts for 29% of the total energy consumption and releases 49.7% of the vehicle cycle co2 emissions. the energy demand and co2 emissions of the vehicle distribution and disposal generate puny environment impacts.



from the analysis above, we can find that there are four ways to reduce vehicle cycle environment impacts. first, lower the weight of the vehicle on the condition of ensuring vehicle performance. second, adopt low energy-intensive and low emission-intensive materials. third, substitute environment friendly energy for coal as the main process fuel in china. the last one, develop advanced vehicle propulsion system.



