The rest of the paper is structured as follows: Section 2 presents formal preliminaries. In Section 3, the paper provides more detailed descriptions of e-cooperatives and introduces an informal overview of the ewe model. Section 4 presents the logical axioms defining the ewe model. Section 5 describes the application-specific, non-logical axioms and discusses their use in ewe policy formulation. In Section 6, an implementation of the approach is described. Section 7 discusses related literature, while Section 8 presents conclusions and suggests future work.

For a server agent s to act on behalf of a client, it must have the intention to act either individually (in f-mode) or cooperatively (in c-mode). The specific intentions depend on whether the agent is acting in f-mode or c-mode, such as the minimum value of a purchase that is permitted by the agent in each mode for an act of buying.

All server agents are required to adhere to the principle of maximal individualistic satisfaction, the shared group ethos. Additional forms of group ethos are also possible, allowing for variations in group competitiveness, which can be represented in the framework.

Events play a crucial role in the approach, as they provide a categorically homogeneous basis for representing change. The concept of events is emphasized due to their prevalent use in linguistics and knowledge representation, particularly in verb nominalization. Events are interpreted as happenings at a specific point in time, for which a one-dimensional, linear, discrete view of time is adopted. This view entails a total ordering of time points that is isomorphic to the natural numbers.

EWE policy conditions often require specification with respect to the current time extracted from the system clock. This is achieved using the auxiliary predicate current time/1, which provides system clock times and is interpreted such that current time(t) = true if t = now, and false otherwise. The semantics of "now" is defined in the paper.

The concept of permission/3 is defined to indicate that a client has the option of performing an action on a resource under certain conditions, such as being assigned a particular status by a server agent of the e-cooperative and having specified permissions from server agents in f-mode or a subset of server agents in c-mode.