Electronic Notes in Theoretical Computer Science 53 (2004)
URL:  http://www.elsevier.nl/locate/entcs/volume53.html  13 pages

An HPSG Analysis of German Depictive Secondary Predicates

Stefan Müller 1 ,2
Theoretische Linguistik/Computerlinguistik Universität Bremen/Fachbereich 10
Postfach 33 04 40
D-28334 Bremen, Germany


Abstract
I will provide German data that shows that depicitve secondary predicates may refer to subjects, direct objects, indirect objects, and even more oblique complements. Reference to more oblique arguments is more marked. The markedness corresponds to the oblique- ness hierarchy that was proposed by Keenan and Comrie [13] and others. Based on these observations I will suggest analyzing depictive secondary predicates parallel to control con- structions rather than raising constructions. Since depictives can refer to arguments that do not surface, the analysis makes reference to the underlying syntactic-semantic representa- tion: the argument-structure.


The Phenomenon
The examples in (1) are sentences with adjectives as secondary predicates.
a. Er ißt  das Fleisch roh.
he eats the meat	raw
Er ißt  das Fleisch nackt.
he eats the meat	naked
Er schneidet das Fleisch klein.

he cuts
Er ißt
the meat den Teller leer.
small

he eats the
plate
empty



1 Thanks to Berthold Crysmann, Christian Dütschmann, Tibor Kiss, Bob Levine for stimulating discussions during conferences, workshops, summer schools, and various other occasions. The re- search carried out for this paper was in part supported by a research grant from the German Bundes- ministerium für Bildung, Wissenschaft, Forschung und Technologie (BMBF) to the DFKI project whiteboard (“Multilevel Annotation for Dynamic Free Text Processing”), FKZ 01 IW 002.
2 Email: Stefan.Mueller@cl.uni-bremen.de
◯c 2004 Published by Elsevier Science B. V. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.


In (1a–b) the secondary predicate provides information about the state of the entity it refers to. In (1c–d) the result of an event is specified by the adjective. In this paper I will examine the properties of the predicates in (1a–b), so-called depictive predicates.
In German, uninflected adjectives and prepositional phrases may appear as de- pictive secondary predicates.
a. Er liest das Buch nackt.
he reads the book naked

b. Er ißt
die Äpfel
ungewaschen.

he eats the apples unwashed

Ich traf ihn
(gestern)  im
dunklen Anzug. 3

I	met him
yesterday in.the dark
suit

‘I met him in a dark suit yesterday.’
Depictive predicates may refer to subjects and to objects. 4 There is a strong preference for serializations where the depictive predicate follows its antecedent. 5
a.	weil er die Äpfel ungewaschen ißt.
(He is unwashed or the apples are unwashed.)
weil er ungewaschen die Äpfel ißt. (He is unwashed.)
* weil ungewaschen er / der Mann die Äpfel ißt.
(4a) has two readings, (4b) just one. Since the object follows the depicitive it cannot be an antecedent.
It is also possible to refer with depicitves to arguments that are not expressed at the surface although this is denied sometimes. 6 For example, Zifonun [33] gives the following example and claims that the depictive predicate cannot refer to the logical subject of the passivized verb. 7

Die Äpfel
wurden ungewaschen in den Keller
getragen.

the
apples were
unwashed
in the
basement carried

‘The apples were carried to the basement unwashed.’
That the reading where the depictive refers to the agent of the carrying is hardly availible has semantic reasons. If the reading where the depictive refers to the logical object of the main verb is semantically implausible the reference to the logical subject of the main verb is fine:

3 The example is taken from [8]. I added the adverb gestern to exclude the possibility of the PP modifying ihn directly.
4 See also [22] for examples of predicates referring to nominative and accusative NPs.
5 Lötscher [17] makes this observation explicit with regard to objects. See also [ 21] for examples from Dutch.
6 See also [22], [7], and [18] on non-overt antecedents.
7 Chomsky [2] and Jaeggli [9] make a similar claim for English. As the translations of the examples below show this claim is as wrong for English as it is for German.


a. Das Buch wurde nackt gelesen.

the
book was
naked read

‘The book was read naked.’
b. Das Buch ist nackt zu lesen.

the
book is
naked to read

‘The book is to be read naked.’
In the same vain depictives may refer to non-expressed subjects in infinitival constructions with verbal complex (so-called coherent constructions (7a) and such without a verbal complex (incoherent constructions (7b).
a. Er hat ihr nackt zu schlafen geraten.
he has her naked to sleep	advised
‘Naked, he advised her to sleep.’ ‘He advised her to sleep naked.’
b. Er hat ihr geraten, nackt zu schlafen.
he has her advised naked to sleep ‘He advised her to sleep naked.’
In coherent constructions we have readings with reference to the subject of the embedded verb (schlafen) and to the subject and to the object of the matrix verb (raten). In the incoherent construction only the reference to elements that depend on heads in the respective coherence field is possible. Since nackt zu schlafen is a separate coherence field in (7b), nackt can refer to the subject of schlafen only. Since the subject of the controlled verb schlafen is coreferent with the dative ob- ject of the controllee, the element the depictive predicate refers to is visible at the surface. But it is also possible to omit the dative object of raten:

Er hat geraten,
nackt
zu schlafen.

he has suggested naked to sleep. ‘He suggested sleeping naked.’
Haider [6] claims that depictive predicates can refer to NPs with structural case only. According to Haider only nominative and accusative are structural cases while dative is not.

a. Er sah
sie
nackt.

he saw heracc naked

b. Er half
ihr
nackt.

he helped herdat naked
In (9a) both the reference to the subject and to the accusative object is possible, while the reading with reference to the object is hardly availible in (9b). As Haider notes, this is explained easily by the assumption that the subject of the predicate and the NP it refers to are identical. The fact that in German, NP subjects always have structural case explains why a depictive element cannot refer to a dative NP, because dative is taken to be a lexical case.


Wunderlich [32] develops an analysis for depictives that constitutes of two dif- ferent subanalyses: Depictives that refer to the subject (VP-adjuncts), and depic- tives that refer to the direct object (V-adjuncts). Therefore he predicts that reference to dative NPs is not possible.
Rothenstein [29] gives an English example that is equaivalent to the sentences in (10).

a. Die Krankenschwester gab
John
krank die Medizin.

the
nurse
gave Johndat ill
the medicineacc

‘The nurse gave John the medicine ill.’

b. Die Krankenschwester gab
John
die Medizin
krank.

the
nurse
gave Johndat the medicineacc ill

Rothstein explains the impossibility of krank refering to John by a restriction that allows depictives to refer to agents and patiens, but not to goals.
However, the reference to dative NPs is possible:

Nackt wurde
ihm
klar,
daß sein Anzug wohl
für immer verloren

naked became himdat clear that his war.
was
suit
possibly for ever
lost

‘Naked it became clear to him that his suit was possibly gone for ever.’
What we see here is probably another instance of the accessability hierarchy that was observed in connection with a broad variety of phenomena as for instance ellipsis [16], topic drop (Vorfeldellipse) [4], non-matching free relative clauses [1,23,18,19], passive [13], and Binding Theory [5]. This hierarchy was originally proposed by Keenan and Comrie [13] and has the following form:
SUBJECT => DIRECT => INDIRECT => OBLIQUES => GENITIVES => OBJECTS OF OBJECT	OBJECT	COMPARISON

This accessability hypothesis is further supported by passive examples:

a. Ihr
wurde nackt
geholfen.

herdat was	naked helped
‘She was helped naked.’

b. John
wurde die Medizin
nackt
verabreicht.

Johndat was	the medicinenom naked given
‘John was given the medicine naked.’
In both sentences the reference to the dative NP is considerably better than in (9b) and (10), where another candidate for coreference appears at the surface. Of course both sentences in (12) have a reading where the helper or the nurse is naked, re- spectively. The reference to the dative NP improves considerably if the reference to the nominative is excluded by world knowledge.



Man half
ihm erst
halbtot.
[24]

one helped him only half.dead
‘One helped him only half dead.’
And finally one can even find examples that have overt accusative objects and a depictive predicate that refers to a dative NP:
Mangos werden manchmal als ‘Badewannenfrüchte’ bezeichnet, weil das saftige Fruchtfleisch Flecken hinterlassen kann, die schwer oder gar nicht zu entfernen sind. In den Tropen gibt man sie den Kindern meistens nackt zu essen. 8
‘Mangos are sometimes described as „bathtub fruits“ because their juicy flesh can leave stains that are difficult to remove or even permanent. In trop- ical countries one usually gives them to the children when they are naked.’
The example in (14) was quoted from the “Hohlspiegel” which is part of the mag- azin Der Spiegel. The “Hohlspiegel” contains quotes from other publications that are either semantic nonsense of the kind a dead man was killed or ambiguous with a preference for a strange reading. Examples for the latter are ambiguities that are due to PP attachment. The sentence in (14) made it to the “Hohlspiegel” because the reading where man is the subject of nackt is the more common one syntacti- cally. However from the context of the sentence it is clear that the children are naked.
From the data presented above it must be concluded that both the restriction of the case of possible antecedent phrases and the restriction of the grammatical role of the antacedent phrase are not adequate. In what follows I will therefore assume that the subject of the depictive predicate is coindexed, i.e., coreferent with the antecedent phrase, but not identical to it, as it was suggested by Haider.
The reference to NPs inside of PPs that are complements of a verb is hardly possible.

daß Jan [mit
Mariai] nackt∗i sprach.

that Jan
with Maria
naked
talked

‘that Jan talked to Maria naked.’
Kayne [12] gives an example for English, that is not transferable to Greman with a similar depictive construction.
a. (?) Why, he’s so enamoured of that chair, he’d even sit in it unpainted.
* Er ist ja so verliebt in diesen Stuhl, daß er sogar auf ihm / darauf ungestrichen sitzen würde.
* Er ist ja so verliebt in diesen Stuhl, daß er sogar ungestrichen auf ihm
/ darauf sitzen würde.
The only example with reference to an NP in a PP I could find so far is (17).

8 From the magazine “Natur und Heilen”, quoted from Hohlspiegel, Spiegel, 9/2000, p. 262


Beim Betreten des Gehwegs sei er mit großer Wucht zu Boden geschleudert worden, wo er kurzzeitig das Bewußtsein verlor.
Noch am   Boden liegend, sei auf ihn eingetreten    worden. 9
still on.the floor  lying  be on him part(in).stepped got
‘When he stepped onto the path he was violently thrown to the ground where he lost consciouness for a short period. While he was still on the floor he was kicked.’
Again, we have a passive sentence. The subject of treten was a police officer and therefore the reference of liegend to the logical subject of treten is excluded by world knowledge. The only remaining antecedent is the NP in the PP.
NPs in adjuncts are excluded from the list of possible referents of depictives.


weil
Karli [neben Maria j] nackti/∗ j schlief.

because Karl
near
Maria
naked
slept

‘because Karl slept near to Maria naked.’
I follow Winkler [31] in assuming that depictive predicates are adjuncts. Appart from prosodic facts that she discussed there is evidence form the linearization of depictives and from partial verb phrase fronting that suggests such an analysis. Depictive predicates can be serialized independently from their antecedent. They can be serialized rather freely in the clause and there is no restriction on the number of depictive predicates per clause. See [20] for data.
In order to establish the proposed coindexing between the subject of the de- pictive predicate and its antecedent element, the depictive has to have access to the complete underlying argument structure of the verb, since the antecedent not necessarily is realized at the surface.

The Analysis
Since the discussion in the data section showed that the subject of the depictive predicate can be coreferent with a dative NP, a raising analysis cannot be adequate if dative is assumed to be a lexical case. Instead of assuming an analysis where the entire subject of the predicate is identified with the representation of its antecedent, I assume that only the referential indeces of the depictive and its antecedent element are identified.
The lexical rule in (19) maps a predicative element that can be used in copula constructions or subject or object predicatives onto a depictive secondary predi- cate. 10

9 taz, 10.06.2000, p. 21
10 The semantic representation is of course a simplification. It is a place holder for whatever turns out to be the correct semantic representation for depictive predicates. For several different semantic patterns see for instance [24].


Lexical Rule that maps predicative elements onto depictive predicates:
2	2	2subj  NP 1  333

6	6cat|head
6prd +
777

synsem|loc	6
777 →

6	6	4adj-or-prep
577

64	46
2synsem|loc
62
66
cont	2
2
6





cat
6
7557


2head|verbal +
64
3
33337
77777



66	6	46cont	4
7 7
777 ∧

6	64lex +
66
7577
77

6	2arg1	2 3	7
arg2	4	7
6	6	7	77

6464
4and	5
5775

XP 1  = member( 3 )

I will demonstrate how this rule works with the examples in (9a) and (20).

Er ist nackt.
he is naked
The local value of the entry for the predicative version of nackt that is used in copula constructions like (20) is shown in (21).
nackt (‘naked’):
2	2	2subj  NP[str] 1  333

6	head
6prd +
777

6cat
6
6	4
46adj	7	7
57

subcat ⟨⟩
6	2theme  1 3	7

6cont
6
64naked	57	7

46loc	75
The entry in (21) is the input for the rule (19). The result of the rule application is shown in (22).



2synsem|loc
62	2
66	6
2	2
6	6cat


2head	 6



verbal
3
+ 333337
777777

66	6	6loc 6	46
5777777

66	6mod 6	6

66cat|head	6
6	64cont	2
577777

6


66
6	46lex +
6	NP[str]
75777
77

66	46
subj	3 
5777

66
66cont


6 arg1
6
2theme	3
64naked
77
757	77
7	77

66
644
arg2	2
64and	57
77
575

XP 3  = member( 1 )
Since the input specification requires a subject, subjectless predicates like for instance the subjectless version of the adjective kalt, cannot be input to the rule.
Ihm	ist kalt.

himdat is
cold

‘He is cold.’
The specification of the subject as referential rules out expletive predicates as in- put. 11
a.	Es	ist kalt.
itexpl is cold
b.	? Es	regnet kalt.

itexpl rains
cold

means that the rain is cold, not that it is cold in general. It may be cold rain in warm weather. The predicate kalt cannot refer to the expletive nominal complement of regnen. The condition on referentiality cannot be imposed on the subject of the verb that is modified, since verbs with expletive subjects allow for depictives if these do not refer to the expletive element:

Es
trug
ihn
unangeschnallt
aus der Kurve.

itexpl carried him not.seat.belt.fastend out the curve
‘He was carried out of the bend without having his seatbelt on.’

11 Note that the es in (24a) is ambiguous between a referential and an expletive es. Only the expletive reading matters here.


In (19), the index of the subject of the input predicate (	) is structure-shared with
the index of an element of the arg-st list of the element that the depictive predi- cates over. The arg-st list is a list that contains the complete argument structure of a predicate. Both subjects and other dependents of finite and non-finite verbs are members of this list. The structure sharing of the indices is equivalent to the struc- ture sharings of a modified noun and a modifying adjective or adjectival participle. The modification of the verbal element can be seen as an instance of control: The depictive controls an argument of the verbal head.
The item at the left hand side of the member-relation is specified as an XP in
(19). The rule admits the predication of depictives over subjects, direct and indirect objects and genitives. It also allows complement PPs to occur as antecedents of depictives, since complement PPs have a cont value of the type nom-obj. That examples of reference to PP elements are hardly acceptable can be explained by their low accessibility on the scale.
Haider’s approach is equivalent to identifying the complete subj element of the input predicate with the left-hand side of the member-relation. It is a raising ap- proach. Since subject NPs always have structural case, only reference to the subject and the direct object of the modifed verbal element is predicted to be possible. This is empirically wrong, as the data that was discussed in section 1 showed.
The coindexing analysis that has been developed here has interesting conse- quences for the overall architecture of the grammar. As Kaufmann [11] observed, the coindexation approach enforces the modification of lexical predicates if one assumes that the argument structure is represented only at lexical items. This is unproblematic for grammars with flat dominance structures for the German clause, but with binary branching structures it is not trivial to establish the coindexing. Figure 1 shows the standard analysis for (26) with binary branching dominance structures.

weil
er nackt
der Frau
hilft.

because he naked the woman helps ‘because he helps the woman naked.’
nackt modifies the projection der Frau hilft, which is non-lexical and does not con- tain the argument structure. It is not possible to refer to the semantic contribution of hilft, which is, of course, contained in der Frau hilft, since helfen may be embedded under a modal or causative verb:

weil
sie
ihn
nackt
der Frau
helfen sieht.

because she him naked the woman help	sees
‘because she sees him help the woman naked.’
sie, ihn, and der Frau are dependents of the verbal complex helfen sieht [14,10,18]. To solve this problem one could project the argument structure. Kiss [15], and others suggest making arg-st a head feature. 12 The problem with the projection

12 See also [26] for an analysis were the argument structure of certain words gets projected.



V[fin, SUBCAT ⟨⟩ ]

1  NP[nom]	V[fin, SUBCAT  1  ]

AP	V[fin, SUBCAT  1  ]

2  NP[dat]	V[fin	 ,
 ]

er	nackt	der Frau	hilft

Figure 1. Binary Branching Structures and Depictive Predicates (Continuous)
of the argument structure is that it is incompatible with the standard approach for coordination in HPSG. In the standard treatment of coordination it is assumed that the cat values of two coordinated elements have to be identical [25]. If we have coordinations of sentences that have arg-st lists of differing length, coordination fails.
a. The woman sleeps and the man washes the dishes.
b. The man beats the dog and the child kicks the zebra.
Since the elements in the arg-st lists of sleeps and washes are still present in the maximal projections, coordination fails because these lists differ in length. The situation is even worse: (28b) cannot be analyzed either, since the projected arg-st list also contains semantic information and this information is incompatible (dog
/=zebra). So, if we wanted to project the argument structure, this would have
to happen outside of cat. Furthermore, this projection of the complete argument
structure violates locality since the internal structure of a maximal projection could be selected by governing heads.
Another possibility is to treat adjuncts as complements and introduce them into the subcat list of the head they modify [30]. Since then modification is treated in the lexicon, the combination of depictives and the predicates they modify can be established before argument saturation takes place. See [3] for a discussion and rejection of this approach. Some discussion of examples with depictives can be found in [20].
In [18] I assumed that adjuncts modify lexical elements for independent rea- sons. I will adopt his approach to adjuncts in general and will handle depictive secondary predicates in a similar way here. The lexical rule in (19) is set up ac- cordingly. Depictives modify lexical elements or quasi-lexical elements, like verbal complexes. The analysis of (26) is shown in figure 2. dom is a list valued feature that contains a head and its adjuncts and arguments [27,28,20]. The order of the dom elements corresponds to their surface order. Elements that are combined may be non-adjacent as nackt and hilft in (26). Since depictive predicates may be it- erated, the argument structure must be present at the mother node in head adjunct




V[subcat ⟨⟩ ,
DOM ⟨ er, nackt, der Frau, hilft ⟩ ]




DOM ⟨ nackt, der Frau, hilft ⟩ ] C	H

2  NP[dat]	V[SUBCAT  1 , 2  ,
ARG-ST  1 , 2 
DOM ⟨ nackt, hilft ⟩ ]

A	H

AP	V[SUBCAT  1 , 2  ,
ARG-ST  1 , 2  ]

er	der Frau	nackt	hilft

Figure 2. Binary Branching Structures and Depictive Predicates (Discontinuous)
structures.
Plank’s coordination examples [24] in (29) are explained by a coordination the- ory that assumes that cat values of conjuncts are shared.

a.	Der Gast
trank
das Bier stehend
lauwarm.

the guest drank the beer standing lukewarm

* Der Gast
trank
das Bier stehend
und lauwarm.

the guest drank the beer standing and lukewarm
The sharing of cat values entails that the subj values, which are located under head, are shared and therefore depictive predicates that are coordinated must have the same antecedent.

References
Bausewein, K., Haben kopflose Relativsätze tatsächlich keine Köpfe?, in: G. Fanselow and S. W. Felix, editors, Strukturen und Merkmale syntaktischer Kategorien, number 39 in Studien zur deutschen Grammatik, Gunter Narr Verlag, Tübingen, 1990
pp. 144–158.
Chomsky, N., “Knowledge of Language – Its Nature, Origin, and Use,” Convergence, Praeger, New York, Westport: Connecticut, London, 1986.
Cipollone, N., Morphologically complex predicates in Japanese and what they tell us about grammar architecture (2000), ms.
Fries, N., Über das Null-Topik im Deutschen, Forschungsprogramm Sprache und Pragmatik 3, Universität Lund-German. Inst., Lund (1988).
Grewendorf, G., Anaphren bei Objekt-Koreferenz im Deutschen. Ein Problem für die Rektions-Bindungs-Theorie, in: W. Abraham, editor, Erklärende Syntax des


Deutschen, number 25 in Studien zur deutschen Grammatik, Gunter Narr Verlag, Tübingen, 1985 pp. 137–171.
Haider, H., The case of German, in: J. Toman, editor, Studies in German Grammar, number 21 in Studies in Generative Grammar, Foris Publications, Dordrecht: Holland, Cinnaminson: U.S.A., 1985 pp. 23–64.
Haider, H., Precedence among predicates, The Journal of Comparative Germanic Linguistics 1 (1997), pp. 2–41.
Helbig, G. and J. Buscha, “Deutsche Grammatik. Ein Handbuch für den Ausländerunterricht,” Langenscheidt Verlag Enzyklopädie, Leipzig Berlin München, 1970.
Jaeggli, O. A., Passive, Linguistic Inquiry 17 (1986), pp. 587–622.
Kathol, A., Constituency and linearization of verbal complexes, in: E. W. Hinrichs,
A. Kathol and T. Nakazawa, editors, Complex Predicates in Nonderivational Syntax, Syntax and Semantics 30, Academic Press, San Diego, 1998 pp. 221–270.
	Kaufmann, I., “Konzeptuelle Grundlagen semantischer Dekompositionsstrukturen. Die Kombinatorik lokaler Verben und prädikativer Elemente,” Number 335 in Linguistische Arbeiten, Max Niemeyer Verlag, Tübingen, 1995.
	Kayne, R. S., Principles of particle constructions, in: J. Guéron, H. G. Obenauer and J.-Y. Pollock, editors, Grammatical Representation, number 22 in Studies in Generative Grammar, Foris Publications, Dordrecht: Holland, Cinnaminson: U.S.A., 1985 pp. 101–140.
	Keenan, E. L. and B. Comrie, Noun phrase accessibility and universal grammar, Linguistic Inquiry 8 (1977), pp. 63–99.
	Kiss, T., “Infinite Komplementation. Neue Studien zum deutschen Verbum infinitum,” Number 333 in Linguistische Arbeiten, Max Niemeyer Verlag, Tübingen, 1995.
	Kiss, T., Configurational and relational scope determination in German, in: D. W. Meurers	and	T.	Kiss,	editors, Constraint-Based Approaches to Germanic Syntax, number 7 in Studies in Constraint- Based Lexicalism, Center for the Study of Language and Information, Stanford, 2001
pp. 131–166, http://cslipublications.stanford.edu/site/1575863049.html.
	Klein, W., Ellipse, Fokusgliederung und thematischer Stand, in: R. Meyer-Hermann and H. Rieser, editors, Ellipsen und fragmentarische Ausdrücke, Max Niemeyer Verlag, Tübingen, 1985 pp. 1–24.
Lötscher, A., Syntaktische Bedingungen der Topikalisierung, Deutsche Sprache 13
(1985), pp. 207–229.
	Müller, S., “Deutsche Syntax deklarativ. Head-Driven Phrase Structure Grammar für das Deutsche,” Number 394 in Linguistische Arbeiten, Max Niemeyer Verlag, Tübingen, 1999, http://www.dfki.de/~stefan/Pub/hpsg.html. 01.08.2004.


Müller, S., An HPSG-analysis for free relative clauses in German, Grammars 2 (1999),
pp. 53–105, http://www.dfki.de/~stefan/Pub/freeRel.html. 01.08.2004.
	Müller, S., “Complex Predicates: Verbal Complexes, Resultative Constructions, and Particle Verbs in German,” Habilitationsschrift, Universität des Saarlandes, Saarbrücken (2000), http://www.dfki.de/~stefan/Pub/complex.html. 01.08.2004.
	Neeleman, A., “Complex Predicates,” Ph.D. thesis, Onderzoeksinstituut voor Taal en Spraak (OTS), Utrecht (1994).
	Paul, H., “Deutsche Grammatik. Teil IV: Syntax,” Max Niemeyer Verlag, Halle an der Saale, 1919, 2nd unchanged edition 1968, Tübingen: Max Niemeyer Verlag.
Pittner, K., Regeln für die Bildung von freien Relativsäzen, Deutsch als Fremdsprache
32 (1995), pp. 195–200.
Plank, F., Prädikativ und Koprädikativ, Zeitschrift für Germanistische Linguistik 13
(1985), pp. 154–185.
	Pollard, C. J. and I. A. Sag, “Head-Driven Phrase Structure Grammar,” Studies in Contemporary Linguistics, University of Chicago Press, Chicago, London, 1994.
Przepiórkowski, A., ARG-ST on phrases: Evidence from Polish, in: D. Flickinger and
A.	Kathol,	editors,	Proceedings of the HPSG-2000 Conference, University of California, Berkeley (2001), pp. 267– 284, http://cslipublications.stanford.edu/HPSG/HPSG00/.
	Reape, M., Getting things in order, in: H. Bunt and A. van Horck, editors, Discontinuous Constituency, number 6 in Natural Language Processing, Mouton de Gruyter, Berlin, New York, 1990 pp. 209–253.
	Reape, M., “A Formal Theory of Word Order: A Case Study in West Germanic,” Ph.D. thesis, University of Edinburgh (1992).
	Rothstein, S. D., “The Syntactic Forms of Predication,” Ph.D. thesis, Bar-Ilan University (1985), reproduced by the Indiana University Linguistics Club.
	van Noord, G. and G. Bouma, The scope of adjuncts and the processing of lexical rules, in: C. Staff, editor, Proceedings of COLING 94 (1994), pp. 250–256, http://grid.let.rug.nl/~vannoord/papers/coling94.ps.gz. 07.09.97.
	Winkler, S., “Focus and Secondary Predication,” Number 43 in Studies in Generative Grammar, Mouton de Gruyter, Berlin, New York, 1997, 481 pp.
Wunderlich, D., Cause and the structure of verbs, Linguistic Inquiry 28 (1997),
pp. 27–68.
Zifonun, G., Das Passiv (und die Familie der grammatischen Konversen), in: H.-
W. Eroms, G. Stickel and G. Zifonun, editors, Grammatik der deutschen Sprache, Schriften des Instituts für deutsche Sprache 7.3, Walter de Gruyter, Berlin, New York, 1997 pp. 1788–1858, http://www.ids-mannheim.de/gra/grammar.html. 13.07.99.
