
ORIGINAL ARTICLE

Assessing call centers’ success: A validation of the DeLone and Mclean model for information system
Hesham A. Baraka a,*, Hoda A. Baraka b, Islam H. EL-Gamily a
a National Telecommunication Regulatory Authority, Egypt
b Computer Engineering, Faculty of Engineering, Cairo University, Egypt

Received 10 January 2013; revised 28 February 2013; accepted 4 March 2013
Available online 31 March 2013

Abstract Business process outsourcing (BPO) is becoming one of the most growing industries in 21st Century and a significant workforce in the global economy. Revolution in telecommunications, free trade agreements, and cultural behavior in a number of developing countries paved the way for the growth of BPO industry. Technology based BPO services are those services provided by Call centers, services that vary from receiving simple phone calls, to marketing services, sales services, and up to remote diagnosis and technical support services.
This paper introduces a model to evaluate the performance of call centers based on the Delone and McLean Information Systems success model. A number of indicators are identified to track the call center’s performance. Mapping of the proposed indicators to the six dimensions of the D&M model is presented. A Weighted Call Center Performance Index is proposed to assess the call center performance; the index is used to analyze the effect of the identified indicators. Policy-Weighted approach was used to assume the weights with an analysis of different weights for each dimension. The analysis of the different weights cases gave priority to the User satisfaction and net Benefits dimension as the two outcomes from the system. For the input dimensions, higher priority was given to the system quality and the service quality dimension. Call centers decision makers can use the tool to tune the different weights in order to reach the objectives set by the organization. Multiple linear regression analysis was used in order to provide a linear formula for the User Sat- isfaction dimension and the Net Benefits dimension in order to be able to forecast the values for these two dimensions as function of the other dimensions
© 2013 Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of Faculty of Computers and Information,
Cairo University.




* Corresponding author. Tel.: +20 1006042190; fax: +20 235344155.
E-mail address: hbaraka@tra.gov.eg (H.A. Baraka).
Peer review under responsibility of Faculty of Computers and Information, Cairo University

Introduction

Business process outsourcing (BPO) is defined [1] simply as the movement of business processes from inside the organization to an external service provider. With the global telecommuni- cations infrastructure now well established and consistently reliable, BPO initiatives often include shifting work to interna- tional providers. Research from Gartner [2] forecasts the

1110-8665 © 2013 Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of Faculty of Computers and Information, Cairo University. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.eij.2013.03.001



growth of the BPO industry 5% worldwide in 2012, The Asia/ Pacific (excluding Japan) business process outsourcing (BPO) market forecast to reach $9.5 billion in 2016, up from $5.9 bil- lion in 2011. Top countries in BPO industry include India, Chi- na, Philippines, Malaysia, and Poland. In 2007, Egypt has launched a national BPO strategy with a substantial ongoing government investment [3] and support that resulted in improving Egypt’s ranking in A.T. Kearney Global services location Index [4] from number 13 in 2007 to number 6 in 2009 and to number 4 in 2011. The positive growing impact of this industry on the Egyptian economy [5] reaching $1.7 bil- lion in 2012, and the large number of job opportunities offered to youngsters in different disciplines make this research critical to the development and growth of this industry in Egypt.
Technology based call centers are used by outsourcing com- panies to fulfill a large number of business process outsourcing services. A call center system [6] is a computer-based system that provides call and contact routing for high-volume tele- phony transactions, with specialist answering ‘‘agent’’ stations and a sophisticated real-time contact management system. The definition includes all call center systems that provide inbound contact handling capabilities and automatic contact distribu- tion, combined with a high degree of sophistication in terms of dynamic contact traffic management. Therefore, its effective and efficient operation is a key ingredient to the overall success of any BPO service.
Measuring the performance of call centers has been exten- sively addressed in the literature; The Outsourcing Institute [7] indicates the growing importance of identification of qualitative metrics in measuring the performance of the outsourced call cen- ter. In [8], NAQC Issue Paper presents best practices in perfor- mance measurement and management to maximize call center Efficiency and Quality. The paper proposes identification of per- formance evaluation indicators instead of the classical ways based on customer surveys, customer praise, complaints, and observation of customer interactions. The modeling and simula- tion techniques in [9–11] are used to study the effect of different call centers parameters and to forecast the performance of the system.
This paper presents a new methodology to evaluate the per- formance of call centers based on the DeLone and McLean Information System model [12]. A complete set of performance indicators for call centers are identified and mapped to the six dimensions of the Delone model. A weighted performance index is introduced to calculate the call center overall performance. Dimension weights reflect the relative priority of a certain dimension on the overall performance. The rest of the paper is described as follows: Section 3 describes the DeLone and McLean model as applied to Call centers. The indicators identi- fied to track the call center’s performance together with the map- ping of these indicators to the six dimensions of the D&M model are presented in Section 3. Section 4 introduces the proposed Weighted Call Center Performance Index; Section 5 shows the results of the proposed methodology and the effect of different dimension weights on the performance assessment of the call centers under study. Finally, Section 5 concludes the paper.
The DeLone and McLean success model as applied to call centers

The original D&M IS success model [13] published in 1992 presented a conceptual framework to measure the success or
failure of information systems. According to D&M [16,17], measurement of IS success is critical for understanding the va- lue and efficacy of IS management actions and IS investments. Ten years later, an update of the model was introduced that was based on theoretical and empirical IS research conducted by different researchers who have tested or discussed the origi- nal model [12,14]. In [15], DeLone and McLean adapted the updated model to the measurement challenges of the e-com- merce systems. Two case examples have been presented to demonstrate how the model can be used to guide the identifi- cation and specification of e-commerce success metrics. The updated model, presented in Fig. 1, consists of six interrelated dimensions that should be considered in the evaluation of information systems:
System quality
Information quality
Service quality
Usage
User satisfaction
Net benefits
Following the same conceptualization method, this paper is
applying the updated DeLone model as a framework to mea- sure the performance of call centers. In this work, the six suc- cess dimensions of the DeLone and McLean IS success model can be applied to the call centers environment as follows:
System quality measures the essential characteristics of call center systems. Characteristics include the following:
Availability of the system (provides 7 · 24 customer services through the automated voice response unit).
Reliability of the system especially that the call cen- ters depend mainly on the telecommunication infrastructure.
Intelligent call routing so that resources can be fully utilized, the use of intelligent call processing (ACD) routing determined by the choice of a variety of conditions.
Flexible channels of communication, allowing cus- tomers with the sales representative when you are free to choose, including traditional voice, IP tele- phony, e-mail, fax, text chat, video, etc., any means of communication.
Response time represented by calls abandoned, wait- ing time to answer, Average call-handling time (time actually on phone with customer).


Figure 1  DeLone and McLean updated IS success model.



Information quality, customers should be properly authenticated, such that agents address the customers with personalized, complete, relevant, easy to under- stand, and secure content in case of customers will per- form financial transactions.
Service quality, this dimension reflects the quality of ser- vice provided by the agents to the customers.
Usage measures the number of customers using the call center, the growth rate of customers using the system, as well as the rate of re-utilization of the same customer for the call center. From the agents’ point of view, the Usage dimension can measure the utilization of the agents of the different modules of the call center system.
User satisfaction is an important means of measuring customers’ feedback of the call center system and should cover the entire customer experience cycle based on the services provided from the call center. Examples of ser- vices may include information retrieval, marketing, tech- nical support, remote diagnosis, remote data entry as in medical transcriptions, mobile, etc. A critical parameter to be measured for the user satisfaction is the rate of the escalation of calls beyond the agent representative as the existing modules failed to answer the customer query.
Net benefits are the most important success measures, because they reflect the global impacts of the call centers on the individual level represented by the customers and agents, as well as on the global level represented by the organizations, the call center industry, and the society.

Mapping call center’s performance indicators to the DeLone and McLean IS model

Many researchers and call centers industry associations and institutions have proposed a number of performance indica- tors [8,9] to be used to measure call centers operation. Some of these performance indicators are targeting measurement of the call center overall performance, others target the quality of service provided to the customers, while other indicators target the quality and skills of the individual employee.
According to NCQI [8], the key performance metrics can be categorized into three main categories: service, quality, and efficiency, with the corresponding indicators, respectively. Tables 1–3 summarize the different proposed metrics for each category.
The defined performance indicators in Tables 1–3 cover only three dimensions of the six dimensions of the D&M mod- el namely: the system quality dimension, the service quality dimension, and the user satisfaction dimension. In order to complete the performance indicators for the other three dimen- sions, a number of performance indicators are proposed based on the literature review for call center’s performance indicators [8,9], and the DeLone and McLean e-commerce indicators model proposed in [18]. Tables 4–9 represent the grouping of the performance indicators for the call centers in correspon- dence to the DeLone and McLean six dimensions. A total of 43 indicators are proposed for the model to cover all the differ- ent angles of performance measures related to the call centers.

Proposed Weighted Call Center Performance Index (W-CCPI)

In order to assess the performance of the call center, the re- search proposes two methods for the assessment of call center’s performance. The two methods are based on calculating a per- formance index for the call center based on the values of indi- cators proposed for the D&M model. The first method ‘‘Linear Call Center performance Index’’, L-CCPI assumes that the weights of all the indicators and all the dimensions are equal, while the second method ‘‘Weighted Call Center Performance Index’’, W-CCPI assumes different weights for indicators of a specific dimension as well as a different weight for each dimension.

Linear based CCPI

The Linear Call Center Performance Index L-CCPI in its sim- plest form can be calculated as the summation of the D&M Dimensions’ performance index as follows:







Table 2  Quality indicators.
Call-handling process
Telephone etiquette
Knowledge and competency
Error/rework rate Adherence to protocol

Resolution First-call resolution rate


The degree to which general telephone communications skills and etiquette are displayed is generally measured via observation or some form of quality monitoring
Is the ability of the agent or counselor to provide correct and thorough product and service information, and to be competent at handling caller questions and problems
The error and rework rate is the degree to which errors have to be corrected or work redone
Ensuring callers receive a consistent call-handling experience regardless of the contact channel or the individual agent involved in the contact is particularly important to the perceived quality of the contact

The percentage of calls completed within a single contact, often called the ‘‘one and done’’

Transfer rate	The transfer percentage indicates what portion of calls has to be transferred to another person to be handled







	
m
aj = 1	(5)
j=1
The model also proposes a second level of analysis as a
weighted average for the indicators for each dimension. The Weighted Index value for each dimension of the model W–I(Dj) is calculated based on the weighted values of the indicators defined for each dimension as follows:
Xm
	

where bj is the weight given to the indicator bjaji, the value for
bj varies from 0 to 1, and
m
bi = 1	(7)
i=1

L-CCPI (Linear Call Center Performance Index)
Xm
Based on Eqs. (4) and (5), the W-CCPI is calculated as
follows:




j=1
where m represents the six dimensions of the D&M model, and
I(Dj) is the Index value for each dimension.
m
=	aj
j=1
n
i=1
(biaji)	(8)

The Index value for each dimension of the model I(Dj) is
calculated based on the values of the indicators defined for each dimension as follows:
m
I(Dj)=   (aji)/(n)	(2)
i=1
where n is the number of indicators for dimension j, and aji rep-
resents the value for the indicators for the dimension (Dj).
Based on Eqs. (1) and (2), the Linear Call Center Perfor- mance Index is calculated as follows:
L-CCPI (Linear Call Center Performance Index)
m  n
= 1/m	(aji)/(n)	(3)
j=1 i=1
Weighted based CCPI (W-CCPI)
In its general form, the W-CCPI can be calculated as the weighted average of the D&M Dimensions’ performance index as follows:
W-CCPI (Weighted Call Center Performance Index)
XM


Selection of values of a and b varies from a call center to the
other based on the type of services provided and the customers served. Even if we believe that the importance of all the dimen- sions should be the same, that is, equal weights, we still see that the weighted value at the level of every indicator will definitely help and support call centers managers in analyzing the perfor- mance of the call centers, diagnosing the shortfalls, and taking the correct actions in the proper areas.
Data analysis and results

The performance evaluation methodology based on the W-CCPI is applied to a variety of call centers located in Egypt. The call centers included in the study were properly selected to span different categories of call centers. Categories were iden- tified based on the following parameters:
Size of the call center expressed by the number of agents.
Channels of Communication (voice vs. voice and data).
Priority of services provided (real-time service vs. non-real- time service, example emergency call centers).
Number of clients served.
Geographic location (capital city, big cities, small cities).

where aj is the weight given to the dimension (Dj), the value for
aj varies from 0 to 1, and
the effects of different weights for the different dimensions in the W-CCPI equation.



Performance evaluation using Linear Call Center Performance Index

In this section, performance evaluation for four call centers are calculated based on the indicators received and based on equal weights for all indicators and dimensions. The call centers se- lected are of medium size call centers of average 80–100 agents providing a mix of voice and data services and located in the capital city Cairo. Fig. 2 depicts the Linear Call Center Perfor- mance Index for different call centers under study, while Fig. 3 presents the percentage contribution of the six dimensions on the L-CCPI. Fig. 4 shows the distribution of the 12 indicators proposed for the System Quality dimension. Fig. 5 illustrates the distribution of the seven indicators proposed for the Infor- mation Quality dimension. Fig. 6 shows the distribution of the six indicators proposed for the Service Quality dimension. Fig. 7 shows the distribution of the eight indicators proposed for the Usage dimension. Fig. 8 illustrates the distribution of the five indicators proposed for the User Satisfaction dimen- sion. Finally, Fig. 9 shows the distribution of the seven indica- tors proposed for the Net Benefits Index dimension. Equal weights for different dimensions may not reflect the real effect of the dimensions on the overall performance calculation of the call centers.
Performance evaluation using Weighted Call Center Performance Index

This section investigates the effect of the weights for the differ- ent dimensions on the Call Center performance index calcula- tion. Different frameworks are used in the literature to develop composite measures [19,20]: Equal-weighted, Policy-Weighted, Empirically Weighted, and multiple Hurdle composites. In the Policy-Weighted approach, the relative weight given to each of the separate indicators is based on policy judgments of their relative importance. In Empirically weighted, the component weights are empirically derived to maximize prediction of some criterion or to maximize internal consistency estimates of score reliability.
In this work, Policy-Weighted approach is applied. Two outcomes are identified the user satisfaction and the net bene- fits outcomes. Weights are given such that the weights for the outcome dimensions are equal to the weights of the input dimensions namely the system quality, Information quality, service quality and Usage. It is well noted that the User Satis- faction dimension is dependent on all the input dimensions with some exception for the Usage dimension. Higher weight is given to the user satisfaction dimension over the net benefits, given priority to the customers over the benefits gained by the provider of the service. Seven weights combinations are














Figure 2	Results for linear call center performance index.

Figure 4	Distribution of system quality index indicators.














Figure 3	Dimensions indices distribution for L-CCPI.	Figure 5	Distribution of information quality index indicators.













Figure 6	Distribution of service quality index indicators.















Figure 7	Distribution of usage index indicators.
















Figure 8	Distribution of user satisfaction index indicators.
Figure 9	Distribution of net benefits index indicators.





considered as shown in Table 10, the first case represents the equal weight case, in the second the weights are equally divided between the two outcomes and the input dimensions, that is,
0.5 is divided equally on the four input dimensions. In the third case, higher priority is given to the system quality dimension,
Figure 10	Policy-Weighted CPPI.
while case four gives higher weight to the system quality and the service quality dimension over the two other input dimen- sions. Last case increases the weight of User Satisfaction to 0.4 while setting the Net benefits weight to 0.1.






Table 11 shows the results for the Weighted Call Center Performance Index for the four call centers. Case 1 in the table is the equal weight case, while the other six cases represent the results for the Policy-Weighted as explained earlier in this sec- tion. Fig. 10 depicts the Weighted Call Center Performance In- dex for the four call centers. Results indicate that the maximum difference in W-CCPI is around 7.5% for the differ- ent cases; on the other hand, the maximum difference from the L-CCPI is 6%, while the standard deviation for the results for the four call centers is 1.7%, 2.64%, 0.99%, and 1.38%, respectively. Management strategy should select the case adopted (different weights) based on the relative priorities of the different dimensions to the decision makers.
Sensitivity analysis of user satisfaction and net benefits to the input dimensions

One way to analyze the measured data for different dimensions and call centers is to try to model the two main outcomes (dimensions) for the call centers, User Satisfaction, and Net Benefits as function of the input dimensions. Use of multiple regression is used in order to model the User satisfaction Dimension as function of the input dimensions System Qual- ity, Information Quality, Service Quality, and Usage. The Net Benefits dimension is modeled as function of the four in- put dimensions as well as the user satisfaction dimension.



Table 12 shows the results measured for different call cen- ters during different phases of implementation. Twenty differ- ent cases are measured and used to model the outcomes measured.
Using Multiple Linear regression, a dependent variable Y is calculated from independent measured variables as follows:
Y = b0 + b1(x1)+ b2(x2)+ b3(x4) + ··· + bn(xn)	(9)
where Y is the dependent variable and x1 to xn are the indepen-
dent variables. The variables b1 to bn represent the weights for corresponding independent variables.
The interdependency of User Satisfaction dimension according to the Delone model is function of System Quality, Information quality, Service Quality as three independent parameters as well as the usage and the net benefits as depen- dent parameters. Two cases are calculated to try to forecast the




values for the User satisfaction as function of other variables. The first case is assuming that User Satisfaction is a Function (D1, D2, D3, D4, D6) as per the Delone model, while the sec- ond case will assume that User Satisfaction is only Function (D1, D2, D3) the three independent variables.
Multiple Linear regression for User Satisfaction for the first case using the LINEST function in Excel results in the following:
From Table 13, we can deduce that:
User satisfaction = 8.34 — 0.14 * System Quality — 0.26
Information Quality + 0.27
Service Quality + 0.74 * Usage + 1.21
Net Benefits.
data          of          2.50599E—10 F = 96.065, df = 14 resulting in F distribution of the fitting
From Table 14, we can deduce that:
User satisfaction = —6.6 + 0.09 * System Quality — 0.09
Information Quality + 1.03
Service Quality.
data          of          6.78311E—09. F = 45.43, df = 16 resulting in F distribution of the fitting
For the Net Benefits as function of (D1, D2, D3, D4, D5,
D6), the LINEST function results in: From Table 15, we can deduce that:
Net benefits = —4.06 + 0.076 * System Quality + 0.087
Information Quality + 0.022
Service Quality — 0.263 * Usage + 0.411
User Satisfaction
data      equal      to      5.79258E—07. F = 29.52 and df = 14 resulting in F distribution of the fitting
Conclusion

This paper adopts the Delone and Mclean model to evaluate and assess information systems. The model is applied to eval- uate the performance of call centers. Identification of different indicators for each dimension of the model is proposed. A call center performance index is introduced, the index is based on the weighting the different dimensions of the Delone model, and equal weights were given to the different indicators for each dimension. Policy-Weighted approach was used to as- sume the weights with an analysis of different weights for each dimension. The analysis of the different weights cases gave pri- ority to the User satisfaction and net Benefits dimension as the two outcomes from the system. For the input dimensions,
higher priority was given to the system quality and the service quality dimension. Call centers decision makers can use the tool to tune the different weights in order to reach the objec- tives set by the organization. Multiple linear regression analy- sis was used in order to provide a linear formula for the User Satisfaction dimension and the Net Benefits dimension in or- der to be able to forecast the values for these two dimensions as function of the other dimensions.
References

Duening Thomas N, Click Rick L. ESSENTIALS of business process outsourcing. John Wiley & Sons, Inc.; 2005.
Gartner report. Market trends: how to profit from BPO services in Asia/Pacific; 2012. <http://www.gartner.com/resId=2036515>.
Ministry of Communications and Information Technology Egypt.
<http://www.mcit.gov.eg>.
Gartner report. The shifting geography of offshoring. The 2009
A.T. Kearney global services location Index. <http:// www.atkearney.com/documents/10192/fda82529-b60a-4fae-8d92- 22cfd69b95b3>.
Information Technology Industry Development Agency. <http:// www.itida.gov.eg>.
Gartner website. IT glossary, defining the IT industry. <http:// www.gartner.com/it-glossary/contact-center-systems/>.
Outsourcing Institute (OI). <http://www.outsourcing.com/>.
NAQC issue paper. North American quitline consortium, 2010. Call center metrics: best practices in performance measurement and management to maximize quitline efficiency and quality.
<http://c.ymcdn.com/sites/www.naquitline.org/resource/resmgr/ issue_papers/callcentermetricspaperbestpr.pdf>.
Jaiswal Anand Kumar. Customer satisfaction and service quality measurement in Indian call centres. Managing Serv Qual 2008;18(4):405–16.
Evensen Ann, Frei Frances X, Harker Patrick T. Harvard University, Graduate School of Business Administration. Division of Research, Effective call center management: evidence from financial services. Division of Research, Harvard Business School; 1999.
Dawson K. The state of the call center industry-our annual overview of key trends the contact center professional needs to follow. Call Center Mag 2006;19(9):24.
Omari AZ, Tariq, Al-Zubaidy Hussein . Call center performance evaluation. In: Canadian conference on electrical and computer engineering, 2005, IEEE. p. 1805–08; 2005.
De Freitas Filho Paulo J, da Cruz Geovani Ferreira, Seara Rui, Steinmann Guilherme. Using simulation to predict market behavior for outbound call centers. In: Proceedings of the 39th conference on winter simulation: 40 years! The best is yet to come. IEEE Press, p. 2247–51; 2007.
AbdulMalek Fawaz, Allahverdi Ali. Optimising a help desk performance at a telecommunication company. Int J Eng Syst Modell Simul 2009;1(2):160–4.
DeLone W, McLean E. The DeLone and McLean model of information systems success: a ten-year update. J Manage Inform Syst 2003;19(4):9–30.



DeLone W, McLean E. Information systems success: the quest for the dependent variable. Inform Syst Res 1992;3(1):60–95.
DeLone W, McLean E. Information systems success revisited. In: Sprague Jr RH, editor. Proceedings of the thirty-fifth Hawaii international conference on system science (CD-ROM). Los Alamitos, CA: IEEE Computer Society Press; 2002.
Delone William H, Mclean Ephraim R. Measuring e-commerce success: applying the DeLone & McLean information systems success model. Int J Electron Comm 2004;9(1):31–47.
Maggino F, Ruviglioni E. Obtaining weights: from objective to subjective approaches in view of more participative methods in the construction of composite indicators. In: Paper presented at the seminar on ‘‘new techniques and technologies for statistics (NTTS)’’ – EUROSTAT, 18–20 February 2009, Brussels, Bel- gium; 2009.
Wise Lauress L. HumRRO. Paper for the PARCC technical advisory group. Combining multiple indicators; 6 September 2011.
