Computers & Education: X Reality 3 (2023) 100035










Exploring the effectiveness of Virtual Reality in teaching Maltese
Jacqueline Z˙ ammit
University of Malta, Malta



A R T I C L E I N F O 

Keywords:
Virtual reality (VR) Educational VR technology Second language acquisition VR apps for language learning An immersive VR environment Maltese as a second language
A B S T R A C T 

Virtual Reality (VR) has gained popularity in education, but its potential in language learning, specifically for teaching a minor language like Maltese, has been understudied. To address this gap, a mixed-methods study was conducted to explore the effectiveness of VR in language learning and identify the advantages and challenges of teaching Maltese as a second language (ML2) with a focus on improving language skills. Qualitative research involved a focus group, while quantitative analysis utilized an online survey with a Likert scale and 25 Maltese teachers as participants. The results revealed that younger respondents were more inclined to believe in the significant impact of VR on improving learning outcomes compared to older respondents. VR was found to effectively engage students in immersive environments and enhance the learning context with entertainment features. However, challenges related to costs, bulky headsets, and technical issues were also uncovered. Although VR tools are not currently utilized in teaching Maltese, this research explored their potential effec- tiveness in ML2 instruction and provided suggestions for effective integration into language teaching. The findings provide quantitative evidence supporting the effectiveness of VR tools in education and their potential to facilitate ML2 learning. Most participants expressed a positive perception, emphasizing the importance of integrating VR technology into Maltese teaching practices to create more engaging and immersive learning experiences for ML2 learners.





Introduction

Research background

Virtual Reality (VR) is a technology that can create a simulated environment and has three types: non-immersive, semi-immersive, and
fully immersive. The non-immersive type manipulates a user’s physical environment through computer-generated imagery (Zhao, et al., 2020),
while the semi-immersive type is primarily used for educational pur- poses (Garduno et al., 2021; Parmaxi, 2023). Fully immersive VR is still under development, but developers are working to make it as realistic as possible (Garduno et al., 2021).
VR is a valuable tool in the process of second language acquisition because it allows learners to operate or test scenarios that may be impossible or difficult to access in real life, encouraging active partici- pation and interaction (Zhao et al., 2020). Additionally, VR can trans- form practical experience into knowledge and skills, making it an ideal tool for learners to acquire knowledge, develop competencies, and practice skills (Liu et al., 2020).
Studies suggest that VR is an effective tool for teaching a second language (L2) as it immerses students in an environment where they can
practise their listening and speaking skills in conditions that are similar to real-life settings (Zhao et al., 2020; Zheng et al., 2022). It is widely accessible as long as the student has a VR headset.

Problem statement

Malta is quickly becoming one of Europe’s top tourist destinations,
with approximately one million visitors in 2021 despite the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic (Malta Immigration, 2021). Third-country na- tionals who wish to reside in Malta must integrate into Maltese society by learning about Maltese culture, the Maltese language, and English (Euromed Rights, 2022). Therefore, exploring new technologies that can help learners become proficient in Maltese as quickly as possible is a relevant research area.
This research investigates the effectiveness of using VR technology in teaching Maltese as a second language (ML2). While previous studies have demonstrated the efficacy of VR in language learning for various widely spoken languages such as English, Chinese, French, and Japanese (Peixoto et al., 2021), there is a lack of academic literature exploring its application specifically for teaching Maltese. This study aims to address a significant research gap by exploring the use of VR as a pedagogical



E-mail address: jacqueline.zammit@um.edu.mt.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cexr.2023.100035
Received 7 May 2023; Received in revised form 31 July 2023; Accepted 3 August 2023
Available online 8 August 2023
2949-6780/© 2023 The Author. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by- nc-nd/4.0/).



tool for teaching a minority language like Maltese, which is spoken by approximately half a million people. The findings of this research hold potential benefits for both ML2 learners and teachers seeking innovative language learning approaches.

Research goal and objectives

This study aims to investigate the effectiveness of using VR tools to teach Maltese to international students (Gardner, 2020; Zheng et al., 2022). This research will contribute to the academic literature by addressing the research gap on the use of VR in teaching a minority language such as Maltese. Furthermore, it will offer insights into the use
of VR in language learning from the teacher’s perspective, which will be a valuable contribution to the broader academic research on VR (Li and
Huang, 2021). This research aims to contribute to the academic litera- ture by bridging the research gap regarding the use of VR in teaching a minority language like Maltese. While previous studies have highlighted the effectiveness of VR as a pedagogical tool for language learning (Gardner, 2020; Zheng et al., 2022), there is a dearth of research spe- cifically examining its application in the context of teaching and learning Maltese. By exploring the use of VR technology in Maltese language instruction, this study will fill this research gap and provide valuable insights into the potential benefits and challenges associated with VR-based language learning. Additionally, this research will contribute to the broader academic research on VR by offering insights from the perspective of teachers, thereby enhancing our understanding of the role of VR in language education (Li and Huang, 2021). The specific objectives of this research are shown in Fig. 1.

Theoretical framework

The theoretical framework of the study is based on the following assumptions.

VR technology can enhance language learning by providing an immersive and interactive environment that engages students in the learning process (Garduno, et al., 2021).
VR can enrich the learning context by providing entertainment fea- tures that make learning more enjoyable and engaging (Liu et al., 2020).
The use of VR in language learning can overcome some of the limi- tations of traditional teaching methods and provide new opportu- nities for language learners (Graeske & Sjoberg, 2021).
The potential benefits of using VR in language learning need to be balanced against the associated challenges, such as high costs, bulky headsets, and technical issues (Yoshimura & Borst, 2021).
The use of VR in language learning is still in its early stages, and further research is needed to identify best practices and effective strategies for using VR in teaching and learning (Parmaxi, 2023).

Literature review

The benefits of VR for language learning

VR technology is increasingly being integrated into educational settings, including language learning classrooms, to cater for diverse learning styles (Garduno et al., 2021). This literature review examines the key advantages and potential risks of VR in language learning.
VR provides a highly immersive learning experience by simulating environments (Hamilton et al., 2021). This unique feature allows stu- dents to engage with language learning in a realistic and interactive manner. For kinesthetic learners, the interactivity offered by VR is particularly beneficial, as it provides hands-on experiences that enhance language acquisition (Garduno et al., 2021). Since physical travel to practice a target language with native speakers may not always be feasible, VR can offer a simulated environment for students to commu- nicate with native speakers, facilitating second language acquisition (Panagiotidis, 2021).
VR can make language learning lessons more memorable, leading to improved vocabulary retention (Yoshimura & Borst, 2021). The immersive nature of VR allows students to engage multiple senses, reinforcing their understanding and memory of new words and phrases. By experiencing language in context, students are more likely to retain L2 vocabulary and reinforce their language skills.
Nonverbal communication, such as body language and facial ex- pressions, plays a crucial role in language learning (Hamilton et al., 2021; Parmaxi, 2023). VR offers an opportunity for students to practice and understand nonverbal communication in a simulated environment, building their confidence in real-life interactions. VR also eliminates the fear of making mistakes when interacting with locals in a foreign country, thus providing a safe space for language practice (Panagiotidis, 2021; Zheng et al., 2022).
The element of entertainment provided by VR captures students’ attention and promotes engagement during language learning (Liu et al.,
2020). VR offers an active learning experience that surpasses passive reading, as students interact and apply their language skills, leading to better learning outcomes (Yildirim et al., 2020). Moreover, VR helps to eliminate distractions and keeps learners focused on the learning pro- cess, thus improving their language acquisition (Lege & Bonner, 2020). One of the significant advantages of VR in language learning is its accessibility. VR technology allows learners to access language lessons from anywhere, overcoming geographic barriers (Garduno et al., 2021).




Fig. 1. Research objectives of the study.



It also enables professionals from remote locations to participate in lessons, enriching the learning experience (Lege & Bonner, 2020). The accessibility of VR has become even more apparent during the COVID-19 pandemic, as students can continue their language learning remotely (Ball, et al., 2021). Additionally, VR facilitates connecting learners from different locations, fostering a sense of community and collaboration (Hu-Au & Lee, 2018).
VR applications, such as gaming and virtual scenarios, allow students to create avatars and interact with peers and educators, providing op- portunities for real language practice (Hu-Au & Lee, 2018). By immersing themselves in a new environment, students can engage in various experiences, situations, and experiments, thereby enhancing their language learning process while reducing costs and resource con- sumption (Panagiotidis, 2021). VR offers a platform for students to engage in authentic language practice, as they can interact with virtual native speakers, participate in realistic conversations, and navigate real-life scenarios (Hamilton et al., 2021). This real language practice in a simulated environment helps students build confidence and fluency in their target language (Liu et al., 2020).
Language learning through VR is not limited to traditional classroom settings. VR can create immersive and interactive language learning experiences outside the classroom, such as virtual field trips or cultural experiences, allowing students to explore and engage with the target language and culture in a more meaningful way (Cardullo & Wang, 2022). These experiences offer opportunities for contextualized lan- guage use, cultural understanding, and global perspectives (Garduno et al., 2021).
Furthermore, VR facilitates language learning in specific contexts, such as business or professional settings. Students can practice language skills in simulated business scenarios, such as negotiations or pre- sentations, which are essential for their career growth (Liu et al., 2020).
The immersive nature of VR enables learners to develop the necessary language proficiency and cultural competence required for effective communication in professional contexts.

Challenges and limitations

While VR presents numerous benefits for language learning, it is essential to acknowledge its challenges and limitations. VR should be used as a complementary tool alongside traditional teaching methods, and it cannot completely replace the role of teachers in the classroom (Cook et al., 2019; Radianti et al., 2020). Effective implementation of VR requires careful planning, teacher guidance, and the provision of sup- porting materials to make the experience relevant and effective (Yil- dirim et al., 2020).
Additionally, the potential risks and limitations of VR must be considered. VR has the potential to cause addiction, leading to excessive use beyond educational purposes (Cook et al., 2019; Yoshimura & Borst, 2021). Moreover, the cost and resources required for developing and maintaining effective VR language applications can be substantial (Cook et al., 2019). Health effects, such as eye strain, motion sickness, and other physical discomforts, may arise from prolonged VR use (Eunhee et al., 2020). These factors and other disadvantages of VR which are mentioned in Fig. 2, should be carefully managed and monitored to ensure the well-being of learners.
The use of VR in language learning offers a range of benefits, but it is crucial to acknowledge and address the limitations and potential risks associated with VR (Graeske & Sjoberg, 2021). By balancing the use of VR with traditional teaching methods and carefully managing its implementation, educators can harness the potential of VR to enhance language learning outcomes and provide students with valuable lan- guage experiences. However, it is crucial to use VR in conjunction with




Fig. 2. Disadvantages of VR



traditional teaching methods and to remain aware of its limitations.

Challenges in traditional pedagogy and the promise of VR in teaching Maltese

Maltese as a second language (ML2) is a relatively new subject, and the teaching of ML2 has been introduced recently, since 2019 (Camilleri
Grima & Z˙ ammit, 2020). There is also a lack of academic research
concerning ML2.
International learners of ML2 have reported that they are taught in a traditional manner, primarily relying on a “chalk and talk” approach, with lists of verbs, grammar rules, and vocabulary notes provided for rote memorization (Z˙ ammit, 2021). The traditional pedagogical
approach in teaching ML2 can present several challenges for adult stu- dents. As reported in Z˙ ammit (2021), the emphasis on memorization and
rote learning may hinder the development of practical language skills, such as speaking and listening comprehension. Learners may struggle to apply the learned grammar and vocabulary in real-life communicative situations. Additionally, the lack of interactive and immersive learning
experiences may limit students’ engagement and motivation, as the learning process can become monotonous and disconnected from authentic Maltese language use (Z˙ ammit, 2021).
VR presents a promising alternative to traditional pedagogy in teaching ML2 by addressing these challenges. One of the main advan- tages of VR in ML2 instruction could be its ability to enhance speaking and listening skills. Traditional methods in ML2 often provide limited
opportunities for learners to engage in authentic conversations, practice pronunciation, or receive immediate feedback (Z˙ ammit, 2021). In
contrast, VR can offer a safe space for learners to interact with virtual characters and practice their speaking skills without fear of judgment (Garduno, et al., 2021). By simulating authentic contexts, VR can pro- vide ML2 learners with meaningful language practice and promote active participation in the learning process (Liu et al., 2020). Learners can engage in realistic dialogues, role-play various scenarios, and receive immediate feedback on their ML2 pronunciation and intonation. Another advantage of VR is its potential to foster cultural immersion and contextualized language learning (Garduno et al., 2021). Tradi- tional pedagogy may struggle to provide learners with authentic cultural experiences and exposure to the nuances of the Maltese language and culture. VR can create virtual environments that replicate real-life set- tings, allowing learners to explore Maltese culture, visit historical landmarks, and interact with virtual natives in simulated contexts, while
simultaneously developing their language skills.
Furthermore, VR can offer a more personalized and adaptive learning experience. Traditional pedagogy often follows a standardized curriculum, where learners progress at a fixed pace regardless of their individual needs and proficiency levels (Tarmo & Kimaro, 2021). In contrast, VR can provide tailored content and adaptive exercises that
align with ML2 learners’ specific goals and proficiency levels (Qian et al., 2020). ML2 learners can receive targeted practice, instant feed-
back, and personalized guidance, creating a more individualized and effective learning experience.
By leveraging VR technology, teachers can overcome the limitations of traditional pedagogy and provide ML2 learners with engaging, immersive, and interactive learning experiences. VR can scaffold learners in overcoming the challenges posed by rote memorization, limited communicative practice, and lack of cultural immersion. By embracing VR as a tool for ML2 instruction, teachers can foster more meaningful language acquisition and equip learners with practical lan- guage skills necessary for real-life communication in the Maltese language.
Research methodology

Participants

A purposive sampling method was used in this study to select 25 Maltese teachers as participants for this study (Ames et al., 2019). The sampling strategy aimed to include teachers who had experience and exposure to VR technology and its applications in language learning. Although there was a lack of research and VR apps for the Maltese language, the participants, who taught Maltese at primary, middle, and secondary schools, had explored and experienced various VR apps and tools in the context of language learning.
Table 1 illustrates the participants’ engagement with VR in different
contexts, primarily in English language settings or other foreign lan- guages. This indicated their willingness to use VR technology and their familiarity with its potential in language learning. The participants’ VR
experience and training ranged from 1 to 4 years, showcasing a diverse
level of familiarity and exposure to VR technology and its applications in language learning.
The participants’ VR experience and training varied in terms of duration and sources. Some participants attended local or international
VR workshops and training sessions, while others conducted personal exploration and experimentation with VR. Additionally, some partici- pants observed VR activities and simulations in language lessons, collaborated with language institutes that utilized VR, or participated in VR-based language learning pilot programs.
The observed VR language learning apps used by the participants included Immerse, VRChat, AltspaceVR, MondlyVR, LingoVR, Rosetta Stone, Babbel VR, VR Language Lab, Language Zen VR, and MondlyARChat. The participants also utilized VR tools such as Oculus Quest, Oculus Rift, Tilt Brush, Unity, Unreal Engine, Oculus Medium, SteamVR, VIVEPORT, Blender, and Gravity Sketch.
Although the participants did not incorporate VR into their Maltese language teaching, their exposure to VR technology and exploration of VR apps and tools provided valuable insights into their familiarity and potential readiness for integrating VR into language education (see Table 1). The diverse range of VR experiences and training among the participants enhanced the richness and validity of the study’s findings
and strengthened the overall understanding of the potential benefits and
limitations of VR in the context of teaching ML2.
Based on the information presented in Table 1, the selected partici- pants had a substantial background in using VR and had engaged with VR technology in various contexts, making them qualified to answer the research inquiries proposed in the study.

Research design

Quantitative phase
The study involved an online survey given to the 25 focus group participants to obtain quantitative evidence on the potential effective- ness of VR tools in teaching ML2. Google Forms was utilized to conduct the survey, and each participant received a link to the questionnaire.

Qualitative phase
To obtain qualitative data on teachers’ opinions and experiences of using VR in ML2 instruction, the study conducted focus groups. This
approach was chosen for its ability to encourage interaction among participants and generate a wide range of ideas (Nyumba et al., 2018).

Data collection

Ethical considerations
Before data collection, the study obtained authorization from the University Research Ethics Committee (UREC) in Malta (reference number EDUC-2022-00082). Ethical aspects were discussed during virtual meetings with teachers to ensure participant privacy and respect.


Table 1	Table 1 (continued )

developed
MondlyARChat
Oculus Rift,
(continued on next page)



Table 1 (continued )
Teacher	Student Group


VR Experience/ Training (Years)


VR Language Learning Apps Observed


VR Tool/s Observed
themes (Nowell et al., 2017). NVivo, a computer-assisted qualitative data analysis software, was used to facilitate the organization, man- agement, and analysis of the data (Aspers and Corte, 2019).
Thematic Analysis allowed for the identification of key themes

Teacher 24




Teacher 25
Primary	2 years of participating in a VR language learning pilot program

Secondary	3 years of
collaborating with a foreign language institute that specialized in VR- based language courses
LingoVR, Rosetta Stone, MondlyAR, VR Language Lab



Immerse, MondlyVR, MondlyARChat
Oculus Quest, Oculus Rift, SteamVR, Tilt Brush, Unity, Oculus Quest, Oculus Rift, Tilt Brush, Unity, Unreal Engine
(Maguire & Delahunt, 2017). Related to the effectiveness of VR in teaching ML2, as presented in Table 2. These themes, derived from the narratives provided by the participants, highlighted the potential ben- efits and challenges associated with VR technology.
To enhance the reliability and validity of the findings, member checking was conducted with the participants (Candela, 2019). The participants were provided with the transcripts and were given the op- portunity to review and provide comments or make any necessary changes. It is important to note that both the qualitative and quantita- tive phases of the research explored similar issues, which further strengthens the validity of the study.





Informed consent forms were signed by focus group participants, guar- anteeing their anonymity and providing them with the option to with- draw their data.

Quantitative data collection
An online survey consisting of 9 questions was administered to the 25 focus group participants. The survey aimed to gather quantitative evi- dence on the potential effectiveness of VR tools in teaching ML2. Google Forms were used to conduct the survey, and participants received a link to the questionnaire.

Qualitative data collection
Focus group discussions were conducted and recorded via Zoom to obtain qualitative data on teachers’ opinions and experiences of using VR in ML2 instruction. The discussions addressed inquiries related to the
potential of VR for language learning, integrating VR into the classroom, engaging aspects of using VR in Maltese language instruction, over- coming obstacles in digital language learning, key features of effective VR language learning, and methods for incorporating VR applications in Maltese lessons.

Data analysis

Quantitative data analysis
The quantitative data collected from the survey was analyzed using a Likert scale, a commonly used rating scale that allows respondents to indicate their level of agreement or disagreement with specific state- ments (Liddell & Kruschke, 2018). In this study, the survey focused on
two main aspects: participants’ opinions on the effectiveness of VR for educational purposes and the effectiveness of VR in facilitating language
learning.
To collect data on these aspects, the survey included carefully designed questions that aimed to capture participants’ perceptions and attitudes towards VR technology in the Maltese language classroom. The
questions were structured to elicit numerical ratings on a scale typically ranging from 1 to 5 or from strongly disagree to strongly agree (see Appendix 1 for the full survey).
Following data collection, the responses were manually processed using MS Excel. Regression analysis was then conducted to explore the potential impact of teachers’ age on their views regarding the effec-
tiveness of VR tools in ML2 classroom settings. This analysis aimed to
provide insights that can inform the development of strategies for implementing VR technology in ML2 learning.

Qualitative data analysis
Thematic Analysis was employed to analyze the qualitative data obtained from the focus group discussions with the 25 Maltese teachers. This method involved coding and categorizing the data to identify recurring ideas, concepts, and patterns, which were then organized into
Results and discussion

Quantitative results

The study sought to obtain quantitative evidence on the potential effectiveness of VR in teaching Maltese. As shown in Table 3, the ma- jority of the participants, 19 out of 25 (76%), strongly agree that VR is effective for educational purposes. This indicates a high level of confi- dence and positive perception among the participants regarding the potential of VR in education. Additionally, 6 participants (24%) agree that VR is effective for educational purposes. This further supports the overall positive sentiment towards VR as an educational tool. It is noteworthy that none of the respondents expressed a neutral stance, disagreement, or strong disagreement regarding the effectiveness of VR for educational purposes. This suggests a consensus among the partici- pants that VR has potential and can be effective in an educational setting.

Effectiveness of VR in facilitating language learning

Table 4 presents the reported effectiveness of VR in facilitating lan- guage learning based on the responses of the participants. The table displays the number and percentage of respondents for each response category.
The majority of the participants, 14 individuals (56% of the re- spondents), strongly agreed that VR is effective in facilitating language learning. Additionally, 11 participants (44% of the respondents) agreed with this statement. Notably, none of the respondents expressed a neutral, disagree, or strongly disagree opinion regarding the effective- ness of VR in language learning.
The participants were also asked to rate the positive impact of VR on students’ learning outcomes based on their professional knowledge and experience, using a 5-point rating scale. The average score of 3.40 in-
dicates that the majority of the participants were confident that using VR could significantly influence their students’ learning outcomes. This assessment was somewhat based on their experience, despite not having

Table 2
Themes.


Themes	The number of
codes
VR offers a fully immersive experience.	24
With VR, there are no physical limitations to overcome.	22
VR provides virtual or real tours of historical sites.	20
VR merges education and entertainment.	16
VR is a forward-thinking tool in the realm of education.	14
VR requires further development.	11
VR caters to language learners of all ages.	7
Integrating VR in lessons can be challenging, and finding the	6
right balance is essential.





Table 3
Respondents’ Opinion on the Effectiveness of VR for educational purposes.
Table 5
Results of the regression analysis.


Disagree	0	0%
Strongly disagree	0	0%
Coefficients	Standard Error	t Stat	P-value


Intercept	77.22	12.96	5.96	4.48E-06
Age	—9.99	2.83	—3.53	0.0018

Table 4
Reported effectiveness of VR in facilitating language learning.


implemented VR in their classrooms yet. Therefore, the risk of bias related to this question was minimal. The study’s findings on the effectiveness of VR in language learning, as reported in Parmaxi (2023),
provide compelling evidence for the potential of VR to improve ML2 teaching.


Effect of age on opinion regarding VR tools

A linear regression analysis was conducted to explore the relation- ship between the respondents’ age and their opinion on the effectiveness of VR tools in facilitating Maltese language learning. The study utilized regression analysis to explore the relationship between the respondents’ age (an independent variable) and their opinion on the effectiveness of
VR tools in facilitating Maltese language learning (a dependent variable).
Regression analysis allows researchers to understand the relation- ship between two or more variables by estimating the mathematical relationship between them (Sarstedt & Mooi, 2014). In this case, this research aimed to determine whether a relationship exists between age and opinion on VR tools. It employed linear regression analysis, which assumes a linear relationship between the variables, to analyze the data.
The current study involved 25 participants aged between 18 and 45 years old. The respondents’ age was used as the independent variable for the regression analysis. This approach allowed the researcher to conduct
a generalized comparison between the opinions of younger and older individuals regarding the effectiveness of VR tools in facilitating Maltese language learning. Through the regression analysis, the study aimed to explore any potential differences in opinions on a broader scale.
This study calculated regression coefficients, t-statistics, and p- values to evaluate the relationship between the respondents’ age and their opinion on the effectiveness of VR tools.
The negative coefficient for age (—9.99) indicates that as age in- creases, the value of the dependent variable (the opinion on VR tools) decreases. The t-statistic and p-value suggest that this relationship is statistically significant, indicating that it is unlikely to have occurred by chance.
The intercept coefficient of 77.22 represents the expected value of the dependent variable when age is zero, although it lacks a meaningful interpretation since age cannot be zero. Nonetheless, it provides addi- tional insights into the regression model. The F-value and its associated p-value indicate the overall statistical significance of the regression model, suggesting that the age variable significantly influences the opinion on the effectiveness of VR tools.
The regression analysis conducted in the research, presented in Table 5, reveals a significant effect of the age variable on the opinion regarding the effectiveness of VR tools in facilitating Maltese language



learning (p-value = 0.0018). The statistical evidence provided by the regression coefficients, t-statistics, and p-values supports the observa- tion that younger respondents demonstrate a stronger belief in the positive impact of VR.
These findings suggest a positive perception among the participants regarding the effectiveness of VR in facilitating Maltese language learning. However, it is important to consider that these results are based on self-reported opinions and may be influenced by various fac- tors such as individual experiences, perceptions, and preferences. Nonetheless, the overwhelmingly positive responses suggest a general belief among the participants in the effectiveness of VR for ML2 or any other language learning.

Qualitative results

Immersion
The qualitative findings support the notion that VR is perceived as an immersive approach that can enhance student engagement in language learning. All 25 participants agreed on the immersive nature of VR and its potential to improve student engagement in lessons.
Teachers expressed their beliefs and expectations regarding the use of VR in Maltese language learning. Teacher 2 from a middle school mentioned the potential of “VR headsets with sensors and controllers” to
grant students the freedom to explore and engage in a virtual environ-
ment. Teacher 2 anticipated that this freedom would increase student participation and interest in Maltese lessons. Similarly, Teacher 3 from a
primary school highlighted that their students, who are fond of “games, magic, and fantasy”, would be more engaged and motivated to learn Maltese in a virtual environment.
My pupils may be more engaged and driven to learn Maltese in a virtual environment since they adore games, magic, and fantasy.
(Teacher 3, primary school)
In addition to increased engagement, teachers emphasized the ben- efits of VR immersion for ML2 learning. Teachers 9 and 16 acknowl- edged that VR provides a unique opportunity for students “to practice
and improve their speaking skills”. Through avatars, students can
engage in conversations with their teacher and peers in a virtual setting (Zheng et al., 2022), which is challenging to replicate in traditional or online classrooms. According to these teachers, VR creates an environ- ment free from disruption and code-switching between English and Maltese, by facilitating focused language practice.
VR can help with two major issues in learning languages: motivation in adults and involvement in elementary students. On the surface, it gives that little boost, that thrilling and enjoyable element, but it also
allows … deeper connections with people through participation, role-play, and practice that is free of all the disruptions found in the
classroom and online learning.
(Teacher 16, primary school)


VR eliminates physical barriers to language learning

According to the feedback from 22 teachers, VR offers a solution to



overcome physical barriers in language learning. Teacher 1 highlighted the benefit for students residing in countries with a substantial Maltese community, such as Australia, the UK, and Canada (Attard, 1989), who can practice Maltese with native speakers through VR. In VR, these native speakers can exclusively speak Maltese, allowing students to enhance their speaking skills without the interference of English, which often occurs in real-life conversations due to Maltese bilingualism. Therefore, VR is considered as a valuable tool for students to improve their speaking skills in Maltese.
Fluency in a foreign language frequently demands a completely immersive approach. I know several adults, especially those living in Australia, the UK, and Canada, who would like to learn Maltese but are unable to visit or reside in Malta, making it impossible to practice with native Maltese speakers. Therefore, students residing abroad might use VR headsets to practically immerse themselves in Maltese language learning without any interference from English as usually happens when speaking to Maltese people.
(Teacher 1, secondary school)
(Teacher 8, middle school)
A VR app, in my opinion, promotes realistic scenarios that reduce mental burden, allowing students to focus on language acquisition rather than attempting to envision a scenario.
(Teacher 19, secondary school)


VR combines education and entertainment

Sixteen teachers mentioned that VR combines educational and entertaining aspects, providing a multisensory approach that can enhance vocabulary memorization and student engagement in real-life situations. Teachers 3, 5, 13, 24, and 25 pointed out the limitations of learning Maltese from textbooks and how VR can provide a more immersive and interactive learning experience.
VR allows students to enter in previously inaccessible areas when unaccompanied by adults, such as hospitals and restaurants, and then they can role-play.


An immersive experience for language and culture

According to 20 teachers, VR headsets offer an immersive experience by simulating real-life situations, that could enable students to experi- ence Maltese language and culture. Teacher 17 specifically mentioned that VR can take students on virtual tours of historical places, providing social engagement and connectedness that is often lacking in distance learning.
I feel that VR can bridge the gap between the traditional classroom and the Teams online classroom. It could help students practice and interact with one another on a more advanced level than just face to face on the screen. It gives social involvement and connectedness that distance learning does not deliver.
(Teacher 17, primary school)
(Teacher 3, primary school)
A VR app can transport teachers and students to locations they would be unable to visit in person owing to time and distance, or safety concerns. For example, after reading Dun Karm’s poem about Wied
Qirda, a VR app could transport us to Qirda Valley during the battle
between the Zebbug people and the French army in 1798. Hence, thanks to VR, students can be in the midst of the battle, providing them with a first-hand experience that goes beyond simply reading poems, viewing photographs, or watching movies on how the French army was defeated by the Zebbug people. In fact, depending on the novel students are reading, VR can take them on a sailing trip around Gozo or Comino, on an underwater walking tour, on a tour of the
moon, or to the national poet, Dun Karm Psaila’s house in Zebbug,
where they could see him writing poems and talking to his bird, or on a fantasy tour.



Practical and simulated tours

Twenty participants highlighted that VR can facilitate practical or simulated tours that help students develop language skills and apply them in real-life situations, as Teacher 7 described:
A VR game can give the one-of-a-kind, immersive experience that many learners of Maltese seek—namely, the opportunity to use their language skills in an authentic context. If these games include mul-
tiple players, it would be simple to develop a community language center for language learners.
(Teacher 7, secondary school)
Teacher 9 pointed out that VR allows students to interact with ob- jects and other learners in realistic scenarios, by creating a dynamic learning environment.
By wearing 3D glasses or using avatars, students can interact with objects and other learners in some scenarios. These environments can include 3D objects, scenery, and simulations from the real or fictional world.
(Teacher 9, middle school)


Concentration and language acquisition

Seventeen teachers, including Teachers 8 and 19, emphasized that VR enables students to concentrate on language acquisition.
VR apps can help students master grammatical forms such as the use of ‘hemm’ there is/there are while asking them to describe what they observe in the VR world.
(Teacher 5, secondary school)
VR can also inspire students to solve riddles like Sherlock Holmes. Students can participate solving mysteries such as ghost stories, the missing children of the Hypogeum, the elongated extraterrestrial skulls discovered at the Hypogeum, or the secret pathway in St Gregory’s Church in Zejtun that was packed with human bones. And
what about the curious carvings throughout the countryside in the
shape of holes in the ground which we were told, were Punic graves, or the parallel grooves going from nowhere to nowhere which we
were told … are cart ruts, and even pans carved into the shore that are still used as saltpans nowadays. Therefore, VR can inspire stu- dents to confront some of our time’s biggest mysteries and to solve them while learning Maltese.
(Teacher 13, middle school)
Pupils can learn Maltese by playing VR games like billiards or paintballing. Students will surely remain motivated and engaged in the lessons by playing such games.
(Teacher 24, primary school)
Students can use VR software that has shopping scenarios where they are physically given a shopping list, say, to follow a recipe and bake a birthday cake, and then they are instructed to go and fetch these products, place them in their shopping trolley, and go to the cashier. They can purchase the goods and hold a conversation, and every- thing feels so real.
(Teacher 25, secondary school)


Innovative tool in ML2 learning

Eleven teachers expressed that VR can be an innovative tool in ML2



learning, serving as a bridge between traditional and online classroom settings. Teacher 5 highlighted the value of VR language games like “Mondly” in language learning.
Several businesses have begun to invest time and money in devel- oping language learning VR games. Mondly, for example, is a VR game that lets players improve their language abilities in various realistic scenarios. Users can talk to a bus passenger, order meals at a restaurant, and check into a hotel. Although this game has its chal- lenges, spanning from technical issues to critiques of a difficult lan- guage learning curve, it would be fantastic if we could have Mondly in Maltese.
(Teacher 5, secondary school)


Challenges and balance in integrating VR

While VR holds great potential, there are challenges that need to be addressed. Teacher 6 highlighted the lack of consistent Wi-Fi connec- tions in many schools, making it difficult to download substantial re- sources simultaneously onto students’ devices. Furthermore, the
technology for realistic simulations of speaking activities is not yet
advanced enough, and there are ongoing technical challenges in build- ing fully immersive language learning games, including audio issues and voice recognition (Mealy, 2018).
Technology is not yet advanced enough to provide a smooth, realistic simulation of speaking activities. Technical challenges will impede VR games for years to come, and given the difficulty of building a fully immersive language learning game, those issues will be amplified. Any audio issues with voice recognition will quickly spoil the user experience.
(Teacher 6, secondary school)
Six teachers acknowledged the challenge of incorporating VR into lessons and emphasized the importance of striking a balance between using VR and traditional teaching techniques. While recognizing the academic value of VR and its ability to provide exceptional learning experiences, they highlighted the need for a hybrid approach (Radianti et al., 2020) that combines VR with established teaching methods.
There really is no denying that VR has academic value since it pro- duces exceptional and unforgettable learning experiences. However, like with other technology, the challenge of introducing VR into our lessons is to find the best balance. VR cannot replace real-life teachers, but when educators combine VR with traditional teach- ing techniques, this hybrid strategy can modify the learning process that we know.
(Teacher 1, secondary school)


Overcoming challenges and enhancing writing skills with VR

Another disadvantage mentioned by both the focus group and the literature review is the potential difficulties associated with adopting VR in ML2 learning. These challenges could include the high cost for some schools, the inconvenience of bulky headsets, and the reliance on a stable internet connection (Yoshimura & Borst, 2021). Teachers 5 and 22 highlighted these concerns:
Fortunately, HTC (Hi-Tech Computer) is developing a VR headset that is so lightweight that it feels like wearing glasses [instead of] the clunky, weighty, and unpleasant goggles we currently have.
(Teacher 5, secondary school)
A possible technical challenge at many schools is a lack of a consis- tent Wi-Fi connection to download all of the large resources on student devices at the same time. However, some VR app developers have already discovered a solution to this problem by making virtual
tours available for download on the teacher’s laptop/smartphone/
tablet. That device then acts as a local server for all connected stu- dent laptops/tablets.
(Teacher 22, secondary school)
While there were similarities between the findings of this study and the existing literature, there were also some differences. The partici- pants did not mention the devaluation of human connection associated with VR, which has been noted in previous studies (Radianti et al., 2020; Yoshimura & Borst, 2021). However, effective communication skills are crucial for language learners and deserve attention. Additionally, the participants did not discuss the potential negative effects of VR on stu-
dents’ health, such as addiction, eye strain (Cook et al., 2019; Yoshimura
& Borst, 2021), and motion sickness (Eunhee, et al., 2020). This lack of mention may be due to the educators’ limited experience with VR.
One significant finding of this study is that VR can play a crucial role
in developing writing skills in the Maltese language. Students often struggle with storytelling and varied writing styles when composing narrative, descriptive, or persuasive essays. However, by providing vi- sualizations of concepts, VR can assist in the development of these skills. For example, when writing an expository essay, a learner using VR can engage in role-playing, explore relevant concepts, and fill out a chart. This hands-on experience allows students to gain insights into how to write this type of essay. Similarly, for descriptive essays, students can wear VR glasses and navigate through a virtual house, observing people and objects to gather vivid details for their writing. Sharing their
observations with peers could further enhance the students’ presenta- tion and writing skills.
In persuasive writing tasks, VR can be highly beneficial. For instance, if the writing task is to describe a football player’s emotions after win- ning a championship game, students can use VR to immerse themselves
in a virtual football stadium, experiencing the electrifying atmosphere of the victory firsthand. This immersive experience adds depth and authenticity to their writing.
Existing research provides strong support for the notion that VR enables detailed observation and access to unique experiences that may not otherwise be available (Fromm et al., 2021). By leveraging VR technology, Maltese learners can enhance their writing skills and engage in more immersive and compelling narratives.
While there are challenges to overcome in the adoption of VR, its potential to enhance language learning, particularly in developing writing skills, is evident. With the ongoing advancements in VR tech- nology and the integration of innovative teaching approaches, educators can harness the power of VR to create transformative Maltese learning experiences for their students.

Study limitations

It is important to note that this research has some limitations. Firstly, the participants had some familiarity with VR from their personal ex- periences, but they had not used it in their classroom. Thus, their opinions may be influenced by biases, as their assessments of the po- tential effectiveness of VR tools are not based on direct experience. Secondly, the sample size was small because there are only a few ML2 teachers in Malta, and it is not a compulsory subject in all schools yet. Thirdly, this study relied on the subjective comments of the teachers, which were not objectively tested. Moreover, the participants had some familiarity with VR from their personal experiences but had not used it in their classrooms. Therefore, the findings of this study cannot be generalized.
Another limitation is that this study solely focuses on the educators’ perspectives, whereas the students’ viewpoints are not taken into consideration. Secondly, the findings are only applicable to VR apps that
concentrate on language learning and may not be generalizable to VR apps designed for other subject areas.



Recommendations

Based on the findings of this study, it is recommended that educators and researchers focus on the development of VR applications specifically tailored to Maltese language teaching and learning. Currently, there is a lack of VR apps available in Maltese, which presents an opportunity to enhance language learning experiences for Maltese learners. By creating immersive and interactive VR experiences that focus on teaching Mal- tese vocabulary, grammar, and pronunciation, students can engage in a dynamic and engaging learning environment that promotes Maltese language acquisition.
To effectively incorporate VR into Maltese language learning, teachers should have first-hand experience and training with VR tech- nology before introducing it to their students. This will allow them to become familiar with the VR tools, understand their potential applica- tions, and effectively guide students in their VR language learning experiences.
Furthermore, educators should set reasonable time limits for stu- dents’ VR use to ensure a balanced approach. While VR can be highly engaging and immersive, it is important to strike a balance between VR
activities and other forms of Maltese language practice. Integrating VR into lesson plans as a supplemental tool, alongside traditional teaching methods, can be an effective approach.
Teachers should also be prepared to address any questions or con- cerns that may arise during students’ VR experiences. VR applications may not cover all Maltese language learning aspects or cater to indi-
vidual student needs. Therefore, teachers should be equipped with the necessary knowledge and resources to support students and provide additional explanations, clarification, and practice as needed.
In addition, further research is needed to explore the practical im- plications of implementing VR in Maltese language learning. This in- cludes evaluating the availability of VR hardware and software resources in educational settings, considering the time required for teachers to prepare and integrate VR tools effectively, and examining the potential benefits and risks associated with using VR for different Mal- tese language learner profiles.
It is also essential to consider the potential health impacts of pro- longed VR use and take appropriate measures to mitigate them. Edu- cators should ensure that students take regular breaks, maintain proper posture during VR activities, and be aware of potential discomfort or adverse effects. By promoting a safe and healthy VR learning environ- ment, international students learning Maltese can fully benefit from the immersive language learning experiences VR offers.
Finally, future research should focus on developing guidelines and best practices specifically for using VR in Maltese language teaching and learning. These guidelines should address pedagogical considerations, effective integration of VR into the curriculum, assessment methods for evaluating the impact of VR on language learning outcomes, and stra- tegies for fostering learner engagement and motivation within the VR environment.

Conclusion

This study employed a mixed methods approach, combining quan- titative and qualitative analyses to investigate the perspectives of 25 educators on the potential of using VR in ML2 classrooms. The educators had prior knowledge of VR but had not yet incorporated it into their language teaching practices due to lack of VR apps in Maltese. The findings revealed that despite the lack of practice of VR in Maltese classes, the majority of educators recognized its usefulness as a tool for ML2 acquisition. Notably, younger educators exhibited a stronger belief in the potential of VR to enhance language learning compared to their older counterparts. The study also identified several issues associated with VR, including technical challenges, the need for further improve- ment of VR apps, and cost considerations. However, it underscored the potential of VR to create a fully immersive language learning
experience. The participants demonstrated varying degrees of VR experience and training, exposure to diverse VR language learning apps and tools, active engagement in professional development, practical experience with VR implementation, and exposure to international settings. Nevertheless, the lack of availability of VR resources and research in the context of the Maltese language highlights a potential gap that needs to be addressed to fully leverage the benefits of VR in Maltese language learning. Based on the findings, it is suggested that VR could emerge as one of the most effective techniques for teaching and learning Maltese in the future. Further research and efforts to expand VR resources and support in the ML2 context are recommended to harness the full potential of VR technology.

Declaration of competing interest

None.

Appendix A. Supplementary data

Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi. org/10.1016/j.cexr.2023.100035.

References

Ames, H., Glenton, C., & Lewin, S. (2019). Purposive sampling in a qualitative evidence synthesis: A worked example from a synthesis on parental perceptions of vaccination communication. BMC Medical Research Methodology, 19(26). https://doi.org/ 10.1186/s12874-019-0665-4
Aspers, P., & Corte, U. What is Qualitative in Qualitative Research. Qualitative Sociology, 42, 139–160. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11133-019-9413-7.
Attard, L. E. (1989). The great exodus (1918–1939). Malta: Publishers Enterprises Group.
Ball, C., Huang, K. T., & Francis, J. (2021). Virtual reality adoption during the COVID-19 pandemic: A uses and gratifications perspective. Telematics and Informatics, 65. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tele.2021.101728
Camilleri Grima, A., & Z˙ ammit, J. (2020). The acquisition of verbal tense and aspect in
Maltese by adult migrants: Implications for pedagogical grammar. Journal of Multilingual Theories and Practices, 1(2), 149–167. https://doi.org/10.1558/ jmtp.13426
Candela, A. G. (2019). Exploring the function of member checking. Qualitative Report, 24
(3), 619–628. https://doi.org/10.46743/2160-3715/2019.3726
Cardullo, V., & Wang, C.-h. (2022). Pre-service teachers perspectives of google expedition. Early Childhood Education Journal, 50, 173–183. https://doi.org/ 10.1007/s10643-020-01136-3
Cook, M., Lischer-Katz, Z., Hall, N., Hardesty, J., Johnson, J., McDonald, R., & Carlisle, T. (2019). Challenges and strategies for educational virtual reality: Results of an expert-
led forum on 3D/VR technologies across academic institutions. Information Technology and Libraries, 4(1), 25–49. https://doi.org/10.6017/ital.v38i4.11075
Eunhee, C., Hyun, T. K., & Byounghyun, Y. (2020). Virtual reality sickness: A review of
causes and measurements. International Journal of Human-Computer Interaction, 36
(17), 1658–1682. https://doi.org/10.1080/10447318.2020.1778351
Euromed Rights. (2022). Migrants and refugees in Malta. Euromed Rights. https:// euromedrights.org/migrants-and-refugees-in-malta/.
Fromm, J., Radianti, J., Wehking, C., Stieglitz, S., Majchrzak, T. A., & vom Brocke, J. (2021). More than experience? - on the unique opportunities of virtual reality to afford a holistic experiential learning cycle. The Internet and Higher Education, 50, Article 100804. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.iheduc.2021.100804
Garduno, H. A. S., Martinez, M. I. E., & Castro, M. P. (2021). Impact of virtual reality on student motivation in a high school science course. Applied Sciences, 11(1), 1–17. https://doi.org/10.3390/app11209516
Graeske, C., & Sjoberg, S. A. (2021). VR-technology in teaching: Opportunities and challenges. International Education Studies, 14(8), 76–83. https://doi.org/10.5539/ ies.v14n8p76
Hamilton, D., McKechnie, J., Edgerton, E., & Wilson, C. (2021). Immersive virtual reality as a pedagogical tool in education: A systematic literature review of quantitative learning outcomes and experimental design. Journal of Computers in Education, 8(1),
1–32. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40692-020-00169-2
Hu-Au, E., & Lee, J. J. (2018). Virtual reality in education: A tool for learning in the experience age. International Journal of Innovation in Education, 4(4), 215–228. https://doi.org/10.1504/IJIIE.2017.10012691
Immigration, M. (2021). Citizenship by investment Malta. Malta Immigration. http s://www.maltaimmigration.com/.
Lege, R., & Bonner, E. (2020). Virtual reality in education: The promise, progress, and challenge. The JALT CALL Journal, 5(1), 167–181. https://doi.org/10.29140/jaltcall. v16n3.388
Liddell, T., & Kruschke, J. (2018). Analyzing ordinal data with metric models: What could possibly go wrong? Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 79, 328–348. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jesp.2018.08.009
Liu, R., Lei, J., Wang, L., Wang, Q., & Ren, Y. (2020). Effects of an immersive virtual reality-based classroom on students’ learning performance in science lessons. British



Journal of Educational Technology, 51(6), 2034–2049. https://doi.org/10.1111/ bjet.13028
Maguire, M., & Delahunt, B. (2017). Doing a thematic analysis: A practical, step-by-step
guide for learning and teaching scholars. All Ireland Journal of Higher Education, 3(1), 3352–3366. http://ojs.aishe.org/index.php/aishe-j/article/view/3354.
Mealy, P. (2018). Virtual & augmented reality for dummies. Hoboken, New Jersey: John
Wiley & Sons Inc.
Nowell, L. S., Norris, J. M., White, D. E., & Moules, N. J. (2017). Thematic analysis: Striving to meet the trustworthiness criteria. International Journal of Qualitative Methods, 16(1). https://doi.org/10.1177/1609406917733847
Nyumba, T. O., Wilson, K., Derrick, C. J., & Mukherjee, N. (2018). The use of focus group discussion methodology: Insights from two decades of application in conversation.
Methods in Ecology and Evolution, 3(5), 6–10. https://doi.org/10.1111/2041- 210X.12860
Panagiotidis, P. (2021). Virtual reality applications and language learning. International Journal for Cross-Disciplinary Subjects in Education, 12(2), 4447–4455. https://doi. org/10.20533/ijcdse.2042.6364.2021.0543
Parmaxi, A. (2023). Virtual reality in language learning: A systematic review and
implications for research and practice. Interactive Learning Environments, 31(1), 172–184. https://doi.org/10.1080/10494820.2020.1765392
Peixoto, B., Pinto, R., Melo, M., Cabral, L., & Bessa, M. (2021). Immersive virtual reality
for foreign language education: A prisma systematic review. IEEE Access, 9, 48952–48962. https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2021.3068858
Radianti, J., Majchrzak, T. A., Fromm, J., & Wohlgenannt, I. (2020). A systematic review
of immersive virtual reality applications for higher education: Design elements,
lessons learned, and research agenda. Computer Education, 147(1), 1–13. https://doi. org/10.1016/j.compedu.2019.103778
Sarstedt, M., & Mooi, E. (2014). Regression analysis. In A concise guide to market research. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Texts in Business and Economics. Springer. https://doi. org/10.1007/978-3-642-53965-7_7.
Tarmo, A., & Kimaro, A. (2021). The teacher education curriculum and its competency based education attributes. The Journal of Competency-based Education, 6(3), Article e01255. https://doi.org/10.1002/cbe2.1255
Yildirim, B., Topalcengiz, E. S., Arikan, G., & Timur, S. (2020). Using virtual reality in the classroom: Reflections of STEM teachers on the use of teaching and learning tools.
Journal of Education in Science Environment and Health, 6(3), 231–245. https://doi. org/10.21891/jeseh.711779
Yoshimura, A., & Borst, C. W. (2021). A study of class meetings in VR: Student
experiences of attending lectures and of giving a project presentation. Frontiers in Virtual Reality, 15(2), 46–50. https://doi.org/10.3389/frvir.2021.648619
Z˙ ammit, J. (2021). Maltese as a second language: Learning challenges and suggested teaching strategies. Malta Review of Educational Research, 15(2), 197–220.
Zhao, J., Xu, X., Jiang, H., & Ding, Y. (2020). The effectiveness of virtual reality-based technology on anatomy teaching: A meta-analysis of randomized controlled studies.
BMC Medical Education, 20(1), 127–137. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12909-020- 1994-z
Zheng, C., Yu, M., Guo, Z., Liu, H., Gao, M., & Chai, C. S. (2022). Review of the application of virtual reality in language education from 2010 to 2020. Journal of
China Computer-Assisted Language Learning, 2(2), 1–16. https://doi.org/10.1515/ jccall-2022-0014
