


Electronic Notes in Theoretical Computer Science

www.elsevier.com/locate/entcs



Hausdorff compactifications of topological function spaces via the theory of continuous lattices

Mart´ın Escard´o

Abstract
It is known from the theory of continuous lattices that if X is a locally compact Hausdorff space then the set LSC(X) of lowersemicontinuous functions defined on X with values on the extended real lineadmits a unique compact Hausdorff topology making the functional (f, g)to min(f, g) continuous, namely the Lawson topology of the continuouslattice LSC(X). It is natural to won- der whether the relative topologyon the subset C(X) of continuous functions is the compact- opentopology. Unfortunately, it turns out to be strictly weaker. But a relatedconstruction does produce a Hausdorff compactification of C(X). Weshow that if X is a locally compact Hausdorff space and Y is aHausdorff topological space which is perfectly embedded into a continuouslattice L endowed with the Scott topology, then the Lawson topologyon the continuous lattice LSC(X,L) of Scott continuous maps fromX to L induces the compact-open topology on the spaceC(X,Y) of continuous maps from X to Y. Thus, by takingthe closure of the image of C(X,Y) in LSC(X,L), one gets aHausdorff compactification of C(X,Y). Three particular cases are ofinterest. (1) If Y is the Euclidean real line one can take L as the lattice of compact connected subsets of the two- pointcompactification of Y ordered by reverse inclusion. In this case,C(X,Y) is already dense in LSC(X,L). (2) If Y is alocally compact Hausdorff space, one can take L as the compactsubsets of the one-point compactification of Y. (3) As a furtherparticular case of (2), if X and Y are compact Hausdorff, oneconcludes that the Vietoris topology on the closed subsets of the cartesianproduct of X and Y induces the compact-open topology onC(X,Y), by identifying continuous functions with their closed graphs,using the fact that the Lawson topology coincides with the Vietoristopology.














1571-0661 ⃝c Elsevier Ltd Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
10.1016/S1571-0661(05)80042-8
