Engineering Science and Technology, an International Journal 48 (2023) 101564








Full Length Article
Optimal sizing of an integrated renewable energy system and effective utilization of surplus energy in electric vehicle charging
Vishal Saini *, S.K. Singal
Hydro and Renewable Energy Department, Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, Roorkee 247667, Uttarakhand, India



A R T I C L E I N F O 


Keywords:
Stand-alone integrated renewable energy system
Life cycle cost
Chimp optimization algorithm Surplus energy
Electric vehicles
Integrated charging strategy
A B S T R A C T 

Renewable energy based power generation has proven to be a viable standalone option in areas where extending the grid is challenging. This study addresses this issue by assessing the possibility of an integrated renewable energy system (IRES) to electrify twelve villages in the Uttarakhand state of India. Four battery energy storage
(BES) devices, namely Lead-Acid (LA), Sodium-Sulfur (NAS), Lithium-Ion (Li-Ion), and Nickel-Iron (Ni-Fe) are considered for storage in this study. Using the Chimp optimization algorithm (ChOA) on the MATLAB© platform, eight different configurations consisting of solar photovoltaic (SPV) array, a micro-hydropower (MHP) plant, and
a biogas generator (BGG) are modeled and optimized. The study reveals that the optimal IRES configuration with the lowest cost and highest performance comprises 676 SPV panels (260 kWp), one MHP plant (25 kW), one BGG (40 kW), and 648 NAS batteries (778 kWh). This configuration has a total system life cycle cost (LCC) of INR
68.77 million and cost of energy (COE) of 16.77 INR/kWh at 0 % loss of power supply probability. The opti- mization problem was run 1–50 times and found that the proposed ChOA algorithm is more robust compared to others, displaying the lowest Best, Worst, and Mean values of LCC (across all eight configurations), convergence
rapidity (26th iteration), and least computational time (3481 sec). However, GWO (seven configurations), MFO (34th iteration), and GA (4154 sec) stand very close to ChOA performance in terms of providing minimum LCCs, convergence rapidity, and computational time, respectively. Furthermore, surplus energy (SE) is effectively utilized by incorporating electric vehicles (EVs) as dump load in the system. The proposed integrated charging (IC) strategy outperforms other charging strategies by energizing 134 EVs, utilizing 99.59 % of SE, and reducing the total COE to 10.57 INR/kWh. Finally, the proposed IC strategy results in a net saving of 94,479.39 tons of greenhouse gas emissions. These findings support the feasibility of implementing a standalone IRES to electrify the study area and provide electricity to EVs.







Introduction

Motivation and incitement

Energy is one of the necessities in today’s era for the welfare of the
people [1]. However, a significant portion of the global population lacks access to basic energy services [2]. In developing countries, distributed renewable energy systems have emerged as a successful solution for meeting the electricity demand [3,4]. These systems, based on renew- able energy sources, have proved particularly beneficial in remote rural communities where grid electrification is challenging and costly [5]. The idea of a renewable energy-based system, which is a microgrid encompassing various loads and generators in a confined region, is un- dergoing transformation because of increased effectiveness, minimal
power loss during transmission, an economical transmission infra- structure, bolstered resilience, and heightened stability [6].
Nevertheless, renewable energy-based systems encounter various challenges, including the intermittent nature of renewable resources, the sizing of system components, system control, energy management, and power quality issues [22]. To address the intermittent nature of renewable energy (RE) sources, integrated renewable energy systems (IRESs) are often equipped with energy storage systems (ESSs) to ensure reliable matching of load demand [7,8]. In RE-based systems, batteries are considered prominently for energy storage purpose [9]. Batteries can augment solar and wind power, allowing for the optimization of total power output to maximize the use of renewable energy sources [10].
The conventional power system deals with variability in the form of random demand patterns. Whereas, RE-based power system introduces randomness in energy sources too. To address this increased variability



* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: vsaini@ah.iitr.ac.in (V. Saini).

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jestch.2023.101564
Received 30 June 2023; Received in revised form 21 October 2023; Accepted 28 October 2023
Available online 16 November 2023
2215-0986/© 2023 Karabuk University.	Publishing services by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).



Nomenclature

Abbreviations
AC	Alternating current
ACs	Air conditioners
AEU	Annual energy utilization BES	Battery energy storage BGG	Biogas generator
BSC	Battery swapping charging CC	Charge controller
CHP	Combined heat and power CM	Chemicals
CO2	Carbon dioxide
CH4	Methane
ChOA	Chimp optimization algorithm
SSA	Salp swarm algorithm WT	Wind turbine
Constant and variable parameters AFC	Annual fuel cost
AMC	Annual maintenance cost ARC	Annual replacement cost Atemp	Ambient temperature CCWS	Cost of civil work
CMS	Cost of mechanical structure Cpw	Present worth factor
Cref, temp SPV cell temperature under standard test conditions CVBG	Calorific value of biogas
CO2eq	CO2 equivalents
d	Journey distance
ef	Emission factor

COE	Cost of energy
CRF	Capital recovery factor
max BES
min BES
Maximum energy storage limit of BES devices Minimum energy storage limit of BES devices

CS	Cold storage
CSA	Cuckoo search algorithm CT	Computational time
DBC	Dumb charging
DC	Direct current
DG	Diesel generator DOD	Depth of discharge EE	Excess energy
EMS	Energy management strategy ESS	Energy storage system
EVs	Electric vehicles
FPA	Flower pollination algorithm GA	Genetic algorithm
GHG	Greenhouse gas
GVs	Gasoline vehicles GWO	Grey wolf optimization
EEAC  AC form of generated electrical energy EEDC  DC form of generated electrical energy EETD   Electrical energy demanded
EEGen	Electrical energy generated Em	Annual GHG emission
Farr	Arrival time of EVs Fdep	Departure time of EVs G	Solar radiation
Gref	Solar radiation under standard test conditions HBGG	Daily operating hours of BGG
HCWD	Hourly clean water demand Hnet	Net head of the MHP plant N	Population size
PL	Project lifetime
Pmax,PC	Maximum power transmitted by the PC QBES	Total count of BES devices

HSA	Harmony search algorithm
max BES
Maximum count of BES devices

IC	Integrated charging
QSPV	Total count of SPV panels

ICC	Initial capital cost
max SPV
Maximum count of SPV panels

IRES	Integrated renewable energy system
kWp	Peak-kilowatt
LA	Lead-Acid battery
LCC	Life cycle cost
QBG	Amount of biogas generated per day QCTD	Quantity of cattle dung
Qturbine	Design flow rate of the turbine SBES	Ampere-hour rating of BES devices

Li-Ion	Lithium-Ion battery
LPSP	Loss of power supply probability
max BES
min
BES
Maximum SOC of BES devices
Minimum SOC of BES devices

LPS	Loss of power supply
MA	Mayfly algorithm
MB	Membrane
MFO	Moth flame optimization MHP	Micro-hydropower
NAS	Sodium-Sulfur battery Ni-Fe	Nickel-Iron battery N2O	Nitrous oxide
OC	Operational cost
PC	Power converter PHEVs	Plug-in hybrid EVs
tu	Usage time of component in years T	Iterations in number
Tcoef	Maximum power temperature coefficient of SPV panels VBES	Voltage rating of BES devices
Greek symbols
ηBGG	Efficiency of BGG
ȠCC	Efficiency of CC
ȠMHP	Efficiency of MHP plant ȠPC	Efficiency of PC
ȠRT,BES	Round trip efficiency of BES devices
σSDR	Self-discharge rate of BES devices


Table 1
Summary of literature review.
(continued on next page)


Table 1 (continued )
ACS = Annualized cost of the system, BMG = Biomass generator, DRP = Demand response program, MOEA/D = Multi-objective evolutionary algorithm based on decomposition, MOPSO = Multi-objective particle swarm optimization, NPC = Net present cost, NSGA = Non-dominated sorting genetic algorithm, WTG = Wind turbine generator, ₦ = Nigerian dollar.


stemming from RE resources, solving the problem requires the use of cutting-edge optimization tools capable of handling randomness [11]. It is noted that metaheuristic optimization algorithms have recently captured attention in the area of RE-based power system studies as they can efficiently tackle issues of randomness, and assist in operation control and energy management [22]. Moreover, they efficiently determine the quantities and dimensions of integrated system compo- nents while minimizing cost and addressing the common issue of converging to local minima, often encountered in traditional methods [12].
In these systems, excess energy generated during off-peak hours is used to charge the ESS. When the ESS is fully charged, any remaining excess energy (called surplus energy) is typically wasted in dump load that can be utilized in cooking, water heating, or baking [13]. Recently, electric vehicles (EVs) have played a crucial role in microgrid systems as emerging energy consumers, offering potential solutions to address system challenges [14]. Hence, EVs can be utilized as a promising consumer of surplus energy (SE) in future IRESs. As a result, the goal of this study is, firstly, to develop the optimal IRES model to electrify the chosen study area. Secondly, effective utilization of SE in standalone IRES for enhancing energy utilization and reducing the cost of energy by deploying EVs as a dump load.

Literature review

Several researchers have conducted studies on the optimal sizing problems of IRES from various perspectives. Hassan [15] used solar photovoltaic (PV)/lead acid (LA) battery-based system to meet the electricity needs of an Iraqi household in grid-connected and off-grid modes. Results reveal that in grid-connected and off-grid modes, 4,600 kWh/year and 1,468 kWh/year amount of SE is transferred to the grid and dump load, respectively. Mokhtara et al. [16] optimized wind tur- bine (WT)/PV/diesel generator (DG)/LA/lithium-ion (Li-Ion) battery- based off-grid system and found that the demand-side management at 100 % renewable fraction reduces SE transferred to dump load by 29 %. Patel and Singal [17] conducted a study on an optimal system comprising 0.25 kWp of solar PV, 1 kW of WT, a biomass generator (BMG), a biogas generator (BGG), and a 360 Ah LA battery. They found that this system transmitted 14,124 kWh, 14,238 kWh, and 18,748 kWh amount of SE to the dump load at energy index ratio levels of 85 %, 90
%, and 95 %, respectively. Faizan et al. [18] found that the SPV/WT/ DG/LA-based optimal system dumps 13,975 kWh/year amount of SE. Javed et al. [19] discovered that the optimal solar/wind/DG/LA/pump hydro storage (PHS) injected 25,450 kWh/year amount of SE to dump load.
Ghussain et al. [20] found that the optimal PV/wind/biomass and PV/wind/biomass/PHS/Zinc-Bromine battery-based system dumped 6,297 MWh and 4,811 MWh amount of SE to grid and PHS, respectively. Kahwash et al. [21] devised PV panels/WTs/battery bank/DG/CHP/ boiler/thermal storage tank-based system and found that the total excess generation is more than 50 % with 15 % unutilized. Shukla and Momoh
[22] discovered that the PV/DG/grid and PV/WT/DG/Li-Ion-based system generates 13,335 kWh/year and 11,818 kWh/year amount of SE in grid-connected and off-grid mode, respectively.
Recently integration of electric vehicles (EVs) in power systems has gained significant attention. In the present literature, several authors have incorporated EVs in their systems and analyzed their impacts on systems performance. Tao et al. [23] created a plug-in hybrid EV (PHEV)/PV/WT/Microturbine (MT)/Fuel cell (FC)/nickel-metal hy-
dride (Ni-MH) battery system to reduce the system’s operational cost (OC) by avoiding PHEV charging during peak demand. Guo et al. [24]
investigated a system comprising PV/DG/plug-in EVs and demonstrated that integrating a demand response program with plug-in EVs lead to reductions in daily OC, DG generation, power purchases from the mar- ket, emission pollution, and renewable energy curtailment by 9.97 %,
3.6 %, 3.8 %, 12.34 %, and 8.49 %, respectively. Ibrahim et al. [25] integrated plug-in EVs into a system consisting of WT, CHP, and hydrogen energy storage, finding that the integration of plug-in EVs resulted in higher OC.
Zeynali et al. [26] investigated the integrated operation of a wind farm and PHEV fleets in a day-ahead wholesale market, taking into ac- count the influence of battery degradation on OC under a smart charging scheme. Alsharif et al. [27] designed a microgrid comprising EVs, PV, WT, the grid, and batteries, aiming to minimize the COE while maxi- mizing energy reliability and the renewable fraction. Bogdanov et al.
[28] created a power, heat, transportation, and desalination energy system transition model to maintain the integrated energy system’s total cost as low as possible.
Xiaoluan et al. [29] proposed a PHEV/grid/PV/WT/MT/FC/Ni-MH battery-based system and found that smart charging strategy reduces



Table 2
General information about the study area [42].


Property	Details


Country	India
State	Uttarakhand
District	Pithoragarh
Block	Munsyari
Name of villages	Milam, Bilju, Pachhu Gunth, Ganghar, Mapa, Burphu,
Tola, Martoli, Lwa, Laspa, Khilach and Ralam.
Region	Hilly
Latitude and Longitude	30.36 N, 80.18 E Number of households	335
Total population	1100
Population age group (0)–	49
(6)
Literates	544
Language	Kumauni





Table 3
Daily seasonal energy demand in kWh.




Fig. 1. Seasonal load demand curves.

PHEV charging cost significantly. Alshammari et al. [30] optimized hybrid EV charging systems for sustainability, considering technical and economic factors. Four different algorithms were deployed for multi- objective optimization, focusing on minimizing total NPC and reducing power supply interruptions. Reddy [31] proposed optimal scheduling for a microgrid, maximizing renewable energy use (wind and solar PV) while considering uncertainty. It minimized total operating cost (including grid exchange, renewables, storage, EVs, and demand response) using probability distribution functions and GAMS software. The literature review is summarized in Table 1, which includes the main evaluating objectives, commonly used software and algorithms,
and key findings from selected works in the literature.
The literature highlights several research gaps regarding the IRESs and the challenges associated with them. These points can be summa- rized as follows:
The cost of storage, particularly batteries, is a significant concern in IRES due to the imbalance between renewable generation and demand. Surplus renewable generation often needs to be dis- carded to maintain system stability. The increased fraction of renewable energy and lower generation cost can further exacer- bate this issue.
Many studies on IRES do not emphasize the utilization of SE effectively. This implies that there is potential to optimize the utilization of surplus renewable energy to enhance the overall efficiency and economic viability of IRES.
Several authors have considered EVs as part of the main load in IRES. Such integration of EVs increases the overall cost and size of the system. However, there is a lack of research on the charging of EVs in 100 % renewable energy-based stand-alone IRES, sug- gesting a gap in the current literature.

Contribution and paper organization

Based on the identified gaps in the literature, the novelty and sig- nificant contributions of this study can be outlined as follows:

This study proposes the stand-alone IRES to meet the electricity demand of the selected villages in Munsyari Block of Uttarakhand state (India), using solar photovoltaic (SPV) array, micro- hydropower (MHP) plant, biogas generator (BGG), Lead-Acid (LA), Sodium-Sulfur (NAS), Lithium-Ion (Li-Ion) and Nickel- Iron (Ni-Fe).
Resilience, proficiency, and computational time performance of the proposed Chimp optimization algorithm (ChOA) [32] have been compared with other optimization algorithms such as Ge- netic algorithm (GA) [33], Particle swarm optimization (PSO) [34], Moth flame optimization (MFO) [35], Salp swarm algo- rithm (SSA) [36], Mayfly algorithm (MA) [37], Grey wolf opti- mization (GWO) [38], Cuckoo search algorithm (CSA) [39], Flower pollination algorithm (FPA) [40] and Harmony search algorithm (HSA) [41].
This study addresses the underutilization of surplus renewable energy in IRESs. It aims to develop an optimization strategy to effectively utilize the SE generated by renewable sources. Maxi- mizing SE use improves the economic viability and efficiency of IRESs.
Unlike previous studies, this research investigates the charging of EVs in stand-alone IRES that solely rely on renewable energy sources. By exploring this aspect, it aims to provide insights into the feasibility, challenges, and potential benefits of integrating EV charging in 100 % renewable energy-based systems.

Overall, this study brings novel perspectives and significant contri- butions by addressing the gaps in existing literature, particularly in terms of SE utilization, EV integration in stand-alone IRES, cost and size optimization using a novel ChOA algorithm, and comprehensive per- formance analysis of the proposed ChOA algorithm with other optimi- zation techniques.
To achieve the abovementioned objectives, details regarding the study area and load-resource assessment are provided in the subsequent Section 2. Afterward, Section 3 elaborates on the methodology adopted to carry out the study. Followed by Section 4, which presents the results and findings. Finally, Section 5 summarizes the paper and highlight the conclusions.

Identification of study area

The study area involves twelve un-electrified villages in the Mun- syari Block of Uttarakhand, India. Munsyari Block is located in the Great Himalayas physiographic zone, at a high latitude, and low temperature. A heating season that can extend up to six months a year is brought on by





Fig. 2. Monthly profile of renewable resources.


Fig. 3. Layout of the proposed integrated renewable energy system.


the long and chilly winters there. Table 2 contains general information about the study region.

Load-resource assessment of the study area

Daily load demand in the study area includes energy needs for various purposes such as domestic, non-domestic, street lights,
irrigation, public water works, a cold storage (CS) facility, and a reverse osmosis desalination (ROD) unit. Table 3 presents the minimum, maximum, and average energy demand for different seasons. Addi- tionally, Fig. 1 illustrates the seasonal load demand curves, showcasing the variations in load demand throughout the year.
During the site survey, it was observed that the study area has abundant solar radiation, water streams, and significant availability of



cattle dung for biomass. Solar radiation and ambient temperature data for a span of 20 years (1995–2015) were provided by the National Renewable Energy Laboratory (USA), as depicted in Fig. 2. The annual
average solar radiation on an inclined plane recorded approx. 5 kWh/
Biogas generator (BGG)
The total power generated by the BGG (PBGG (t)) in kW on daily basis is expressed by Eq. (3) as [17]:
QBG × CVBG × ηBGG

m2/day, while the ambient temperature averaged 19 ◦C. In order to estimate the hydropower potential discharge, rainfall data spanning 20
PBGG(t) =
860 × HBGG
(3)

years (1995–2015) were collected from the Indian Meteorological
Department, Pune (India). Fig. 2 illustrates the monthly water discharge for the micro-hydropower (MHP) plant. Annual dependable water discharge for the MHP plant was estimated to be 232 L per second. In addition, the study area is home to a significant number of cattle, and their dung can be utilized to generate biogas and electricity [43]. Fig. 2 also demonstrates that the research region produces approximately 989 tons of dung per year, which is expected to yield around 42,705 cubic meters of biogas.

Methodology adopted
This section details power and economic modeling of all system components. Subsequently, this section explains the objective function
where, QBG is the amount of biogas generated per day (117 m3), CVBG is the calorific value of biogas (4700 kcal/m3), ȠBGG is the efficiency of BGG (25 %), and HBGG is the daily operating hours of BGG (4 h from 4p. m. to 8p.m.).

Battery energy storage (BES) devices
Excess energy stored by the BES devices when hourly energy gen- eration exceeds load demand is illustrated by Eq. (4). Similarly, the required deficit load supplied by the BES devices when hourly load demand exceeds energy generation is illustrated by Eq. (5). The avail- able capacity of BES devices at time t can be stated as [45]:
EBES(t) = [(1 — σSDR) × EBES(t — 1) + (EEGen (t) — EETD (t) ) × ηCC

and constraints of the study. Finally, it depicts the developed energy management strategy.

× ηRT,BES
]QBES	(4)


Power modeling of the integrated renewable energy system (IRES) components

The layout of the proposed IRES is shown in Fig. 3, which comprises SPV array, MHP plant, BGG, BES devices, Bi-directional power converter with a charge controller (PC-CC), load demands, and EVs as a dump load. The SPV array is connected to the DC bus, while the MHP plant and BGG are connected to the AC bus. The BES devices are connected to both the AC and DC bus through the bi-directional PC-CC. This allows them to store and supply power as needed. Similarly, the EVs are also connected to both the buses through the bi-directional PC-CC, enabling them to consume the SE generated on an hourly basis.

Solar photovoltaic (SPV) array
The SPV array mainly comprises several SPV panels that transform solar energy into electricity. Based on hourly solar radiation (G (t)) and ambient temperature (Atemp (t)), the power delivered by the SPV array (PSPV (t)) can be calculated as [16]:
PSPV (t) = SPVrated(G(t) ){1 +  [Atemp(t) + 0.0256*G(t) ]
Cref ,temp )Tcoef }QSPV	(1)

where, SPVrated is the SPV panel’s rated output power. Gref and Cref, temp
are solar radiation and SPV cell temperature under standard conditions, respectively. Tcoef is the maximum power temperature coefficient (0.0037/◦C) and QSPV is the total count of SPV panels.

Micro-hydropower (MHP) plant
The assessment of hydropower potential in this study is conducted using the soil conservation service-curve number method, as described in reference [44]. This method is utilized to estimate the monthly discharge of direct run-off stream, as depicted in Fig. 2. Hourly power output of the MHP plant (PMHP (t)) in kW is evaluated by using Eq. (2) as [44]:
EBES(t) = [(1 — σSDR) × EBES(t — 1) — (EETD (t)
EEGen (t) )/ηRT,BES ]QBES	(5)

EEGen(t) = (EEDC + EEAC)×ηPC	(6)
EEDC(t) = PSPV (t) × Δt	(7)
EEAC(t) = (PMHP(t) + PBGG(t) ) × Δt	(8)
where, EBES (t) and EBES (t-1) are the states of energy of BES devices at the time ‘t’ and ‘t-1′, respectively. σSDR is the hourly self-discharge rate of BES devices. EEGen (t) and EETD (t) are the total electrical energy
generated and demanded at any time ‘t’, respectively. ƞPC is the effi-
ciency of power converter (PC), ƞCC is the efficiency of charge controller (CC), ƞRT, BES is the round-trip efficiency of the BES devices, and QBES is the total count of BES devices. EEDC and EEAC are the generated direct current (DC) and alternating current (AC) forms of electrical energy, respectively. Δt is the time step of one hour.
Bi-directional power converter with a charge controller (PC-CC) system
The bi-directional power converter (PC) in the system serves two purposes: converting AC to DC in rectifier mode and DC to AC in inverter mode. This allows for the utilization of both AC and DC electrical energy in the system. In IRES, charge controllers (CC) play a pivotal role in safeguarding BES devices against potential harm caused by excessive charging and discharging. It is achieved by regulating the flow of current to and from the BES devices, ensuring their longevity and optimal per- formance. The power rating of bi-directional PC-CC (PPC-CC) is calcu- lated by Eq. (9) as:
PPC—CC = Pmax,PC × 1.1	(9)

where, Pmax,PC is the maximum power transmitted by the PC and the

PMHP(t) =
9.81 × ρ × Qturbine × Hnet × ηMHP	(2)
1000
multiplication factor of 1.1 shows the 10 % overloading capacity of the PC [17].
Additionally, one ROD unit and one CS facility are proposed in this

where, ρ is the water density (1000 kg/m3), Qturbine is the design flow rate of the hydro turbine, Hnet is the net head (18.25 m), and ȠMHP is the
overall efficiency of the MHP plant (60 %). Based on the available head and discharge, the MHP plant of 25 kW capacity has been proposed in the study area.
study. They require 2 kWh and 4.22 kWh, respectively, on a daily basis.

Integration of electric vehicles (EVs) as dump load with the IRES
Electric vehicle charging demand is determined by analyzing the


 












Fig. 4. Typical trip chains prepared from daily activities.















Fig. 5. Hourly departure and arrival time of EVs.

















Fig. 6. Daily distance covered by EVs.


daily travel profiles. Data on daily driving patterns were obtained from the Uttarakhand Transport Corporation and residents in the study area. The dynamic travel patterns were captured using the trip chain model, which is based on daily driving patterns [46]. Fig. 4 illustrates six
representative trip chains that reflect daily activities. It is observed that most EVs are charged during the night and early morning hours when they are parked. The hourly departure and arrival timing of EVs are shown in Fig. 5, while Fig. 6 displays the daily travel distance of EVs.




Fig. 7. Charging strategy for EVs.






















Fig. 8. The energy required by EVs for daily distance travel.


For the various factors that contribute to the unpredictability of EVs charging demand, such as driver behavior, travel patterns, and charging

F (t) =

e—(t—μt )/2σ2 , 0 < t < 24	(10)

dep


σ ,̅̅̅π̅̅	t

To account for the stochastic behavior of EV drivers, the probability distribution function of the departure (Fdep (t)) and arrival (Farr (t)) time
where, μt = 10.5, σt = 3.45

of EV drivers are considered which is a normal distribution that can be
F (t) =   1  e—(t—μt)/2σ2
(11)

expressed by Eqs. (10) and (11), respectively as [47]:
arr
σ ,̅̅̅π̅̅
t , 0 < t < 24



Table 4
CO2 emission from the IRES.
(ICC), cost of mechanical structure (CMS) of SPV panels, cost of civil works (CCWS), annual maintenance cost (AMC), annual replacements cost

Emission source
GHG emission (Em in tons)	Emission factor (ef in kgCO2/
kWh)
(ARC), and annual fuel cost (AFC).
The following assumptions are taken into account in the economic analysis:

Grid	8760	0.79 [53]
t 1
SPV	Em,SPV = ∑8760 PSPV (t)*ef,SPV	0.046 [19]

CCWS of all the IRES components viz: SPV panels, MHP plant,

MHP	Em,MHP =
∑8760 PMHP (t)*ef,MHP
0.009 [54]
BGG, BES devices, PC-CC, ROD unit, and CS facility are consid-

BGG	Em,BGG = ∑8760 PBGG (t)*ef,BGG	0.099 [54]


where, μt = 14.5, σt = 3.6
To account for the stochastic travel pattern of EVs, the probability
distribution function of the daily distance (Fd (d)) covered by EVs is considered and is evaluated by Eq. (12) as [47]:
F d) =   1	e—(ln(d)—μt)/2σ2 , d > 0	(12)
ered as 20 % [17], 40 % [55], 5 % [17], 3 % [17], 3 % [17], 3 %
[56], and 108 % [57] of their initial capital cost, respectively.
AMC of IRES components viz: SPV panels, BGG, PC-CC, and CS facility are considered as 2.5 % [17], 2.5 % [17], 2.5 % [17], and 2 % [57] of their initial capital cost, respectively. Whereas, AMC of the MHP plant and ROD unit are taken as 7500 INR/kW [33] and 15 INR/m3 [56], respectively.
ARC of all the IRES components viz: BGG, BES devices, PC-CC, MB
(membrane), CM (chemicals), ACs, and PUF insulation material

d(	dσ ,̅̅̅π̅̅	t


where, d is the journey distance, μt is the mean of ln(d) (55.62), and σt is the standard deviation (24.16).
The following assumptions are taken into account in the EV charging analysis:

The probability of charging infrastructure availability at home is 100 %.
This study takes into consideration the capital cost per kilowatt of
all standby EV batteries, as outlined later in Table 6.
capital cost, respectively.

The overall LCC of the IRES is estimated by Eq. (14) as [17]:
LCC = ∑ ICC + ∑ CMS + ∑(CCWS + AMC + ARC + AFC).CPW	(14)

where, Cpw is a present worth factor which includes the change in the value of money over time. It is calculated as follows [17]:
tu	i—1

For simplification, it is also assumed that the standby EV batteries
CPW = ∑ (1 + μ) 
(15)

have a lifespan of 20 years.
To ensure that future EVs are efficient, this study assumes an EV energy consumption rate of 0.135 kWh/km [48].

In this study, EVs are equipped with a 16.2 kWh Li-Ion battery and 10
i=1
δn — μ
1 + μ
(1 + δ)


(16)

kWh charger capacity. Fig. 7 presents the developed EV charging strategy, based on the hourly energy required by the EVs as shown in Fig. 8. Each EV is associated with a specific arrival time, and charging
where, δ, δn, µ, and tu represent the discount rate, nominal interest rate,
inflation rate, and usage time of component in years, respectively. Finally, the cost of energy (COE) is evaluated as:

begins when the EV arrives at home [49]. For instance, if the energy consumption of an EV is below 10 kWh upon arrival, charging proceeds


COE INR
kWh
LCC
8760 EE

(t)
× CRF
(17)

the energy consumption is higher, charging occurs at a rate of 10 kWh.
where, CRF is the capital recovery factor and is expressed as:

Avoided greenhouse gas (GHG) emission
Avoided GHG emission is an important environmental indicator that represents the reduction in equivalent carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions

CRF
δ 1  δ PL
= (1 + δ)PL — 1	(18)

achieved by implementing IRES and EVs, compared to the emissions that would have been produced if the conventional grid and gasoline vehicles (GVs) were used instead. The calculation of avoided GHG emissions in this study is expressed by the following formula [50]:
GHG = (GHGGrid + GHGGVs)—(GHGSPV + GHGMHP + GHGBGG + GHGEVs)
(13)
In this study, the emission of CO2 from EVs is assumed to be zero, while from GVs is considered to be 0.1135 kgCO2 per kilometer [51], Table 4presents the equations used to estimate the CO2 emissions from the IRES.
where, PL is the project lifetime of 20 years.

Objective function and constraints

The life cycle cost as an objective function and the constraints that were taken into account are explained below.

Life cycle cost (LCC)
The objective function of this study is to minimize the LCC by considering constraints. The objective function is written as:
min

To compare the emissions of different GHGs, they are expressed in terms of CO2 equivalents (CO2eq). CO2 is used as a baseline with a global warming potential of one, while other GHGs specified in the Kyoto Protocol have higher global warming potentials than CO2 [52].
MinimizeLCC(QSPV , QBES) =
m=SPV,MHP,BGG,BES,PC—CC,ROD,CS

Energy balance constraints
(LCC)m
(19)

This allows for standardized measurement of emissions and their impact
on global warming.

Economic analysis modeling of the IRES

The life cycle cost (LCC) of the system includes initial capital cost
The equality constraint in the IRES ensures the equilibrium between instantaneous energy generation and load demand. This constraint can be articulated as follows:
(PBGG(t) + PMHP(t) + PSPV (t)) × Δt ± EBES(t) = EETD(t) + En	(20)
where, Et is the SE consumed by the nth EV at hour ‘t’.

Techno-economic parameter values.


Parameter	Value	Parameter	Value
Nominal interest rate (%)	13	ICC of ROD unit (INR)	156,600 Annual inflation rate (%)	5	ICC of WST (INR)	76,800 Rated power of SPV panel	385	ICC of MB (INR)		18
(WP)

8760
LPSP	t=1
8760 EETD (t)


Energy management strategy (EMS)

(29)

ICC of SPV panel (INR)	9,600	ICC of CM (INR)	18
EMS ensures efficient operation of the IRES by allocating energy

Lifetime of SPV panel
(years)
20	No. of MB replacement/year	2
units to meet system demand while minimizing LCC and adhering to

MS cost of each SPV panel (INR)
3,075	Rated power of air conditioners (kW)
4.22
reliability constraints. It optimizes the utilization of energy sources (BGG, MHP, and SPV) based on availability, cost, and reliability con-

Lifetime of MS of SPV panel (years)
20	ICC of air conditioners (INR)	135,000
siderations. The EMS is explained as follows:












Upper and lower bound constraints
This study considers the total count of SPV panels (QSPV) and BES devices (QBES) as decision variables, as expressed by Eqs. (20)-(21):











the BES devices are full, the remaining excess energy (called surplus energy) is used to charge the EVs.

Results and discussion

0 ≤ QSPV ≤ Qmax

0 ≤ QBES ≤ Qmax

Energy storage limit on the BES devices
(21)

(22)
This analysis involves a thorough examination of the best possible configuration and scheduling strategy for renewables BGG, MHP, and SPV with various BES devices, including, LA, Li-Ion, NAS, and Ni-Fe. To find the optimal solution, numerous optimization algorithms are employed, such as ChOA, GA, PSO, MFO, SSA, MA, GWO, CSA, FPA, and

The following expression limits the amount of energy stored in the BES devices at any time ‘t’ given by Eq. (23),
HSA, which are implemented within the optimization model to identify
the most favorable configuration. The optimal configuration is deter- mined based on the concept of the system’s least LCC. To gauge the

Emin ≤ EBES (t) ≤ Emax
(23)
performance of these algorithms, a model is established to assess criteria

The following are the maximum and minimum energy storage limits for BES devices:
like resilience, proficiency, and computational time. The primary
objective of this methodology is to pinpoint the most appropriate BES device and algorithm for achieving optimal results in a system driven by

Emax = (QBES × VBES × SBES ) × SOCmax
(24)
BGG, MHP plant, and SPV panels. Lastly, the approach is employed to

BES
1000
BES
charge EVs using the SE generated by the IRES, following different EV
charging strategies.

Emin = (QBES × VBES × SBES ) × SOCmin
(25)
The total count of SPV panels (QSPV) and BES devices (QBES) are

BES
1000
BES
considered decision variables and optimized in this study. Whereas, MHP plant, BGG, and converter system capacities are considered fixed

where, VBES is the rated voltage and SBES is the rated ampere-hour (Ah)
capacity of each BES device.
The minimum and the maximum state of charge of BES devices are as follows:
SOCmin = 1 — DOD	(26)
SOCmax = SOCmin + DOD	(27)
variables. Thus, based on the provided upper and lower limit values of the optimized variable in search space, the optimization algorithm will give the optimum value of that particular component. The BGG gener- ates electricity at its rated capacity throughout the project lifetime. The MHP plant, on the other hand, is expected to generate electricity at its rated capacity for more than 75 % of the year.

BES
BES
Identification of optimal IRES configuration

where, SOC is the state of charge and DOD is the depth of discharge.

Power reliability constraint
The loss of power supply probability (LPSP) occurs when IRES is not able to meet the energy demand. This study evaluates hourly power losses (LPS(t)) using hourly generated electricity, hourly load demand, and BES devices energy level at any time (t):
LPS(t) = (EETD (t) ) — EEGen(t)[(1 — σSDR) × EBES(t — 1) — Emin ] × ηRT BES

This study examines different configurations of the IRES involving BGG, MHP plant, SPV panels, and BES devices with varying depths of discharge (DOD). Four types of BES devices (LA battery, NAS battery, Ni- Fe battery, and Li-Ion battery) are considered for optimization. Earlier ChOA algorithm has been used to address various issues such as breast cancer detection, optimal location of DGs, underwater acoustical data- set, real‑time COVID-19 diagnosis from x-ray images, diagnosis of Par-
kinson’s disease and cleft lip and palate, except optimal sizing of the


ηPC
BES
,
(28)
IRESs. Therefore, in this study, the ChOA algorithm is implemented in MATLAB© to determine the optimal IRES configuration. A total of eight configurations are simulated and optimized at 0 % LPSP level. The

Techno-economic specification of BES devices.
80 % DOD configuration. The optimal values for QSPV and QBES are 676
















Table 7
Parameter settings of algorithms.
Algorithm	Parameters
ducing LCC and COE of INR 103.575 million and 25.26 INR/kWh, respectively, which are approximately 12.08 % lower than the BGG/ MHP/SPV/Ni-Fe at 70 % DOD configuration. The QSPV and QBES values for BGG/MHP/SPV/Ni-Fe at 80 % DOD configuration are found 836 and 671, respectively.
The findings from subsection 4.1 lead to the following conclusions:
(i) Among all the batteries considered, the BGG/MHP/SPV configuration combined with the NAS battery at 70 % DOD yields the best results. (ii) The NAS battery, LA battery, Ni-Fe battery, and Li-Ion battery exhibit the lowest LCCs and COEs in that order. Based on these results, it is recommended to implement the BGG/MHP/SPV/NAS configuration at 70 % DOD for the electrification of the study area as it offers the most favorable outcomes.

GA	N =
100
PSO	N =
100
MFO	N =
100
SSA	N =
100
ChOA	N =
100
MA	N =
100
CSA	N =
100
GWO	N =
100
FPA	N =
100
HSA	N =
100
T = 100 T = 100 T = 100 T = 100 T = 100 T = 100 T = 100 T = 100 T = 100 T = 100
µ = 0.1, CR = 0.9

Wmax = 0.9, Wmin = 0.2, c1 and c2 = 2 a = -1 to —2, b = 1
c1 = rand (0,1), c2 = rand (0,1), c3 = rand (0,1)

m = chaotic, a = 2.5 to 0, f = -1 to 1, r1 and r2 =
rand (0,1)
g = 0.8, a1 = 1, a2 = 1.5, β = 2, d = 5, f1 = 1, CR
= 0.9
pa = 0.25, λ = 1.5, α = 0.01 to 0.1
a = 2 to 0, A = (-2a, 2a), C = rand (0,2) p = 0 to 1, γ = 10-4 to 1, λ = 1.5

p = 0 to 1, m = 0.9, nb = 0.3
Performance analysis of the proposed ChOA algorithm

In this study, the performance of the proposed ChOA algorithm is compared with other optimization algorithms, including Genetic algo- rithm (GA), Particle swarm optimization (PSO), Moth flame optimiza- tion (MFO), Salp swarm algorithm (SSA), Mayfly algorithm (MA), Grey wolf optimization (GWO), Cuckoo search algorithm (CSA), Flower pollination algorithm (FPA) and Harmony search algorithm (HSA). The comparison is based on several factors, namely Best, Worst, and Mean values of LCC, convergence rapidity, and computational time (CT).
Table 8 shows LCC results for all optimized configurations using different algorithms. The Best, Worst, and Mean LCC values show how
well each algorithm finds the optimal solution. Each algorithm’s CT for
one run simulation is shown in seconds (sec). The average CT was estimated from 50 run simulations for all configurations.
Comparing the results shows each algorithm’s resilience and ability to solve the IRES configuration problem optimally. The CT shows how
fast algorithms solve problems. These comparative results help assess

simulations are performed on a computer with an Intel (R) Core (TM) i5- 3470 CPU and 8 GB of RAM. The values of techno-economic parameters of all materials used are shown in Tables 5 and 6. Further, Table 7 dis- plays the parameter settings for the algorithms used.

Performance analysis of LA battery configured IRES configuration
From Table 8, it is observed that the IRES configuration with LA battery (BGG/MHP/SPV) at 80 % DOD yield the best results. The cor- responding LCC is INR 82.29 million, and the COE is 20.07 INR/kWh. This configuration exhibits a reduction of approximately 0.73 % compared to the BGG/MHP/SPV/LA at 70 % DOD configuration. The optimal values for QSPV and QBES are found 743 and 244, respectively.

Performance analysis of Li-Ion battery configured IRES configuration According to the results presented in Table 8, the Li-Ion battery performs best with the BGG/MHP/SPV configuration at 80 % DOD. The corresponding LCC and COE are obtained as INR 137.69 million and
33.59 INR/kWh, which are approximately 8.87 % lower than the BGG/ MHP/SPV/Li-Ion at 70 % DOD configuration. At 80 % DOD, the QSPV and QBES corresponding to the BGG/MHP/SPV/Li-Ion are found 654 and 173, respectively.

Performance analysis of NAS battery configured IRES configuration Based on the findings presented in Table 8, the NAS battery dem- onstrates the most favorable outcome when combined with the BGG/ MHP/SPV configuration at 70 % DOD. The associated LCC is INR 68.77 million, and the COE is 16.77 INR/kWh. These values indicate an
the ChOA algorithm’s solution quality and computational efficiency advantages over other optimization algorithms.

Algorithm ranking based on best, worst, and mean values of LCC
The rankings of the ten algorithms are detailed below to get the overall Best, Worst, and Mean values of LCCs:
The GA and HSA both ranked seventh by providing the lowest Best, Worst, and Mean values of LCC in two, zero, and zero configurations, respectively, out of the eight configurations. The CSA is ranked sixth because it only produced the lowest Best, Worst, and Mean values of LCC in four, zero, and zero configurations. The PSO and FPA both ranked fifth because they only produced the lowest Best, Worst, and Mean values of LCC in five, two, and two configurations. The MA is ranked fourth because it only produced the lowest Best, Worst, and Mean values of LCC in five, three, and three configurations. The MFO and SSA are ranked third because they produced the lowest Best, Worst, and Mean values of LCC in six, five, and five configurations. The GWO is ranked second because it produced the lowest Best, Worst, and Mean values of LCC in seven, six, and six configurations. Finally, the ChOA is ranked first because it produced the lowest Best, Worst, and Mean values of LCC across all eight configurations.
These rankings show how well each algorithm finds optimal LCC values for different IRES configurations. The ChOA algorithm produces the better Best, Worst, and Mean LCC results across all configurations, while the other algorithms show varying degrees of performance.

Table 8
Comparison of the optimization results obtained by the algorithms at 0% LPSP.
(continued on next page)

Convergence rapidity plot of the deployed algorithms
The convergence rapidity plot in Fig. 9 shows how well the algo- rithms find the global optimal solution. Fig. 9 indicates the minimum LCC values achieved by each algorithm at different iterations. The plot shows that the GA, SSA, PSO, FPA, CSA, HSA, GWO, MA, MFO, and ChOA reach their minimum LCC in the 69th, 61st, 56th, 55th, 49th, 47th, 44th, 35th, 34th and 26th iterations, respectively, for NAS battery configuration.
Similarly, for the LA battery configuration, the algorithms reach their minimum LCC in the 66th, 57th, 57th, 49th, 46th, 51st, 44th, 45th, 37th, and 35th iterations for GA, SSA, PSO, FPA, CSA, HSA, GWO, MA, MFO, and ChOA, respectively.
For the Ni-Fe battery configuration, the algorithms reach their minimum LCC in the 60th, 45th, 44th, 54th, 44th, 55th, 48th, 49th, 42nd, and 37th iterations for GA, SSA, PSO, FPA, CSA, HSA, GWO, MA, MFO, and ChOA, respectively.
For the Li-Ion battery configuration, the algorithms reach their minimum LCC in the 57th, 49th, 45th, 57th, 49th, 57th, 53rd, 46th, 40th, and 31st iterations for GA, SSA, PSO, FPA, CSA, HSA, GWO, MA, MFO, and ChOA, respectively.
In summary, the rankings of the algorithms for providing the least LCC solution in the minimum iterations are as follows: ChOA (1st rank), MFO (2nd rank), MA (3rd rank), CSA (4th rank), GWO (5th rank), PSO (6th rank), HSA (7th rank), SSA (8th rank), FPA (9th rank), and GA (10th rank).

Average computational time (CT) of deployed algorithms
The amount of time it takes to complete one run simulation by an algorithm is called computational time (CT). To examine the resilience of each algorithm after the entire simulation process is completed, the average CT of each algorithm in eight configurations is evaluated and compared to the other algorithms as explained below.
According to the results given in Table 8, the CSA algorithm is ranked tenth because it takes an average of 6870 s to complete one run simu- lation. The HSA ranks ninth with an average CT of 5898 s. The FPA ranks eighth with an average CT of 5895 s. The MA ranks seventh with an average CT of 5801 s. The MFO ranks sixth with an average CT of 5797 s. The PSO ranks fifth with an average CT of 5651 s. The SSA ranks fourth with an average CT of 5214 s. The GWO ranks third with an average CT of 5163 s. Whereas, GA on the other hand, has an average CT of 4154 s and is ranked second. Finally, the ChOA is ranked first because its average CT to complete one run simulation is 3481 s.
Therefore, the ChOA algorithm demonstrates the highest resilience and efficiency among the compared algorithms, as it achieves the min- imum average CT to complete one run simulation.
Based on the Best, Worst, and Mean values of LCC, convergence rapidity, and average CT of algorithms, the ranking criterion has been developed and shown in Table 9. It shows that the HSA, FPA, CSA, GA, PSO, SSA, MA, MFO, GWO, and ChOA are ranked 10th, 9th, 8th, 7th, 6th, 5th, 4th, 3rd, 2nd, and 1st overall, respectively. Based on this ranking, the proposed ChOA algorithm is highly recommended for optimal sizing of the IRESs as it achieves the highest ranking among the compared algorithms.

Analysis of electric vehicle (EV) charging strategies

EVs are widely recognized as pollution-free and environmentally friendly modes of transportation. However, integrating EVs into the transportation industry necessitates careful consideration of charging infrastructure. Without a coordinated charging plan, the full potential of battery storage capacity remains untapped, and unmanaged charging can lead to increased peak demand, thereby straining the power system. Therefore, a well-planned charging approach is crucial to yield positive outcomes. Consequently, this study explores four charging strategies, namely: i) Dumb charging, ii) Battery swapping charging, iii) Smart charging, and iv) Integrated charging.























				


Fig. 9. Convergence rapidity plot of NAS at 70% DOD battery configured optimal IRES.


Table 9
Overall ranking criterion of applied algorithms.


















Fig. 10. Number of EVs charging per hour in the DBC strategy.


Dumb charging (DBC) strategy
The DBC strategy involves simply plugging in and charging EVs when they arrive home, without any advanced coordination or control. However, this strategy can lead to exceed the system’s peak-load
demand. Fig. 10 presents the number of EVs charging every hour for a 24-hour period, under the DBC strategy. In this strategy, the system is able to charge 49 EVs per day, utilizing only 38.83 % of the available SE. The daily utilization of SE in EV charging under the DBC strategy is















         



Fig. 11. Daily utilization of SE in EV charging under the DBC strategy.



















Fig. 12. Number of EVs charging per hour in the BSC strategy.


depicted in Fig. 11. Additionally, the DBC strategy result in a significant
26.88 % reduction in the total COE, while increasing the total annual energy utilization (AEU) by 36.77 %.

Battery swapping charging (BSC) strategy
The BSC strategy involves EV owners charging an additional battery at home whenever SE is available, irrespective of their EV arrival time. Fig. 12 illustrates the hourly EV battery charging patterns based on the availability of SE.
Under the BSC strategy, the current system is capable of energizing 139 EVs per day, utilizing 100 % of the available SE, as demonstrated in Fig. 13. However, the introduction of standby batteries leads to an in- crease in the total COE to consumers by 50.52 %, and the total AEU experiences a significant boost of 99.69 %.

Smart charging (SC) strategy
The SC strategy enables EV drivers to charge a greater number of EVs per day without incurring additional COE. This feat is achieved by smartly adjusting the departure-arrival time of EVs belonging to trip chain activities viz: goods transport, shopping/errands, gathering/ functions, temple/mosque/church, etc. to maximize the utilization of SE
in EVs charging. However, it is important to note that trip chains with fixed times, such as school and work/offices, cannot be altered. For other activities, the arrival times of EVs can be smartly adjusted to optimize the utilization of SE. Fig. 14 presents the new arrival times of EVs under the SC strategy.
Fig. 15 demonstrates that by utilizing 66.63 % of the SE, a total of 75 EVs can be charged per day using the SC strategy. This strategy leads to a reduction in total COE by 38.69 % while increasing the total AEU by
63.1 %. Furthermore, Fig. 16 illustrates the daily utilization of SE in EV charging under the SC strategy.

Integrated charging (IC) strategy
The proposed IC strategy combines elements of dumb charging, battery swapping, and smart charging to address the drawbacks of in- dividual charging strategies while harnessing their respective benefits. The objective is to create a hybrid strategy that optimizes EV charging operations.
In the IC strategy, the departure-arrival timings of trip chain activ- ities such as goods transport, shopping/errands, gatherings/functions, and temple/mosque/church visits are smartly adjusted, similar to the approach in the SC strategy. This allows for the efficient utilization of SE















         



Fig. 13. Daily utilization of SE in charging standby batteries of EVs under the BSC strategy.


















Fig. 14. The new arrival time of EVs under the SC strategy.


during EV charging. Additionally, to maximize SE utilization and enhance EV penetration, EV standby batteries are utilized to store remaining hourly available SE. Standby batteries are allocated to EVs involved in trip chains like schools and work/offices, where the trip times cannot be changed.
Fig. 17 demonstrates how the IC strategy power 134 EVs by utilizing
99.59 % of SE. Specifically, 75 EVs are charged using the SC strategy, 44 EVs using the DBC strategy, and 15 EVs using the BSC strategy. More- over, the IC strategy reduces the total COE by 37.93 % while increasing the total AEU by 99.3 %. Fig. 18 illustrates the daily utilization of SE in EV charging under the IC strategy.
Table 10 summarizes the performance of all charging strategies. The IC strategy charges more EVs by using over 99 % of SE than the DBC and SC strategies. Additionally, it reduces total COE more than the others. The BSC strategy, on the other hand, achieves the maximum number of charged EVs, while increasing the total COE.
Performance analysis shows that the IC strategy is best for microgrid EV charging. It uses SE to charge a significant number of EVs at the lowest COE than other methods. Overall, the findings support the suit- ability of the IC strategy for efficient and sustainable EV charging in microgrid systems.
Emission analysis

Table 11 shows GHG emissions from the conventional grid, RE re- sources, and GVs under the IC strategy. The proposed IRES net CO2 savings and tons of CO2, CH4, and N2O emissions are listed. The table indicates that the proposed IRES emits 9646 tons of GHGs, 9.3 % of the conventional grid emissions. It is estimated that the IC strategy saves 94479.39 tons of GHG emissions. In addition to Table 11, Fig. 19 shows the avoided CO2 emissions from implementing the IRES with EVs under DBC, BSC, SC, and IC strategies.
These findings underscore the positive impact of the IC strategy in reducing CO2 emissions, promoting sustainability, and contributing to the overall decarbonization efforts associated with EV integration and RE utilization.

Conclusions

This study investigates the feasibility of a stand-alone integrated renewable energy system (IRES) to supply electricity for various pur- poses to a cluster of twelve un-electrified villages in Munsyari Block, Uttarakhand, India. This study presented a stand-alone IRES design

















             


Fig. 15. Number of EVs charging every hour in the SC strategy.


















Fig. 16. Daily utilization of SE in EV charging under the SC strategy.


framework with diverse BES devices. The developed system has been optimized using the novel Chimp optimization algorithm (ChOA). Electric Vehicles (EVs) are used as dump load to consume surplus energy (SE). Finally, the optimal IRES and EVs under different charging stra- tegies were analyzed for greenhouse gas (GHG) emission reduction. The following are the findings of the study:

The study proposes the electrification of the study area using the optimal IRES configuration, including BGG/MHP/SPV/NAS at a depth of discharge (DOD) of 70 %. The cost of energy (COE) for this configuration is found 16.77 INR/kWh, and the life cycle cost (LCC) amount to 68.77 million INR.
The optimal IRES configuration includes 676 solar photovoltaic (SPV) panels with a capacity of 260 kWp, one micro-hydropower (MHP) plant with a capacity of 25 kW, one biogas generator (BGG) with a capacity of 40 kW, and 648 sodium-sulfur (NAS) batteries with a capacity of 778 kWh.
Alternative configurations, such as BGG/MHP/SPV/LA at 80 % DOD, BGG/MHP/SPV/Ni-Fe at 80 % DOD, and BGG/MHP/SPV/
Li-Ion at 80 % DOD, have LCCs and COEs approximately 20 %, 50
%, and 100 % higher than the optimal configuration, respectively.
Among all the deployed algorithms, ChOA secures 1st rank in all the ranking criteria such as Best, Worst, and Mean values of LCC, convergence rapidity, and average computational time (CT) taken while searching global best results. Indicating its effec- tiveness in optimizing the IRES design.
Among the EV charging strategies considered, the integrated charging (IC) strategy yielded the best results, enabling the charging of 134 EVs using 99.59 % of SE, and reducing the total COE to 10.57 INR/kWh.
The IC strategy achieved significant GHG emission reductions, with an overall net saving of 94,479.39 tons. The IRES alone and the IRES with EVs under various strategies avoided approxi- mately 290.77 to 291.61 tons of CO2 emissions.

The adopted methodology can be useful in designing IRES for other remote rural areas that are not yet electrified. However, there is room for further research into other energy storage devices such as hydrogen energy storage, pump hydro storage, or hybrid energy storage systems.
















             


Fig. 17. Number of EVs charging per hour in the IC strategy.


















Fig. 18. Daily utilization of SE in EV charging under the IC strategy.



Table 10
Performance analysis of all the charging strategies.
Furthermore, the performance of EVs in terms of fuel cost and carbon emissions should be compared with other vehicles such as hybrid energy vehicles and flex-fuel vehicles.

Declaration of Competing Interest

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.






Table 11
The overall CO2 emission.

















				

Fig. 19. Total CO2 emission avoided by the IRES with EVs under different charging strategies.


Acknowledgment

The first author wishes to express gratitude to the Ministry of Edu- cation (MOE), Government of India, for giving financial assistance in the form of a fellowship for the research work.

References

R. Pachauri, R. Singh, A. Gehlot, R. Samakaria, S. Choudhury, Experimental analysis to extract maximum power from PV array reconfiguration under partial
shading conditions, Eng. Sci. Technol. Int. J. 22 (1) (2019) 109–130, https://doi. org/10.1016/j.jestch.2017.11.013.
E. Biyik, et al., A key review of building integrated photovoltaic (BIPV) systems, Eng. Sci. Technol. Int. J. 20 (3) (2017) 833–858, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. jestch.2017.01.009.
“Global status report.” [Online]. Available: https://www.ren21.net/gsr-2023/.
T.R. Ayodele, A.S.O. Ogunjuyigbe, K.O. Akpeji, O.O. Akinola, Prioritized rule based
load management technique for residential building powered by PV/battery system, Eng. Sci. Technol. Int. J. 20 (3) (2017) 859–873, https://doi.org/10.1016/ j.jestch.2017.04.003.
D. Kumar, H.D. Mathur, S. Bhanot, R.C. Bansal, Modeling and frequency control of community micro-grids under stochastic solar and wind sources, Eng. Sci. Technol.
Int. J. 23 (5) (2020) 1084–1099, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jestch.2020.02.005.
M.S. Alam, F.S. Al-Ismail, S.M. Rahman, M. Shafiullah, M.A. Hossain, Planning and protection of DC microgrid: A critical review on recent developments, Eng. Sci. Technol. Int. J. 41 (2023), 101404, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jestch.2023.101404.
D. Sadeghi, A. Hesami Naghshbandy, S. Bahramara, Optimal sizing of hybrid renewable energy systems in presence of electric vehicles using multi-objective particle swarm optimization, Energy 209 (2020), 118471, https://doi.org/ 10.1016/j.energy.2020.118471.
A. Dogan, Optimum sitting and sizing of WTs, PVs, ESSs and EVCSs using hybrid
soccer league competition-pattern search algorithm, Eng. Sci. Technol. Int. J. 24
(3) (2021) 795–805, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jestch.2020.12.007.
M.M. Samy, A. Emam, E. Tag-Eldin, S. Barakat, Exploring energy storage methods for grid-connected clean power plants in case of repetitive outages, J. Storage Mater. 54 (2022), 105307, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.est.2022.105307.
S.S. Reddy, Optimal power flow with renewable energy resources including storage, Electr. Eng. 99 (2) (2017) 685–695, https://doi.org/10.1007/s00202-016-
0402-5.
J.A. Momoh, S.R. Salkuti, Feasibility of Stochastic Voltage/VAr Optimization Considering Renewable Energy Resources for Smart Grid, Int. J. Emerg. Electr.
Power Syst. 17 (3) (2016) 287–300, https://doi.org/10.1515/ijeeps-2016-0009.
A. Fatih Güven, M. Mahmoud Samy, Performance analysis of autonomous green energy system based on multi and hybrid metaheuristic optimization approaches, Energ. Conver. Manage. 269 (2022), 116058, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. enconman.2022.116058.
A. Chauhan, R.P. Saini, A review on Integrated Renewable Energy System based power generation for stand-alone applications: Configurations, storage options,
sizing methodologies and control, Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 38 (2014) 99–120.
S. Turkdogan, Design and optimization of a solely renewable based hybrid energy system for residential electrical load and fuel cell electric vehicle, Eng. Sci.
Technol. Int. J. 24 (2) (2021) 397–404, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. jestch.2020.08.017.
Q. Hassan, Evaluation and optimization of off-grid and on-grid photovoltaic power system for typical household electrification, Renew. Energy 164 (2021) 375–390.
C. Mokhtara, B. Negrou, A. Bouferrouk, Y. Yao, N. Settou, M. Ramadan, Integrated supply–demand energy management for optimal design of off-grid hybrid renewable energy systems for residential electrification in arid climates, Energ.
Conver. Manage. 221 (2020), 113192.
A.M. Patel, S.K. Singal, Optimal component selection of integrated renewable
energy system for power generation in stand-alone applications, Energy 175 (2019) 481–504.
F.A. Khan, N. Pal, S.H. Saeed, Optimization and sizing of SPV/Wind hybrid
renewable energy system: A techno-economic and social perspective, Energy 233 (2021), 121114, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2021.121114.
M. S. Javed, T. Ma, J. Jurasz, and J. Mikulik, “A hybrid method for scenario-based techno-economic-environmental analysis of off-grid renewable energy systems,” Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, vol. 139, no. December 2020, p. 110725,
2021, doi: 10.1016/j.rser.2021.110725.
L. Al-Ghussain, A. Darwish Ahmad, A. M. Abubaker, and M. A. Mohamed, “An integrated photovoltaic/wind/biomass and hybrid energy storage systems towards 100% renewable energy microgrids in university campuses,” Sustainable Energy Technologies Assessments, vol. 46, no. December 2020, p. 101273, 2021, doi:
10.1016/j.seta.2021.101273.
F. Kahwash, A. Maheri, K. Mahkamov, Integration and optimisation of high- penetration Hybrid Renewable Energy Systems for fulfilling electrical and thermal demand for off-grid communities, Energy Convers. Manage. 236 (2021), 114035, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enconman.2021.114035.
A. Shukla, J.A. Momoh, Pseudo inspired gravitational search algorithm for optimal sizing of grid with integrated renewable energy and energy storage, J. Storage Mater. 38 (2021), 102565, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.est.2021.102565.
H. Tao F.W. Ahmed H. Abdalqadir kh ahmed, M. Latifi, H. Nakamura, and Y. Li, Hybrid whale optimization and pattern search algorithm for day-ahead operation of a microgrid in the presence of electric vehicles and renewable energies Journal of Cleaner Production vol. 308, no. April 2021 127215 10.1016/j. jclepro.2021.127215.
Q. Guo, S. Nojavan, S. Lei, X. Liang, Economic-environmental analysis of renewable-based microgrid under a CVaR-based two-stage stochastic model with efficient integration of plug-in electric vehicle and demand response, Sustain. Cities Soc. 75 (2021), 103276, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scs.2021.103276.
I. AlHajri, A. Ahmadian, and A. Elkamel, “Stochastic day-ahead unit commitment
scheduling of integrated electricity and gas networks with hydrogen energy storage (HES), plug-in electric vehicles (PEVs) and renewable energies,” Sustainable Cities and Society, vol. 67, no. December 2020, p. 102736, 2021, doi: 10.1016/j.
scs.2021.102736.
S. Zeynali, N. Nasiri, M. Marzband, S.N. Ravadanegh, A hybrid robust-stochastic framework for strategic scheduling of integrated wind farm and plug-in hybrid electric vehicle fleets, Appl. Energy 300 (2021), 117432, https://doi.org/10.1016/ j.apenergy.2021.117432.
A. Alsharif, C. W. Tan, R. Ayop, K. Y. Lau, and A. M. d. Dobi, “A rule-based power
management strategy for Vehicle-to-Grid system using antlion sizing optimization,” Journal of Energy Storage, vol. 41, no. April, p. 102913, 2021, doi: 10.1016/j.est.2021.102913.
D. Bogdanov, A. Gulagi, M. Fasihi, C. Breyer, Full energy sector transition towards 100% renewable energy supply: Integrating power, heat, transport and industry sectors including desalination, Appl. Energy 283 (2021), 116273, https://doi.org/ 10.1016/j.apenergy.2020.116273.
Z. Xiaoluan, H. Farajian, W. Xifeng, M. Latifi, K. Ohshima, Scheduling of renewable energy and plug-in hybrid electric vehicles based microgrid using hybrid crow- Pattern search method, J. Storage Mater. (2021), 103605, https://doi.org/ 10.1016/j.est.2021.103605.
N.F. Alshammari, M.M. Samy, S. Barakat, Comprehensive Analysis of Multi- Objective Optimization Algorithms for Sustainable Hybrid Electric Vehicle

Charging Systems, Mathematics 11 (7) (2023) pp, https://doi.org/10.3390/ math11071741.
S.R. Salkuti, Optimal operation of microgrid considering renewable energy sources, electric vehicles and demand response, E3S Web Conference 87 (201) (2019) 9, https://doi.org/10.1051/e3sconf/20198701007.
M. Khishe, M.R. Mosavi, Chimp optimization algorithm, Expert Syst. Appl. 149 (2020), 113338.
R.J. Kuo, M.N. Alfareza, T.P.Q. Nguyen, “Genetic based density peak possibilistic
fuzzy c-means algorithms to cluster analysis- a case study on customer segmentation, Eng. Sci. Technol. Int. J. 47 (2023), 101525, https://doi.org/ 10.1016/j.jestch.2023.101525.
S. Tyagi, P. Kumar, A. Kumar, Advancements in performance of zinc oxide / carbon quantum dots based photovoltaic trigeneration system using genetic algorithm and particle swarm optimization, Sustain. Energy Technol. Assess. 60 (2023), 103501, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.seta.2023.103501.
C.C.W. Chang, et al., Moth flame optimization for the maximum power point tracking scheme of photovoltaic system under partial shading conditions, Energy
Rep. 9 (2023) 374–379, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.egyr.2023.09.026.
M.H. Sulaiman, Z. Mustaffa, “An application of improved salp swarm algorithm for optimal power flow solution considering stochastic solar power generation”, e-
Prime - Advances in Electrical Engineering, Electron. Energy 5 (2023), 100195, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.prime.2023.100195.
J. Li, et al., Optimal planning of Electricity-Hydrogen hybrid energy storage system considering demand response in active distribution network, Energy 273 (2023), 127142, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2023.127142.
I˙. Yazıcı and E. K. Yaylacı, “Modified grey wolf optimizer based MPPT design and
experimentally performance evaluations for wind energy systems,” Engineering
Science and Technology, an International Journal, vol. 46, no. March, 2023, doi: 10.1016/j.jestch.2023.101520.
Y. W. Kohol´e, C. A. Wankouo Ngouleu, F. C. V. Fohagui, and G. Tchuen, “Quantitative techno-economic comparison of a photovoltaic/wind hybrid power system with different energy storage technologies for electrification of three remote areas in Cameroon using Cuckoo search algorithm,” Journal of Energy Storage, vol. 68, no. February, 2023, doi: 10.1016/j.est.2023.107783.
H. Zhang, J. Gao, L. Kang, Y. Zhang, L. Wang, K. Wang, State of health estimation of lithium-ion batteries based on modified flower pollination algorithm-temporal convolutional network, Energy 283 (2023), 128742, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. energy.2023.128742.
V. Pandiya Raj, M. Duraipandian, “Energy conservation using PISAE and cross-
layer-based opportunistic routing protocol (CORP) for wireless sensor network, Eng. Sci. Technol. Int. J. 42 (2023), 101411, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. jestch.2023.101411.
“Census of India.” https://censusindia.gov.in/2011census/Listofvillagesandtowns. aspx (accessed Jan. 26, 2023).
“Uttarakhand Tehsilwise and Districtwise Livestock Census.” Accessed: Jan. 29, 2023. [Online]. Available: https://dahd.nic.in/documents/statistics/livestock-
census.
M. Ramesh, R.P. Saini, Dispatch strategies based performance analysis of a hybrid renewable energy system for a remote rural area in India, J. Clean. Prod. 259 (2020), 120697.
A. Chauhan, R.P. Saini, Discrete harmony search based size optimization of Integrated Renewable Energy System for remote rural areas of Uttarakhand state in
India, Renew. Energy 94 (2016) 587–604.
H. Liang, Z. Lee, G. Li, A Calculation Model of Charge and Discharge Capacity of Electric Vehicle Cluster Based on Trip Chain, IEEE Access 8 (2020)
142026–142042, https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2020.3014160.
S. Sachan, S. Deb, S.N. Singh, Different charging infrastructures along with smart charging strategies for electric vehicles, Sustain. Cities Soc. vol. 60, no. May (2020), 102238, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scs.2020.102238.
Q. Wu et al., “Driving Pattern Analysis for Electric Vehicle (EV) Grid Integration Study,” pp. 1–6, 2011, doi: 10.1109/isgteurope.2010.5751581.
M. Li, Y. Ahad, “A novel real-time pricing for optimal DRP, considering price
elasticity, and charging control methods of PHEV integrated with smart grids, using GMO algorithm, Eng. Sci. Technol. Int. J. 47 (2023), 101538, https://doi. org/10.1016/j.jestch.2023.101538.
D.S. Kourkoumpas, G. Benekos, N. Nikolopoulos, S. Karellas, P. Grammelis,
E. Kakaras, A review of key environmental and energy performance indicators for
the case of renewable energy systems when integrated with storage solutions, Appl. Energy 231 (September) (2018) 380–398, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. apenergy.2018.09.043.
N. Singh, T. Mishra, R. Banerjee, Emission inventory for road transport in India in 2020: framework and post facto policy impact assessment, Environ. Sci. Pollut.
Res. (2021) 1–31, https://doi.org/10.1007/s11356-021-17238-3.
N. Alshammari, J. Asumadu, Optimum unit sizing of hybrid renewable energy system utilizing harmony search, Jaya and particle swarm optimization algorithms, Sustain. Cities Soc. 60 (2020), 102255, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. scs.2020.102255.
“CO2 Baseline Database for the Indian Power Sector.” Accessed: May 06, 2023. [Online]. Available: https://cea.nic.in/?lang en&s CO2 database.
D. Weisser, A guide to life-cycle greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions from electric supply technologies, Energy 32 (9) (2007) 1543–1559, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. energy.2007.01.008.
A.H. Elbatran, O.B. Yaakob, Y.M. Ahmed, H.M. Shabara, Operation, performance and economic analysis of low head micro-hydropower turbines for rural and
remote areas: A review, Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 43 (2015) 40–50, https://doi. org/10.1016/j.rser.2014.11.045.
A. Maleki, Design and optimization of autonomous solar-wind-reverse osmosis desalination systems coupling battery and hydrogen energy storage by an improved bee algorithm, Desalination 435 (March) (2018), https://doi.org/ 10.1016/j.desal.2017.05.034.
R. Mishra, S.K. Chaulya, G.M. Prasad, S.K. Mandal, G. Banerjee, Design of a low cost, smart and stand-alone PV cold storage system using a domestic split air conditioner, J. Stored Prod. Res. 89 (2020), 101720, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. jspr.2020.101720.
