Egyptian Informatics Journal 24 (2023) 257–263











Study on trust evaluation and service selection for Service-Oriented E- Commerce systems in IoT environments
Xu Wu ⇑,a,b, Junbin Liang a
a School of Computer, Electronics and Information, Guangxi University, University East Road, Nanning 530000, China
b School of information science and technology, Hainan Normal University, Longkun South Road, Haikou 571158, China



a r t i c l e  i n f o 

Article history:
Received 3 April 2022
Revised 10 March 2023
Accepted 19 March 2023
Available online 1 April 2023

Keywords:
Trust computing Service selection Internet of Things
E-Commerce systems
a b s t r a c t 

Trust-based service management in IoT systems, a promising research direction provides an intelligent solution for the identification of appropriate and trustworthy service providers from a huge of number smart nodes providing similar services. An efficient trust-based service ranking scheme (TBSRS) is pro- posed. The novelty of our design lies in providing accurate trust evaluation and service ranking in the absence of assessment data or presence of untrustworthiness recommendations. TBSRS also addresses the issue about the trustworthiness evaluation of a new service. Service providers are ranking based on the binary fruit fly optimization algorithm in TBSRS. The experimental results demonstrate desirable convergence, accuracy, and resiliency properties of TBSRS, and also demonstrate that TBSRS outperforms Adaptive IoT Trust and IoT-HiTrust in terms of the precision of service selection and other a few perfor- mance metrics.
© 2023 THE AUTHORS. Published by Elsevier BV on behalf of Faculty of Computers and Artificial Intel-
ligence, Cairo University. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creative-
commons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).





Introduction

As there are many E-Commerce Systems which can provide the similar services, it is hard for the nodes to identify the appropriate and trustworthy service providers from these similar service alter- natives. Applying a trust model to the study of service selection has been proved to be an effective approach. Trustworthiness of nodes is considered as a service quality metric which reflects the perfor- mance characteristics of the services. The approach helps a service requester to decide whether the service provided is trustworthy or not.
Most of trust based service selection approaches assess the trustworthiness of service providers based on the direct service experiences or indirect recommendations. In general, if a node has not enough interaction experiences with service providers, then recommendations would be needed for decision making. These recommendations may include a number of untrustworthy or unfair users’ feedbacks. Various recommendation filtering meth- ods have been proposed in the area. One method is to use trust threshold to filter untrustworthy recommendations [1–3]. How- ever, it neglects the most critical service requirements of requester. This greatly impacts on the results of recommendation. Another

* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: xrdz2006@163.com (X. Wu).
method is to compute social similarity to filter untrustworthy rec- ommendations [4–7]. But it is impractical to build an accurate social network graph for all nodes in an IoT network where the number of nodes is too large, and many nodes often join in or leave the network due to their mobility.
How to evaluate the trustworthiness of a new services in Service-Oriented E-Commerce Systems. For a new service, it is dif- ficult to evaluate the trustworthiness due to data sparsity. To the best of our knowledge, one possible solution used by most of trust models is to assign an initial trust value to the new service. How- ever, this leads to another problem how to determine the initial trust value. In this paper, we propose an efficient trust-based ser- vice ranking scheme given as TBSRS which can provide accurate trust evaluation and service ranking in the absence of assessment data or presence of untrustworthiness recommendations. The key contributions of this paper are as follows:
1) A service requirement similarity algorithm based on distance correlation coefficient was proposed for filtering out the recom- menders who have a low similarity with the service requester; 2) A novel trust evaluation algorithm is proposed based on combining subjective and objective data. The algorithm solves trustworthi- ness assessment problem of a new service; 3) A service ranking method is proposed based on the binary fruit fly optimization algo- rithm, which provides the optimal ranking for service providers by


https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eij.2023.03.003
1110-8665/© 2023 THE AUTHORS. Published by Elsevier BV on behalf of Faculty of Computers and Artificial Intelligence, Cairo University. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).



considering both service provider’s trustworthiness and service requester’s benefit.
The remainder of the paper is arranged as follows: Section II discusses the previous work. The proposed scheme TBSRS is pre- sented in Section III. In Section IV, we conduct extensive experi- ments to evaluate the proposed scheme. Conclusions and our future work are discussed in Section V.

Related work

With the development of IoT technology, more and more E- Commerce applications are running on top of it, such as smart health, smart car, smart home and smart city [9,10]. A large of number smart nodes can request and provide these similar appli- cations on behalf of the owners. In such a scenario, it is crucial to select the appropriate and trustworthy service providers for max- imally satisfying the service requester. Trust is viewed as an effec- tive method for selecting trustworthy service providers [11,12,18]. A noteworthy point is that the traditional trust models for P2P net- works, social networks and service computing system cannot be directly applied for service selection in IoT systems due a huge number of IoT nodes, varied user requirements and complex con- text environments [13]. Designing an effective and efficient trust
computation method is still an urgent and important issue in
(SOEs) consisting of service providers (SPs) and service requesters (SRs). In this SOE application, TBSRS is based on an assumed sce- nario, where a SR (service requester) requests a service, and multi- ple SPs (service providers) with similar service quality are competing for the requested service. The system framework is shown in Fig. 1. The entire framework of TBSRS comprises of three components, namely (i) Filtering component, (ii) Trustworthiness assessment component, and (iii) Ranking component.
Filtering component
The filtering progress includes two steps:
Step one: Filtering based on service requirement similarity.
Service requirement is a subject description of user own idea about the most critical metrics of service performance. All features of requirement are be normalized to the interval [0,1]. Suppose
S = {si|i ∈ {1, ..., m}} is the set of m services. N = nj|j ∈ {1, ..., p}
is the set of p nodes. F = Fk|k ∈ {1, ..., l} is the set of l features of service requirement. Fk represents the kth feature value of nj’s
i ∈ {1, ..., m},j ∈ {1, ..., p} and k ∈ {1, ..., l}. According to different service	requirement	with	service	si,	where features (‘‘benefit” or ‘‘cost”), when Fk –, The normalized feature
value Fk is given by:
8> Fkj —Fk	k

i,
F	Fk
min
—Fk
i,j
is benefit
1

Service-Oriented E-Commerce Systems.
Ing-Ray Chen et al. [8] propose a distributed IoT trust manage-


k
i,j
max
k
>:  max


min	( )
i,j , F is cos t

ommendation collecting issue in Adaptive IoT Trust, Ing-Ray Chen et al. propose a 3-tier cloud-cloudlet device hierarchical trust- based service management protocol called IoT-HiTrust [5], where recommendations are acquired in the cloud. Although IoT- HiTrust is a scalable solution, the trustworthiness computation of
service providers still must rely on the existence of enough friend-
where Fk and Fk are the minimum and maximum features val- ues, respectively. To support service selection, multiple features are composed on the basis of their weights Fi,j is the composite feature value, and it is defined as:
l

ship social relationship data in nature. Yating Wang et al. [1] pro- pose a context-aware trust management model for service- oriented IoT networks. This paper pays attention to predict the probability of making satisfactory service instead of service qual-
Fi,j =	wk × Fk
k=1
where (wk wk ∈ [0, 1] Pl
(2)
wk = 1)is the weight of the kth feature.

ity. Al-Hamadi Hamid et al. [6] discuss the trust management prob- lem in a smart service community. The trustworthiness of service providers is assessed based on service requester’s own experiences
and other witnesses’ experiences. Zhiting Lin et al. [2] propose a
Pearson Correlation Coefficient (PPC) [16], is used to measure the user similarities. Given the value Fi,j and Fi,c, the similarity
Fsim(j,c) between nj and nc is obtained based on PPC formula:

comprehensive model of trust for social IoT. Relative to [1,4-6,8],
F
Psi ∈Sj,c
—
Fi,j — Fj	F
—
i,c — Fc
3)

the work in [2] focuses on using objective assessment data to eval-
sim( j,c) = sﬃﬃPﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ—ﬃﬃﬃ ﬃﬃﬃ2ﬃﬃsﬃﬃPﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ—ﬃﬃﬃ ﬃﬃﬃ2ﬃﬃ	(

uate the trustworthiness of service providers. Li et al. [14] propose a trust model to identify trusted service providers in a dynamic IoT environment. The trust of service providers was evaluated based
si ∈Sj,c
—	—
Fi,j — Fj
si ∈Sj,c
Fi,c — Fc

on the objective historical information relating to a service’s previ- ous negotiations and its monitored run-time performance. Wang et al. propose a method of Integrating modified cuckoo algorithm and creditability evaluation for QoS-aware service composition [15]. In an open Internet environment, services attribute values will dynamically change along with the different context environ- ments, so the service selection methods based on service attribute values are still have limitations. Binsi et al. [21] propose a trust inference model for service recommendation in IoT. The model incorporated the direct and indirect subjective data for rating pred- ication. Our work is inspired by the above existing research works, different from these methods, our work focuses on providing accu- rate trust evaluation and service ranking in the absence of assess- ment data or presence of untrustworthiness recommendations.

System model

The section provides the details about the proposed scheme. TBSRS is proposed for Service-Oriented E-Commerce Systems
where Fj and Fc are average feature values of nj and nc respectively.
each service requester is used. Only when the similarity Fsim( j,c) is In this paper, a dynamic threshold d which differs with respect to bigger than the threshold d, the recommendation from nc can enter
the step two.
Step  two:  Filtering  based  on  the  trustworthiness  of recommender.
To filter out untrustworthiness recommendations from step
one, a threshold parameter Tth is used. Only when nc’s trustworthi-
ness is bigger than the threshold parameter Tth, its recommenda- tions will be accepted.
Trustworthiness assessment component
The details of trustworthiness assessment are expressed in the following:
Subjective evaluation
The subjective trustworthiness of SPs reflects SR’s subjective confidence level of service.
It is assumed that a service si provided by nq has n indirect rec- ommendations from filtering component, which is denoted as





Fig. 1. The system framework of TBSRS.


R1, R2, ..., Rn(Rh ∈ [0, 1]). Bayesian estimation of the trust value of a service is used to evaluate the subjective trustworthiness of nq
appearing in the xth level. Similar to the literature [19], we choose

a Dirichlet prior over e, i.e., p →e  = Dir(b1, ..., bX ). According to the

Pn  Rh + nwj
property of the Dirichlet distribution, the posterior assessment e

q,i	2n

j
Yvx + bx

where wq,i denotes the prior direct service experiences of requester
E(e ) = 	q,i	
(7)

j	x	PX
b + PX+1Yvx

is set to 0, that is to say, the subjective trustworthiness value
Tsubjective is obtained only based on the recommendations.
Objective evaluation
The objective trustworthiness is to predict the probability of completing its commitment of a service provider by comparing the difference between actual provisioned value and the promised
Equation (8) shows the probability of a certain attribute appears in the xth trust level. The objective trustworthiness value of Qv  is
denoted as the overall probability of excellent, good, and satisfac- tory level which is given by:
Tobjective = X E(e )	(8)

value.
It is assumed that v ∈ {1, ..., V }. Let Qv

and Qv

present nq’s
v
q,i
x
x=1

actual provisioned value and the promised value about the vth attri-	Tobjective is the composite trustworthiness of nq’s multiple attributes

bute Qv
for service si. Yv
is denoted as nq’s service completing
for service si, and it is defined as the objective trustworthiness value

extent of Qv . The bigger Yv
is, the better service completing extent.
of service provider nq for service si:

q,i	q,i
Yv is calculated as follows:	V

8	Tobjective = X cv Tobjective
(9)

q,i =	Qv' —Qv''
>
(	where c
(c ∈ [0, 1] PV
c = 1X) is the weight of Qv .

where there are two types of service attributes: benefit and cost. Based on Yv , the objective trustworthiness level for the vth attribute is defined as five levels [19]:
The overall trustworthiness of a SP can be evaluated by aggre- gating both subjective trustworthiness and objective trustworthiness:

Tq,i
jTsubjective + 1 — j Tobjective
(10)

8>  1 (excellent)	if 0.5 6 Yv < 1
=	q,i
(	) q,i

2 (good)	if 0 < Yv < 0.5
Lv = <	3 (satisfactory)	if Yv = 0
(6)
The tunable parameter j is used to balance objective and sub-
jective trustworthiness.

4 (bad)	if — 0.5 6 Yv < 0
i	q,i
q,i

q,i
v
q,i
Here, Bayes learning theory is applied to measure the objective
above Equations will be zero due to the data sparsity problem. It is obviously unfair for a new service. Therefore, to overcome the data sparsity problem, our TBSRS will infer the trustworthiness

T	based on the previous services provided by n . It is assumed

v	—→v
n v1 v2
vX o
q,i	q
v

the service completing extent information for the attribute Qv ,
attribute,v ∈ {1, ..., V }. If the attribute Qv
is included in the previ-

where X is the number of levels. YvX represents the times of Qv
ous service se and is the gth attribute of se, that is to say Qv
and Qg

q,i
q,i
q,i
q,e



is the same attribute. The objective trustworthiness value of Qv
position of the fruit fly with high fitness value and the position is

can be inferred as Tobjective. If the attribute Qv
is not included in
a seed in the next iteration. The fitness of each fruit fly is calculated

g q,e
q,4
with Equation (11).

the previous services, the objective trustworthiness value of Qv
can be given as 0.5. For example, service s4 is a new service, which has three attributes:Q 1 , Q 2  and Q 3 . Their weights are 0.2, 0.6
fitness = rTp,i + (1 — r)Gj,i	(11)

q,4
q,4
q,4
where Tp
denotes the trustworthiness of service provider nq for

and 0.2, respectively. Q 1  is included in the previous experienced
,i
the service si. r is a weight value. Gj,i denotes the gain of a service

service s1 and trustworthiness in service s1 is 0.6. Q 2
is included
requester n using the service provided by n . In experimental sec-

q,4	j	q
in the previous experienced service s2 and trustworthiness in ser-	tion, the gain of a service requester is randomly set as a value of

vice s1 is 0.8. Q 3  isn’t included in the previous experienced ser-
vices, so its trustworthiness is set to 0.5. Based on the above inferring	method,	the	trustworthiness	Tq,4	is:
0.6 × 0.2 + 0.8 × 0.6 + 0.5 × 0.2 = 0.7.
Ranking component
To rank the trustworthy service providers, our scheme uses the binary fruit fly optimization algorithm [20] shown in Fig. 2. The process includes two steps: Initialization and Iteration.
Step one:
The algorithm firstly initializes population size (popsize ), maxi- mum number of generations (genmax), local best smell concentra-
tion (smellbest), global best smell concentration (gsmellbest), best position (posbest), global best position (gposbest), fitness value (fitness) and random position of ‘‘m” fruit flies with appropriate values, shown from line 1 to line 12. The position of a certain fruit fly is denoted as ‘‘z” tuple vectors. ‘‘z” is the number of trustworthy service providers. If the binary position of fruit fly js  is
(0, 0, 1, 1, 0, 0), it shows n3, n4 are present and n1, n2, n5, n6 are
absent on the position. Global best position (gposbest) stores the
[0,1].
Step two:
The random position in the current iteration is generated in the initialization step. Then, the fitness value of each fruit fly is evalu- ated based on current position. smellbest and posbest are updated with the fitness value and position of the fruit fly with high fitness value respectively. The new smellbest is compared with the last
gsmellbest. If smellbest>gsmellbest, then gsmellbest← smellbest ; gposbest←posbest. Subsequently, the new gsmellbest and gposbest are set as a seed for the next generation. In order to obtain the optimal
service ranking result, the algorithm will check whether the value of fitness is 1 or not, shown from line 13 to line 23. In addition, if the current global best solution is the same with the solution from the last iteration, the Equation (12) [12] will be used to update the position of fruit flies, shown from line 24 to line 26.
p(t + 1) = Mutation(p(t))	(12)
tions   (fitness  =  1   or   genmax)   is   met. The iteration process is completed until one of the two condi-




Fig. 2. The binary fruit fly optimization algorithm.



Experimental analysis

Experiment setup

We simulate a service-oriented network system with Nn nodes. The experimental data come from realistic dataset (Epinions Trust Network Datasets). We slight modify them in the experi- ments. Table 1 lists the parameters and their values/ ranges used
in the performance validation.

Performance metrics

The main performance metrics are shown as follows:
The difference between predicted trust value and actual trust value: The smaller the difference, the higher accuracy of trustworthiness computation.
The percentage of malicious nodes selected as SPs for a good SR: The smaller the number, the higher the capacity of filter- ing out malicious recommendations. The percentage is expressed as follows:
tation method. Two approaches and our TBSRS are both trust-based service selection methods. In addition, the two approaches outper- form existing trust-based service selection ones for SOEs.

Performance validation

TBSRS performance
In the first experiment, the trustworthiness of a malicious SP and a good SP is calculated by our TBSRS from the perspective of a good SR as time progresses. Fig. 3 shows the experimental results. When the experiment begins, the trustworthiness of malicious SP and good SP goes down and rises up, respectively. The main reason is that TBSRS effectively filter out untrustworthy assessment data based on the proposed recommendation filtering algorithm.
In the second experiment, the trust difference of a SP’s pre- dicted trustworthiness and the actual trustworthiness is measured from the perspective of a good SR as time progresses. Fig. 4 shows the experimental results. One can observe that the trust difference firstly goes down slowly, then goes down quickly, finally converges to 0. The main reason is that when the experiments start, the trust-


Pm,sp
=  Nm,sp  × 100%	(13)
worthiness assessment data is sparse in which case the malicious recommendations would have a great influence on the trustwor- thiness computation, so the predicted trustworthiness only slowly

Nsp is the number of SPs selected to provide service for a good SR.
Nm,sp is the number of malicious nodes in Nsp.
The precision of service selection: The bigger the number, the higher the precision of service selection. The precision is expressed as follows:
precision = Nsatisfaction × 100%	(14)
Nsp is the number of SPs selected to provide service for a good SR.
Nsatisfaction is in Nsp, and it is the number of SPs providing the satisfied service.
The percentage of good nodes providing new service selected as SPs for a good SR: The bigger the number, the higher the capacity of assessing a new service. The percentage is expressed as follows:
closes to the actually trustworthiness. As time passes, more trust- worthy assessment date is gathered in which case the malicious recommendations would have a little influence on the trustworthi- ness computation, so the predicted trustworthiness quickly closes to the actually trustworthiness until it is equal to the actual trust- worthiness. The third experiment shows the impact of different value of Similarity weight factor k on the precision of service selec- tion. Top-13% SPs are selected in the experiment. The results are shown in Fig. 5. We are able to see that when k equals to 0.5, the value of precision of service selection reaches the highest point under the same simulation condition. Thus, we can get the conclu-
tion        of        k      =      0.5. sion that the algorithm can achieve better result under the condi-

Comparative analysis

P	 Nsp,new 

100
The first experiment compares the three methods in selecting
15

sp,new =
Nnew	×
%	(  )
malicious nodes as SPs for a good SR. Fig. 6 shows the percentage of malicious SPs selected by a good SR as time progresses. The pink

Nnew is the number of good nodes providing new service.Nsp,new is
the number of good nodes providing new service selected as SPs in Nnew. The performance of our TBSRS is compared against: Adap- tive IoT Trust [17] and IoT-HiTrust [3]. The reason we select Adap- tive IoT Trust and IoT-HiTrust is that their SP’s trustworthiness evaluation method is similar with our SP’s trustworthiness compu-


Table 1
Parameter list for performance evaluation.

Symbols  Meaning	Default  Range


Nn	Number of nodes	100	[50–300]
Na	Number of service attributes	3	[1–5]
Ns	Number of service types	2	[2–5] Nf	Number of user requirement’s feature	3	[2–5] Tq,i	Initial trustworthiness of any node	0.5	[0,1] Gj,i	Initial gain of any node	0.5	[0,1]
i	Service request rate	5 / hr	[2–10]
Pm	Percentage of malicious nodes	10%	[10%-70%]
k	Similarity weight factor	0.5	[0–1]
curve expresses Adaptive IoT Trust. The green curve expresses IoT- HiTrust. The blue curve expresses our TBSRS. The trustworthiness of all SPs is initially set to 0.5, so malicious SRs initially could have the chances selected as SPs to provide the service. Under our TBSRS, the percentage of malicious nodes selected is the lowest in comparison with Adaptive IoT Trust and IoT-HiTrust.
The second experiment compares the three methods in the pre- cision of service selection. The Top-1%, Top-4%, Top-7%, Top-10% and Top-13% SPs are selected respectively and the selection results by three methods will be compared and shown in Fig. 7. One can observe that TBSRS outperforms both Adaptive IoT Trust and IoT- HiTrust in terms of the precision performance metric of service




j	Weight factor of objective and subjective trustworthiness
r	Weight factor of trustworthiness and
gain
0.5	[0–1]

0.5	[0–1]

Nsc	Number of selected candidate SPs	Top-4%  [Top-1%-
Top-13%]	Fig. 3. Trustworthiness of a good SP and a malicious SP vs. time.



 	
	

Fig. 4. Trust difference of a SP’s predicted trustworthiness and the actual trustworthiness.

Fig. 8. Percentage of good nodes providing new service selected for service over time under Adaptive IoT Trust, IoT-HiTrust and TBSRS.














Fig. 5. The influence of k on precision of service selection.



Fig. 6. Percentage of malicious nodes selected for service over time under Adaptive IoT Trust, IoT-HiTrust and TBSRS.


Fig. 7. The precision of service selection under Adaptive IoT Trust, IoT-HiTrust and TBSRS.

selection. In addition, when selecting the top-13% candidate SPs, TBSRS has a very high precision, which is close to 100%. This obser- vation implies that, Top-13% candidate SPs are recommended by us to the SR.



Fig. 9. The influence of Pm on precision of service selection.


The third experiment compares the three methods in the per- centage of good nodes providing new service selected as SPs. The experimental results are shown in Fig. 8.
One can observe that TBSRS outperforms both Adaptive IoT Trust and IoT-HiTrust in terms of the percentage of good nodes providing new service selected as SPs. The experiments results show that more new services are selected by SRs due the accurate trustworthiness of new service in TBSRS as time processes. The fourth experiment shows the impact of different value of Percent- age of malicious nodes Pm on the precision of service selection. Top-13% SPs are selected in the experiment.
One again observes that TBSRS outperforms Adaptive IoT Trust and IoT-HiTrust. An important observation from Fig. 9 is that, even when malicious recommenders add to 70%, the precision of service selection of TBSRS keep also remarkably more than 0.75. The rea- son is that our TBSRS provides the optimal ranking for SPs by con- sidering both service provider’s trustworthiness and service requester’s benefit.

Conclusion

In the paper, an efficient trust-based service ranking scheme (TBSRS) is proposed for providing accurate trust evaluation and service ranking in the absence of assessment data or presence of untrustworthiness recommendations. The entire framework of TBSRS comprises of three components, namely (i) Filtering compo- nent (ii) Trustworthiness assessment component (iii) Ranking component. The convergence, accuracy and resiliency properties of TBSRS is analyzed and validated via simulation. A comparative analysis of TBSRS is also performed against Adaptive IoT Trust and IoT-HiTrust. The experimental results validate by simulation demonstrate that TBSRS outperforms these existing approaches in terms of the precision of service selection and other a few per- formance metrics. TBSRS will be applied to mobile social IoT appli-



cations, where the mobility of nodes is considered. In service rank- ing component, how to measure the gain of a service requester is not discussed in our paper, so it will be furtherly researched. Lastly, TBSRS will be further tested in complicated multi-domain scenar- ios, and will extend our work in terms of dealing with more sophis- ticated attack behaviors such as opportunistic, collusion, and insidious attacks.

Declaration of Competing Interest

The authors declare that they have no known competing finan- cial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

Acknowledgment

The work in this paper has been supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China (62062006, 71501156, 62062008, 62067001, 61762008), Natural Science Basis Research Plan in Guangxi Province of China (2018JJA170028, 2019JJA170045, 2018JJA170194), Special Funds of Guangxi Bagui Scholars and National Key Research and Development Program of China (2018YFB1404404).

References

Yating Wang, Ing-Ray Chen, Jin-Hee Cho, et al., ‘‘CATrust: Context-Aware Trust Management for Service-Oriented Ad Hoc Networks, IEEE Trans Services Comput 2018; 11(6): 908–221.
Lin Z, Dong L. Clarifying trust in social internet of things. IEEE Trans Knowl Data Eng 2018;30(2):234–48.
Cho JH, Swami A, Chen I-R. Modeling and analysis of trust management with trust chain optimization in mobile Ad hoc networks. J Netw Comput Appl 2012;35(3):1001–12.
Nitti M, Girau R, Atzori L. Trustworthiness management in the social Internet of Things. IEEE Trans Knowl Data Manag 2014;26(5):1253–66.
Chen I-R, Guo J, et al. Trust-based service management for mobile cloud IoT systems. IEEE Trans Netw Service Manage 2019;16(1):246–63.
Hamid A-H, Chen I-R, Cho JH. Trust management of smart service communities. IEEE Access 2019. doi: https://doi.org/10.1109/ ACCESS.2019.2901023.
Wu X, Cheng B, Chen J. Collaborative filtering service recommendation based on a novel similarity computation method. IEEE Trans Services Comput 2017;10(3):352–65.
Chen IR, Guo J, Bao F. Trust management for SOA-based IoT and its application to service composition. IEEE Trans Services Comput 2016;9(3):482–95.
Guo J, Chen I-R, Tsai JJP. A survey of trust computation models for Internet of Things systems. Comput Commun 2017;97:1–14.
Wang Y, Chen IR, Cho JH, Swami A, Chan K. Trust-based service composi- tion and binding with multiple objective optimization in service-oriented mo- bile Ad Hoc networks. IEEE Trans Serv Comput 2016. doi: https://doi.org/10.1109/ TSC.2015.2491285. in press.
Li YY, Huang YS, et al. Service selection mechanisms in the Internet of Things (IoT): a systematic and comprehensive study. Clust Comput 2020;23:1163–83.
Adewuyi AA, Cheng H, Shi Q, Cao J, Wang X, Zhou B. SC-TRUST: a dynamic model for trustworthy service composition in the internet of things. IEEE Internet Things J 2022;9(5):3298–312.
Xia H, Li Z, Zheng Y, Liu A, Choi Y, Sekiya H. A novel lightweight subjective trust inference framework in MANETs. IEEE Trans Sustain Comput doi: 10.1109/ TSUSC.2018.2817219.
Fan L, Gary W, et al. A trust model for SLA negotiation candidates selection in a dynamic IoT environment. IEEE Trans Services Comput 2022;15(5):2565–78.
Wang H, Yang D, et al. Integrating modified cuckoo algorithm and creditability evaluation for QoS-aware service composition. Knowl-Based Syst 2019;140:64–81.
Adomavicius G, Zan H, Tuzhilin A. Personalization and recommender systems. INFORMS Tutorials Operations Res 2014;14(1):55–107.
Ding S, Xia CY, Zhou KL, Yang SL, Shang JS. Decision support for personalized cloud service selection through multi-attribute trustworthiness evaluation. PLoS One 2014;9(6):e97762. doi: https://doi.org/10.1371/journal. pone.0097762. PMID: 24972237.
Viriyasitavat W, Xu LD, Bi ZM. User-oriented selections of validators for trust of internet-of thing services. IEEE Trans Ind Inform 2022;18:4859–67.
Wang HB, Yang DR, Yu Q, Ta Y. Integrating modified cuckoo algorithm and creditability evaluation for QoS-aware service composition. Knowl-Based Syst 2018;140:64–81.
Shen L, Chen H, Yu Z, Kang W, Zhang B, Li H, Yang B, Liu D. Evolving support vector machines using fruit fly optimization for medical data classification. Knowl-Based Syst 2016;96:61–75. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.knosys.2016. 01.002.
Cai B, Li XY, et al. A reliable and lightweight trust inference model for service recommendation in SIoT. IEEE Internet Things J 2022;9(13):10988–1003.
