Petri nets are commonly used as a formalism for dealing with concurrent systems. Dynamic logics (DL) are a group of modal logics where each modality corresponds to a program. This paper introduces a resolution-based technique for Petri-PDL, which is a DL in which programs are replaced by Petri nets. The method includes a procedure for converting any Petri-PDL formula into a normal form, a set of resolution-based inference rules, examples of the method's application, and a discussion on its soundness and completeness.

The axiomatisation of Petri-PDL is demonstrated to be sound and complete, and the problem of satisfiability is shown to be decidable. While other systems for reasoning about the properties and behavior of Petri nets have been proposed in the literature, they lack some of these desirable properties. For example, the trace theory is incomplete and undecidable. Other systems may retain these properties, but reasoning can only be carried out after translating Petri nets into the target language. By embedding Petri nets as part of the language, Petri-PDL provides a natural way of specifying complex systems and the properties to be verified at no extra cost.

This paper presents a resolution-based calculus for addressing the (un)satisfiability problem in Petri-PDL, as an initial step towards automating proofs for Petri-PDL. The method employs a clausal approach, translating a formula to be proved unsatisfiable into a normal form and applying a set of resolution-based inference rules to different contexts. Correctness results are briefly discussed, and examples are provided.

The paper is organized as follows. The basics of marked Petri nets are explained in the next section. Section 3 introduces the syntax, semantics, and the axiomatisation of Petri-PDL. Section 4 presents the resolution-based method for Petri-PDL, including the transformation into normal form, the inference rules, main results, and examples. Conclusions and future work are provided in Section 5.

The paper presents a sound resolution-based method for proving the satisfiability of formulae in Petri-PDL, a logic system that leverages the graphical interpretation of Petri nets within a known decidable and complete fragment. The resolution method is applied to formulae in Petri-PDL after converting them into anti-prenex normal form (APNF), with simplification applied whenever possible. The method has been proved to be sound and terminating, with optimal running time for testing satisfiability of a set of clauses. Future work includes investigating its completeness, designing strategies for the method, implementing an automatic theorem-prover, and extending the method to DS3, a logic system that deals with stochastic Petri nets.