The assessment of techniques to counter timing side-channel attacks (TSCA-CTS) in the context of IoT platforms with various Multi-Processor System on Chip (MPSoC) architectures poses a multi-criteria decision-making (MCDM) problem. Prioritizing the most effective countermeasure technique against timing side-channel attacks requires employing an efficient MCDM ranking technique. The Fermatean by Fuzzy Decision Opinion Score Method (F-FDOSM) is identified as the most suitable approach for this purpose. However, the FDOSM method necessitates the weighting of criteria before the ranking process. To address this challenge, the Criteria-Importance through Inter-Criteria Correlation (CRITIC) technique can be employed as an effective MCDM weighting technique to provide explicit weights for a set of criteria with no inconsistency.

The results of CRITIC weighting indicate that the criterion of MPSoC Network-on-Chip (NOC) throughput (packets per clock) holds the highest weight, while latency (clock per cycle) carries the least weight. Furthermore, the Fermatean-FDOSM-based group ranking demonstrates that the adaptive routing countermeasure technique scores highest compared to the combined with separate interface hybrid approach. The priority ranks of TSCA-CTS were systematically determined and confirmed by strong correlation results across ten criterion weight values. A comparison with recent studies supports the feasibility of the proposed framework.

MPSoCs are increasingly vulnerable to hardware and software attacks, posing significant threats to critical applications and resource sharing. While attacks on MPSoCs can occur at computational and communication levels, exploring defensive approaches and countermeasure techniques is imperative to mitigate potential data security risks posed by side-channel attacks, specifically TSCAs.

The remainder of the study is organized as follows: Section 2 presents a literature review on TSCAs in the context of MPSoCs-based IoT, studies on FDOSM, and CRITIC methods. Section 3 provides an overview of the suggested methodology, while Section 4 discusses the study results from applying CRITIC criteria weighting and Fermatean-FDOSM alternative ranking methods. Finally, Section 5 concludes the study.

The literature review is divided into three subsections. The first part reviews current research on TSCAs and countermeasure techniques in the context of MPSoCs of IoT, particularly focusing on IP core caches and NOCs. The second part concentrates on FDOSM, while the last section discusses recent studies related to FFSS.

Two main categories, traffic partitioning and route randomization, are employed to counter TSCAs in the context of MPSoCs. Traffic partitioning aims to prevent interference between secure and non-secure applications, and it may be achieved by statically dividing NOC resources spatially or temporally. However, sub-optimal solutions may degrade performance.

Furthermore, a benchmarking framework for evaluating network congestion control methods using FDOSM with the support of six experts has been developed, and a model for smart electronic-tourism applications using FDOSM with fuzzy weighted approach has been supported by eleven expert panels.

In the validation of group decision-making evaluation results, the procedure of validation according to previous studies was followed. To justify the evaluation results of TSCA-CTS, the validation process involved dividing the countermeasure techniques into two groups and aggregating all opinion matrices to produce a unified opinion matrix.