In this research, we propose an adaptive algorithm with variable tap-length for diffusion networks. This algorithm allows nodes within the network to exchange information without a central fusion center and utilize both exchanged information and their local observations to make individual estimations. By introducing a fractional tap-length solution and leveraging the fully distributed structure of networks, we address estimation problems related to tap-length and tap-weights. The adaptive tap-length structure of our algorithm enables the networks to reduce communication energy and network resources, as confirmed by simulation results demonstrating its convergence properties.

Traditionally, in distributed adaptive algorithms, the tap-length of the adaptive filter at each node is assumed to be a fixed value. However, when the tap-length is unknown or variable, it creates the tap-length estimation problem for distributed networks. To address this issue, we propose an incremental adaptive algorithm with a fractional tap-length solution. This algorithm is based on incremental learning over a distributed network, where a hamiltonian cycle is built to facilitate communication between nodes at each iteration. To address the tap-length estimation problem within networks with a fully distributed structure, we introduce the fractional tap-length solution, allowing each node to communicate with its neighbors and experience the effect of the entire network. We utilize the fractional solution in the proposed distributed variable tap-length algorithm to resolve both tap-length and tap weights estimation problems in a distributed diffusion network. We provide performance analysis for the new algorithm and present simulation results to confirm its convergence properties.

The remainder of this paper is organized into four main sections. Section 2 outlines the estimation problem that motivates the formulation of the proposed algorithm. Section 3 analyzes the steady-state performance of the algorithm, while Section 4 presents simulation results that validate the analysis. Finally, in Section 5, we draw conclusions based on our findings.

We consider a network with n nodes distributed over an area, where direct communication between two nodes defines a connection. Each node is included in its own neighborhood, consisting of all nodes with which it can communicate directly, including itself. The total number of neighbors of node k is denoted by nk. At each instant i, every node k receives.

In summary, we have presented a distributed variable tap-length algorithm for diffusion networks that exploits the fractional tap-length solution, estimation theory, and diffusion LMS distributed adaptive algorithm. Our analysis of the algorithm's performance, along with simulation results, aligns well with the theoretical findings.