The main-memory database (MMDB) is a database management system that relies primarily on main-memory for data storage, in contrast to systems that use disk storage. Main-memory databases are faster than disk-based databases due to simpler optimization algorithms and fewer CPU instructions required for data access. Recent increases in main-memory size have led to more prevalent use of databases that store the entire database in memory. However, main memory is still a limited and costly resource compared to disk storage. Consequently, recent research aims to improve main-memory storage optimization to increase system performance and cost efficiency.

One major focus of current research is to separate data into "hot" (active) and "cold" (inactive) categories, keeping hot data in main memory and moving cold data to a cheaper storage option. The level of granularity at which data is classified as hot or cold varies among existing techniques, with some databases classifying data at the tuple level and others at the page level.

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 surveys recent related work, Section 3 introduces the proposed hybrid filtering approach, Section 4 presents a detailed case study to illustrate the workflow of the proposed approach, Section 5 reports the experimental evaluation of the proposed approach, and Section 6 concludes the paper.

Hardware advancements have led to decreasing main-memory prices, making it economically feasible to use main-memory as the primary data store for DBMS, a key characteristic of MMDBs. Recent research efforts are focused on improving storage in MMDBs.

One approach stores the primary copy of the data on disk and then uses a hybrid filtering (HF) concept. However, it applies HF and vertical filtering (VF) on disk and then moves the hot data into an in-memory columnar store. In contrast, the proposed hybrid filtering approach applies HF at the level of data resident in main memory, with a focus on classifying cold and hot data at the same level of granularity as the data is accessed.

The novel hybrid filtering approach (HFA) is based on a row store main-memory database, with the primary copy of data entirely stored in main memory. HFA horizontally filters the data by hot tuples and then vertically filters the data by hot columns.

The offline phase consists of three modules, where periodic offline analysis is run to define hot and cold attributes in the log files and update the hot/cold attributes list. The duration of this analysis is predefined by the system administration based on either time (number of months) or database workload (number of queries).