We believe, as Pullum and Scholz argue, that model-theoretic approaches to syntax are an essential aspect of the formal analysis of natural language formalisms. In this paper, we aim to address the limitations posed by the limited expressive power of MSO by adopting a two-step model-theoretic approach. We use tree adjoining grammar (TAG) as a representative mildly context-sensitive formalism for natural languages to illustrate our proposal for a denotational approach to a generative, non-context-free formalism.

Initial trees are labeled such that all interior nodes (including the root node) are marked with nonterminals, and all nodes on the frontier are labeled with terminal or nonterminal symbols, with the nonterminals marked for substitution. The same holds for the auxiliary trees, with the exception of one distinguished leaf node labeled with the same nonterminal as the root node, which is referred to as the foot node. Additionally, nodes can be marked to allow or forbid adjunction. For simplicity, nodes where no adjunction is allowed are indicated by placing a bar on top of them.

From an algebraic perspective, we can extend from strings to trees using the technique of generalizing from unary to multiary operators. This allows for a natural extension of grammars working on strings to grammars working on trees, thus providing a counterpart to the Chomsky hierarchy: regular tree grammars correspond to regular grammars, and context-free tree grammars correspond to context-free grammars.

Viewing grammars as mechanisms for performing local transformations on trees, the central component of a grammar is a finite set of productions, where each production is a pair of trees. These productions determine a binary relation on trees such that two trees stand in that relation if one is the result of a local transformation on the other according to the production rules. These transformation rules can involve the substitution of single-node trees by complex symbols or the rewriting of auxiliary variables as elements of a tree algebra. The process of replacing null-ary variables by trees is analogous to the rewriting of nonterminal auxiliary symbols in context-free string grammars.

The process of lifting Multi-Component TAGs (MCTGs) uses the same definitions for lifting as is used for general Context-Free TAGs (CFTGs). The translation process for grammars involves a liftmorphism for the translation of the alphabets of the operatives and inoperatives, as well as the right-hand sides of the production rules.

Similar to the tree-walking automaton for dominance, we also need to construct a tree-walking automaton for the intended precedence relation. Since the RTGs in our examples are linear (i.e., they do not use a variable more than once on any right-hand side), we can present the definition for precedence in two steps.

The classical technique of interpreting a relational structure within another one forms the basis for MSO transductions. Here, the output tree is interpreted on the input tree, with the nodes of the output tree being a subset of the nodes from the input tree specified with unary MSO relation and the daughter relation specified with a binary MSO relation.