A method for tracking formation targets is proposed based on the kinetics of formation movement, which involves formation initiation, separation, merging, and updating. This method offers a holistic solution to multi-target tracking by utilizing a center-based tracking approach during track updating. As a result, it is practical as it reduces computational burden and conserves system resources.

The method selects the minimum bounding rectangle or the minimum circumscribed circle of a formation, or the geometric center of the smallest closures, to track and maintain formations. When formations are combined, the geometric center is adjusted to account for changes in the correlated area of formation targets caused by the entry of new targets. Furthermore, the identification and evolutionary relationships of formation spatial structure are detailed, focusing on the bounding rectangle of formation targets and the maintenance of length and width parallel to the x-axis and y-axis of the Cartesian coordinate system.

The approach to dealing with target measurement involves processing measurements by determining the minimum enclosing rectangle and its center as well as establishing corresponding relationships between the center and all measurements in the formation.

When a new target is identified, the shortest distance between the new target and the center of all tracking formations is computed. Depending on the distance, the new target is either appended to the closest formation or considered as a new formation, which is created using the sliding window algorithm or the separation of the formation.

The algorithm is utilized to manage the maintenance of tracking formation state, the addition of new targets (formation combination), and the loss of targets (formation separation). Additionally, the formation tracking and multiple targets tracking methods are applied to a specific tracking instance, and the impact of the number of targets on these tracking methods is analyzed. A cv and a ct model is employed as the target movement model.