Our rewriting logic framework comprises a collection of maude theories and parameterized functional modules that can be easily incorporated into any other maude application by instantiating the parameter theories with the specific settings of the application. The axiomatic theory of constraint semi-rings is represented as a maude functional theory, while specialized constraint semi-rings, such as weighted sum and fuzzy natural numbers, are represented as functional maude modules. Additionally, all other modules of the framework, including Cartesian products of constraint semi-rings and implicit and explicit soft constraints, as well as the constraint solving algorithms, are parameterized by the choice of the constraint domain and semiring. To enhance the efficiency of constraint solving, all recursive specifications are composed in tail-recursive form, and domain elements of individual constraints are ordered based on their grade in the constraint semiring. Furthermore, we establish the correctness of our search algorithm.

For the radio application, we require algorithms for both quickly finding one acceptable solution and, in cases where sufficient computing power and time are available, finding all optimal solutions or all acceptable solutions. Assuming that all variables (knobs) are of interest and the involved semirings are all totally ordered can simplify the task. Subsequently, we make these simplifying assumptions and present a maude implementation for searching all optimal solutions, as well as provide an outline of the implementation of other search algorithms.

In the context of the radio application, we engage in multicriteria optimization by minimizing the violations of the impact goals and maximizing the benefits of the knob settings, with a preference for optimizing the impact goals. This formally involves constructing the lexicographically ordered Cartesian product of the semirings of weighted sums and fuzzy natural numbers (modeled by wsumfuzzypair). It is important to note that by interchanging the order of the two semirings, we could also give priority to the benefits of the knob settings.

Furthermore, as we design specialized constraint solvers, it is recognized that simple soft constraints, as discussed in this paper, will not suffice. More intricate policies for tasks such as resource allocation and providing quality of service must be adhered to, and solutions need to be compared using preferences. Building on the successful c-semiring-based approaches to preferences, quality of service, and soft concurrent constrained programming, we are presently developing an expressive modeling language for policies involving preferences and hard/soft constraints, which will similarly be based on the c-semiring approach.