For any vertex x and all of its neighbors xj, there are paths connecting these neighbors that do not go through x (Lemma 1.7). Consequently, all these neighbors are in the same component of the graph g minus x (g\x), which implies that g\x is connected. Hence, g is biconnected.

If u is isolated in k, then any path l connecting h\k to k\h contains either u or v, as per Lemma 1.12. By hypothesis, u is not present, so every such path contains v. According to Claim 1, at least one such path exists, indicating that g\v is not connected, and therefore g is not biconnected.

Claim 4 states that the vertices u and v share a common face. If not, let x1,..., xk be the neighbors of u. Per Lemma 1.7, they are all connected by paths in the set b\u, where b is the union of boundaries of bounded faces incident to u. If v is not incident to any of these faces, then these paths would also avoid v. This implies that all neighbors of u are in h or in k, which contradicts Claim 3.

If all vertices on j belong to h, then all vertices outside j also belong to h, since for any vertex y outside j, one can choose a shortest path joining y to a vertex in j. Since neither u nor v occur as internal vertices on this path, all vertices on the path are in h or k (Lemma 1.12), i.e., h, since the last vertex is in h.

Let u1 (respectively, u2) be the second vertex (following u) in q1 (respectively, q2). The only faces incident to u and v are f and f', so u1 and u2 differ from v, and are connected by a path that avoids u and v (Lemma 1.7). Consequently, by Lemma 1.12, u1 and u2 are both in h or in k, and so are all vertices on j. The same holds for all vertices outside j, so either h = g or h = q is a path graph, which is a contradiction.

Let ui, i = 1, 2, be the second vertices on qi. Again, there is a path joining u1 to u2 that avoids u and v, and all vertices on j are in h or k, and the same holds for all vertices inside j. If they are all in h, then h = g, and if they are all in k, then h = q, a simple path. This contradiction completes the proof of Claim 7.