In this paper, we present a comprehensive analysis of resource semantics using a series of stone-type duality theorems that cover various systems, including layered graph logics, boolean bi, and separation logic. We also discuss the potential extension of our analysis to encompass intuitionistic variants of each logic, as well as systems with additional multiplicatives, and potentially modal and epistemic systems described in other literature. As a result of our work, we derive soundness and completeness theorems for standard truthfunctional models.

To begin, we introduce the classical logic of layered graphs, LGL, and its intuitionistic version, ILGL, providing a formal, graph-theoretic definition of layered graphs intended to capture the concept as it is used in modeling complex systems. Particularly, we focus on how two layers in a directed graph are connected by a specified set of edges.

We then proceed to discuss the systematic treatment of stone-type duality for the structures interpreting bunched logics, beginning with the weakest systems and extending to encompass familiar systems like BBI and separation logic. Our results cover all known algebraic approaches to separation logic, demonstrating their soundness with respect to standard store-heap semantics. As a result, we uniformly retrieve soundness and completeness theorems for the systems under consideration.

Additionally, we obtain similar results for the intuitionistic variant of LGL (ILGL), as well as BI and Intuitionistic FOBBI, with intuitionistic separation logic being a specific model. The theorems are extendable to bunched logics with additional multiplicatives corresponding to negation and disjunction, including DMBI, CBI, and a full range of sub-classical bunched logics, which will be discussed in a separate presentation. We also speculate that this treatment can cover a range of bunched modal and epistemic systems, as well as higher-order variants of separation logic via general hyperdoctrines. We anticipate that this approach will simplify completeness arguments for bunched logics and can be adapted for various nonclassical predicate logics.

Finally, we conjecture that our approach can be extended to account for the operational semantics of program execution given by Hoare triples, potentially interpreting computational approaches to the frame rule, such as bi-abduction. We believe that extending our framework with a duality-theoretic approach to Hoare logic can facilitate this, and we aim to explore the potential use of algebraic or topological methods in addressing these important properties of separation logic.