In summary, this study examines the distinctiveness of hydrogen-electric motorcycles and considers green consumption attitude, perceived risk, and perceived value as the precursor variables. The research aims to reveal the impact of recognition on perceived risk and perceived value on purchase intention of hydrogen-electric motorcycles, with the results potentially serving as a reference for government, relevant industries, and further research.

The formal survey was conducted from January to February 2012, covering the five major urban regions in Taiwan (including Taipei, Hsinchu, Taichung, Tainan, and Kaohsiung). The participants were adults aged 18 and above, with the number of samples for each region determined proportionally according to the regional population. Out of 500 questionnaires distributed, 468 were responded to, and 431 valid questionnaires remained after the removal of 37 invalid ones, resulting in an 86.2% response rate.

The direct effect is 0.18, while the perceived risk (through consumption attitude) has a positive indirect influence on purchase intention toward hydrogen-electric motorcycles with an effectiveness of 0.09. Similarly, perceived value (through consumption attitude) positively influences purchase intention toward hydrogen-electric motorcycles with an indirect effect of 0.24. The total effects of perceived value and consumption attitude on purchase intention are 0.15 and 0.42, respectively.

The hypothesis of the indirect effect of perceived value on hydrogen-electric motorcycle purchase intention (H3) is consistent with Macarthy and Shrum's (1994) value-attitude-behavior theory, indicating that perceived value is a determining factor of consumption attitude with a positive relationship between the two. Regarding the direct influence of perceived value on purchase intention (H4), Monroe and Krishnan (1985) assert that consumers' perceived value influences purchase intention, which is supported by the research findings.

In the context of the growing trend of green consumption and increasing global environmental awareness, it is suggested that the government should educate consumers through news and promotional campaigns to communicate its policies. Collaboration between the government, businesses, and consumers is recommended to facilitate trust and understanding, while clear regulations can be instituted to protect green products. Furthermore, the study predicts that with the increase in the supply of recycled materials, green products' prices will become more competitive, ultimately contributing to sustainable development.