The process of developing computer languages or software artifacts from fundamental concepts to the final product typically involves starting with an abstract model of a central concept, then gradually adding more detailed functionalities to create extended structural definitions. In this paper, we propose a method for stepwise development of algebraic models, where each step involves either adding new elements to the model or refining the properties of existing ones. We introduce a refinement approach for the stepwise development of algebraic models. This approach, called superposition, involves the process of refining elements while preserving the properties of the original elements. Furthermore, we present a categorical framework for refining algebraic structures, which can be utilized to model various concepts and objects. Models represented in terms of algebras are used in application areas such as language semantics and formal methods.

It is important to note that t is not generally a functor, and the lifting triple is not expected to be a monad. Our approach to representing types will use slice categories, while we also consider monoid actions and types to introduce an alternative. In addition, we explore the combination of type and function preservation, which results in a function lifting that respects types.

Based on the category e, which comprises all elements needed in our approach, we define two major subcategories of e to capture function preservation (ef) and type preservation (et) in isolation, along with defining functors expressing the extensions on these subcategories. The constructs involving truth-value objects are not relevant for the second lifting, and we formulate a result about the compositionality of extensions.

The application of our superposition operator results in a model presented in layers, where each layer superimposes the layer below, and the layers are specified using superposition and, possibly, augmentation. To provide a useful toolkit, we need to introduce a library of common superpositions, essentially a collection of superposition schemes that have been obtained by applying our concepts to language semantics. Additional details regarding this can be found in an earlier work.