The presentation of counterfactual semantics involves the specification of a neighborhood system for each world in a meta-logical manner, and the exclusion of a set of axioms based on the intended semantics. The paper articulates precise concepts of completeness and soundness for each derived counterfactual logic in these cases.

Roughly speaking, a topos is a category equipped with an internal logical theory that is similar to set theory. Formally, a topos is a finitely complete and cocomplete category with exponentials and a subobject classifier, from which logic notions belonging to the higher-order setting can be defined. The article follows this approach to the categorical definition of a topos and, using local set theory, it defines basic notions intended to define classes of neighborhood systems. Following the framework initiated by Lewis, a counterfactual conditional is defined in the internal logic of the topos. For each possible neighborhood system, the (internal) counterfactual logic can be analyzed, and the inference system of local set theory can be used to derive proper counterfactual axioms and to demonstrate that certain inference rules are derived rules inside local set theory.

Section 2 of the paper defines the basic categorical notions for establishing terminology. Section 3 defines the class of topos used in the article, while Section 4 outlines the key notion of neighborhood systems and some of their instances. Section 5 provides a logical definition of the involved counterfactuals and compares them to known logical systems in the existing literature on counterfactuals. The paper concludes by summarizing its findings.

In this work, counterfactual conditionals are explored through logic notions belonging to the higher-order setting. This is achieved by utilizing a higher-order logic called local set theory, which is capable of deriving propositions that preserve truth under any topos interpretation. This paper demonstrates how the local set theory inference system enables the derivation of topos-theoretic properties at a linguistic level.