We can address this issue and make more effective use of the unused radio frequency band by implementing the concept of cognitive radio (CR) put forth by Mitola. Mitola suggested that spectrum gaps can be most effectively utilized by allowing unlicensed users to access the spectrum band when licensed users are not using it. The licensed users, referred to as primary users (PUs), have absolute authority and higher priority to use the spectrum band at any time and any place, while the unlicensed users, known as secondary users (SUs) or CR nodes, only use the spectrum band when the PUs are not using it.

In this study, we propose the use of a tree routing protocol for cognitive radio networks (C-TRP). Tree-based routing has been previously employed for large-scale wireless networks, such as in IEEE 802.16j used in Japan, and the ZigBee standard for sensor wireless networks, which operates on the 2.4 GHz band.

Nodes periodically send root announcement (RANN) messages to all nodes. Upon receiving a RANN message, a node caches the sender of the message as a potential parent. Subsequently, each node selects a parent from potential parents based on the best path metric from the node to the root node.

The authors introduce two routing decision schemes for link metric calculation. The first scheme is the global decision scheme, which determines the route selection from end to end, while the second one, called the local decision scheme, selects the best interface for transmission based on the least load interface.

Our proposed C-TRP protocol involves communication among all connected nodes on a spectrum band. Each node executes the C-TRP based on information received from neighboring nodes. The algorithm selects a reference point in the network and calculates all the routes to that reference point. When redundant paths are identified, the C-TRP algorithm selects one channel for message forwarding and disables or blocks forwarding on the other channel to prevent interference and ensure the fair distribution of spectrum among SUs to enable other SUs to find available free channels. Many studies have considered the criterion of maximizing throughput fairness among SUs.

As the name suggests, C-TRP computes a tree structure that spans all nodes in a specific spectrum band. Redundant channels are placed in a blocking or standby state to prevent data forwarding, resulting in an interference-free network. However, if a forwarding channel fails or becomes unavailable (e.g., occupied by a primary user or used by another secondary user), the proposed algorithm recomputes the spectrum tree topology so that the properly blocked channels can be reactivated through channel switching.

Each node has a unique node ID in the spectrum tree. The node ID of a node is {a0, a1, …, an}, where a0 is the number of the spectrum band in which the spectrum tree is formed, and it is also the node ID of the root in this spectrum tree. (n) represents the hop number.

When the next-closest parent nodes receive the RA message, they add their node cost to the path cost value and rebroadcast the RA message with the new accumulative path cost. The path cost value is incremented by each node along the tree downward, and each node chooses the lowest channel to become the root channel for sending data to the root node.

In this section, we assess the performance of the C-TRP protocol through numerical simulation using the network simulator NS-2 with an extension to support multi-hop multi-channel cognitive radio environments. The NS-2 visual trace analyzer is utilized to analyze the simulation results stored in the NS-2 trace file. The simulation is conducted under various network settings and environmental conditions, such as channel conditions and the number of CR nodes.

When nodes aim to forward packets, they balance between assigning new channels and using the currently active channel. If the CR nodes use the new channel, they can avoid queuing delay but incur switching delay. Conversely, if the CR nodes use the currently active channel, they can avoid switching delay but incur queuing delay. This load balancing distributes the traffic load between the available channels, leading to a decrease in the end-to-end delay. Additionally, the CTBR and STOD-RP protocols use the same channel along the path from end to end.