In process algebras, it is typical to define semantics using a reaction relation supported by a structural congruence relation. As process algebras have become more expressive to accommodate modeling requirements in fields such as business modeling and systems biology, it has become challenging to define the reaction semantics when combining various features that were previously studied separately, such as general choice and parallelism. In this paper, we present a general approach based on active evaluation contexts that enables the construction of reaction semantics in a straightforward manner.

The traditional approach of defining only structural operational semantics for derivatives of this calculus is due to the difficulty of syntactically matching the normal form of constituents of redexes and the lack of semantic significance in allowing choice and parallelism to distribute freely over one another.

We demonstrate in this paper how reaction semantics can be defined for highly expressive calculi. We also discuss the importance of being able to handle a binary unrestricted choice as opposed to an indexed guarded sum, following a design principle that emphasizes the use of unary or binary syntactic constructors for better machine-readable formal semantics and a deeper semantic understanding of programming constructs.

Our proposed approach is based on a novel notion of active evaluation contexts, which naturally emerge when standard evaluation contexts evolve during reactions. We develop active evaluation contexts in section 3 and use them to define a reaction semantics for the recursion-free fragment of CCS with unrestricted choice. We initially consider CCS with guarded sums and focus on the finite fragment of the language in order to clearly present our contribution in section 3, while stating that recursion can be easily incorporated using a structural congruence as demonstrated later in section 4.

The use of process calculi as modeling languages for real-world domains has become a prevalent trend, leading to increasingly expressive calculi that pose challenges in the definition of appropriate reaction semantics.

Bioambients, following the tradition of ambient calculi, has been endowed with reaction semantics, as it ensures coherence between the bio-chemical modeling domain and the operational model of the language. However, the technical means to combine parallelism and unrestricted choice was lacking at the time of definition, which led to external choice being limited to guarded sums. In this paper, we present a variant of bioambients where choice is unrestricted, aiming to demonstrate a conservative extension of the original calculus and focusing on defining a reaction semantics using our active evaluation contexts.