The ambient logic (AL) has been put forward to express spatial characteristics of processes in the mobile ambient calculus (MA). Constraining both the calculus and the logic to their static component yields static ambients (SA) and the static ambient logic (SAL), which serve as a framework for querying semistructured data. SAL includes the non-standard fresh quantifier (I).

The AL approach, however, is more intensional compared to standard type systems. Essentially, the entire spatial structure of the calculus is mirrored in the logic. For example, the formula n[r] is satisfied by processes in the form n[p] where p satisfies r. AL also accounts for the dynamics of computation through the standard o modality. Furthermore, AL incorporates adjunct connectives for each spatial construct. For instance, the guarantee operator specifies that a process can satisfy b whenever it is put in parallel with any process satisfying r. This connective imparts a functional aspect to the logic, where the formulas can describe a service offered by the referred process. It has been demonstrated that adjuncts, in conjunction with the o connective, enable the expression of very intensional properties and can capture all constructs of the calculus.

This accomplishment is achieved in two steps. First, it is established for quantifier-free formulas (Theorem 4.4), and then extended to fresh-quantified formulas based on the use of prenex forms (Proposition 5.3). To establish adjunct elimination for quantifier-free formulas, a notion of intensional bisimilarity is initially defined, along the lines of, in which the number of test steps is bounded. Subsequently, two properties justify the encoding: a property called precompactness, expressing finiteness of behaviors, and the existence of characteristic formulas for the classes of bounded intensional bisimilarities.

This represents the first precise delimitation of the expressiveness of a spatial logic to our knowledge. Other works on expressiveness only provide some indications. A preliminary result on the separation power of AL is presented elsewhere. Additional examples of expressive formulas for AL, such as formulas for persistence and finiteness, are demonstrated in other work.

The setting in which the encoding is obtained is quite different in the dynamic case. There, the presence of adjuncts significantly enhances the expressive power of the logic. For example, it allows the construction of formulas to characterize processes in the form open n. p, and, using the @ connective, a formula can be defined to capture processes of the form out n. p.

The usage of a bounded intensional bisimilarity and the concept of precompactness is original. Intensional bisimilarity plays a crucial role in characterizing the separation power of the logic. Furthermore, our proof suggests that it is also a powerful and meaningful concept for the study of expressiveness.

The presence of the @ connective in the logic is crucial for decidability issues. The undecidability of the model-checking of SAL with classical quantification has been established. Quite unexpectedly, decidability results for spatial logics with and without quantification were subsequently established. Our work closely relates to the present study; roughly, the decidability result relies on the finiteness of processes, whereas our encoding exploits the finiteness of observations. Most recently, the undecidability of the model-checking problem for SAL has been established. This recent work investigates various modifications surrounding SAL, derives decidability results with and I, and presents a prenex form result similar to ours.

The precompactness property asserts that if we bound the granularity of the observations, only finitely many distinct situations may arise. The characteristic formula property states that each of these situations is expressible in the intensional fragment. The basic idea of the encoding is to systematically enumerate all these possible situations logically.

Due to its finiteness, the construction of our proof might appear to be effective. However, this cannot be the case due to an undecidability result for the model-checking problem on SAL. This is rather surprising, as only an effective enumeration of the bisimilarity classes is lacking to make the proof constructive. Moreover, such an enumeration exists for SA without name restriction, using testing sets as defined elsewhere. This exposes an unexpected richness of SA compared to pure trees.

Let SALint denote the intensional fragment with classical quantification. We pose the question of adjunct elimination for extensions of this logic. The undecidability result implies that there is no effective adjunct elimination for SALint+{}. Now, we establish a more precise result:

We have established the adjuncts elimination property for SAL, a logic for trees with binders, including the fresh quantifier I. This involves putting a formula in prenex form and then performing the transformation on the quantifier-free formula. The adjunct-free fragment SALint then turns out to be a minimal logic.

Finally, the author expresses gratitude towards M.J. Gabbay for insightful discussions on nominal sets theory, the anonymous referees and G. Ghelli for significant contributions to improving the initial version of this presentation, and D. Sangiorgi, L. Monteiro, L. Caires, and D. Hirschkoff for their guidance throughout this work.

In this section, we establish Proposition 6.2, which is used in the proof of Theorem 6.1. It follows from Lemma A.2, which itself is dependent on Lemma A.1. In essence, the aim of this section is to identify sufficient conditions under which substitutions can be applied on both the formula and the process while maintaining satisfaction.

R = R1 | R2. By symmetry, we can assume that P1 satisfies R. Also, by symmetry, we can assume that P1 satisfies R1 and 0 satisfies R2. If P2 satisfies R, then R1 separates P1 from P2 and is a smaller formula, leading to a contradiction.
