We also investigate the algebras associated with two interconnected monads, vf and vp, namely the simple valuation monad vf and the point-continuous valuation monad vp. In the context of top0, the algebras for these monads are fully characterized as weakly locally convex topological cones and weakly locally convex sober topological cones, respectively. In both instances, the algebra morphisms are continuous linear maps between the corresponding algebras.

Our focus is on the algebras of the extended probabilistic powerdomain within the category of t0 topological spaces and continuous functions. In Section 2, we review established facts about the extended probabilistic powerdomain monad, and in Section 3, we discuss cones. In Section 4, we demonstrate that every algebra of this monad in the category of t0 spaces is a weakly locally convex sober topological cone, and algebra morphisms must be continuous linear maps. Subsequently, we highlight the strong connection between algebras of the extended probabilistic powerdomain monad and barycentres, a notion inspired by Choquet and previously utilized by Cohen.

Naturally, one may question whether vs constitutes a monad on top. Unfortunately, this is not generally the case. The issue lies in the fact that the topology ox is typically too sparse to adequately restrict the Scott topology on vx. As an alternative, we consider the weak topology on vx, which we will show to be the appropriate topology for establishing a monad structure.

Based on the foundational theory of monad algebras, we know that in particular the pair (t a, ma) forms an algebra of t, where m denotes the multiplication of t. In our scenario, (vwx, mx) is a vw-algebra for every topological space x. To identify all the algebras, we first examine the structure of vwx for an arbitrary topological space x and see that vwx is a topological cone as defined below.

For any topological space x, lx is a cone with the pointwise addition and multiplication. It is a semitopological cone with the Scott topology induced by the pointwise order. It is a topological cone if x is core-compact (i.e., if ox is a continuous lattice). Indeed, in that case, lx is also a continuous lattice, as can be deduced from [7, proposition ii-4.6] and the fact that r+ is a continuous lattice. Every continuous dcpo is a c-space in its Scott topology, and because of this, we utilize [17, corollary 6.9(c)], which states that every semitopological cone with a c-space topology is topological.

In addition to the space vwx of continuous valuations on any topological space x, Heckmann also considered its subspaces vf x of simple valuations and vpx of point-continuous valuations on x. In his paper, he demonstrated that vpx is the sobrification of vf x [11, theorem 5.5]. We will see that vf and vp can also be extended to monads in the category top0.