The use of zonotopes as an abstract domain has proven to be useful for the precise analysis of programs with numerical variables in computer science. Zonotopes are advantageous over the domain of convex polyhedra as they are less computationally expensive and can handle non-linear assignments more easily. However, the classical join operator of zonotopes does not always preserve linear invariants, unlike the convex hull. In this paper, a global join operator is proposed that preserves some affine relations. Experiments conducted on the constrained taylor1+ domain of apron demonstrate the effectiveness of this new join operator.

Zonotopic methods have been utilized in various computer science applications such as image processing, reachability analysis of hybrid systems, and static analysis by abstract interpretation. While transfer functions involving arithmetic expressions and assignments are precise and fast in zonotopes, set-theoretic operations such as meet and join are difficult to characterize and compute. In this article, improvements to the time and space efficient upper bound operators for zonotopic abstract domains are proposed, addressing issues related to the relations between program variables.

The paper introduces a more precise global join operator that utilizes previous component-wise join operations on a subset of variables and common affine relations to deduce upper bounds on other variables. The optimality of this join operator in certain important situations is demonstrated. In addition, it is shown that the least upper bound of two affine sets might not exist, and there may be incomparable minimal upper bounds. The proposed join operator has been implemented in the taylor1+ abstract domain of the apron library, and results from program analyses using the standard and global joins are presented.

The new join operator improves the precision of the analyses while maintaining fast operation. It is noted that the approach can be extended to the case of constrained affine sets and inexact common affine relations in future work. The paper concludes that the proposed join operator addresses the main drawback of zonotopic abstract domains and contributes to the discovery and preservation of common affine relations between program variables and inputs, as well as the identification of useful properties. The proposed approach is anticipated to generalize to the handling of inexact common affine relations in the future.