I will present German data that demonstrates how depictive secondary predicates can refer to various syntactic elements, such as subjects, direct objects, indirect objects, and oblique complements. Reference to more oblique arguments is considered more marked, and this markedness aligns with the obliqueness hierarchy proposed by Keenan, Comrie, and others. Based on these observations, I propose analyzing depictive secondary predicates parallel to control constructions rather than raising constructions. Since depictives can refer to arguments that do not appear at the surface, the analysis takes into account the underlying syntactic-semantic representation, i.e., the argument structure.

In coherent constructions, readings with reference to the subject of the embedded verb "schlafen" and to the subject and object of the matrix verb "raten" are possible. In incoherent constructions, only reference to elements that depend on heads in the respective coherence field is possible. For example, "nackt zu schlafen" represents a separate coherence field in (7b), and "nackt" can refer to the subject of "schlafen" only. Additionally, the reference to the dative object of "raten" can be omitted.

In German, it is possible for a depictive predicate to refer to both the subject and the accusative object (as in 9a), but the reading with reference to the object is less available (as in 9b). Haider explains this by assuming that the subject of the predicate and the noun phrase it refers to are identical. Furthermore, the fact that in German, noun phrase subjects always have structural case explains why a depictive element cannot refer to a dative noun phrase, as dative is considered to be a lexical case.

The reference to the dative noun phrase is considerably better in both examples in (12) compared to (9b) and (10), where another candidate for coreference appears at the surface. Additionally, both sentences in (12) can be interpreted as meaning that the helper or the nurse is naked, respectively. The reference to the dative noun phrase improves considerably if the reference to the nominative is excluded by world knowledge.

In a passive sentence, the subject of "treten" was a police officer, and therefore the reference of "liegend" to the logical subject of "treten" is excluded by world knowledge. The only remaining antecedent is the noun phrase in the prepositional phrase.

Following Winkler, I assume that depictive predicates are adjuncts. Apart from the prosodic facts she has discussed, evidence from the linearization of depictives and from partial verb phrase fronting suggests such an analysis. Depictive predicates can be serialized independently from their antecedent and can be serialized rather freely in the clause without restriction on the number of depictive predicates per clause.

It's important to note that the phrase "the rain is cold" in German means that the rain itself is cold, not that it is cold in general. It may be cold rain in warm weather. The predicate "kalt" cannot refer to the expletive nominal complement of "regnen." Additionally, the condition on referentiality cannot be imposed on the subject of the modified verb because verbs with expletive subjects allow for depictives only if they do not refer to the expletive element.

The argument structure is incompatible with the standard approach for coordination in HPSG. In the standard treatment of coordination, it is assumed that the CAT values of two coordinated elements must be identical. If we have coordinations of sentences with argument structure lists of differing length, coordination fails.

Another possibility is to treat adjuncts as complements and introduce them into the subcat list of the head they modify. When modification is treated in the lexicon, the combination of depictives and the predicates they modify can be established before argument saturation takes place.

Overall, the paper presents a detailed analysis of depictive secondary predicates in German, discussing the various factors that influence their reference and proposing a new framework for their analysis based on the data presented.