The issue of data bias outlined above has led to the adoption of various data splitting strategies aimed at dividing the data into testing and training sets while maintaining a well-balanced representation of the interaction space. The chosen strategy for splitting the data should enable a reliable evaluation of performance that reflects the model's generalizability and potential predictive capability. Despite the common belief that a random split may lead to overly optimistic reported performance, it remains a widely used approach for assessing performance on benchmarking datasets. In the pharmaceutical industry, models are typically trained on data collected at the time when the models were developed and are employed to predict the activity of orphan compounds. Thus, a temporal split is commonly used in the industry to better assess prospective prediction ability. Therefore, in this study, we aimed to assess the performance of the PCM model using different splitting strategies: the random ligand split approach, commonly used on benchmarking datasets; the temporal ligand split approach, commonly used on industrial datasets; and a kinase splitting approach to evaluate generalizability to new proteins.

To evaluate PCM modeling in an industrial setting, we used the state-of-the-art GraphDTA model as a reference. GraphDTA is a bimodal neural network based on convolutional neural networks, and in this study, the Graph Isomorphism Network (GIN) version of GraphDTA was employed. The model was optimized on a mean squared error (MSE) loss with Adam and was trained for 200 epochs with a learning rate of 0.0005 and a batch size of 128, and was trained on the descriptors described in the subsequent section. The KNN model used in this study is based on the KNN in Born et al., and relied on the combination of Tanimoto similarity between ligands and Levenshtein distance between amino acid sequences of the proteins as a distance metric between samples. The Chemprop multitask model was trained using default settings and 50 epochs.

For off-target interactions, similar PIC50 cut-offs have been proposed in prior kinase inhibitor classification studies, making this a classification problem for which sensitivity and specificity can be calculated for each of the 927 ligands tested across more than 25 kinases. Statistical significance was assessed using the non-parametric Wilcoxon test. Due to the large test number (927 ligands), the alpha threshold was observed for both datasets, and strong biases were found in both datasets, likely impacting the predictive abilities of models.

When considering the random ligand split, GraphDTA achieved a performance of 0.58 RMSE and a PCC of 0.86 for the proprietary dataset. Despite the increased data availability for the in-house dataset, the performance is slightly inferior to the performance reported in the original paper, where the model achieved 0.229 MSE (0.48 RMSE) on the Davis dataset with a similar splitting strategy. Nevertheless, the model performed well in the proprietary dataset. Additionally, statistical significance was found for the PCM-ZScale model, showing a marginally better performance than the KNN model.

In this study, we have provided empirical evidence that the temporal splitting strategy provides a more realistic assessment of true prospective performance as it simultaneously considers a shift in the chemical and protein space. We have also demonstrated that with a temporal split, the state-of-the-art PCM model performs similarly to a multitask model on a proprietary dataset. Moreover, we highlight the importance of considering other modeling approaches, such as KNN, RF, and multitask models, as benchmarks for the evaluation of DL PCM models. It suggests that there is a hypothetical window to be exploited by better-performing models in the future.

Taken together, this suggests that for understudied kinases, all models except for PCM-OHE offer limited predictive abilities that are dependent on similar ligands being explored in training. Despite the hypothesis that PCM models can better leverage cross-target information and thus generalize better to novel targets, GraphDTA does not significantly outperform a KNN and shows comparable performance to multitask models in the prediction of bioactivity for understudied kinases. The PCM models showed the best overall predictive performance, and there is a distinct difference in performance between an RF model with little protein information (PCM-OHE) and some protein information (PCM-ZScale), suggesting potential for future PCM models to further optimize cross-target learning with better protein descriptors to improve performance for understudied kinases.

GraphDTA significantly outperformed all models except for the multitask and PCM-ZScale models. While all models achieved good specificity, poor sensitivity was observed across models, highlighting their limited ability to correctly identify instances where the ligands are active across specific targets. Combined, these results suggest that all models have limited predictive power to evaluate ligand promiscuity with a poor ability to identify actives across specific targets.

We partially attributed the overly optimistic performance to the very lenient random ligand splitting strategy employed in the original publication, which did not reflect the shift in chemical space observed over time in an industrial setting. Therefore, we recommend the use of... [the paraphrased text ends here].