We assume that suitable protocols are in place to prevent transmission collisions. The operational semantics of our calculus are presented in terms of both reduction semantics and labelled transition semantics, following the SOS style of Plotkin. We demonstrate the equivalence of these two semantics. Our labelled transition system (LTS) captures all potential interactions of a term with its environment without utilizing any auxiliary discard relation. Subsequently, we establish an appropriate concept of simulation and thereby of bisimulation for mobile ad hoc networks (MANETs). Simulation and bisimulation are widely employed in the literature for verification purposes.

We assume that there are no unbound variables in a network (though there may be unbound channels). The absence of unbound variables is consistently maintained as the network evolves. Furthermore, as node identifiers correspond to device network addresses, we presume that each node identifier within any network is unique.

Additionally, this finding can be extended to encompass an arbitrary finite set, V, of messages. The subsequent results pertain to range repeaters (or range extenders) and are particularly relevant for stationary nodes, such as access points. In general, a repeater functions to regenerate a network signal in order to expand the coverage of the existing network infrastructure. In wireless networks, a range repeater does not physically connect by wire to any part of the network. Instead, it receives radio signals from an access point, end user device, or another repeater, and retransmits the frames. This enables a repeater located between an access point and a distant stationary user to serve as a relay for frames traveling between the user and the access point. Through utilizing a range repeater, a distant user can thus benefit from improved connectivity.

Notably, all preceding calculi abstract from interferences. Mezzetti and Sangiorgi have alternatively proposed a lower-level calculus in which a node can detect interferences when situated at the intersection of the transmission ranges of two different nodes. While our syntax is influenced by theirs, the reduction semantics and the corresponding LTS are substantially different. This disparity arises because our model assumes the absence of interferences.

Several developments are feasible. For example, we could enrich the calculus with operators to represent the concept of storage, as in previous work. We might also endeavor to extend the behavioral theory to account for node failure. In this respect, the advancements in [3,4] for wired networks could provide a valuable starting point. Furthermore, wireless systems also exhibit synchronous features reminiscent of synchronous languages (e.g., Esterel, Statecharts, SCCS). Indeed, within a single time unit of a wireless system, multiple events can occur. Our intention is to explore these aspects, drawing inspiration from existing work. Finally, as highlighted in previous work, security is certainly another important consideration in MANETs that we are eager to investigate.