In traditional transition-system specifications (TSSs), the premises are typically defined as sets of atoms and their negations. For practical applications, these sets can be easily represented by a formula using conjunctions and universal quantifications over negations of atoms. However, if this representation is not possible, one might want to use infinitary operators, although at present, we do not see a reasonable way to implement this.

We have selected Isabelle/HOL because it closely aligns with our reasoning method outlined in Section 3. The support for using meta-variables (or unknowns) is particularly important. The main difference is that it employs a single formula.

To demonstrate our proof of concept, we illustrate how our running example can be automatically proven sound. We first provide a specification of the semantics and axioms. Here, the symbol "=>" represents meta-implication (i.e., the horizontal line in an SOS rule), and "->" and "&&" denote logical implication and conjunction, respectively. All unbound variables are treated as universally quantified.

Running the Isabelle/HOL file typically yields one of three results. If everything is in order and soundness has been established, no errors are reported. In cases where there is an issue, Isabelle/HOL will display errors indicating that the proof could not be completed, or it may continue running indefinitely.

Based on our tested cases so far, successful results are obtained in less than a minute. It is worth noting that the longer runtime is due to the combination of all axioms into one relation, resulting in numerous branches in the proof that are fully explored but do not lead to a positive result (e.g., attempting to relate x + x with (x + y) + z). When dealing with several smaller relations, the performance significantly improves, typically taking at most a few seconds.

It would be interesting to investigate whether this method can be utilized to address problems other than soundness. We believe that proofs for commutativity, transitivity, and congruence should also be feasible. Additionally, it is possible that settings outside of process theory could benefit from this approach.