The paper presents a description of a protocol using a probabilistic process algebra and analyzes it in an untimed setting with a notion of probabilistic weak bisimulation. In previous work, the protocol was described using probabilistic timed systems and bisimulation for probabilistic timed systems in order to demonstrate fairness up to a specified tolerance. This paper translates the probabilistic timed systems modeling the protocol into prism specifications to evaluate how the tolerance changes when the protocol parameters are varied.

The protocol concludes in a fair and correct manner when the action correctstop is executed, specifically when the system reaches the state (q0, r5). If both participants behave correctly, unfair behavior cannot be executed; however, a malicious recipient can still receive the expected information and deny sending the final acknowledgment.

The state r7 represents the state reached by the malicious recipient when correctly guessing the last message. By setting the variable l to 1 when the originator sends the last message, the malicious recipient succeeds in its strategy by reaching the final state r7 when in state r5, the variable l has a value of 1. On the other hand, if the variable l has a value of 0, the malicious recipient moves to state r6 and attempts to send the acknowledgment back.

It is observed that the probability for the malicious user to disrupt the protocol is always less than a parameter p decided by the protocol designer. This occurs only when the condition ad + dd > ad holds. In such a scenario, the malicious user could either try to decrypt the first message with the last received one as the key (risking the protocol's termination) or send an acknowledgment to the originator.

PRISM is a probabilistic model checker used for modeling and analyzing systems with probabilistic behavior. It constructs a probabilistic model, which can be a discrete-time Markov chain (DTMC), a Markov decision process (MDP), or a continuous-time Markov chain (CTMC), based on the system description. PRISM can then verify properties specified using temporal logic (PCTL for DTMCs and MDPs, and CSL for CTMCs).