To accurately assess the impact of farming methods on carbon sequestration and the potential for mitigating emissions in paddy ecosystems, it is essential to understand the carbon and nitrogen cycles within these ecosystems. There has been a significant accumulation of basic data through field observations and simulation experiments to understand the scientific processes of the carbon and nitrogen cycles in terrestrial ecosystems. With advancements in science and technology, as well as an increasing understanding of the mechanisms of the carbon and nitrogen cycles, scientists have started developing models to quantify and forecast substance flow within ecosystems. Among these models, the process-oriented model, based on the biogeochemical processes of carbon and nitrogen dynamic migration, captures key processes and their controlling factors in agricultural ecosystems. This model extends the scope of analysis from limited site experiments to unlimited temporal and spatial scales, thus providing a practical method for quantitatively measuring the carbon and nitrogen cycles in agricultural ecosystems.

Currently, a series of process models are recommended in IPCC guidelines for national greenhouse gas (GHG) inventories, including the Century, RothC, CH4MOD, and DNDC-Rice (derived from the DNDC model) models. The DNDC model, developed by Li et al. (1992), has been employed in various countries and regions to simulate the carbon and nitrogen cycles in agricultural, wetland, forest, and grassland ecosystems. Within paddy ecosystems, the DNDC model is primarily utilized to evaluate soil carbon and nitrogen dynamics and GHG emissions. After years of development, the DNDC model can effectively conduct simulations, and its efficacy has been acknowledged by numerous researchers.

The DNDC model is capable of simulating soil gases, such as CO2, CH4, N2O, and NH3. The formation of CO2, CH4, and N2O in soil primarily results from soil microbial activities, which are influenced by the soil environment. Therefore, accurate simulations of soil climate, including temperature, moisture, pH, electrical potential (EH), and related substrate concentration, are crucial for tracking GHG emissions.

To accurately simulate GHG emissions from paddy fields in India, Pathak et al. (2005) adjusted the leakage rate of certain reaction substrates in soil within the model, such as dissolved organic carbon (DOC) and nitrate. The optimized model resulted in a significant reduction in CH4 emissions at the high leakage point while having no effect on emissions at the low or medium leakage points.

The decomposition process is influenced by numerous factors, such as organic matter type and soil texture (Li, 2016). The DNDC model can accurately simulate soil organic carbon (SOC) and its dynamic changes under specific climates (R2 = 0.96) and can also provide long-term estimations. H2 and DOC are used as electron donors to effectively track changes in soil EH, determine the reaction rates of each oxidation/reduction reaction, and calculate the generation and consumption of CH4 and N2O.

CH4 is produced by methanogenic bacteria utilizing soil humus, rice root exudates, soil microbial residues, and organic materials as substrates. In the root exudation area (around the root) or soil microoxidation area, some CH4 is oxidized to CO2 and H2O by methanotrophic bacteria, and any unoxidized CH4 is discharged into the atmosphere through rice plants, bubbles, and liquid diffusion. The model features a module based on an anaerobic balloon, effectively implementing and stimulating CH4 and N2O emissions in flooded paddy fields.

Furthermore, the DNDC model can define numerous water management modes. This enables the simulation and analysis of GHG emission scenarios under various water management types to effectively predict their emissions mitigation potential on temporal and spatial scales. After parameterizing two rice varieties, M206 (a high-yield and semi-dwarf variety) and Koshihikari (a traditional variety), Simmonds et al. (2015) simulated the grain yield and CH4 and N2O emissions of rice under different nitrogen loads and water management types with water-seeding and dry-seeding cultivation. The results indicated that the DNDC model could distinguish the rice yield of the two varieties and replicate the dynamics of CH4 emissions under different management scenarios. Water-saving irrigation management, such as controlled irrigation, showed that when nitrogen fertilizer application reached 60% of the conventional amount, the increase in nitrogen no longer promoted a significant increase in crop yield, whereas the comprehensive greenhouse effect decreased by 43% compared with the conventional practice (Li, 2012).

The DNDC model can also determine the relationship between crop yield and nitrogen application, showing that reducing nitrogen fertilizer application based on the current amount can lead to a reduction in GHG emissions without affecting crop yield. It was found that in the main rice growing regions of China, such as Jiangsu, Yunnan, Guizhou, and Hubei provinces, GHG emissions can be reduced by as much as 40% through a reduction in nitrogen fertilizer.

The addition of exogenous carbon can significantly affect CH4 emissions in paddy fields. Studies have shown that various types of exogenous carbon, such as straw, green manure, and organic manure, provide rich substrates for methanogens and can notably promote CH4 emissions from rice fields. The model has incorporated the effect of environmental conditions on the application of plastic mulching cultivation technology, which can effectively mitigate CH4 emissions from paddy rice in northwest China. Numerous studies have adjusted the mulching submodule of the DNDC model to accurately simulate soil temperature and moisture under different mulching density scenarios.

As environmental issues become more pressing and agricultural practices continue to evolve, there is a growing demand for the predictive capabilities of the model. In the future, it will be essential to evaluate the comprehensive effects of various farmland measures on SOC change, GHG emissions, food security, and ecological environments. The development trends for the model's application involve making more effective use of the DNDC model to support low-carbon production of rice from the local to regional scale, as well as establishing a reliable prediction and evaluation system under agricultural practices and climate scenarios.
