Aho-nets can be seen as a specialized type of algebraic high-level (AHL) nets. The primary focus of this paper is to introduce a high-level process semantics for AHL-nets in general, with a specific example in Section 2 involving a mobile ad-hoc network modeled by an Aho-net.

The structure of the paper is as follows: Section 2 provides an example of a mobile ad-hoc network in a university campus to illustrate the concepts discussed in the subsequent sections. In Section 3, the paper both reviews the concepts related to high-level net processes and introduces the new notion of high-level net processes with instantiations. Section 4 presents the main findings of the paper.

The paper presents a case study of a wireless network on a university campus to illustrate the concepts discussed in the subsequent sections. The modeling technique utilized is algebraic higher-order (AHO) nets, which are essentially Petri nets with complex tokens, rules, and support for changes in network topology. AHO-nets, given their specific data type part, can be considered as a special case of algebraic high-level nets.

The paper introduces high-level occurrence nets and high-level net processes, referred to as AHL-occurrence nets and AHL-processes based on previous works. An AHL-occurrence net is a type of AHL-net where the pre- and post-domain of its transitions are sets rather than multisets, and the arc inscriptions are unary. It is noted that there are no forward and backward conflicts, the partial order given by the flow relation is irreflexive, and for each element in the partial order, the set of its predecessors is finite.

In the case study of a wireless network on a university campus (as discussed in Section 2), the dynamic nature of the communication structure is represented through net transformations, i.e., changes in the network topology are modeled by the application of corresponding rules. While these rules mainly focus on modifications of the net structure, an interesting avenue for future research would be to explore the concepts of broadcasting and multicasting using rule-based transformations. Consequently, rules to modify the marking of an AHO-net need to be introduced to allow for messages to be simultaneously sent to a specific number of receivers.