A problem in conic optimization involves a constraint that the optimization variable must be within a closed convex cone. The field of conic optimization is quite broad, encompassing any convex optimization problem, as indicated by Nesterov and Nemirovski (1992). This paper will specifically focus on conic problems that naturally arise when solving quadratic or combinatorial optimization problems. In particular, developments in second order cone programming (SOCP), semidefinite programming (SDP), and copositive optimization will be highlighted.

While the optimality of (d) may imply optimality for (p), the converse is not generally true. Positive duality gaps may exist, or the optimal value of (p) or (d) may not be achieved. Examples illustrating this phenomenon in second order cone programming can be found in Alizadeh and Goldfarb (2003) or in Ben-Tal and Nemirovski (2001, section 2.4.1). For the SDP case, examples can be found in Helmberg (2002), and a comprehensive analysis of this behavior can be found in Wolkowicz (1981a, b).

Other approaches, such as the work of Ramana (1997), focus on the dual side and construct an extended dual that achieves strong duality without assuming a constraint qualification. Pataki (2013) provides a good exposition of these two approaches.

Mixed integer SDPs have applications in truss topology optimization, certain clustering problems (Aloise and Hansen, 2009), and sparse principal component analysis (Li and Xie, 2020). References to numerous fields of application of nonlinear SDPs in engineering, (robust) control, finance, and others can be found in Andreani et al. (2020) and Yamashita and Yabe (2015).

Cone programming (CP) cones have been studied for decades in the linear algebra literature, with numerous interesting properties, as highlighted by Berman and Shaked-Monderer (2003) and references therein. However, they are still not fully understood, as noted by Berman et al. (2015). It is important to note that the two cones are given in different forms, with one given by its extreme rays, which determine the stability number of an infinite graph, as discussed in Decorte et al. (2021). Dobre et al. (2016) generalized the concept of copositive matrices to the infinite-dimensional setting by defining its relaxation.

The relaxation of a quadratic problem corresponds to the Lagrangian dual of that problem. Considering partial Lagrangian duals, i.e., dualizing the problem only with respect to a subset of the constraints, leads to various copositive relaxations, as highlighted by Bomze (2015). The Shor relaxation can be improved by adding more constraints to the SDP, or by using some relaxation-linearization techniques, leading to stronger SDP relaxations, as discussed in detail by Bao et al. (2011).

The max-cut problem can be viewed as a canonical model for linear and quadratic binary problems, and can be formulated as a copositive problem. Approximation hierarchies from section 3 can be applied in this context.