Numerous researchers in the field of static analysis of biological models have been generating invariants and visually inspecting them. Although the computation of invariants is automated, thus far, the modeler has been responsible for assessing whether the computed invariants match the expected set of invariants for the model. If they match, it indicates that the model has been constructed as intended; if they do not match, it suggests that an error may have been made during the model construction.

In a bio-PEPA model of a biochemical system, each molecular species (e.g., proteins, genes, mRNAs) is represented by a process. The state of the system at a given time is determined by the current amount of the molecular species, and the occurrence of a biochemical reaction results in a change in the available amount of the involved species.

Processes interact through shared action names that represent reactions and specify their role in the reaction (e.g., reactant, product, catalyzer, inhibitor) and their stoichiometric coefficient for that reaction. The effect of a reaction occurrence is to decrease the amount of reactants and increase the amount of products according to the stoichiometry.

Invariants can be categorized into state invariants and reaction invariants. A state invariant involves a set of components or species in the model, and the sum of the populations of the components of a state invariant always remains the same during a simulation. Analogously, reaction invariants can be defined. A reaction source is a reaction that has no reactants but at least one product, while a reaction sink is a reaction that has no products but at least one reactant. The software provides an outline view of the model showing reactions, making it easy to identify source or sink reactions. 

When constructing a model, the modeler must decide which features of the physical system to include as model components, while excluding others as external components or collectively referred to as the external environment. Models are finite in extent and scope, and the external components are essentially everything not mentioned in the model. Taps in the model represent boundaries between the model components and the external environment. A reaction sink forms a natural boundary between the model components and the external environment because it removes mass from the system, which corresponds to an external component not mentioned in the model. Similarly, a reaction source is also a boundary between the model components and the external environment.

Reactions that modify a component tap cannot be involved in any reaction invariant because any reaction modifying a component source must decrease the population of that component, and the original population of the component can never be restored by any combination of other reactions in the model. 

In modeling, it is sometimes desirable to remove a component or a reaction from the model to observe its effect on the model evaluation. The removal may be done manually or automated in modeling software, and removing a component will not disrupt any component invariants in which it is not involved, nor will it disrupt any reaction invariants.

After performing invariant analysis over the model, it is important to check if mass is conserved because every component in the model should be covered by at least one invariant. However, it is often the case that mass is not conserved in a biological model due to the loss or gain of mass from external components not within the scope of the model. By removing tap reactions from the model and performing invariant analysis, any internal mass production or consumption within the model can be identified.

The methodology presented in the paper provides a way to automatically distinguish between models that conserve mass and those that do not. It offers an efficient and useful analysis, greatly reducing the time spent identifying errors if they exist. The approach is scalable and has been successfully tested against models in the biomodels database.