This paper aims to explore which indexes can achieve high accuracy segmentation when performed with kfcm and skfcm, without focusing on enhancing the kernel function. Instead, the objective is to identify the indexes with kfcm and skfcm capable of producing good MRI segmentation. The original euclidean distance in the fcm algorithm is replaced by the Gaussian radial base function (grbf)-induced kernel, known to be more robust than fcm (with euclidean distances), thereby generalizing existing fcm methods. The kfcm and skfcm algorithms based on the Gaussian rbf kernel are derived and applied independently to each image. Eighteen indexes are implemented to estimate the number of clusters representing the best structure of a given image, with a focus on medical image segmentation. These indexes include both classical and more recent ones. 

The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 presents the kernel methods; several criteria to determine the number of clusters are briefly reviewed in Section 3; experimental comparisons are presented in Section 4; and finally, Section 5 provides the conclusions.

The study identifies various factors that play a role in determining the correct number of clusters in an image. These factors include the compactness and separation of clusters, as well as the use of cross-validation as a means of validating the obtained clusters on a dataset different from that used for cluster estimation.

In the experimental comparisons, the tests focus on applying the standard fcm and most popular skfcm methods, such as ahmed et al., zhang et al., and kang et al., with the indexes on T1-weighted MR phantom images. The results show that the aic, i, and fhv indexes consistently yield better results, and the aic index is particularly robust for determining the correct number of clusters using kfcm and skfcm for MR medical images.

The paper suggests that further research should be conducted to test different real datasets and consider the effect of error noise levels within the datasets on the performance of the indexes. Additionally, the paper recommends further testing on the improvement of fuzzy methods using a wide range of validity indexes for automatic clustering algorithms, with the help of specialists in the relevant fields of application.