The deep docking protocol described in the research paper enables efficient screening of a vast molecular library using minimal computational resources. In this study, the protocol was utilized to screen the enamine real library, which contains 1.4 billion commercially available compounds. The approach involves iteratively training deep learning models on relatively small molecular subsets extracted from the library to identify potential active compounds with favorable scores. The best-performing model is then used to predict the remaining molecules in the database. Molecules with high docking scores are selected as virtual hits (VHs) and further filtered using pharmacophore models that characterize the binding modes of known a2ar antagonists when docked to the crystal structure of the a2ar receptor. The filtered compound poses are then visually inspected to generate the final hit list for virtual screening. The effectiveness of the computational method was validated by in vitro assay, leading to the successful identification of a series of novel a2ar antagonists. The results demonstrate the efficacy of the deep docking method in expediting virtual screening of a large molecular library and its potential to enhance traditional virtual screening methods.

The a2ar receptor is a G protein-coupled receptor located in the cell membrane. When bound with adenosine by its extracellular domain, the receptor is activated and stimulates the release of cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) in cells. To quantify the inhibition of a2ar antagonists, a cellular assay called ultra lance cAMP utilizing time-resolved fluorescence resonance energy transfer technique was employed. The assay involves the use of a reaction kit containing europium-labeled cAMP tracer that competes with cellular cAMP to bind with cAMP-specific antibodies labeled with Alexa Fluor 647 dye. The decrease in the fluorescence signal upon a2ar activation by cellular cAMP can be reversed proportionally by antagonists, allowing for the quantitative evaluation of a2ar antagonist activity.

Pharmacophore models based on the crystal structures of a2ar revealed common features such as two hydrogen bonds with asn253 (hb1 and hb2) and one aromatic feature corresponding to the pi-pi stacking interaction with phe168 (ha1) for all a2ar antagonists. Seven pharmacophore models were developed by optionally selecting additional features, considering the different binding modes among the a2ar antagonists. After pharmacophore filtering, 13,718 molecules possessing at least three common pharmacophore features (hb1, hb2, and ha1) remained. Among them, the number of molecules matching the hydrophobic feature hp1 was notably higher than those matching other pharmacophore models, as a majority of known a2ar antagonists exhibited a hydrophobic interaction with trp246. Only a few molecules matched all features.