An investigation was conducted to assess the economic viability of implementing ground source heat pump (GSHP) systems in swine farms in Beijing, China. The study analyzed and compared the initial investment and operating costs of GSHP heating and cooling systems with those of coal-fired heating systems (CFH), wet curtain fan cooling systems (WCFC), and air conditioner heating and cooling systems (AC). The results indicated that while the initial investment for GSHP systems was higher than that for CFH integrated with WCFC, the relative operating costs for GSHP heating, CFH, and AC were 0.94, 1.00, and 0.98, respectively. Moreover, the relative operating costs for GSHP cooling, WCFC, and AC were 4.50, 1.00, and 6.38, respectively.

In 2009, Beijing had 18 million square meters of buildings utilizing ground source pump systems, with an expected increase to 50 million square meters by 2015. Researchers evaluated the capacity and performance of shallow groundwater heat pumps in the Beijing plain area, and the city government of Beijing has developed a feasibility layout for ground source heat pumps in the area. Swine farms in Beijing can determine the technical and policy feasibility of applying ground source heat pumps based on this information.

Regarding the initial investment for cooling and heating systems, it was found that GSHP systems had higher costs compared to AC systems and CFH systems with WCFC. The lowest initial investment was associated with CFH systems integrated with WCFC. As a result, while GSHP systems can save energy and reduce emissions compared to CFH systems, financial subsidies are necessary for their implementation in swine farms due to their high investment costs.

Based on the technical parameters described in the study, the relative operating cost of the cooling system for GSHP, WCFC, and AC was found to be 4.50, 1.00, and 6.38, respectively. The study also noted that the heating cost of GSHP systems was higher than the cooling system with WCFC.

At present, swine farmers in Beijing are unlikely to implement GSHP systems without government subsidies. However, considering the cooling effect, energy savings during the heating period, and air pollution reduction from PM2.5, it is anticipated that GSHP systems will become more widely accepted in the future.