Jania rubens and Sargassum dentifolium macroalgae were manually collected from the Red Sea in Hurghada, Egypt in May 2015. The healthy algal samples were cleaned to remove epiphytes, extraneous matter, and necrotic material. After thorough washing with sea water and sterile distilled water, the samples were air dried, cut into small pieces, and ground to a fine powder using a tissue grinder. The dried seaweed powder (1 g) was mixed with 100 ml of distilled water and heated until it turned light purple, indicating the formation of silver nanoparticles (Ag-NPs) within 1 hour. The solution was left under stirring for an additional 4 hours to ensure complete reaction. The Ag-NPs associated with J. rubens and/or S. dentifolium were separated from the residual seaweed by collecting the pellets after centrifugation at 6000 rpm for 10 minutes. The pellets were then suspended in double-distilled water and adjusted to the optimal concentration of NPs that prevented color change as described earlier.

Subsequently, the growth inhibitory effect of the Ag-NPs was determined by measuring the optical density at 595 nm (OD595) compared to the negative control (TSB only), with growth defined as at least a two-fold increase in OD595. Minimum bactericidal concentration (MBC) testing was performed, and the bactericidal effect was defined as a 99.9% decrease in colony forming units (CFU) compared to the starting inoculum during a 24-hour incubation. The MBC was determined by transferring 50 ml of the suspension onto agar plates and incubating for static stabilization. This stability might be achieved with the help of high repulsive and attractive forces between the nanoparticles. The negative charge on the surface of the nanoparticles results in repulsion among the nanoparticles, leading to the stability of nanoparticles in cell culture media.

The Ag-NPs associated with Sargassum dentifolium were determined by measuring OD600 nm for the minimal inhibitory concentration (MIC) using the tetrazolium reduction assay and were confirmed as MBC by colony count. The results showed that the coated nanoparticles on the surfaces, surfactants, and enzymes inhibited the formation of bacterial biofilm. Consistent with our findings, Ag-NPs have been demonstrated to inhibit and reduce the formation of biofilms of various bacterial species. This inhibitory effect on biofilm formation is noteworthy as bacterial biofilms are a major challenge in medicine due to their increased resistance against antibiotics, chemicals, and phagocytosis, and their role in causing chronic infections. The results suggest that biofilm formation was possibly inhibited at the early adherence stage at various concentrations of Ag-NPs tested. This study highlights the potential of Ag-NPs in addressing the challenges presented by bacterial biofilms.