Typically, power consumption models use fixed values for input parameters, but since these values are estimated from a limited number of collected samples, they introduce uncertainties into the model due to incomplete information. This type of uncertainty, known as epistemic uncertainty, needs to be propagated from the input to the output of the model.

To investigate how epistemic uncertainty affects the power consumption of a machine, we conducted benchmarks on an ASUS desktop computer with specific hardware and software configurations. We then applied the obtained theoretical results to a practical case, examining the impact of epistemic uncertainty on the backup battery life of an uninterruptible power supply (UPS) that is strained by a constant load affected by epistemic uncertainty.

Several power consumption models have been proposed for studying and reducing data center power consumption. Priya et al. described the main power consumption models used for data centers, with the linear model proposed by Fan et al. being the most widely used. Similarly, Cerotti et al. used the linear model to study the power consumption of pool depletion systems.

Buyya et al. proposed a power model similar to the one introduced by Fan et al., and used it to address energy-aware resource allocation in cloud environments. They also considered the power consumption for cooling mechanisms, estimating it to be between 30% and 50% of the total data center power consumption.

In our case study, we investigated the lifetime distribution of a UPS battery when the power model used to estimate the system power consumption is based on uncertain input parameters. Our approach allows users to consider the number of samples to be collected in order to obtain a more accurate output measure.

We then applied the concept of uncertainty propagation in power models to a real-world case, analyzing a UPS battery's lifetime when it needs to support a server processing a constant workload. We considered various UPS architectures and their implications for estimating battery lifetime.

This paper represents the first known use of epistemic uncertainty propagation to study power consumption models. Previous work typically considered input parameters to be exact, regardless of the number of observed samples used for their estimations.