The presence of non-zero equivalent series resistance (ESR) in capacitances leads to differential mode (DM) noises between the circuit lines and the ground. Several studies have demonstrated that common mode (CM) noise is significantly higher than DM noise, indicating that CM noise has a greater impact on electromagnetic interference (EMI) compared to DM noise [23, 6].

In the literature, double active bridge (DAB) DC-DC converters are recognized as important for high-power applications [30, 19, 7, 10]. However, DAB circuits are complex due to their 8-switching control structure, and they exhibit high EMI values because of their output capacitance. These circuits are controlled using four different phase shift modulation methods: single phase shift (SPS), dual phase shift (DPS), extended phase shift (EPS), and triple phase shift (TPS) modulation. While SPS is commonly used, TPS modulation method remains significant in terms of efficiency and detailed control. Studies have also indicated that the EMI values of DAB circuits using SPS switching method are higher than those of circuits with different topologies.

Notably, despite the importance of phase shift modulation techniques, there is a lack of analysis on their impact on EMI. Understanding these techniques is crucial, as they can be used to mitigate EMI without the need for hardware modifications such as gate drive control and EMI filter design. This paper investigates the effects of SPS and DPS methods on EMI in the context of DAB circuits.

In this study, two DAB circuits using Si and SiC MOSFETs with a power rating of 1 kW and 80 V output voltages were designed. These circuits were separately controlled by SPS and DPS modulation techniques and analyzed using the LTspice program, followed by experimental EMI analysis. Section II details the four DAB circuits designed with Si and SiC MOSFETs controlled with SPS and DPS modulation methods. In Section III, the operating parameters of the DAB circuits including leakage inductance current, input power, power loss, and efficiency are compared. Section IV focuses on the EMI of the designed circuits.

The study sets the voltage for high voltage side (VHV) at 200 V, low voltage side (VLV) at 80 V, duty cycle (D3) at 0.15, and number of phase shifts (NPS) at 2 in order to achieve soft switching for both bridges. However, it is important to note that the loss may not be minimized when the circuit operates with soft switching.

Comparing the current waveform and root mean square (RMS) values for circuit type 1 and type 2, it is observed that the average current on the leakage inductance is higher in circuit type 2. Additionally, the current waveform in circuit type 2 exhibits a sawtooth shape rather than a square wave, with its peak value reaching 11A. These factors are expected to cause more stress on the switching elements due to EMI emitted by the parasitic components, leading to higher EMI in circuit type 2.

References

a. Kumar, A.H. Bhat, P. Agarwal. "Comparative Analysis of Dual Active Bridge Isolated DC to DC Converter with Single Phase Shift and Extended Phase Shift Control Techniques." 2017 6th International Conference on Computer Applications in Electrical Engineering-Recent Advances (CERA), 2017. Roorkee, India.
b. M. Kumar, A. Kumar, A.H. Bhat, P. Agarwal. "Comparative Study of Dual Active Bridge Isolated DC to DC Converter with Single Phase Shift and Dual Phase Shift Control Techniques." 2017 Recent Developments in Control, Automation Power Engineering (RDCAPE). Noida, India, 2017.