In broad terms, the advancements in concurrency research have shifted focus from centralized concurrent systems to distributed systems in the past decade. This is motivated by the need to consider various phenomena beyond pure interaction, such as location-dependent behavior, resource usage, and mobility in distributed systems. The spatial logics for concurrency include the composition operator a| b and the void operator 0, where a system satisfies a| b if it can be decomposed into two subsystems satisfying a and b, and a system satisfies 0 if it is empty. The guarantee operator ad b allows the logic to talk about contextual properties, with a process satisfying ad b if composing it with a system that satisfies a yields a system satisfying b.

The rules red comm, red tau, red go, and red fail specify interaction, internal action, migration, and failure in the context of concurrent systems. The paper establishes standard properties of strong reduction barbed congruence, emphasizing congruences under static contexts. The observation of barbs in networks provides information about the distributed structure of systems, and strong reduction barbed congruent networks are shown to result from a one-to-one correspondence of sites.

Furthermore, the ability to count sites is a result of mobility and local synchronization in the model, and the paper utilizes failures to demonstrate the correspondence between strong reduction barbed congruent sites. Grow transitions are used to observe process migration from the system to the external environment, enabling the enlargement of the system with a new site to serve as a possible destination for migratory processes. The proof of the main theorem relies on the compositionality principle of the calculus and the migration of processes.

Similarly, weak reduction barbed congruence is able to distinguish systems based on their structure, with weakly reduction barbed congruent networks consistently having the same number of sites. The proof for weak reduction barbed congruence relies on exploiting the failure behavior of the context to ensure an unique correspondence after the migration of mark-placing processes.