The initial initiative in this direction was documented in the literature. It is important to note that a graph is classified as locally chordal when the vertex neighborhood induces a chordal graph. A set of subtrees of a graph H is characterized as 2-acyclic if the combination of any two trees from the set results in an acyclic structure. Also, a set F of sets is described as helly if, for any subfamily of F comprising pairwise intersecting sets F1, F2, ..., Fn, the intersection of these sets is nonempty. It has been determined that locally chordal graphs can be identified as the intersection graphs of a helly 2-acyclic family of induced subtrees of a graph H.

When dealing with a chordal graph G and aiming to represent G as the intersection graph of a set of subtrees of a tree T, the potential options for T are countless. However, it becomes more intriguing when T contains the fewest vertices possible. If the number of vertices of T is minimal, it can be confirmed that the vertices of T correspond to the maximal cliques of G, thereby introducing the notion of a clique tree. 

Assuming G is a graph such that the number of vertices in G equals the number of elements in a set F, and every set of F induces a subtree in G, let Gj be a graph such that the number of vertices in Gj equals the number of elements in Fj. G is a subgraph of Gj, every set in Fj with exactly two elements forms an edge in Gj, xivj is an edge in Gj for every i between 1 and n, and Gj has no edge other than those implied by the aforementioned conditions. It can be confirmed that every set in Fj induces a subtree in Gj. 

Clique representations were introduced as an endeavor to generalize clique trees in chordal graphs; however, there are numerous properties of clique trees that clique representations lack. Furthermore, the problem of determining whether a graph has a clique representation is NP-complete.

Given these limitations, it is most reasonable to pursue research in the study of intersection graphs of induced subtrees of specific types of graphs. This paper examines the intersection graphs of induced subtrees of certain classes of bipartite graphs. For future research, it would be beneficial to investigate the intersection graphs of induced subtrees of other types of graphs.