Byun et al. originally introduced a cross-realm c2c-pake protocol that leverages key distribution centers (KDCs) in different realms to facilitate communication. They demonstrated the security of the protocol against potential attacks. This type of protocol is commonly referred to as cross-realm c2c-pake. For simplicity, we will use the term c2c-pake for the remainder of this paper.

The paper is structured as follows: In section 2, we outline our general approach for constructing cross-realm c2c-pake protocols. Section 3 revisits the security model known as the real-or-random (ror) model, along with the necessary basic assumptions and security definitions to establish the protocol's security. In section 4, we delve into the security analysis of the new scheme and provide a detailed security proof. Lastly, in section 5, we offer concluding remarks.

The concept of a security model for key exchange protocols was first introduced by Bellare and Rogaway. Subsequently, Bellare et al. extended this model to password-based key exchange protocols in 2000. More recently, Abdalla et al. proposed a refined security model, the real-or-random (ror) model, as a stronger alternative. They recommended adopting the ror model to prove the security of their password-based schemes. In this section, we apply this formal model to demonstrate the security of our general construction for cross-realm client-to-client password-based key exchange.

Semantic security in the ror model entails allowing the adversary A to send multiple queries to execute, sendClient, sendServer, and test oracles as desired, with the exception that they are no longer permitted to make reveal queries, as allowed in the model presented by Abdalla et al. Notably, when b=0, the same random key value should be returned for test queries posed to two partnered instances.

The proof closely resembles games g6 and g7 in the semantic security proof of c2c-gpake. Let AKP be an adversary against the key privacy of c2c-gpake, with a time complexity of at most t. Furthermore, AKP can make at most qexe queries to design a generic construction of c2c-pake in the cross-realm setting using 2-party pake and key distribution protocols. However, they were unable to provide a scheme. In this paper, we present a general construction for client-to-client pake protocols based on the generic construction for a 3-party scenario. Furthermore, we are able to prove its security by utilizing existing efficient protocols based on standard assumptions rather than random oracle models.