This academic paper focuses on the application of armored optical fiber Bragg grating metal temperature sensors in real-time online monitoring of high voltage cables in the cable trench and cable pit of a substation in Zhaotong. The cable plays a crucial role in the electricity system, connecting various electricity devices in the substation to the control room. The cable is usually laid in cable bridges, tunnels, interlayers, ditches, and shafts due to the abundance of cables, long routes, complex trajectories, and compact arrangements.

The double-layer tube structure is utilized to conduct temperature and alleviate the impact of external stress strain on Bragg wavelength offset. The outer tube primarily functions to counteract the external stress strain impact, while the inner tube uniformly transfers temperature, causing changes in the Bragg wavelength offset value. The system is deployed in the 220/110/35kV substation cable trench and cable pits of the Yunnan Power Network of Zhaotong Power Supply Bureau. Traditional temperature detection systems based on telecommunication transmission methods are inadequate for the cable trench and cable pits, necessitating the use of fiber Bragg grating real-time temperature monitoring systems with distributed monitoring points.

The article describes a cable temperature rise test conducted in the laboratory to determine the initial temperature change and distribution of heat faults in the cable. The system is capable of accurately measuring the temperature with a resolution of 0.1 and an effective measurement distance of up to 4 km. A total of 60 metal armored fiber optic Bragg grating temperature sensors are needed according to the 0.5 m per branch principle.

The study conducted a comparative analysis and monitoring of temperature data over 24 hours and 479 days and found that the cable surface temperature and environmental temperature change trend were consistent. Moreover, the temperature changes observed were influenced by seasons, and the extent of change in the maximum and minimum temperatures of the cable trench and cable pit indicated normal working conditions, without any abnormal or mutational temperature changes.