The existence of a version of predictive labeling with models and arbitrary interpretations is not possible, as it is only applicable to quasi-models and cannot be reused for innermost rewriting. However, it is worth investigating whether predictive labeling with models could be utilized for innermost termination, allowing for freely chosen interpretations and only requiring the algebra to be a model of the usable rules. While previous results on predictive labeling are limited to quasi-models, they do not apply to innermost rewriting, as shown in Example 2.3, indicating that the main theorem of predictive labeling does not hold for innermost rewriting [4, theorem 18].

It is worth noting that the innermost termination of r is attributed to the fact that test-ab(x) can only yield true if x is instantiated with a(b), which is not permissible as a(b) is not in normal form. The algebra a with carrier a={0, 1} is chosen with particular interpretations.

The aforementioned example does not demonstrate that semantic labeling with models is unsound for innermost termination, as there are no decreasing rules when using models. Furthermore, the subsequent section demonstrates the soundness of semantic labeling with models for innermost termination, with the additional incorporation of usable rules. In fact, stronger results are proven by incorporating usable rules.

Lemmas 3.3(i) and (ii) enable the transformation of innermost reductions of r into infinite innermost reductions of lab(r), a necessity for proving the main theorem of this section (Theorem 3.4). Property (iii) is essential for the proof of Lemma 3.3.

This analysis illustrates how semantic labeling can be utilized to establish innermost termination, revealing that semantic labeling can be applied to models but not to quasi-models. The findings are extended to predictive labeling, where only a model for the usable rules needs to be found. This approach is further enhanced by integrating argument filters. Ultimately, this enhancement is integrated with predictive labeling for termination.

The implementation of semantic and predictive labeling with infinite (quasi-)models for termination has been realized in the automatic termination prover TPA, with the underlying theory detailed in previous works. In the latter paper, predictive labeling for termination is combined with dependency pairs, and adapting these results for innermost termination is straightforward. Incorporating argument filterings enlarges the search space but otherwise presents no significant challenge. It is anticipated that the findings of this paper will enhance the capabilities of TPA and other termination provers.