It is evident that when transitioning from example 1.1 to example 1.2, a generalization was indeed made. In fact, both f and f serve as specific instances of qf. Given the set of individuals w, consider the families e and a of subsets of w, defined by the following expressions.

We establish the groundwork for the pnl system, extending the concept of a basic modal system to pnl, and demonstrate how the systems presented in [4, 2, 8, 1] can be constructed as straightforward instances of our formalism. Specifically, we illustrate the utilization of pnl by presenting simplified versions of results in [8, 1], obtained by applying the general strategy outlined earlier to extend pnl and apply general versions of fundamental results. This provides insight into the essential characteristics of these systems and sheds light on the numerous relationships between them.

From a mathematical perspective, the results presented here can be seen as direct applications of established techniques when applied to a broader context. Our primary contributions are conceptual. On one hand, the generalization to a multi-modal and poly-modal setting is valuable as it demonstrates how many well-known systems can be unified. On the other hand, the observation that complex new techniques are not required highlights the naturalness of this framework.

Consider example 2.1 and the sentence (5) from example 1.2, which was formalized as qf l by employing the unary modal operator qf indexed by f. Alternatively, we can utilize a binary modal operator q and formulate sentence (5) as q(f, l), where f represents the set of all my friends (i.e., the image of me under the relation f) and l represents the set of all logicians. In this particular case, the proper interpretation of the formula q(f, l) should imply that the relation "me has q(f, l)" holds when the set of all my friends that are logicians contains a substantial portion of the set of all friends.

Systems of modal logic with neighborhood semantics are extensions of basic modal logic. Here, we generalize neighborhood semantics, as neighborhood formulas and meaning definitions are just special cases of definitions 2.2, 2.3, 2.4, and 2.5, in which the similarity type consists of a single unary operator.

Basic modal logic is a specific instance of modal logic with neighborhood semantics, as demonstrated earlier. This section can also be seen as a preparatory step for the work in section 4. The basic similarity type comprises only one modal operator of rank 1.

In this paper, we have initiated the exploration of polymodal neighborhood languages. We have presented a completeness result for the basic polymodal neighborhood system and illustrated how some critical systems based on neighborhood-like semantics can be simulated as special cases of our system. There is still much work to be done.