Cheminformatics refers to the utilization of information technology for handling chemical information, and has been closely linked with the chemical sciences for many years. The term itself was coined fairly recently, as the growing volume of chemical data generated within the drug discovery field necessitated the use of chemical information technologies. Core activities in the field of cheminformatics include managing chemical databases and datasets, storing and retrieving chemical information, studying structure-property relationships, conducting in silico screening, and designing combinatorial and focused libraries.

A variety of data science and machine learning platforms have been developed to enable users with limited coding ability to create pipelines for data exploration, analysis, and mining. While some well-known examples, such as KNIME, Pipeline Pilot, and Alteryx, offer free and open-source distributions, advanced features or third-party applications are often only available under commercial licenses, making them inaccessible to small research units in developing countries.

All applications within the LIDEB tools suite have been deployed as web apps on the Streamlit platform, providing scientists with a user-friendly interface and access to computational resources allocated to the cloud. Alternatively, their standalone distributions are written in plain Python, adopting an object-oriented programming paradigm and utilizing open-source libraries, thereby offering a higher level of customization and code reusability. Moreover, these tools can be easily integrated into existing chemoinformatic pipelines.

In the input step, molecules to be clustered should be provided as a .csv file in SMILES format. After optional standardization using MolVS, Mordred is employed to compute 1613 molecular descriptors for each molecule. Alternatively, users may provide their own pool of molecular descriptors as a tab-delimited .txt file.

In another scenario of the input step, molecules are provided in SMILES notation as a .csv file. Instead of calculating molecular descriptors, the molecular representations are encoded into EState1 molecular fingerprints, with a fixed-length fingerprint containing 79 features, using RDKit. The UMAP algorithm is then applied to reduce the hyperdimensional space of the fingerprints, retaining the most informative features. The size of the embedded space is determined based on the dataset size. In the clustering step, the GMM algorithm is applied to search for the number of clusters that maximizes the silhouette score in the embedded UMAP space. An elbow plot of the silhouette score vs. the number of clusters is presented for visual estimation of the optimal cluster number. The same additional cvis described previously for IRAPCA are also calculated and the same output files are generated.

Once the optimal cutoff has been identified, CHICA is re-run with this distance value, generating four output files: clustering_assignations.csv specifies which molecules have been assigned to clusters according to the chosen cutoff value, cluster_distribution.csv specifies the number of obtained clusters and their sizes, validations.csv contains the values of the cvis, and settings.csv contains the selected parameters in the run.

Preliminary decoys are estimated by calculating the difference between each known active compound and each decoy in terms of six pairing properties, summarizing them with a physicochemical similarity score (PSS) ranging from 0 (lowest similarity) to 1 (highest similarity). Compounds are then ordered based on descending PSS values, and the top 200 are selected.

The quality of the generated decoy molecules, in terms of physicochemical matching of decoys and the risk of allowing latent active compounds in the decoy set (LADs), was determined by the deviation from the optimal embedding score (DOE score) and the assessment of the doppelganger score, as recommended by Vogel et al. The DOE score was obtained by analyzing the spatial distances of the molecules in the chemical space defined by the six normalized physicochemical properties used to match queries and decoys. Additionally, the distances from each active compound to all remaining active compounds and decoys were calculated in the normalized multidimensional space, and molecules were sorted in ascending order according to these distances. A receiving operating characteristic (ROC) curve was then built for each active compound, and the average absolute value of the difference between the area of these ROC curves and the area of a randomly sorted list of compounds (0.5) was defined as the DOE score.

Seventy percent of the proteins in each class were sampled for the training set of the classifiers, while the remaining proteins were used as a test set to externally validate the generated models. To sample representatively, a clustering strategy combining dimensionality reduction of Zernike descriptors by principal component analysis (PCA) was used, followed by the application of the k-means clustering algorithm.

In contrast, in the randomization test, the class label was randomized across the proteins comprising the training set. The training set with the randomized variable was used to train new models, starting from the descriptor selection step. This procedure was repeated 1000 times for each descriptor subset. Randomized models are expected to exhibit poor accuracy compared with real models.