We aim to investigate the impact of introducing new train stops in an existing railway network, taking into account two main effects. The first effect focuses on the accessibility of the railway network to the population, with a specific interest in reducing the distance between people's residences and their nearest train stop. This accessibility model will be elaborated further in section 2, along with the introduction of an optimization problem that is proven to be NP-complete. The second effect under consideration pertains to the change in travel time for existing railway customers resulting from the introduction of new train stops. This involves assessing the trade-off between the potential slowing down of train journeys due to additional stops and the reduced travel time for customers living closer to the newly opened train stops. Understanding this travel time model is essential, and we will demonstrate the associated NP-completeness result for the corresponding optimization problem in section 3. Additionally, this paper will propose a genetic algorithm as an approach to solve this optimization problem, and section 5 will present experimental results for the entire railway network of Deutsche Bahn AG in Germany.

In the problem, the set of coordinate points, denoted as p, represents settlements, while the set of feasible points along the tracks of the railway company is represented by l. It is assumed that the set of tracks is piecewise linear, consisting of a finite number of line segments si ∈ ℝ^2, for i = 1, ..., l. A feasible solution x to the problem consists of a set of points in the plane, representing the stops to be installed, and x is deemed feasible if x ⊆ l, meaning that each point in x satisfies the condition x ∈ l.

Furthermore, the problem involves the replacement of a set of points a of p with jaj ≥ 2 by a disc with a center point q and diameter d, where q is the center point of the smallest enclosing circle of a.

In a special case where there is only one line segment in l, covering along lines translates to a set covering problem with an interval matrix as the constraint matrix, thus making it polynomially solvable by linear programming. This result can be extended to sets of line segments, with the condition that no settlement can be covered by two stops from different line segments.

To illustrate the concept, we reduce covering along lines to saved travel time. Given an instance of covering along lines with p, l, d, and k < |p|, as defined previously, we construct a network g = (v, e) using the line segments in l.

The travel time model can be seen as a location problem in which new facilities must be situated on a given network, while the existing facilities are represented as points in the Euclidean plane. Therefore, traditional approaches of location theory, including planar location models and network location theory, are not entirely suitable for this scenario. Furthermore, even in the case of locating only one new stop, the objective function of saved travel time is not convex. Hence, we need to develop new solution algorithms to address this issue. We will introduce our initial approach, a genetic algorithm, in the following section.