The programming language Java is commonly utilized for developing distributed and concurrent systems. However, testing multithreaded systems does not ensure the software's quality. In comparison, verification techniques offer increased confidence in the system. Model checking methods, in particular, automatically establish properties of complex systems and are typically applied to specification languages. This paper describes an attempt to utilize model checking techniques to verify a subset of multithreaded Java programs by using a tool based on the selective mu-calculus logic to check systems described through the ccs specification language. 

The paper is structured as follows: Section 2 provides an overview of the basic concepts of ccs and the methodology based on the selective mu-calculus to address the state explosion problem. Section 3 describes the transformation of multithreaded Java programs into ccs specifications, and Section 4 demonstrates the utility of the approach in reducing the model's complexity through a simple synchronization problem. Finally, Section 5 offers considerations and comparisons with related work. 

The paper briefly reviews the main concepts of ccs and selective mu-calculus. ccs is a widely-used specification language for concurrent and distributed systems. The selective mu-calculus is a branching temporal logic to express behavioral properties of systems and has been introduced by the authors.

The resulting ccs process is analyzed by a ccs reduction tool that automatically removes non-relevant actions in relation to the formula to be checked. The main advantage is the ability to combine this tool with other techniques developed to address the state explosion problem, such as partial order methods, abstraction techniques, compositional reasoning, and heuristic searches. Once the ccs specification corresponding to the initial Java program is obtained, the aforementioned methods can be applied.

The paper defines an operator, "t," which applies to the Java code of a program to translate it into ccs specifications. The method also defines how every method corresponds to a process waiting to be invoked through the action "callmethodnamei."

The results obtained from this approach are promising, but further investigation is needed to validate the results on relevant problems in software verification and to compare them with other tools. In general, the usefulness of the tool depends on the number of actions occurring in the formula and the structure of the formula to be checked.

The approach proposed in this paper falls within the source-to-source translation category and involves the translation of multithreaded Java programs into ccs specifications. It also uses a reduction algorithm based on the selective mu-calculus logic to address the state explosion problem and facilitate the writing of properties. The paper concludes by highlighting the relevance of this approach in error detection in concurrent programs at a lower cost compared to testing the program.