However, there are compelling reasons to consider open games as the objects of a category as well. Primarily, it is desirable to characterize specific open games using universal properties, enabling more abstract reasoning about them. This paper introduces the concept of contravariant lens morphisms as a general notion of morphisms between open games, and explores the resulting structure and applications.

It is anticipated that morphisms of open games can be depicted as surface diagrams, cobordisms between the string diagrams representing the open games, and composition of morphisms as the gluing of surfaces; however, additional foundational work in 3-dimensional algebra is necessary to fully justify this. The ultimate objective is to be able to reason about game-theoretic concepts solely using surface diagrams. Additionally, open games and globular morphisms together form a bicategory, but it is argued through examples that a more general double-categorical structure is also beneficial.

In extensive-form games, a strategy for a player i is defined as a map that assigns to each information set x owned by player i, a choice of action available at nodes in x. Furthermore, a strategy profile is a tuple of strategies for each player.

A subgame of an extensive form game g is defined as a subtree h with the property that if x is any node in h, then any node in g in the same information set as x is also in h. The subtree h inherits the structure of an extensive form game from g.

The term "bimorphic lens" is introduced in this paper to differentiate it from the more familiar cases of monomorphic and polymorphic lenses. While the definition of a polymorphic lens remains the same, a monomorphic lens satisfies x= s and y= r in a polymorphic type system. Whereas monomorphic and polymorphic lenses are typically subject to certain axioms called the lens laws, such restrictions do not apply in general for bimorphic lenses. In the context of compositional game theory, arbitrary bimorphic lenses need to be considered.

It is anticipated that all reasonable definitions of general morphisms between open games will coincide with globular morphisms, but it is demonstrated through examples in this paper and elsewhere that more general morphisms are essential. The morphisms defined in this paper are quite distinct from those in a previous work, yet they share the same globular morphisms.

This paper focuses on pseudo double categories, in which the vertical morphisms form a category, while the horizontal morphisms form a category only up to invertible 2-cells. Consequently, there is a category of vertical morphisms and a bicategory of horizontal morphisms. The notation mainly follows a specific reference, which provides an explicit definition of symmetric monoidal pseudo double categories. In this section, it is shown that there is a pseudo double category where objects are disets, horizontal 1-cells are open games, vertical 1-morphisms are reversed lenses, and 2-cells are contravariant lens morphisms.