The inclusion of open natural products (such as coconut) and the universal natural product database (UNPD) are two expansive compound databases. Coconut is considered the most comprehensive public natural product database, containing 389,184 unique structures, while the UNPD follows as the second-largest public natural product database, housing 153,375 natural products. A notable difference between UNPD and coconut is that UNPD compounds include chirality information. In Latin America, various public natural product databases compile compounds isolated and characterized from their respective countries of origin. 

For this research, a range of databases with compounds from diverse origins were utilized, including three natural product data sets and a data set focused on a specific pharmaceutical molecular target. Natural product databases from different sources were compared to assess the NPL score of UNPD subsets (natural product-likeness). Additionally, a data set centered on a specific molecular target and natural products from various sources were employed to evaluate and compare the molecular diversity of UNPD subsets. By using a focused database, a reference value of low structural diversity was obtained to compare against the structural diversity of the UNPD subsets. Furthermore, chemical structures from other natural product databases were used as reference compound collections to assess the diversity of newly generated data sets. Each type of data set and its contents are detailed below.

Three natural product data sets were used, namely, coconut, UNPD, and Biofacquim. Coconut comprised 389,184 unique structures without including chirality information, while UNPD housed 153,375 natural products with encoded chirality. Biofacquim is a database containing 531 natural products isolated and characterized in Mexico, including information on the chirality of the compounds. Additionally, a data set consisting of 715 compounds focused on DNA methyltransferase 1 (DNMT1) inhibitors, an epigenetic target relevant to drug discovery, was obtained from the ChEMBL database, release 31.

Molecules with valence errors or containing any chemical element other than H, B, C, N, O, F, Si, P, S, Cl, Se, Br, and I, were eliminated, and stereochemistry information, when available, was retained. Compounds with multiple components were split, and the largest component was retained. The remaining compounds were neutralized and reionized to generate the corresponding canonical tautomer.

The t-SNE technique was employed to generate plots organizing compounds, with similar compounds forming clusters and dissimilar ones positioned distantly from each other. TMAP was used for visualizing multiple chemical compounds by representing the distances between clusters. Local sensitive hashing (LSH) was utilized to hierarchically group compounds according to common substructures using molecular fingerprints and to determine the number of nearest neighbors.

The study reports the selection and characterization of three subsets from UNPD representing the most diverse compounds using the maxmin algorithm. These subsets, containing 14,994, 7,497, and 4,998 compounds, were found to contain the most structurally diverse natural products. Unlike compounds in the coconut database, molecules in UNPD are annotated with chirality. The structural diversity of compounds appears to be unaffected by the number of subsets derived from the original database, and an analysis of the chemical multiverse supports the presence of the most diverse molecules within UNPD subsets. The study also concluded that the visualization of the chemical space using ECFP6 is more accurate in describing the structural diversity of compounds compared to ECFP4 and MACCS keys (166 bits). The natural product subsets displayed a large diversity of chemical compounds with various structural features and properties relevant to pharmaceutical applications. The NPL score supports the observation that the chemical structures of natural products are highly diverse and different, as defined by the NPL score threshold. As expected, natural products (coconut, UNPD, and Biofacquim) displayed NPL scores close to 5.