This academic paper introduces a novel method for model predictive control of a continuous stirred-tank reactor (CSTR) using a fuzzy-Hammerstein model. The proposed approach utilizes a T-S fuzzy model to approximate the static nonlinear characteristics of the Hammerstein model, and a linear autoregressive model is employed for optimal control. By leveraging the universal approximation capabilities of the T-S model, the designed nonlinear predictive controller effectively addresses the challenges of nonlinear predictive control by separating the tasks of nonlinear model recognition and linear predictive control. The application results on the CSTR process demonstrate that the proposed control method outperforms the PID controller in terms of control performance.

Previous literature has explored different predictive control algorithms, including the Hammerstein model, Wiener model, and Volterra model. The use of a polynomial model to approximate the nonlinear characteristics of the Hammerstein model and employing an autoregressive model with exogenous input (ARX) to describe the linear part of external factors has shown effectiveness in simulating binary distillation tower results. However, the precision and complexity of the algorithm increase proportionally with the use of a polynomial to describe nonlinearity, limiting its applicability. Another study utilized a nonlinear base to represent the static nonlinear part of the Hammerstein model and a Laguerre series for its dynamic linear part, which effectively controlled output interference in the pH neutralization process. Additionally, an improved Hammerstein model by Zhu et al. demonstrated better control effects through simulation. Furthermore, this paper introduces two new identifications based on the Hammerstein model for the CSTR reactor, which proved to be effective in providing good control methods. Finally, literature on nonlinear predictive control algorithms based on the Hammerstein model demonstrated the stability and robustness of the algorithm through simulation examples in pH and reaction processes.