The complexity of determining weak bisimilarity on bpp is a long-standing open problem, as it is not even known whether the notion is decidable. While weak bisimilarity remains pspace-hard for normed bpp, decidability has been achieved for slightly more restricted classes, such as the class of totally normed bpp. However, both algorithms for totally normed bpp seem to have non-elementary complexity. Branching bisimilarity, which also reflects a notion of observable behavior, is decidable on totally normed bpp as well.

Classes of infinite-state processes are typically defined in terms of rewrite systems, such as (1, p)-prs, which capture bpp processes. The notion of crs generalizes (1, p)-prs by allowing processes to communicate, with the type of communication specified by a synchronization algebra. Additionally, crs allows a process to evolve into a tuple of processes rather than only one, thus capturing generalizations of transition systems like those used by distributed bisimilarity, as well as capturing branching bisimilarity.

Our unique decomposition result is achieved through the use of a tool developed by Luttik and van Oostrom, which states that a partial commutative monoid has a unique decomposition if it has a decomposition order. The concept of a decomposition order captures the algebraic properties underlying unique decomposition proofs in process theory. Each normed crs induces a notion of norm-reducing bisimulation, and we show that congruences which are norm-reducing bisimulations have a natural decomposition order, thus satisfying unique decomposition. This result not only implies unique decomposition for bisimilarity, but also forms the basis of our general decision procedure.

We introduce a tool based on a theorem by Luttik and van Oostrom that characterizes when a partial commutative monoid has unique decomposition.

In the following, we provide some preliminaries, including a definition for when a presentation mapping is considered effective with respect to a given complexity class. We then prove our main result: whenever a presentation mapping is effective within a certain complexity class, then the bisimilarity problem can be decided within that class. Finally, we provide the proofs that were omitted from the main text.

We also introduce a new normed crs "p" that captures weak bisimilarity, where the presentation mapping, in contrast to the previous one, is pspace-effective. The treatment of the indices "k" is the only new ingredient in this new presentation mapping.