The paper addresses the verification problem of a class of infinite-state systems known as wpad, which are used to model programs with potentially recursive procedure calls and the dynamic creation of parallel processes. These systems are an extension of pad models and involve an acyclic finite-state control unit. Symbolic reachability techniques have been proposed for the verification problem of pad models using a class of unranked tree automata. The paper extends this work to wpad models, which are more powerful than pad models and provides a positive answer to an open question regarding the decidability of the model checking problem for wpad against ef.

To enhance the modeling power of pushdown systems (PRS), one approach is to add synchronization through rendezvous, leading to a turing powerful model called synchronized PRS. Similarly, pad models can be extended to synchronized pad models, for which approximate analysis algorithms using abstraction techniques have been proposed.

Another approach for enhancing the modeling power of PRS and pad models involves adding global control states. The resulting models, called seprs, are a parallel product of a PRS with a finite-state automaton representing global control. These models are Turing powerful as they allow communication between recursive parallel processes through the global control state. However, if the control automaton has a weak structure with all its loops being self-loops, the resulting models, called wprs, have a decidable reachability problem. Similar results hold for pad models, where adding weak control automata results in models called wpad, which have a decidable reachability problem and are proven to be more powerful than pad models with respect to strong bisimulation.

The paper presents a solution to the problem of computing reachability sets and 1-step reachability sets for pad and wpad systems. Computing reachability sets is generally difficult for PRS; however, the paper shows that the reachability sets of canonic pad systems can be effectively computed if the underlying multiset rewrite system is effectively semilinear. This result is due to the properties of context-free multiset rewrite systems. The paper also proposes an approximative algorithm for canonic PRS systems to compute overapproximations of reachability sets. By applying this algorithm, the paper concludes that overapproximations of reachability sets for general wprs systems can be computed, and 1-step reachability sets for wprs systems can be computed precisely.