The techniques developed for proving cut elimination theorems can be broadly categorized into two groups: reduction-based methods and model-based methods. In recent times, there has been a merging of these two types of techniques. This paper discusses the transformation that has led to the consideration of reduction-based and model-based methods as being closely intertwined.

In order to establish the disjunction property for arithmetic or simple type theory, it is necessary to first extend the cut elimination theorem. This explains the existence of various cut elimination theorems for different theories of interest. For example, in arithmetic, a new form of cut specific to the induction axiom is typically introduced, and the cut elimination theorem is re-established for this extended notion of cut.

The elimination rules for connectors and quantifiers, as well as the folding of these into propositions, are followed by the corresponding introduction rules. This results in very natural deduction rules where connectors and quantifiers almost vanish, resembling the practice in mathematics. Significantly, the theories that possess the cut elimination property in these three formalisms are the same, demonstrating the strength of this concept of cut.

In the traditional concept of bi-valued model, it is not feasible to permute the quantifiers and prove the existence of a uniform model \(m\) such that for every proposition \(a\), if \(a\) is valid in \(m\), then \(a\) is provable. However, by extending the model concept to allow truth values to be elements of an arbitrary boolean algebra, this statement becomes provable. An example of such a model is the syntactic model, where the truth values are the elements of the lindenbaum algebra of the language. In constructive logic, the boolean algebras need to be replaced by heyting algebras, but this uniform completeness theorem can still be proved.

We have jointly proposed with Benjamin Werner a reduction-based cut elimination proof for a wide range of theories in deduction modulo. In deduction modulo, unlike in type theory, the terms of the theory and the proof-terms are entities of different kinds, as well as the sorts of the language and the propositions. Thus, it was appropriate to interpret not only propositions using reducibility candidates for truth values, but also terms.

As mentioned earlier, the traditional concept of bi-valued model can be extended to concepts where the truth values form a boolean algebra or a heyting algebra. This raises the question of whether pre-models can be viewed as heyting algebra-valued models, i.e., the question of defining an order on the set of reducibility candidates that makes it a heyting algebra. Unfortunately, this is not possible, as in the case of ...

Once this convergence is achieved, several directions may be worth exploring. Firstly, we may aim to directly derive proof theoretical results from superconsistency, without first proving cut elimination. Secondly, we may want to extend the notion of super-consistency to type theory. The recent revelation that relates deduction modulo and type theory may serve as a good starting point for these endeavors.