In a previous iteration of this paper, we derived canonical forms for third-order DPH distributions with all possible eigenvalue structures except for one case, referred to as the pnp case. We also proposed a conjecture for this pnp case, which was later found to be invalid. In this paper, we revisit the established findings for third-order DPH distributions and focus specifically on the pnp case. Findings related to second-order DPH distributions are not included in this paper.

The subsequent sections are structured as follows: a brief introduction to DPH distributions is provided in the following section. Section 3 summarizes the previous results on the canonical representation of third-order DPH distributions with all possible eigenvalue structures except for the pnp case. New results are presented in Section 4, which delves into the canonical representation of third-order DPH distributions with the pnp eigenvalue structure. The challenge in addressing the pnp case stems from the fact that the methodology used to establish canonical forms for third-order CPH and DPH distributions with non-pnp eigenvalue structures does not apply to the pnp case.

In the pursuit of a viable proof for a given distribution of the six zero elements, we discovered that its complexity is comparable to that of the proofs presented in Section 3. However, the drawback of this approach lies in the large number of different distributions of the six zero elements. We cataloged the potential non-symmetric and non-circular symmetric distributions of the six zero elements, eliminating those that were obviously meaningless (e.g., those resulting in a matrix with lower rank), and were left with over 300 distinct structures (specifically, 319 structures, although some might be redundant). This substantial number of different distributions of zero elements hindered our ability to prove observation 1 using this approach.

To address this challenge, we employed a general transformation method to numerically compute the proportion of the 300 structures with six zero elements that are Markovian for a given tuple of s1, s2, s3, a1, and a2. Our numerical experiments validated observation 1 in conjunction with Theorem 4.3, Theorem 4.4, and Observations 2 and 3. Outside the Markovian region of the pnp1, pnp2, and pnp3 representations, none of the other representations were Markovian. Conversely, inside these regions, typically more than one of the 300 different structures were Markovian, and at least one of the pnp1, pnp2, and pnp3 representations was consistently among the Markovian ones.