The rise and rapid spread of networked infrastructures present new obstacles to the integration of information systems. Coalitions are frequently formed between independent systems, such as organizations collaborating within a common framework (e.g., ministries in e-government infrastructures, interconnected hospitals in e-healthcare environments), to enable access to shared resources. Security is a major concern in such scenarios due to heterogeneity, differing policy specifications, and varied domain restrictions, leading to potential conflicts. Managing the security of these coalitions is time-consuming and error-prone when relying heavily on human intervention and not leveraging flexible approaches.

The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 discusses partial constraint satisfaction techniques and briefly explores the use of constraints for access control. Section 3 introduces our fuzzy constraint framework and presents a detailed example demonstrating its utility in resolving policy conflicts. Section 4 discusses related work in comparison with our approach, and Section 5 concludes the paper, offering directions for future research.

According to RBAC principles, role R may inherit permissions from R1 or R2. Taking into consideration the classification of the remote user from domain B, we aim to establish a (semi-)automated way of assigning access permissions to enable access to shared resources. However, additional constraints, such as those imposed by IPsec local policies (e.g., local firewall rules), may affect this task. For instance, a local firewall in IPsec may deny the establishment of a channel between the two domains when remote access is attempted through an encrypted channel. Under such circumstances, access may be restricted, and conflicts over permissions can arise due to local policy restrictions.

Fuzzy restrictions provide an alternative formalism for describing fuzzy constraints, offering the ability to express prioritized constraints and model priorities similar to preferences, expressed by levels on a scale from 0 to 1. A coefficient, ac, expresses the priority degree of each constraint, allowing the degree to which the constraint must be satisfied to be indicated. A fuzzy relation, s, on extent, a partial instantiation of y, can be extended to a complete instantiation of y that satisfies t, allowing for the partial satisfaction of given problems to the highest degree.

A critical parameter that needs to be instantiated first is required to find the best solution, where variables are first instantiated with a limited set of appropriate values. This allows for the application of branch and bound techniques, which keep track of the best-known good solution. By calculating the degree of satisfaction of an existing partial solution, we can continue exploring only further solutions that achieve higher degrees of satisfaction, excluding solutions that do not exceed the best solution found so far.

Barker and Stuckey apply constraint logic programming to express policies and present a technique for representing multiple access control policies, but their work does not support multiple access control restrictions, such as limitations to accessing objects at specific locations, as incorporated in our approach. They also do not address issues of partial constraint satisfaction in the presence of diverse domain restrictions or discuss the possibility to determine preferences over constraints.

Khurana et al. define a model for the dynamic management of coalitions using the RCL 2000 language, where coalition formation is performed through round-robin negotiation and a coalition access control matrix is formulated to keep records of allowed accesses. However, they do not discuss conflict resolution techniques. In contrast, our work focuses on resolving non-critical conflicts in a secure manner with minimal human intervention.

Our proposed flexible framework combines sub-policies in a hierarchical manner to determine safe release paths and provide support for conflict resolution by defining several policy operators. Furthermore, our work builds upon constraints instead of logic programs, introducing flexibility through the use of fuzzy constraints.

The process of multi-domain policy formulation is complex, considering the presence of diverse characteristics and restrictions. To support coalition formation and resolve conflicts, we have introduced a model based on partial constraint satisfaction, extended using fuzzy constraints to determine domain preferences and constraints prioritization. Additionally, we have illustrated the validity and applicability of our framework by applying it to an RBAC-driven example and have described a prototype architecture that builds upon standardized languages and utilizes the principles of our framework.