Aim and Background: Despite advancements in antibiotic therapies and intensive hospital care, the mortality rate for spontaneous peritonitis (SP) in cirrhotic patients remains high. The concurrent presence of spontaneous fungal peritonitis (SFP) is a neglected health issue due to challenges in early diagnosis using conventional culture-based methods. This study aimed to use a PCR-based method to assess the prevalence of fungal infections in cirrhotic patients with peritonitis who did not respond to recommended therapy, and to investigate its association with in-hospital mortality.

Results: During hospitalization, 23 patients (42%) had died despite receiving guideline-driven treatment. Demographic, clinical, hematological, and biochemical data were similar in both mortality and survival groups. However, the incidence of fungal infection was significantly higher in the mortality group compared to the survival group (7/23; 30% vs. 0/32; 0%, p= 0.0012). Fungal infection was significantly associated with SP drug resistance development (p= 0.007). PCR-based diagnosis detected all cases of fungal infection, while conventional culture-based methods only identified 4 cases, indicating a diagnostic sensitivity of 57%.

It is widely accepted that resistance to third-generation cephalosporins is a significant cause of mortality in SP cases. This is evidenced by the higher mortality rate among cirrhotic patients infected with germs resistant to third-generation cephalosporins compared to those infected by sensitive pathogens. Antibiotic resistance in SP may be due to the increased incidence of extended-spectrum β-lactamase (ESBL)-producing enterobacteriaceae or the presence of fungal infection. Candida albicans is commonly detected in ascitic fluid of cirrhotic patients and is reported as a potent etiological agent of SP. However, SFP is challenging to diagnose early using conventional culture-based methods due to longer culture times. The limitations in diagnosing SFP underscore the need for early and accurate detection before initiating guideline-driven treatments.

Recent diagnostic advances, such as the detection of fungal cell wall components and fungal genomic DNA using PCR, have the potential to improve diagnostic capabilities and increase clinical awareness of SFP. Despite limited studies on the use of these molecular techniques in diagnosing SFP in cirrhotic patients, this study aimed to utilize a DNA-based PCR method to evaluate the prevalence of fungal infection in cirrhotic patients with peritonitis who failed to respond to recommended antibiotic therapy, and to gain insights into the clinical characteristics and prognosis of SFP in comparison with other groups of cirrhotic patients with non-fungal peritonitis.

Methods: Blood and ascitic fluid samples were collected from each patient for various analyses, including liver function markers, creatinine, random blood glucose, and electrolyte levels. PCR products were visualized after electrophoresis on agarose gels.

Conclusions: The results support the need to specifically analyze data from patients with SFP compared to other groups with non-fungal ascitic fluid infection. The study identified the importance of accurate and early detection of SFP before initiating treatment, and the potential of PCR-based methods for diagnosing fungal infections in this patient population.