In this paper, we investigate the determinability of five issues concerning an expanded class of Petri nets. The motivation behind studying this specific class of Petri nets stems from the challenge of parametric verification of multiple instances of processes that can interact through partially non-blocking rendezvous, which is pertinent to the abstractions of multi-threaded Java programs.

Parametric verification aims to assess an entire range of systems simultaneously. For instance, certain mutual exclusion protocols are designed to function for any number of identical processes, and verifying these protocols for a specific number of processes is not adequate. The difficulty of the parametric verification problem has been demonstrated to be generally undecidable. To facilitate the development of partially automated methods, various abstractions have proven to be useful. While transfer nets, capable of modeling broadcast communications, have been the subject of theoretical study, extensions of Petri nets that model partially non-blocking rendezvous have not received similar attention. This paper focuses on the determinability of five significant issues within the context of Petri nets extended with non-blocking arcs. Although those five issues are decidable for Petri nets, we establish that only two of them remain decidable in the extended model.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. We provide a brief overview of basic concepts and notations in the second section. The third section introduces Petri nets extended with non-blocking arcs and the five problems of interest. In the fourth section, we demonstrate that two of the problems remain decidable in the extended model. Finally, in the fifth section, we prove the undecidability of the three remaining issues.

We use rectangles to represent transitions, and plain edges from places to transitions are labeled with the number of occurrences of the place in the input multi-set of the transition. Conversely, plain edges from transitions to places are labeled with the number of occurrences of the place in the output multi-set of the transition.  If there is no occurrence of a place in the input or output multi-set of a transition, there is an absence of an edge from/to that place to/from the transition. Dashed edges from a place to a transition and from the transition to a place represent the non-blocking aspect of the transition. The markings of tokens in the places are used to define the tokens in the usual manner.

We note that for reachability, we may streamline the construction of the widget by removing the capacity place k. However, to maintain uniformity in proofs and to utilize specific lemmas, we have opted to retain the widget in its entirety.

Numerous extensions of the Petri net formalism have been proposed for modeling parametric systems, including transfer nets, reset nets, multitransfer nets, and the extension proposed in this paper. The expansion proposed in this paper is specifically defined to model partially non-blocking rendezvous, and the other extensions have been suggested for similar purposes related to modeling. However, a comprehensive analysis of the expressive capabilities of these various Petri net extensions has not been conducted thus far. It is our intention to formally compare their expressive powers by studying the languages they are capable of defining.

Additionally, this paper includes reference to undecidability results for transfer nets, as well as context-specific studies of similar problems in the context of lossy counter machines. For practical model analysis that encompasses the class of extended Petri nets studied in this paper, we direct the reader to other sources.