This academic paper explores the typability of functions under various type systems, such as the Hindley-Milner system, an intersection-type system, and extensions of these systems. The aim of the report is to demonstrate that many examples can be typed using intersection types as a form of polymorphism, thereby laying the groundwork for future research into a decidable intersection-type inference algorithm.

The functions double, foo, and goo are mutually recursive, leading to recursive calls to double within the definitions of foo and goo. Consequently, the Hindley-Milner typing derivation breaks down as each recursive call is on an argument of a different type.

In addition, the paper provides translations of some examples into Haskell syntax and compares the error messages in SML/NJ with those in GHC (which uses algorithm M, in contrast to algorithm W of SML/NJ for more discussion). The report focuses on translating examples that yield interesting and different error messages, noting that most translated examples result in error messages that are very similar to those of SML/NJ, with occasional differences in the targeted program location identified as problematic.

The final type assigned to one of the examples is "int," and it can be decoupled in a similar way to the previous examples. The paper also addresses objections related to the polymorphic recursion in examples of matrix transpose and vector addition and suggests that the definition of polymorphic recursion may be too restrictive. The authors propose alternatives to address these objections, such as adjusting the arguments of map2 or illustrating the need to pass different functions to sumlist.

The comparison of error reporting in SML/NJ and GHC notes differences in the error messages for the "bar" example and other examples, raising questions about the precision and relevance of the error reporting in the two compilers. The report suggests that while GHC may pinpoint the core error, SML/NJ reports multiple superfluous messages, and it leaves the issue for future inquiry, advising interested readers to seek further discussion on this matter elsewhere.