The paper begins with introductory remarks in section 2, followed by a discussion in section 3 on the concept of functional approximation, which is fundamental in domain theory and is central to rb-, fs-, qrb-, and qfs-domains. The paper also emphasizes the idea, paraphrasing M. Stone, that it is important to always topologize, and introduces qfs-spaces in section 4 as the natural topological counterpart of qfs-domains. Section 5 presents the proof that qrb-domains and qfs-domains are equivalent and coincide with four other natural notions, including sober qfs-spaces. In section 6, this proof is applied to show that the probabilistic powerdomain of a qrb-domain is also a qrb-domain.

Overall, the paper highlights that despite the existence of four different variants, they all lead to the same structures, providing relief to the reader. Specifically, the paper demonstrates that the most liberal notion, involving arbitrary image of general compact saturated sets, and the most restrictive one, involving finite image of finitary compacts, are equivalent, with or without assuming sobriety.

The paper also addresses the probabilistic powerdomain v(x) over a space x, introduced by Jones in her PhD thesis to provide semantics to higher-order programs with probabilistic choice. Jones proved that v(x) is a continuous dcpo for every continuous dcpo x but is not a continuous lattice or bc-domain, even for simple continuous lattices or bc-domains x. The paper raises unanswered questions about whether v(x) is an fs-domain or an rb-domain when x is one, except in specific cases. However, the paper suggests that the notion of functional approximation offered by qrb-domains is relaxed enough that the probabilistic powerdomain of a qrb-domain is also a qrb-domain, an assertion proved by the first author.

The paper concludes by stating that using theorem 5.7, the assumption of sobriety is irrelevant for the proof and also mentions proving it for spaces of continuous subprobability valuations and general, unbounded, continuous valuations, with a different nature of proof involving the construction of an approximating family of qfs maps on v(x).