This paper explores the symbolic model checking of safety properties for linear parametrized systems by representing sets of configurations as regular languages and actions as regular relations. The focus is on computing the reachability set, denoted as r(), for a regular relation r and a regular language. The paper introduces a technique called regular widening, which, upon termination, allows the computation of either the reachability set r() of a system or the transitive closure r of a regular relation. The method is demonstrated to be applicable to various parametrized systems and is capable of simulating existing methods that compute either r or r() for certain subclasses of regular relations or regular languages.

The paper addresses the challenge of verifying parametrized systems, which are commonly found in distributed systems, by proposing a semi-decision procedure for the model checking of safety properties of linear parametrized systems.

Prior research in this area has focused on characterizing regular relations and identifying subclasses of regular languages suitable for modeling parametrized systems. For instance, the paper mentions the work by Abdulla et al. on a class of unary regular relations and the identification of a subclass of regular languages known as alphabetic pattern constraints (APC) for modeling parametrized systems like mutual exclusion protocols.

The paper introduces the regular widening technique and demonstrates its application to the verification of the Burns protocol. The technique automatically computes an upper approximation of the effect of the iteration of a regular relation and is based on comparing and detecting patterns to produce loops in the limit language. The widening principle is presented in three stages: elementary, useful for single positions where r can be applied; the second stage, applicable when there are multiple positions where r can be applied but with a constraint on change; and the most general stage, extended to different classes of systems.

The paper also describes the extension of the regular widening principle to handle multiple growths between the application of a regular relation and its iteration. The paper discusses the implementation of the widening principle in a tool based on Mona and provides an overview of the semi-decision procedure used for model checking several mutual exclusion protocols.

In conclusion, the regular widening technique presented in the paper allows for the computation of an upper approximation of the reachability set of linear parametrized systems and is applicable to various parametrized systems. It is shown to simulate existing constructions for computing either r or r() for certain subclasses of regular relations or regular languages.