This paper is structured as follows. In Section 2, we provide an overview of relevant research areas, from which we have adopted various concepts and techniques. Section 3 presents the new architectural modeling primitives, with a particular focus on our utilization of role-based modeling. Finally, in Section 4, we outline aspects of our approach that are not addressed in this paper.

The architectural approach we propose to expand has been developed through a collaboration between industry and academia [1, 2, 3]. It models connector types using coordination laws, which bring together a series of event-condition-action (ECA) rules to coordinate the collective behavior of a group of components (referred to as partners) in response to triggers from other components or outside the system. In this approach, partners, over which coordination laws are instantiated, are represented by coordination interfaces. Coordination laws constitute the connector concept, while coordination interfaces represent the roles of connector types that must be instantiated with components when a law is to be activated on them. For example, the coordination of the way an in-charge doctor interacts with a respiratory-control system in an emergency room. 

Our approach to socio-technical systems focuses on modeling the social impact of integrating people within systems, by combining human autonomy, capabilities, and responsibilities using role models. Humans assume roles within the context of the collaborative activities in which they participate. These roles derive a significant portion of their meaning from the organizational structures to which they belong. 

Implementing actions for communication aligns with the essence of workflow management systems. These systems are recognized, among other collaboration-based technologies such as computer-supported cooperative work, for their ability to elevate task allocation as a primary entity for collaboration, rather than just another communication protocol. Well-defined workflows, encompassing clearly defined initiation actions, termination actions, and final goals, are essential for addressing the challenges of extracting intentions and goals of the performing agent when these actions are performed intentionally.

Roles are abstract constructs that specify the expected behavior of social components through operations and normative aspects that are ascribed to certain organizational positions, such as head of surgeons, or a consistent set of assumed capabilities expected from a qualified doctor. More specifically, we distinguish between the ability to perform an operation and having the qualification or authorization to do so. A social component may have the ability to perform an operation and still trigger a role violation if it is not an instance of a role that has the appropriate qualification. Here, we use the term "qualification" to signify, for example, that the organization has empowered the social component to perform specific operations. Delegation of services or operations is crucial in any dynamic organizational setting, although we are not investigating delegation as it is beyond the scope of this research.