The path-execution method calculates a distance metric based on navigation paths by taking into account both false-positive paths, which are collision-free in the derived map but not in the ideal map, and false-negative paths, which are collision-free in the ideal map but considered unsafe in the derived map [6,2].

Our approach is most closely related to methods based on map scoring, but we specifically focus on formalizing the conceptual aspects when relating the ground truth environments to the derived context information. By using partial order relations on sets of environments and derived context information, we can distinguish explicitly between unsafe and imprecise deviations. As a result, our framework can be seen as a unification of different map scoring approaches, as all the different metrics can be represented and justified on a formal basis. While other work also studies abstraction as part of spatial knowledge representation, they do not formally express safety aspects.

E-correct environments are those that are indistinguishable from e under the given perception. E-imprecise environments yield higher elements in the lattice order but still represent e. The union of e-correct and e-imprecise environments is considered safe with respect to e, while the rest are considered unsafe.

The use of occupancy grids for representing spatial context for mobile autonomous vehicles has a long history. Many important problems in robotics, such as map building, localization, sensor fusion, path planning, and obstacle avoidance, can be addressed using grid-based representations.

We present a graphical representation for fields and grid valuations in the following. A field is depicted by a box representing the area and gray shapes representing the occupied space within that area. Occupied cells in a boolean grid are shown with a hatched pattern. The ideal sensor's output is assumed.

Similar to the previous section, a probabilistic sensor is defined as a mapping to a probability distribution over the abstract lattice. Typically, probabilities are available only on the lowest level, for the perception of individual attributes. These probabilities can be elevated to function lattices using the methods described in the previous section on grid-based representations. The general framework outlined in section 2 and demonstrated in the previous section can then be utilized to obtain quantitative measures for object-based representations.

This work demonstrates that modeling sensory perception in a formal framework involving abstraction and concretization functions allows for a mathematically sound investigation of safety aspects. Methodologically, we propose to model the information order regarding both the environment and the context in terms of lattices. Functions that go back and forth between these two lattices express the interdependencies between the original and the derived information. This formalization explicitly delineates several safety-related aspects and can thus help provide formally rigorous arguments regarding the overall safety of a mobile autonomous system.