The initial challenge concerns user-defined rewriting strategies, and the extension of rewriting strategies with scoped dynamic rewrite rules. It examines how dynamic rules are generated at runtime, accessing variables available from their definition context and automatically retracted at the end of that scope. The technique is illustrated through several program transformations, such as bound variable renaming, function inlining, and dead function elimination.

The paper introduces programmable rewriting strategies, which provide control over the application of rules while keeping rules and strategies separate. Strategies are little programs that select from available rules, defining the order and position for applying the rules. This allows rules to remain pure and reusable in multiple transformations.

The usual solution to this problem extends tree traversal to distribute data needed by transformation rules, which can make traversal strategies data heavy instead of just handling control flow. The paper addresses these issues by introducing the extension of rewriting strategies with scoped dynamic rules. Dynamic rules are first-class, and their application is controlled by a normal strategy. They can be applied as part of a global tree traversal, overruling previously generated rules.

Sections 3 through 5 present dynamic rules through examples of program transformations on tiger programs, including bound variable renaming, function inlining, and dead function elimination. The paper also discusses other applications, related and future work.

The paper concludes by discussing the basics of rewriting strategies in Stratego and providing an example of execution using the Tiger language. It also explores the notion of term rewriting and the use of rewriting strategies to provide control over the application of rewrite rules.

In summary, the paper presents an extension of term rewriting with the runtime generation of context-dependent rewrite rules, illustrating its application in the transformation of arbitrary abstract syntax trees. It also points to potential future research areas for dynamic rules and their interaction with various optimizations.