An algorithm with an approximation ratio of 1.75 was initially presented, but subsequent improvements by Christie and then by Berman, Hannenhalli, and Karpinski brought the ratio down to 1.5 and then 1.375, respectively. The latter algorithm is of theoretical interest due to its challenging practical implementation.

It is known that an optimal solution for solving any signed permutation in the search space also solves the initial unsigned permutation. Thus, an optimal solution for the elements of the search space can also apply to the initial unsigned permutation. This insight guides the proposed genetic algorithm.

The standard genetic algorithm (GA) approach is utilized, where a random population of signed permutations for the input permutation is initially generated, and reproduction is conducted in subsequent generations through crossover and mutation operations. This process continues until all generations have been completed.

One improvement over the standard GA approach involves applying 2-reversals only to the initial unsigned permutation in a greedy manner until no additional 2-reversals are applicable. Although this may not always yield an optimal sorting, prioritizing the elimination of 2-breakpoints serves as a local optimization method.

The fitness of each individual in the population is determined by the optimal number of reversals needed to sort the signed permutation that the individual represents. This fitness value is computed using an exact algorithm provided by the authors in linear running time.

The initial population size is set to n log n, and each individual in the population is generated from the input permutation in linear time by randomly assigning a sign to its elements, resulting in a running time of O(n^2 log n) for generating the initial population.

During the crossover stage, the best individuals are chosen as parents, and for each pair of parents, crossover is executed in linear time to generate two offspring, resulting in a total running time of O(n^2 log n) for the entire crossover stage. In the mutation stage, mutation is applied to each offspring produced by the crossover, with the total time taken by the mutation stage being... [information missing]

To validate the proposed GA approaches, several tests were conducted on permutations for which the reversal distance is known, as well as on randomly generated permutations. The tests involved single point crossover with a crossover rate of 0.9 and a mutation rate of 0.02. Parent selection for crossover and replacement of offspring were both based on representations of the best and worst individuals in the population, respectively.