In this paper, we demonstrate a technique for representing the generator matrix of the underlying Markov process for a given set of rules as Kronecker sums of the rate matrices associated with individual view-automata. When there is no birth, the automata are finite because the number of different contexts in which an agent can appear in a rule-set is finite. We present an example related to cellular signaling events to illustrate the framework.

The rest of the paper is structured as follows: in Section 2, we present the site graphs and their encoding as a valuation over a set of boolean variables. This encoding is influenced by the definition of site graphs in the Kappa language. Section 3 continues by defining a rule and a rule-based system. Each rule-based system, along with the initial conditions, is given a continuous-time stochastic semantics using the interpreted labeled transition system (ILTS). Additionally, we define agent-view and population-view projections.

We develop a formalism based on the rule-based language Kappa. The primary data structure used to describe the structure of the protein network and encode the reaction mixture is site graphs. While standard graphs are defined by a pair structure consisting of a set of nodes and a set of edges formed over pairs of nodes, site graphs have a slightly richer structure. Each node is defined by its name, a set of sites with internal state, and a set of binding sites of that node. The edges are established between pairs of binding sites belonging to different nodes.

Example 2.6 (revisiting example 2) illustrates that a valuation x2=(0, 1, 1, 1, 0, 0, 1, 1, 1, 0, 1, 1) is not well-defined due to specific inconsistencies. Furthermore, the valuation x3=(0, 1, 1, 1, 0, 1, 1, 1, 1, 0, 1, 1) is also not well-defined, as there are two bonds stemming from a specific site.

Given a rule-based system B, we interpret its semantics by assigning it the ILTS ML. We state that ML models the rule-based system, denoted as ML|= B. Each state of the ILTS is related to an interpretation, with valuations describing the reaction mixture, either by identifying each agent or at a certain level of abstraction. Additionally, the transitions are labeled by the rule which enables the transition. The origin of the transition is the state whose interpretation satisfies the left-hand-side of the rule, and the activity is determined.

The state space of a full ILTS that models the rule-based system grows proportionally to the number of variables over its full contact map, which increases combinatorially with the number of agents and the complexity of their interfaces. We propose defining it as a composition of smaller ILTS. We begin with an ILTS that models each rule separately, and then we define a composition operator over them. In other words, we decompose the ILTS as a standard product of the set of smaller ILTS.