The compound 8-aminoquinoline acenaphthenequinone thiosemicarbazone was reacted with iron(III), nickel(II), copper(II), and zinc(II) chlorides or acetates to form complexes, which were characterized through spectroscopic analysis. Additionally, the free ligand exhibited potent inhibition of cell proliferation and induced differentiation in Friend erythroleukemia cells (FLC).

The delta2 spectrometer (500 MHz) from JEOL USA Inc., Peabody, MA, USA, was used for spectroscopic measurements. The mass spectrum of acenaphthaquinone thiosemicarbazone was obtained using the Thermo DSQ II spectrometer from Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., Waltham, MA, USA. For atomic absorption spectrometry (FAAS) measurements, a Perkin Elmer Analyst 800 atomic absorption spectrometer with Zeeman background correction was utilized, with a carrier gas flow rate of 1000 ml/min and a slit width of 0.7 nm. The pH of the solution was adjusted using a Hanna Instrument Model 8519 digital pH meter from Hanna Instruments, Rhode Island, Woonsocket, RI, USA. The cell compartment temperature was maintained by circulating water from a thermostatic water bath, and a Memmert GmbH Co. KG instrument was used for CPE experiments. Additionally, a centrifuge from Alkeslabindo, Kota Depok, Indonesia, was employed to expedite the phase separation process.

A 1% w/v stock solution of the non-ionic surfactant Triton X-114 was prepared by dissolving 1g of Triton X-114 in 100 ml of distilled water. Hexamine buffer solutions at a concentration of 0.5 M were also utilized in the experiments.

Furthermore, the 1H-NMR spectrum of the cadmium(II) complex in DMSO-d6, compared to that of the ligand, displayed aromatic protons at similar positions, along with singlet signals at 12.83 and 10.84 ppm attributed to the N2H and N4H protons, respectively. It was observed that the extraction of the metal ion was most effective at pH 7, after which the complexation and/or extraction efficiency decreased. Notably, the stability of mercury(II) was found to be higher than that of cadmium(II), which showed a sharp decrease. Therefore, pH 7 was selected as the optimal working pH for the experiments.