The software components that control systems in the automotive industry are responsible for implementing real-time reactive systems using C code. These components are often automatically generated from Simulink/Stateflow (SL/SF) models based on the cyclic executive model. The cyclic executive model breaks down a component into cooperative non-preemptive periodic tasks that operate in an execution loop. Each iteration of the execution loop involves reading inputs from the environment, computing outputs (which constitute the state of the controller), and transmitting the outputs to the environment.

To address the test generation problem, the approach in this study adapts bounded model checking, solvers, and slicing within a framework that integrates two widely-used tools: Frama-C and CBMC. This adaptation involves a specialized slicing engine for cyclic executives using the slicing plugin of Frama-C, and a test generation engine built on top of CBMC. Experimental results for two industrial powertrain software components demonstrate that our framework outperforms CBMC alone. The results indicate that slicing cyclic executive systems is effective in improving test generation for complex controllers by reducing computation time. Several code metrics, including the number of acyclic paths, are used to evaluate code complexity, which can impede model-checking based test generation engines. These metrics also highlight the importance of slicing in our approach.

As an example, a cyclic executive system with specific input and output variables and tasks is considered. The system is decomposed into three frames, and the C code for these tasks is presented. 

Model-checking is used to verify that systems satisfy properties and generate counterexamples when they fail to do so. This study applies model-checking based test generation to reduce the test data generation problem for cyclic executive systems to a model-checking problem for safety properties. The safety property prohibits a system under test from reaching a target state.

In our test generation framework, we propose a slicing engine for cyclic executive systems that utilizes the slicing plugin of Frama-C. Frama-C is an open source static C code analyser equipped with various plugins, including the program dependency graph and the slicing plugin. The slicing plugin of Frama-C reduces the code by using over-approximations of the variables' values at each statement, along with the control and data dependencies between statements.

The study also discusses the challenges and benefits of using slicing, as well as the impact of code complexity on test generation and model-checking. Additionally, the study highlights the potential of the proposed test generation framework for industrial applications and explores future research directions to enhance its efficiency and effectiveness.