The system responsible for assigning and reverting pseudonyms has been simplified to a distributed infrastructure that focuses solely on providing valid pseudonym certificates. This allows for the use of widely accepted and standardized certificate formats (e.g., x.509) and the utilization of efficient and mature methods to manage them in a public key infrastructure (PKI). The proposed approach is distributed and user-centric, granting users the freedom to choose which and how many entities within the infrastructure will be involved in assigning their pseudonyms. While no single entity involved in assigning a pseudonym can trace the user, the system retains the ability to determine the real identity behind a pseudonym through cooperation among all the entities involved in its assignment. This means that rather than having to trust a specific third party, the user only needs to trust that the entities chosen by the user herself will not collude against her privacy rights.

The process of assigning a pseudonym certificate to a user is completed offline, meaning that it does not add extra time or computational burden to the service provision. The user receives one or more authorization permissions during the registration phase, which enable access to services at later times. An authorization permission involves the service provider (SP) signing a pseudonym certificate submitted to the SP, ensuring that the permission is accountable. The user can prevent linkability by requesting the SP to authorize multiple pseudonyms during the registration phase and then changing between the authorized pseudonyms during different access sessions.

The proposed approach is straightforward and effective, and it can be expanded to create a user-driven identity management PKI. It is up to the user to decide which infrastructure components to use and whether to use a single infrastructure or multiple ones for improved robustness. Additionally, the deployed infrastructure servers form a PKI infrastructure, with each server maintaining a list of trusted certificate authorities (CAs) and accepting certificates issued by other CAs based on deployed policies. The chain of infrastructure servers chosen by the user to obtain a pseudonym affects the regulatory conditions under which the pseudonym can be reverted.

The revocation of an authorization permission for a single misbehaving pseudonym is managed locally by the SP, while the revocation of all the pseudonyms associated with a single real user identity can be accomplished in a distributed manner by the PKI components through the management of certificate revocation lists.

An integrated implementation approach has been taken, with a multi-purpose server (MPS) integrating the server logic for pseudonym assignment and authorization credential issuing. The server stores transaction logs in a back-end database, and a pseudonym manager tool has been developed for users to assist them in the token/pseudonym assignment, registration, and verification procedures. Communication between entities occurs over TCP sockets, and a security protocol such as TLS is assumed to secure all communications.