The utilization of office workstations in research institutions and universities is often enhanced through the deployment of a high-throughput cycle-stealing distributed system, which allows users to submit numerous computing tasks into a central pool. This system monitors workstation activity and assigns tasks to idle machines, interrupting task execution when a user becomes active. While this approach can significantly increase resource utilization, it may result in wasted computing cycles if tasks are interrupted frequently.

In this paper, we present a detailed population continuous time Markov chain (PCTMC) model of the entire system, which accurately captures the interplay between interactive users and high-throughput tasks. The PCTMC framework is well-suited to the time-varying nature of user behavior and facilitates the capture of various performance and energy consumption metrics. We fit the PCTMC model to real data and propose a methodology for forecasting cluster availability. We demonstrate how historical and live data can be used to parameterize the model and employ efficient fluid analysis techniques to predict relevant metrics. We also showcase a working implementation of the method using the existing GPA tool for PCTMC model analysis. We argue that this methodology could allow system maintainers to optimize the energy and performance parameters of the system, benefiting users in planning their large-scale computations more effectively.

We discuss the applicability of the PCTMC framework to our problem and define a PCTMC model in which components represent computers in the system, interactive users, computing tasks, and the central scheduler. The model captures connections between different resource and task types due to non-uniform resource pools and task varieties.

We provide insights into the HTCondor cluster comprising approximately 1400 machines from various locations on the campus, each with different usage patterns. The cluster is accessible to researchers across departments, and we anticipate that a reliable forecasting tool would enable a wider variety of tasks to be run on the cluster.

While HTCondor records detailed information about workstation and job states, we aggregate and model this data using the PCTMC framework, considering different patterns of user behavior and energy profiles of hardware types.

We propose a methodology for fitting the PCTMC model of user behavior using exponential delays to estimate transition rate parameters and introduce multi-phase Coxian distributions to account for non-exponential delay distributions.

We describe the components in the model and their behaviors, including the assignment of jobs to workstations and user interactions with the system. We apply the model to a real data set from the Newcastle University, fitting parameters, and developing a forecasting algorithm. Our ultimate goal is to develop a tool that can be integrated with HTCondor, using the PCTMC model to optimize job submission and resource utilization while providing insight into expected job durations for users and maintainers of the system.