The life cycle assessment (LCA) is a widely recognized method for evaluating the environmental impacts associated with the existence of a product. Currently, there are some commercial tools, such as SimaPro, used for LCA, which estimate metrics like global warming potential (GWP) based on a conversion database of resource consumption. However, these tools are inadequate for conducting a performance evaluation of activities involved in the product life cycle, such as machine utilization and reliability analysis, as these aspects are not addressed by LCA.

The concept of exergy is linked to the second law of thermodynamics and assesses the amount of energy that can be converted into useful work. Exergy analysis has been employed to measure and compare the use of different energy sources in systems and processes. Efforts have been made to combine exergy and LCA to create a single sustainability metric. However, a challenge in using an exergy-based method is capturing the entire exergy flow for each resource used in the production of a good or service.

Modeling is frequently used to quantitatively and qualitatively evaluate systems. Stochastic models have been widely used to evaluate supply chains and manufacturing systems, as they are well suited for modeling systems with at least one variable assumed to follow a probability distribution. Queue networks, Markov chains, and Petri nets can also be adopted for stochastic modeling of these systems.

This paper introduces an approach using stochastic reward net (SRN) models to assess environmental impact and business indicators. Reward functions are associated with transitions and places of an SRN to calculate performance indicators for each state of the model.

The proposed classification aims to separately measure the GWP and exergy outputs of each activity or process without becoming overly detailed, thereby avoiding a complex and inefficient evaluation process. Additionally, different GWP or exergy efficiency values can be assigned to the same substance depending on its classification. For instance, a block of wood has a different GWP value when used as a raw material in production, disposed for recycling, or disposed in a landfill. This categorization is based on the conversion factors usually adopted in LCA to provide a detailed description of the GWP of consumed or disposed resources.

The paper also presents SRN models conceived to represent facilities and processes of a supply chain and manufacturing systems. It includes a case study conducted in a Brazilian meat processing industry, which considers energy consumption, waste generation, and the impact of failures on system performance. This approach provides insights to compare the effects of failures on both performance and environmental metrics.

The paper details the evaluation of GWP and exergetic indicators in manufacturing systems and supply chains using stochastic models, as well as a comparison of exergetic values for different energy sources and their corresponding GWP. Importantly, it emphasizes the need to consider the effects of the system location on evaluated metrics, as the GWP factor might vary substantially according to the country using such energy sources. The proposed approach allows for the calculation of measurements like the probability of having an indicator over a limit amount using stochastic Petri nets and supports cost/environment trade-off analysis.