The forward and backward rates of quantum efficiency reactions, specifically the step 3 of algorithm 1, do not distinguish reversible reactions. An alternative approach is to consider that slaved species may have relatively high concentrations, in which case they are not quasi-steady state (QSS) species. However, it is challenging to determine the concentration value that separates QSS from non-QSS species among slaved species. Therefore, the former dominance criterion is deemed more effective in this regard.

Starting from the system (2), we initially simplify it to a more basic model. The analysis of the model is conducted for specific parameter values, namely k1= 0.015, k3= 200, k4= 180, kJ= 0.018, k6= 1, k7= 0.6, k8= 1000000, k9= 1000.

Tropicalization serves as an abstraction of the ODE model. Although this abstraction may not accurately capture certain dynamic properties, it may preserve others. If the trajectories of the ODE model are significantly distant or proximal to tropical varieties, they tend to remain close to the trajectories of the tropicalization for a certain duration. Nevertheless, the quality of the approximation cannot be guaranteed at finite distances from the tropical variety. For example, the exit of tropicalized trajectories from a sliding mode is inclined to be delayed, and smooth trajectories depart from neighborhoods of tropical varieties earlier. The example examined in this paper also demonstrates some characteristics of bifurcations of the tropicalization, which have been verified numerically. The tropicalization qualitatively retains the type and stability of attractors but can also introduce delays in a Hopf bifurcation. Consequently, the tropicalization can only approximately indicate the position of the bifurcation in the ODE model. Additionally, in proximity to the bifurcation, the amplitude of the limit cycle oscillations behaves differently for the ODE model and the tropicalization. The two detected Hopf bifurcations are continuous (the oscillation amplitude vanishes at the bifurcation) for the ODE model and discontinuous (the oscillation amplitude does not vanish at the bifurcation) for the tropicalization.

VN received support from the University of Rennes 1, while SV was supported by the Russian Foundation for Basic Research (Grant Nos. 10-01-00627 S and 10-01-00814 A) and the CDRF NIH (Grant No. RR07801), in addition to a Visiting Professorship Grant from the University of Montpellier 2.