The practical use of functional translation often involves the use of a many-sorted first-order language for clarity. This implies the need for a theorem prover that handles many-sorted first-order logic, such as spass, or the introduction of additional predicate symbols to simulate sorts in unsorted first-order logic. Both alternatives may impact the performance of automated theorem proving.

In this paper, we present the basic and optimized functional translations in sections 2 and 3, providing original proofs of soundness with minor adjustments for nominals and hybrid machinery in order to make the article self-contained. Based on these proofs, our main result in section 4 demonstrates the safety of erasing sort annotations from formulas obtained using the optimized functional translation when reasoning over any modally definable class of models. However, in section 5, we show that sort erasure is not sound when reasoning over a class definable by a pure hybrid axiom, providing a specific counterexample.

Ohlbach and Schmidt use this observation to prove that swapping two consecutive quantifiers is sound in terms of satisfiability, allowing for the avoidance of skolem functions by rearranging existential quantifiers before universal ones. This is the essence of the optimized functional translation.

The proof is similar to that of theorem 3.5, with proposition 2.5 playing a crucial role in the correctness proof of the optimized functional translation in the many-sorted case, while an analogous holds for g-maximal models in the basic case.

We discuss the utility of many-sorted first-order logic in presenting functional translations and provide evidence of its technical necessity in certain cases. We show that as long as reasoning is confined to classes of models closed by disjoint unions (e.g., modally definable classes), sorts can be eliminated.

However, the empirical benefits of eliminating sorts need to be carefully evaluated. While off-the-shelf automated provers could be benchmarked on functionally translated formulas with and without sort annotations, it is not clear whether meaningful conclusions can be drawn from such experiments due to potential bottlenecks in the clausification process and other factors.

We also demonstrate that the functional translation is well-suited for the hybrid case and establish the termination of any refinement of resolution plus the condensing rule for the output of the optimized functional translation within the basic modal case. Finally, we note that termination conditions for some frame classes were also investigated and express interest in exploring termination in the case of h(@) as future work.