ERAP2 gene variants are associated with autoimmune disorders and severe infectious diseases, but the function of these variants remains unknown. Venema et al. use genome editing and functional genomics to show that these genetic variants regulate ERAP2 through multiple independent mechanisms, including by transforming a downstream gene promoter into an enhancer for ERAP2.

Wouter J. Venema,1,2 Sanne Hiddingh,1,2 Jorg van Loosdregt,2 John Bowes,3 Brunilda Balliu,4 Joke H. de Boer,1 Jeannette Ossewaarde-van Norel,1 Susan D. Thompson,5 Carl D. Langefeld,6 Aafke de Ligt,1,2 Lars T. van der Veken,7 Peter H.L. Krijger,8 Wouter de Laat,8 and Jonas J.W. Kuiper1,2,9,*

We investigated whether rs2248374 is sufficient for the expression of ERAP2. Polymorphisms influencing ERAP2 expression were identified using allelic replacement by CRISPR-mediated homologous repair and conformation cap- ture assays. We report that rs2248374 was indeed critical for ERAP2 expression but that ERAP2 expression is further influ- enced by additional SNPs that facilitate a local conformation that increases promoter interactions.

Overview of the CRISPR-Cas9-mediated homology directed repair (HDR) strategy for SNP allelic replacement of the G allele of rs2248374 to the A allele in THP-1 cells. The single-strand DNA oligo template introduces the A allele at position rs2248374, and a silent TaqI restriction site used for screening successfully edited clones. The predicted effect size (delta scores from SpliceAI and Pangolin, see STAR Methods) and intended position that exhibits altered splicing induced by the G allele of rs2248374 is shown in blue.

Overview of the homology directed repair (HDR) strategy to use CRISPR-Cas9-mediated SNP replacement in Jurkat cells to switch the alleles from disease risk SNPs (i.e., alleles associated with higher ERAP2 levels) to protective haplotype (i.e., alleles associated with lower ERAP2 expression). The region from 5' to 3' spans 879 bp.

Expression of ERAP2, LNPEP, and ERAP1 by qPCR in Jurkat clones after allelic substitution of rs2548224. Data represent n = 4 biological replicates, Two- tailed unpaired t test was assessed to compare WT expression with the modified clone (**p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001).

Another significant reason is that these findings have implica- tions for our understanding of diseases in which ERAP2 is impli- cated. We recognize that the considerable LD between SNPs near ERAP2 indicates that the effects of rs2248374 on splicing, as well as other mechanisms for regulation (i.e., chromosomal spatial organization), should often occur together. Because of their implications for the etiology of human diseases, it is still important to differentiate them functionally. Because disease- associated SNPs affect ERAP2 expression independently of rs2248374, ERAP2 may be implicated in autoimmunity not because it is expressed in susceptible individuals but because it is expressed at higher levels.20,37 It corresponds with the notion that pro-inflammatory cytokines, such as interferons, up- regulate ERAP2 significantly, while regulatory cytokines, like transforming growth factor b, downregulate it, or that ERAP2 is increased in lesions of autoimmune patients.54,55 Overexpres- sion of ERAP2 may be exploited therapeutically by lowering its

4C template preparation was performed as described.45 Birdshot uveitis patient derived LCLs were cultured in RPMI 1640 supple- mented with 10% FBS 1% penicillin/streptomycin (Thermo Fisher Scientific), washed and cross-linked in 2% formaldehyde. DNA was digested in situ with MboI (NEB) and Csp6I (Thermo Scientific). Primers used for inverse PCR (5'-TACACGACGCTCTTCC GATCTTGTGGTTGGTTACTTCAGGT-3', 5'-ACTGGAGTTCAGACGTGTGCTCTTCCGATCTGGACCCTTGACATTAACAAG-3') allow

Genomic DNA of unedited and edited clones of THP-1 and Jurkat cell lines, and patient-derived LCLs was used for SNP-array copy number profiling and analysis of regions of homozygosity with the Infinium Human CytoSNP-850K v1.2 BeadChip (Illumina, San Diego, CA, USA). This array has ~850,000 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) markers across the genome and can detect genomic insertions and deletions as well as stretches of homozygosity. Data analysis was conducted using NxClinical software v6.0 (Bionano genomics, San Diego, CA, USA). Human genome build Feb. 2009 GRCh37/hg19 was used. Results were classified with BENCH Lab CNV software (Agilent, Santa Clara, CA, USA). The genotype data were used for cell line verification and monitoring for potential genomic alterations in single cell cultures.

