Modern machine learning methods already make it possible to create evolving viral cyber threats that are invulnerable to typical protective mechanisms of information systems. Undoubtedly, soon the toolkit of attackers will allow the automatic creation of new viral cyber threats, hardened by pseudo-evolutionary selection to the specified properties of the target information environment. Such viral cyber threats will have developed heuristic properties and swarm organization. Creating models of the spread of such cyber threats to investigate their behavior and develop counter- measures is an urgent scientific and applied task.

There are also known works where the progress of the influence of a viral cyber threat is described by the method of comparisons [12,27,28]. For example, the analysis of such influence is carried out simultaneously by the methods of autoregression and Fourier analy- sis. These methods make it possible to predict the trend of the progress of the cyber infection, and the use of different bases for creating a regression model is aimed at increasing the accuracy of the forecast (due to the increase in the computational complexity of the analysis). If a computer network focused on a critical use is investigated, then models that take into account the mechanism of the topology of blocking nodes of a conglomerate of computer networks in the event of the registration of a viral cyberthreat become relevant. A representative of the models that describe the process of function- ing of such a mechanism is a Cayley tree structure with a random number of connections [14,15]. This mathematical apparatus allows researchers to calculate the probability of infection of speci- fic nodes depending on their distance from the source of cyber infection in the topology of a heterogeneous network, taking into account its scale. Such opportunities are provided by the authors of the works [20,23,29] using the large-scale graph technology, which allows for taking into account the processes of hierarchical growth of the network structure. A specific parameter that should be determined when creating such models is the percolation threshold, which is understood as the proportion of blocked nodes at which the target computer network as a whole is unable to implement its functional purpose. When defining this parameter (functional purpose), the classes to which blocked nodes or net-

sensitive to the value of the parameter a0 than the function A~(t). It can also be predicted that this discrepancy will quickly level off with an increase in the value of the parameter a. However, this statement also needs experimental verification.

To conduct experiments, it was necessary to obtain data for a tuple of sets. Such information was kindly provided by the staff of the Situation Center of the Information Technology Department of Vinnytsia City Council (Vinnytsia, Ukraine) (hereinafter referred to as SC). The staff of the SC department supports the functioning of the distributed information and communication system (high availability cluster), which manages video surveillance and traffic lights on the roads of Vinnytsia. There are more than 1000 ele- ments (servers, workstations, client computers) involved in infor- mation exchange and are potentially vulnerable to viral cyber threats in the architecture of the information and communication system of the SC.

function A~(t) decreases with the increase in the value of the parameters a and t. It is noticeable that the functions A(t) and A~(t) react differently to the initiating value (parameter a0). The function A(t) is more sensitive to the value of the parameter a0 than the function A~(t). However, this discrepancy is quickly lev- elled off with an increase in the value of the parameter a.

The article is devoted to the investigation of the process of the influence of an active viral cyber threat on a high-availability clus- ter in the paradigm of the provisions of the theory of Markov pro- cesses, graph theory and the theory of mathematical analysis. The main contribution of the research is a formalized computationally efficient method of approximate estimation of the average number of affected elements of the target high-availability cluster under the influence of an active viral cyber threat. Also, a criterion that allows estimating the trend of the quantitative parameter of the metric of the model of the studied process at medium and long time intervals is proposed. To obtain the declared scientific result, the authors: - formulated a Markov model of the process of the influence of an active viral cyber threat on a high availability clus- ter; - substantiated a compact metric for accurate assessment of the average number of cluster elements affected by an active viral cyber threat at any time; - formulated a computationally efficient method of approximate estimation of the parameter of the men- tioned metric for the model of the target studied process; - pro- posed a criterion that allows researchers to evaluate the trend of the parameter of the mentioned metric for the model of the target researched process at medium and long intervals of time.

