The Estimation Distribution Algorithm (EDA) is an evolutionary algorithm that uses probabilistic models to create candidate solutions. Previous researchers have suggested various hybrid methods to avoid the premature convergence of EDA. This research conducts a comparative study between several variations of hybridization in EDA with regards to the descriptive statistics in the objective values.

The single row facility layout problem (SFLP) is categorized as an NP-complete problem, and a heuristics method is needed to provide a near-optimal solution [5]. The enhanced facility layout problem (EFLP) is an extension of SFLP with the addition of install- ment cost, and the safety constraint [6]. The experiments in this research show that the solution to several instances of EFLP can still be improved. Therefore, the new variant of EDA is proposed to deal with the problem. This research tests the proposed algo- rithm to solve instances of EFLP.

The contributions of this research are the comparative study between the hybridization of EDA, the introduction of a new vari- ant of EDA named Adapted EDA (AEDA), and the application of the algorithms to EFLP datasets. This paper is organized as follows. Pre- vious studies are reviewed in Section 2, while the problem is described in Section 3. The methodology is followed by a descrip- tion of AEDA, hybridization of EDA, and Genetic Algorithm (GA) with Tabu Search (TS) in Section 4. The experimental results and the comparative study are recorded and analyzed as well in Sec- tion 5. Finally, the discussion and conclusion of this study are drawn based on the outcome analysis in Section 6.

EDA, first introduced by Baluja in [7], formerly contained a sin- gle probabilistic model. Current research hypothesizes that the effectiveness of EDA depends primarily on the accuracy of the probabilistic model to extract the information in the population. Therefore, the multivariate probabilistic model becomes an option to build a better probabilistic model [8]. This reasoning determined the use of two probabilistic models in EDA, the ordinal and the dependency, in this research. A detailed explanation is provided

hybridization of EDA and DE [2]. The hybrid EDA and PSO was uti- lized for solving the reservoir flood control operation [10]. Mean- while, the combination of EDA and GA was used to deal with the scheduling problem [2]. The combination of EDA and BOA was used to solve vehicle routing problem [4].

SFLP that consider material handling cost and rearrangement cost of the departments at the beginning of each period was pro- posed in [15]. The authors used Simulated Annealing (SA) and GA and their hybridizations to deal with the problem. The results showed that SA demonstrated better performance comparing to other algorithms [15]. Meanwhile, DE and its variant were explored by [16] to solve SFLP. GA and a neighborhood search were also proposed in the previous literature to deal with the SFLP [17,18].

To summarize, the following research gaps can be stated, as indicated earlier in the Introduction section. First, there is no research that compares the solution quality of the hybridization of EDA. Hence, more research is essential to direct the develop- ment of EDA. Second, in recent years, there have been no studies that utilize EDA to deal with SFLP and EFLP. Therefore, the com- parative study in this problem is a potential area for further research.

At first, a group of candidate solutions is initialized randomly. The structure of these candidate solutions is constructed using the permutation-based variable. The cost of every candidate solu- tion is then calculated. The iteration begins and the main phases of AEDA (described in the following subsections) are executed.

The swaplist, constructed in every tabuGen, contains a set of the move (the swap of two facilities) and the associated costs (tcost). Next, TS checks if a move is taboo and if the cost of every move (tcost) worse than tabuSol. A penalty charge is given if a move matches these conditions. TS then updates the tabooList and tabu- Sol. At the end of a generation, tabuSol will contain the best solu- tion from TS. The TS phase ends with the replacement of gBest with tabuSol if the better solution is found in tabuSol. Finally, the elitism procedure, which records 10% of the best solution through the gen- erations, is performed at the end of every generation of AEDA.

The concept of EDAGA, firstly introduced by Chen et al. (2012) [23,24], was to combine GA into the structure of EDA. GA ensures the group of candidates remains diverse, while EDA exploits the candidate to achieve a good solution. EDAGA has been used for the scheduling problem [23], no-idle flow shop scheduling prob- lem [24]. Algorithm 2 shows the basic pseudocode of EDAGA.

EDAhybrid continues with the fitness value calculation of every particle. Particle best (pBest), that is, the current best particle found in the swarm and gBest (the best particle found so far through gen- eration) are then updated. TS (Algorithm 3, lines 12) will exploits gBest to find whether an improvement can be made. If the solution from TS is better than gBest, it will replace gBest. The elitism proce- dure is applied at the end of every iteration.

GA, as well as its hybridization with other heuristic algorithms, is often found in the literature [25]. A hybrid GA with a deconstruc- tion and reconstruction solution for a facility layout problem was demonstrated in [26]. A modified rotation operator in GA was used for static facility layout problems [27]. Among others, a hybridiza- tion of GA and TS was proven as a robust algorithm to solve com- binatoric problems such as job shop scheduling [28] and vehicle

and TS as a method is hardly found. Therefore, this research estab- lishes the GA plus TS (GATS) to be benchmarked against AEDA. The concept of GATS is to add TS as a local search. Algorithm 5 presents the GATS procedure.

As shown in Algorithm 5, the generation starts with the fitness calculation of every chromosome in the population. The parents are then selected via roulette wheel selection. The crossover (using two-point operator) and mutation procedures are applied to the chromosomes. After that, the replacement step will renew the chromosomes with their offspring. TS part of GATS is executed if there is no improvement in the gbest. The elitism procedure is per- formed at the end of every generation.

This study utilizes Matlab in a PC with an Intel i5 processor and 12 GB RAM to develop all algorithms. The parameters of these algorithms are similar in that the bigger the problem size, the more iterations needed. This section lists the results of the implementa- tion of all algorithms along with an analysis of the results.

The comparative study of the hybrid algorithms in this research is expected to inspire future research to determine which methods are likely to be chosen. The data and the results provided can become a benchmark for future research in EFLP. Future research also can focus on improving the performance of the algorithms or applying different cases.

