We derive a soundness and completeness proof for the axiomatization of strong late bisimilarity in the pi-calculus [8]. The proof is machine checked in the interactive theorem prover Isabelle [9], using the nominal data type package [1]. It represents a continuation of our work [3] on formalizing the pi-calculus in Isabelle. The com- pleteness proof is the first formally verified proof of its kind. The original manual counterpart is little more than a sketch, and our mechanically verified proof follows it quite closely in structure. Therefore we regard our contribution as threefold: it clarifies exactly what is needed for the full formalization of this particular proof, it opens the possibility to check similar proofs more easily, and it supports our claim that the Isabelle formulation in the nominal data type package is very well suited for deriving this kind of result.

At the core of the completeness proofs are head normal forms, or hnf for short. A term is in head normal form if it is a sum of prefixed processes. In Isabelle, we use the following function to determine whether or not a term is in hnf.

Proof By rule induction on the construction of S. In the inductive step a case analysis is made on whether or not the inserted term can do the desired transition. If so, that term is picked, otherwise the term is obtained through the induction hypothesis.	 

We have presented a machine checked proof of the complete axiomatization of strong late bisimilarity in the pi-calculus. It is difficult to estimate the time this has re- quired since it was done in parallel with the development of the infrastructure in Isabelle. As an example, the effort corresponding to Section 6 (adding the paral- lel operator) turned out to be roughly one day, most of which was spent proving soundness. Our experience is that the Isabelle system with its nominal datatype package and our implementation of the pi-calculus [3] works well for this task, in that the treatment of bound names is facilitated. This is not really apparent from the presentation in this paper since the gain is in many low-level details. Ulti- mately such judgements must be subjective, and we refer to our previous paper for a comparison with other approaches. But our present result strengthens our claim: similar completeness proofs have been around for more than 20 years, and no such proof has been formalized inside a theorem prover before now.

