In this paper we investigate the connection between two well known models for interactive systems. Re- active Systems `a la Leifer and Milner allow to derive an interactive semantics from a reduction semantics guaranteeing, under rather restrictive conditions, the compositionality of the abstract semantics (bisimi- larity). Universal Coalgebra provides a categorical framework where bisimilarity can be characterized as final semantics, i.e., as the unique morphism to the final coalgebra. Moreover, if lifting a coalgebra to a

a clear idea of the intended structure of the states while reaction rules, which are often non conditional, give a direct account of the possible steps. Transitions caused by reaction rules, however, are not labeled, since they represent evolutions of the system without interactions with the external world. Thus reduction semantics in itself is neither abstract nor compositional.

After formally introducing the theory of reactive systems (Section 2), and the theory of coalgebras and structured coalgebras (Section 3), we first define a coalge- braic characterization of the derived LTS of reactive systems (Section 4), and then we lift this construction from Set to algebras representing the syntactical category of reactive systems (Section 5). At the end (Section 6), we summarize the results and we outline the future direction of research. The proofs of several important lemmas can be found in [5].

Note that PC is not an endofunctor on Set, as it is the case of the standard PL discussed above, but it is defined on Set|C2|, i.e. the category of sets sorted by pairs of objects in |C|. Indeed, the states of an ILTS are arrows of a category and then they are typed by their source and target objects. Thus the carrier of a coalgebra is not just a set, but a family of sets indexed by their types. In particular

The theory of Reactive Systems by Leifer and Milner [12] allows to derive a labeled transition system, from a reduction semantics, (i.e., an unlabeled transition system) considering as labels the possible contexts (environments) in which the system can interact. The main result of this theory is that if the base category that defines the syntax of the formalism, has a special colimits (namely RPOs) then bisimilarity on the distilled LTS is a congruence.

The theory of Universal Coalgebra [14] allows to specify interactive systems as black boxes, i.e., systems with an hidden state space with some observable (static or dynamic) behaviors. The notion of bisimulation is central in this theory and it is described to a very high level of abstraction. Under certain conditions, the theory guarantees the existence of final coalgebra, and bisimilarity can be characterized by the unique morphism to this final object (final semantics). The Theory of Uni- versal Coalgebra has been extended to coalgebras over algebras, namely structured coalgebras [18,6,7], in order to handle the algebraic structure of process algebras. A fundamental theorem assures that bisimilarity over a structured coalgebras is

