Structural Operational Semantics (SOS) [14] has been widely used in a variety of forms. Transition System Specification (TSS) [7] is a formalization of SOS which defines a rigorous syntactic and semantic framework for SOS. The notion of TSS paved the way for building up meta-theories around SOS [1,10]; theories about congruence rule formats [7,4] are examples of such meta-theories.

From a purely theoretical viewpoint, there is no reason to only use existential quantification (implicitly) in the premises and it makes sense to study the meta- theory of an SOS framework in which universal quantification over (valuations of) variables is also allowed. Universal quantification in SOS rules appears in practice, too [2,3,11,15]. The following examples illustrate the use of universal quantification in practical instances of operational semantics.

One may argue that universal quantification in the above examples (and other similar ones such as [15, Definition 33]) can be resolved by a semantics-preserving transformation which replaces universally quantified variables / terms with all their possible instantiations. This is not always desired. In a general framework, universal quantification can indeed be seen as an acronym for a (usually infinite) number of existentially quantified premises and/or rules. However, once due to the restrictions

in the meta-theory, one restricts the framework to a certain form of rules (i.e., a certain congruence rule format such as the NTyft format), this transformation may change the shape of the rules and take the specification beyond the restricted framework.

This paper takes a step towards the addition of universal quantification to the SOS meta-theory. We slightly extend the syntax of SOS rules with one level of universal quantification. Inspired by examples such as those mentioned before, we also introduce the use of disjunction in the premises of a rule. We define the semantics of such SOS rules as expected. As the main contribution, we propose a congruence rule format for strong bisimilarity that supports these new features. To our knowledge no such format (supporting universal quantification) exists. Our meta-language for SOS rules is still restricted; one may consider a language in which an arbitrary first order predicate formula (thus, an arbitrary mix of existential and universal quantification) is allowed in the premises of deduction rules but this is an extremely complicated problem which we could not tackle in one go.

We intend to add one level of universal quantification and this suffices for the applications we have encountered thus far in the literature. It seems reasonable to make the already existing and implicit existential quantification in rules explicit. This raises the question as to whether these existentially bound variables are bound outside or inside the universal quantification, i.e., whether the clause should be

positive premises (items 1 to 3 above) must have a proof (for they are all included in the C component of the least well-supported model). For the negative premises, there is no case where substituting a b for an a may enable a- or b-transitions. Similarly, substituting a b for an a may disable c-transitions but may not enable them. Hence,

Next, we show that the syntactic constraints concerning the UNTyft format can- not be simply dropped or the congruence meta-result will be ruined. The first condi- tion in the UNTyft format concerns the source of the conclusion and it is among the conditions of the ordinary Tyft and NTyft formats. Thus, counter-examples given in [7,6] work in this case, as well. Constraint (ii) is about distinctness of variables appearing as targets of premises. Our addition to the traditional constraints of the NTyft format is that we prohibited the repetition of target variables among differ- ent disjuncts. The following counter-example shows that this additional constraint cannot be dropped.

Results. We extended the syntax and the semantics of SOS specifications with one level of universal quantification, explicit notions of existential quantification (before and after the universal quantifier), conjunction and disjunction. We proposed a rule format with the above-mentioned features that guarantees the induced bisimilarity to be a congruence.

Future Work. From a theoretical viewpoint, a much more challenging goal is to introduce a framework supporting the full first-order logic. We plan to investigate the possibility of relaxing the well-foundedness assumption in our congruence meta- results. Expressiveness of the UNTyft rule format with respect to the NTyft and the Tyft format is another topic for our future research. Our main point of inspiration for the introduction of universal quantification originated from our study of ordered SOS [13,8]. There, we observed that in order to translate general Tyft rules with ordering into the NTyft format, we need some extra expressive power, possibly modeled by universal quantification over variables. Otherwise, the ordered version of the Tyft format is strictly more expressive that the NTyft format and a direct translation (involving no auxiliary operators) is shown to be impossible in [9]. It remains thus to show that the UNTyft format indeed gives us sufficient expressive power to remove ordering from ordered Tyft rules.

