that she believes that he will give a sweet to Bob rather than to Clara. In a scale from 0 to 5, her belief is 4. This kind of belief is not true or false. In this work we deal with graded knowledge, but atomic propositions are true or false.

In [6] Multi-Agent Epistemic Logic has been investigated, to represent and rea- son about agents or groups of agents knowledge and beliefs. There are many pro- posals to extend these logics with uncertainty. Some extensions aimed to reasoning about knowledge and probabilities [5]. In general, this is accomplished extending the language with weighted formulas and adding probabilities to the semantics. There are other attempts that provide a fuzzy or many-valued semantics [7,14]. This work goes in the later direction.

The work of Fitting [7] proposes a many-valued modal logic where the truth values are taken from a lattice. It is presented two semantics, one where the atomic propositions are many valued and a second one where the accessibility relation also is many valued. Also, in [4], it is presented a many-valued modal logic over a finite residuated lattice. In [14], it is introduced an epistemic logic based on the work of Fitting. It differs from ours because they work with a particular lattice. Another related work that uses a complete, distributive lattices as semantics for epistemic and doxastic logics is presented in [8]. More recently, some interesting works have appeared to deal with many valued dynamic epistemic logic [17,1,11].

on this method, we introduce a method to build graded multi-agent epistemic logics. Both methods are based on action lattices [10]. Using action lattices, we are able to support a generic space of agent knowledge operators, as choice, composition and closure (as a Kleene algebra), but also a proper truth space for possible non bivalent interpretation of the assertions (as a residuated lattice). We use matricial algebra to be able to introduce knowledge representations as weighted graphs, which enables us to capture a wide class of weighted scenarios, from the classic bivalent perspective of knowledge, to other structured, discrete and continuous, domains. It should be notice that, in this work, we only deal with the epistemic notions of knowledge and their duals.

This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents all the background needed about Multi-Agent Epistemic Logic. Section 3, introduces our method for building graded Multi-Agent Epistemic Logics. It also provides some concepts on Kleene algebras and action lattices. Section 4 illustrates the use of our method with two examples. Section 5 discusses some conditions where classical axioms of Multi-Agent Epistemic Logic are valid and points out some future work.

Example 1 (An adaptation from [18]) Suppose a father has three envelopes, each containing: 0, 1 and 2 dollars inside respectively.The father has three children: anna, bob and clara. Each child receives one envelope and does not know content of the envelopes of the other children.

We have already discussed an example of epistemic logic in the background section. Such example can be seen as an instantiation of our method over the {0, 1} standard action lattice (see [12]). We present two more examples, namely one that deals with discrete degrees of knowledge and, on the same context, another one that admits knowledge ranging over a continuous scale.

clara also believes that the father has a preference for bob . In a scale from 0 to 5, her belief is 3; and conversely, her belief that the envelop bob received has a smaller value is 1. But if she has the envelop 2 then she believes that the father has no preference between anna and bob; in that case her belief is 4.

cath also believes that the father has a preference for bob. Her belief is 3 . But if she has the envelop 2 then she believes that the father has no preference between anna and bob. In such case her belief is 1.

So, we have to study the remaining axioms, specifically the ones that distinguish Epistemic Logic from other modal logics - the axioms (iii), (iv), (v) and (vi). In this view, we have to impose further properties on the structure of the models. In particular, we have to generalize the reflexivity and transitivity conditions for our graded setting to guarantee the validity of (iii) and (iv). What the conditions needed for the cases (iii) and (iv) are still in study.

There is, however, a lot of work to do in this line of research. To establish suffi- cient conditions for validating the negative introspection axiom (and of (vi)) is still work in progress for us. It seems that, beyond of a generalization of the Euclidean property on models, some new conditions should be imposed in the action lattices, particularly with respect to their negation (note that, in its generic form, there is no negation involution in general). The parametric generation of calculus and the study of complexity of generated epistemic logic w.r.t. to specific classes of action lattices are also in our agenda. Another interesting line of research is to investigate the concepts of simulation and bisimulation for our knowledge representations on the lines proposed in [19,15] for generic fuzzy labelled transition systems.

