Thus, we contribute to the effort of QoS management using an approach with a high level of abstraction and the support of a formal-based tool to analyze QoS contracts. To report this contribution, we have organized this paper as follows. In Section 2 we exemplify the QoS contract language by means of the video on demand (VoD) application example. Section 3 presents the abstract operational semantics for the QoS contract language. Section 4 describes the implementation of the semantics given in Section 3 in the Maude MSOS Tool. In Section 5 we describe our analysis of the VoD example given in Section 2 using real data. We conclude this paper in Section 6 with our final remarks.

QoS contracts were originally proposed in [7] essentially as record types in a programming language. Each record index is a QoS property that may be bound to an element from a collection of values, manipulated by services. That is, they represented, essentially, static information. One of the authors [10,11] extended QoS contracts with the notion of negotiation among services and represented their notion of QoS contract in their software architecture description language named CBabel.

The normalization happens as follows. Given two rules with the same service on the left-hand side they should be merged. If the two right-hand sides are disjoint, the two rules are replaced by a rule with the service S on the left-hand side and right-hand side given by appending to the tail of the right-hand of the second rule the right-hand side of the first rule. Otherwise the order of the first rule should prevail. Our example does not need normalization but it should be easy to see how this is done in general.

The semantics specified in Section 3 and implemented in Section 4 can be used to analyze QoS contracts. The QoS Tool generates MSDF specifications that can be analyzed using MMT with different techniques such as state-space search. (Rewrit- ing modulo axioms and model checking are also possible, though not described in this paper.) These analyses can assist:

