In this paper the machinery of Hybrid Logic and the logic of public announcements are merged. In order to bring the two logics together properly the underlying hybrid logic has been changed such that nominals only partially denote states. The hybrid logic contains nominals, satisfaction operators, the downarrow binder as well as the global modality. Following this, an axiom system for the Hybrid Public Announcement Logic is presented and using reduction axioms general completeness (in the usual style of Hybrid Logic) is proved. The general completeness allows for an easy way of adding distributed knowledge. Furthermore, it turns out that distributed knowledge is definable using satisfaction operators and the downarrow binder.

When Arthur Prior introduced Hybrid Logic, it was in the context of temporal logics (see [3]), and since then several applications in temporal logics have been found for Hybrid Logic ([5]). However, Hybrid Logic can be viewed as an extension of any kind of modal logic, such as Epistemic Logic. Thus, it is a natural step to extend Epistemic Logic to a hybrid version, but this step has rarely been taken. This paper remedies this insufficiency.

has received increased attention (see for instance the textbook [16]). The simplest fragment of DEL is Public Announcement Logic (PAL), which adds modalities for the action of public announcement to epistemic logic. The main concern of this paper is to combine PAL with Hybrid Logic.

Besides this paper, only a handful of other contributions appear to exist on com- bining Dynamic Epistemic Logic with Hybrid Logic. In the paper [13] all epistemic actions (of full DEL) are internalized. This is done by adding the epistemic actions to the domain of the models, on the same level as epistemic states, and then use a hybrid language to refer to them. However, in the process of modeling epistemic scenarios this may result in a blow-up of the models, which must now also contain the epistemic actions. This is not in line with the usual way of using Kripke mod- els, where the states represent different ways the world might be or different states a system might be in. In [12] a public announcement logic with nominals, global modality, modalities for intentions and preferences is introduced. In that paper, to deal with the interplay between nominals and the public announcement operators, the truth condition for nominals is only changed in the updated models. Thus the updated models are not genuine models for the language. We deal with this defi- ciency in this paper by letting nominals partially denote states in the original model as well; an approach also taken in [7].

The main focus of this paper is another advantage of introducing hybrid machinery into PAL. From a proof theoretical point of view classical Hybrid Logic fixes a great deal of the problems of classical modal logic. In the case of PAL the proof theory also becomes much nicer when we move to a hybrid version, as already demonstrated by the paper [7].

The structure of this paper is as follows: In section 2 Hybrid Logic with partially denoting nominals is introduced and axiomatized. Next, a hybrid version of PAL is presented, and a sound and complete axiomatization is given (section 3). In section 4 we add distributed knowledge to the logic. In the process it is also shown that distributed knowledge can be defined using satisfaction operators and the downarrow binder. Finally, concluding remarks and further directions of research are given in section 5. Some of the proofs are left out but can be found in [8].

In this paper it has been shown that nominals, satisfaction operators, the downar- row binder, the global modality, and distributed knowledge can be added to Public Announcement Logic. Furthermore general completeness results for extensions with pure formulas, a well celebrated result in Hybrid Logic, also transfer to the case of Hybrid Public Announcement Logic. The completeness is shown using reduction axioms as in classical PAL. Hence the public announcement operator does not in- crease the expressive power when added to Hybrid Logic. Using the terminology of [14], classical Hybrid Logic is not closed under relativization because nominals might lose their references in submodels, but relaxing Hybrid Logic to a logic with only partially denoting nominals, Hybrid Logic does become closed under relativization.

Another line of further research is to add common knowledge to the Hybrid Public Announcement Logic. The question of extending the logic from Public An- nouncement Logic to full Dynamic Epistemic Logic is left for further research as well. The problem here is that in full Dynamic Epistemic Logic there are epistemic actions that can expand a state into several states, and thus it is not clear anymore what nominals should denote.

