We study the biochemical processes involved in scaffold-mediated crosstalk between the cAMP and the Raf-1/MEK/ERK pathways. We model the system by a continuous time Markov chain with levels and analyse properties using Continuous Stochastic Logic and the symbolic probabilistic model checker PRISM. We consider two kinds of properties of the model, causal events and pulsating behaviour, and, in order to formulate these properties, we enrich the model with trend formulas. The system is currently under wet-lab investigation and our approach was developed in collaboration with the experimentalists.

Intracellular signal transduction pathways are the mechanism whereby signals are transmitted from a receptor to the nucleus, where they determine a response such as cell growth or apoptosis. Scaffold proteins can play a major role in these pathways as they anchor particular proteins into specific locations for receiving signals or transmitting them. Under certain circumstances, a scaffold can increase the output of a signalling cascade or decrease the response time for a faster output. While individual pathways have a specific signalling role, they can also interact with each other, called cross-talk. In this paper we consider how to model and reason about the scaffold-mediated crosstalk between the cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) and the Raf-1/MEK/ERK pathways, an interaction that has an important role in the regulation of cell proliferation, transformation and survival. The scaffold protein is A-kinase anchoring protein, usually abbreviated to AKAP.

Since some information is incomplete, our approach to modelling AKAP is based on a stochastic, computational and concurrent view, using continuous-time Markov chains (CTMCs). In particular, we use an abstraction of CTMCs based on discrete levels of concentrations, namely CTMC with levels [6]. The formal language used for modelling is the state-based language underlying the probabilistic symbolic model checker PRISM [9]. We express temporal properties of the model in Continuous Stochastic Logic (CSL) [1], focusing on causality properties and pulsations. In order to express these properties, we define trend formulas for variables in the PRISM model which compute for every state the probability that the value of a specific variable increases or decreases during a transition.

The paper is organised as follows. In the next section we give an overview of AKAP scaffold behaviour. In Sect. 3 we give an overview of the PRISM model. Section 4 contains a description of some properties of interest and the results of analysis. Conclusions and directions for future work follow.

Activation and inhibition of Raf-1. If the concentration level of cAMP rises above the basal one, cAMP activates PKA by binding to its regulatory sub- units. When PKA becomes active, its catalytic subunits catalyse the transfer of ATP terminal phosphates to the phosphorylation site S259 of Raf-1. The site S338 of Raf-1 is inhibited when S259 is phosphorylated. Only when S338 gets phos- phorylated, the pathway Raf-1/MEK/ERK is activated and the signalling cascade begins.

Downregulation by PDE8A1. The catalytic function of PKA sometimes couples with the AKAP, by binding PKA together with phosphodiesterase PDE8A1 on the scaffold to form a complex that functions as a signal module. Under these conditions, as the cell is stimulated, cAMP activates PKA, and then PKA is responsible for the activation of PDE8A1 (by phosphorylation). PDE8A1 converts cAMP to AMP by hydrolysis. If phosphorylated, PDE8A1 degrades more cAMP, hence rapidly reducing the amount of cAMP that can activate PKA; this leads to a feedback mechanism for downregulating PKA.

Scaffold notation. The AKAP scaffold has three positions to be filled by PKA, Raf-1 and PDE8A1 respectively. Hereafter we use a binary representation of the states of each position: 1 for activation or phosphorylation and 0 otherwise. The second position concerns the state of the site S259 of Raf-1. If the scaffold position for PDE8A1 is not filled, we only represent the first two positions of the scaffold. For instance S100 stands for a filled scaffold with active PKA and unphosphorylated site S259 and PDE8A1, whereas S01 for an unfilled scaffold with inactive PKA and phosphorylated S259.

Pulsating behaviour. Time courses from laboratory experiments suggest the presence of a pulsating behaviour in the system. The pulsations ensure that the state of the Raf-1 pathways alternates between active and inactive (note: very long periods of activity or inactivity may increase the risk of disease). In the current model we do not consider explicitly interactions between cAMP and Raf-1. However, the system is not closed since we include a kind of exogenous interaction concerning the diffusion of cAMP. We conjecture this makes the system exhibit a pulsating behaviour corresponding to the feedback mechanism for the downregulation of PKA, coupled with the diffusion of cAMP. Note that we call such a behaviour pulsating, not oscillating. This is because oscillation assumes fluctuation around a given value; current data does not provide us with such a value, hence our choice of pulsating rather than oscillating behaviour.

A CTMC with levels for a biochemical system is a CTMC where the states represent levels of concentrations of the species and the reactions between species define transitions and transition rates between states defined as follows. For n different species (Ai)i=1..n, a state is a tuple s = (l1, l2,..., ln) with li the discrete concentration level for the species Ai, for all i = 1..n. Let us consider a reaction in

Following the style adopted in [4], we define a PRISM model 3 of AKAP using CTMCs with levels as follows. A molecular species is represented as a PRISM process (module) and its behaviour by labelled transitions. The reactions are represented by multi-way synchronisations between transitions based on common labels. There is one module for each species, i.e. for cAMP, scaffold, unscaffolded PDE8A1 and PP, each with corresponding variables representing levels of concentrations. In particular, the module for the scaffold has a variable for each possible combination of scaffold positions (S000, S100, S101, S110, S011, S010, S001, S111, S00, S10, S01,

In this section we formalise the properties described in Sect. 2.2 and we use PRISM [9] to verify their satisfaction (or not). First we use rewards to compute the expected level of concentration at a particular time. However this analysis is not sufficient to confirm the causality relation between events and the pulsating behaviour. So second, we consider transient properties. We extend the set of state formulas of the CTMC model to include trend formulas for some variables of interest. The aim is to reason in terms of ascending/descending (positive/negative) trends for particular concentration levels of populations. Prior to this, we review very briefly the syntax and semantics of CSL and the PRISM model checker.

Future work includes reasoning about the amplitude of the pulsation and we will investigate the relation between trends in a CTMC model and the sign of first-order derivatives in the corresponding ODE model. Derivatives have been considered previously in the context of model checking biochemical systems. For example in BIOCHAM [7,11], oscillatory properties are analysed using queries expressed as formulas in LTL with constraints over real numbers. Such formulas are interpreted over traces of states and a state include not only the concentration value of each molecule but the value of its first order derivative as well.

