Clustering is usually considered as the most important problem in unsupervised learning. Like any other unsupervised problem, it involves searching for patterns and structures in unlabeled data. The goal of a clustering algorithm is to group similar objects into sets called clusters. Due to the nature of the problem, it appears in many research areas such as data compression, image analysis, bioinformatics, and data mining.

In essence, clustering is not a well defined task, but a very general problem to be solved. For that reason, many well defined problems and algorithms have been proposed for this task. There is a great variety of different concepts and definitions of what a cluster is and how it can be formed. There is also no general convention about what types of data can be clustered. So, all that diversity led to several models of clustering [2]. A very popular one is called center-based model.

Many algorithms have been proposed for reducing the outlier effect in the k - means algorithm. However, few of them are strict partitioning clustering algorithms, that is, many of them try to identify the outliers and remove them. In this paper, a robust center-based clustering algorithm, SSO-C, is presented for strict partitioning.

Optimization problems can sometimes be difficult to solve in a closed form. In this work, an optimization problem will be faced and a global optimization algorithm will be needed for solving it. One of the recent swarm intelligence algorithms that had good results when compared with state-of-the-art algorithms is the Social Spider Optimization algorithm (SSO) [10]. Swarm intelligence is a collective intelligence of groups of simple agents dealing with behaviors of swarms [13].

The SSO algorithm is based on the simulation of cooperative behavior of social- spiders. The algorithm assumes that the entire search space is a communal web, where each position of a spider represents a solution for the problem. Each spider i receives a weight wi which represents its solution quality. The information trans- mitted through the communal web is encoded in form of vibrations. The vibration made by spider j and perceived by spider i is modeled according to:

Where the vibration intensity decreases with the squared distance of the spiders involved. The algorithm distinguishes between male and female agents. The entire process consists on iteratively emulating three cooperative operators: Female Coop- erative Operator, Male Cooperative Operator, and Mating Mating Operator. When performing each of these operators, the spiders change their positions according to bio-inspired laws in order to explore the search space and find a better solution.

where the the set S no longer belongs to (Rd, l2), but to (Rd, l1), being l1 the 1-norm or the Manhattan norm. This function has the advantage of being more robust in an outlier scenario because it minimizes the within cluster error with respect to the 1-norm distance metric, as opposed to the squared 2-norm distance metric. Problems P1 and P2 stay the same for this new problem. So, this allows

using the heuristic mentioned above. When calculating the new centers, the median in each dimension is taken and then combined. Also, the points of S are assigned according to the Voronoi diagram induced by the set of centers C with respect to the 1-norm distance metric. This variation of the k -means algorithm is usually called the k -medians algorithm [21].

As can be observed, the only difference between the k -means problem and this new one is the objective function. Function J1 takes the within cluster sum of squared Euclidean distances. On the other hand, function J2 takes the within cluster sum of Euclidean distances.

Until now, there was no formal definition of the EMAX problem or the algo- rithms used to solve it in the literature. However, the EMAX problem was infor- mally approached in the past and some algorithms attempting to approximate it were implemented as part of clustering packages [8]. Also, a global optimization approach for the problem was proposed in [27] using Social Spider Optimization to directly approximate it. This algorithm will be used in the experiments with the name of SSO-A.

despite the elegant construction of the geometric median using ruler and compass by Evangelista Torricelli, there is not a similar construction for a larger number of points. In fact, it was shown that even for five points, the geometric median is not expressible by radicals over the rationals [5] and there is also no exact algorithm that solves this problem using arithmetic operations and k th roots. The approximation problem has been widely studied for a great number of points, giving as result many polinomial time algorithms for the approximate geometric median problem. In [9], a compilation of many of these algorithms is given and a nearly linear time algorithm is proposed for finding the geometric median of a set with arbitrary precision.

Finally, a fairly natural criterion for the convergence of the algorithm is, like in the k -means algorithm, when clusters do not change anymore. The clusters can be easily recovered given the set C and the matrix A. The entire procedure of EMAX is shown in Algorithm 1.

As can be seen in the plot, those problems are highly related. In many cases, a solution near the minimum of both problems is not dominated by the majority of the other solutions. This fact simplifies the problem, as we can take the solutions that minimizes an objective that takes into account both objectives. This way, we can convert a multi-objective optimization problem into an optimization problem with a single objective. A common approach taken is to redefine the objective function taking a weighted sum of the objectives involved. So, the objective function that handles both problems is defined as:

and mean values. When all algorithms are considered, SSO-C showed bests results in almost all datasets regarding the maximum values. Also, for median and means values, EMAX and SSO-C have the best results the same number of cases (7 out of 13).

In this paper, two algorithms were presented. In the first one (EMAX algorithm), a similar heuristic used in the k -means algorithm is used to solve the EMAX problem. The second one (SSO-C algorithm) is based on the Social Spider Optimization algorithm for approaching multi-objective problems. The SSO-C algorithm is used to minimize the weighted sum of two objective functions: those defined in the k -

As a future work, we plan to perform several experiments with more sophisti- cated datasets, with higher dimensionality and size. Also, we plan to develop other initialization procedures (such as Opposition-Based Learning [25,3]) for SSO-C in order to improve convergence results and robustness. For the EMAX problem, we plan to prove convergence and NP Hardness.

