Depending on the characteristics, metaheuristic optimization algorithms can be classified in various ways. They can be classified into population-based algorithms and trajectory-based or single- point search algorithms. In the latter case, the algorithm uses a sin- gle solution, which means in each iteration only a single solution will manipulate. Hill climbing, tabu search, and simulated anneal- ing are examples of this class of algorithms. On the other hand, population-based algorithms use a population of agents and the whole population is modified in each iteration. Examples for population-based algorithms are genetic algorithm, particle swarm optimization, ant colony optimization, and so on [4].

The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 shows the inspiration of the proposed algorithm. Section 3 presents the features (operators) of GA that are utilized in the proposed tech- nique. The LPB operators and techniques along with the pseudo code are presented in section 4. Furthermore, the results of the algorithm and an inclusive and comparative study on some bench- mark test functions along with a real-world problem are presented in section 5. Finally, the conclusion of the work and directions for future researches are shown in section 6.

The level of learning of transition learners from high school to college can be improved by adopting some effective strategies, which are quite different from those in high school. A number of behaviors have been considered to judge between the strong and weak learners, they include (level of interest, deep processing, effective note taking, problem-solving, group working, seeking help, and self-study). Additionally, according to [30] the learners with a high level of creativity are always strong learners. Depend- ing on the previously mentioned resources, it can be concluded that learners who have a good level of the aforementioned behav- iors are good learners.

In this algorithm, the first step is used to choose individuals from the population. The importance of this step is dividing the main population to some sub-populations and then the individuals will be selected from the sub-populations depending on their fit- ness. This prevents converge to local optima because selecting individuals will start from the perfect sub-population. The latter two steps are used to improve the individuals by letting the learn- ers work in groups and ask for help from each other. Furthermore, having a good level of metacognition will influence the overall studying behaviours of a learner in a stochastic way (mutation). On the other hand, learners affect the studying behaviours of each other when they study together (crossover).

The genetic operators imitate the procedure of the heredity of genes to produce new individuals at each generation. The opera- tors are utilized to make changes in the structure of individuals during the representation. The common genetic operators are crossover, mutation, and selection. Here, we only define crossover and mutation operators.

Crossover is the most fundamental genetic operator. It works on two individuals at the same time and produces offspring by inte- grating features of both individuals. Various crossover techniques are available; however, the most used one is choosing a stochastic cut-point to produce the offspring by integrating the part of one parent to the right of the cut-point with the part of the second par- ent to the left of the cut-point. For example, one-cut point cross- over, two-cut point crossover, multi-cut point crossover, etc. [33].

Mutation creates random changes in different individuals. The simplest form of mutation is altering one or more genes. Mutation in the genetic algorithm has a great role of either a) restoring the lost genes during the selection process, hence, they can be used in another context or b) serving the genes that were not available in the initial population. Various ways of mutation are available for different representations of individuals. For example, uniform

For the traditional benchmark functions, the PT of the LPB is much smaller comparing to the DA. The reason for this is that in the first stage of the LPB, a subset of the population is chosen based on this smaller group other subpopulations are built. The perfect subpopulation has priority to be optimized first, then the good sub- population and so on. Since the subpopulations are much smaller compared to the main population, searching for the solutions in these subpopulations is speeder. This improves the randomness and saves the optimization time simultaneously. However, com- pared to the PSO and GA, the PT of the LPB is higher.

A generalized assignment problem known as (GAP) is a popular NP-hard combinatorial optimization problem [41]. The main goal in the GAP is assigning a set of tasks to a set of workers with min- imum cost. In this work, we assign cases in the court to justice teams in a way that the cases could be finished within a minimum number of working hours. Assigning cases and justice administra- tion in the judicial system is routine works, however, they are very time-consuming. Increasing caseloads at any time will make the

This paper proposed another metaheuristic algorithm based on the process of transferring graduated learners from high school to university and improving the studying behaviors of the learners at colleges. The genetic algorithm inspired this algorithm. The two most important phases of metaheuristic algorithms (exploitation and exploration) were outlined. Mimicking the process of transfer- ring graduated learners from high school to college and dividing them into different groups according to their GPA outlined the for- mer phase. The exploration phase, however, was designed by mim- icking the process of improving the level of learners by utilizing various affective study skills. The parameters used in the LPB were dp, crossover, mutation. The dp parameter is used in the first steps of the algorithm to divide the population into different groups. The latter two parameters were utilized in the process of improving learners studying skills.

If the solution is [4 5 2 3 1] that means case 4 in column 1 with cost 12 will be given to the first justice team, case 5 in column 2 with cost 15 will be given to the second team, case 2 with cost 13 in col- umn 3 will be given to the third team, and so on. Because of the constraint that says every case should be assigned to one and only one team and according to the encoding used, elements in each tuple should be unique. Thus, partially mapped crossover [42] was used where the individuals are permutations of numbers between 1 and N. For mutation, swap mutation was used, randomly

proposed technique. Furthermore, the ability of the algorithm was tested using a real-world NP-hard problem. Again, the results proved the effectiveness of the proposed algorithm in solving a real-world problem. As per finding of the examined work, it can be concluded that the proposed work is able to outperform most of the algorithms in the literature. However, bigger problem sizes for combinatorial optimization could be a challenge for LPB. There- fore, it is recommended for researchers in different fields to use it as an optimization technique.

For future works, a number of research directions can be rec- ommended. First of all, the authors will focus on reducing the processing time of the algorithm. Moreover, implementing the multi objective version of the algorithm is another research direc- tion. Modifying the algorithm to improve the exploitation phase

Raja, M., Umar, M., Sabir, Z., Khan, J. and Baleanu, D. A new stochastic computing paradigm for the dynamics of nonlinear singular heat conduction model of the human head. Eur Phys J Plus, [online]; 2018: 133(9). Available at: https://link.springer.com/article/10.1140/epjp/i2018-12153-4 [Accessed 10

