Abstract Automatic classification of lung diseases in computed tomography (CT) images is an important diagnostic tool for computer-aided diagnosis system. In this study, we propose a new image based feature extraction technique for classification of lung CT images. A novel fusion based method was developed by combining the Gabor filter and Walsh Hadamard transform features using median absolute deviation (MAD) technique and hence, it possesses the advantages of both models. The proposed system comprises of three stages. In the first stage, the images are prepro- cessed and features are extracted by novel fusion based feature extraction technique, followed by second stage, in which extracted features are selected by applying genetic algorithm which selects the top ranked features. In the final stage, classifiers namely decision tree, K nearest neighbor (KNN), Multi layer perceptron Neural Networks (MLP-NN) are employed to perform classifica- tion of the lung diseases. A total of 400 datasets for the diseases bronchitis, emphysema, pleural effusion and normal lung were used for training and testing. The classification accuracy of above 90% is accomplished by multilayer perceptron neural network classifier. The system has been tested with a number of real Computed Tomography lung images and has achieved satisfactory results in classifying the lung diseases.

In the recent years, medical CT Images have been applied in clinical diagnosis widely. It assists physicians to detect and locate pathological changes with more accuracy. Computed tomography images can be distinguished for different tissues according to their different gray levels. Lung diseases can be caused by infection, an exposure at the workplace, medications and various disorders. X-ray chest radiography and computer tomography (CT) are two common anatomic imaging modal- ities that are routinely used in the detection and diagnosis of a variety of lung diseases.

Medical images play a vital role in patient diagnosis, ther- apy, surgical, medical reference, and training. The Digital Imaging and Communications in Medicine (DICOM) stan- dard [1,17] allows storing textual descriptions, known as meta- data, along with the images. It was the most important breakthrough since the discovery of the X-rays, and CT has remained a cornerstone of diagnostic radiology throughout the years. An excellent overview of its technology and applica- tions is given by Kalender [2]. CT imaging had evolved far enough in terms of speed and resolution to make it a valuable tool in the imaging of the lungs [3]. CT lung image classifica- tion with correction for perfusion gradient was suggested by Chabat et al., [4].

Median filter and morphological smoothening filter techniques are applied to remove the noise from the images and enhance the image. The median filter will remove the salt and the pep- per noises and produces the enhanced image. The dilation and erosion process is done for morphologically smoothening of the images. Erosion involves the alteration (removal) of pixels at the edges of regions, i.e., exchanging binary 1 value to 0, while dilation is the reverse process with regions growing out from their boundaries. The Erosion followed by dilation is known as Opening operation which suppresses the bright details smaller where dilation followed by erosion is closing operation which suppresses the dark details are computed. Herein this work the darker details are suppressed where the dilation is performed followed by erosion. The preprocessed image is obtained by applying the median filter and morpho- logical smoothening.

The feature extraction refers to creating a subset of new fea- tures by combination of the existing features. The purpose of feature extraction is to reduce original dataset by measuring certain features that distinguish one region of interest from another. Each subimage is taken from top left corner of the original image and the texture features and pixel coefficient values are extracted. The analysis and characterization of tex- tures present in the medical images can be done by using sta- tistical feature extraction method. Texture analysis is a quantitative method that can be used to quantify and detect structural abnormalities.

For a discrete series of N length the set of Walsh functions is N by N Hadamard matrix. The output of the WHT is the pixel co-efficients on the whole image .The features extracted from the WHT are sum, mean, min, max, median.

The Fusion of multiple samples extracted from the identical source similar to using multiple images from the lung CT scan is referred as multisampling. Fusion of multiple processing methods for individual samples is referred Multi-algorithm. In template level fusion, multiple templates combine to form a single template. Feature level fusion contains richer informa- tion than any other levels of fusion. The main advantages of

The median absolute deviation is calculated by taking the median of the absolute deviations from the median (|X1-MED|,  |X2-MED|,  .. .,  |Xn-MED|)  and  the  mean of the absolute deviations from the median is given by (  (|Xn-MED|))/N. The Gabor co-efficients are represented as gi1,gi2,gi3	gin and the Walsh Hadamard co-efficient

K-NN is a typical instance-based prediction model. By K-NN, the class label of a new testing sample is decided by the major- ity class of its k closest neighbors based on their Euclidean dis- tance The Nearest Neighbor Classification underlying intuitions are straightforward, and examples based on class of nearest neighbor are classified. More than one neighbor is considered and so the technique is usually called k-Nearest Neighbor (k-NN) where k nearest neighbors determines class. As training examples are needed at run-time, it is also called Memory-Based Classification. It is considered a Lazy Learning technique as induction is delayed by run time. As classification is training examples based it is also called Example-Based Classification or Case-Based Classification [21,22]. The for- mula for Minkowski distance is

The precision refers to the measurement deviation from true value and its scatter, recall refers to the measurement devi- ation from the false value. The F-Measure refers to a measure that combines precision and recall is the harmonic mean of precision and recall. The various values of the precision, recall, F-measure are calculated for the J48, KNN, MLP-NN classifiers.

In this work a novel fusion based feature extraction is pro- posed and feature selection is done by genetic algorithm that selects the top ranked features and classification is done through J48, KNN, MLP NN classifiers to classify the lung CT dataset. The algorithm has been designed based on the concept of texture and pixel co-efficient features. This method effectively works well for the detection of lung diseases with high sensitivity, specificity and accuracy. The classification accuracy for the tenfold crossvalidation method shows 85.96 for gabor filter, 77.19 for Walsh Hadamard transform and

91.53 for the proposed feature extraction method. Results show that MLP NN classifier with median absolute deviation techniques and genetic algorithm for feature selection yields better results. This justifies the choice of using fusion with the genetic algorithm with the classifier. This approach has potential for further development because of this simplicity that will motivate to classify the types of lung diseases. The developed classification system is expected to provide valuable diagnosis for the physicians. The work can further be extended by including more feature extraction and selection methods for classifying more lung diseases.

