The note is organized as follows. Section 2 recalls the basic notions concerning typed graphs with interfaces; while Section 3 performs the same task concerning dgs-monoidal categories, illustrating their correspondence with graphs with dis- crete interfaces. Section 4 presents the main remarks about discrete and discon- nected graphs; while Section 5 shows some preliminary results on disconnected DPO rewriting. The final Section 6 wraps up this note, offering some further pointers to the literature.

Nodes are denoted by their sort. Moreover, nodes in the input (output) interface are denoted by circling them with a dotted (solid, respectively) circle: it might be restrictive (a node might occur twice in an interface), but for this simple example will do. Finally, edges are boxes with an entering tentacle (from the source) and a leaving tentacle (to the target).

For example, graph F1 contains four nodes and four edges. The node labelled X is an input node, while Z is an output node. Edges are labelled by boxing their type: the two edges in F1 labelled f have an outgoing tentacle to the node labelled Z, and an incoming tentacle from two different nodes, both labelled Y .

Please note that more direct derivations can be performed by d(p) than by p. However, the former class could be suitably restrained: chosen a match mL, a one- to-one correspondence could be obtained, for example by considering only those derivations obtained via the so-called natural pushout complement. We refer the reader to [7, Section 3].

view of graph rewriting, since they allow for an inductive presentation of the direct derivations obtained via the DPO approach, yet preserving all its concurrency fea- tures. While the latter issue is discussed with some details in Section 5, we do not tackle the former, and we refer the reader to [6] and especially [7]. Indeed, discon- nected graphs were first studied there, and the present paper can be considered as a reformulation and generalization (to hyper graphs) of some of the results occurring there, partly filtered through some remarks in [10].

