Statistical usage testing of hardware/software systems is based in the main on a Markov chain usage model. This kind of model represents the expected use of the system by a usage profile, i.e. appropriate probability values that are attached to the state transitions. In this paper we present a constraint-based polyhedron approach to calculate the probability distribution for the MCUM from a given set of usage constraints. Comparing the computed probability distributions of our polyhedron approach with the maximum entropy technique shows that our result is much closer to the intented constraint semantics. Using the polyhedron method, customer profiles can be calculated so that they reflect the intended system usage of different customers or customer types much better. In order to demonstrate the applicability of our approach, workflow testing of a complex RIS/PACS system in the medical domain was carried through and yielded very promising results.

and may be considered as independent of the specification. Because exhaustive test- ing of real systems is infeasible in practice, an appropriate set of test cases is derived for accomplishing a given test goal. At this point, Markovian statistics come into play.

After all structural components, i.e. states and arcs of the MCUM, have been identified [1], appropriate transition probabilities have to be obtained. Ideally, for every state of the MCUM, the exact probability distribution of the outgoing arcs of each state is known and fixed. Unfortunately, this is often not the case. For example, in the medical domain very large and complex RIS/PACS systems have to be tested, where the usage of the system is subject to diverse influences [5]. American Image Centers, for example, show a typical similar system usage and can be treated as one customer type. The behavior of this customer type is therefore mapped to a single MCUM.

Informed probability generation presumes collecting field data, which is then mapped to a usage profile. Hence, this method represents the most accurate way of gaining information about system usage. Field data may be derived from direct logging of user interaction use or screen recording, and can afterwards be evaluated or directly mapped to the model structure.

Since it can not be assumed that customer experts do also have expert knowledge about statistics and MCUM theory, the process of information acquisition must be arranged in the most informal way as possible. This implies that customer experts are allowed to describe their knowledge in terms of constraints [13]. Instead of assigning fixed numbers to the MCUM transition probabilities, they have to pos- tulate relationships between them. These constraints can further be automatically transformed to fixed probabilities by using algebraic techniques.

Considering constraints (i) and (ii) instead of (iii) and (iv), there exists an infinite set of possible solutions. The distribution p1 = 0.7, p2 = 0.25, p3 = 0.05 is valid as well as p1 = 0.5, p2 = 0.3, p3 = 0.2.

This seems reasonable because the entropy is a measure of uncertainty and there- fore guarantees that the information content is limited exclusively by the defined constraints. Considering the entropy function without defining constraints, the maximum is found when the probability values represent a uniform distribution, which also matches the idea of the uninformed strategy 2.2.1.

The basic idea is as follows. Without any constraints, the solution space of the searched probability distribution of a state with k outgoing arcs would be Rk. Of course, at least the structural constraints and, if stated, any usage constraints, restrict the solution space.

For reasons of compactness, constraints can be placed directly within the model. The combination of both constraints and models result in a MCUM usage profile. To ensure an unambiguous mapping, each arc of the MCUM is assigned a unique name. Then, constraints can be placed in the model as a simple text field, as

