The watermarking techniques can be used to provide the integrity and the privacy; however, the diagnostic value in the medical image should not be changed. Lossless data hiding known as reversible watermarking embeds data within a digital image such that the original image can be completely restored. Therefore, many recent researches propose to use it for provid- ing medical image integrity and patient privacy.

[1] the image authentication and self-correction through an adaptive reversible watermarking technique are proposed. In this technique, the image is divided into two regions: Region Of Interest (ROI) and Region Of Non-Interest (RONI), it em- beds the ROI into the RONI, and any modification of the im- age will be detected and could be self-restored back to the original image by extracting the ROI from the RONI. The ROI area is depending on the availability of clinical finding and its features in the medical image, and the RONI is the background or any area, where there is not any clinical finding. The pros of this technique are providing two levels of robust- ness by mixing a reversible watermarking method and a robust watermarking method. This watermarking method provides the initial level of robustness of the watermark extraction pro- cess against JPEG compression; a digital signature derived from the ROI, and an authenticity code is concatenated to form a primary code to be embedded inside the RONI using the robust watermarking method. The reversible watermarking technique provides the second level of robustness by embed- ding another code into the ROI; this code is determined for the whole image (RONI and ROI).

In adaptive data hiding scheme for medical images using integer wavelet transform [2]; integer wavelet transform hiding technique is used for embedding the multiple watermarks by decomposes the cover image to obtain the wavelet coefficients. Before watermark embedding process; an adaptive threshold is determined for each block; it uses iterative optimization of threshold for compression and expansion process. It avoids histogram pre and post-processing; therefore, its pros are reducing the histogram processing overhead and keeping the distortion small between the watermarked and the original images. The cons of this technique are: low imperceptibility values at normal embedding capacity (bad tradeoff between robustness and capacity) and it is not applied to color images (it is applied only for grayscale images).

A multiple block based authentication watermarking for distribution of medical images is proposed in [3], it provides an active method of authentication for the efficient distribution of images, and this technique suggests a new method using fragmentation of the watermark information content of images. Medical imaging modalities such as Computed Tomography (CT), Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI), Pos- itron Emission Tomography (PET) and the structure of tissues contain a large amount of clinical information. Therefore, it is important to provide authentication for the safety of frag- mented blocks. The proposed technique is based on the secure encryption watermark, but removes the problem of indepen- dence block wise of existing methods. This technique suggests

A medical image authentication based on lossless water- marking is proposed [4]; it is used for interleaving patient information and message authentication code with images using lossless compression. At embedding process the authen- tication code of the image using MD5 algorithm is calculated; the authentication code and patient information are concate- nated then encrypted. Least Significant Bits (LSBs) of all pixels are selected and compressed using Run Length Encoding (RLE) lossless compression algorithm. The compressed string and the encrypted string are concatenated and inserted into the LSB locations by adding blanks if necessary. Before embedding process the patient information is encrypted; there- fore, this technique provides a high level of security for the pa- tient information. This proposed technique inherits the disadvantage of the LSB embedding process that is changing the statistical property of the cover image; therefore, the hiding process can be detected easily by computer systems.

scheme [8], It is robust against high JPEG and JPEG2000 compression, and it can provide information security, content authentication, safe archiving and controlled access retrieval. In this proposal, an original image is decomposed based on CN transform, then the watermark is embedded inside the im- age using the low pass such that the embedded watermark can be extracted in a blind manner, finally the image is recon- structed based on the inverse of the CN transform to get the watermarked image. It can be used during a medical image acquisition process to provide authenticity, integrity and con- fidentiality, but the embedded capacity is very low it is less than 0.0053 bpp.

A reversible watermarking scheme based on image classifi- cation and histogram shifting is proposed [9]. In this scheme, each part of the image is watermarked with the most adapted lossless modulation between: Pixel Histogram Shifting (PHS) or Dynamical Error Histogram Shifting (DEHS); therefore, at first a reference image is created to identify the most efficient watermarked method: PHP or DEHS for each image part. The watermark embedding and extraction are implemented based on the reference image. DEHS dynamically shifts predicted- errors between the image and its reference image. This technique can embed high capacity with low distortion.

In [11] a security technique based on encryption, and watermarking is proposed to protect medical images; it en- ables access to the outcomes of the encrypted image integrity and of its origins. With this technique, the RC4 stream ciphers and two substitute watermarking methods are combined; these two watermarking methods are the LSB and the QIM methods. In the embedding process, the watermarking and encryption are conducted jointly; therefore, in the extraction process, the watermark extraction and decryption can be ap- plied independently. This technique can achieve a large embedded capacity in the spatial domain (0.5 bpp) with a high Peak Signal to Noise Ration (PSNR) that is greater than 49 dB. Due to using the LSB watermarking method; the statis- tical property of the watermarked images is changed; accord- ingly, the hidden information can be detected by the attacking computer system.

LSB of the four pixels; the number of unused groups is in- creased. Therefore, in the proposed technique, it modifies only the two middle pixels of the group; this leads to increase the value of (NR + NS). In addition, the total number of groups is increased due to using joint groups. This means the two mid- dle pixels of each group (each group has four pixels) are only belonging to a unique group; however, Least Significant Pixel (LSP) belongs to both of this group and the previous group, also Most Significant Pixel (MSP) belongs to both of this group and the next group. For example, if we have six pixels [p10, p11, p12, p13, p14, p15, p16, p17, p18, p19], then the first group consists of [p10, p11, p12, p13]. The second group in- cludes [p13, p14, p15, p16], and the third group includes

This section consists of four subsections: the first subsection represents the performance results due to applying the pro- posed technique on grayscale DICOM images. The second subsection represents the results of applying the technique on color medical images. The third section represents the results of applying the proposed technique on grayscale test images and on the color test images.

The proposed technique is not designed to provide copy- right protection; however, it is proposed to provide integrity and authentication services for the DICOM images. Therefore, its target is not to be robust against modification attacks, but its target is to detect any modification into the watermarked images. To check the ability of this technique to discover if the integrity and authentication of the image are corrupted, at the sender side a one pixel of the authenticated image was modified, then at the receiver side the proposed technique de- tected this modification and sent a message that the image is not validated. These checks were implemented for all types of test images that are used in section four.

As a future work the proposed technique can practically be included within the medical information systems to provide medical image integrity, system authentication and confidenti- ality. Other revertible watermarking methods can be proposed to increase the amount of embedded data, and other lossless compression methods can be proposed to enhance the ability of the proposed technique to embed larger amount of data. In addition, a public encryption technique can be used instead of AES encryption technique to provide source authentication.

