In the context of Fc receptor-mediated phagocytosis, the signalling cascade is trig- gered by antibodies, called immunoglobulin, e.g., IgG, which protect the organism by binding to the surface of infectious microorganisms to form a coat. In this sit- uation, the tail region of each antibody molecule, called the Fc region, is exposed on the exterior. This antibody coat is recognised by specific Fc receptors on the surface of the cell. Their binding induces the phagocytic cell to extend pseudopods and extend its tips to form a phagosome while proceeding with binding its ligands in a zipper like fashion around the internalised particle [10].

the GDIs. The model uses mainly the quantitative biochemical data on Cdc42p. This results in an explanation of the experimentally observed rapid turn over in Rho GTP-binding proteins by means of an ODE model. In the following, based on this ODE model, we will give a process calculus model which compositionally builds and extends the ODE model. We will provide a comparison of two models.

Processes are viewed as the choice between zero or more processes. A process with n choices is written as let P = do P1 or ... or Pn. If there is only one choice, we write let P = P1. A process can perform an input ?x(m);Q or output

!x(n);Q on a channel x or perform a delay, written as delay@r;Q, where r is a real number value denoting the rate of an exponential distribution and Q is the continuation process. Complementary input and output actions interact by means of hand shake operations on channels declared with the syntax new. The operator new x@r:t P creates a fresh channel x of rate r to be used in the process P where t is the type of the channel x which can be, e.g., chan(chan,chan) denoting that

the channel can pass the names of two channels. When a process is prefixed with a declaration of a fresh channel, that channel remains private to the process and does not conflict with any other channel. A process can be the empty process, written (). Two process components P and Q can be combined using parallel composition P | Q. This constitutes the basic form of compositionality which allows to compose processes in order to gradually build bigger models.

The first line of the code states that there is a channel share which takes another channel as argument. The second and third line state that the process RD can interact on channel share and broadcast the private channel e, and then evolve to process RD_Bound, which can send a message on channel e and evolve to RD. The fourth line states that process E can receive a message on channel share, and then evolve to E_Bound which can receive a message on channel e and evolve to E.

The first line above states that the values of D and T are set to 50.0 and 500.0 respectively. The second line states that process R can evolve to RD or RT with the rates 0.033*D and 0.1*T, respectively. The third and forth lines state that RD can evolve to R with rate 0.02 and RT can evolve to R or RD with both rates 0.02.

GDIs were initially identified as down-regulators of GTP-binding proteins due to their ability to prevent the dissociation of GDP or GTP from the GTP-binding pro- teins [6]. However, this ability turns out to be a crucial mechanism with which GDIs serve as transport proteins, shuttling GTP-binding proteins between membranes. It is now believed that the complementary structures of GTP-binding proteins and GDIs is crucial in this transport mechanism [8]. When associated to the membrane, GTP-binding proteins are anchored to the membrane by lipid modification on their C-terminus. However, when GTP-binding proteins interact with GDIs, they estab- lish a bond such that C-terminal domain of GDI binds with the C-terminus and recognises switch 2 region of the GTP-binding protein, while N-terminal domain of the GDI binds to the switch 2 region of the GTP-binding protein and recognises its switch 1 region as well. This interaction results in a blocking mechanism that prevents the anchoring of the GTP-binding protein to the membrane. By interact- ing with and covering the switch 1 and switch 2 region of the GTP-binding protein, GDIs also inhibit the dissociation of the GDP or GTP [6]. We can thus summarise the function of the GDIs as inhibiting the disassociation of GDP, inhibiting GTP hydrolysis, and stimulating the shuttling of Rho GTP proteins such as Cdc42 and Rac to and from cellular membranes.

We extend our basic model to capture also the effect of the GDIs in the Rho GTP-binding protein cycle. We expected to use the biological models described in a survey paper [7]. Instead, based on discussions with Caron, a biologist at Imperial, we introduce an abstract, hybrid model which better reflects the current knowledge. At the moment, we lack the quantitative data for the rates of the reactions for this model. We give an initial analysis of the behaviour of the protein cycle by setting the unknown rates as 1.0 and varying the quantity of GDIs. A thorough assessment of the usefulness of SPiM as a tool for systematically searching the parameter space for plausible rates is left for future research. We hope SPiM will eventually assist in the literature search and wet-lab experiments necessary to complete the missing quantitative data.

Rho GTP-binding proteins serve as molecular switches in various subcellular activities, including phagocytosis. Our long-term goal is to use the model of this paper as a generic model for these proteins which can be compositionally plugged into larger models. By gradually extending the model and moving between levels of abstractions, we hope to eventually deliver useful process models of phagocytosis. However, biological knowledge is in a state of constant flux, and is often incomplete. Our aim is to work closely with biologists at Imperial to overcome these challenges.

