Related work. The technical precursor of our framework is the process calculus of Mitchell et al. [11]. Though any of the models [1,6,3,11,4,10] or any similar framework could have been an interesting starting point, the framework of Mitchell et al. [11] appears appropriate for the following reasons. Although it is a formal model, it is still close to computational setting of modern cryptography since it works directly on the cryptographic level. Indeed it defines an extension of the CCS process algebra with finite replication and probabilistic polynomial-time terms denoting cryptographic primitives. It turns out that these probabilistic polynomial functions are useful for modelling the probabilistic behaviour of security systems. Unlike formalisms such as [6,4,10], the scheduling is probabilistic, better reflecting so the ability of the attacker to control the communication network. Finally it also appears as a natural formal framework for capturing and reasoning about a variety of fundamental cryptographic notions.

depending on whether or not we want to make the internal action completely in- visible to the attacker. In this way the user has total freedom and can eliminate undesirable schedulers at the specification level. The drawback is that the protocol designer who has incomplete knowledge about the system, may specify his intuition of the protocol and so get some properties that might not be satisfied by the actual protocol.

from the protocol (output) to the intruder (input), then the intruder can select the channel and its (input) component. For synchronization arising in the opposite direction, the intruder can select not only the channel but also the message and its output component as well. Finally, if communication arises between two components of the intruder, then the intruder controls everything.

Definition A.3 An oracle Turing machine is a Turing machine with an extra oracle tape and three extra states qquery, qyes and qno. When the machine reaches the state qquery, control is passed either to the state qyes if the contents of the oracle tape belongs to the oracle set, or to the state qno otherwise.

