We answer a question posed by Martin et al. at MFPS XXVI in the affirmative: the free affine monoid over a finite involution group has a quantum representation, in addition to the classical representation already shown to exist in [8]. In particular, this implies that in every dimension there are non-trivial classes of quantum channels that have classical representations which were not present in the lower dimensions. En route to establishing this result, we give two characterizations of the diagonal n-qubit channels (one of which

In [11], Martin reduced the calculation of scope to a simple eigenvalue cal- culation. Moreover, there are classes of (m, n) channels which carry information theoretic data about certain classes of unital qubit channels. The classes are well studied and were shown to be conjugate to their quantum counterparts [4,5,9]; since conjugation preserves eigenvalues, the scope and capacity of these channels can be calculated from the classical representations.

In order to discuss quantum channels we need a way to talk about how an envi- ronment acts on quantum systems and a way of describing a system whose state is not completely known. We use density operators/matrices (the terms are used interchangeably) to describe a quantum system. Let 2n be a Hilbert space of dimension 2n.

Proof. Note for all i < j, the involution group of order 2j has the involution group of order 2i as a subgroup and the restriction of an embedding is still an embedding. So we will check the claim for involution groups of order 22j.

Interestingly enough, the proof of the last theorem, along with work done by Keye Martin on retractive groups, gives a bound on the scope of a unital channel: the scope of any unital channel is bounded from below by the capacity of its diagonal [10]. Moreover, Theorems 5.1 and 3.2 allow us to extend the trace lemma from [11] in a very intuitive way. We can bound the trace of an arbitrary unital channel with the following lemma.

It is hard to overstate the importance of the diagonal qubit channels. As shown in [7], set of teleportation channels for a single qubit is exactly the set of diagonal channels; we believe that the diagonal channels will play a large roll in the general teleportation schemes. Also, the scope of every qubit channel can be calculated using the set of diagonal channels [11]. Although we can can only bound the scope from below by the set of diagonal channels, we hope that a similar result will be true for n-qubits.

We would like to thank Johnny Feng for entertaining more questions than any one person should and for his helpful discussions on the formalisms of quantum channels and density matrices...we are sure at those times he wished he had a secluded office. We would also like to thank Keye Martin for many valuable discussions on quantum mechanics and for persuading us to look into this topic.

