Our rewriting logic framework consists of a package of Maude theories and pa- rameterized functional modules which can be integrated easily in any other Maude application by instantiating the parameter theories with the particular settings of the application. The axiomatic theory of constraint semi-rings is modelled as Maude functional theory; special constraint semi-rings such as weighted sum and fuzzy nat- ural numbers are modelled as functional Maude modules; all other modules of the framework (such as cartesian products of constraint semirings, implicit and explicit soft constraints as well as the constraint solving algorithms) are parameterized by the choice of the constraint domain and semiring. In order to improve the efficiency of constraint solving, all recursive specifications are written in tail-recursive form and domain elements of individual constraints are ordered according to their grade in the constraint semiring. We also prove the correctness of our search algorithm.

PAGODA (see http://pagoda.csl.sri.com) is a modular architecture for de- sign of (partially) autonomous systems. A PAGODA node interacts with its en- vironment by sensing and affecting, driven by goals to achieve and constrained by policies. A PAGODA system is a collection of PAGODA nodes cooperating to achieve some mutual goal. The PAGODA architecture was inspired by the study of architectures developed for autonomous space systems, especially the MDS archi- tecture [12] and its precursors [15].

For the radio application, we need algorithms for both: for finding one admissible solution in a short time and, in cases where enough computing power and time are available, for finding all best solutions or all admissible solutions. But we could simplify the job in that all variables (knobs) were of interest and the involved semirings were all totally ordered. Following, we make therefore these simplifying assumptions and present a Maude realisation for searching all best solutions and give a sketch of the implementation of the other search algorithms.

For the radio application, we perform a multicriteria optimization by minimizing the violations of the effect goals and maximizing the benefits of the knob settings where we give preference to the optimization of the effect goals. Formally, this means to build the lexicographically ordered cartesian product of the semirings of weighted sums and of fuzzy natural numbers (modelled by WSUMFUZZYPAIR). Note that by exchanging the order of the two semirings we could give also priority to the benefits of the knob settings.

[6] for designing specialized constraint solvers. Moreover, simple soft constraints as in this paper will not be enough. More complex policies for tasks such as resource allocation and providing quality of service have to be respected and solutions have to be compared using preferences. Based on the successful c-semiring-based ap- proaches to preferences [11], quality of service [10] and soft concurrent constrained programming [5], we are currently developing an expressive modelling language for policies involving preferences and hard/soft constraints which will also be based on the c-semiring approach.

